A COLLECTION OF THE WRITINGS Of the AUTHOR of the True-Born ENGLISHMAN.

VIZ. I. The True-Born Englishman. A Satyr. II. The Mock Mourners. A Satyr.
III. Reformation of Manners. A Satyr. IV. The Spanish Descent. A Poem. V. The
Poor Man's Plea, concerning Reformation of Manners. VI. An Enquiry into the
Occasional Conformity of the Dissenters, in Cases of Preferment: With a Preface
to Mr. How. VII. An Enquiry into Occasional Conformity: Shew^ that the
Dissenters are ^o Way Concerned in it. VIII. A New Test of the Church of
England's Loyalty. IX. The Shortest Way with the Dissenters. X. A brief
Explanation of the Shortest Way with the Dissenters. XI. A Dialogue between a
Dissenter and the Observator, concerning The Shortest Way with Dissenters. XII.
Lex Talionis: Or, An Enquiry into the most Proper Ways to Pr^ent the
Persecution of the Protestants in France. XIII. A Letter to Mr. How, by way of
Reply to his Considerations of the Preface to an Enquiry into the Occasional
Conformity of Dissenters.


London, Printed in the Year 1703.

AN Explanatory Preface.
IT is not that I see any Reason to alter my Opinion in any thing I have Writ,
which occasions this Epistle; but I find it necessary for the satisfaction of
some Persons of Honor, as well as Wit, to pass a short Explication upon it,
and tell the World what I mean, or rather, what I do not mean, in some things
wherein I find I am liable to be mis-understood.

I confess my self something surpised to hear that I am taxed with Bewraying
my Own Nest, and Abusing our Nation, by Discovering the Meanness of our
Original, in order to make the English contemptible abroad and at home; in
which, I think, they are mistaken: For why should not our Neighbors be as good
as We to Derive from? And I must add, That had we been an Unmixed Nation, I am
of Opinion it had been to our Disadvantage: For to go on farther, we have three
Nations about us as clear from Mixtures of Blood as any in the World, and I
know not which of them I could wish our selves to be like; I mean the Scots,
the Welsh and Irish; and if I were to write a Reverse to the Satyr, I would
examine all the Nations of Europe, and prove, That those Nations which are most
mixed, are the best, and have least of Barbarism and Brutality among them; and
abundance of Reasons might be given for it, too long to bring into a Preface.

But I give this Hint, to let the World know, that I am far from thinking, it is
a Satyr, upon the English Nation, to tell them, They are Derived from all the
Nations under Heaven; that is, from several Nations Nor is it meant to
undervalue the Original of the English, for we see no Reason to like them the
worse, being the Relics of Romans, Danes, Saxons and Normans, than we shoul'd
have done, if they had remained Britains, that is, than if they had been all
Welshmen.

But the Intent of the Satyr is pointed at the Vanity of those who talk of
their Antiquity, and value themselves upon their Pedigree, their Ancient
Families, and being True Born; whereas it is impossible we should be True Born;
and if we could, should have lost by the Bargain.

These sort of People, who Call themselves True Born, and tell long Stories of
their Families, and like a Nobleman of Venice, Think a Foreigner ought not to
walk on the same side of the Street with them, are owned to be meant in this
Satyr. What they would infer from their own Original, I know not, nor is it
easy to make out whether they are the better, or the worse for their
Ancestors: Our English Nation may Value themselves for their Wit, Wealth, and
Courage, and I believe few will dispute it with them; but for long Originals,
and Ancient True Born Families of English, I would advise them to wave the
Discourse. A True English Man is one that deserves a Character, and I have no
where lessened him, that I know of; but as for a True Born English Man, I
confess I do not understand him.

From hence I only infer, That an English Man, of all Men ought not to despise
Foreigners as such, and I think the Inference is just, since what they are to
day, we were yesterday, and to morrow they will be like us. If Foreigners
misbehave in their several Stations and Employments, I have nothing to do with
that; the Laws are open to Punish them equally with Natives, and let them have
no Favor.

But when I see the Town full of Lampoons and Invectives against Dutchmen, only
because they are Foreigners, and the King Reproached and Insulted by Insolent
Pedants, and Ballad-making Poets, for employing Foreigners; and for being a
Foreigner himself, I confess my self moved by it to remind our Nation of their
own Original, thereby to let them see what a Banter is put upon our selves in
it; since speaking of Englishmen ab Origin, we are really Foreigners our
selves.

I could go on to prove it is also Impolitick in us to discourage Foreigners;
since it is easy to make it appear that the multitudes of Foreign Nations who
have took Sanctuary here, have been the greatest Additions to the Wealth and
Strength of the Nation; the great Essential whereof is the Number of its
Inhabitants: Nor would this Nation have ever arrived to the Degree of Wealth
and Glory, it now boasts of, if the addition of Foreign Nations, both as to
Manufactures and Arms, had not been helpful to it. This is so plain, that he
who is ignorant of it, is too dull to be talked with.

The Satyr therefore I must allow to be just, till I am otherwise convinced;
because nothing can be more ridiculous, than to hear our People boast of that
Antiquity, which if it had been true, would have left us in so much worse a
Condition than we are in now: Whereas we ought rather to boast among our
Neighbors, that we are a part of themselves, or the same Original as they, but
bettered by our Climate, and like our Language and Manufactures, derived from
them, and improved by us to a Perfection greater than they can pretend to.

This we might have valued our selves upon without Vanity: But to disown our
Descent from them, talking big of our Ancient Families, and long Originals, and
stand at a distance, from Foreigners, like the Enthusiast in Religion, with a
Stand off, I am more holy than thou: This is a thing so ridiculous, in a Nation
derived from Foreigners, as we are, that I could not but attack them as I have
done.

And whereas I am threatened to be called to a Public Account for this
Freedom; and the Publisher of this has been New-Paper'd in Goal already for it;
though I see nothing in it for which the Government can be displeased; yet, if at
the same time those People who with an Unlimited Arrogance in Print, every day
Affront the King, Prescribe the Parliament, and Lampoon the Government, may be
either Punished or Restrained, I am content to stand and fall by the Public
Justice of my Native Country, which I am not sensible I have any where injured.

Nor would I be mis-understood concerning the Clergy; with whom if I have taken
any License more than becomes a Satyr, I question not but those Gentlemen, who
are Men of Letters, are also Men of so much Candor, as to allow me a Loose at
the Crimes of the Guilty, without thinking the whole Profession Lashed, who are
Innocent. I profess to have very mean Thoughts of those Gentlemen who have
deserted their own Principles, and exposed even their Morals as well as
Loyalty; but not at all to think it affects any but such as are concerned in
the Fact.

Nor would I be misrepresented as to the Ingratitude of the English to the
King and his Friends; as if I meant the English as a Nation, are so. The
contrary is so apparent, That I would hope it should not be Suggested of me:
And therefore when I have brought in Britannia Speaking of the King, I suppose
Her to be the Representative, or Mouth of the Nation, as a Body. But if I say
we are full of such who daily affront the King, and abuse his Friends; who
Print Scurrilous Pamphlets, Virulent Lampoons, and reproachful Public Banters,
against both the King's Person and Government; I say nothing but what is too
true: And that the Satyr is directed at such, I freely own; and cannot say, but
I should think it very hard to be Censured for this Satyr, while such remain
Vnquestion'd, and tacitly approved. That I can mean none but such, is plain
ftom these few Lines. Ye Heavens regard! Almighty Jove, look down,
And view thy Injured Monarch on the Throne.
On their Ungrateful Heads due Vengeance take,
Who sought his Aid, and then his Part forsake.


If I have fallen upon our Vices, I hope none but the Vicious will be Angery.
As for Writing for Interest, I disown it; I have neither Place, nor Pension,
nor Prospect; nor seek none, nor will have none: If matter of Fact justifies
the Truth of the Crimes, the Satyr is Just. As to the Poetic Liberties, I hope
the Crime is Pardonable: I am content to be Stoned, provided none will Attack
me but the Innocent.

If my Countrymen would take the Hint, and grow better-Natur'd from my
Ill-natured Poem, as some call it; I would say this of it, that though it is far
from the best Satyr that ever was Wrote, 'twould do the most Good that ever
Satyr did.

And yet I am ready to ask Pardon of some Gentlemen too; who though they are
Englishmen, have good Nature enough to see themselves Reproved, and can bear
it. These are Gentlemen in a true Sense, that can bear to be told of their Faux
Pas, and not abuse the Reprover. To such I must say, this is no Satyr; they are
Exceptions to the General Rule; and I value my Performance from their Generous
Approbation, more than I can from any Opinion I have of its Worth.

The hasty Errors of my Verse I made my Excuse for, before; and since the time
I have been upon it has been but little, and my Leisure less, I have all along
strove rather to make the Thoughts Explicit, than the Poem Correct. However, I
have mended some Faults in this Edition, and the rest must be placed to my
Account.

As to Answers, Banters, True English Billinsgate, I expect them till no Body
will buy, and then the Shop will be shut. Had I wrote it for the Gain of the
Press, I should have been concerned at its being Printed again and again, by
Pirates, as they call them, and Paragraph-Men: But would They but do it
Justice, and Print it True, according to the Copy, they are welcome to Sell it
for a Penny, if they Please.

The Pence indeed is the End of their Works. I Will engage, if no body will Buy,
no body will Write: And not a Patriot-Poet of them all, now will in Defense of
his Native Country, which I have abused, they say, Print an Answer to it, and
give it about for Gods-sake.

THE PREFACE.
THE End of Satyr is Reformation: And the Author, though he doubts the Work of
Conversion is at a General Stop, has put his Hand to the Plow.

I expect a Storm of Ill-Language from the Fury of the Town, and especially
from those whose English Talent it is to Rail: And without being taken for a
Conjurer, I may venture to foretell, That I shall be Cavil'd at about my Mean
Style, Rough Verse, and Incorrect Language; things I might indeed have taken
more Care in; But the Book is Printed; and though I see some Faults, it is too
late to mend them: And this is all I think needful to say to them.

Possibly some body may take me for a Dutchman, in which they are mistaken: But
I am one that would be glad to see Englishmen behave themselves better to
Strangers, and to Governors also; that one might not be reproached in Foreign
Countries for belonging to a Nation that wants Manners.

I assure you, Gentlemen, Strangers use us better Abroad; and we can give no
reason but our Ill Nature for the contrary here.

Methinks an Englishman, who is so Proud of being called A Goodfellow, should
be Civil: And it cannot be denied but we are in many Cases, and particularly to
Strangers, the Churlishest People alive.

As to Vices, who can dispute our Intemperance, while an Honest Drunken Fellow
is a Character in a Man's Praise? All our Reformations are Banters, and will be
so, till our Magistrates and Gentry Reform themselves by way of Example; then,
and not till then, they may be expected to Punish others without Blushing.

As to our Ingratitude, I desire to be understood of that particular People,
who pretending to be Protestants, have all along endeavored to reduce the
Liberties and Religion of this Nation into the Hands of King James and his
Popish Powers: Together, with such who enjoy the Peace and Protection of the
present Government, and yet abuse and affront the King, who procured it, and
openly profess their Uneasiness under him: These, by whatsoever Names or Titles
they are dignified, or distinguished, are the People aimed at: Nor do I disown,
but that it is so much the Temper of an Englishman to abuse his Benefactor,
that I could be glad to see it rectified.

They who think I have been Guilty of any Error, in exposing the Crimes of my
own Countrymen to themselves, may among many honest Instances of the like
Nature, find the same thing in Mr. Cowely, in his Imitation of the second
Olympic Ode of Pindar: His Words are these, But in this Thankless World, the
Givers
Are Envied even by the Receivers:
It Is now the Cheap and Frugal Fashion,
Rather to hide than pay an Obligation.
Nay, it is much worse than so;
It now an Artifice does grow,
Wrongs and Outrages to do,
Lest Men should think we Owe.


The Introduction.
SPeak, Satyr; for there is none can tell like thee,
Whether it is Folly, Pride, or Knavery,
That makes this Discontented Land appear
Less Happy now in Times of Peace, than War?
Why Civil Feuds disturb the Nation more
Than all our Bloody Wars have done before?
Fools out of Favor Grudge at Knaves in Place,
And Men are always Honest in Disgrace:
The Court Preferments make Men Knaves in course:
But they which would be in them, would be worse.
It Is not at Foreigners that we repine,
Would Foreigners their Perquisites resign:
The Grand Contention's plainly to be seen,
To get some Men put out, and some put in.
For this our S -- rs make long Harangues,
And florid M -- rs whet their polished Tongues.
Statesmen are always sick of one Disease;
And a good Pension gives them present Ease.
That Is the Specific makes them all Content
With any King, and any Government.
Good Patriots at Court-Abuses rail;
And all the Nation's Grievances bewail:
But when the Sovereign Balsam's once applied,
The Zealot never fails to change his Side.
And when he must the Golden Key resign,
The Railing Spirit comes about again.
Who shall this Bubbl'd Nation disabuse,
While they their own Felicities refuse?
Who at the Wars have made such mighty Pother,
And now are falling out with one another:
With needless Fears the Jealous Nation fill,
And always have been saved against their Will:
Who Fifty Millions Sterling have disburs'd,
To be with Peace and too much Plenty Cursed.
Who their Old Monarch eagerly undo,
And yet uneasily Obey the New.
Search, Satyr, search; a deep Incision make;
The Poyson's strong, the Antidote's too weak.
It Is pointed Truth must manage this Dispute,
And downright English, Englishmen Confute.
Whet thy just Anger at the Nation's Pride;
And with keen Phrase repel the Vicious Tide.
To Englishmen their own beginnings show,
And ask them why they slight their Neighbors so.
Go back to elder Times, and Ages past,
And Nations into long Oblivion cast;
To old Britannia's Youthful Days retire,
And there for True-Born Englishmen enquire.
Britannia freely will disown the Name,
And hardly knows, her self, from whence they came:
Wonders that They of all Men should pretend
To Birth and Blood, and for a Name contend.
Go back to Causes where our Follies dwell,
And fetch the dark Original from Hell:
Speak, Satyr, for there is none like thee can tell.
The True-Born Englishman. PART I.
Wherever God erects a House of Prayer,
The Devil always builds a Chapel there:
And 'twill be found upon Examination,
The latter has the largest Congregation:
For ever since he first Debauched the Mind,
He made a perfect Conquest of Mankind.
With Uniformity of Service, he
Reigns with a general Aristocracy.
No Nonconforming Sects disturb his Reign,
For of his Yoke there is very few Complain.
He knows the Genius and the Inclinaton,
And matches proper Sins for every Nation,
He needs no Standing-Army Government;
He always Rules us by our own Consent:
His Laws are easy, and his gentle Sway
Makes it exceeding pleasant to Obey.
The List of his Vicegerents and Commanders,
Out-does your Caesar's, or your Alexanders.
They never fail of his infernal Aid,
And he is as certain never to be betrayed.
Through all the World they spread his vast Command,
And Death's Eternal Empire is maintained.
They rule so Politickly and so well,
As if they were L -- J -- of Hell.
Duly divided to Debauch Mankind,
And plant Infernal Dictates in his Mind.
Pride, the first Peer, and President of Hell,
To his share Spain, the largest Province, fell.
The subtle Prince thought fittest to bestow
On these the Golden Mines of Mexico;
With all the Silver Mountains of Peru;
Wealth which would in wise Hands the World undo:
Because he knew their Genius was such;
Too Lazy and too Haughty to be Rich.
So proud a People, so above their Fate,
That if reduced to beg, they will beg in State.
Lavish of Money, to be counted Brave,
And Proudly Starve, because they Scorn to Save.
Never was Nation in the World before,
So very Rich, and yet so very Poor.
Lust chose the Torrid Zone of Italy,
Where Blood ferments in Rapes and Sodomy:
Where swelling Veins overflow with liquid Streams,
With Heat impregnate from Vesuvian Flames:
Whose flowing Sulphur forms Infernal Lakes,
And humane Body of the Soil partakes,
There Nature ever burns with hot Desires,
Fanned with Luxuriant Air from Subterranean Fires:
Here undisturbed in Floods of scalding Lust,
The Infernal King Reigns with Infernal Gust.
Drunk'nness, the Darling Favorite of Hell,
Chose Germany to Rule; and Rules so well,
No Subjects more obsequiously Obey,
None Please so well, or are so Pleased as They.
The cunning Artist manages so well,
He lets them Bow to Heaven, and Drink to Hell.
If but to Wine and Him they Homage pay,
He cares not to what Deity they Pray,
What God they Worship most, or in what way.
Whether by Luther, Calvin, or by Rome,
They sail for Heaven; by Wine he Steers them home.
Ungoverned Passion settled first in France,
Where Mankind Lives in haste, and Thrives by chance,
A Dancing Nation, Fickle and Untrue;
Have often undone themselves, and others too:
Prompt the infernal Dictates to Obey,
And in Hell's Favor none more great than they.
The Pagan World he blindly leads away,
And Personally Rules with Arbitrary Sway:
The Mask thrown off, Plain Devil his Title stands;
And what elsewhere he Tempts, he there Commands.
There with full Gust the Ambition of his Mind
Governs, as he of old in Heaven designed.
Worshipped as God, his Painim Altars smoke
Embru'd with Blood of those that him Invoke,
The rest by Deputies he Rules as well,
And plants the distant Colonies of Hell.
By them his secret Power he maintains,
And binds the World in his Infernal Chains.
By Zeal the Irish; and the Rush by Folly:
Fury the Dane: The Swede by Melancholy:
By stupid Ignorance, the Muscovite:
The Chinese by a Child of Hell, called Wit;
Wealth makes the Persian too Effeminate:
And Poverty, the Tartars Desperate:
The Turks and Moors by Mah'met he subdues;
And God has given him leave to Rule the Jews:
Rage rules the Portuguese, and Fraud the Scotch:
Revenge the Pole; and Avarice the Dutch.
Satyr be kind, and draw a Silent Veil,
Thy Native England's Vices to conceal:
Or if that Task's impossible to do,
At least be Just, and show her Virtues too:
Too Great the first, Alas! the last too Few.
England unknown as yet, unpeopled lay;
Happy, had she remained so to this day,
And not to every Nation been a Prey.
Her Open Harbors, and her Fertile Plains,
(The Merchants Glory those, and these the Swains,)
To every Barbarous Nation have betrayed her,
Who Conquer her as often as they Invade her,
So Beauty's Guarded but by Innocence,
That Ruins her, which should be her Defense.
Ingratituds, a Devil of Black Renown,
Possessed her very early for his own.
An Ugly, Surly, Sullen, Selfish Spirit,
Who Satan's worst Perfections does inherit:
Second to him in Malice and in Force,
All Devil without, and all within him worse.
He made her Firstborn Race to be so Rude,
And suffered her so often to be subdued:
By several Crowds of wandering Thieves o'er-run,
Often unpeopl'd, and as often undone.
While every Nation that her Powers reduced,
Their Languages and Manners introduced.
From whose mixed Relics our compounded Breed,
By Spurious Generation does succeed;
Making a Race uncertain and unev'n,
Derived from all the Nations under Heaven.
The Romans first with Julius Caesar came,
Including all the Nations of that Name,
Gauls, Greeks, and Lombards; and by computation,
Auxiliaries, or Slaves of every Nation.
With Hengist, Saxons; Danes with Sueno came,
In search of Plunder, not in search of Fame.
Scots, Picts, and Irish from the Hibernian Shore,
And Conquering William brought the Normans over.
All these their Barbarous Offspring left behind,
The Dregs of Armies, they of all Mankind;
Blended with Britains who before were here,
Of whom the Welsh have blessed the Character.
From this Amphibious Ill-born Mob began
That vain ill-natured thing, an Englishman.
The Customs, Sir-names, Languages, and Manners,
Of all these Nations are their own Explainers:
Whose Reliks are so lasting and so strong,
They have left a Shiboleth upon our Tongue;
By which with easy search you may distinguish
Your Roman-Saxon-Danish Norman English.
The great Invading W. the Conq.
Norman let us know
What Conquerours in Aftertimes might do.
To every Or Archer
Musqueteer he brought to Town,
He gave the Lands which never were his own.
When first the English Crown he did obtain,
He did not send his Dutchmen back again.
No Reassumptions in his Reign were known,
D' Avenant might there have let his Book alone.
No Parliament his Army could disband;
He raised no Money, for he paid in Land.
He gave his Legions their Eternal Station,
And made them all Freeholders of the Nation.
He Cantoned out the Country to his Men,
And every Soldier was a Denizen.
The Rascals thus Enriched he called them Lords,
To please their upstart Pride with new made words,
And Doomsday Book his Tyranny Records.
And here begins our Ancient Pedigree,
That so exalts our poor Nobility:
It Is that from some French Trooper they derive,
Who with the Norman Bastard did arrive;
The Trophies of the Families appear;
Some show the Sword, the Bow, and some the Spear,
Which their great Ancestor, forsooth, did wear.
These in the Heralds Register remain,
Their Noble Mean Extraction to explain,
Yet who the Hero was, no Man can tell,
Whether a Drummer or a Colonel:
The silent Record Blushes to reveal
Their Undescended Dark Original.
But grant the best, How came the change to pass,
A True Born Englishman of Norman Race?
A Turkish Horse can show more History,
To prove his Well-descended Family.
Conquest, as by the Dr Sherl, de facto.
Moderns it is expressed,
May give a Title to the Lands possessed:
But that the longest Sword should be so civil,
To make a Frenchman English, that is the Devil.
These are the Heroes that despise the Dutch,
And rail at new-come Foreigners so much;
Forgetting that themselves are all derived
From the most Scoundrel Race that ever lived;
A horrid Crowd of Rambling Thieves and Drones,
Who ransacked Kingdoms, and dispeopl'd Towns.
The Pict and Painted Britain, Treacherous Scot,
By Hunger, Theft, and Rapine hither brought.
Norwegian Pirates, Buccaneering Danes,
Whose Red-Hair'd Offspring every where remains.
Who joined with Norman-French compound the Breed,
From whence your True-Born Englishmen proceed.
And left by Length of time it be pretended,
The Climates may this Modern Breed have mended;
Wise Providence to keep us where we are,
Mixes us daily with exceeding care:
We have been Europes' sink, the Jakes where she,
Voids all her Offal Outcast Progeny.
From Henry's time, the Strolling Bands
Of banished Fugitives from Neighboring Lands,
Have here a certain Sanctuary found:
The Eternal Refuge of the Vagabond.
Where in but half a common Age of Time,
Borr'wing new Blood and Manners from the Clime,
Proudly they learn all Mankind to contemn,
And all their Race are True-Born Englishmen.
Dutch, Walloons, Flemmings, Irishmen and Scots,
Vaudois and Voltolins, and Hugonots,
In good Queen Bess's Charitable Reign,
Supplied us with three hundred thousand Men.
Religion, God we thank thee, sent them hither,
Priests, Protestants, the Devil and all together:
Of all Professions, and of every Trade,
All that were perfecuted or afraid;
Whether for Debt, or other Crimes they fled,
David at Hackelah was still their Head.
The Offspring of this Miscellaneous Crowd,
Had not their new Plantations long enjoyed,
But they grew Englishmen, and raised their Votes
At Foreign Shoals for Interloping Scots.
The K. J. I.
Royal Branch from Pict-land did succeed,
With Troops of Scots and Scabs from North-by-Tweed.
The Seven first Years of his Pacifick Reign,
Made him and half his Nation Englishmen.
Scots from the Northern Frozen Banks of Tay,
With Packs and Plods came Whigging all away:
Thick as the Locusts which in Egypt swarmed,
With Pride and hungry Hopes completely armed:
With Native Truth, Diseases, and no Money,
Plundered our Canaan of the Milk and Honey.
Here they grew quickly Lords and Gentlemen,
And all their Race are True-Born-Englishmen.
The Civil Wars, the common Purgative,
Which always use to make the Nation thrive,
Made way for all that strolling Congregation,
Which thronged in Pious Ch -- s's Restoration. K: C: II.
The Royal Refugee our Breed restores,
With Foreign Courtiers, and with Foreign Whores:
And carefully repeopled us again,
Throughout his Lazy, Long, Lascivious Reign;
With such a blessed and True-born English Fry,
As much Illustrates our Nobility.
A Gratitude which will so black appear,
As future Ages must abhor to hear:
When they look back on all that Crimson Flood,
Which streamed in Lindsey's, and Caernarvon's Blood:
Bold Strafford, Cambridge, Capel, Lucas, Lisle,
Who crowned in Death his Father's Funeral Pile.
The Loss of whom, in order to supply,
With True-Born-English N -- ty,
Six Bastard Dukes survive his Luscious Reign,
The Labors of Italian C -- n,
French, P -- b, Tabby S -- t, and Cambrian.
Besides the Numerous Bright and Virgin Throng,
Whose Female Glories shade them from my Song.
This Offspring, if one Age they multiply,
May half the House with English Peers supply:
There with true English Pride they may contemn
S -- g and P -- d, new-made Noblemen.
Fench Cooks, Scotch Pedlars, and Italian Whores,
Were all made L -- ds, or L -- ds Progenitors.
Beggars and Bastards by his new Creation,
Much multiplied the P -- ge of the Nation;
Who will be all, ever one short Age runs over,
As True-Born L -- ds as those we had before.
Then to recruit the Commons he prepares,
And heal the Latent Breaches of the Wars;
The Pious Purpose better to advance,
H' invites the banished Protestants of France:
Hither for God-sake and their own they fled,
Some for Religion came, and some for Bread;
Two hundred thousand pair of Wooden Shoes,
Who God be thanked had nothing left to lose;
To Heavens great Praise did for Religion fly,
To make us Starve our Poor in Charity.
In every Port they plant their Fruitful Train,
To get a Race of True-Born Englishmen:
Whose Children will when riper Years they see,
Be as Ill-natured, and as Proud as we:
Call themselves English, Foreigners despise,
Be Surly like us all, and just as Wise.
Thus from a mixture of all kinds began,
That Het'rogeneous Thing, An Englishman:
In eager Rapes, and furious Lust begot,
Betwixt a Painted Britain, and a Scot:
Whose gend'ring Offspring quickly learned to Bow,
And yoke their Heifers to the Roman Plow:
From whence a Mongrel half-bred Race there came,
With neither Name nor Nation, Speech nor Fame.
In whose hot Veins new Mixtures quickly ran,
Infused betwixt a Saxon and a Dane.
While their Rank Daughters to their Parents just,
Received all Nations with promiscuous Lust.
This Nauseous Brood directly did contain,
The well extracted Brood of Englishmen.
Which Medly cantoned in a Heptarchy,
A Rhapsody of Nations to supply,
Among themselves maintained eternal Wars,
And still the Ladies Loved the Conquerors.
The Western Angles all the rest subdued;
A bloody Nation, barbarous and rude:
Who by the Tenure of the Sword possessed
One part of Britain, and subdued the rest.
And as great Things denominate the small,
The Conquering part gave Title to the whole,
The Scot, Pict, Britain, Roman, Dane, submit,
And with the English-Saxon all Unite:
And these the Mixtures have so close pursued,
The very Name and Memory's subdued:
No Roman now, no Britain does remain,
Wales strove to separate, but strove in vain:
The silent Nations undistinguished fall,
And Englishman's the common Name of all.
Fate jumbl'd them together, God knows how;
What ever they were, they are True-Born English now.
The wonder which remains is at our Pride,
To value that which all Men else deride.
For Englishmen to boast of Generation,
Cancels their Knowledge, and Lampoons the Nation.
A True-Born Englishman's a contradiction,
In Speech an Irony, in Fact a Fiction.
A Banter made to be a test to Fools,
Which those, that use it, justly ridicules.
A Metaphor invented to express,
A Man akin to all the Universe.
For as the Scots as Learned Men have said,
Throughout the world their wandering Seed have spread;
So open-handed England, it is believed
Has all the Gleanings of the World received.
Some think of England 'twas our Savior meant,
The Gospel should to all the World be sent:
Since, when the Blessed Sound did hither reach.
They to all Nations might be said to Preach.
It Is well that Virtue gives Noblity,
How shall we else the want of Birth and Blood supply?
Since scarce one Family is left alive,
Which does not from some Foreigner derive.
Of sixty thousand English Gentlemen,
Whose Name and Arms in Registers remain,
We challenge all our Heralds to declare,
Ten Families which English-Saxons are.
France justly owns the Ancient Noble Line,
Of Bourbon, Mommorency and Lorrain.
The Germans too their House of Austria show,
And Holland their Invincible Nassau.
Lines which in Heraldry were Ancient grown,
Before the Name of Englishman was known.
Even Scotland too, Her Elder Glory shows.
Her Gourdons, Hamiltons, and her Monroes;
Douglas, Mackays, and Grahams, Names well known,
Long before Ancient England knew her own.
But England Modern to the last degree,
Borrows or makes her own Nobility,
And yet she boldly boasts of Pedigree.
Repines that Foreigners are put upon her,
And talks of her Antiquity and Honor:
Her S -- lls, S -- ls, C -- ls, De -- M -- rs,
M -- ns, and M -- ues, D -- s and V -- rs,
Not one have English Names, yet all are English Peers
Your H -- ns, P -- llons, and L -- liers,
Pass now for True-Born English Knights and Squires,
And make good Senate-Members, or Lord-Mayors.
Wealth, howsoever got, in England makes
Lords of Mechanics, Gentlemen of Rakes:
Antiquity and Birth are needless here;
It Is Impudence and Money makes a P -- r.
Innumerable City-Knights we know,
From Blewcoat-Hospital and Bridewell flow.
Draymen and Porters fill the City Chair,
And Foot-Boys Magisterial Purple wear.
Fate has but very small Distinction set
Betwixt the Counter and the Coronet.
Tarpaulin L -- ds, Pages of high Renown,
Rise up by Poor Men's Valor, not their own.
Great Families of yesterday we show,
And Lords, whose Parents were the Lord knows who.
The True-Born Englishman. PART II.
THE Breed's described: Now, Satyr, if you can,
Their Temper show, for Manner make the Man.
Fierce, as the Britain; as the Roman, Brave;
And less inclined to Conquer, than to Save:
Eager to Fight, and lavish of their Blood;
And equally of Fear and Forecast void.
The Pict has made 'em Sour, the Dane Morose:
False from the Scot, and from the Norman worse.
What Honesty they have, the Saxons gave them,
And That, now they grow old, begins to leave them.
The Climate makes them Terrible and Bold;
And English Beef their Courage does uphold:
No Danger can their Daring Spirit pall,
Always provided that their Belly's full.
In close Intrigues their Faculty's but weak,
For gen'rally whatever they know, they speak:
And often their own Councils undermine,
By their Infirmity, and not Design;
From whence the Learned say it does proceed,
That English Treasons never can succeed:
For they are so open-hearted, you may know
Their own most secret Thoughts, and others too.
The Laboring Poor, in spite of Double Pay,
Are Saucy* Mutinous, and Beggarly:
So lavish of their Money and their Time,
That want of Forecast is the Nation's Crime.
Good Drunken Company is their Delight;
And what they get by Day, they spend by Night.
Dull Thinking seldom does their Heads engage,
But Drink their Youth away, and Hurry on Old Age.
Empty of all good Husbandry and Sense;
And void of Manners most, when void of Pence.
Their strong Aversion to Behaviour's such,
They always talk too little, or too much.
So dull, they never take the pains to think:
And seldom are good-natured, but in Drink:
In English Ale their dear Enjoyment lies,
For which they will starve themselves and Families.
An Englishman will fairly Drink as much
As will maintain two Families of Dutch:
Subjecting all their Labor to their Pots;
The greatest Artists are the greatest Sots.
The Country poor do by Example live,
The Gentry lead them, and the Clergy drive;
What may we not from such Examples hope?
The Landlord is their God, the Priest their Pope.
A Drunken Clergy, and a Swearing Bench,
Has given the Reformation such a Drench,
As wise Men think there is some cause to doubt.
Will Purge good Manners and Religion out.
Nor do the Poor alone their Liquor prize,
The Sages join in this great Sacrifice.
The Learned Men who study Aristotle,
Correct him with an Explanation Bottle;
Praise Epicurus rather than Lysander,
And The Drunkards Name for Canary
Aristippus more than Alexander.
The Doctors too their Galen here resign,
And gen'rally prescribe Specific Wine.
The Graduates Study's grown an 'easier Task,
While for the Vrinal they toss the Flask.
The Surgeon's Art grows plainer every Hour,
And Wine's the Balm which into Wounds they pour.
Poets long since Parnassus have forsaken,
And say the ancient Bards were all mistaken.
Apollo's lately Abdicate and fled,
And good King Bacchus governs in his stead;
He does the Chaos of the Head refine,
And Atom-Thoughts jump into Words by Wine:
The Inspirations of a finer Nature:
As Wine must needs excel Parnassus Water.
Statesmen their weighty Politics refine,
And Soldiers raise their Courages by Wine,
Caecilia gives her Choristers their Choice,
And lets them all drink Wine to clear their Voice.
Some think the Clergy first found out the way,
And Wine's the only Spirit by which they Pray.
But others, less profane than so, agree,
It clears the Lungs, and helps the Memory.
And therefore all of them Divinely think,
Instead of Study, it is as well to Drink.
And here I would be very glad to know,
Whether our Asgilites may Drink or no.
The enlightening Fumes of Wine would certainly,
Assist them much when they begin to fly:
Or if a Fiery Chariot should appear,
Inflamed by Wine, they would have the less to fear.
Even the Gods themselves, as Mortals say,
Were they on Earth, would be as Drunk as they:
Nectar would be no more Celestial Drink,
They Would all take Wine, to teach them how to think.
But English Drunkards, Gods and Men out do,
Drink their Estates away, and Money too.
Colon's in Debt, and if his Friends should fail
To help him out, must Die at last in Goal:
His Wealthy Uncle sent a Hundred Nobles,
To pay his trifles off, and rid him of his troubles:
But Colon like a True-Born Englishman,
Drank all the Money out in Bright Champaign;
And Colon does in Custody remain.
Drunk'ness has been the Darling of this Realm,
Ever since a Drunken Pilot had the Helm.
In their Religion they are so uneven,
That each Man goes his own By-way to Heaven.
Tenacious of mistakes to that Degree,
That every Man pursues it sep'rately,
And fancies none can find the way but he:
So shy of one another they are grown,
As if they strove to get to Heaven alone:
Rigid and Zealous, Positive and Grave.
And every Grace, but Charity, they have:
This makes them so Ill-natured and uncivil,
That all Men think an Englishman the Devil.
Surly to Strangers, Froward to their Friend;
Submit to Love with a reluctant Mind;
Resolved to be Ungrateful and Unkind.
If by Necessity reduced to ask,
The Giver has the difficultest task:
For what is bestowed they awkwardly receive.
And always take less freely than they give.
The Obligation is their Highest Grief;
And never Love, where they accept Relief.
So sullen in their Sorrow, that it is known,
They Will rather die than their Afflictions own:
And if relieved, it is too often true,
That they will abuse their Benefactors too:
For in Distress, their Haughty Stomach's such,
They hate to see themselves obliged too much.
Seldom contented, often in the Wrong;
Hard to be Pleased at all, and never long.
If your Mistakes their Ill-Opinion gain,
No Merit can their Favor re-obtain:
And if they are not Vindictive in their Fury,
It Is their Unconstant Temper does secure-ye;
Their Brains so cool, their Passion seldom burns:
For all is condensed before the Flame returns:
The Fermentation's of so weak a Matter,
The Humid damps the fume, and runs it all to Water.
So though the Inclination may be strong,
They Are Pleased by fits, and never Angry long.
Then if Good Nature shows some slender Proof,
They never think they have Reward enough:
But like our Modern Quakers of the Town,
Expect your Manners, and return you none.
Friendship, the abstracted Union of the Mind,
Which all Men seek, but very few can find:
Of all the Nations in the Universe,
None Talk on it more, or Understand it less:
For if it does their Property annoy,
Their Property their Friendship will destroy.
As you discourse them, you shall hear them tell
All things in which they think they do excel:
No Panegyric needs their Praise record;
An Englishman never wants his own good Word.
His long Discourses gen'rally appear
Prologu'd with his own wondrous Character:
But first to illustrate his own good Name,
He never fails his Neighbor to defame:
And yet he really designs no wrong;
His Malice goes no further than his Tongue.
But pleased to Tattle, he Delights to Rail,
To satisfy the Letch'ry of a Tale.
His own dear Praises close the ample Speech,
Tells you how Wise he is; that is, how Rich:
For Wealth is Wisdom; he that is Rich is Wise;
And all Men Learned Poverty Despise.
His Generosity comes next, and then
Concludes that he is a True-Born-Englishman;
And they it is known, are Generous and Free,
Forgetting, and Forgiving Injury:
Which may be true, thus rightly understood,
Forgiving Ill turns, and Forgetting Good.
Cheerful in Labor when they have undertook it,
But out of Humor, when they are out of Pocket.
But if their Belly and their Pocket's full,
They may be Phlegmatic, but never Dull:
And if a Bottle does their Brains refine,
It makes their Wits as sparkling as their Wine.
As for the general Vices which we find
They Are guilty of, in common with Mankind,
Satyr, forbear, and silently endure;
We must conceal the Crimes we cannot cure.
Nor shall my Verse the brighter Sex defame;
For English Beauty will preserve her Name,
Beyond dispute, Agreeable and Fair;
And Modester than other Nations are:
For where the Vice prevails, the great Temptation
Is want of Money, more than Inclination.
In general, this only is allowed,
They Are something Noisy, and a little Proud.
An Englishman is gentlest in Command,
Obedience is a Stranger in the Land:
Hardly subjected to the Magistrate;
For Englishmen do all Subjection hate.
Humblest when Rich, but Peevish when they are Poor:
And think what-e'er they have, they merit more.
The meanest English Plowman studies Law,
And keeps thereby the Magistrates in Awe;
Will boldly tell them what they have to do,
And sometimes punish their Omissions too.
Their Liberty and Properties so dear,
They Scorn their Laws or Governors to fear:
So Bugbear'd with the Name of Slavery,
They cannot submit to their own Liberty.
Restraint from ill, is Freedom to the Wise;
But Englishmen do all Restraint Despise.
Slaves to their Liquor, Drudges to the Pots,
The Mob are Statesmen, and their Statesmen Sots.
Their Governors they count such dangerous things,
That it is their Custom to affront their Kings:
So jealous of the Power their Kings possessed,
They suffer neither Power nor King to rest.
The Bad with Force they easily subdue:
The Good with constant Clamours they pursue:
And did King Jesus Reign they would murmur too.
A discontented Nation, and by far
Harder to Rule in times of Peace than War:
Easily set together by the Ears,
And full of causeless Jealousies and Fears:
Apt to Revolt, and willing to Rebel,
And never are contented when they are well.
No Government could ever please them long,
Could Tie their Hands, or rectify their Tongue.
In this to Ancient Israel well compared,
Eternal Murmurs are among them heard.
It was but lately that they were oppressed,
Their Rights Invaded, and their Laws suppressed:
When nicely tender of their Liberty,
Lord! What a Noise they made of Slavery.
In Daily, Tumult showed their Discontent,
Lampoon'd the King, and mocked his Government:
And if in Arms they did not first appear,
'Twas want of Force, and not for want of Fear.
In humbler Tone than English used to do,
At Foreign Hands, for Foreign Aid they sue.
William, the Great Successor of Nassau,
Their Prayers heard, and their Oppressions saw:
He saw and saved them: God and Him they Praised;
To this their Thanks, to that their Trophies raised.
But glutted with their own Felicities,
They soon their New Deliverer Despise;
Say all their Prayers-back, their Joy disown,
Unsing their Thanks, and pull their Trophies down:
Their Harps of Praise are on the Willows hung;
For Englishmen are never Contented long.
The Reverend Clergy too! And who would have thought
That they who had such Non-Resistance Taught,
Should ever to Arms against their Prince be brought?
Who up to Heaven did Regal Pow'er advance;
Subjecting English Laws to Modes of France.
Twisting Religion so with Loyalty,
As one could never Live, and the other Die.
And yet no sooner did their Prince design
Their Glebes and Perquisites to undermine,
But all their Passive Doctrines laid aside;
The Clergy their own Principles denied:
Unpreach'd their Non-resisting Cant, and Prayed
To Heaven for Help, and to the Dutch for Aid.
The Church chim'd all her Doctrines back again,
And Pulpit Champions did the Cause maintain;
Flew in the Face of all their former Zeal,
And Non-Resistance did at once repeal.
The Rabbis say it would be too prolix,
To tie Religion up to Politics:
The Churches Safety is Suprema Lex.
And so by a new Figure of their own,
Their former Doctrines all at once disown.
As Laws Post Facto in the Parliament,
In urgent Cases have obtained Assent;
But are as dangerous Presidents laid by;
Made Lawful only by Necessity.
The Reverend Fathers then in Arms appear,
And Men of God become the Men of War.
The Nation, Fired by them, to Arms apply;
Assault their Antichristian Monarchy;
To their due Channel all our Laws restore,
And made things what they should have been before.
But when they came to fill the Vacant Throne,
And the Pale Priests looked back on what they would done;
How English Liberty began to thrive,
And Church of England Loyalty outlive:
How all their persecuting Days were done,
And their Deliv'rer placed upon the Throne:
The Priests, as Priests are wont to do, turned Tail;
They Are Englishmen, and Nature will prevail.
Now they deplore the Ruins they have made,
And murmur for the Master they betrayed.
Excuse those Crimes they could not make him mend;
And suffer for the Cause they cannot defend.
Pretend they would not have carried things so high;
And Proto-Martyrs make for Popery.
Had the Prince done as they designed the thing,
Have set the Clergy up to Rule the King;
Taken a Donative for coming hither,
And so have left their King and them together,
We had, say they, been now a happy Nation.
No doubt we had seen a Blessed Reformation:
For Wise Men say it is as dangerous a thing,
A Ruling Priesthood, as a Priest-rid King.
And of all Plagues with which Mankind are Cursed,
Ecclesiastic Tyranny's the Worst.
If all our former Grievances were feigned,
King James has been abused, and we Trapann'd;
Bugbear'd with Popery and Power Despotick,
Tyrannick Government, and Leagues Exotic:
The Revolution's a Phanatick Plot,
W -- a Tyrant, S -- a Sot:
A Factious Army, and a Poisoned Nation,
Unjustly forced King James's Abdication.
But if he did the Subjects Rights invade,
Then he was Punished only, not betrayed;
And Punishing of Kings is no such Crime,
But Englishmen have done it many a Time.
When Kings, the Sword of Justice first lay down,
They are no Kings, though they posses the Crown:
Titles are Shadows, Crowns are empty things,
The Good of Subjects is the End of Kings;
To guide in War, and to protect in Peace;
Where Tyrants once commence, the Kings do cease:
For Arbitrary Power's so strange a thing,
It makes the Tyrant, and unmakes the King.
If Kings by Foreign Priests and Armies Regin,
And Lawless Power against their Oaths Maintain,
Then Subjects must have reason to Complain.
If Oaths must bind us when our Kings do Ill;
To call in Foreign Aid is to Rebel.
By force to Circumscribe our Lawful Prince,
Is willful Treason in the largest Sense:
And they who once Rebel, most certainly
Their God, and King, and former Oaths defy.
If we allow no Maladministration
Could cancel the Allegiance of the Nation;
Let all our Learned Sons of Levi try,
This Eccles'astick Riddle to unty:
How they could make a Step to Call the Prince,
And yet pretend to Oaths and Innocence?
By the first Address they made beyond the Seas,
They Are Perjured in the most intense Degrees;
And without Scruple for the time to come,
May Swear to all the Kings in Christendom.
And truly did our Kings consider all,
They Would never let the Clergy Swear at all:
Their Politic Allegiance they would refuse,
For Whores and Priests do never want Excuse.
But if the Mutual Contract was dissolved,
The Doubt's explained, the difficultys 'solv'd:
That Kings when they Descend to Tyranny,
Dissolve the Bond, and leave the Subject free.
The Governments ungirt, when Justice dies,
And Constitutions are non-Entities.
The Nations all a Mob, there is no such thing
As Lords or Commons, Parliament or King.
A great promiscuous Crowd the Hydra lies,
Till Laws revive, and Mutual Contract ties:
A Chaos free to choose for their own share,
What Case of Government they please to wear:
If to a King they do the Reins commit,
All Men are bound in Conscience to submit:
But then that King must by his Oath assent
To Postulata's of the Government;
Which if he breaks, he cuts off the Entail,
And Power retreats to its Original.
This Doctrine has the Sanction of Assent,
From Nature's Universal Parliament.
The Voice of Nature, and the Course of Things,
Allow that Laws superior are to Kings.
None but Delinquents would have Justice cease,
Knaves rail at Laws, as Soldiers rail at Peace:
For Justice is the End of Government,
As Reason is the Test of Argument.
No Man was ever yet so void of Sense,
As to Debate the Right of Self-Defence;
A Principle so grafted in the Mind,
With Nature born, and does like Nature bind:
Twisted with Reason and with Nature too;
As neither one or the other can undo.
Nor can this Right be less when National;
Reason which governs one, should govern all.
Whatever the Dialects of Courts may tell,
He that his Right Demands, can never Rebel.
Which Right if it is by Governors denied,
May be procured by Force or Foreign Aid.
For Tyranny's a Nation's Term of Grief;
As Folks cry Fire, to hasten in Relief.
And when the hated Word is heard about,
All Men should come to help the People out.
Thus England groaned, Britannia's Voice was heard;
And Great Nassau to rescue her appeared:
Called by the Universal Voice of Fate;
God and the Peoples Legal Magistrate.
Ye Heavens regard! Almighty Jove, look down,
And view thy Injured Monarch on the Throne.
On their Ungrateful Heads due Vengeance take,
Who sought his Aid, and then his part forsake.
Witness, ye Powers! It was our Call alone,
Which now our Pride makes us ashamed to own.
Britannia's Troubles fetched him from afar,
To Court the dreadful Casualties of War:
But where Requital never can be made,
Acknowledgements a Tribute seldom paid.
He dwelt in Bright Maria's Circling Arms,
Defended by the Magic of her Charms,
From Foreign Fears, and from Domestic Harms.
Ambition found no Fuel to her Fire,
He had what God could give, or Man desire.
Till Pity rowz'd him from his soft Repose:
His Life to unseen Hazards to expose:
Till Pity moved him in our Cause to appear;
Pity! that Word which now we hate to hear.
But English Gratitude is always such,
To hate the Hand which does oblige to much.
Britannia's Cries gave Birth to his Intent,
And hardly gained his unforeseen Assent:
His boding Thoughts foretold him he should find
The People Fickle, Selfish and Unkind.
Which Thought did to his Royal Heart appear
More dreadful than the Dangers of the War:
For nothing grates a generous Mind so soon,
As base Returns for hearty Service done.
Satyr be silent, awsully prepare.
Britannia's Song, and William's Praise to hear.
Stand by, and let her cheerfully rehearse
Her Grateful Vows in her Immortal Verse.
Loud Fames eternal Trumpet let her sound;
Listen ye distant Poles and endiess Round.
May the strong Blast the Welcome News convey
As for as Sound can reach, or Spirit can fly.
To Neighboring Worlds, if such there be, relate
Our Heroes Fame, for theirs to imitate.
To distant Worlds of Spirits let her rehearse:
For Spirits, without the help of Voice, Converse.
May Angels hear the gladsome News on high,
Mixed with their everlasting Symphony.
And Hell it self stand in Suspense to know,
Whether it be the Fatal Blast or no.
BRITANNIA.
The Fame of Virtue it is for which I sound,
And Heroes with Immortal Triumphs Crowned.
Fame Built on solid Virtue swifter flies,
Than Morning-Light can spread my Eastern Skies.
The gathering Air returns the doubling Sound,
And Loud Repeating Thunders force it round:
Eccboes return from Caverns of the Deep:
Old Chaos Dreamed on it in Eternal Sleep:
Time hands it forward to its latest Vrn,
From whence it never, never shall return;
Nothing is heard so far, or lasts so long,
It Is heard by every Ear, and spoke by every Tongue.
My Hero with the Sails of Honor Furled,
Rises like the Great Genius of the World.
By Fate and Fame wisely prepared to be,
The Soul of War, and Life of Victory:
He spreads the Wings of Virtue on the Throne,
And every Wind of Glory fans them on.
Immortal Trophies dwell upon his Brow,
Fresh as the Garlands he has won but now.
By different Steps the high Ascent he gains,
And differently that high Ascent maintains.
Princes for Pride, and Lust of Rule, make War;
And struggle for the Name of Conqueror.
Some Fight for Fame, and some for Victory;
He Fights to Save, and Conquers to set Free.
Then seek Phrase his Titles to conceal,
And hide with Words what Actions must reveal.
No Parallel from Hebrew Stories take,
Of God-like Kings my Similies to make:
No borrowed Names conceal my living Theme;
But Names and Things directly I Proclaim.
It Is honest Merit does his Glory raise,
Whom that Exalt's let no Man fear to Praise:
Of such a Subject no Man need be shy;
Virtue's above the Reach of Flattery.
He needs no Character but his own Fame,
Nor any flattering Titles, but his Name:
Willam 's the Name that is spoke by every Tongue:
William 's the Darling Subject of my Song.
Listen ye Virgins to the Charming Sound,
And in Eternal Dances hand it round:
Your Early Offerings to this Altar bring;
Make him at once a Lover and a King.
May he submit to none but to your Arms;
Nor never be subdued. but by your Charms.
May your soft thoughts for him be all Sublime;
And every tender Vow he made for him.
May he be first in every Morning-thought,
And Heaven never hear a Prayer, when he is left out.
May every Omen, every Boding Dream,
Be Fortunate by mentioning his Name:
May this one Charm Infernal Power affright,
And guard you from the Terrors of the Night,
May every cheerful Glass, as it goes down,
To William's Health, be Cordials to your own.
Let every Song be Chorust with his Name,
And Music pay a Tribute to his Fame.
Let every Poet tune his Artful Verse,
And in Immortal Strains his Deeds rehearse.
And may Apollo never more inspire
The Disobedient Bard with his Seraphick Fire.
May all my Sons their Grateful Homage pay;
His Praises Sing, and for his Safety Pray.
Satyr return to our Unthankful Isle,
Secured by Heavens Regard, and Williams's Toil.
To both Ungrateful, and to both Untrue;
Rebels to God, and to Good Nature too.
If ever this Nation be Distressed again,
To whomsoe'er they cry, they will cry in vain.
To Heaven they cannot have the Face to look:
Or if they should, it would but Heaven provoke.
To hope for Help from Man would be too much;
Mankind would always tell them of the Dutch:
How they came here our Freedoms to obtain,
Were Paid, and Cursed, and Hurried home again.
How by their Aid we first dissolved our Fears,
And then our Helpers Damned, for Foreigners.
It Is not our English temper to do better,
For Englishmen think every Man their Debtor.
It Is worth observing that we never complained
Of Foreigners, nor of the Wealth they gained,
Till all their Services were at an end.
Wise Men affirm, it is the English way,
Never to Grumble till they come to Pay;
And then they always think, their temper's such,
The Work too little, and the Pay too much.
As frighted Patients when they want a Cure,
Bid any Price, and any Pain endure:
But when the Doctors Remedies appear,
The Cure's too Easy, and the Price too Dear.
Great Portland never was banter'd when he strove,
For Us his Master's kindest thoughts to move.
We never Lampoon'd his Conduct, when employed
King James's Secret Councils to divide:
Then we caressed him as the only Man,
Which could the doubtful Oracle explain:
The only Hushai able to repel
The dark Designs of our Achitopel.
Compared his Masters Courage to his Sense,
The Ablest Statesman, and the Bravest Prince.
On his wise Conduct we depended much,
And liked him never the worse for being Dutch.
Nor was he valued more than he deserved,
Freely he ventured, faithfully he served.
In all King William's Dangers he has shared:
In England's Quarrels always he appeared:
The Revolution first, and then the Boyne,
In both his Counsels and his Conduct shine,
His Martial Valor Flanders will confess;
And France Regrets his managing the Peace.
Faithful to Englands Interest, and her King;
The greatest Reason of our murmuring.
Ten Years in English Service he appeared,
And gained his Masters, and the Worlds Regard:
But it is not Englands Custom to Reward.
The Wars are over, England needs him not;
Now he is a Dutchman, and the Lord knows what.
Schombergh the Ablest Soldier of his Age,
With Great Nassau, did in our cause engage:
Both joined for England's Rescue and Defense,
The greatest Captain, and the greatest Prince.
With what Applause his Stories did we tell!
Stories which Europe's Volumes largely swell.
We counted him an Army in our Aid:
Where He Commanded, no Man was afraid.
His Actions with a constant Conquest shine,
From Villa-Vitiosa to the Rhine.
France, Flanders, Germany, his Fame confess:
And all the World was fond of him, but Us.
Our Turn first served, we grudged him the Command,
Witness the Grateful Temper of the Land,
We blame the K -- that he relies too much
On Strangers, Germans, Hugonots, and Dutch;
And seldom does his great Affairs of State,
To English Counselors communicate.
The Fact might very well be answered thus,
He has so often been betrayed by us,
He must have been a Madman to Rely
On English G -- ns Fidelity.
For laying other Arguments aside,
This thought, might mortify our English Pride,
That Foreigners have faithfully Obeyed him,
And none but Englishmen have ever Betrayed him.
They have our Ships, and Merchants bought and sold,
And bartered English Blood for Foreign Gold.
First to the French they sold our Turky-Fleer,
And Injured Talmarsh next, at Camaret.
The King himself is sheltered from their Snares,
Not by his Merit, but the Crown he wears.
Experience tells us it is the English way,
Their Benefactors always to betray.
And least Examples should be too Remote,
A Modern Magistrate of Famous Note,
Shall give you his own Character by Rote.
I Will make it out, deny it he that can,
His Worship is a True-Born Englishman:
In all the Latitude of that empty Word,
By Modern Acceptations understood.
The Parish-Books his great Descent Record,
And now he hopes e're long to be a Lord.
And truly as things go, it would be pity
But such as he should Represent the City:
While Robb'ry for Burnt-Offering he brings,
And gives to God what he has stole from Kings:
Great Monuments of Charity he raises,
And good St. Magnus whistles out his Praises.
To City-Goals he grants a Jubilee.
And hires Huzza's from his own Mobilee.
Lately he wore the Golden Chain and Gown,
With which Equipt, he thus Harangu'd the Town.
His Fine Speech, etc.

With Clouted Iron Shoes, and Sheep-skin Breeches,
More Rags than Manners, and more Dirt than Riches:
From driving Cows and Calves to Layton-Market,
While of my Greatness there appeared no Spark yer,
Behold I come, to let you see the Pride
With which Exalted Beggars always Ride.
Born to the Needful Labors of the Plow,
The Cart-Whip Graced me, as the Chain does now.
Nature and Fate in doubt what Course to take,
Whether I should a Lord or Flough-Boy make;
Kindly at last resolved they would promote me,
And first a Knave, and then a Knight, they Vote me.
What Fate appointed, Nature did prepare,
And furnished me with an exceeding Care.
To fit me for what they designed to have me;
And every Gift, but Honesty, they gave me.
And thus Equipped, to this Proud Town I came,
In quest of Bread, and not in quest of Fame.
Blind to my future Fate, a humble Boy,
Free from the Guilt and Glory I enjoy.
The hopes which my Ambition entertained,
Were in the Name of Footboy all contained.
The Greatest Heights from Small Beginnings rise:
The Gods were Great on Earth, before they reached the Skies.
B -- well, the Generous Temper of whose Mind,
Was ever, to be bountiful, inclined:
Whether by his ill Fate or Fancy led,
First took me up, and furnished me with Bread.
The little Services he put me to,
Seemed Labors, rather than were truly so.
But always my Advancement he designed;
For 'twas his very Nature to be kind.
Large was his Soul, his Temper ever free;
The best of Masters and of Men to me.
And I who was before decreed by Fate,
To be made Infamous as well as Great,
With an obsequious Diligence obeyed him,
Till trusted with his All, and then betrayed him.
All his past Kindnesses I trampled on,
Ruined his Fortunes, to erect my own.
So Vipers in the Bosom bred, begin
To hiss at that Hand first which took them in.
With eager Treach'ry I his Fall pursued,
And my first Trophies were Ingratitude.
Ingratitude, the worst of Humane Guilt,
The basest Action Mankind can commit;
Which, like the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
Has least of Honor, and of Guilt the most;
Distinguished from all other Crimes by this,
That it is a Crime which no Man will confess.
That Sin alone, which should not be forgiven
On Earth, although perhaps it may in Heaven.
Thus my first Benefactor I o'rethrew;
And how should I, be to a second, true?
The Public Trusts came next into my Care,
And I to use them scurvily prepare:
My Needy Sovereign Lord I played upon,
And lent him many a thousand of his own;
For which great Interests I took care to Charge,
And so my ill-got Wealth became so large.
My Predecessor Judas was a Fool,
Fitter to have been whipped and sent to School,
Than Sell a Savior: Had I been at Hand,
His Master had not been so cheap trapann'd;
I would have made the eager Jews have found,
For thirty Pieces, thirty thousand Pound.
My Cousin Ziba, of Immortal Fame,
(Ziba, and I, shall never want a Name:)
Firstborn of Treason, Nobly did Advance
His Masters Fall, for his Inheritance.
By whose keen Arts, old David first began
To break his Sacred Oath with Jonathan:
The Good Old King it is thought was very loath
To break his Word, and therefore broke his Oath.
Ziba's a Traitor of some Quality,
Yet Ziba might have been informed by me:
Had I been there, he never had been Content
With half the Estate, nor half the Government.
In our late Revolution 'twas thought strange,
That I, of all Mankind, should like the Change,
But they who wondered at it, never knew,
That in it I did my old Game pursue:
Nor had they heard of Twenty thousand Pound,
Which never yet was lost, nor never was found.
Thus all things in their turn to Sale I bring,
God and my Master first, and then the King:
Till by successful Villainies made Bold,
I thought to turn the Nation into Gold;
And so to Forg -- y my Hand I bent,
Not doubting I could gull the Government;
But there was ruffl'd by the Parliament.
And if I escaped the Unhappy Tree to Climb,
'Twas want of Law, and not for want of Crime.
But my The Devil,
Old Friend, who Printed in my Face
A needful Competence of English Brass,
Having more Business yet for me to do,
And loath to lose his Trusty Servant so,
Managed the Matter with such Art and Skill,
As saved his Hero and threw down the B -- ll.
And now I Am Graced with unexpected Honors,
For which I Will certainly abuse the Donors:
Knighted, and made a Tribune of the People,
Whose Laws and Properties I Am like to keep well:
The Custos Rotulorum of the City,
And Captain of the Guards of their Banditie.
Surrounded by my Catchpoles I declare
Against the Needy Debtor open War.
I Hang poor Thieves for stealing of your Pelf,
And suffer none to Rob you, but my self.
The King Commanded me to help Reform ye,
And how I Will do it, Miss shall inform ye.
I keep the best Seraglio in the Nation,
And hope in time to bring it into Fashion.
No Brimstone Whore need fear the Lash for me,
That part I Will leave to Brother Jeffery.
Our Gallants need not go abroad to Rome,
I Will keep a Whoring Jubilee at Home.
Whoring's the Darling of my Inclination;
An't I a Magistrate for Reformation?
For this my Praise is sung by every Bard,
For which Bridewell would be a just Reward.
In Print my Panegyricks fill the Streets,
And hired Goal-Birds their Huzza's Repeat.
Some Charities contrived to make a show,
Have taught the Needy Rabble to do so:
Whose empty Noise is a Mechanic Fame,
Since for Sir Beelzebub they would do the the same.
The Conclusion.
THen let us boast of Ancestors no more,
Or Deeds of Heroes done in Days of Yore,
In latent Records of the Ages past,
Behind the Rear of time, in long Oblivion placed.
For if our Virtues must in Lines descend,
The Merit with the Families would end:
And Intermixtures would most fatal grow;
For Vice would be Hereditary too;
The tainted Blood would of Necessity,
In Voluntary Wickedness convey.
Vice, like Ill Nature, for an Age or two,
May seem a Generation to pursue;
But Virtue seldom does regard the Breed;
Fools do the Wise, and Wise Men Fools succeed.
What is it to us, what Ancestors we had?
If Good, what better? Or what worse, if Bad?
Examples are for imitation set,
Yet all Men follow Virtue with Regret.
Could but our Ancestors retrieve the Fate,
And see their Offspring thus Degenerate;
How we contend for Birth and Names unknown,
And Build on their past Actions, not our own;
They Would Cancel Records, and their Tombs Deface,
And openly disown the Vile Degenerate Race:
For Fame of Families is all a cheat,
It Is Personal Virtue only makes us Great.
THE Mock Mourners. A SATYR, By way of ELEGY on King WILLIAM.
To the QUEEN.
MADAM,
YOUR Majesty has so often declared Your just Concern for the Nations Loss, and
Your Value for the Memory of the late King: You have so publicly approved his
Conduct, so visibly moved in the same Steps, and pursued the wise Measures of
this Your Glorious Ancestor, that it cannot be thought displeasing to Your
Majesty, to reprehend those who make a Mock at the Sorrow of Your Majesty and
Three Nations.

Your Majesty was the first who told us he could not be sufficiently Lamented.
May those who are not of the same Mind find no Favor with Your Majesty, nor
there Maker, till they repent that Sin against his Merit, and the Voice of their
Native Country.

Here are no Reflections upon Your Majesty's Household, or Council, or Courts of
Justice, or either House of Parliament, and consequently no Offense against
Your Royal Proclamation. 'Twou'd be an Affront to Your Majesty to imagine there
were any, under all those Heads of Your Government, could deserve the Reproof
of the following Satyr.

Your Majesty has an entire Possession of the Hearts of Your People, but their
Affection is still the deeper rooted by that generous Sorrow you have expressed
for the Loss of Him, to whom they owe the full Possession of their Liberty
under Your Government.

How they can be faithful Subjects to Your Majesty that were not true Friends
to such a King, is a Mystery out of bumane Understanding, since the Happiness
we enjoy by Your Government proceeds from his defending us against those who
would not have had Your Majesty to Reign over us.

'Twou'd be a Crime against Your Majesty, which deserved no Pardon, to suggest
You should be offended at that part of the Satyr which points at our
Immoralities: Your Majesty's Example, as well as Command, has encouraged us all
to declare War against Vice, and there we are sure of Your Royal Protection.

For the rest, if an extraordinary Concern for the Glorious Memory of the late
King has led the Author into any Excesses, he begs Your Majesty would place it
to the Account of that just Passion every honest Man retains for his
extraordinary Merit; believing that no Man can have an Indifferency for the
Memory of King William, and at the same time have any Desire for the Welfare of
his Native Country.

While Your Majesty pursues the true Interest of England, the Protestant
Religion, and the Welfare of Europe, as He did, You will have the same Enemies
that he had; the same to oppose You Abroad, and reproach You at Home; but You
will thereby engage all Your Honest Subjects to adhere the firmer to their
Duty, all Your Protestant Neighbors to depend upon Your Protection, and God
shall Crown Your Majesty and these Nations with His Special Favor and
Benediction.

Amen.
A SATYR, etc.
SUCH has been this Ill-natured Nation's Fate,
Always to see their Friends and Foes too late;
By Native Pride, and want of Temper, led,
Never to value Merit till it is Dead:
And then Immortal Monuments they raise,
And Damn their Former Follies by their Praise;
With just Reproaches Rail at their own Vice,
And Mourn for those they did before despise:
So they who Moses Government defied,
Sincerely sorrow'd for him when he Died.
And so when Britain's Genius fainting lay,
Summoned by Death, which Monarchs must Obey,
Trembling and Soul-less half the Nation stood,
Upbraided by their own Ingratitude.
They, who with true born Honesty before,
Grudged him the Trophies he so justly wore,
Were, with his Fate, more than himself dismayed,
Not for their King, but for themselves afraid.
He had their Rights and Liberties restored,
In Battle purchased, and by Peace secured:
And they with English Gratitude began,
To feel the Favor, and despise the Man.
But when they saw that his Protection ceased,
And Death had their Deliverer possessed;
How Thunderstruck they stood! What cries they raised!
They looked like Men Distracted and Amazed:
Their Terror did their Conscious Guilt explain,
And wished their injured Prince Alive again.
They Dreamed of Halters, Gibbets and of Goals,
French Armies, Popery and Prince of Wales.
Descents, Invasions, Uproars in the State,
Mobs, Irish Massacrees, and God knows what:
Imaginary Enemies appeared,
And all they knew they Merited, they Feared.
It Is strange that Pride and Envy should prevail,
To make Men's Sense as well as Virtue fail:
That where they must depend they should abuse,
And slight the Man they were afraid to lose.
But William had not Governed Fourteen Year,
To be an unconcerned Spectator here:
His Works, like Providence, were all Complete,
And made a Harmony we Wondered at.
The Legislative Power he set Free,
And led them step by step to Liberty,
'Twas not his Fault if they could not Agree.
Impartial Justice He Protected so,
The Laws did in their Native Channels flow,
From whence our sure Establishment begun,
And William laid the first Foundation Stone:
On which the stately Fabric soon appeared,
How could they sink when such a Pilot steered?
He taught them due defenses to prepare,
And make their future Peace their present Care:
By him directed, Wisely they Decreed
What Lines should be expelled, and what succeed;
That now he is Dead there is nothing to be done,
But to take up the Scepter he laid down.
The Circle of this Order is so round,
So Regular as nothing can confound:
In Truth and Justice all the Lines commence,
And Reason is the vast circumference;
William's the moving Center of the whole,
'T had else a Body been without a Soul;
Fenced with just Laws, impregnable it stands,
And will for ever last in Honest Hands.
For Truth and Justice are the immortal Springs,
Give Life to Constitutions, and to Kings:
In either case if one of them decay,
These can no more Command than those Obey:
Right is the only Fountain of Command,
The Rock on which Authority must stand.
And if Executive Power steps awry,
On either hand it splits on Tyranny:
Oppression is a Plague on Mankind sent,
Infects the Vitals of a Government.
Convulsions follow, and such Vapors rise,
The Constitution Suffocates and Dies:
Law is the Grand Specific to Restore,
And, unobstructed, never fails to Cure;
All other Rules compared unto that,
Are Tampering and Quacking with the State.
The Conscitution's like a vast Machine
That Is full of curious Workmanship within:
Where, though the parts unweildy may appear,
It will be put in Motion with a Hair.
The Wheels are Officers and Magistrates,
By which the whole Contrivance operates:
Laws are the Weights and Springs which make it move
Wound up by Kings as Managers above;
Which if they are screwed too high, or down too low,
The Movement goes too fast, or else too slow.
Then Legislators are the Engineers,
Who, when it is out of Order, make Repairs:
The People are the Owners; 'twas for them
The first Inventor drew the Ancient Scheme.
It Is for their Benefit it works, and they
The Charges of maintaining it defray:
And if their Governors unfaithful prove,
They Engineers or Managers remove.
Unkind Contention sometimes their appears
Between the Managers and Engineers:
Such Strife is always to the Owners wrong,
And once it made the Work stand still too long;
Till William came, and loosed the Fatal Chain,
And set the Engineers to Work again:
And having made the wondrous thing complete,
To Anne's unerring Hand he left the Helm of State.
Anne, like Elisha, when just William went,
Received the Mantle of this Government,
And by Divine Concession does inherit
A Double Portion of his Ruling Spirit.
The Dying Hero loaded with Renown,
Gave her the Nations Blessing with a Crown,
From God, the People, and the Laws, her own.
Told her that he had Orders from on High,
To lay aside the Government, and Die:
What he had Fought for, gave her up in Peace,
And cheered her Royal Heart with Prospect of Success.
While he, who Death in all its Shapes had seen,
With full Composure quiet and serene,
Passive and undisorder'd at his Fate,
Quitted the English Throne without Regret.
No conscious Guilt disturbed his Royal Breast,
Calm as the Regions of Eternal Rest:
Before his Life went out, his Heaven came in,
For all was bright without, and clear within.
The blessed Rewards did to his Sight appear,
The Passage easy, and the Prospect near:
His parting Eye the gladsome Regions spied,
Just so, before, his Dear Maria Died.
His High Concern for England he expressed;
England, the Darling of his Royal Breast:
The transports of his parting Soul he spent,
Her dis-united Parties to Lament.
His Wishes then supplied his want of Power,
And Prayed for them, for whom he Fought before.
Speak Envy, if thou can, inform us what
Could this unthankful Nation, Murmur at?
But Discontent was always our Disease,
For Englishmen what Government can please?
We always had our Sons of Belial here,
Who knew no God, nor Government to Fear:
No Wonder these disliked his Gentle Sway,
Unwilling Homage to his Scepter Pay,
And only did for want of Power, Obey.
Some soft excuse for them we might contrive,
Had he not been the Gentlest Prince Alive:
Had he not born, with an exalted Mind,
All that was disobling and unkind.
Peaceful and tender Thoughts his Mind possessed,
And High Superior Love concealed the rest:
Our Discontents would often his Pity move,
But all his Anger was suppressed by Love.
That Heaven-born Passion had subdued his Soul,
Possessed the greatest part, and Ruled the whole:
This made him strive his People to possess,
Which he had done had he obliged 'em less.
He knew that Titles are but empty Things,
And Hearts of Subjects are the strength of Kings:
Justice and Kindness were his constant care;
He scorned to Govern Mankind by their Fear.
Their Universal Love he strove to Gain;
'Twas hard that we should make him strive in vain:
That he should here our English Humors find,
And we, that he had saved, should be unkind.
By all endearing Stratagems he strove
To draw us by the Secret Springs of Love:
And when he could not Cure our Discontent,
It always was below him to Resent.
Nature was never seen in such Excess;
All Fury when Abroad, at Home all Peace:
In War all Fire and Blood, in Peace inclined
To all that is Sweet, and Gentle, Soft and Kind;
Ingratitude for this must needs Commence
In want of Honesty, or want of Sense.
When Kings to Luxury and Ease resigned,
Their Native Countries just Defense declined,
This High pretending Nation used to plead,
What they would perform had they a King to lead.
What Wondrous Actions had by them been done,
When they had Martial Monarchs, to lead on:
And if their Prince would but with France make War,
What Troops of English Heroes would appear.
William the bottom of their Courage found,
False like themselves, mere emptiness and sound:
For called by Fate to Fight for Christendom,
They sent their King Abroad, and stayed at Home;
Wisely declined the hazards of the War,
To Nourish Faction and Disorders here.
Wrapped in Luxurious Plenty they Debauch,
And load their Active Monarch with Reproach:
They stay at Home and teach him to Command,
And Judge those Actions which they dare not mend.
Backward in Deeds, but of their Censures free,
And blame that Conduct they are afraid to see:
Against the Hand that saves them they exclaim,
And Curse the Strangers, though they Fight for them.
Though some who would excuse the Matter say,
They did not grudge their Service, but their Pay.
Where are the Royal Bands that now advance
To spread his dreadful Banners into France?
Britannia's Noble Sons her Interest fly,
And Foreign Heroes must their place supply;
Much for the Fame of our Nobility.
Posterity will be ashamed to hear
Great Britain's Monarch did in Arms appear,
And scarce an English Nobleman was there.
Our Ancestors had never Conquered France,
For Kingdoms seldom are subdued by Chance,
H^d Talbott, Vere and Montacutte, with held
The Glory for the danger of the Field.
Had English Honesty been kept alive,
The Ancient English Glory would survive.
But Gallantry and Courage will decline,
Where Pride and all Confederate Vices join.
Had we kept up the Fame of former Years,
Landen had been as Famous as Poictiers;
Ormond and Essex had not Fought alone,
The only English Lords our Verse can own:
The only Peers of whom the World can say,
That they for Honor Fought, and not for Pay.
A Regimented Few we had indeed,
Who served for neither Pride nor Fame, but Bread:
Some Bully L -- s, Protection P -- s, and some
Went out because they durst not stay at Home.
Loaded with Noxious Vices they appear
A Scandal to the Nation, and the War:
Heroes in Midnight Scuffles with the Watch,
And Lewd enough an Army to Debauch,
Flesh't with cold Murders, and from Justice fled,
Pursued by Blood, in Drink and Darkness shed,
In vain they strive with Bravery to appear,
For where there is Guilt, there always will be Fear.
These are the Pillars of the English Fame.
Such Peers as History must blush to Name.
When future Records to the World relate
Marsaglia's Field, and Gallant Schomberg's Fate,
W -- was Captive made, it was severe,
Fate took the Honest Man, and left the Peer.
The World owes Fame for Ages long before
To the Great Style of W -- which he bore:
But when we come the Branches to compare,
It Is a Hero Ancestor, a Bully Heir:
The Virtues the Posterity forsake,
And all their Gallant Blood is dwindl'd to a Rake.
More might be said, but, Satyr, stay thy Rhimes,
And mix not his Misfortunes with his Crimes;
We need not Rake the Ashes of the Dead,
There Is Living Characters enough to Read.
How could this Nation ever think of Peace?
Or how look up to Heaven for Success?
While lawless Vice in Fleets and Camps appeared;
And Oaths were louder than their Cannon heard?
No wonder English Israel has been said,
Before the French Philistines Fleet to have fled.
While T -- Embraced with Whores appeared,
And Vice it self the Royal Navy Steered.
William opposed their Crimes with steady Hand,
By his Example First, and then Command,
Prompted the Laws their Vices to suppress,
For which no doubt the Guilty Loved him less.
Ye Sons of Envy, Railers at the Times,
Be bold like Englishmen, and own your Crimes:
For shame put on no Black, but let us see
Your Habits always and your Tongues agree.
Envy never Blushes: Let it not be said.
You Hate him Living, and you Mourn him Dead:
No Sorrow show where you no Love protess;
There are no Hypocrites in Wickedness.
Great Bonfires make, and tell the World you are glad
Y' have lost the greatest Blessing ever you had:
So Madmen sing in Nakedness and Chains;
For when the Sense is gone, the Song remains.
So Thankless Israel, when they were set free,
Reproached the Author of their Liberty,
And wished themselves in Egypt back again;
What pity 'twas they wished, or wished in vain?
Stop Satyr, let Britannia now relate
Her William's Character, and her own Fate;
Let her to him a grateful Trophy raise;
She best can sigh his Loss that sung his Praise.
BRITANIA.

Of all my Sons by Tyranny bereft,
A Widow desolate, and Childless left,
By Violence and Injury oppressed,
To Heaven I cast my Eyes, and sighed the rest.
I need but Sigh, for I was always Heard,
And William on my welcome Shores appeared.
With Wings of speed to Rescue me he came,
And all my Sorrows vanished into Flame.
New Joys sprung up, new Triumphs now abound,
And all my Virgin Daughters hear the sound:
Eternal Dances move upon my Plains,
And youthful Blood springs in my ancient Veins.
With open Arms I yielded my Embrace,
And William saw the Beauties of my Face.
He had before the Knowledge of my Charms,
For he had my Maria in his Arms.
While he remained I gave eternal Spring,
Made him my Son, my Darling, and my King;
While all the wondering World my choice approve,
Congratulate his Fate, and justify my Love.
Of British Blood in Belgian Plains he lived,
My only Foreign Offspring that survived,
Batavian Climates nourished him a while,
Too great a Genius for so damp a Soil,
And freely then surrendered him to me,
For wise Men freely will the fates Obey.
Yet in my William they had equal Share,
And he defended them with equal care.
They were the early Trophies of his Sword,
His Infant Hand their Liberty restored.
His Nurse, the Belgic Lion, roared for Aid,
And planted early Laurels on his Head.
His easy Victories amazed Mankind;
We wondered what the dreadful Youth designed.
Fearless he Fought his Country to set Free,
And with his Sword Cut out their Liberty.
The Journals of his Actions always seemed
So wonderful as if the World had dreamed:
So swift, so full of Terror, he went on,
He was a Conqueror before a Man.
The Bourbon Sword, though it was brighter far,
Yet drawn for Conquest, and oppressive War,
Had all the Triumphs of the World Engrost:
But quickly all those Triumphs to Him lost.
Justice to William early Trophies brought;
William for Truth and Justice always fought.
He was the very Mystery of War,
He gained by it when he was not Conqueror.
And if his Enemies a Battle won,
He might be beaten, they would be undone.
Antaeus like from every fall he rose,
Strengthened with double Vigor to oppose;
Those Actions Mankind judged Unfortunate,
Served but as secret Steps to make him Great.
Then let them Boast their Glory at Landen,
In vain the Embattell'd Squadrons crowded in,
Their's was the Victory, the Conquest mine.
Of all the Heroes Ages past adore,
Back to the first Great Man and long before;
Though Virtue has sometimes with Valor joined,
The Barren World no Parallel can find.
If back to Israel's Tents I should retire,
And of the Hebrew Heroes there enquire,
I find no Hand did Judah's Scepter wear,
Come up to Williams Modern Character.
Namure's Gygantick Powers he o'erthrew;
David did less when he Goliath slew.
Here Is no Vriah's for Adult'ry slain,
No Oaths forgot to faithful Jonathan.
And if to Jesse's Grandson we have recourse,
William his Wisdom had without his Whores.
Joshua might still have staid on Jordan's Shore,
Must he, as William did, the Boyne pass over.
Almighty Power was forced to interpose,
And frighted both the Water, and his Foes:
But had my William been to pass that Stream.
God needed not to part the Waves for him.
Not Forty Thousand Canaanites could stand;
In spite of Waves, or Canaanites, he would Land:
Such Streams never stemmed his Tide of Victory;
No, not the Stream; no, nor the Enemy.
His Bombs and Cannon would have made the Wall,
Without the Help of Jewish Rams-Horns, fall.
When his dear Israel from their Foes had fled,
Because of stoll'n Spoils by Achan hid,
He never, like Joshua, on the Ground have laid,
He Would certainly have fought as well as prayed.
The Sun would rather have been thought to stay,
Amazed to see how soon he had won the Day,
Than to give time the Canaanites to slay:
The greatest Captains of the Ages past,
Debauched their Fame with Cruelty at last:
William did only Tyrants subdue;
These conquered Kings, and then the People too:
The Subjects reaped no Profit for their Pains,
And only changed their Masters, not their Chains;
Their Victories did for themselves appear,
And made their Peace as dreadful as the War:
But William fought Oppression to destroy,
That Mankind might in Peace the World enjoy.
The Pompeys, Caesar's, Scipio's Alexanders,
Who crowd the World with Fame, were great Commanders.
These too brought Blood and Ruin with their Arms,
But William always fought on other Terms:
Terror indeed might in his Front appear,
But Peace and Plenty followed in the Rear:
And if Oppression forced him to contend,
Calmness was all his Temper, Peace his End:
He was the only Man which Heaven saw fit
To regulate the World, or Conquer it.
Who can his Skill in Government Gainsay,
He that could England's brittle Scepter Sway,
Where Parties too much Rule, and Kings Obey?
He always Reigned by Gentleness and Love,
An Emblem of the Government above.
Vote me not Childless then in Christendom.
I yet have Sons in my suspended Womb;
And 'till just Fate such due Provision makes,
A Daughter my Protection undertakes.
Crowns know no Sexes, and my Government
To either Kind admits a just Descent.
Queens have to me been always Fortunate,
Ever since my English Phaenix ruled the State,
Who made my People Rich, my Country Great.
Satyr be just, and when we lash their Crimes,
Mingle some Tears for William with our Rhimes.
Though Baseness and Ingratitude appear,
Thank Heaven that we have Weeping Millons here:
Then speak our hearty Sorrows if you can,
Superior Grief in feeling Words explain:
Accents that wound, and all the Senses numb,
And while they speak, may strike the Hearer dumb:
Such Grief as never was for King before,
And such as never, never shall be more.
See how Authority comes weeping on,
And view the Queen lamenting on his Throne.
With just Regret, she takes the Sword of State,
Not by her Choice directed, but his Fate;
Accepts the sad Necessity with Tears,
And mournfully for Government prepares.
The Peoples Acclamation she receives
With sadden'd Joy, and a Content that grieves.
View next the sad Assemblies that appear
To tell their Grief for Him, and Joy for Her.
The first confounds the last with such Excess,
They hardly can their Noble thoughts express.
The illustrious Troops address here to condole,
And speak such Grief as Wounds her to the Soul:
They lodge their Sorrows in the Royal Breast;
The Harbor where the Nation looks for Rest.
Next these, the Representatives arise,
With all the Nation's Sorrow in their Eyes.
The Epithets they righteously apply
To the Restorer of their Liberty,
Are Tokens of their Sense and Honesty.
For as a Body we were always true,
But it is our Parties that our Peace undo.
Who can like them the Peoples Grief express?
They show her all the Tokens of Excess:
Overwhelmed with Sorrow, and suppressed with Care,
They place the Nation's Refuge now in her:
Nothing but her Succession could abate
The Nation's Sorrow for their Monarch's Fate:
And nothing but his Fate could their true Joy
For her Succession, lessen or destroy.
The Civil Sword to her, as Heaven saw fit,
With general Satisfaction they commit:
How can it in a Hand like hers miscarry?
But who shall for us weild the Military?
Who shall the jarring Generals Unite;
First teach them to agree, and then to Fight?
Who shall Renewed Alliances contrive,
And keep the vast Confederacies alive?
Who shall the growing Gallick Force subdue?
'Twas more than all the World, but him could do.
Sighs for departed Friends are senseless things,
But it is not so when Nations Mourn for Kings:
When wounded Kingdoms such a Loss complain,
As Nature never can repair again;
The Tyrant Grief, like Love, obeys no Laws,
But blindly views the Effect, and not the Cause.
Dark are the Works of Sovereign Providence
And often clash with our contracted Sense;
But if we might with Heavens Decrees debate,
And of our Makers Works expostulate,
Why should he form a Mind supreamly Great,
And to his Charge commit the Reins of Fate,
And at one hasty Blow the World defeat?
A Blow so sudden, so severe and swift,
We had no time for Supplication left:
As if Almighty Power had been afraid.
Such Prayers would by such Multitudes be made;
Such Moses's would to his Altars go,
To whom he never did, or would, say no:
He hardly could know how to strike the Blow.
For Prayer so much the Sovereign Power commands
Even God himself sometimes as Conquered stands,
And calls for Quarter at the Wrestlers Hands.
How Strenuous then had been the Sacred Strife,
While all the kneeling World had begged his Life,
With all that Earnestness of Zeal, and more
Than ever Nation begged for King before?
See how the neighboring Lands his Fame improve,
And by their Sorrows testify their Love,
Sprinkle his Memory with grateful Tears,
And hand his Glory to succeeding Years.
With what Contempt will English Men appear
When future Ages read his Character?
They Will never bear to hear in time to come
How he was loved Abroad, and scorned at Home.
The World will scarce believe it could be true,
And Vengeance must such Insolence pursue.
Our Nation will by all Men be abhorred,
And William's juster Fame be so restored.
Posterity, when Histories relate
His Glorious Deeds, will ask, What Giant's that?
For common Virtues may Men's Fame advance,
But an immoderate Glory turns Romance.
Its real Merit does it self undo,
Men talk is up so high it cannot be true:
So William's Life, increased by doubling Fame,
Will drown his Actions to preserve his Name.
The Annals of his Conduct they will revise,
As Legends of Impossibilities.
'Twill all a Life of Miracles appear,
Too great for him to do, and them to hear.
And if some faithful Writer should set down
With what Uneasiness he wore the Crown,
What thankless Devil had the Land possessed,
This will be more prodigious than the rest.
With Indignation 'twill their Minds inspire,
And raise the Glory of his Actions higher.
They Will be ashamed their Ancestors to own,
And strive their Father's Follies to atone.
New Monuments of Gratitude they will raise,
And Crown his Memory with Thanks and Praise.
Thou, Satyr, shall the grateful Few rehearse,
And solve the Nation's Credit in thy Verse;
Embalm his Name with Characters of Praise,
His Fame's beyond the Power of time to raze.
From him let future Monarchs learn to Rule,
And make his lasting Character their School.
For he who would in time to come be Great,
Has nothing now to do but imitate.
Let dying Parents when they come to bless,
Wish to their Children only his Success.
Here their Instructions very well may end,
William's Examqle only recommend,
And leave the Youth his History to attend.
But we have here an Ignominious Crowd,
That Boast their Native Birth, and English Blood.
Whose Breasts with Envy and Contention burn,
And now Rejoice, when all the Nations Mourn:
Their awkward Triumphs openly they Sing,
Insult the Ashes of their Injured King;
Rejoice at the Disasters of his Crown;
And Drink the Horse's Health that threw him down.
Blush, Satyr, when such Crimes we must reveal,
And draw a silent Curtain to conceal.
Actions so vile shall never debauch our Song;
Let Heaven alone, though Justice suffers long,
Her Leaden Wings, and Iron Hands, may show
That she is certain, though she may be slow.
His Foreign Birth was made the Famed Pretense,
Which gave our Home-Born Englishmen Offense.
But Discontent's the ancient English Fashion,
The Universal Blemish of the Nation.
And it is a Question, whether God could make
That King whom every Englishman would like?
Nor is it any Paradox to say,
William had more of English Blood than they;
The Royal Life flowed in his sprightly Veins,
The same that in the Noble Stock remains;
The same which now his Glorious Scepter wields,
To whom three Nations just Obedience yields.
ANNE, the remaining Glory of our Isle,
Well she becomes the Royal English style:
In William's steps sedately she proceeds,
William 's a Pattern to Immortal Deeds.
Preserves his Memory with generous care,
Forgetting him is disobliging her;
Where shall the murmuring Party then appear
Where would the Nation, but for her, have found
So safe a Cure for such a sudden Wound?
And could she but as well the Camp supply,
The World the sooner would their Grief lay by.
But there the Fatal Breach is made so wide,
That Loss can never, never be -- supplied.
Ye Men of Arms, and English Sons of War,
Now Learn from him how you may Fight for her.
Your Grief for him express upon her Foes,
For William loved such Funeral Tears as those.
It Is William's Glorious Scepter which she bears,
Like William she for Liberty appears.
She Mounts to Honor by the steps of Truth,
And his Example imitates in Both.
It Is you must make her blooming Fame increase,
It Is you must bring her Honor, Wealth and Peace:
And let it once more to the World be seen,
Nothing can make us greater than a Queen.
REFORMATION OF MANNERS.
The PREFACE.
NO Man is qualified to reprove other Men's Faults, but he that has none of his
own, say some People, who are loath to be told of their Errors; and it is on
this Account only, that the World has the Trouble of a Preface.

If that be true, the Author freely acknowledges he is the most unqualified Man
in the World to reprove.

That no Man is qualified to reprove other Men's Crimes, who allows himself in
the Practice of the same, is very readily granted, and is the very Substance
and Foundation of the following Satyr: And on that score, the Author has as
good a Title to Animadversion as another, since no Man can charge him with the
Vices he has reproved.

But instead of Self-defence, he is rather willing to look back on the best
Actions of his Life, with the Temper of a Penitent, and he wishes all Men would
do the like; it is the only way to make the Satyr Impertinent. For Penitence
would all his Verse disarm,
The Satyr's answered if the Men reform.


But the Fact is not true neither: It Is a very pretty way for Men to get rid of
the Impertinence of Admonition. If none but faultless Men must reprove others,
the Lord have Mercy upon all our Magistrates; and all our Clergy are undignified
and suspended at a Blow.

Nor does the Satyr assault private Infirmity, or pursue Personal Vices; but is
bent at those, who pretending to suppress Vice, or being vested with Authority
for that purpose, yet make themselves the Shame of their Country, encouraging
Wickedness by that very Authority they have to suppress it.

He professes himself sorry, either that Freedom of Speech is so dangerous in
this Age, or that he is too much a Coward; otherwise, some had heard of their
Crimes who think themselves above the Power of Punishment.

It Is hard that Vice should have so much shelter from Civil Power, that Reproof
should lead the Party to suppress the Poet rather than the Crime.

And yet his Friends give him over for lost: An Account of what he has ventured
to say, to whose Importunity he thinks himself obliged to answer with Juvenal,
Difficile est Satyram non scribere. Nam quis Iniquae
Tam Patiens Urbis, tam ferreus ut teneat se?


If any Man is injured by the Characters, he is content they should carry their
Resentment to what Extremity they please; but if Truth may be on his side, the
only way to make him do them Justice is to reform: And he promises to give
Testimony to their Repentance, as an Amand Honorable, in a manner as public
as possible.

A SATYR, etc.
HOW long may Heaven be banter'd by a Nation,
With broken Vows, and Shams of Reformation,
And yet forbear to show its Indignation?
Tell me ye Sages, who the Conscience guide,
And Ecclesiastic Oracles divide,
Where do the Bounds of Sovereign Patience end,
How long may People undestroy'd offend?
What Limits has Almighty Power prepared,
When Mercy shall be deaf and Justice heard?
If there is a Being Immortal and Immense,
Who does Rewards and Punishments dispense,
Why is he Passive when his Power's defied,
And his Eternal Government's denied?
Tell us why he that sits above the Sky,
Unreins no Vengeance, lets no Thunders fly,
When Villains prosper, and successful Vice,
Shall humane Power control and Heavenly Power despise?
If it is because the Sins of such a Nation,
Are yet too small to conquer his Compassion,
Then tell us to what height Mankind may sin,
Before Celestial Fury must begin?
How their extended Crimes may reach so high,
Vengeance must follow and of course destroy;
And by the common Chain of Providence,
Destruction come like Cause and Consequence.
Then search the dark Arcana of the Skies,
An if ye can, unfold these Mysteries:
His clashing Providence reconcile
The partial Frown, and the unequal Smile.
Tell us why some have been destroyed betimes,
While Albion's glittering Shores grow black with Crimes?
Why some for early Errors are undone,
Some longer still, and longer still sin on?
England with all her blackening Guilt is spared,
And Sodom's lesser Crimes received a swift Reward:
And yet all this be reconciled to both,
Impartial Justice, and unnerring Truth.
Why Ostia stands, and no revenging hand
Has yet dismissed her from the burdened Land;
No Plague, no sulphurous Shower her exit makes,
And turns her Silver Thames to Stygian Lakes,
Whose so uninhabitable Banks might flow
With Streams as black as her that made 'em so:
And as a Monument to future times,
Should send forth Vapors nauseous as her Crimes.
Tell us why Carthage fell a Prey to Rome,
And mourn the Fate of bright Byzantium.
Why ancient Troy's embraced by Destiny,
And Rome, Immortal Rome, to Fate gives way,
Yet Ostia stands, more impious far than they?
Where are the Golden Gates of Palestine,
Where High Superior Glory used to shine?
The mighty City Millions dwelt within,
Where Heaven's Epitome was to be seen.
God's Habitation Sacred to his Name,
Magnificent beyond the Voice of Fame:
Those lofty Pinnacles which once were seen,
Bright like the Majesty which dwelt within.
In which Seraphick Glory could reside,
Too great for humane Vision to abide;
Whose glittering Fabric, God the Architect,
The Sun's less Glorious Light, did once reject.
These all have felt the Iron hands of Fate,
And Heaven's dear Darling City's desolate.
No more the sacred Place commands our Awe,
But all become a Curse, a Golgotha.
The Reverend Pile can scarce its Ruins show,
Forsook by him whose Glory made it so.
Yet Ostia stands, her impious Towers defy
The threatening Comets of the blazing Sky,
Foreboding Signs of Ruin she despises,
And all her teaching Saviors Sacrifices;
The Jews are Fools, Jerusalem's outdone,
We crucify the Father, they the Son.
Within her Reprobate Gates they are allowed
Worse Jews than those which crucified the God:
They killed a Man, for they supposed him so;
These boldly sacrifice the God they know,
His Incarnation Miracles deny,
And vilely Banter his Divinity;
Their old Impostor, Socinus, prefer,
And the long Voyage of Heaven without a Pilot steer.
Yet Ostia boasts of her Regeneration,
And tells us wondrous Tales of Reformation:
How against Vice she has been so severe,
That none but Men of Quality may swear:
How Public Lewdness is expelled the Nation,
That Private Whoring may be more in fashion.
How Parish Magistrates, like pious Elves,
Let none be Drunk a Sundays, but themselves.
And Hatkney Coach-men durst not ply the Street
In Sermon-time, till they had paid the State.
These, Ostia, are the Shams of Reformation,
With which thou mock'st thy Maker, and the Nation.
While in thy Streets unpunished there remain
Crimes which have yet insulted Heaven in vain,
Crimes which our Satyr blushes to review,
And Sins thy Sister -Sodom never knew:
Superior Lewdness Crowns thy Magistrates,
And Vice grown gray usurps the Reverend Seats;
Eternal Blasphemies, and Oaths abound,
And Bribes among thy Senators are found.
Old Venerable Jeph, with trembling Air,
Ancient in Sin, and Father of the Chair,
Forsook by Vices he had loved so long,
Can now be vicious only with his Tongue;
Yet talks of ancient Lewdness with delight,
And loves to be the Justice of the Night:
On Bawdy Tales with Pleasure he reflects,
And lewdly Smiles at Vices he corrects.
The feeble tottering Magistrate appears
Willing to Wickedness, in spite of Years;
Struggles his Age and Weakness to resist,
And fain would sin, but Nature will not assist.
L -- l, the Pandor of thy Judgment Seat,
Has neither Manners, Honesty, nor Wit;
Instead of which, he is plentiously supplied
With Nonsense, Noise, Impertinence, and Pride
Polite his Language, and his flowing style
Scorns to suppose good Manners worth his while;
With Principles from Education stored,
The Drudgery of Decency abhorred:
The City-Mouth, with Eloqvence endu'd,
To Mountebank the listening Multitude,
Sometimes he tunes his Tongue to soft Harangues,
To banter Common Halls, and flatter Kings:
And all with but an odd indifferent Grace,
With Jingle on his Tongue, and Coxcomb in his Face;
Definitive in Law without Appeal,
But always serves the Hand who pays him well:
He Trades in Justice, and the Souls of Men,
And prostitutes them equally to Gain:
He has his Public Book of Rates to show,
Where every Rogue the Price of Life may know:
And this one Maxim always goes before,
He never hangs the Rich, nor saves the Poor.
God-like he nods upon the Bench of State,
His Smiles are Life, and if he Frown it is Fate:
Boldly invading Heavens Prerogative;
For with his Breath he kills or saves alive.
Fraternities of Villains he maintains,
Protects their Robberies, and shares the Gains,
Who thieve with Toleration as a Trade,
And then restore according as they are paid,
With awkward scornful Phiz, and vile Grimace,
The genuine Talents of an ugly Face;
With haughty Tone, insults the Wretch that dies,
And sports with his approaching Miseries.
F -- e for so sometimes unrighteous Fate
Erects a Madman for a Magistrate,
Equipt with Lewdness, Oaths, and Impudence,
Supplies with Vices his defect of Sense;
Abandoned to ill Manners, he retains
His want of Grace, as well as want of Brains.
Before the Boy wore off, the Rake began,
The Bully then commenced, and then the Man.
Yet Nature seems in this to do him wrong,
To give no Courage with a saucy Tongue;
From whence this constant Disadvantage flows,
He always gives the Words, and takes the Blows:
Tho ofren Can'd, he is instructed by it;
But still he shows the Scoundrel with the Knight,
Still scurilous, and still afraid to sight.
His Dialect's a Modern Billingsgate,
Which suits the Hosier, not the Magistrate;
The same he from behind the Counter brought,
And yet he practiced worse than he was taught;
Early Debauched, in Satan's Steps he moved,
And all Mechanic Vices he improved:
At first he did his Sovereign's Rights invade,
And raised his Fortune by clandestine Trade;
Stealing the Customs, did his Profits bring,
And 'twas his calling to defraud his King:
This is the Man that helps to Rule the State,
The City's New-reforming Magistrate.
To Execute the Justice of the Law,
And keep less Villains than himself in Awe:
Take Money of the Rich, and Hang the Poor.
And lash the Strumpet he Debauched before.
So for small Crimes poor Thieves Destruction find,
And leave the Rogues of Quality behind.
Search all the Christian Climes from Pole to Pole,
And match for Sheriffs S -- ple and C -- le;
Equal in Character and Dignity,
This famed for Justice, that for Modesty:
By Merit chosen for the Chair of State,
This fit for Bridewel, that for Billingsgates
That richly clad to grace the Gaudy Day,
For which his Fathers Creditors must pay:
This from the fluxing Bagnio just dismissed,
Rides out to make himself the City Jest.
From some lascivious Dish-clout to the Chair,
To punish Lewdness and Disorders there;
The Brute he Rides on would his Crimes detest,
For that is the Animal, and this the Beast;
And yet some Reformation he began,
For Magistrates never bear the Sword in vain.
Expensiue Sinning always he declined,
To frugal Whoring totally resigned:
His Avarice his Appetites oppressed,
Base like the Man, and Brutish like the Lust:
Concise in Sinning, Natures Call supplied,
And in one Act two Vices gratified.
Never was Oyster, Beggar, Cinder Whore,
So much caressed by Magistrates before:
They that are nice and squeamish in their Lust,
'Ts a sign the Vice is low, and wants a Gust;
But he that is perfect in the Extreme of Vice,
Scorns to excite his Appetite by Price.
'Twas in his Reign we to Reform began.
And set the Devil up to mend the Man,
More might be said, but Satyr stay thy Rhimes,
And mix not his Misfortunes with his Crimes.
C -- n superbly wise and grave of Life,
Could every one reform, except his Wife:
Passive in Vice, he Pimps to his own Fate,
To show himself a Loyal Magistrate.
It Is doubtful who debauched the City more,
The maker of the Masque, or of the Whore.
Nor his Religion less a Masquerade,
He always drove a strange Mysterious Trade;
With doubtful Zeal, to Church he will gravely come,
To Praise that God which he denies at home.
Socinian T -- d's his Dear Ghostly Priest,
And taught him all Religion to digest.
Took prudent care he should not much profess,
And he was never addicted to Excess.
And yet he Covets without Rule or End,
Will sell his Wife, his Master, or his Friend.
To houndless Avarice a constant Slave,
Unsatisfied as Death and greedy as the Grave.
Now, Satyr, let us view the the numerous Fry,
That must succeeding Magistrates supply,
And search if future Years are like to be
Much better taught, or better ruled than we.
The Senators of Hospital Descent,
The upper House of Ostia's Parliament,
Who from Destruction should their City save,
But are as wicked as they should be grave:
With Citizens in Petto, who at need,
As these do those, so those must these succeed.
D -- b, the Modern Judas of the Age,
Has often tried in vain to mount the Stage:
Profuse in Gifts and Bribes to God and Man,
To ride the City-Horse, and wear the Chain.
His Vices Ostia, thou have made thy own,
In choosing him, thou writ'st thy own Lampoon:
Fancy the haughty Wretch in Chair of State,
At once the City's Shame and Magistrate;
At Table set, at his right Hand a Whore,
Ugly as those which he had kept before.
He to do Justice, and reform our Lives,
And She receive the Homage of our Wives.
Now Satyr, give another Wretch his Due,
Who Is chosen to reform the City too;
Hate him, ye Friends to Honesty and Sense,
Hate him in injured Beauty's just Defense;
A Knighted Booby Insolent and Base,
" Whom Man no Manners gave, nor God no Grace.
The Scorn of Women, and the Shame of Men,
Matched at Threescore to innocent Fifteen;
Hag-rid with jealous Whimsies lets us know,
He thinks he is Cuckold 'cause he should be so:
His virtuous Wife exposes to the Town,
And fears her Crimes, because he knows his own.
Here Satyr, let them just Reproach abide,
Who sell their Daughters to oblige their Pride
The Ch -- er -- n begins the doleful Jest,
As a Memento Mori to the rest;
Who fond to raise his Generation by it,
And see his Daughter buckl'd to a Knight:
The Innocent unwarily betrayed,
And to the Rascal joined the hapless Maid;
The Purchase is too much below the Cost,
For while the Lady's gained, the Woman's lost.
What shall we say to common Vices now,
When Magistrates the worst of Crimes allow?
Ostia, if ever thou will reform thy Gates,
't must be another Set of Magistrates:
In Practice just, and in Profession sound;
But God knows where the Men are to be found.
In all thy numerous Streets it is hard to tell,
Where the few Men of Faith and Honor dwell:
Poor and despised so seldom they appear,
The Cynick's Lanthorn would be useful here.
No City in the spacious Universe,
Boasts of Religion more, or minds it less;
Of Reformation talks, and Government,
Backed with an Hundred Acts of Parliament:
Those useless Scare-Crows of neglected Laws,
That miss the Effect because they miss the Cause:
Thy Magistrates who should reform the Town,
Punish the poor Men's Faults, but hide their own.
Suppress the Players Booths in Smithfield-Fair,
But leave the Cloisters, for their Wives are there,
Where all the Scenes of Lewdness do appear.
Satyr, the Arts and Mysteries forbear,
Too black for thee to write, or us to hear:
No Man, but he that is as vile as they,
Can all the Tricks and Cheats of Trade survey.
Some in Clandestine Companies combine,
Erect new Stocks to trade beyond the Line:
With Air and empty Names beguile the Town,
And raise new Credits first, then cry 'em down.
Divide the empty nothing into Shares,
To set the Town together by the Ears.
The Sham Projectors and the Brokers join,
And both they Cully Merchant undermine;
First he must be drawn in and then betrayed,
And they demolish the Machine they made:
So conjuring Chemists, who with a Charm and Spell,
Some wondrous Liquid wondrously exhale;
But when the gaping Mob their Money pay,
The Charm's dissolved, the Vapor flies away:
The wondering Bubbles stand amazed to see
Their Money Mountebank'd to Mercury.
Some fit out Ships, and double Fraights ensure,
And burn the Ships to make the Voyage secure:
Promiscuous Plunders through the World commit,
And with the Money buy their safe Retreat.
Others seek out to Africk's Torrid Zone,
And search the burning Shores of Serralone;
There in unsufferable Heats they fry,
And run vast Risques to see the Gold, and die:
The harmless Natives basely they trepan,
And barter Baubles for the Souls of Men:
The Wretches they to Christian Climes bring over,
To serve worse Heathens than they did before.
The Cruelties they suffer there are such,
Amboyna's nothing, they have outdone the Dutch:
Cortez, Pizarro, Guzman, Penaloe,
Who drank the Blood and Gold of Mexico,
Who thirteen Millions of Souls destroyed.
And left one third of God's Creation void;
By Birth for Natures Butchery designed,
Compared to these are merciful and kind;
Death could their cruellest Designs fulfill,
Blood quenched their Thirst, and it sufficed to kill:
But these the tender Coup de Grace deny,
And make Men beg in vain for leave to die;
To more than Spanish Cruelty inclind,
Torment the Body and debauched the Mind:
The lingering Life of Slavery preserve,
And vilely teach them both to sin and serve.
In vain they talk to them of Shades below,
They fear no Hell, but where such Christians go;
Of Jesus Christ they very often hear,
Often as his Blaspheming Servants swear,
They hear and wonder what strange Gods they be,
Can bear with Patience such Indignity.
They look for Famines, Plagues, Disease, and Death,
Blasts from above, and Earthquakes from beneath:
But when they see regardless Heaven looks on,
They curse our Gods, or think that we have none.
Thus Thousands to Religion are brought over,
And made worse Devils than they were before.
Satyr, the Men of Drugs and Simples spare,
It Is hard to search the latent Vices there;
Their Theologicks too they may defend,
They cannot deceive, who never do pretend.
As to Religion, generally they show
As much as their Profession will allow:
But count them all Confederates of Hell,
'Till B -- they with one consent expel.
B -- our Satyr startles at his Name,
The College Scandal, and the City's Shame:
Not satisfied his Maker to deny,
Provokes him with Lampoon and Blasphemy;
And with unpresidented Insolence
Banters a God, and scoffs at Providence.
No Nation in the World, but ours, would bear
To hear a Wretch blaspheme the Gods they fear:
His Flesh long since their Altars had adorned,
And with his Blood appeased the Powers he scorned.
But see the Badge of our Reforming Town,
Some cry Religion up, some cry it down:
Some worship God, and some a God defy,
With equal boldness, equal liberty;
The silent Laws decline the just Debate,
Made dumb by the more silent Magistrate;
And both together small distinction put
'Twixt him that owns a God, and him that owns him not:
The Modern Crime it is thought no Being had,
They knew no Atheist when our Laws were made.
It Is hard the Laws more Freedom should allow,
With God above, than Magistrates below.
B -- unpunished, may Heaven and Earth defy,
Dethrone Almighty Power, Almighty Truth deny;
Burlesque the Sacred, High, Vnutter'd Name,
And impious War with Jove himself Proclaim.
While Justice unconcerned looks calmly on,
And B -- boasts the Conquests he has won;
Insults the Christian Name, and laughs to see
Religion Bully'd by Philosophy.
B -- with far less hazard may blaspheme,
Than thou may Satyr trace thy Noble Theme;
The Search of Vice more Hazard represents
From Laws, from Councils, and from P --
Thou may be wicked, and less danger know,
Than by informing others they are so:
Thou can (...) P -- r, no Counselor expose,
Or dress a vicious M -- r in his proper Clothes;
But all the Bombs and Canon of the Law,
Are soon drawn out to keep thy Pen in awe:
By Laws Post Facto thou may soon be slain,
And Innuendo's shall thy Guilt explain.
Thou may Lampoon, and no Man will resent,
Lampoon but Heaven, and not the P --:
Our Trusties and our Welbelov'ds forbear;
You Are free to banter Heaven, and all that is there;
The boldest Flights you are welcome to bestow
Of The Gods above, but not the Gods below.
B -- may banter Heaven, and A -- l Death,
And T -- d poison Souls with his infected Breath,
No Civil Government resents the Wrong;
But all are touched and angry at thy Song,
Thy Friends without the help of Prophecy,
Read Goals and Gibbets in thy Destiny;
But Courage springs from Truth, let it appear,
Nothing but Guilt can be the Cause of Fear;
Satyr go on, thy keenest Shafts let fly,
Truth can be no Offense to Honesty:
The Guilty only are concerned, and they
Lampoon themselves, when ever they censure thee.
PART II.
THE City's viewed, now Satyr turn thine Eye,
The Country's Vices, and the Court's survey;
And from Impartial Scrutiny set down,
How much they are Both more vicious than the Town.
How does our ten Years War with Vice advance?
About as much as it has done with France.
Ride with the Judge, and view the wrangling Bar,
And see how lewd our Justice-Merchants are:
How Clito comes from instigating Whore,
Pleads for the Man he Cuckol'd just hefore;
See how he Cants, and acts the Ghostly Father,
And brings the Gospel and the Law together:
To make his Pious Frauds be well received,
He quotes the Scripture which he never believed.
Fluent in Language, indigent in Sense,
Supplies his want of Law with Impudence.
See how he rides the Circuit with the Judge;
To Law and Lewdness a devoted Drudge.
A Brace of Femal-Clients meet him there,
To help debauch the Sizes and the Fair:
By Day he plies the Bar with all his Might,
And Revels in St. Ed -- 's Streets at Night:
The Scandal of the Law, his own Lampoon,
Is Lawyer, Merchant, Bully, and Bu^^oon,
In Drunken Quarrels eager to engage,
Till Brother Justice lodged him in the Cage:
A thing the Learned thought could never be,
Had not the Justice been as drunk as he.
He pleads of late at Hymen's Nuptial Bar,
And bright Aurelia is Defendant there.
He Courts the Nymph to wed, and make a wife,
And Swears by God he reform will his Life.
The solemn Part he might have well forbore;
For she alas! has been, has been a Whore:
The Pious Dame, the sober Saint puts on,
And Clito's in the way to be undone.
Casco's debauched, it is his Paternal Vice;
For wickedness descends to Families:
The tainted Blood the Seeds of Vice convey,
And plants new Crimes before the old decay.
Through all Degrees of Vice the Father run,
But sees himself out-sin'd by either Son;
Whoring and Incest he has understood,
And they subjoyn Adultery and Blood.
This does the Orphan's Cause devoutly plead,
Secures her Money and her Maidenhead:
And then persuades her to defend the Crime,
Evade the Guilt, and Banter off the Shame.
Taught by the subtle Counselor, she shows
More nice Distictions than Ignatius knows:
In Matrimony finds a learned flaw,
A Wife in Honor, and a Wife in Law.
" Choice is the Substance of the Contract made,
" And mutual Love the only Knot that is tied:
" To these the Laws of Nations must submit;
" And where they fail, the Contract's incomplete.
" So that if Love and Choice were not before,
" The last may be the Wife, the first the Whore.
Thus she securely sins with eager Gust,
And satisfies her Conscience, and her Lust:
Nor does her Zeal and Piety omit,
But to the Whore she joins the Jesuit;
With constant Zeal frequents the House of Prayer,
To heal her prostituted Conscience there,
Without Remorse, adjourns with full Content,
From his lascivious Arms to the Sacrament.
The Brother less afraid of Sin than Shame,
Doubles his Guilt, to save his tottering Fame:
'Twas too much Risque for any Man to run,
To save that Credit which before was gone:
The Innocent lies unrevenged in Death,
He stopped the growing Scandal in her Breath:
Till rhyme shall lay the horrid Murder bear:
No Bribes can crush the Writs of Error there.
Nor is the Bench less tainted than the Bar:
How hard's that Plague to cure that is spread so far!
'Twill all prescribed Authorities reject,
While they are most guilty who should first correct.
Contagious Vice infects the Judgment-Seats,
And Virtue from Authority retreats:
How should she such Society endure?
Where she is contemned she cannot be secure.
Milo's a Justice, they that made him so
Should answer for the oppressive Wrongs he will do:
His Lands almost to Ostia's walls extend;
And of his heaped up thousands there is no end,
If Magistrates, as in the Text it is clear,
Ought to be such as Avarice abhor,
This may be known of the Almighty's Mind,
That Milo's not the Man the Text designed.
Satyr, be bold and, and fear not to expose
The vilest Magistrate the Nation knows:
Let Furius read his naked Character.
Blush not to write what he should blush to hear;
But let them blush, who in a Christian State
Made such a Devil be a Magistrate.
In Britain's Eastern Provinces he Reigns,
And serves the Devil with excessive Pains:
The Nation's shame, and honest Men's surprise,
With Drunkard in his Face, and Madman in his Eyes.
The sacred Bench of Justice he Prophanes,
With a Polluted Tongue, and Bloody hands.
His Intellects are always in a Storm,
He frights the People which he should reform.
Antipathys may some Diseases cure,
But Virtue can no contraries endure.
All Reformation stopped where Vice commands,
Corrupted Heads can never have upright Hands.
Shameless his Class of Justices he will Swear,
And plants the Vices he should punish there.
His Mouths a Sink of Oaths and Blasphemies,
And Cursings are his kind Civilities;
His servent Prayer to Heaven he hourly sends,
But it is Damn himself and all his Friends;
He raves in Vice, and storms that he is confined,
And studies to be worse than all Mankind.
Extremes of Wickedness are his Delight,
And's as pleased to hear that he is distinguished by it.
Exotic ways of sinning he improves,
We curse and hate, he censures where he loves;
So strangely retrograde to all Mankind,
If crossed he damns himself, if pleased his Friend.
This is the Man that helps to bless the Nation,
And bully Mankind into Reformation:
The true Coercive Power of the Law,
Which drives the People which it cannot draw:
The Nation's Scandal, England's true Lampoon,
A Drunken, Whoring, Justicing Buffoon.
With what stupendous Impudence can he,
Punish a poor Man's Immorality?
How should a Vicious Magistrate assent,
To mend our Manners or our Government
How shall new Laws for Reformation pass,
When Vice the Legislation does possess.
To see old S -- y Blasphemy descry,
And old S -- ne punish Bribery.
Lying exploded by a Perjured Knight,
And Whoring Punished by a Sodomite,
That he the Peoples Freedom shon'd defend,
Who had the King and People too trepan'd.
Soldiers seek Peace, Drunkards prohibit Wine,
And Fops and Beaus our Politics refine:
These are the Absurdities too gross to hide,
Which wise Men wonder at, and Fools deride.
When from the Helm Socinian H -- t flies,
And all the rest his Tenants stigmatize,
And none remain that Jesus Christ denies.
Judas expelled, Lewd Lying C -- sent home,
And Men of Honesty put in their Room.
Blaspheming B -- s to his Fen-Ditches sent,
To bully Justice with a Parliament,
Then we shall have a Christian Government.
Then shall the wished for Reformation rise,
And Vice to Virtue fall a Sacrifice:
And with the Nauseous Rabble that retire,
Turn out that Bawdy, Saucy Poet P --.
A Vintner's Boy the Wretch was first preferred,
To wait at Vice's Gates, and Pimp for Bread;
To hold the Candle, and sometimes the Door,
Let in the Drunkard, and let out the Whore:
But as to Villains it has often chanced,
Was for his Wit and Wickedness advanced.
Let no Man think his new Behavior strange,
No Metamorposis can Nature change;
Effects are chained to Causes, generally
The Rascal born will like a Rascal die.
His Prince's Favors followed him in vain,
They changed the Circumstance, but not the Man.
While out of Pocket, and his Spirits low,
He Would beg, write Panegyricks, cringe and bow;
But when good Pensions had his Labor crowned,
His Panegyrick's into Satyrs turned,
And with a true Mechanic Spirit cursed,
Abused his Royal Benefactor first.
O what assiduous Pains does P -- take,
To let great D -- see he could mistake!
Dissembling Nature false Description gave,
Showed him the Poet, and concealed the Knave.
To -- d, if such a Wretch is worth our Scorn,
Shall Vices blackest Catalogue adorn
His hated Character, let this supply,
Too vile even for our University.
Now, Satyr, to one Character be just,
M -- ns the only Pattern and the first:
A Title which has more of Honor in it,
Then all his ancient Glories of Descent.
Most Men their Neighbors Vices will disown,
But he is the Man that does reform his own.
Let those alone reproach his want of Sense,
Who with his Crimes have had his Penitence.
It Is want of Sense makes Men when they do wrong,
Adjourn the promised Penitence too long,
Nor let them call him Coward because he fears
To pull both God and Man about his Ears.
Amongst the worst of Cowards let him be Named,
Who having sinn'd's afraid to be ashamed:
And to mistaken Courage he is betrayed,
Who having sinn'd's ashamed to be afraid.
Thy Valor, M --, does our Praise prevent,
For thou have had the Courage to Repent:
Nor shall his first Mistake our Censure find.
What Heaven forgets let no Man call to mind.
Satyr, Make search through all the sober Age,
To bring one seasoned Drunkard on the Stage;
Sir Stephew, nor Sir Thomas will not suffice,
Nor six and twenty Kentish Justices:
Your E -- x Priesthood hardly can supply,
Though they are enough to Drink the Nation dry;
Though Parson B -- d has been steept in Wine,
And sunk the Royal Tankard on the Rhine,
He Is not the Man that is fit to raise a Breed,
Should P -- k, P -- l, or R -- n succeed;
Or match the Size of matchless Rochester,
And make one long Debauch of Thirteen Year;
It must be something can Mankind outdo,
Some high Excess that is wonderful and new:
Nor will Mechanic Sots our Satyr suit,
It Is Quality must grace the Attribute.
These like the lofty Cedars to the Shrub,
Drink Maudlin-Colledge down, and Royston Club.
Such petty Drinking's a Mechanic Evil,
But he is a Drunkard that out-Drinks the Devil;
If such can not in Court or Church appear,
Let Us view the Camp, you will quickly find 'em there.
Brave T -- n, who Revell'd Day and Night,
And always kept himself too drunk to fight;
And O -- d, in a Sea of Sulphur strove
To let the Spaniards see the Vice we love.
Yet these are puny Sinners, if you will look
The dreadful Roll in Fate's Anthentick Book.
The Monument of Bacchus still remains,
Where English Bones lie heaped in Irish Plains:
Triumphant Death upon our Army trod,
And Revell'd at Dundalk in English Blood.
Let no Man wonder at the Dreadful Blow,
For Heaven has seldom been insulted so.
In vain brave Scomberg mourned the Troops that fell,
While he made Vows to Heaven and they to Hell.
Our Satyr trembles to review those times,
And hardly finds out Words to name their Crimes;
In every Tent the horrid Juncto's sat,
To brave their Maker, and despise their Fate;
The Work was done, Drunkenness was gone before,
Life was suspended, Death could do no more.
Five Regimented Heroes there appear,
Captains of Thousands, mighty Men of War,
Glutted with Wine, and Drunk with Hellish Rage,
For want of other Foes they Heaven engage.
Sulphur and ill extracted Fumes agree,
To make each drop push on their Destiny.
The Infernal Draughts in Blasphemies rebound,
And openly the Devil's Health went round:
Nor can our Verse their latent Crime conceal,
How they shook hands to meet next day in Hell;
Death pledged them, Fate the dreadful Compact Read,
Concurring Justice spoke, and Four of Five lay Dead.
When Men their Maker's Vengeance once defy,
It Is a certain Sign that their Destruction's nigh.
It Is vain to single out Examples here,
Drunkenness will soon be the Nation's Character:
The grand Contagion's spreading over all,
It Is Epidemick now, and National.
Since then the Sages all Reproofs despise,
Let Us quit the People and Lampoon the Vice.
Drunkenness is so the Error of the Time,
The Youth begin to ask if it is a Crime:
Wonder to see the grave Patricians come,
From City Courts of Conscience reeling home;
And think it is hard they should no License make,
To give the Fredom which their Father's take.
The Seat of Judgment's so debauched with Wine,
Justice seems rather to be Drunk than blind:
Let Us fall the Sword, and her unequal Scale,
Makes Right go down, and Injury prevail.
A Vice, it is thought, the Devil at first designed
Not to allure, but to affront Mankind;
A Pleasure Nature hardly can explain,
Suits none of God Almighty's Brutes but Man.
An Act so nautious, that had Heaven enjoined
The Practice, as a Duty on Mankind,
They Would shun the Bliss which came so foul a way,
And forfeit Heaven, rather than once obey.
A double Crime, by which one Act we undo
At once the Gentleman and Christian too:
For which no better Antidote is known,
Than to have one Drunkard to another shown.
The Mother Conduit of expatiate Sin,
Where all the Seeds of Wickedness begin;
The In roduction to Eternal Strife,
And Prologue to the Tragedy of Life;
A foolish Vice, does needless Crimes reveal,
And only tells the Truth it should conceal.
It Is strange how Men of Sense should be subdued
By Vices so unnatural and rude,
Which gorge the Stomach to divert the Head,
And to make Mankind merry, make them mad:
Destroys the Vitals, and distracts the Brain,
And rudely moves the Tongue to talk in vain,
Dismisses Reason, stupifies the Sense,
And wondering Nature's left in strange suspense;
The Soul's benumbed, and ceases to inform,
And all the Sea of Nature's in a Storm;
The dead unactive Organ feels the Shock,
And willing Death attends the Fatal stroke.
And is this all for which Mankind endure
Distempers past the Power of Art to cure?
For which our Youth Old Age anticipate,
And with Luxurious Drafts suppress their Vital Heat?
Tell us, ye Learned Doctors of the Vice,
Wherein the high mysterious Pleasure lies?
The great sublime Enjoyment's laid so deep,
It Is known in Dream, and understood in Sleep.
The Graduates of the Science first commence,
And gain Perfection when they lose their Sense:
Titles they give, which call their Vice to mind;
But Sot's the common Name for all the kind:
Nature's Fanatics, who their Sense employ,
The Principles of Nature to destroy.
A Drunkard is a Creature God never made,
The Species Man, the Nature retrograde,
From all the Sons of Paradise they seem
To differ in the most acute Extreme;
Those covet Knowledge, labor to be Wise;
These stupifie the Sense, and put out Reason's Eyes,
For Health and Youth those all their Arts employ,
These strive their Youth and Vigor to destroy,
Those Damn themselves to heap an ill-got Store,
These liquidate their Wealth, and covet to be Poor.
Satyr, examine now with heedful Care,
What the Rich Trophies of the Bottle are,
The mighty Conquests which her Champions boast,
The Prizes which they gain, and Price they cost.
The Ensigns of her Order soon displace
Natures most early Beauties from the Face,
Paleness at first succeeds, and languid Air,
And bloated Yellows supersede the Fair;
The flaming Eyes betray the Nitrous Flood,
Which quench the Spirits, and inflame the Blood,
Disperse the Rofie Beauties of the Face,
And Fiery Botches triumph in the place;
The tottering Head and trembling Hand appears,
And all the Marks of Age, without the Years,
Distorted Limbs, gross and unweildy move.
And hardly can pursue the Vice they love:
A Bacchanalian Scarlet dies the Skin,
A Sign what Sulphurons Streams arise within,
The Flesh embossed with Ulcers, and the Brain
Oppressed with Fumes and Vapor, shows in vain
What once before the Fire it did contain.
Strange Power of Wine, whose Vehicle the same
At once can both extinguish and inflame:
Keen as the Lightning does the Sword consume,
And leaves the untouched Scabbard in its room;
Nature burnt up with fiery Vapor dies,
And Wine a little while Mock-Life supplies:
Gouts and old Aches, Life's short Hours divide,
At once the Drunkards Punishment and Pride:
Who having all his Youthful Powers subdued,
Enjoys Old Age and Pain, before he should,
Till Nature quite exhausted quits the Wretch,
And leaves more Will than Power to Debauch,
With Hellish Pleasure past excess he views,
And fain would drink, but Nature must refuse:
Thus Drenched in artificial Flame he lies,
Drunk in Desire, forgets himself and dies.
In the next Regions he expects the same;
And Hell's no change, for here he lived in Flame.
Satyr, to Church, Visit the House of Prayer,
And see the wretched Reformation there;
Unveil the Mask, and search the Sacred Sham:
For Rogues of all Religion are the same.
The several Tribes, their numerous Titles view,
And fear no Censure where the Fact is true;
They all shall have thee for their constant Friend,
Who more than common Sanctity pretend;
Provided they will take care the World may see
Their Practices and their Pretense agree;
But count them with the worst of Hypocrites,
Whom Zeal divides, and Wickedness unites,
Who in Profession only are precise,
Dissent in Doctrine, and conform in Vice.
They who from the Established Church divide,
Must do it out of Piety or Pride:
And their Sincerity is quickly tried.
For always they that stand before the first.
Will be the best of Christians, or the worst.
But shun their secret Councils, O, my Soul!
Whose Interest can their Consciences control;
Those Ambo-Dexters in Religion, who
Can any thing dispute, yet any thing can do:
Those Christian-Mountebanks, that in disguise,
Can reconcile Impossibilities:
Alternately conform, and yet dissent,
And sin with both Hands, but with one repent.
The Man of Conscience all Mankind will love,
The Knaves themselves his Honesty approve:
He only to Religion can pretend,
The rest do for the Name alone contend;
The Verity of true Religion's known
By no Description better than its own:
Of Truth and Wisdom it informs the Mind,
And Nobly strives to civilize Mankind;
With potent Vice maintains Eternal Strife,
Corrects the Manners, and reforms the Life.
Tell us ye Learned Magi of the Schools,
Who pose Mankind with Ecclesiastic Rules,
What strange amphibious Things, are they that can
Religion without Honesty maintain?
Who own a God, pretended Homage pay,
But neither his, nor Human Laws Obey.
Blush England, hide thy Hypocritick Face,
Who has no Honesty, can have no Grace.
In vain we argue from Absurdities,
Religion's buried just when Virtue dies:
Virtue's the Light by which Religion's known,
If this be wanting, Heaven will that disown.
We grant it Merits no Divine Regard;
And Heaven is all from Bounty, not Reward:
But God must his own Nature contradict,
Reverse the World, its Government neglect,
Cease to be just, Eternal Law repeal,
Be weak in Power, and mutable in Will,
If Vice and Virtue equal Fate should know,
And that unblessed, or this unpunished go.
In vain we strive Religion to disguise,
And smother it with Ambiguities;
Interest and Priest --, may, perhaps, invent
Strange Mysteries, by way of Supplement:
Schoolmen may deep perplexing Doubts disclose,
And subtle Notions on the World Impose;
Till by their Ignorance they are betrayed,
And lost in Deserts which themselves have made.
Zealots may Cant, and Dreamers may Divine,
And formal Fops to Pageantry incline,
And all with specious Gravity pretend
Their spurious Metaphysics to defend.
Religion's no divided Mystic Name;
For true Religion always is the same.
Naked and Plain her Sacred Truths appear,
From pious Frauds, and dark Aenigma's clear:
The meanest Sense may all the Parts discern,
What Nature teaches all Mankind may learn:
Even what is revealed, is no untrodden Path,
It Is known by Rule, and understood by Faith,
The Negatives and Positives agree,
Illustrated by Truth and Honesty.
And yet if all Religion was in vain,
Did no Rewards or Punishments contain,
Virtues so suited to our Happiness,
That none but Fools could be in love with Vice,
Virtue's a Native Rectitude of Mind,
Vice the Degeneracy of Human-kind:
Virtue is Wisdom Solid and Divine,
Vice is all Fool without, and Knave within:
Virtue is Honor circumscribed by Grace,
Vice is made up of every thing that is base:
Virtue has secret Charms which all Men love,
And those that do not choose her, yet approve:
Vice like ill Pictures which offend the Eye,
Make those that made them their own Works deny:
Virtue's the Health and Vigor of the Soul,
Vice is the foul Disease infects the whole:
Virtue's the Friend of Life, the Soul of Health,
The Poor Man's Comfort, and the rich Man's Wealth,
Vice is a Thief, a Traitor in the Mind.
Assassinates the Vitals of Mankind;
The Poison of his high Prosperity,
And only Misery of Poverty.
To States and Governments they both extend,
Virtue's their Life and Being, Vice their end:
Virtue establishes, and Vice destroys,
And all the end of Government unties:
Virtue's an English King and Parliament,
Vice is a Czar of Muscow Government:
Virtue sets Bounds to Kings, and limits Crowns,
Vice knows no Law, and all Restraint disowns:
Virtue prescribes all Government by Rules,
Vice makes Kings Tyrants and their Subjects Fools:
Virtue seeks Peace, and Property maintains,
Vice binds the Captive World in hostile Chains:
Virtue's a Beauteous Building formed on high,
Vice is Confusion and Deformity.
In vain we strive these two to reconcile,
Vain and impossible, the unequal Toil:
Antipathies in Nature may agree,
Darkness and Light, Discord and Harmony;
They distant Poles, in spite of space may kiss;
Water capitulate, and Fire make Peace:
But Good and Evil never can agree,
Eternal Discords there, Eternal Contrariety.
In vain the Name of Virtue they put on,
Who preach up Piety and practice none.
Satyr resume the Search of secret Vice,
Concealed beneath Religion's fair Disguise.
Solid's a Parson Orthodox and Grave,
Learning and Language more than most Men have.
A fluent Tongue, a well-digested Style,
His Angel Voice his Hearers Hours beguile,
Charmed them which Godliness, and while he spoke,
We loved the Doctrine for the Teachers sake;
Strictly to all Prescription he conforms,
To Canons, Rubric, Discipline, and Forms;
Preaches, Disputes, with Diligence and Zeal,
Labors the Church's latent Wounds to heal:
'Twou'd be uncharitable to suggest,
Where this is found, we should not find the rest:
Yet Solid's frail and false to say no more,
Dotes on a Bottle, and what is worse a W --
Two Bastard Sons he educates abroad,
And breeds them to the Function of the Word.
In this the zealous Churchman he puts on,
And Dedicates his Labors to the Gown.
P --, for so his Grace the Duke thought fit,
Has in the wild of Sussex made his Seat:
His want of Manners we could here excuse,
For in his Day 'twas out of Fulpit-use;
Railing was then the Duty of the Day,
Their Sabbath-work, was but to Scold and Pray:
But when transplanted to a Country-Town,
'Twas hoped he would lay his fiery Talent down,
At least we thought he would so much Caution use,
As not his Noble Patron to abuse.
But it is in vain to cultivate Mankind,
When Pride has once possession of his Mind.
Not all his Grace's Favors could prevail,
To calm that Tongue that was so used to rail.
Promiscuous Gall his Learned Mouth defiled,
And Hypocondraick Spleen his Preaching spoiled;
His undistinguished Censure he bestows,
Not by Desert, but as Ill Nature flows.
The Learned say the Causes are from hence,
An Ebb of Manners, and a Flux of Sense;
Dilated Pride, the Frenzy of the Brain.
Exhaled the Spirits and disturbed the Man;
And so the kindest thing which can be said,
Is not to say he is mutinous, but mad:
For less could never his Antic Whims explain,
He thought his Belly pregnant as his Brain:
Fancied himself with Child, and durst believe,
That he by Inspiration could conceive,
And if the Het'rogeneous Birth goes on,
He hopes to bring his Mother Church a Son:
Though some Folks think the Doctor ought to doubt,
Not how't got in, but how it will get out.
Hark, Satyr, Now bring Boanerges down,
A Fighting Priest, a Bully of the Gown:
In double Office he can serve the Lord,
To fight his Battles and to preach his Word;
And double Praise is to his merit due,
He thumps the Pulpit and the People too.
Then search my L -- of L -- Diocese,
And see what R -- the Care of Souls possess;
Beseech his L -- but to name the Priest,
Went sober from his Visitation Feast.
Tell him of sixteen Ecclesiastic Guides,
On whom no Spirit but that of Wine abides;
Who in contiguous Parishes remain,
And Preach the Gospel once a Week in vain:
But in their Practices unpreach it all,
And sacrifice to Bacchus or to Baal.
Tell him a Vicious Priesthood must imply
A careless or defective Prelacy.
But still be circumspect and spare the Gown,
The Mitre's full as Sacred as the Crown;
The Churches Sea is always in a Storm,
Leave them at Latter Lamas to reform.
If in their Gulf of Vice thou should appear,
Thou Wilt certainly be lost and Shipwrack'd there:
Nor meddle with their Convocation Feuds,
The Church's F --, the Clergy's Interludes;
Their Church Distinctions too let us lay by,
As who are low Church R -- and who are high.
Enquire not who their Passive Doctrine broke,
Who swore at Random, or who ly'd by Book:
But since their Frailties come so very fast,
It Is plain they should not be believed in have.
Satyr, for Reasons we have told before,
With gentle Strokes the Men of Posts pass over
Nor within Gunshot of St. Stephen's come,
Unless you are well prepared for Martyrdom;
Not that there is any want of Subjects there,
But the more Crimes we have the less we'll hear,
And what have thou to do with S -- P --?
Let them sin on and tempt the Fatal Hour,
It Is vain to preach up dull Morality,
Where too much Crime and too much Power agree;
The hardn'd Guilt undocible appears,
They Will exercise their Hands but not their Ears.
Let their own Crimes be Punishment enough,
And let them want the favor of Reproof.
Let the Court-Ladies be as lewd as fair,
Let Wealth and Wickedness be M -- Care;
Let D -- drench his Wit with his Estate,
And O -- sin in spite of Age and Fate;
On the wrong side of Eighty let him Whore,
He always was, and will be lewd and poor,
Let D -- be proud, and O -- gay,
Lavish of vast Estates, and scorn to pay:
The Ancient D -- has sinned to's Heart's contend,
And but he scorns to stoop would now repent:
Would Heaven abate but that one Darling Sin,
He Would be a Christian and a P -- again,
Let poor Corrina mourn her Maidenhead,
And her lost D -- gone out to fight for Bread.
Be he Embarkt for P -- or S --,
She prays he never may return again;
For fear she always should resist in vain.
Satyr, forbear the blushing Sex to expose,
For all their Vice from Imitation flows;
And 'twou'd be but a very dull pretense,
To miss the Cause, and blame the Consequence;
But let us make Mankind ashamed to Sin,
Good Nature'l make the Women all come in,
This one Request shall thy Rebukes express,
Only to talk a little little less.
Now view the Beau's at Will's, the Men of Wit,
By Nature nice, and for discerning fit:
The finished Fops, the Men of Wig and Snuff,
Knights of the famous Oyster-Barrel Muff.
Here meets the Diet of Imperial Wit,
And of their weighty Matters wisely treat;
Send Deputies to Tunbridge and the Bath,
To guide your Country Beau's in Wits unerring Path.
Prigson from Nurse and Hanging-sleeves got free,
A little smatch of Modern Blasphemy;
A powdered Wig, a Sword, a Page, a Chair,
Learns to take Snuff, drinks Chocolate, and swear:
Nature seems thus far to have led him on,
And no Man thinks he was a Fop too soon;
But 'twas the Devil surely drew him in,
Against the Light of Nature thus to sin:
That he who was a Coxcomb so complete.
Should now put in his wretched Claim for Wit.
Such sober steps Men to their Ruin take,
A Fop, a Beau, a Wit, and then a Rake.
Fate has the Scoundrel Party halv'd in two,
The Wits are shabby, and the Fops are Beau;
The Reasons plain, the Money went before,
And so the Wits are Rakish 'cause they are Poor,
Indulgent Heaven for Decency thought fit,
That some should have the Money, and some the Wit.
Fools are a Rent Charge left on Providence,
And have Equivalents instead of Sense;
To whom he is bound a larger Lot to carve:
Or else they would seem to have been born to starve:
Such with their double Dole should be content,
And not pretend to Gifts that Heaven never sent:
For 'twou'd reflect upon the Power Supreme,
If all his Mercies ran in one contracted Stream:
The Men of Wit would by their Wealth be known,
Some would have all the Good, and some have none.
The useless Fools would in the World remain,
As Instances that Heaven could work in vain,
Dull Flettumacy has his Hearts Delight,
Get's up in the Morning to lie down at Night;
His Talk's a Mass of weighty emptiness,
None more of Business prates, or knows it less;
A painted lump of Laziness and Sloth,
And in the Arms of Bacchus spends his Youth:
The waiting Minutes tend on him in vain,
Misspent the past, unvalu'd those remain;
Time lies as useless unregarded by,
Needless to him that is only Born to Dye,
And yet this undiscerning thing has Pride,
And hugs the Fop that wiser Men deride.
Pride's a most useful Virtue in a Fool,
The humble Cockcomb's always made a Tool;
Conceit's a Blockhead's only Happiness,
He Would hang himself if he could use his Eyes.
If Fools could their own Ignorance discern,
They Would be no longer Fools:
From whence some wise Philosophers have said,
Fools may sometimes be sullen, but cannot be mad.
It Is too much thinking which distracts the Brain,
Crowds it with Vapors which dissolve in vain;
The fluttering Wind of undigested thought
Keeps Mock Idea's in, and true ones out:
These guide the undirected Wretch along,
With giddy Head and inconsistent Tongue;
But Flettumasy's safe, he is none of them,
Bedlam can never lay a Claim to him,
Nature secured is unincumbred Scull,
For Flettumacy never thinks at all:
Supinely sleeps in Diadora's Arms;
Doz'd with the Magic of her Craft and Charms;
The subtle Dame brought up in Vice's School,
Can love the Cully, though she hates the Fool:
Wisely her just Contempt of him conceals,
And hides the Follies he himself reveals.
It Is plain the self-denying Jilt's in the Right
She wants his Money, and he wants her Wit.
Satyr, the Men of Rhyme and Jingle shun,
Has thou not Rhim'd thy self till thour't undone?
On Rakish Poets, let us not reflect,
They only are what all Mankind expect.
Yet it is not Poets have debaucht the Times,
It Is we that have so damned their sober Rhimes:
The Tribe's good natured, and desire to please,
And when you snarl at those, present you these.
The World has lost its ancient Taste of Wit,
And Vice comes in to raise the Appetite;
For Wit has lately got the start of Sense,
And serves it self as well with Impudence.
Let him whose Fate it is to write for Bread,
Keep this one Maxim always in his Head:
If in this Age he would expect to please,
He must not cure, but nourish their Disease;
Dull Moral things will never pass for Wit,
Some Years ago they might, but now it is too late.
Virtue's the faint Green Sickness of the Times,
It Is luscious Vice gives Spirit to all Rhimes,
In vain the Sober thing inspired with Wit,
Writes Hymns and Histories from Sacred Writ;
But let him Blasphemy and Bawdy write,
The Pious and the Modest both will buy't.
The blushing Virgin's pleased and loves to look,
And plants the Poem next her Prayer Book.
W -- ly with Pen and Poverty beset,
And Bl -- re Vers't in Pyysick as in Wit.
Though this of Jesus, that of Job may sing,
One Bawdy Play will twice their Prosits bring,
And had not both carest the Flattered Crown,
This had no Knighthood seen, nor that no Gown.
Had Vice no Power the Fancy to bewitch,
Dryden had Hanged himself as well as Creech:
Durfey had starved, and half the Poets fled
In Foreign parts, to pawn their Wit for Bread.
*It Is Wine or Lewdness all our Theams supplies,
Gives Poets Power to write, and Power to please:
Let this describe the Nations Character,
One Man reads Milton, forty Rochester.
This lost his Taste, they say, when h' lost his Sight,
Milton had Thought, but Rochester had Wit.
The Case is plain, the Temper of the Time,
One wrote the Lewd, and the other the Sublime.
And should Apollo now descend and write,
In Virtue's Praise 'twou'd never pass for Wit.
The Bookseller perhaps would say, 'Twas well:
But 'Twou'd not hit the Times, 'Twou'd never Sell:
Unless a Spice of Lewdness could appear,
The sprightly part would still be wanting there.
The Fashionable World would never read,
Nor the Unfashionable Poet get his Bread.
It Is Love and Honor must enrich our Verse,
The Modern Terms, our Whoring to rehearse.
The sprightly part attends the God of Wine,
The Drunken Style must blaze in every Line.
These are the Modern Qualities must do,
To make the Poem and the Poet too.
Dear Satyr, If thou will reform the Town,
Thou Wilt certainly be beggared and undone:
It Is at thy Peril if thou will proceed
To cry down Vice, Mankind will never read.
CONCLUVSION.
WHat strange Mechanic thoughts of God and Man
Must this unsteady Nation entertain,
To think Almighty Science can be blind,
Wisdom it self be banter'd by Mankind;
Eternal Providence be mocked with Lies,
With outsides and Improbabilities,
With Laws those Rhodomonta's of the State,
Long Proclamation, and the Lord knows what;
Societies ill Manners to suppress,
And new sham Wares with Immoralities,
While they themselves to common Crimes betrayed,
Can break the very Laws themselves have made:
With Jehu's Zeal they furiously reform,
And raise false Clouds, which end without a Storm;
But with a loose to Vice securely see
The Subject punished, and themselves go free.
For shame your Reformation-Clubs give over,
And jest with Men, and jest with Heaven no more:
But if you would avenging Powers appease,
Avert the Indignation of the Skies;
Impending Ruin avoid, and calm the Fates,
Ye Hypocrites, reform your Magistrates.
Your Quest of Vice at Church and Court been
There lie the Seed of high expatiate Sin;
It Is they can cheek the Vices of the Town,
When ever they please, but to suppress their own.
Our Modes of Vices from their Examples came,
And their Examples only must reclaim
In vain you strive ill Manners to suppress
By the Superlatives of Wickedness:
Ask but how well the Drunken Plowman looks,
Set by the swearing Justice in the Stocks;
And poor Street Whores in Bridewel feel their Fate,
While Harlot M -- n rides in a Coach of State.
The Mercenary Scouts in every Street,
Bring all that have no Money to your feet,
And if you lash a Strumpet of the Town,
She only smarts for want of half a Crown:
Your Annual Lists of Criminals appear,
But no Sir Harry or Sir Charles is there.
Your Proclamations Rank and File appear,
To Bugbear Vice, and put Mankind in fear:
These are the Squibs and Crackers of the Law,
Which hiss and make a Bounce, and then withdraw.
Law like the thunder of Immortal Jove,
Rings Peals of Terror from the Powers above;
But when the pointed Lightnings disappear,
The Cloud dissolves, and all is serene and clear:
Law only aids Men to conceal their Crimes,
But it is Example must reform the Times,
Force and Authorities are all in vain,
Unless you can persuade, you will never constrain;
And all persuasive Power expires of Course,
'Till backed with good Examples to enforce.
The Magistrates must Blasphemy forbear,
Be faultless first themselves, and then severe;
Impartial Justice equally dispense,
And fear no Man, nor fear no Man's Offense:
Then may our Justices, and not before,
When they reprove the Rich, correct the Poor.
The Men of Honor must from Vice dissent,
Before the Rakes and Bullies will repent;
Virtue must be the Fashion of the Town,
Before the Beau's and Ladies put it on;
Wit must no more be Bawdy and Profane,
Or Wit to Virtue's reconciled in vain.
The Clergy must be sober, grave and wise,
Or else in vain they cant of Paradise:
Our Reformation never can prevail,
While Precepts govern and Examples fail.
Were but the Ladies virtuous as they are fair,
The Beau's would blush as often as they swear;
Vice would grow antiquated in the Town,
Would all our Men of Mode but cry it down:
For Sin's a Slave to Custom, and willed to die,
Whenever Habits suffer a Decay;
And therefore all our Reformation here,
Must work upon our Shame, and not our Fear.
If once the Mode of Virtue would begin,
The poor will quickly be ashamed to sin.
Fashion is such a strange bewitching Charm,
For fear of being laughed at they will Reform.
And yet Posterity will blush to hear
Royal Examples have been useless here;
The only Just Exception to our Rule,
Virtue's not learnt in this Imperial School.
In vain Maria's Character we read,
So few will in her Path of Virtue tread.
In vain her Royal Sister recommends
Virtue to be the Test of all her Friends,
Backed with her own Example and Commands.
Our Church established, and our Trade restored,
Our Friends protected, and our Peace secured:
France humbl'd, and our Fleet's insulting Spain,
These are the Triumphs of a Female Reign;
At Home her milder Influence she imparts,
Queen of our Vows, and Monarch of our Hearts.
If Change of Sexes thus will change our Scenes,
Grant Heaven we always may be ruled by Queens.
THE Spanish Descent. A POEM.
LOng had this Nation been amused in vain
With Posts from Portugal and News from Spain:
With Ormonds Conquests and the Fleets success,
And Favors from the Moors at Maccaness,
The Learned Mob bought Compasses and Scales,
And every Barber knew the Bay of Cales,
Showed us the Army here, and there the Fleet,
Here the Troops Land, and there the Foes retreat.
There at St. Mary's how the Spaniard runs
And listen close as if they heard the Guns,
And some pretend they see them -- the Nuns.
Others describe the Castle and Puntalls
And tell how easy it is to conquer Cales,
Wisely propose to let the Silver come,
And help to pay the Nations Debts at Home.
But still they count the Spoils without the Cost,
And still the News came faster than the Post.
The graver Heads, like Mountebanks of State
Of Abdications and Revolts Debate,
Expect a Revolution should appear
As Cheap and Easy as it had done here.
Bring the Revolting Grandees to the C^ast,
And give the Duke D' Anjou up for lost.
Doom him to France to seek relief in vain,
And send the Duke of Austria to Spain,
Canvas the Council at Madrid and find
How all the Spanish Courtiers stand inclined,
Describe the strange Convulsions of the State,
And old Carreroe's Sacrificed to Fate:
Then all the Stage of Action they survey
And wish our Generals knew as much as they,
Some have their Fancies so exceeding Bold
They saw the Queens fall out, and heard 'em scold,
Nor is the thing so strange for if they did,
'Twas talking from Toledo to Madrid.
And now the Farce is Acting over again,
The meaning of our Mischiefs to explain;
The Learned Mob O'er-read in Arms and Law,
The Cause of their Miscarriages foresaw.
Tell us the Loytering Minutes were misspent
Too long a going, and too few that went.
Exalt the Catalonian Garrison,
The new made Works, the Platform and the Town:
Tell us it was impossible to Land,
And all their Batteries sunk into the Sand.
Some are all Banter, and the Voyage despise
For fruitless Actions seldom pass for wise.
Tell us 'twas like our English Politics
To think to wheedle Spain with Heretics.
The disproportioned Force they Banter too,
The Ships too Many, and the Men too Few.
Then they find Fault with Conduct, and condemn
Sometimes the Officers sometimes the Men,
Nor escapes his Grace the Satyr of the Town,
Whoever fails success, shall fail Renown.
Sir George comes in amongst the Indiscreet,
Sometimes the Army's censured then the Fleet.
How the abandoned Country they destroyed
And made their early Declarations void,
Too hasty Proofs of their Protection gave,
Plund'ring the People, they came there to save.
As if the Spaniards were so Plagued with France,
To fly to Thieves for their deliverance,
But amongst all the Wisdom of the Town
The vast designs of Fate remain unknown,
Unguest at, unexpected, hid from thoughts,
For no Man looked for Blessings in our Faults,
Mischances sometimes are a Nations Good.
Rightly Improved, and Nicely Understood.
Ten Years we felt the Dying Pangs of War
And fetched our Grief and Miseries from far.
Our English Millions Foreign War maintains,
And English Blood has drencht the Neighboring Plains.
Nor shall we Blush to Boast what all Men own,
Uncommon English Valor has bin shown,
The forward Courage of our Ill Paid Men,
Deserves more Praise than Nature spares my Pen,
What could they not perform, or what endure?
Witness the mighty Bastions of Namur.
We Fasted much, and we attempted more.
But never could come to giving thanks before,
Unless, 'twas when the Fatal Strife was over.
Some secret Achan Cursed our Enterprise,
And Israel fled, before her Enemies.
Whether the Poisonous Particles were hid,
In us that Followed, or in Them that Led,
What Fatal Charm benumn'd the Nations Sense,
To struggle with Eternal Providence,
Whether some Curse, or else some Perjured Vow,
Or some strange Guilt that is expiated now?
Was it the Pilots who ill steered the State,
Or was it the Decisive Will of Fate?
It Is hard to tell, but this too well we know,
All things went backward, or went on too slow
Small was the Glory, of our High Success,
A tedious War, and an Imperfect Peace,
Peace Dearly purchased, and which Cost us more
Great Kingdoms, than we Conquered Towns before.
Actions may miss of their deserved Applause,
When Heaven approves the Men, and not the Cause,
And well contrived Designs miscarry when,
Heaven may approve the Cause but not the Men,
Here then is the Ground of our Expense of Blood,
The Sword of Gideon's, not the Sword of God.
The Mighty and the Wise are laid aside,
And Victory the Sex has Dignified,
We have been used to Female Conquests here,
And Queens have been the Glory of the War,
The Scene Revives with Smiles of Providence,
All things Declined before, and Prosper since;
And as if ill-Success had been entailed,
The Posthume Projects are the last that failed,
As Heaven, whose works were hid from Human view,
Would blast our old Designs, and bless our New.
And now the Baffled Enterprise grows stale,
Their Hopes Decrease, and juster Doubts prevail,
The unattempted Town sings Victory,
And scared with Walls, and not with Men, we fly.
Great Conduct in our safe Retreat we show,
And bravely Re-embark, when none pursue:
The Guns, the Ammunition's put on Board;
And what we could not Plunder we restored.
And thus we quit the Andalusian Shores,
Drencht with the Spanish Wine, and Spanish W -- s.
With songs of scorn the Arragonians Sing,
And loud Te Deums make the Valleys Ring.
Uncommon Joys now raise the hopes of Spain,
And Vigo does their Plate-Fleet entertain.
The vast Galleons deep-Ballased with Ore,
Safely reach home to the Galitian Shore.
The Double Joy spreads from Madrid to Rome,
The English fled, the Silver Fleet comes home:
From thence it reaches to the Banks of Po,
And the Loud Cannons let the Germans know,
The Rattling Volleys tell their short-lived Joys,
And roar Te Deum out in Smoke and Noise.
To Milan next it flies on Wings of Fame,
There the Young Monarch and his Heroes came,
From sad Luzara, and the Mantuan Walls
To seek New Dangers and to Rescue Cales.
His Joy for welcome Treasure he expressed,
But grieves at his Good Fortune in the rest.
The Flying English he had wished to stay,
To crown with Conquests one Victorious Day.
The Priests, in high Procession show their Joy,
And all the Arts of Eloquence employ,
To feed his Pride of fancied Victories,
And raise his un-try'd Valor to the Skies.
The flattering Courtiers his vain mind possess,
With Airy hopes of Conquest and Success.
Prompt his Young thoughts to run on new Extremes,
And Sycophantick Pride his Heart Inflames:
His Native Crime springs up, his Pulse beats high,
With thoughts of Universal Monarchy;
Fancies his Foreign Enemies suppressed,
And Boasts too soon, how he will subdue the Rest.
Princes like other Men are Blind to Fate,
He only sees the Event who does the Cause Create.
From hence through France the Welcome Tidings fly,
To mock his ancient Sire with mushroom Joy.
Raptures possess the ambitious Heads of France,
And Golden Hopes their new Designs advance.
Now they Consult to Crush the World again,
And talk of riffling Christendom for Men.
New Fleets, new Armies, and new Leagues contrive,
And swallow Men and Nations up alive.
Prescribe no Bounds to their ambitious Pride,
But first the Wealth, and then the World divide.
Excess of Pride, to airy Madness grows,
And makes Men strange Romantic things propose.
The Head turns round, and all the Fancy's vain,
And makes the World as Giddy as the Brain.
Men that consult such weighty things as those,
All possible Disasters should suppose.
In vain great Princes mighty things Invent,
While Heaven retains the Power to prevent.
He that to General Mischief makes pretense,
Should first know how to Conquer Providence.
Such strive in vain, and only show Mankind,
How Tyrants clothed with Power, are all inclined.
Mean while our Melancholy Fleet steers Home,
Some grieved for past, for future Mischiefs some.
Disaster swells the Blood, and Spleen the Face;
And ripens them for glorious things apace.
With deep Regret they turn their Eyes to Spain,
And wish they once might visit them again.
Little they Dreamt that Good which Heaven prepared,
No merit from below, no Signs from Heaven appeared.
No hints unless from their high ripened Spleen,
And strange ungrounded Sympathy within.
The silent Duke from all mis-conduct free,
Alone enjoys the Calm of Honesty:
Fears not his Journal should be fairly shown,
And sighs for Englands Errors, not his own.
His constant Tempers all Serene and Clear;
First, free from Guilt, and therefore free from fear.
Not so the rest for conscious Thoughts become
More restless now, the nearer they come home.
The Party-making Feuds on Board begin:
For People always Quarrel when they sin.
Reflect with shame upon the things mis-done,
And shift their Faults about from One to One.
Prepare Excuses, and compute their Friends,
And dread the Fate, which their Desert attends.
Some wish for Storms, and curse the Wind and Sails.
And dream, no doubt of Gibbets and of Jayls;
Imaginary Punishments appear,
And suited to their secret Guilt's their fear:
Their hastening Fate in their own Fancies Read,
And few, it is feared, their Innocence can plead.
Then their sweet Spoils to trusty Hands convey,
And throw the rifl'd Gods of Spain away:
Disgorge that Wealth they dare not entertain,
And wish the Nuns their Maidenheads again.
Dismiss their Wealth for fear of Witnesses,
And Purge their Coffers and their Consciences:
Cursing their ill got Trifles but in vain:
For still the Guilt, and still the fears remain.
Tell us ye Rabbis of abstruser Sense,
Who jumble Fate and Fools with Providence.
Is this the chosen Army, this the Fleet,
For which Heavens Praises sound in every Street?
Could Heaven provide them one occasion more,
Who had so ill-Discharg'd themselves before:
That Fleet so many former Millions lost.
So little had Performed, so much had Cost;
That Fleet, so often Manned with Knaves before,
That served us all the War to make us Poor;
That twice had made their fruitless Voyage to Spain,
And saw the Streights, and so came Home again:
Our Wooden Walls that should defend our Trade,
And many a Witless, Wooden Voyage have made,
How often have they been fitted out in vain,
Wasted our Money, and destroyed our Men,
Betrayed our Merchants, and exposed their Fleets,
And caused Eternal Murmurs in our Streets?
The Nation's Genius sure prevails above,
And Heaven conceals his Anger, show's his Love:
The Nations Guardian Angel has prevailed,
And on her Guardian Queen new Favors has entailed.
Now let glad Europe in her turn rejoice,
And sing new Triumphs with exalted Voice.
See the glad Post of Tidings winged with News,
With suited Speed the Wondering Fleet pursues:
His haste discerned, increases their Surprise,
The more they wonder, and the more he flies.
Nor Wind, nor Seas, proportioned speed can bear;
For Joy and Hope have swifter Wings than Fear.
With what Surprise of Joy they meet the News!
Joys, that to every Vein new Spirits infuse.
The wild Excess in Shouts and Cries appear:
For Joys and Griefs are all irregular.
Councils of War, for sake of Forms they call,
But shame admits of no Disputes at all.
How should they differ, where no Doubt can be?
But if they should accept of Victory,
Whether they should the great occasion take,
Or baffle Heaven, and double their mistake?
Whether the naked and defenseless Prize
They should accept; Or Heaven and that despise?
Whether they should revive their Reputation;
Or sink it twice, and twice betray the Nation?
Who dare the horrid Negative design?
Who dare the Last suggest, the First decline?
Envy her self: For Satan's always there,
And keeps his Councils with the God of War.
Though with her swelling Spleen she seemed to burst,
Willed the Design, while the Event she cursed.
The word's gone out, and now they spread the Main
With swelling Sails, and swelling Hopes for Sapin.
To double Vengeance pressed, where ever they come,
Resolved to pay the haughty Spaniard home.
Resolved by future Conduct to atone,
For all our past Mistakes, and all their own.
New Life springs up in every English Face,
And fits them all for Glorious things apace.
The Booty some excites, and some the Cause;
But more the Hope to gain their lost Applause.
Eager their sullied Honor to restore,
Some Anger whets, some Pride and Vengeance more,
The lazy Minutes now pass on too slow:
Fancy flies faster than the Winds can blow.
Impatient Wishes lengthen out the Day;
They chide the loytering Winds for their delay.
But Time is Natures faithful Messenger,
And brings up all we wish, as well as all we fear.
The Mists clear up, and now the Scout discryes
The subject of their Hopes and Victories:
The wished for Fleets embay'd, in Harbor lie,
Unfit to fight, and more unfit to fly.
Triumphant Joy throughout the Navy flies,
Echoed from Shore with Terror and Surprise.
Strange Power of Noise! which at one simple sound,
At once shall some encourage, some confound.
In vain the Lion tangl'd in the snare
With Anguish roars, and rends the trembling Air.
It Is vain to struggle with Almighty Fate:
Vain and impossible the weak Debate.
The Mighty Booms, the Forts resist in vain,
The Guns with fruitless Force in Noise complain.
See how the Troops intrepidly fall on!
Wish for more Foes; and think they fly too soon.
With eager Fury to their Forts pursue,
And think the odds of Four to One too few,
The Land's first Conquered, and the Prize attends,
Fate beckens in the Fleet to back their Friends.
Despair suceeeds: They struggle now too late,
And soon submit to their prevailing Fate.
Courage is Madness when Occasion's past:
Death's the securest Refuge and the last.
And now the rolling Flames come threatening on,
And mighty streams of melted Gold run down.
The flaming Oar down to its Center makes,
To form new Mines beneath the Oazy Lakes.
Here a Galeon with Spicy Druggs inflamed,
In Odoriferous folds of Sulphur streamed.
The Gods of old no such Oblations knew,
Their Spices weak, and their Perfumes but few.
The frighted Spaniards from their Treasure fly,
Loath to forsake their Wealth, but loath to dye.
Here a vast Carrack flies while none pursue,
Bulg'd on the Shore by her Distracted Crew:
There like a mighty Mountain she appears,
And groans beneath the Golden weight she bears.
Conquest perverts the Property of Friend,
And makes Men ruin what they cannot defend.
Some blow their Treasure up into the Air,
With all the wild Excesses of Despair.
Strange Fate! that War such odd Events should have;
Friends would destroy, and Enemies would save.
Others their Safety to their Wealth prefer,
And mix some small Descretion with their Fear.
Life's the best Gift that Nature can bestow;
The first that we receive, the last which we forego:
And he that is vainly Prodigal of Blood,
Forfeits his Sense to do his Cause no good.
All Desperation's the Effect of Fear;
Courage is Temper, Valor cannot Despair.
And now the Victory's completely gained;
No Ships to Conquer now, no Foes remained.
The mighty Spoils exceed what ever was known,
That Vanquished never lost, or Victor won.
So great, if Fame shall future Times remind,
They Will think she lies, and Libels all Mankind.
Well may the Pious Queen New Anthems raise,
Sing Her own Fortunes, and Her Makers Praise;
Invite the Nation willing Thanks to pay:
And well may all the mighty Ones obey.
So may they sing, be always so preserved,
By Grace unwish'd, and Conquest undeserved.
Now let us Welcome Home the Conquering Fleet,
And all their well atton'd Mistakes forget:
Such high Success should all Resentments drowned,
Nothing but joy and welcome should be found.
No more their past Miscarriages reprove;
But bury all in Gratitude and Love.
Let their high Conduct have a just Regard,
And meaner Merit meet a kind Reward.
But now what Fruits of Victory remain?
To Heaven what Praise, what Gratitude to Man?
Let France sing Praise for shams of Victories,
And mock their Maker with Religious Lies:
But England blessed with thankful Hearts shall raise,
For mighty Conquests, mighty Songs of Praise.
She needs no false Pretenses to deceive:
What all Men see, all Men must needs believe.
Our Joy can hardly run into Excess,
The well known Subject all our Foes confess:
We cannot desire more, they cannot pretend no less.
ANNE, like her Great Progenitor, sings Praise:
Like her she Conquers, and like her she Prays:
Like her she Graces and Protects the Throne,
And counts the Lands Prosperity her own:
Like her, and long like her, be Blessed her Reign,
Crowned with new Conquests, and more Fleets from Spain.
See now the Royal Chariot comes amain,
With all the willing Nation in her Train,
With humble Glory, and with solemn Grace,
Queen in her Eyes, and Christian in her Face.
With Her, Her represented Subjects join;
And when she Prays the whole Nation says, Amen.
With Her, in Stalls the Illustrious Nobles sat,
The Cherubims and Seraphims of State:
ANNE like a Comet in the Center shone,
And they like Stars that circumsere the Sun.
She Great in them, and they as Great in Her;
Sure Heaven will such Illustrious Praises hear.
The crouding Millions Hearty Blessings pour:
Saint Paul never saw but one such Day before.
THE Poor Man's PLEA. IN Relation to all the Proclamations, Declarations, Acts
of Parliament, etc. which have been, or shall be made, or published, for a
Reformation of Manners and suppressing Immorality in the Nation.
The PREFACE.
REformation of Manners is a Work so Honorable, and at this Time so absolutely
necessary, that like the Reform of our Money it can be no longer delayed.

The Ways by which the present Torrent of Vice has been let in upon the Nation,
and by which it maintains the Tyranny it has usurped on the Lives of the
Inhabitants, are too plain to be hid. The following Sheets aim at the Work, by
leading to the most direct means, Viz. Reformation by Example. Laws are, in
Terrorem Punishments, and Magistrates Compel and put a Force upon Men's Minds;
but Example is Persuasive and Gentle, and draws by a Secret, Invisible, and
almost Involuntary Power.

If there can be any Remedies proposed more proper to bring it to pass, they
that know them would do well to bring them forth. In the mean time the Author
thinks Conscience in the Minds of Men Impartially Consulted, will give a
Probatum est to the following Proposal; and to that Judgment be refers all
those who Object against it.

THE The Poor Man's PLEA.
IN searching for a proper Cure of an Epidemick Distemper, Physicians do tell
us it is first necessary to know the Cause of that Distemper, from what Part of
the Body, and from what ill Habit it proceeds; and when the Cause is
discovered, it is to be removed, that the Effect may cease of its self; but if
removing the Cause will not work the Cure, then indeed they proceed to apply
proper Remedies to the Disease it self, and the particular Part afflicted.

Immorality is without doubt the present reigning Distemper of the Nation: And
the King and Parliament, who are indeed the proper Physicians, seem nobly
inclined to undertake the Cure. It Is a Great Work, well worthy their utmost
Pains: The Honor of it, were it once perfected, would add more Trophies to the
Crown, than all the Victories of this Bloody War, or the Glories of this
Honorable Peace.

But as a Person under the Violence of a Disease sends in vain for a Physician,
unless he resolves to make use of his Prescription; so in vain does the King
attempt to reform a Nation, unless they are willing to reform themselves, and
to submit to his Prescriptions.

Wickedness is an Ancient Inhabitant in this Country, and it is very hard to
give its Original.

But however difficult that may be, it is easy to look back to a time when we
were not so generally infected with Vice as we are now; and 'twill seem
sufficient to enquire into the Causes of our present Defection.

The Protestant Religion seems to have an unquestioned Title to the first
introducing a strict Morality mong us; and it is but just to give the Honor of
it, where it is so eminently due. Reformation of Manners has something of a
Natural Consequence in it from Reformation in Religion For since the principles
of the Protestant Religion disown the Indulgencies of the Roman Pontiff, by
which a thousand Sins are, as Venial Crimes, bought off, and the Priest, to
save God Almighty the trouble, can blot them out of the Account before it comes
to his hand; common Vices lost their Charter, and men could not sin at so cheap
a Rate as before. The Protestant Religion has in it self a Natural Tendency to
Virtue, as a standing Testimony of its own Divine Original, and accordingly it
has suppressed Vice and Immorality in all the Countries where it has had a
Footing: It has civilized Nations, and reformed the very Tempers of its
Professors: Christianity and Humanity has gone hand in hand in the World; and
there is so visible a difference between the other Civilized Governments in the
World, and those who now are under the Protestant Powers, that it carries its
Evidence in it self.

The Reformation, begun in England in the days of King Edward the Sixth, and
afterward gloriously finished by Queen Elizabeth, brought the English Nation
to such a degree of Humanity, and Sobriety of Conversation, as we have reason
to doubt will hardly be seen again in our Age.

In King James the First's time, the Court affecting something more of
Gallantry and Gaiety, Luxury got footing; and twenty Years Peace, together with
no extraordinary Examples from the Court, gave too great Encouragement to
Licentiousness.

If it took footing in King James the First's time, it took a deep Root in the
Reign of his Son; and the Liberty given the Soldiery in the Civil War,
dispersed all manner of Prophanness throughout the Kingdom. That Prince, though
very Pious in his own Person and Practice and had the Misfortune to be the
first King of England, and perhaps in the World, that ever established
Wickedness by a Law: By what unhappy Council, or secret ill Fate he was guided
to it, is hard to determine; but the Book of Sports, as it was called, that
Book to tolerate the Exercise of all Sports and Pastimes on the Lord's Day,
tended more to the vitiating the Practice of this Kingdom, as to keeping that
Day, than all the Acts of Parliament, Proclamations and Endeavors of future
Princes has done, or ever will do, to reform it.

And yet the People of England expressed a general sort of an Aversion to that
Liberty; and some, as if glutted with too much Freedom, when the Reins of Law
were taken off, refused that Practice they allowed themselves in before.

In the time of King Charles the Second, Lewdness and all manner of Debauchcry
arrived to its Meridian: The Encouragement it had from the Practice and
Allowance of the Court, is an invincible Demonstration how far the Influence of
our Government extends in the Practice of the People.

The present King and his late Queen, whose Glorious Memory will be dear to the
Nation as long as the World stands, have had all this wicked Knot to unravel.
This was the first thing the Queen set upon while the King was engaged in his
Wars abroad: She first gave all sorts of Vice a general Discouragement; and on
the contrary, raised the value of Virtue and Sobriety by her Royal Example. The
King having brought the War to a Glorious Conclusion, and settled an Honorable
Peace, in his very first Speech to his Parliament proclaims a New War against
Profaneness and Immorality, and goes on also to discourage the practice of it
by his Royal Example.

Thus the Work is begun nobly and regularly; and the Parliament, the General
Representative of the Nation, follows this Royal Example, in enacting Laws to
suppress all manner of Profaneness, etc.

These are Great Things, and, well-improv'd, would give an undoubted Overthrow
to to the Tyranny of Vice, and the Dominion Profaneness has usurped in the
hearts of Men.

But we of the Plebeii find our selves justly aggrieved in all this Work of
Reformation; and this Reforming Rigor makes the real Work impossible: Wherefore
we find our selves forced to seek Redress of our Grievances in the old honest
way of Petitioning Heaven to relieve us: And in the mean time, we solemnly
Enter our Protestation against the Vicious part of the Nobility and Gentry of
the Nation; as follows:

First, We Protest, That we do not find, impartially enquiring into the matter,
speaking of Moral Goodness, that you are not one jot better than we are, your
Dignities, Estates, and Quality excepted. It Is true, we are all bad enough, and
we are willing in good Manners to agree, that we are as wicked as you; but we
cannot find, on the exactest Scrutiny, but that in the Commonwealth of Vice,
the Devil has taken care to level Poor and Rich into one Class, and is fairly
going on to make us all Graduates in the last Degree of Immorality.

Secondly. We do not find that all the Proclamations, Declarations, and Acts of
Parliament yet made, have any effective Power to punish you for your
Immoralities, as it does us. Now while you make Laws to punish us, and let your
selves go free, though guilty of the same Vices and Immoralities, those Laws are
unjust and unequal in themselves.

It Is true, the Laws do not express a Liberty to you, and a Punishment to us;
and therefore the King and Parliament are free, as King and Parliament, from
this our Appeal; but the Gentry and Magistrates of the Kingdom, while they
execute those Laws upon us the poor Commons, and themselves practicing the same
Crimes, in defiance of the Laws both of God and Man, go unpunished; This is the
Grievance we protest against, as unjust and unequal.

Wherefore, till the Nobility, Gentry, Justices of the Peace, and Clergy, will
be pleased either to Reform their own Manners, and suppress their own
Immoralities, or find out some method and Power impartially to punish
themselves when guilty, we Humbly crave Leave to Object against setting any
Poor Man in the Stocks, or sending them to the House of Correction for
Immoralities, as the most unequal and unjust way of proceeding in the World.

And now Gentlemen,

That this Protestation may not seem a little too Rude, and a Breach of Good
Manners to our Superiors, ws crave Leave to subjoin our Humble Appeal to your
selves; and will for once, knowing you as English Gentlemen to be Men of
Honor, make you Judges in your own Case.

First, Gentlemen, We appeal to your selves, whether ever it be likely to
perfect the Reformation of Manners in this Kingdom, without you; Whether Laws
to punish us, without your Example also to influence us, will ever bring the
Work to pass.

The first Step from a loose vicious Practice in this Nation was begun by King
Edward the Sixth, backed by a Reformed Clergy, and a Sober Nobility: Queen
Elizabeth carried it on: 'Twas the Kings and the Gentry which first again
Degenerated from that strict Observation of Moral Virtues, and from thence
carried Vice on to that degree it now appears in. From the Court Vice took its
Progress into the Country; and in the Families of the Gentry and Nobility it
harbored, till it took heart under their Protection, and made a general Salley
into the Nation; and We the poor Commons, who have been always easy to be
guided by the Example of our Landlords and Gentlemen, have really been
debauched into Vice by their Examples: And it must be the Example of you the
Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, that must put a Stop to the Flood of Vice
and Profaneness which is broken in upon the Country, or it will never be done.

Our Laws against all manner of Vicious Practices are already very severe: But
Laws are useless insignificant things, if the Executive Power which lies in the
Magistrate be not exerted. The Justices of the Peace have the power to punish,
but if they do not put forth that power, it is all one as if they had none at
all: Some have possibly exerted this power; but wherever it has been so put
forth, it has fallen upon us the poor Commons: These are all Cobweb Laws, in
which the small Flies are caught, and great ones break through. My Lord Mayor
has whipped about the poor Beggars, and a few scandalous Whores have been sent to
the House of Correction; some Alehouse-keepers and Vintners have been fined for
drawing Drink on the Sabbath day; but all this falls upon us of the Mob, the
poor Plebeii, as if all the Vice lay among us; for we do not find the Rich
Drunkard carried before my Lord Mayor, nor a Swearing Lewd Merchant. The man
with a Gold Ring and Gay Clothes, may Swear before the Justice, or at the
Justice; may reel home through the open Streets, and no man take any notice of
it; but if a poor man get drunk, or swears an Oath, he must to the Stocks
without Remedy.

In the second place, We appeal to your selves, whether Laws or Proclamations
are capable of having any Effect toward a Reformation of Manners, while the
Benches of our Justices are infected with the scandalous Vices of Swearing and
Drunkenness; while our Justices themselves shall punish a man for Drunkenness,
with a God damn him, set him in the Stocks: And if Laws and Proclamations are
useless in the Case, then they are good for nothing, and had as good be let
alone as published.

It Is hard, Gentlemen, to be punished for a Crime, by a man as guilty as our
selves; and that the Figure a man makes in the World, must be the reason why he
shall not be liable to the Law: This is really punishing men for being poor,
which is no Crime at all; as a Thief may be said to said to be hanged, not for
the Fact, but for being taken.

We further appeal to your selves, Gentlemen, to inform us, whether there be
any particular reason why you should be allowed the full Career of your corrupt
Appetites, without the Restraint of Laws, while you your selves agree that such
Offenses shall be punished in us, and do really execute the Law upon the Poor
People, when brought before you for the same things.

Wherefore that the Work of Reformation of Manners may go on, and be brought to
Perfection, to the Glory of God, and the great Honor of the King and
Parliament: That Debauchery and Profaneness, Drunkenness, Whoring, and all sorts
of Immoralities may be suppressed, we humbly propose the Method which may
effectually accomplish so great a Work.

(1.) That the Gentry and Clergy, who are the Leaders of us poor ignorant
people, and our Lights erected on high places to Guide and Govern us, would in
the first place put a voluntary Force upon themselves, and effectually reform
their own Lives, their way of conversing, and their common Behavior among
their Servants and Neighbors.

1. The Gentry. They are the Original of the Modes, and Customs, and Manners of
their Neighbors; and their examples in the Countries especially are very
moving. There are three several Vices, which have the principal Mannagement of
the greatest part of Mankind, viz. Drunkenness, Swearing, and Whoring; all of
them very ill becoming a Gentleman, however Custom may have made them Modish:
Where none of these Three are in a House, there is certainly something of a
Plantation of God in the Family; for they are such Epidemic Distempers, that
hardly Humane Nature is entirely free from them.

1. Drunkenness that Brutish Vice; a Sin so sordid, and so much a Force upon
Nature, that had God Almighty enjoined it as a Duty, I believe many a Man would
have ventured the loss of Heaven, rather than have have performed it. The
Pleasure of it seems to be so secretly hid, that wild Heathen Nations know
nothing of the matter; it is only discovered, by the wise people of these
Northern Countries, who are Proficients in Vice, Philosophers in Wickedness,
who can extract a Pleasure to themselves in losing their Understanding, and
make themselves Sick at Heart for their Diversion.

If the History of this well bred Vice was to be written, 'twould plainly
appear that it begun among the Gentry, and from them was handed down to the
poorer sort, who still love to be like their Betters. After the Restitution of
King Charles the Second, when drinking the King's Health became the distinction
between a Cavalier and a Roundhead, Drunkenness began its Reign, and it has
Reigned almost Forty Years: The Gentry caressed this Beastly Vice at such a
Rate, that no Companion, no Servant was thought proper unless he could bear a
Quantity of Wine: and to this Day it is added to the Character of a Man, as an
additional Title, when you would speak well of him, He is an Honest Drunken
Fellow; as if his Drunkenness was a Recommendation of his Honesty. From the
practice of this nasty Faculty, our Gentlemen have arrived to the teaching of
it; and that it might be effectually preserved to the next Age, have very early
instructed the Youth in it. Nay, so far has Custom prevailed, that the Top of a
Gentleman's Entertainment has been to make his Friend Drunk; and the Friend is
so much reconciled to it, that he takes that for the effect of his Kindness,
which he ought as much to be affronted at, as if he had kicked him down Stairs:
Thus it is become a Science: and but that the Instruction proves so easy, and
the Youth too apt to learn, possibly we might have had a College erected for
it before now. The further Perfection of this Vice among the Gentry, will
appear in two things; that it is become the Subject of their Glory, and the way
of expressing their Joy for any public Blessing. Jack, said a Gentleman of
very high Quality, when after the Debate in the House of Lords, K. William was
Voted into the Vacant Throne; Jack (says he) God damn ye, Jack, go home to your
Lady, and tell her we have got a Protestant King and Queen; and go make a
Bonfire as big as a House, and bid the Butler make ye all Drunk, ye Dog: Here
was sacrificing to the Devil, for a Thanksgiving to God. Other Vices are
committed as Vices, and Men act them in private, and are willing to hide them;
but Drunkenness they are so fond of, that they will glory in it, boast of it,
and endeavor to promote it as much as possible in others: It Is a Triumph to a
Champion of the Bottle, to repeat how many Quarts of Wine he has Drank at a
sitting, and how he made such and such Honest Fellows Drunk. Men Lie and
Forswear, and hide it, and are ashamed of it, as indeed they have reason to do:
But Drunkenness and Whoring are Accomplishments Men begin to value themselves
upon, repeat them with Pleasure, and affect a sort of Vanity in the History;
are content all the world should be Witnesses of their Intemperance, and have
made the Crime a Badge of Honor to their Breeding and introduce the practice
as a Fashion. And whoever gives himself the Trouble to Reflect on the Custom of
our Gentlemen in their Families, encourageing and promoting this Vice of
Drunkenness, among the poor Commons, will not think it a Scandal upon the
Geutry of England, if we say, That the Mode of Drinking, as it is now practiced,
had its Original from the Practice of the Country-Gentlemen, and they again
from the Court.

It may be objected, and God forbid it should not, That there are a great many
of our Nobility and Gentlemen, who are Men of Honor and Men of Morals, and
therefore this Charge is not universal. To which we answer, It Is universal for
all that; because those very Gentlemen, though they are negatively clear as to
the Commission of the Crimes we speak of, yet are positively guilty, in not
executing that Power the Law has put into their hands, with an Impartial
Vigor. For where was that Gentleman or Justice of the Peace ever yet found,
who executed the Terms of the Law upon a Drunken, Swearing, Lewd Gentleman, his
Neighbor, but the Quality of the Person has been a License to the open
Exercise of the worst Crimes; as if there were any Baronets, Knights, or
Squires in the next World; who because of those little steps Custom had raised
them on, higher than their Neighbors, should be exempted from the Divine
Judicature; or that, as Captain Vratz said, who was Hanged for Murdering
Esquire Thynn, God would show them some respect as they were Gentlemen.

If there were any reason why a Rich Man should be permitted in the public
Exercise of Open Immoralities, and not the poor Man, something might be said:
But if there be any difference it lies the other way; for the Vices of a poor
Man affect only himself; but the Rich Man's Wickedness affects all the
Neighborhood, gives offense to the Sober, and encourages and hardens the Lewd,
and quite overthrows the weak Resolutions of such as are but indifferently
fixed in their Virtue and Morality. If my own Watch goes false, it deceives me
and none else; but if the Town Clock goes false, it deceives the whole Parish.
The Gentry are the Leaders of the Mob; if they are Lewd and Drunken, the others
strive to imitate 'em; if they Discourage Vice and Intemperance, the other will
not be so forward in it, nor so fond of it.

To think then to effect a Reformation by punishing the Poor, while the Rich
seem to Enjoy a Charter for Wickedness, is like taking away the Effect, that
the Cause may cease.

We find some People very fond of Monopolizing a Vice, they would have all of
it to themselves; they must, as my Lord Rochester said of himself, Sin like a
Lord; little sneaking Sins will not serve turn; but they must be Lewd at a rate
above the Common Size, to let the World see they are capable of it.

Our Laws seem to take no Cognizance of such, perhaps for the same reason that
Lycurgus made no Law against Parricide, because he would not have the Sin named
among his Citizens.

Now the poor Man sees no such Dignity in Vice, as to study Degrees; we are
downright in Wickedness, as we are in our Dealings; if we are Drunk, it is
plain Drunkenness; Swearing, and Whoring, is all Blunderbus with us; we don't
affect such Niceties in our Conversation; and the Justices use us accordingly;
nothing but the Stocks, or the House of Correction is the Case, when we are
brought before them; but when our Masters the Gentlemen come to their Refined
Practice, and Sin by the Rules of Quality, we do not find any thing come of it
but false Heraldry, the Vice is punished by the Vice, and the Punishment renews
the Crime.

The Case in short is this; the Lewdness, Profaneness, and Immorality of the
Gentry, which is the main Cause of the General Debauchery of the Kingdom is not
at all touched by our Laws, as they are now Executed; and while it remains so,
the Reformation of Manners can never be brought to pass, nor Profaneness and
Immorality Suppressed; and therefore the punishing the Poor distinctly, is a
Mock upon the good Designs of the King and Parliament; an Act of Injustice upon
them to punish them, and let others as guilty go free; and a sort of Cruelty
too, in taking the advantage of their Poverty to make them suffer, because they
want Estates to purchase their Exemption.

We have some weak Excuses for this Matters, which must be considered: As,

(1.) The Justice of the Peace is a Passive Magistrate, till an Information be
brought before him, and is not to take notice of any thing, but as it is laid
in Fact, and brought to an Affidavit. Now if an Affidavit be made before a
Justice, that such or such a man Swore, or was Drunk, he must, or cannot avoid
Finding him; the Law obliges him to it, let his Quality be what it will; so
that the Defect is not in the Law, nor in the Justice, but in the want of
Information.

(2.) The Name of an Evidence or Informer is so scandalous, that to attempt to
inform against a Man for the most open Breach of the Laws of Morality, is
enough to denominate a man unfit for Society; a Rogue and an Informer are
Synonimous in the Vulgar Acceptance; so much is the real Detection of the
openest Crimes against God, and Civil Government, Discouraged and Avoided.

(3.) The Impossibility of the Cure is such, and the Habit has so obtained upon
all Mankind, that it seems twisted with Human Nature, as an Appendix to Natural
Frailty, which it is impossible to separate from it:

For Answer:

1. It Is true, the Justice of the Peace is in some respect a Passive
Magistrate, and does not act but by Information, but such Information would be
brought if it were encouraged; if Justices of of the Peace did acquaint
themselves with their Neighborhood, they would soon hear of the Immoralities
of the Parish; and if they did impartially Execute the Law on such as offended,
without respect of Persons they would soon have an Account of the Persons and
Circumstances. Besides, it is not want of Information, but want of punishing
what they have Information of. A Poor Man informs against a Great Man, the
Witness is discouraged, the Man goes unpunished, and the Poor Man gets the
Scandal of an Informer; and then it is but too often that our Justices are not
Men of extraordinary Morals themselves; and who shall Inform a Justice of the
Peace that such a Man Swore, when he may be heard to Swear himself as fast as
another? Or who shall bring a Man before a Justice for being Drunk, when the
Justice is so Drunk himself, he cannot order him to be set in the Stocks?

(2.) Besides, the Justice has a Power to punish any Fact he himself sees
committed, and to enquire into any he hears of casually: and if he will stand
still and see those Acts of Immorality committed before his Face, who shall
bring a Poor Man before him to be punished? Thus I have heard a Thousand horrid
Oaths Sworn on a Bowling-Green, in the presence of a Justice of the Peace, and
he take no Notice of it, and go home the next hour, and set a Man in the Stocks
for being Drunk.

As to the Scandal of Informing, it is an Error in Custom, and a great Sin
against Justice; it is necessary indeed that all Judgment should be according to
Evidence, and to discourage Evidence is to discourage Justice; but that a Man
in Trial of the Morality of his Neighbor, should be shamed to appear, must
have some particular cause.

(1.) It proceeds from the Modishness of the Vice; it has so obtained upon some
Men Men's Practices, that to appear against what almost all Men approve, seems
malicious, and has a certain prospect either of Revenge or of a Mercenary
Wretch, that Informs merely to get a Reward. It Is true, if no Reward be placed
upon an Information, no Man will take the trouble; and again, if too great a
Reward, Men of Honor shun the thing, because they scorn the Fee, and to inform
merely for the Fee has something of a Rascal in it too; and from these reasons
arises the Backwardness of the People.

The very same Rich Men we speak of are the persons who discourage the
Discovery of Vice by scandalizing the Informer; a Man that is any thing of a
Gentleman scorns it, and the Poor still Mimick the Humor of the Rich, and hate
an Informer as they do the Devil, It Is strange the Gentlemen should be ashamed
to detect the Breach of those Laws, which they were not ashamed to make; but
the very Name of an Informer has gained so black an Idea in the minds People,
because some have made a Trade of informing against People for Religion, have
misbehaved themselves, that truly 'twill be hard to bring any Man either of
Credit or Quality to attempt it.

But the main thing which makes our Gentlemen backward in the prosecution of
Vice, is their practicing the same Crimes themselves, and they have so much
wicked Modesty and Generosity in them, being really no Enemies to the thing it
self, that they cannot with any sort of Freedom punish in others what they
practice themselves.

In the Times of Executing the Laws against Dissenters, we found a great many
Gentlemen very Vigorous in Prosecuting their Neighbors; they did not stick to
appear in Person to disturb Meetings, and demolish the Meeting Houses, and
rather than fail, would be Informers themselves; the reason was because they
had also a dislike to the thing; but we never found a Dissenting Gentleman, or
Justice of the Peace forward to do thus, because they approved of it. Now were
our Gentlemen and Magistrates real Enemies to the Immoralities of this Age, did
they really hate Drunkenness as a Vice, they would be forward and zealous to
root the practice of it out of the Neighborhood, they would not be backward or
ashamed to detect Vice, to disturb Drunken Assemblies, to disperse those
Plantations of Leachery, the Public Bawdy Houses, which are almost as openly
allowed as the Burdelloes in Italy. They would be willing to have all sorts of
Vices Suppressed, and glory in putting their hands to the Work; they would not
be ashamed to appear in the detecting Debauchery, or afraid to embroil
themselves with their Rich Neighbors. It Is Guilt of the same Fact which makes
Connivance, and till that guilt be removed, the Gentlemen of England neither
will or can indeed with any kind of Honor put their hands to the Reforming it
in their Neighbors.

But I think it is easy to make it appear that this difficulty of Informing may
be removed, and there need not be much occasion for that Scandalous Employment.

It Is in the power of the Gentry of England to reform the whole Kingdom without
either Laws, Proclamations, or Informers; and without their Concurrence, all
the Laws, Proclamations, and Declarations in the World will have no Effect; the
Vigor of the Laws consists in their Executive Power: Ten thousand Acts of
Parliament signify no more than One single Proclamation, unless the Gentlemen
in whose hands the Execution of those Laws is placed, take care to see them
duly made use of; and how can Laws be duly Executed-but by an impartial
Distribution of equal Rewards, and Punishments, without Regard to the Quality
and Degree of the Persons? The Laws push on the Justices now, and they take
care to go no faster than they are driven; but would the Justices push on the
Laws, Vice would fly before them, as Dust in the Wind, and Immoralities would
be soon suppressed; but it can never be expected that the Magistrates should
push on the Laws to a free Suppression of Immoralities, till they Reform
themselves, and their Great Neighbors Reform themselves, that there may be
none to Punish, who are too big for the Magistrate to venture upon,

Would the Gentry of England decry the Modishness of Vice by their own
Practice; would they but dash it ouf of Countenance by disowning it; that
Drunkenness and Oaths might once come into difesteem, and be out of Fashion,
and a Man be valued the less for them; that he that will Swear, and be Drunk,
shall be counted a Rake, and not fit for a Gentleman's Company. This would do
more to Reforming the rest of Mankind than all the Punishments the Law can
inflict; the Evil increased by Example, and must be Suppressed the the same
way. If the Gentry were thus Reformed, their Families would be so too: No
Servant would be Entertained, no Workman Employed, no Shopkeeper would be
Traded with by a Gentleman, but such as like themselves, were sober and honest;
a Lewd Vicious Drunken Footman must Reform or Starve, he would get no Service;
a Servant once turned away for his Intemperance would be Entertained by no Body
else; a Swearing Debauched Labourer or Workman must Reform, or no Body would
Employ him; the Drunken Whoring Shopkeeper must grow Sober, or lose all his
Customers, and be undone. Interest and Good Manners will reform us of the
poorer sort, there would be no need of the Stocks or Houses of Correction; we
should be Sober of Course, because we should be all Beggars else; and he that
loved the Vice so dearly as to purchase it with the loss of his Trade and
Employment, would soon grow too Poor for his Vice, and be forced to leave it by
his own Necessities; there would be no need of Informers, a Vicious Fellow
would be presently Notorious, he would be the Talk of the Town, every one would
slight and shun him for fear of being thought like him, by being seen in his
Company: he would Expose himself, and would be Punished as unpitied as a Thief.

So that in short, the whole Weight of this Blessed Work of Reformation, lies
on the Shoulders of the Gentry; they are the cause of our Defection, which
being taken away, the Effect would cease of Course, Vice would grow Scandalous,
and all Mankind would be ashamed of it.

(2.) The Clergy also ought not to count themselves exempted in this matter,
whose Lives have been, and in some places still are so vicious and so loose,
that it is well for England we are not subject to be much Priest-riddden.

It Is a strange thing how it should be otherwise than it is with us the poor
Commonalty, when the Gentry our Pattern, and the Clergy our Teachers are as
Immoral as we. And then to consider the Coherence of the thing; the Parson
preaches a thundering Sermon against Drunkenness, and the Justice of Peace sets
my poor Neighbor in the Stocks, and I am like to be much the better for
either, when I know perhaps that this same Parson and this same Justice were
both Drunk together the Night before.

It may be true, for ought we know, that a Wicked Parson may make a good
Sermon; and the Spanish Proverb may be true of the Soul as well as the Body, If
the Cure be but wrought, let the Devil be the Doctor; but this does not take
with the downright ignorant People in the Country; a poor Man gets Drunk in a
Country Ale House, Why, are you not ashamed to be such a Beast, says a good
honest Neighbor to him the next day? Ashamed, says the Fellow! Why should I be
ashamed? Why, there was Sir John -- and Sir Robert -- and the Parson, and they
were all as Drunk as I. And why a Beast, Pray? I heard Sir Robert -- say, That
He that Drinks least,
Drinks most like a Beast.


A Vicious Parson that preaches well, but lives ill, may be like an unskilful
Horseman, who opens a Gate on the wrong side, and lets other Folks through, but
shuts himself out. This may be possible, but it seems most reasonable to think
they are a means by that sort of living, to hinder both themselves and others;
and would the Gentry and Clergy of England but look back on the Guilt that
really lies on them, as Gentlemen by whose Example so great a part of Mankind
has been led into, and encouraged in the Progress of Vice, they would find
Matter of very serious reflection.

This Article of the Clergy may seem to lie in the Power of their Superiors to
rectify, and therefore may be something more feasible than the other; But the
Gentry are Sui juris, can no way be reduced but by their own voluntary
practice. We are in England exceedingly governed by Modes and Customs. The
Gentry may effectually Suppress Vice, would they but put it out of Fashion; but
to Suppress it by Force seems impossible.

The Application of this rough Doctrine is in short both to the Gentry and
Clergy, Physicians Heal your selves; if you leave off your Drunkenness and
Lewdness first, if we do not follow you, then set us in the Stocks, and send us
to the House of Correction, and punish us as you please; if you will leave off
Whoring first, then Brand us in the Foreheads, or Transport or Hang us for
Fornication or Adultery, and you are welcome; but to preach against Drunkenness
immediately after an Evening's Debauch; to Correct a poor Fellow for Swearing
with the very Vice in your Mouths; these are the unjustest ways in the World,
and have in themselves no manner of tendency toward the Reformation of
Manners, which is the true Design of the Law.

It Is acknowledged there are in England a great many Sober, Pious, Religious
Persons both among the Gentry and Clergy, and it is hoped such cannot think
themselves Libelled or Injured in this Plea; if there were not, Laws would
never have been made against those Vices, for no men make Laws to punish
themselves; it is designed to reflect upon none but such as are Guilty, and on
them no farther than to put them in mind how much the Nation owes its present
Degeneracy to their folly, and how much it is in their Power to Reform it again
by their Example; that the King may not publish Proclamations, nor the
Parliament make Laws to no purpose; but that we might live in England once more
like Christians, and like Gentlemen, to the Glory of God, and the Honor of the
present King and Parliament, who so publicly have attemped the Great Work of
Reformation among us, though hitherto to so little purpose.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Occasional Conformity OF DISSENTERS, IN Cases of
Preferment.
Preface to Mr. HOW.
SIR,
THese Sheets are addressed to you, because the Author, with Submission, thinks
they something more nearly concern you, than ordinary: 1. As you are, not
unjustly, esteemed one of the most Learned and Judicious of the Dissenting
Ministry. And 2. As you have more immediate Relation to our present Lord Mayor,
who is or has been a Member of the Church of Christ under your Charge.


The Author has carefully avoided Personal Reflections, and hopes he has no
where exceeded the Rules of Charity or Good Manners.

The Treatise is individually the same which the Author published in the
Mayoralty of Sir Humphry Edwin; the Address by way of Preface, being only left
out.

The Debate was then young, and the Practice of this Scandalous Conformity was
new: Sir John Shorter being the first Instance of it. But it is now growing a
received Custom, to the great Scandal of the Dissenters in general, the Offense
of such whose Consciences forbid them the same Latitude, and the Stumbling of
those who being before weak and irresolute, are Led aside by the Eminency and
Frequency of Examples.

Sir, If you knew the Author, you would easily be satisfied that the Reason of
this Preface, is not that he covets to engage in Controversy with a Person of
your Capacity and Learning, being altogether unfit for such a Task, and no way
a Match to your Talent that way.

But he desires, in the Name of himself, and a great many honest good
Christians, who would be glad to see this Case decided, That you will by your
self, or some other Hand, as you please, declare to the World, Whether this
Practice of Alternate Communion be allowed, either by your Congregation in
particular, on the Dissenters in general.

And if not so allowed, then he conjures you by the Honor you owe to your
Profession, and the Tenderness you have for the Weakness of others; by the
regard you have to God's Honor, and the Church you serve, That such
Proceedings may receive their due Censure, tho the Persons wear the Gay Clothes
and the Gold Ring; that the Sincerity and Purity of Dissenting Protestants may
be vindicated to the World both in their Discipline as well as Doctrine; and
that without Respect of Persons.

If on the other hand it be allowed, it is desired it may be defended by such
Arguments as you think convenient; which the Author promises, if desired, never
to reply to; or if you give him that Liberty, shall do it so, as you shall
easily see is in order only to be informed, and always suitable to the Respect
which is due to your Person; for whom none has a greater Esteem.

If none of these Requests shall be granted, the World must believe, (...)That
Dissenters do Allow themselves to Practice what they cannot Defend.

Your very Humble Servant. D. F.

A DISCOURSE UPON Occasional Conformity.
WHEN I review the Past Times, and look back upon the various Scenes which they
present us, as to Ecclesiastical Transactions within this Kingdom, there seems
nothing more strange than the Turns we have had from Popish to Regal Supremacy,
from the Romish Religion to Reformed, from Reformed back again to Romish, and
then to Reformed again, and so on through several Degrees of Reformation, and
back again from those Degrees to the first Steps of Reformation, and then
forward again.

King Henry the 8th, a Prince of a haughty Spirit, disdaining the Insolence
with which his Predecessors were treated by the Popes, gave the first Shock to
the Roman Power in these Kingdoms. I will not say he acted from any principles of
Conscience, whatever his Ambition and Interest led him to pretend; but that was
the Gloss, as it is in most Cases of Public Revolutions. However it was,
having satisfied his Pride by subduing the Suppremacy of the Pope, and
establishing his own; his Interest next guided him to the Suppression of Abbeys
and Monastries. The horrible Vices which were protected, as well as practiced
in those Nests of Superstition, giving his pretense of Piety the larger Scope;
and I Will for once be so free with the Character of that Prince, as to suppose
what to me seems plain, that neither This Religion, or That, were of much
Moment in his Thoughts, but his Interest, as the Sequel made plain, by the
Seizure he made of the Revenues of the Church.

And yet the Justice of Providence seems very conspicuous in that point, That
those Houses, who under the specious pretenses of Religion and extraordinary
Devotion, had amassed to themselves vast Revenues to the Impoverishing many
Families, and in the mean time secretly practiced most unheard of Wickedness,
should under the same pretense of Zeal and Piety be suppressed and impoverished
by a Person, who merely to serve his own Glory, triumphed over them,
pretending, Jehu like, to show his Zeal for the Lord.

Some do assure us, That the Eyes of this Pince were really opened as to the
Point of Religion; and that had he lived longer, he would most effectually have
established the Reformation in his time; but God who gave him that light, if he
had it, however he might accept his Intention, as he did that of David's
Building his House, yet he reserved the Glory of the performance to his Son.

King Edward the 6th, of whom wondrous things are spoken in all our English
Writers, and more than we need suppose should be literally true; yet was
without doubt, a Prince of the strictest Piety, not only that ever reigned, but
that ever lived, perhaps, since the Days of Josidh, whose Parallel our Writers
say he was.

The Reformation began in his hand; not but that the Protestant Religion had
been received in England many years before, by the preaching of John Wickliff,
William Tindall, and others, and had many professors, and those such who
gallantly offered their Lives in defense of the Truth.

But it got but little ground, for Religion has but few Votaries, while all its
professors must also be Confessors, and while Exile or Martyrdom is all the
prospect of Advantage to be got by it.

None will dare to be Dissenters in times of Danger, but such whose Consciences
are so awakened that they dare not be otherwise.

But in the hands of this young Prince, the great work was begun, and in a
shorter time than could be imagined, was finished and established; the
Romanists fled or conformed; for we find but very few had an Inclination to
Martyrdom if it had been put upon them. Some indeed to show the Nature of their
Religion, Pleaded for Baal, and Rebelled, stirring up the Ignorant People to
Murder their Gideon for throwing down the Altars of Baal, but like the
Ephramites of old, their Shiboleth was their undoing.

God, who thought fit to discover the Levity of those who had only Conformed,
and not Reformed, who, in exemplum Regis, had took up this as they would have
done any Religion, and also for the Trial and Glory of his Church, suffered all
this great Fabric, however of his own Working, to be overthrown at the Death
this good King, and a Deluge of Cruelty and Popery overwhelmed the People in
the Reign of the Queen, his Sister.

But Popery found more Dissenters than the Reformation had done; and the
Impression Religion had made on the minds of those who had sincerely Embraced
it, was not so easily Defaced as the pretended Reformation of others; For the
Glosses Men had put on their Actions, only as a cover from common Observation,
was soon Discovered, when the Safety of owning their Old principles rendered
those Outsides no longer needful, but where the True Religion had got footing
in the Mind, it was still the same, whatever alterations of Times might meke it
Dangerous, and yet all People did not Burn; but some being persecuted in one
City, fled to another, and Germany especially was a Sanctuary for the
Distressed English Protestants, that Country having been before hand with us in
the Reformation.

'Twas here that our Exiled Clergy having conversed with the Learned Reformers
abroad, and particularly with John Calvin, found, that though they were reformed
indeed from the Gross Errors of Popery and Superstition, there was yet several
things which might be further and further Reformed; and being willing to arrive
to the greatest Perfection they were capable of in Religion, (that as near as
possible they might pursue the great Example of Christ Jesus, whose Name they
professed, and for whom they could most gloriously die,) they Corrected in
themselves those things which they saw needful, and by Letters to their
Brethren in England communicated their Opinions, with their Reasons, exhorting
them to go on unto perfection as they had begun

Some of the most Zealous for Piety and Holiness of Life, rejected this Motion;
and Others as Zealous and Pious, closed with it; and the Disputes were carried
so far sometimes, as to Invade the Charity of one another, an humble
Acknowledgment of which you have in a most Christian Reconciling Letter from
Bishop Ridley to Bishop Hooper, two of the most Glorious Triumphant Martyrs
that ever confessed the truth of Christ at the Stake.

For the present, the Fire of the Persecution (as the Greater Light obscures
the Less, extinguished that of Dissension. But when Queen Elizabeth rescued the
Protestant Religion, and the Church enjoyed its Peace again, the Debate
revived: But the first Establishment of King Edward obtained so on the Minds of
Men, that the further Reformation was rejected. The other Party being not at
all convinced, though overruled, submitted their Persons to the Laws, but not
their Opinion; affirming, "That 'twas the Duty of every Christian, to endeavor
to serve God with the greatest Purity of Worship as was possible; and that this
was the purest Worship which came nearest to the Divine Institution, which they
believed the established Liturgy did not, and therefore in Conscience they must
be Dissenters.

It must be owned, That the Original Authors of these Disputes were Learned,
Devout, and singularly Pious, strict in Conversation to excess, if that be
possible, and from thence in a sort of happy Derision, were called Puritans; of
whom I shall say nothing, but leave for a Record the last Speech of a Famous
Foreigner, who had seen the way of living among those Dissenters, and speaking
of the Words of Balaam, Let me Die the Death of the Righteous, and let my
latter end be like his, cried Out, Sit Anima Mea cum Puritanis Anglicanis.

I shall not take upon me to observe the Difference between these Primitive
Dissenters and Our Present, which is too plain; nor to dispute the Substance of
the Point in Debate between them and the Established National Church.

I shall only observe, That the Reasons for the present Dissenters Separation
from the Established Church, are said to be exactly the same they were then; and
the present Dissenters are the Successors of those first, as the present
Conformists are the Successors of the first Reformers under King Edward the
Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth.

I must acknowledge that it fares with the Church of England, and with the
Dissenters both, as it has always fared with Christ's Church in the whole
World; That while Suppressed and Persecuted, their Professors were few, and their
Profession more severe; but when a Religion comes to be the Mode of the
Country, so many painted Hypocrites get into the Church who are not by their
Voices to be distinguished, that Guile is not to be seen, till it arrive to
Apostasy. The whole Ecclesiastical History, from the first Century of the
Christian Church, is full of Instances to confirm this, That the Prosperity of
the Church of Christ has been more fatal to it, than all the Pesecution of its
Enemies.

I am now brought down to the present Time, when the Dissenting Protestant is
sheltered by the Laws and protected from the Violence which he suffered in the
Late Reigns, under the Arbitrary Commands of such State Ministers, who strove
to dash the whole Protestant Interest to pieces by its own weight; and nothing
is more apparent to those who are any thing acquainted with the late Management
of Affairs in this Land, than that the Court used both Parties alternately, as
Policy and Occasion directed, to Suppress and Destroy one another; that the
whole House, which being so divided, could not stand, might at last fall of it
self.

But our Eyes are at last opened, the Name of Protestant is now the common
Title of an Englishman, the Church of England extends her Protection to the
tender Consciences of her Weaker Brethren, knowing that all may be Christians,
though not alike informed, and the Dissenter extends his Charity to the Church of
England, believing that in his due time, God shall reveal even this unto them.
If this is not, I wish this were the Temper of both Parties; and I am sure it
is already the Temper of some of each Side, which few are of the Wisest, most
Pious, and most Judicious.

But while Frailty and Infirmity are Essential to Humanity, and Pride and
Hypocrisy are the two Regnant Vices of the Church, this good Spirit cannot be
Universal, and we do not expect it.

But there is a sort of Truth, which all Men owe to the Principles they
profess, and generally speaking, all Men pay it; a Turk is a Turk zealously and
entirely; an Idolater is an Idolater, and will serve the Devil to a tittle:
None but Protestants halt between God and Baal; Christians of an Amphibious
Nature, who have such preposterous Consciences, as can believe one Way of
Worship to be right, and yet serve God another way themselves; This is a
strange thing in Israel! All the Histories of Religion in the World do not show
such a Case: It Is like a Ship with her Sails haled some back and some full:
It Is like a Workman that Builds with one Hand, and pulls down with the other:
It Is like a Fisherman, who catches Fish with one Hand, and throws them into the
Sea with another: It Is like every thing which signifies nothing. To say a Man
can be of two Religions, is a Contradiction, unless there be two Gods to
Worship, or he has two Souls to save.

Religion is the sacred Profession of the Name of God; serving him, believing
in him, expecting from him; and like the God it refers to, it is in one and the
same Object, one and the same thing perfectly indivisible and inseparable there
is in it no Neuter Gender, no Ambiguous Article, God or Baal; Mediums are
impossible.

As to the different Modes and Ways, which are the Circumstantials of this
Sacred Thing I call Religion; I will not say, but that as Ships take different
Courses at Sea, yet to the best of their Skill, keeping to the direct Rules of
Navigating by the Compass, they may arrive at the same Port; so Christians
taking different Methods in the serving this God, yet going to the best of
their Judgments by the direct Rules of the Scripture, may arrive at the same
Heaven; but this is nothing at all to the Case; for no Ship would arrive at any
Port that sailed two ways together, if that were possible; nor no man can serve
One God, and at the same time hold two Opinions. There is but one Best, and he
that gives God two Bests, gives him the Best and the Worst, and one Spoils
the other, till both are good for nothing.

I have said already, that both the Church of England, and the Dissenter,
suffer in their Reputation for the mixed Multitudes of their Members, which is
occasioned by their present Prosperity: If a Third Party were to tyrannize over
them both, we should see then who were Professors, and who were Confessors; but
now it cannot be: Wherefore, I think 'twere well to put both Sides in mind of
one thing, which they are bound mutually to observe; and that is, That the
Personal Miscarriages of any particular Person or Member, is not really any
Reflection upon the Religion they profess, nor ought not to be so accounted,
unless it be where such Miscarriages are the direct Dictates of the Doctrines
they teach; and thus I would be understood in the present Case. Wherefore I
shall give my Essay as to what I understand a Real Dissenting Protestant is, or
ought to be.

He who Dissents from an Established Church on any account, but from a real
Principle of Conscience, is a Politic, not a Religious Dissenter. To explain
my self; He who Dissents from any other Reasons, but such as these, That he
firmly believes the said Established Church is not of the purest Institution,
but that he can really serve God more agreeable to his Will, and that
accordingly it is his Duty to do it so, and no otherwise. Nay, he that cannot
Dye, or at least desire to do so, rather than Conform, ought to Conform. Schism
from the Church of Christ is, doubtless, a great Sin, and if I can avoid it, I
ought to avoid it, but if not, the Cause of that Sin carries the Guilt with it.

But if I shall thus Dissent, and yet at the same time Conform; by Conforming I
deny my Dissent being lawful, or by my Dissenting I damn my Conforming as
sinful.

Nothing can be lawful and unlawful at the same time; if it be not lawful for
me to Dissent, I ought to Conform; but if it be unlawful for me to Conform, I
must Dissent; several Opinions may at the same time consist in a Country, in a
City, in a Family, but not in one entire Person, that is impossible.

To come to the point; there are Dissenters who are separated from the Church
of England, and joined in Communion with Dissenting Churches or Congregations.
They have appeared Zealous, Conscientious, and Constant; have born the
Reproaches and Inconveniences of their Party, nay, suffered Persecution, and
Loss of Estates and Liberty for the Cause: And who could have so little Charity
as to doubt the Sincerity of their Profession? And yet these Persecuted,
Suffering Dissenters, to make themselves room in the Public Advancements, and
Glittering Gaudy Honors of the Age, shall Conform to that which they refused
under all those Disadvantages to do before. And which is worse than all this;
hear O Heavens! as soon as the present Honor is attained, the present
Advantage made, they return to the former Circumstances again, and are freely
received, a double Crime, as having done no Evil.

I know not, I profess, what these Persons can say for themselves, and
therefore cannot pretend to Answer their Objections; but I cannot omit one
Answer which some People give for them, viz. That this is no Conformity in
Point of Religion, but done as a Civil Action, in Obedience to the Laws of the
Land, which have made it a necessary Characteristick Quality, for admittance
into public Employments, which they think it their Duty to accept in order to
serve their Country, which they doubly perform by Executing those Offices to
the public Interest, and by excluding those who would otherwise get into those
places, and betray their Country and their Liberties.

I have never met with any considerable Excuse made for this fast and loose
Game of Religion, but this, and this I desire to consider a little particularly.

1. That this is no Conformity in Point of Religion, but done as a Civil
Action. How this can be possible remains to be determined. It Is true, the
Morality of an Action consists in its End; but I cannot conceive that an Action
purely and originally Religious, such as the Solemn Ordinances of God's
Worship, can be made Civil Actions by any End, Design, Will, or Intention of
Man whatsoever. It Is true, an Oath, which is a calling God to witness, is an
Action both Civil and Religious, but still that was appointed and instituted to
that end, as is expressly noted, Heb. Naaman's bowing in the House of Rimmon; to
which the Prophet answered, Go in Peace, which is understood as a permission,
is a thing still different; for Naaman only bowed for the Convenience or State
of the King, at the same time publicly disowning the Worship, as Interpreters
are of Opinion; besides, bowing the Head, though it may be a customary Act of
Worship at that place, yet is no Act confined to Worship only, and instituted
and directed so by the God who is Worshipped, but is an Act used in Common
Salutations. Thus we kneel to God, and to the King; but Sacraments are things
appropriated by the Divine Institution of God himself, as things which have no
other Signification or Import but what is Divine: Had Naaman desired to be
excused in offering Sacrifices to the Idol Rimmon, the Prophet would hardly
have bid him go in peace. Some Actions are not Civil or Religious, as they are
Civilly or Religiously performed, but as they are Civil or Religious in
themselves; for some Religious Actions are so entirely such, that they cannot
without a horrid invasion of the Sovereignty of the Institutor be appropriated
to any other use; and such are in especial manner, the Two Sacraments
instituted by Christ, such was, before Christ, the Sacrifices by Fire; And the
Judgments of God on Nadab and Ahihu, for attempting to offer Sacrifice with
strange Fire, stands as a terrible Instance of what we ought to think is the
Will of God in this matter.

Further, speaking directly of the Sacraments, Are they not the same thing,
though differently Administered in the established Church, or in a dissenting
Church? and how can you take it as a Civil Act in one place, and a Religious
Act in another? This is playing-Bopeep with God Almighty, and no Man can tell
of them when they are about a Civil Action, and when about a Religious. But to
answer this pretense at once, Sacraments as Sacraments are Religious Acts, and
can be no other, if you do not take it as a Sacrament the Case differs, but how
can you say you do not take it as a Sacrament? An Oath is to be taken in the
Sense of the Imposer, and a Sacrament, which is a Recognition of the most
Sacred of Oaths, must be also taken in the Sense of the Imposer. If the Person
Administering declared at the Administration, He did not give it as a Sacrament,
but only give you a bit of Bread and Draught of Wine as a Friend, or the like,
this was something; but can a Minister deliver the Bread to you, and say, The
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and you Kneeling with Reverence take it as
such, and repeat the Responses at the Communion, and say Amen to the Prayer,
and say it is a Civil Action. This is such Bantering with Religion, as no Modest
Christian can think of without Horror.

2. Another part of the Apology is, That without it they cannot be admitted
into Public places of Trust; and if they were not admitted, such will get in
as will betray their Country and Liberties, and they do it purely to secure
their Country, which they think their Duty.

These are Patriots indeed, that will damn their Souls to save their Country;
a sort of a Public Spirit hardly to be found in the World, and indeed a
Nonentity in it self, for it is a Mistake; the Gentlemen who make this Answer,
put the case wrong. For I would desire such to Answer a few Questions. ear

If the Service of their Country be so d^e to them, pray why should they not
choose to expo their Bodies and Estates for that Service, rather than their
Souls?

The Penalty of the Law in accepting the Public Employments is wholly
Pecuniary; the difference lies here, they choose the Trespassing on their
Consciences, before the hazard of their Estates, as the least Evil; for it is
plain, any Man who will suffer the Penalty, or run the Risque of it, which is
all one, may excuse the conformity; for the Lord does not say, you shall so and
so Conform, but if you do not Conform, you shall incur such and such Penalties;
any Man that will incur the Penalty, may commit the Trespass.

So that all this Compliance is not, To be admitted to Places, that they may be
able to serve their Country, but to save the Five hundred pounds and other
Penalties of that Act.

2. Why, if we believe the Power of God to be Omnipotent, should we imagine
that he is not able to protect our Country and Liberties, without our
perpetrating so wicked an Act to secure them, as doing Evil that Good may come,
which is expressly forbidden.

But we are told again, This is in it self no Sinful Act, and therefore it is
not doing Evil. This is tacitly answered before; though it is not a Sinful Act in
it self, Yet it is either a Sinful Act in a Dissenter, or else his Dissenting
before was a Sinful Act. For if he is satisfied he does well in Conforming now,
why did he not before? There is but one Answer for that, which is, He is
otherwise convinced; to which I reply, If that were true, he would then as a
Convert continue in this New Communion; but it is evident the same Persons
return immediately to the former Profession as Dissenters, and they can have no
such Excuse unless it be, that they were convinced and reconvinc'd, and then
convinced again.

Some have the Folly to argue against the Law it self, as a most Notorious
Imposition upon the Consciences of Man, by making the Sacred Institutions of
Christ a Drudge to Secular Interest, and a Cause of men's Sins, by leading them
into Tempation; I could say enough to vindicate that part, tho I am no more
reconciled to that Law, than other Men, but it is remote to our Argumnet: It Is
an Act of Parliament, and what is so, is of every Man's own doing, and
therefore it is just every one should comply with the Terms, or suffer the
Penalty; but here is no Penalty, if no Crime; if no Preferments are sought, no
Honors accepted, there is no Crime; if Self denial was as practicable as Self
advancement, here is no need of the Crime. So that they who do this, seek the
Crime, that is the first Sin; then Morgage their Consciences to avoid the
Penalty, and so add one Sin to another. But we are told by some, it is not
against their Consciences, they hope both Parties are Good Christians, there
are differences between them which they don't understand nor meddle with, and
their Consciences are very well satisfied to Communicate with either.

I would ask such, if their Consciences would serve to Communicate with the
Church, why did they Separate? For Communicating with the Dissenter, is not an
Occasional or Casual thing, but an open declared breaking off from the Church
Established. Now no Man can be said to separate from, and join to a thing at the
same time; if your Conscience is satisfied in Joining, it cannot be satisfied
in Separating, unless you can suppose your Conscience to be satisfied and
dissatisfied both together. If you have a Conscience of any Religion at all, it
must be of some Religion or other; if of this, it cannot be of that, if of sent
and Approve, are different Acts, and can never be fixed upon the same Object at
the same time; as for a Man, Passively Religious, that can Communicate any
where, that Man may from the same Principle, and with far less Guilt
Communicate no where, for such a Man, in downright English, has Prostituted
the little Religion he had, if ever he had any, to his Interest, and may be
Turk, Jew, Papist, or any thing.

The latter part of the Charge leads me to consider another Point, which
relates to the Assemblies of the Dissenters, who admit, and by consequence
approve this way of proceeding. I do not pretend to examine by what Methods
such particular Churches do procced. And I would be as tender as possible in
making Reflections. I wish they would be as Charitable in censuring this
Reproof.

I do think, with Submission, it is impossible to prove that any Person, whose
Case the foregoing Paragraph reaches, can be received again into
Church Communion in a Dissenting Assembly upon any other Terms, than as a
Penitent. I have heard of some, who have been said to have leave from their
Ministers for this Matter; if so, they have assumed some Dispensing Authority,
which I believe does not appertain to the Ministerial Function, nor is not
contained in the Mission of our Savior. But I do not affirm, That any such
thing has been really allowed.

As to the Relation of Churches, and the Members thereof, one to another, as
the Dissenters now Established them; I am sure, the allowance of any Member in
a Promiscuous Communion with the Church of England and the Dissenter at the
same time, is not pretended to be allowed, nor is it consistent with it self.
It Is Preposterous, and Excentrick, and is Destructive of the very Foundation of
the Dissenters Principles, as is already noted, concerning Schisms in the
Church. In this Case, Charity can heal nothing, nor help nothing; it is of
absolute necessity that one Man be but of one side, at one and the same time.
Either the Conformist will mar the Dissenter, or the Dissenter will mar the
Conformist. For if I shall be admitted into the Communion of the Dissenter, and
of the Church together; then the Dissenter must have some other Reason for
being a Dissenter, than Purity of Worship.

Methinks Men should seem what they are; if a Man Dissent from the Church, let
him do so; and his Principle being well grounded for such Dissent, let him hold
it; if not well-grounded, let him leave it; if he cannot suffer one way, let
him suffer another; and why should we not be as honest to God as our Country.

The Motives to serve our Country are strong, but there are ways to do it
without such a Violation of all our Principles and Profession; if not, trust
God's Providence with the Issue, who never wants Agents to preserve and deliver
his People when his time is at hand; and you can have small hope to expect that
the Office and Trust you shall Execute, shall receive any Assistance from his
Providence, when the first Step into it, is made by offering the greatest
Affront to his Honor, and committing the vilest Act of Perfidy in the World.

But if the gay Prospect of a great Place, tempt any Person beyond the Power
that God's Grace is pleased to assist them with, in that way let him abide, and
not be readmitted, because of his Gold Ring, and Fine Apparel, without a
Penitent Acknowledgement. The Dissenters in England can never pretend to be
Dissenters upon the mere Principle of Purity of Worship, as I have related in
the beginning of this Discourse, if such shall be received as blameless into
their Communion, who have deserted them upon the occasion of Preferment, and
have made the Sacred Institutions of Christ Jesus, become Pimps to their
Secular Interest, and then wipe their Mouths, and sit down in the Church, and
say, They have done no Evil.

It Is also an Intolerable Affront to the Church of England, reflecting upon its
Doctrine as well as Practice; to make use of the Church for a Cover to fence
them against the Laws, at the same time continuing to disown its Communion, as
a thing not fit to be continued in.

And yet the Church of England is in the right to receive such of the
Dissenters as shall come to them without the Ceremony of Recognition, because
it is agreeable to the Notion of a National Church, which they profess to be.
But Dissenters are bound to justify their Separation from them, or else their
whole Constitution falls to the Ground. Now, how a Separation and a Conformity
are Consistent, is to me an Inexplicable Riddle.

I question not here the Lawfulness of the Dissenters Separation; it is not the
business of this Discourse to define it; and I am as careful as I can in making
Reflections upon either; but I am bold to affirm, That no Dissenting Church can
with lawful Cause Separate from the Church of England, Establish Private
Churches or Communions, and at the same times allow the Members to Conform to
the Established Church too: This is incongruous, and one must destroy the
other. From whence I think it becomes the Dissenters, if they would maintain
the Doctrine they teach; if they would have us believe they Dissent purely on
the honest Principles of Conscience, and Purity of Worship, with such a one,
No, not to Eat. And it is not sufficient that the Offender a Lord Mayor, or any
greater Person; unless he would be Lord Mayor without a Breach of the Sacred
Relation he had entered into, he should be dealt with in that Case, as the
meanest Member of such a Society.

On the other hand, if a Man be called upon to be a Magistrate, and has Courage
enough to follow the Impartial Dictates of his Conscience, a Query lies before
him, What shall he do?

The Case is plain; Either refuse the Honor, or run the Risque. The first
indeed is the plainest and easiest Way, and the Ground of it is good, for he
whose Concience Dictates to him that the Terms are Sinful, may refuse the Call;
for Preferments and Honors are a Bait that some have refused on mere Points of
Speculative Philosophy; and it is hard, Christianity should not carry a Man as
far. Well, but perhaps a Man has a mind to be a Sheriff or a Lord Mayor, and is
a Dissenter; or perhaps he really thinks it is his Indispensable Duty to serve
his Country, if he is called to that, or the like Office; or perhaps he thinks
it is a Duty he owes his Family, to advance his Children, and the like, and he
is a Professed Dissenter: What shall he do? Let him boldly run the Risque, or
openly and honestly Conform to the Church, and neither be ashamed of his
Honor, nor of his Profession; such a Man all Men will Value, and God will own:
He need not fear carrying the Sword to a Conventicle, or bringing the
Conventicle to his own House. But to make the matter a Game, to dodge
Religions, and go in the Morning to Church, and in the Afternoon to the
Meeting; to Communicate in private with the Church of England, to save a
Penalty, and then go back to the Dissenters and Communicate again there: This
is such a Retrograde Devotion, that I can see no color of pretense for in all
the Sacred Book.

I have heard, indeed, that some, who are Ministers of Dissenting Churches do,
or did at the same time Communicate with the Church of England. I do not
dispute how far a Minister may Conform as a Layman, though he cannot as a
Clergyman; but how any Dissenting Minister can Conform as a Layman, and at
the same time execute a Pastoral Charge over a Congregation, whom he teaches to
Separate from the Church in a Lay-Communion, I cannot imagine.

It Is not as I have already noted, Conformity or Nonconformity at the same
time, in one and the same Person, that is the Point; and doing this for a
Secular End, to save a Penalty, and privately; and then, as being ashamed of
it, to go back and sit down as not having done it at all; and a Church-Society
admitting this without taking notice of it; these are the Contradictions I must
upon, and rather wish, than expect to see rectified.

AN ENQUIRY INTO Occasional Conformity. Showing that the DISSENTERS Are no Way
Concerned in it.
HE that Opposes his own Judgment against the Current of the Times, ought to be
backed with unanswerable Truths; and he that has that Truth on his Side, is a
Fool, as well as a Coward, if he is afraid to own it because of the Currency or
Multitude of other Men's Opinions.

It Is hard for a Man to say, all the World is mistaken but himself; but if it
be so who can help it?

But since it is not likely a Single Vote should prevail upon Espoused Errors,
in an Age when every one is so fond of themselves, he that starts Truth by
himself must expect the World will stand still and look on till they see the
Issue.

The Act depending in the House of Commons about Occasional Conformity has set
abundance of Heads to Work in the World; and be the House in the Right, or in
the Wrong, I know my own Business, and their Temper too well to meddle with it:
But I pretend to say, that all Men I have met with, who have meddled with the
Argument, either in Print or otherwise, are manifestly Mistaken.

With more Humility therefore than I owe to any Man, I ask leave not to be
Censured till I am Heard; and those who call me Arrogant before, reprove me
with more Arrogance than is their share among their Fellow Creatures.

But since I, who was altogether Born in Sin, have undertaken to teach my
Superiors, I desire to explain my self before they cast me out of the Synagogue.

For as that Blind Man thought 'twas a Mavelous thing they should not know
whence he came that had opened his Eyes.

So to me it is every jot as wonderful to find no Body of my Mind, and yet be
Positively assured that I am in the Right.

The Subject I am upon needs no Introduction, the History is in every Man's
Knowledge; the Parliament are upon a Bill to prevent Occasional Conformity, and
about that Bill the Press swarms with Pamphlets; the Pulpit sounds with
Exaltations on one Hand, and Deprecations on the other; every one speak their
Opinions, some their Hopes, some their Fears, and so it should have been to the
end of the Chapter, if I could have found but one middle Sort, that, free from
Prejudice of Parties, could have discerned the Native State of the Case as it
really is, discovered from the Passions and Follies of Men.

About their Act of Parliament I affirm most of the People I have met with are
Mistaken; and that I may be as Explicit as I can, I shall enquire more
particularly who are mistaken, how, and then I doubt not the Sequel of this
Paper shall make it appear that the Fact is true.

First, All those People who designed the Act as a Blow to the Dissenting
Interest in England; are mistaken.

Secondly, All those who take it as a Prelude or Introduction to the further
Suppressing of the Dissenters, and a Step to Repealing the Toleration, or
intend it as such, are Mistaken.

Thirdly, All those who think the Dissenters at all concerned in it, or have
designed to Mortify them by it, are Mistaken.

Fourthly, All those Hot-Spurs of Divinity who Prophecy Destruction from the
Pulpit, and from this Step pretend to foretell that the time of Plund'ring their
Brethren is at Hand, are Mistaken.

Fifthly, All those Phlegmatic Dissenters who fancy themselves undone, and that
Persecution and Desolation is at the Door again, are Mistaken.

Sixthly, All those Dissenters, who are really at all Disturbed at it, either
as an Advantage gained by their Enemies, or as a real Disaster upon themselves,
are Mistaken.

Seventhly, All those Dissenters who Deprecate it as a Judgment, or would Vote
against it, if it were in their Power, are Mistaken.

Eighthly, That all those who begun or promoted this Bill with a Design to
Ruin, Weaken and Destroy the Interest or Body of the Dissenters in England, are
Mistaken.

Not that I hereby suppose the Parliament or the Persons Originally concerned
in moving this Bill, did it in mere Kindness to the Dissenters, in order to
Refine and Purge them from the Scandals, which some People had brought upon
them, that 'twas an Action of Christian Charity to the Dissenters, to Prevent
and Detect Frauds and Hypocrisy in Religion, and to clear their Reputation.

I never yet saw or read of a Division of Parties in any Nation, but the Hot
Heads of both Parties were always for Enflaming the Reckoning; if the Hot Men
of the Dissenters have done any Mischief, I am sorry for it; but let us Examine
a little what other Hot Men would be now a doing.

No sooner was Queen Ann settled upon the Throne of England, and had declared
that the Church of England should be the Men of Her Favor, as being the Church
She had been Educated in, and ever constant to, but these Hot Men fly out upon
their Brethren with all the Excesses of their furious Temper.

Nothing would serve them, but this Queen and Parliament must, Root and Branch,
blast the Dissenters with their Breath, blow up their Interest in the Nation,
and we should be all one Church and one People, of a sudden; 'twas to be done
with a Blow all at once, and so certainly, that no possible Doubt could be made
of it.

But Her Majesty was pleased to let these People know from Her own Mouth, that
for as much as concerned Her, they were Mistaken; in that, upon the Address of
the Dissenters to Her, She gave them Her Royal Word for Her Protection, and
whenever She breaks it, we shall all be Mistaken.

Upon this the Pulpit, that Drum Ecclesiastic began the War, and Mr.
Sachavrell, in his Sermon at Oxford, Dooms all the Dissenters to Destruction,
without either Bell, Book, or Candle; not regarding common Decency, not
respecting his good Manners to the Queen, nor his Deference to the Parliament;
but tells them it is their Duty, if they will be true Members of the Church of
England, to lift up a Standard against the Phanaticks, and the like; as much as
to say, Madam, whatever your Majesty has promised, You must break Your Word;
and Gentlemen of the House of Commons, we will have you do it.

Now all these Gentlemen have lived to see themselves Mistaken; and if they
retain any Expectations of seeing it fulfilled, they must exercise their Faith
upon it, as a thing in Futuro, and believe that some time or other Her Majesty
will break her Word; but as yet there is no great Probability, for hitherto we
have seen we are all mistaken.

But to revive their Expectations, comes a Bill into the House for preventing
Occasional Conformity, this has been matter of great Triumph to some Gentlemen,
who upon this Act revive their common Discourse, and are pleased to treat the
Dissenters in this manner: Well, Gentlemen, now down you go, the Parliament are
a beginning with you, and they don't use to do Business by halves, they have
taken the Insulted Church into Consideration, they will reduce you, and this is
the first Step, you shall soon see some more on it: We have got a Church
Parliament now, and down ye go, this Bill will effectually Ruin your Interest,
and bring all your Great Men off from you.

This brings us close to the Point; and it is no small matter for any one to
show these Gentlemen how they are mistaken.

First, It Is time for these Gentlemen to tell us what the Parliament will do
when they either know it, or the House has declared their Intentions; and till
they have, it is a Presumption some Houses would have taken Notice of, for any
People to pretend to lead them to their Business; and therefore when they tell
us this is a Taste of the rest they are preparing for us, I must say, either
they are too well acquainted with the Mind of the House, or they are all
Mistaken; and as to the Blow this Bill is to the Dissenters Interest in England,

As far as I may be allowed to give my Judgment, and as the Nature of the
Thing seems to speak its self; it is plain this Bill is no Damage at all to the
Dissenters in England, and we hope the House did not intend it as such.

I cannot imagine that so great a Spirit of Enmity and contempt can be
entertained in the Breast of a Nation against their Neighbors, their Brethren,
People Born in the same Climate, submitting to the same Government, professing
the same God, and in most Fundamental Points of Religion agreeing, People
linked together in the same common Interest, by intermarriages continually mixed
in Relation, concerned in the same Trade, making War with the same Enemies, and
Allied with the same Friends; were it not that these People, called Dissenters,
are represented to them under some strange and untrue Character, or that under
the Name of Dissenter, some ill Persons are shrouded and disguised, who deserve
to be thus Treated.

Wherefore, in order to set the Dissenters Right in the Eyes of their Brethren,
and that they may have common Justice at least, if they can have nothing of
Courtesy, that Peace may be where there is no Occasion for War, and Quietness,
and good Manners preserved, 'twill be needful to set the Matter in a true
Light, and examine who this Dissenter is, what the People Dissenters are, and
what they have done, for which they are Treated after so infamous a Manner by
Scurrilous Preachers, and Scandalous Pamphleteers, and other ignorant People,
not a few.

The Dissenter is an Englishman, that being something desirous of going to
Heaven, having heard his Church of England Father, and Schoolmaster, and the
Minister of the Parish, talk much of it, begins seriously to enquire about the
Way thither, and to that Purpose consulting his Bible and his Conscience, he
finds that in his Opinion there are some Things in the Established Way of
Worship, which do not seem to correspond with the Rule he has found out in the
Scripture.

Now I shall not examine here whether the Man thus scrupulous be in the Right,
or whether the Church be in the Right, it does not at all belong to the Case in
Hand.

But the Man being fully convinced that he ought to Worship God in that Way,
exclusive of all others, which is most agreeable to the Will of God revealed in
the Scripture; and being on mature Consideration also, and after sincere
Endeavors to be otherwise satisfied, fully convinced that this Established Way
is not so near to that Rule as it ought to be, ventures the Displeasure of the
Civil Magistrate in Dissenting, in pure Obedience to the Commands of his
Conscience, and of that Rule which bids him obey God rather than Man; firmly
believing that it is his Duty so to do; and that the Compass and Extent of
Humane Laws do not reach to bind him in Matters of Conscience; at the same time
living in Charity with all the rest of the World whose Consciences do not
require the same Restriction, and Peaceably submitting to the Laws and
Government he lives under, as far as either his Right, as an Englishman, or his
Duty as a Christian, can require.

This is the English Protestant Dissenter which I have been speaking of, and
concerning whom I have ventured to say, so many Men, so much Wiser than I, are
Mistaken.

If there are crept into his Company State Dissenters, Politic Dissenters, or
any that give no Reason or other, or less Reasons, for their Dissenting than
these, they are not of them, and we wish they would go out from them.

I see no Act of Parliament a making to the Prejudice of this Dissenter; and
let Hot Men, Preach, Print, and Say, what they please, it is impossible it
should ever enter into the Breast of an English Protestant Parliament, or an
English Protestant Queen, either to Oppress or Suppress such a Dissenter.

It Is for the Protection of this Honest, Well-meaning Dissenter, that in the
late Reign the King and Parliament finding their Number Great, thought it was
Meet for the Quiet of the Nation, and as an Acknowledgement of the Superiority
of Conscience to all Humane Laws, to Settle their Liberty in an Act of
Parliament; the same undisputed Authority on which all our Civil, as well as
Religious, Rights are Established.

This is the Dissenter to which Her Majesty has promised Her Protection, and
this Act of Parliament is the Toleration to Tender Consciences, for which Her
Majesty openly declared Her Self, even to the Hazard of Her Royal Person.

These are the Dissenters who never gave Her Majesty any Reason to believe they
did not Merit Her Protection, and I firmly believe never will.

From these the Church of England has nothing to fear, unless their Exemplary
Lives, and Unquestioned Piety, should prevail to weaken Her Numbers, and we
heartily wish all the Strife were reduced to this, viz. who should Live best,
and who should Preach best.

If there are among them Vicious Youths, or Grown Hypocrites; if there are
crept in Errors, Heresies and Enthusiasts; are not the same among the Church?
If there are among these Dissenters, Quakers, Antinomians, Sweet-Singers,
Muggletonians, and the like; the Church has also Her Socinians, Deists,
Anti-Trinitarians, Scepticks, Asgilites, and the like; there can be no
Advantage pleaded against Heresy, and Damnable Heterodox Opinions, from one
side more than another.

If we regard the Matters of State, the Dissenters, and the Church of England,
have small Advantage of the Argument one against another; and I may without
Arrogance Challenge the Hot Churchmen, who can Treat them with nothing but the
Odious Name of Disturbers of the Peace, Enemies of Monarchy, and Authors of
Confusion, to bring the Loyalty of the Church of England, so much boasted of in
the World, to the Test, with the Loyalty of the Dissenter; New Test of the
Church of England's Loyalty. P.
and as it has lately been done to my Hand, it is easy to prove that the
Dissenter has been equally Loyal to Princes, equally True to the Government and
Constitution of England, as the Church; and the Church has been equally
Disloyal, and has as often Resisted, and took Arms against the Lawful
Established Power and Prince, as the Dissenter; and let them enter into this
Dispute whenever they please.

But what is all this to the present Case? What we do as Englishmen is one
thing, and what we do as Christians, and Dissenters, is another.

It Is also Foreign to our Purpose to Examine or Reply to Dr. Stubbs, or the
Multitude of Pamphleteers, who place themselves at the forelorn Hope of the
Church, and begin the War in hopes of drawing on that whole Body to an
Engagement; when they can make it out, that the Dissenter and the Church are as
far asunder in Religion as God and Baal, I may possibly think they Merit what
they so much Covet, viz. to be Replied to.

Whole Reams of Paper are spoiled since that to prove that this Act of
Parliament is needful, because it is fit the Church should be Established; to
which I Answer with a Question asked once with much less Reason in another
Case, What need all this Waste?

Gentlemen, Establish your Church with all the Precaution you can, Build a
Fence of Impregnable Laws about it, you are welcome; we never did, nor we do
not now, Disturb you; leave but us, your Poor Brethren, Liberty to serve God
according to our Consciences; don't bind us to do as you can do, whether we can
or no; take your Places, and Pensions, and Profits, and deserve them of the
Nation, if you can, we ask nothing but our Right, and what is now become so by
Law; if you claim the Civil Power as yo^ own, you consequently take us into
your Protection* and let us see how Generous you will be.

As to those among us who can conform to yo^ Church for a Place, for a Salary,
you are also Welcome to take them among you, and let them be a pa^ of your
selves; all the Converts you can make by the Mammon of Unrighteousness are your
own; all yo^ can Buy off, or Bribe off, or Fright off, let 'em go; w^ readily
Grant, that whoever among us can, with Sati^faction to his Conscience Conform,
ought to Confor^ and we heartily Wish you would make some smal^ Steps by way of
Condescension to your Brethren such as might open a Door for us all to Conform
t^ you, and then you should Dissent from Principles o^ Obstinacy and
Ill Nature, or from a mere Necessity of Conscience you should then see whether
the Dissenters in England were Schismatics by Nature, and Heterdox by
Inclination; or whether their Objectio^ are grounded upon Scripture, and their
Dissenting from you an Act of an enlightened Conscience; yo^ would then try the
Spirits whether they be of God.

But since you are of the Opinion that you are capable of no Amendment, that
you cannot Reform farther, and therefore will not Condescend one Step, though
'twould bring over Half a Million of Souls to you* an Eminent Instance of the
Charity of your Church, all we have to say in the Case is, let us have the
Protection of the Government, and the Liberty the Laws allow us, and we are
Content.

Upon this Score it is that we say the Act against Occasional Conformity does
not concern us; they who can Conform for One Reason, may conform without Two,
and ought to Conform; and we are therefore content to be distinguished who
cannot Conform at all; and if we might offer so boldly to you, who have any
Interest in the House of Commons, we would humbly propose to have the Title of
the Act altered, and to have it Entitled, An Act for the better Uniting the
Protestant Dissenters, by preventing Occasional Conformity to the Church of
England; and when that is done, let it pass with all our Hearts; and though we
can easily see what the Design is, viz. That no Dissenter shall be employed in
Place of Trust or Profit in the Government, yet since it must be so, We hope,
Gentlemen, you will be content to take all the Miscarriages of the Government
on you too; we shall acquiesce, let us alone in our Religion, let us Worship
God as we believe he has directed us, and all the rest is your own.

But before we part let us have leave to remind you, that although you are
willing to quit all our Civil Right to the Honors, as well as the Advantages,
of serving our Country, when we are chosen to it by a fair Majority, rather
than not enjoy our Religion, and ^he Profession we make, with Peace and
Liberty, yet ^t is no less an Oppression upon us, and the Hardships ^re such as
can never be defended by Reason or Equi^y.

We would be glad we had no Cause to think our selves Injured; and to such of
the Church of England who can judge without Prejudice, we would Appeal whether
it is not very Hard.

First, That the Dissenter shall be excluded from all Places of Profit, Trust
and Honor, and at the same time shall not be excused from those which are
attended with Charge, Trouble, and Loss of his Time?

Secondly, That a Dissenter shall be Pressed as a Sailor to Fight at Sea,
Listed as a Soldier to Fight on Shore, and let his Merit be never so much above
his Fellows, shall never be capable of Preferment; no, not a Lieutenant at Sea,
or so much as a Halbert in the Army.

Thirdly, That we must maintain our own Clergy, and your Clergy; our own Poor,
and your Poor; pay equal Taxes, and equal Duties; and not be thought worthy to
be Trusted to set a Drunkard in the Stocks.

We wonder, Gentlemen, you will accept our Money on your Deficient Funds, our
Stocks to help carry on your Wars, our Loans and Credits to your Victualling
Office, and Navy Office.

If you would go on to distinguish us, get a Law made we shall Buy no Lands,
that we may not be Freeholders; and see if you could find Money to Buy us out.

Transplant us into Towns and Bodies, and let us Trade by our selves; let us
Card, Spin, Knit, and Work, with and for one another, and see how you will
maintain your own Poor without us.

Let us Freight our Ships apart, keep our Money out of your Bank, accept none
of our Bills, and separate your selves as absolutely from us in Civil Matters,
as we do from you in Religious, and see how you can go on without us.

If you are not willing to do this, but we must live among you, Trade, Work,
Receive and Pay, together, why may we not do it in Peace, with Love and Unity,
without daily Reproach? If we have any Knaves among us, take them, if we have
any Hypocrites, any who can Conform, and do not, we are free to part with them,
that the Remainder may be all such as agree with the Character here given; and
when you have Garbl'd us to your Hearts desire, and ours, you need never fear
your Church, as to her Politic Interest in the World; Pray then let us be
quiet.

What have we to do with your Distinctions of Whig and Tory? No farther that I
know of than this, that when, distinct from our Religious Concerns, we come to
talk of our Liberties, Properties, and English Privileges, we are not for
having them destroyed by Absolute Authority, Dispensing Power, and the like;
and if this be to be Whigs, ye are Whigs.

As to Kings and Rulers, we are of the Opinion, that when they Degenerate into
Tyrants, Oppress their People, Destroy the Laws, with all the et caetera's of
Arbitrary Power, it is Lawful for the Injured People to Reduce them to Reason,
and to seek Protection, and Powerful Help, from any Body, to Assist them to
Recover their Undoubted Rights and Liberties; if this be to be Traitors, why
then, Gentlemen of the Church of England, hold up your Hands; how say you? Are
you Guilty, or not Guilty?

As to Oaths, with which, Gentlemen, ye were the Men that loaded your
Allegiance farther than you had any Occasion, we are of the Opinion, that they
can bind the Subject no longer than the Sovereign continues the Protection of
the Executive Power; and that the late King by his Deserting the Throne,
Absolved all his Subjects from the Bond of their Allegiance; and on this Foot
we made no Scruple to Swear to the Government, as it now stands on the Foot of
the late Revolution; and if you have Sworn with us, and yet do not believe so,
you may get off of the Perjury if you can.

And what need is there now of running down the Dissenters with a full Cry, as
if this Act a coming out was a Machine to blow them all up; we see no Harm in
it at all, other than the Hardships we mentioned before, most of which we
suffered before, and are like only to have them the faster entailed on our
Posterity.

All those Gentlemen therefore who think this Act will weaken the Dissenters,
or wish it would, are manifestly Mistaken; it may distinguish them better, and
I am persuaded will fortify them in their Honest Profession; 'twill teach
them, that if they will hold fast the Truth, they must learn to live like
People under the Power of those who hate them, and despitefully use them.

The Dissenters too are strangely Mistaken in their Apprehensions of the Ill
Consequences of this Act.

To such I would say, I cannot imagine what they have to fear from it, or why
they should be uneasy with the Honor they are also rid of, the Encumbrance of
being Mayors, Aldermen, Jurats, and Sheriffs of the Towns and Corporations; and
let them but reflect what was the Gain that all the Dissenters in England have
made by Places and Pensions from the Government since the late Revolution, I am
persuaded 'twill not all amount to the Sum that one Churchman will be found to
have Cheated the Nation of.

The Church are willing to engross all the Knaves to themselves, and let them
do it, and welcome, though they get all the Money into the Bargain; if they would
but come to a fair Account with us now, and repay all the Dissenters Money the
Nation has been Cheated of by Church Knaves, I dare undertake the Dissenters
shall repay all that can be charged on their Knaves out of the Balance.

The Foundation of the Dissenters Safety is lodged, by God's Especial
Providence, in the Queen's Veracity; while Her Majesty esteems Her Word Sacred,
as She has assured us She will, we have no Occasion to be concerned at all.

The Safety of the Dissenters consist in their own Honesty and Integrity; while
they do nothing to offend either Her Majesty, or the Laws, if it were possible
to have a Parliament of Church Bigots, or of Pulpit Sachaverells, there will be
no Fear of their Liberty.

As to the present Act, I doubt not but they will live to see Cause to be
thankful for the making it, when the Miscarriages of all People in Public
Offices and Employments are so eminently fixed upon a Party, and so openly and
fairly taken off from them.

They are Mistaken too in the Sense of the Present Parliament; and they may be
assured, had not their Enemies seen that an English Protestant Parliament, as
this is, is not to be prevailed upon to Overthrow so Substantial a Part of the
Nations Liberty as is settled in the Act of Toleration, they had not rested so
long, but before now had attempted it.

They have tried it in the Pulpit, scattered it in Scandalous Pamphlets from
the Press, affirmed that Toleration is Destructive of the Churches, as well as
the Nations Safety; they have endeavored, by Calumny and Reproach to blacken
the Dissenters with Crimes never committed; and which they would never own
before, are at last come to represent them as a formidable Party.

And yet all this could never bring so much as One Member of the House to be so
blind to his Countries Interest, as to make a Motion against the Act of
Toleration.

Being thus disappointed, and willing to play at small Game rather than stand
out, they fly to the Sanctuary of this Bill, and feign themselves gratified by
it more than ever the Bill, or the House it self, intended; for in all their
Arguments for the Bill, it is supposed to be a Means to Reduce, Humble, and
Mortify the Dissenters; Ridiculus Mus! Is this all? Why really, Gentlemen, had
it been in our Power, you should have had all this without an Act of
Parliament; this will Strengthen, not Reduce, us; 'twill please, not Mortify
or Humble, us; and thus you find your selves all Mistaken, Mistaken in the
House of Commons themselves, in thinking the Representatives of a Protestant
Nation will Repeal the Act of Toleration, upon which the Tranquillity of their
Native Country so much depends, but above all Mistaken in their Expectation of
the Queen, to whom their Behavior is Preposterous and Unmannerly.

'Twas preposterous for People to expect, that because the Queen was a Friend
to the Church, a constant Member, and always Espoused the Interest of the
Church, that therefore when She came to the Crown, She must come up to all
their extravagant Heights.

When Her Majesty was Princess, and a Subject, she constantly adhered to the
Interest of the Church; but at the same time declared Her Opinion for
tolerating the Dissenters in their Liberty of Protestant Worship, while they
behaved themselves quietly and obediently under the Government.

When Her Majesty came to the Crown, She became the general Mother, the
Guardian, the Refuge of all Her Subjects; She places the Church first in Her
Favor, promises them Her special and particular care, as those who by Judgment
and Inclination She stands engaged with; but as She finds a great Number of Her
People unhappily divided in Opinion, yet in all other Respects Her good
Subjects, what can She do less than give them Her Protection? This She has
readily promised them, and on this they thankfully depend,

But here comes the Gentlemen of the Long Gown, and they tell her in so many
Words, She cannot, She must not keep her Word with us; They tell us She will
halt between God and Baal, if She does not so Declare for the Church, as to her
Best to Suppress and destroy all Separate Worships, and have all the Priests of
Baal, the best Terms they can bestow on the Dissenting Ministers, hewed to
Pieces before the Lord.

It Is Unmannerly that the Church of England-men should expect the Queen to
break Her word with some of Her Subjects to oblige others; and that whereas She
has promised them Her Special Favor, they should not be content with that,
unless She will at the same time Oppress Two Millions of her Faithful People to
oblige them.

Let them go on, but let them be assured the Dissenters shall enjoy their
Liberty of Conscience, till they can prevail with Her Majesty to lay aside her
Veracity, and forget Her Royal Word, and refuse us Her Protection, which we are
resolved never to give Her any Reason for.

As to the Bill against Occasional Conformity, it baulks their Design on the
Dissenters, for it is for their Advantage; they always disliked the Practice; it
has more than once been Protested against, and Exploded, and I dare undertake
not one Dissenter offers to present a Petition to the House against its passing.

It Is plain, that Occasional Communion is contrary to the very Nature and Being
of a Dissenter; who, if he can Conform, ought to Conform; and if he can for a
Place of Preferment, ought to do it without that Preferment.

It Is plain, that whatever, by the Connivance of Remiss Ministers, and with too
much Regard to Parties, may have been slightly passed over, yet by the very
Constitution and Foundation of a collected, separate Church or Congregation, no
Man can go back to the Communion of the Church of England, and be received
again upon any other Condition but as a Penitent; it is an Act Destructive of
all possible Pretense for Dissenting and never was, nor never can, be defended
by any Dissenter, without over-throwing all the Reasons they could ever give
for Dissenting.

How then can this Bill be aimed at the Dissenters? either they who think it is
aimed at them, are Mistaken; or they that point it at them, are Mistaken, for
Suppressing an Error crept in among them, contrary to their Constitution,
against their Judgment, declared by them to be a Grievance, can never be their
Injury, nor ought to be their Trouble.

Let them Name us the Dissenter that ever vindicated this Practice, one
passionate Author excepted; let them tell us the Time when any Congregation
received such conforming Nonconformatists without dissatisfactions and
Discontents; let them tell us a Time whenever the thing was practiced till the
Reign of King James.

It Is a Novelty, an Abuse crept in among us, and we are glad to have it
Condemned by Authority; at the same Time not at all thinking our selves obliged
to the Authors for their Good Will.

'Twill be objected, this is a Feint, to close with a thing when you cannot
help it.

No, Gentlemen, we don't tell you we like that part of the Bill which Excludes
us from the Native Honors and Preferments of our Country, which are our Due,
our Birthright, equally with our Neighbors, and to which we should be called
by the Suffrage of the People; and we cannot but think it a Hardship beyond the
Power of Reason to justify; but since this Right must be clogged with so many
Inconveniences, that we must Mortgage our Consciences to enjoy them, no Man
can have any Charity left for us, but must presently conclude we shall freely
forego such Trifles for our Consciences, or else that we may have no
Consciences at all.

Therefore it is no Feint; we are so content with the Suppressing the Grievance
of this Scandalous Ambo-dexter Conformity, that we think the Hardships put upon
us with it not worth naming; we doubt not the Parliament will one time or other
see Cause to do us Justice, and to restore to us the Privileges of our
Ancestors, and which we have done nothing to forfeit.

But all the Parliaments that ever were, or will be, can never Suppress any
thing among us so Scandalous to our Reputation, and to that Candor with which
we desire to Guide our Actions, nor so Contrary to, and Destructive of, the
very Nature of our separating from the Church of England, and the Constitution
of all our Collected Congregations.

We acknowledge, that if this was an allowed Practice among us, we could not
pretend the Character of a Dissenter I have here given to be Just; but without
Question it is a most Just Character of all those Dissenters who are
Conscientious and Honest; it is the Original, the Nature, of a Dissenter; what
is crept in more is a Corruption, and we wish it Extinguished; and since none
has said any thing of this Nature but what has been said before, and no Church
of England-Man can think or speak worse of it than the truly Religious
Dissenters have done, we freely dismiss all those who can thus Build with one
Hand, and Pull Down with another, to a Liberty of declaring for the future who
they are for.

Only pursuant to what has all along been acknowledged, so far as we handled
this Argument, if they would accept of the Friendly Advice of their Brethren,
it should be, that they would for the future Conform to the Church of England.

For it is plain, he that can Conform to the Church to qualify himself for
Preferment, for Employment, or any such Reason, can Conform; if not, he must be
arrived to a Degree of Mastership over his Conscience so as to subject it to
his Interest, and act against light; and he that can do that, may do any thing,
and it is no matter what Church he communicates with; of such a Man I think I
Trespass not upon Charity to say, he has all his Work of Religion to do over
again, and he also may Conform till God shall give his Conscience Light enough
to choose by, and him Grace to be Obedient to the Convictions of his own Heart,
and whether that be to Conform or Dissent, let him judge

But if any Man who has professed himself a Religious Dissenter, shall, upon the
passing this Act, declare himself Resolved to turn to the Dissenters, I think
no Congregation of Dissenters, according to the Nature of Religious Communion,
can receive him upon any other Terms than as a Penitent.

If he has not Sinned, why should he Repent? Says a Learned Author in this very
Case.

I answer, he either has Sinned in Conforming, or he Sinned in Dissenting
before, or he Sins in coming off; for if he did not Sin in Conforming, he ought
to have continued there, and his coming off is a plain Schism; but if he did
Sin, he ought to acknowledge the Sin, which is what I mean by being received as
a Penitent.

I am told after all this, but upon what Authority do you write thus? You take
upon you to write in the Name of the Dissenters, what Commission have you to
write in the Plural? And how do we know that the Dissenters disown this
Occasional Communion.

I answer, Publication is an Appeal to the World; if I have wrote what is not
true, or affirmed that in the Name of the Dissenters which is not their
Opinion, I am liable to an easy Confutation; but as I have never yet had my
Argument refuted, so though I have not received a Formal Commission, Truth is a
General Commission, and any Man may write it.

And yet I am not without a general Concurrence of all the Dissenters I ever
converst with: and he that can answer the Argument is welcome to Make his
Negative as Public as this, and let the World judge who is in the Right.

A NEW TEST OF THE Church of England's Loyalty: OR, WHIGGISH LOYALTY AND CHURCH
LOYALTY COMPARED
IN all the unhappy Contentions among Parties and Factions in this brangling
Nation, the Champions of the Church of England, as they would have themselves
called, have laid it down as the distinguishing Mark of their Hierarchy, that
it is her Practice, and has been derived from her very Constitution, as well as
Doctrine, to fix in all her Members Principles of unshaken Loyalty to her
Prince, entire and undisputed Obedience to all her Commands, and an Abhorrence
of the very Thoughts of those Hellish Principles, That it can be lawful on any
Account whatsoever to resist the established Power of their Kings.

'Twou'd be endless to quote the the Reverend Dr. B -- ge, who from the Text in
the 13th of Romans, v. 1, 2. Resist not the Powers, etc. for whatsoever Powers
are, he ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God; tells us, That if the King should by his Royal Command
execute the greatest Violence upon either our Person or Estate, our Duty was to
submit by Prayers and Tears first to God Almighty, to turn the Wrath of his
Vicegerent from his Servant, and by bumble Entreaty to beg his Majesty's Grace
and Pardon; but to lift up the Hand against the Lord's Anointed, or resist the
Evil of punishment he thought fit to inflict this were a Crime unpardonable
either before God or Man, and a Crime, (says the Reverend Dr.) which we bless
God the very Principles of our Ever Loyal Mother, the Church of England, abhors
and detests.

Let Incendiaries, Phanaticks, and Bloody Peace-breaking Wbigs (says another
Learned Divine) nourish the Vip'rous Principles of Treason and Rebellion, and
let them meet their due Reward of their Factious Doings in the Resentments of a
Righteous, but Provoked Nation: But God be praised, our Mother, the Church of
England, has always brought up her Sons in an unspotted Loyalty and Obedience;
none have been found lifting up their Hands against their Sovereign, or
possessing the Rights of the Anointed of God, etc.

The very Being and Life, the Original and Principles of the Church of England,
(says another 30th of January Sermon) is Loyalty and Fidelity to God, as the
Immediate Supreme, and to the King as the lively Image of Divine Authority,
whose Power is immediately derived from, holds of, and is accountable to none
but to God Himself.

To avoid Prolixity of Quotation, the Reader is desired to accept of these as
sufficient Proofs of what I lay down upon this Condition; nevertheless, that
besides the general Appeal which I make to the Memory of most Men, I oblige my
self upon Demand to produce Ten Thousand fair Quotations of Non-resistance of
Princes, Passive-Obedience, and Divine Authority of the Kingly Power, is owned
and declared to be an Essential Part of the Profession and Practice of the
Church of England; and upon this Foot, which I hold to be sufficient, I think I
cannot be censured if I take it for Granted.

Now as this too much divided Nation has always been composed of two contending
Parties, those Parties have been distinguished, as in like Cases, by Names of
Contempt; and though they have often changed them on either side, as Cavalier and
Roundhead, Royalists and Rebels, Malignants and Phanaticks, Tories and Whigs,
yet the Division has always been barely the Church and the Dissenter, and there
it continues to this Day.

As the Church of England Party have boasted of their own Loyalty, so they have
branded the Dissenter with Rebellion and Faction, not only in their Nature, but
in their very Principles; they have laid it down in their Writings and Sermons,
and Multitudes of their ignorant Hearers believe it, that the very Doctrine of
the Dissenter is made up of Principles in their own Nature tending to Confusion
and Rebellion; they wo'n't be content that we should own there may be Men among
all Parties of bad Designs, and who would on all Occasions embroil their Native
Country; but it must be woven with the very Articles of Faith; and that it is
the Religion of a Dissenter to disturb Government, kill Kings, and oppose Laws.

The Phanatical Enemies of our King and Church, says the Learned Dr. P -- n,
drink in Rebellion as Water; it is the very Substance of their Schismatical
Doctrine to overwhelm and destory; and Commonwealths and Confusions are the
Doctrines they preach.

He that lays out one Groat with a Dissenter (says the worthy Sir Roger in one
of his Famous Observators) contributes so much as the Profits of that Groat
amounts to in Trade, toward the Subversion of the Monarchy, and Erecting a
Commonwealth, for the very Nature and Tendency of their Profession is
destructive of Kingly Power, and the Government of the Nation.

This has been the Opinion of the Church of England, both of themselves on one
Hand, and of the Dissenters on the other Hand. I should be glad if I could only
say, It has been, for we find it is still too much their Opinion.

Let no Man say that the Author of these Sheets is either widening or keeping
unheal'd the Breaches of this Nation; for if I can make it appear that there is
really no Occasion of such unnatural Divisions; and that neither the
extraordinary Opinion of themselves, nor the Contempt of their Neighbors, as
to the matter of Loyalty, is a becoming Principle; no, nor a rational one
neither: For that as to Loyalty, Passive-Obedience, Non-Resistance, etc. there
is really no great Difference between one side or other; I go as far toward
healing the Breach as any Man; for there can be no better way to end the Strife
on both Sides, than to prove that neither Side has any just Cause to contend.

To examine the Matter on both Sides, seems very useful at this time, in order
to reconcile Parties, and to settle the Universal Character of the Nation.

The Government of England, is a limited Monarchy, composed of King, Lords, and
Commons; each have their several, their separate, and their conjunctive Powers;
which acting in Concert, make the Harmony of the Constitution. I shall not
invade the Province of those learned Gentlemen, who have undertaken to set
forth the Branches of the Constitution in all their Powers, Limitations and
Prerogatives: It Is enough to say the Constitution is known, the Government is
confined by Laws, the Crown limited by Statutes, and the Peoples Rights
confirmed by the Concession of Ages.

To this Government, all Distinction of Names set apart, I am of the Opinion
all Parties have in their Turns been equally Loyal; I was going to say, equally
Disloyal: And if I were to use the Language of late Times, it would be a very
proper way of speaking.

Affirming without demonstrating is an absurd way of arguing, and therefore it
will be needful to come to Particulars, and to examine the several Acts and
Deeds of both Parties when the Kingly Prerogative has shocked or clash'd with
the People.

In order to this it is needful co examine the Date of the Difference, and so
enter a little into History.

Our first Reformation from Popery was in the Days of King Edward the VI. I
call it the first, because 'twas under him that the whole Nation and the
Government embraced the Protestant Reformed Religion; this Protestant Religion
was established by that Zealous King, and by his Parliament, backed with the
force of Laws, and confirmed by all the Sanction of Authority it was capable
of, and here it began to be called the Church of England.

Some enquiring Christians were for making farther Steps, and carrying on the
Reformation to a higher Degree; and if that good reforming King had lived, his
Zeal and Integrity was such, that there was no doubt he would have gone on to
perfect every thing he had begun, as new Light or more Knowledge had increased;
but the Return of Popery under Queen Mary put a Stop to the Work in general,
and went very far toward overturning the whole Structure of the Reformation.

Queen Elizabeth restored it again; but as she was a Zealous Protestant Queen,
yet she was not for subjecting the Reformation to any Amendment. Not that she
believed it perfect; but she was a Politic Princess, surrounded with Enemies
that were not to be dally'd with; and she was loath to suppose such Defects in
the Reformation as were alleged, because 'twas to lessen the Reputation of it,
and consequently her Interest in the World.

Those who insisted upon the further Reformation were then called Puritans,
because they set up for a greater Purity of Worship; and they separated
themselves from the established Church, because, as they said, their
Consciences informed them they could serve God more agreeable to his Will.

I shall not meddle with the Arguments made use of on both Sides, either to
defend or expose this Principle; it is sufficient to acquaint my Reader that
this is the true Original of the Dissenters: We are now to examine a little
further back. Before this Reformation there was no such thing as Church of
England, it was then the Church of Rome that was the established National
Church.

The Protestants under the Titles of Lollards, Wickliffians, Hussites, etc.
what did they do? Did they, as our Modern People say every Body should, conform
to what the Government commanded? No, the present Church of England Party were
the Dissenters, the Schismatics and Phanaticks, in the Days of King Henry
VIII. were persecuted for not coming to Church, many of them put to Death, and
always treated with Scorn and Contempt, as Enemies to the Government, Broachers
of new Opinions, and Contemners of Authority, as in the Case of that Famous
Proto-Martyr of Christ's Church, John Lambert, and others.

In the next Ages these come to have the Power in their Hands, and forgetting
that they had found it Righteous in the Sight of God to obey God rather than
Man, they treat those whose Consciences oblige them to dissent from them with
the same Contempt which themselves had received from the Roman Government.

Thus far they are upon even Terms, as to Obedience to their Superiors.

The Dissenters have the first Occasion after this to show their Submission
under extraordinary Pressures. Queen Elizabeth discountenanced them
continually, and as good a Queen as she was, put some of them to Death. King
James I. hunted them quite out of the Kingdom, made Thousands of them fly into
Holland and Germany, and at last to New England.

During the long Reign of these Two Princes we find no charge of Treason or
Rebellion upon them; they bore the Displeasure of their Princes with Patience
and Passive Obedience, if I may be allowed that Ridiculous Phrase; being
persecuted in one City, they fled to another; they bore illegal Prosecutions,
and things contrary to their Right, as English Men, but never took up Arms
against their Prince.

Under the Reign of King Charles I. the Case altered, the King and Parliament
fell out about Matters of Civil Right, and Invasion of the Liberty and
Properties of the People, the Puritans or Dissenters, call them what we please,
fell in unanimously with the Parliament.

And here it is worthy Remark, that the first Difference between the King and
the English Parliament did not Respect Religion but Civil Property; nor were
the Majority of the House Puritans, but true Church Protestants, and English
Men, who stood upon the Rights of the People, as English Men; and none were
more Zealous in the first Disputes than the Lord Digby, Sir Thomas Wentworth,
and such as were afterward deep Sufferers for the King.

But the Parliament finding the Puritan Party stuck close to their Cause, they
also came over them when Things came to a Rupture, and so the War begun on the
Score of Right, Invasion of Liberty, Breach of the Laws, Private Leagues, and
Maladministration, a Game we have seen played over again by the very same
Church of England that have exclaimed so much against it, so damned it, and so
damned themselves, by Oaths, Declarations, Tests, and God knows what against it.

It Is allowed here the Puritan broke through his Loyalty, and his former
Obedience, and fought his Way to the Liberty he demanded. Well, the War ended
to his Advantage, he subdued his Sovereign, and brought him to the Block, to
the Astonishment of the whole World.

I will not dispute here which or which Party did or did not do it; but to give
the Enemy all just Advantage, I am willing to grant it in the largest Sense
that the Dissenters, or Phanaticks, or Whigs, call them as you please, did
embrue their Hands in the Blood of the Lord's Anointed, put to Death that
Blessed Martyr, King Charles the I. whom the Learned Divine, in a Sermon on the
30th of January, before the Parliament, compares both in the manner of his
Sufferings, and the People by whom, to our Savior and the Jews, and boldly
runs on in the Blasphemous Parallel, to show that the Indignities and
Sufferings of King Charles exceed those of Jesus Christ.

I think I have granted as largely as a fair Adversary can desire, for I have
yielded, for Peace-sake, to several Things which I could fairly disprove.

Nor shall I return to a Repetition of the ill Usage the Dissenters have
received from the contrary Party on this Account for above 30 Years; the
constant Reproaches they and their Children after them have met with from those
Gentlemen, who on all Occasions have (as I hinted before) particularly taken
care to extol their own unshaken Fidelity to their Prince, till at last an
Occasion presents to touch them in the same most sensible Part, their Right and
Property; and alas! Their Loyalty, what became of it? Truly the Faithful,
Passively Obedient, Vnshakenly Loyal, Church, returned to the Original Nature
of their Neighbors, and did the same thing exactly which the Whigs, the
Factious Rebellious Whigs, had done before.

No, that is false, (says a Disciple of Dr. Sherlock's) we did not Kill our
King, we did not dip our Hands in Royal Blood, nor hurt the Lords Anointed.

No, that is true, but the Lords Anointed may thank himself for that; for my
part I think the Difference only lies here; the Whigs in 41, to 48, took up
Arms against their King, and having Conquered him, and taken him Prisoner, and
having taken him Prisoner, cut off his Head, because they had begun: The Church
of England took Arms against their King in 88, and did not cut off his Head,
because they had him not. King Charles lost his Life, because he did not run
away; and his Son, King James, saved his Life, because he did run away.

It Is such a Jest, such a Banter, to say, We did take up Arms, but we did not
kill him: Bless us, Kill our King, we would not have hurt a Hair of his Head!
Why, every Bullet shot at the Battle of the Boyne was a killing the King; for
if you did not, 'twas because you could not hit him.

If a Highway-man Fires at you upon the Road, when he is taken, and brought
upon his Trial, our Learned Recorder, before he pronounces Sentence of Death,
Harangues him in this manner: And besides all this, Sir, you are plainly guilty
of Murder; for you not only assaulted this Honest Man in order to take away
his Money, but you endeavored to Murder him; for you shot at him in order to
kill him; and the Intention of Murder is equally Criminal in the Eyes of God
with the Act it self.

Now who did we shoot at at the Boyne? It Is true, King James generally stood
out of the way: But who did we Shoot at? What! Was our Orders to fight against
both small and great, and not against the King of Israel? Had your Bullets
Commission to show their Loyalty, and not to touch the Lords Anointed? If he
had charged in the first Squadrons of his Horse had you not killed him if you
could? I think this needs no further Proof.

Nay, if Arguments may be allowed to have equal Weight on both sides, the Whigs
have been the honester of the two, for they never professed any such blind,
absolute and undisputed Obedience to Princes, as the others have done.

It has always been their Opinion, That Government was Originally contrived by
the Consent, and for the mutual Benefit of the Parties Governed, that the
People have an Original Native Right to their Property, the Liberty of their
Persons and Possessions, unless forefaulted to the Laws; that they cannot be
divested of their Right but by their own Consent; and that all Invasion of this
Right is destructive of the Constitution, and dissolves the Compact of
Government and Obedience.

They have always declared, That they understand their Allegiance to their
Governors to be, supposing they Govern them according to the Laws of the Land;
and that if Princes break this Bond of Government, the Nature of it is
inverted, and the Constitution ceases of course.

Buchanan in Scotland, Algernoon Sidney in England, have set their Names, and
the latter his Blood, to this Doctrine; and the Author of the True-born
Englishman is worth quoting in this Case. The Government's ungirt when Justice
dies,
And Constitutions are Non-Entities:
The Nation's all a Mob, there is no such thing
As Lords or Commons, Parliament or King:
A great promiscuous Crowd the Hydra lies,
Till Laws revive, and mutual Contract ties:
A Chaos free to choose for their own Share,
What Case of Government they please to wear.
If to a King they do the Reins commit,
All Men are bound in Conscience to submit;
But then that King must by his Oath assent
To Postulata's of the Government;
Which if he breaks, he cuts off the Entail,
And Power retreats to its Original.
True-Born Englishman, P. 74.

This has been the avowed Doctrine of the Dissenters, and is indeed the true
Sense of the Constitution it self; pursuant to this Doctrine they thought they
had a Right to oppose Violence with Force; believing that when Kings break
Coronation Oaths, the Solemn Compact with their People, and encroach upon their
Civil Rights, contrary to the Laws of the Land, by which they are Sworn to
Rule, they cease to be the Lord's Anointed any longer; the Sanction of their
Office is vanished, and they become Tyrants and Enemies of Mankind, and may be
treated accordingly.

Now it is no wonder to find People of these Principles vigorously withstanding
their Governors when they tread upon the tender sore Places of the
Constitution, it is nothing but what they all along pretended to, and declared
to be their Opinion.

But to find the Church of England-Men, whose Loyalty has been the Subject of a
thousand Learned Authors, and numberless Sermons, whose Character and Mark of
Distinction has been chosen more for her steady Adherence and Fidelity to her
Prince than to God Almighty, whose Obedience to her Monarch has been declared
to be Inviolate and Immovable, and who pretends to be Famous through the whole
World for her Faithfulness to Kings, for her, as soon as ever the King did but,
as it were, seem to aim at crushing her Authority, as soon as he did but begin
to call her Clergy to an Account, and clap her Golden Condlesticks for
Disobedience, for her to winch and kick fly to Foreign Princes for Protection,
and rise in Arms against her Prince, O Pellin! O Brady; O Sherloch* O Hominum!
O Mores!

Where Is the Worthy Dr. B -- ge's Loyal^ now, his Immovable Loyalty? That after
all his Absolute Submission, is so far from being a Martyr to his own Doctrine,
that he could not lose a small Benefice for it?

Where is the famous Dr. S -- k? Who having stood out long in his old
Antiquated Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and confirmed the Faith of his
Suffering Brethren, by strong and wonderful Arguments, at last, at the powerful
Instigation of a Wife, and a good Salary, has Sold all his Loyalty for a Mess
of Pottage, solving his Honesty with the wretched Distinction of a Power De
Facto, and a Power De Jure; as if the Church of England's Credit could be saved
by such an impotent Shift, or as if he could make Amends to the Prebendary for
his helping him to Sacriflce his Brethren, to Father his Conversion on reading
honest Dr. Overall, whose Doctrine, it is well known, the Doctor knew before;
but that he was loath Dr. South should have the Honor of bringing him over to
such Old Phanatick Principles?

Behold the Loyalty of the Church of England; now let us examine their
Conscience, as to taking Oaths; and if I do not bring them to be all Whigs, and
Forty-One-Men, or else prove them all Perjured, then I do nothing.

The Clergy, all the Magistrates and Officers of the Household, of the Civil or
Military Government, were Members of the Church of England, otherwise they
could not be employed; the Sacramental Test has done the Dissenters this
Kindness, that it is plain all the Managing Hands in the Kingdom were Disciples
of the Church; and as an additional Circumstance, the Oath of Allegiance which
they took, and which was (God be praised) of their own making, bound them to
that same Absolute Blind Obedience which they professed, and confined it to the
King, his Heirs and Successors.

If this Oath be considered literally, I am content to be silenced when one
fair Argument can be brought to evade it; the Declaration followed it, wherein
they detest and abhor that devilish Doctrine, that it is lawful on any Pretense
whatsoever, (Mark the Emphasis) to take up Arms against the King; this (equal
to an Oath) declared in the Presence of God, and the Particulars being material
to our Purpose, are as follows: I A. B. do Declare and Believe that it is not
Lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King, and that
I do abhor that Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against
those that are commissioned by him. So help me God.



Notwithstanding this, you have taken up Arms against, deposed, and as far as
you were able, put to Death your lawful King, the very King you swore
Allegiance to.

Now pray Gentlemen give Commission to some worthy Champion of your Church's
Loyalty to bring you sairly off of your Oath and Declaration if you can; and
till you do, be not angry with us for making one of these Conclusions from the
Premises, and you shall choose for your selves.

First, That this Doctrine of Absolute, Passive and Non-resistant Obedience, is
an Absurdity in it self, contradictory to the Nature of Government and
Allegiance, and politically introduced by State Engines into the Church of
England, to abuse her, and betray her Members into unforeseen Mischiefs and
Inconveniences.

Or, Secondly, That the Members of the Church of England are all Apostates from
the very Fundamental Doctrine of their Church, Perjured in the Sight of God and
Man, Notorious Hypocrites, and Deceivers; who having sworn Obedience without
Reserve to their Prince, are become Traitors, Rebels, and Murderers of the
Lord's Anointed, and their Lawful Sovereign; and not having the Fear of God
before their Eyes, have deposed and traitorously dethroned their Rightful King,
God Almighty's Vicegerent, accountable to no Earthly Power, Supreme under God,
Absolute, and, from Divine Institution, Undoubted Sole Lord of them and their
Country.

Or, Lastly, That they only are the true Church of England, who according to
their avowed Profession, have firmly adhered to their King in all his
Sufferings and Solitude, have never blackened their Consciences, nor gone back
from their Obedience, forgotten their Oaths, nor sullied their Reputation with
the horrid Crimes of Treason and Rebellion, as they think it to be.

Now, as a fair Disputant, I am willing the Respondent shall choose which of
these three Consequences he will stand by in Behalf of the Church of England's
Loyalty; but if they would take the Advice of a Friend to the Honest Part of
them, I would recommend the first Conclusion to be fittest for them for the
following Reasons.

1. Because since Humane Infallibility is (and with good Reason) disowned by
the Church of England, both for her self and every Body else, it can be no
Diminution to her Reputation, when she has found her self mistaken, and imposed
upon, to acknowledge her Error; a wise Man will always own, rather than defend
a Mistake.

2. Because it is my Opinion that their Way is hedged up against any other
Pretense, Evasion, or Reservation, and therefore it is with me the only thing
that Charity can say for them, and must remain so, till I find something else
said that is more to the Purpose.

But the Mischief of all is, that if this be honestly acknowledged (as is
doubtless most true) that the Church of England was mistaken, and imposed upon,
to espouse a Senseless Absurd Principle, contrary to the Nature of Government
and Allegiance, etc. why then they come over to this Consequence;

That Government and Allegiance are both Conditional, and Oaths of Subjects are
always to be considered in a Constructive Sense, with Conditions of Protection,
and the like; a thing which is without question the real Meaning of all Oaths
of Allegiance; otherwise Subjects may be put under an Absolute Necessity of
Perjury, or State Martyrdom, by often Swearing what may be impossible for them
to perform.

The Town of Aeth in Flanders has been about Six Times, and the Town of
Rhinebergh in Gueldre about Twelve Times, Taken and Retaken; and as often as
new Masters had Possession of the Place, so often the poor Inhabitants have
sworn to their new Lords: What can the Meaning of such an Oath be, but that
they will be faithful to them so long as they keep Possession of the Place?
'Twou'd be ridiculous to imagine the Imposers of the Oath required any more.

If our Zealous Churchmen worded an Oath contrary to the very Nature of
Swearing Allegiance, let them answer for it who first made it, then took it,
then broke it: But the Nature of the thing can leave Room for no other
Suggestion that I know of.

Till then some further Argument is produced, it must rest here, that the
Church of England was Mistaken, Imposed upon, etc. that she finds when the Laws
are Broken, the Right of the People Invaded, the Root of the Government Struck
at, Church and State Undermined, and Despotick Tyranny at the Door, the Native
Right of the People is Superior, and they may assume a Power to Right
themselves.

And so we are brought back to Whiggism and Forty. One; and Gentlemen, there is
no Remedy for it, help it if ye can.

Where now is the Difference between Church Loyalty, and Whiggish Loyalty,
Roundhead or Cavalier, Churchman or Dissenter, Whig or Troy? All are alike;
they are pleased, when legally Governed, Quarrelsome and Unruly, if Oppressed;
and will Defend themselves, if Assaulted, though it be by their Kings, or any
Body else.

Why then is the Difference kept up? Methinks they might all be Friends
together, for they are all alike; the Dissenters have been in their times as
Loyal, and the Church of England in their time as Disloyal, one as another.
Vice versa; the Dissenters have been as Disloyal, and the Churchmen as Loyal,
as one another upon the same Occasion; they have been both Sufferers, and have
submitted to the Government; ay, and to the Oppressions and Persecutions of
their Superiors and Sovereigns; and again, upon the like Occasions, they have
both of them been Rebels. if their own Language may be so far used; they have
both of them, in their Turn, taken Arms against, and deposed their Rightful and
Lawful Kings.

So that in my Opinion, with a Latitude to all that think otherwise, to think
as they please, the Church of England, and their Neighbors the Dissenters,
have nothing to quarrel with one another about, as to Loyalty; as to other
Matters I have nothing to say to them, nor shall not mingle it with this
Discourse.

Nor do I think I am writing a Satyr against the Church of England, nor is it
at all intended to be so; and to stop all Pretenses that way, I take the
Freedom to say, here has been no Crime, the Church of England has been in the
right of it; not in taking Arms, but the Error was in Espousing, Crying up, and
Pretending to a Blind Absolute Obedience to Princes, be their Commands never so
Absolute, Tyrannical or Illegal; this neither the Doctrine nor Practice of the
Church of England, nor of any Church or People in the Christian World, ever
pretended to; and therefore the Fanlt lay in those People, who being themselves
Members of the Church of England, suffered themselves to be deluded by State
Ministers, to foster a Tenent upon the Church, which her Original Constitution
never pretended to, and then call it the Doctrine of the Church of England.

The first beginning of their pretended Doctrine was found in Manwaring's and
Sibthorp's Libels, in the Days of King Charles I. cajoling the King; and then
to please him, endeavoring to wheedle the People into a Belief of the Divine
Right of Kingly Government; and affirming, that the King was not obliged by the
Laws in the Administration of the Government.

Upon this preposterons Foundation they built the Illegitimate Structure of
Absolute Undisputed Obedience; for if Kingly Power were once proved to be
immediately derived from Divine Authority, Absolute Obedience would be a
Consequence no Body could dispute, since the same Obedience without Reserve
would be due to the Delegated Power, as to the Power Delegating.

And though this is a Point easily enough confuted, yet being willing to keep the
present Dispute within as small a Compass we can, I think our Argument has
nothing at all to do with it.

Whether Government be of Divine Original or not, seems not the Question here;
for if it be not so, then, as before, the Church of England have been Mistaken,
and Imposed upon; and if it be so, then the Church of England has trampled
under Foot their own Doctrine, turned Rebels to God, and Apostates from the
Faith they have professed, have Sacrilegiously and Traitorously taken up Arms
against their Prince, assaulted the Lords Anointed, resisted the Powers, which
are the Ordinance of God, deposed their Lawful Sovereign, broken their
Allegiance, and consequently are a Parcel of Perjured Rebels; every Jot as bad
as the worst Roundhead Regicide, and Rebel of the Year Forty-One.

What more or less can be said I profess I know not, and am in great
Expectation of something new in the Matter; for I cannot find in all the
Writings I have met with, any thing to contradict it.

The bringing Government and Obedience to the proper Circumstances of mutual
Compact between King and People, seems to me to be the only Method to unravel
this Skein of entangl'd Principles; the Nature of Government has made it the
necessary Consequence of all Argument relating to Power; and I could give
Instances in all the Nations in the World, that some time or other, even the
Right of Succession to Government, which must be as Sacred as the Power, has
been Interrupted and Limited by the People, in case of Tyranny and Illegal
Governing; and every Nation, and this among the rest, has oftentimes Deposed
their Princes for the Preservation of the State, when either Incapacity for
Government, Tyrannical Usurpation, or other Maladministration, has been the
Case.

But this I think also needless here; every one that is versed in History can
read the numerous Examples in the Roman, Grecian and Persian Histories, even
Sacred Histories, where Kings were more particularly of Divine Right than any
where, are full of them; the Histories of Spain, Portugal, France, Lombardy,
the Empires of Germany and Muscovy, even the Papal Chair, have suffered
Convulsions and Revolutions, the Deposing and Displacing their Sovereigns, when
the Peoples Good, which is, and ever was, the Soul, the Center, the End, and
the Cause of all Government, came to be in the Dispute.

But to return to the Principles of the Two Parties we are now discoursing of;
the Whigs, as before, have always asserted this to be their Notion of
Government and Governors; and the Church of England, however some among them
have topt an empty Notion upon them, have all along, and now at last once for
all, owned it by their Practice. That Kings when they descend to Tyranny,
Dissolve the Bond, and leave the Subject free.
True-born Eng. Man, P. 47.

The Act for the further Limitation of the Crown past in the last Parliament,
and the Right of the People therein Declared and Recognized, I would ask my
Opponent whose Act and Deed it was? Will they say it was a Whiggish Act, made
by a Phanatical House of Commons? I dare say there was not Ten Dissenters in
the House; let them descend with us into Particulars, let them draw out a Black
List of Members, who in that Loyal Honest English Parliament gave their Hands
to the last Settlement and Declaration of Right, and let us tell Noses, and put
a Brand upon the Phanaticks among them.

Will they tell us it was a Phanatical Parliament that set the Crown upon the
Queens Head? I hope they will own Her Majesty, and their Lordships the Bishops,
are part of the Church of England; for if the Head and the principal Members
are not, we know not who are.

Will they tell us that Sir E. S. Sir B. S. Sir J. B. Mr, H -- y, Sir C -- r M
-- ve, and a Hundred more of that Side, were Whigs and Commonwealth-Men?

How comes it to pass in England, that no Papist can inherit? Divine Right
ought to supercede all Precautions, and the Young Prince of Savoy, not the
House of Hannover ought to Reign with a Non Obstante to all Humane Limitation,
if all was from Heaven? Where are our Right Line-Men now! Why, truly the Reason
is plain, the Church of England, People of England, a Church of England,
Parliament of England, have thought fit to Declare, that for the Good of the
People to which all Right of Succession to Power must give way, because from
them all Power it self does derive, and by the Voice of that people (in which
Authority sufficient is Legally Grounded) it is Unanimously agreed, that we
will not have a Papist to Reign over us.

All this is too plain to admit of a Dispute; and now to me it seems
Preposterous why any Men should keep up the Distinction between Parties as to
Loyalty, when indeed there is no manner of Difference in the Case.

I have talked several times of Bearing, Suffering, being Persecuted and
Oppressed, as the Dissenters in their time have been more than enough, and
again in their Turn the Church of England have been Persecuted too; for as I
noted before, they were once the Schismatics, the Whigs, and the Dissenters.
Now I think it is not very foreign to my Argument to examine whether of the Two
behaved themselves under their Sufferings with the greatest Submission, who
showed most Absolute Obedience to their Superiors, and who first, or oftenest,
rebelled against their Lawful Sovereign.

The Protestants under Henry VIII. were the first Dissenters; they were kept
Under, Persecuted, and put to Death as Rebels and Schismatics. Now upon due
Search it will be fouhd, that under the Protection of Two Protestant Queens,
Wives of King Henry VIII. they had more than once formed such Interest at
Court, and in the Kingdom, as to begin to be formidable to the Popish Powers
then reigning; and the Fall of the Lord Cromwell was thought a necessary Policy
in King Henry, to prevent the Plots of the Phanatical Church of England
Heretics; a long Account of which may be read in the Life of that Prince.

King Edward the VI. a Zealous and pious Prince, made no Scruple for the
Propagation of the Protestant Church of England, of which he was the Glorious
Founder, to set Aside the Lawful and Undisputed Succession of his own Sisters,
to Establish the Crown in the Lady Jane Gray, who he knew would carry on the
Work of Reformation.

There Is an Instance of the Zeal for Succession in the Right Line in the First
Protestant Head that ever the Church of England had.

After this, the Gospellers, that is, the Church of England Protestants of
Suffolk, having some Sense of Injury done to the Princess Mary, and willing to
have the Succession go on in the Right Line, provided they could both preserve
their Religion and Loyalty too; Capitulate with her, and promise to stand by
her, provided she would promise to preserve, and make no Alteration, in their
Established Church of England.

Here the Church of England Men owned the Liberty of their Religion to be
Superior to their Loyalty to her; and that they had a Right to Submit, or not
to Submit, as their Liberty was, or was not, Secure: and accordingly
Conditioned with her before they would Acknowledge her to be their Queen.

And we see how Heaven punished them for venturing on the Word of a Prince when
their Religion and Liberty was at Stake.

In this Queen's Time the Church having been again Suppressed, and Popery
Erected, Sir Thomas Wyat, an honest Church of England Protestant, with a very
good Body of Men, took up Arms against their Lawful Princess for breaking her
Word, in Defense of their Dear Religion Established by Blessed King Edward,
which were the very Words of the Manifesto they Published: The Londoners, with
800 Men sent by the Queen against against them, thought it no Treachery to
Desert their Lawful Popish Queen, and go over to their Protestant Church of
England Brethren.

We have nothing to do with the Justification of this Fact, it is sufficient
that so it was, and that these were Protestants of the Church of England, in
the first and purest part of their Principles, and let them justify the Fact
if they please.

Queen Elizabeth Succeeds, and then the Church of England shone in its Meridian
Glory; and then grew up some, who aiming, as I said before, at a further
Reformation, and the Church refusing to hearken to it, formed a new Party of
Dissenters, and these were called Puritans, and since that Phanaticks.

Now I Challenge the Defender of this Cause to tell me one Disloyal Act, one
Plot against the Government, one Disturbance of the Civil Peace, among these
Dissenters, from the beginning of this Queen, which was their own beginning, to
the Reign of King Charles I. which was a continued Term of 80 Years; and yet,
during this time, they suffered all manner of Indignities, Reproaches, Fining,
Imprisonings, Banishment, Confiscations, and Corporal Punishments.

So that hitherto the Passive Obedience of the Dissenters has far exceeded
that of the Church of England. These had but Five Years Oppression under Queen
Mary, and in that Five Years they once Capitulated with their Sovereign to make
her Queen upon Conditions, and once took Arms against her after she was Queen;
and by that I must always understand, that if they did not Depose and Destroy
her, it was because they could not; and if they had done it, no doubt they had
Cause sufficient to Justify them before God and Man. The Puritans after this
suffered all that their too cruel Brethren of the Church of England laid upon
them during Three tedious Reigns, before they so much as made the least offer
at doing themselves Justice; and for 80 Years together exercised that Passive
Obedience which they never pretended to.

At last they took Arms, and when they did, they did it to purpose, carried all
before them, subdued Monarchy, cut off their Kings Head, and all that.

After the Restoration Things began to return to their old Channel, and 30
Years more the Dissenters endured another Egyptian Servitude, were Persecuted,
Plundered, Indicted, Imprisoned, Plagued with Impositions, Stigmatized with a
Thousand Reproaches, their Meeting Houses Demolished, their Estates
Confiscated, their Persons Excommunicated, and Anathematized, Sworn into Plots
they never Heard of, and into Crimes they never Commltted, Dragged to Goals,
Gibbets and Scaffolds, and the like; all this while Passive-Obedence, if there
were any such thing, was found among them more than any where else; for here
was no Rebellion, no Insurrection, nor breaking of the Peace by the Dissenters,
notwithstanding all those Oppositions.

After this comes King James the Second to the Crown, and he turned the Scale,
and, together with Invasion of Liberty, falls upon the Church, begins to Rifle
her of her Trophies, for no Essentials had been touched, and how long did she
bear it? Not 80 Years, not 30 Years, no, not so many Months.

What did she do? Truly nothing but what she ought to have done; Defend her
Liberty and Religion by Force, against Unjust Invasion and Tyranny: nothing but
what all the Nations in the World have done, and would do again if they could.

The only Error we Charge upon the Church of England, was setting up pretenses
of what they really would not practice; crying up themselves for Fools, when we
knew they were Wiser Men, calling themselves humble Slaves, but when the Trial
came, proving Stubborn, Refractory, Liberty Mongers, even as bad as the worst
Whig or Phanatick of them all.

For the future then, if a Humble Mediator might be permitted to give Advice to
the Gentlemen of the Church of England, it should be in these short and
friendly Terms.

Pray Gentlemen never be Imposed upon, to pretend to more Loyalty, and more
slavish Principles than you intend to practice.

Never pretend to more Obedience than your Sovereign requires. Our Late King,
who I am not ashamed to show as a Pattern for future Ages, required; and Her
present Majesty, without Affront to Her Majesty's Authority it may be said,
requires no further Obedience from the People of England than the Laws of
England require.

To Govern according to Law, is a full Satisfaction to the People; and to obey
according to Law, is a full Satisfaction to the Sovereign. The Laws are the
Test both of the Royal Authority, and of the Subjects Obedience; and to pretend
to more Obedience than the Law requires, is abusing your Prince, and abusing
your Selves.

Never be ashamed to own, with your Brethren the Whigs, that you are willing to
Submit to Authority but that you expect to be governed according to the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm,

Let the Scoth Motto be set upon your Liberties; and according to your constant
Practice, as well as theirs; let all Men know you design to make it Good, Nemo
me Impune Lacessit.

And as it really never was the Principle of the Church of England, nor were a
Hundredth Part of the Members of the Church tainted with it; so for the Future
it is hoped you will not suffer such to Mingle themselves among you, or to Act
in the Name of the Church of England, who pretend to a Blind Absolute Obedience
to Princes.

And Lastly, Gentlemen, a little more Modesty to your Humble Servants, your
Protestant Brethren the Dissenters, or Whigs, I mean as to Matter of Loyalty:
For in Truth, Gentlemen, we do not see any Reason you have to Reproach us in
that Matter, you being in every Particular as faulty that way as your
Neighbors.

THE SHORTEST-WAY WITH THE DISSENTERS: OR, PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE CHURCH.
SIR Roger L'Estrange tells us a Story in his Collection of Fables, of the Cock
and the Horses. The Cock was gotten to Roost in the Stable, among the Horses,
and there being no Racks, or other Conveniences for him, it seems, he was
forced to Roost upon the Ground; the Horses jostling about for room and putting
the Cock in danger of his Life, he gives them this grave Advice; Pray
Gentlefolks let us stand still, for fear we should tread upon one another.

There are some People in the World, who now they are Vnpearcht, and reduced to
an Equality with other People, and under strong and very just Apprehensions of
being further Treated as they deserve, begin, with Aesop's-Cock, to Preach up
Peace and Union, and the Christian Duties of Moderation, forgetting, that when
they had the Power in their Hands, those Graces were Strangers in their Gates.

It is now near Fourteen Years that the Glory and Peace of the purest and most
flourishing Church in the World has been Eclipsed, Buffetted, and Disturbed, by
a sort of Men, who God in his Providence has suffered to insult over her, and
bring her down; these have been the Days of her Humiliation and Tribulation:
She has born with an invincible Patience the Reproach of the Wicked, and God
has at last heard her Prayers, and delivered her from the Oppression of the
Stranger.

And now they find their Day is over, their Power gone, and the Throne of this
Nation possessed by a Royal, English, True, and ever Constant, Member of, and
Friend to, the Church of England. Now they find that they are in danger of the
Church of England's just Resentments; now they cry out Peace, Union,
Forbearance, and Charity, as if the Church had not too long harbored her
Enemies under her Wing, and nourished the Viperous Brood, till they hiss and
fly in the Face of the Mother that cherished them.

No, Gentlemen, the Time of Mercy is past, your Day of Grace is over; you
should have practiced Peace, and Moderation, and Charity, if you expected any
your selves.

We have heard none of this Lesson for Fourteen Years past: We have been huff'd
and bully'd with your Act of Toleration; you have told us that you are the
Church established by Law, as well as others; have set up your
Canting-Synagogues at our Church-Doors, and the Church and Members have been
loaded with Reproaches, with Oaths, Associations, Abjurations, and what not;
where has been the Mercy, the forbearance, the Charity, you have shown to
tender Consciences of the Church of England, that could not take Oaths as fast
you made 'em; that having sworn Allegiance to their lawful and rightful King,
could not dlspence with that Oath, their King being still alive, and swear to
your new Hodge-podge of a Dutch Government? These have been turned out of their
Livings, and they and their Families left to starve; their Estates double
Taxed, to carry on a War they had no Hand in, and you got nothing by: What
Account can you give of the Multitudes you have forced to comply, against their
Consciences, with your new sophistical Politics, who like new Converts in
France, Sin because they cannot Starve. And now the Tables are turned upon you,
you must not be Persecuted, it is not a Christian Spirit.

You have Butchered one King Deposed another King, and made a mock King of a
Third; and yet you could have the Face to expect to be employed and trusted by
the Fourth; any Body that did not know the Temper of your Party, would stand
amazed at the Impudence, as well as Fully, to think of it.

Your Management of your Dutch Monarch, whom you reduced to a mere King of Cl
-- s, is enough to give any future Princes such an Idea of your Principles, as
to warn them sufficiently from coming into your Clutches; and God be thanked,
the Queen is out of your Hands, knows you, and will have a care of you.

There is no doubt but the supreme Authority of a Nation has in its self a
Power, and a Right to that Power, to execute the Laws upon any part of that
Nation it governs. The execution of the known Laws of the Land, and that with a
weak and gentle Hand neither was all this phanatical Party of this Land have
ever called Persecution; this they have magnified to a Height, that the
Sufferings of the Hugonots in France were not to be compared with -- Now to
execute the known Laws of a Nation upon those who transgress them, after
voluntarily consenting to the making those Laws, can never be called
Persecution, but Justice. But Justice is always Violence to the Party
offending, for every Man is Innocent in his own Eyes. The first execution of
the Laws against Dissenters in England, was in the Days of King James the
First; and what did it amount to, truly, the worst they suffered, was at their
own request, to let them go to New England, and erect a new Collony, and give
them great Privileges, Grants, and suitable Powers, keep them under
Protection, and defend them against all Invaders, and receive no Taxes or
Revenue from them. This was the cruelty of the Church of England, fatal Lenity!
'Twas the ruin of that excellent Prince, King Charles the First. Had King James
sent all the Puritans in England away to the West Indies, we had been a
national, unmixed, Church; the Church of England had been kept undivided and
entire.

To requite the Lenity of the Father, they take up Arms against the Son;
Conquer, Pursue, Take, Imprison, and at last put to Death, the Anointed of God,
and Destroy the very Being and Nature of Government, setting up a fordid
Impostor, who had neither Title to Govern, nor Understanding to Manage, but
supplied that want with Power, bloody and desperate Councils and Craft, without
Conscience.

Had not King James the First withheld the full execution of the Laws; had he
given them strict Justice he had cleared the Nation of them, and the
Consequences had been plain; his Son had never been Murdered by them, nor the
Monarchy overwhelmed; 'twas too much Mercy shown them was the ruin of his
Posterity, and the ruin of the Nations Peace. One would think the Dissenters
should not have the Face to believe that we are to be wheedl'd and canted into
Peace and Toleration, when they know that they have once requited us with a
civil War, and once with an intolerable and unrighteous Persecution for our
former Civility.

Nay to encourage us to be easy with them, 'tls apparent that they never had
the Upper-hand of the Church, but they treated Her with all the Severity; with
all the Reproach and Contempt as was possible: What Peace, and what Mercy did
they show the Loyal Gentry of the Church of England in the Time of their
Triumphant Commonwealth? How did they put all the Gentry of England to Ransom,
whether they were Actually in Arms for the King or not, making People compound
for their Estates, and starve their Families? How did they treat the Clergy of
the Church of England, sequestered the Ministers, devoured the Patrimony of the
Church, and divided the Spoil, by sharing the Church Lands among their
Soldiers, and turning her Clergy out to starve? just such Measure as they have
meted, should be measured them again.

Charity and Love is the known Doctrine of the Church of England, and it is
plain She has put it in Practice toward the Dissenters, even beyond what they
ought, till She has been wanting to Her Self, and in effect, unkind to own
Sons; particularly, in the too much Lenity of King James the First, mentioned
before; had he so Rooted the Puritans from the Face of the Land, which he had
an Opportunity early to have done, they had not had the Power to vex the Church,
as since they have done.

IN the Days of King Charles the Second, how did the Church reward their Bloody
Doings with Lenity and Mercy, except the Barbarous Regicides of the pretended
Court of Justice: not a Soul suffered for all the Blood in an Unnatural War:
King Charles came in all Mercy and Love, cherished them, preferred them,
employed them, withheld the Rigor of the Law, and oftentimes, even against the
Advice of his Parliament, gave them Liberty of Conscience; and how did they
requite him which the villainous Contrivance to Depose and Murder him and his
Successor at the Rye-Plot.

KING James, as if Mercy was the inherent Quality of the Family, began his
Reign with unusual Favor to them: Nor could their joining with the Duke of
Monmouth against him move him to do himself Justice upon them; but that
mistaken Prince thought to win them by Gentleness and Love, Poclaim'd an
Universal Liberty to them, and rather discountenanced the Church of England
than them; how they requited him all the World knows.

THE late Reign is too fresh in the Memory of all the World to need a Comment;
how under Pretense of joining with the Church in redressing some Grievances,
they pusht Things to that Extremity, in Conjunction wirh some mistaken
Gentlemen, as to Depose the late King, as if the Grievance of the Nation could
not have been redressed but by the absolute Ruin of the Prince: Here Is an
instance of their Temper, their Peace, and Charity. To what height they carried
themselves during the Reign of a King of their own; how they crope into all
Places of Trust and Profit; how they Insinuated into the Favor of the King,
and were at first preferred to the highest Places in the Nation; how they
engrossed the Ministry, and above all, how pitifully they Managed, is too plain
to need any Remarks.

BUT particularly their Mercy and Charity, the Spirit of Union, they tell us so
much of, has been remarkable in Scotland, if any Man would see the Spirit of a
Dissenter, let him look into Scotland: there they made entire Conquest of the
Church, trampled down the Sacred Orders, and suppressed the Episcopal Government,
with an absolute, and as they suppose irretrievable Victory, though it is
possible, they may find themselves Mistaken: Now 'twou'd be a very proper
Question to ask their Impudent Advocate, the Observator, Pray how much Mercy
and Favor did the Members of the Episcopal Church find in Scotland, from the
Scotch Presbyterian Government; and I shall undertake for the Church of
England, that the Dissenters shall still receive as much here, though they
deserve but little.

In a small Treatise of the Sufferings of the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland,
'twill appear what Usage they met with, how they not only lost their Living,
but in several Places, were plundered and abused in their Persons; the
Ministers that could not Conform, turned out with numerous Families, and no
Maintenance, and hardly Charity enough left to relieve them with a bit of
Bread; and the Cruelties of the Parties are innumerable, and not to be
attempted in this short Piece.

And now to prevent the distant Cloud which they perceived to hang over their
Heads from England; with a true Presbyterian Policy, they put in for a Union of
Nations, that England might unite their Church with the Kirk of Scotland, and
their Presbyterian Members sit in our House of Commons, and their Assembly of
Scotch canting Long Cloaks in our Convocation, what might have been if our
Phanatick, Whiggish Statesmen continued, God only knows, but we hope we are
out of fear of that now.

It Is alled'd by some of the Faction, and they began to Bully us with it; that
if we will not Unite with them, they will not settle the Crown with us again, but
when Her Majesty Dies, will choose a King for themselves.

If they will not, we must make them, and it is not the first time we have let them
know that we are able. The Crowns of these Kingdoms have not so far disowned
the Right of Succession, but they may retrieve it again, and if Scotland thinks
to come off from a Successive to an Elective State of Government, England has
not promised not to assist the Right Heir, and put them into Possession,
without any regard to their ridiculous Settlements.

THESE are the Gentlemen, these their ways of treating the Church, both at home
and abroad. Now let us examine the Reasons they pretend to give, why we should
be favorable to them, why we should continue and tolerate them among us.

First, THEY are very Numerous, they say, They are a great Part of the Nation,
and we cannot Suppress them.

To this may be answered, 1. THEY are not so Numerous as the Protestants in
France, and yet the French King effectually cleared the Nation of them at once,
and we don't find he Misses them at Home.

But I am not of the Opinion they are so Numerous as is pretended, their Party
is more Numerous than their Persons, and those mistaken People of the Church
who are misled and deluded by their wheedling Artifices, to join with them,
make their Party the greatter; but those will open their Eyes, when the
Government shall set heartily about the Work, and come off from them, as some
Animals, which they say, always desert a House when it is likely to fall.

2 dly. The more Numerous, the more Dangerous and therefore the more Need to
Suppress them; and God has suffered us to bear them as Goads in our Sides, for
not utterly extinguishing them long ago.

3 dly. If we are to allow them, only because we cannot Suppress them, then it
ought to be tried whether we can or no; and I am of Opinion it is easy to be
done, and could prescribe Ways and Means, if it were proper, but I doubt not
the Government will find effectual Methods for the rooting the Contagion from
the Face of this Land.

ANOTHER Argument they use, which is this, That it is a Time of War, and we have
need to Unite against the common Enemy.

WE answer, This common Enemy had been no Enemy, if they had not made him so;
he was quiet, in peace, and no way disturbed, or encroach'd upon us, and we
know no reason we had to quarrel with him.

But further, We make no question but we are able to deal with this common
Enemy without their help; but why must we unite with them, because of the
Enemy? Will they go over to the Enemy, if we do not prevent it by a Union with
them? -- We are very well contented they should, and make no question we shall
be ready to deal with them and the common Enemy too, and better without them
than with them.

Besides, if we have a common Enemy, there is the more need to be secure
against our private Enemies; if there is one common Enemy, we have the less
need to have an Enemy in our Bowels.

'Twas a great Argument some People used against Suppressing the Old Money,
that 'twas a Time of War, and 'twas too great a Risque for the Nation to run,
if we should not master it, we should be undone: and yet the Sequel proved the
Hazard was not so great, but it might be mastered, and the Success was
answerable. The Suppressing the Dissenters is not a harder Work, nor a Work of
less Necessity to the Public: we can never enjoy a settled uninterrupted Union
and Tranquillity in this Nation, till the Spirit of Whiggisme, Faction, and
Schism is melted down like the Old-Money.

To talk of the Difficulty, is to Frighten our selves with Chimaeras and
Notions of a Powerful Party, which are indeed a Party without Power;
Difficulties often appear greater at a distance, than when they are searched
into with Judgment, and distinguished from the Vapors and Shadows that attend
them.

We are not to be frightened with it; this Age is wiser than that, by all our
own Experience, and theirs too; King Charles the First, had early suppressed this
Party, if he had took more deliberate Measures. In short, it is not worth
arguing, to talk of their Arms, their Monmouths, and Shafts^urys, and Argiles
are gone, their Dutch-Sanctuary is at an end, Heaven has made way for their
Destruction, and if we do not close with the Divine occasion, we are to blame
our selves, and may remember that we had once an opportunity to serve the
Church of England, by extirpating her implacable Enemies, and having let slip
the Minute that Heaven presented, may experimentally Complain, Post est Occasio
Calva.

Here are some popular Objections in the way.

As First, THE Queen has promised them, to continue them in their Tolerated
Liberty; and has told us She will be a Religious Observer of Her Word.

WHAT Her Majesty will do we cannot help, but what, as the Head of the Church,
She ought to do, is another Case: Her Majesty has promised to Protect and
Defend the Church of England, and if She cannot effectually do that without the
Destruction of the Dissenters, She must of course dispense with one Promise to
comply with another. But to answer this Cavil more effectually: Her Majesty did
never promise to Maintain the Toleration, to the Destruction of the Church; but
it is upon supposition that it may be compatible with the well being and safety
of the Church ch which She had declared She would take especial Care of: Now if
these two Interests clash, it is plain Her Majesty's Intentions are to Upholds,
Protect, Defend, and Establish the Church, and this we conceive is impossible.

Perhaps it may be said, THAT the Church is in no immediate danger from the
Dissenters, and therefore it is time enough: But this is a weak Answer.

For first, IF a Danger be real, the Distance of it is no Argument against, but
rather a Spur to quicken us to prevention, lest it be too late hereafter.

And 2dly, Here is the Opportunity, and the only one perhaps that ever the
Church had to secure her self, and destroy her Enemies.

The Representatives of the Nation have now an Opportunity, the Time is come
which all good Men have wished for, that the Gentlemen of England may serve the
Church of England; now they are protected and encouraged by a Church of England
Queen.

What will ye do for your Sister in the Day that She shall be spoken for?

If ever you will establish the best Christian Church in the World.

If ever you will suppress the Spirit of Enthusiosm.

If ever you will free the Nation from the viperous Brood that have so long
sucked the Blood of their Mother.

If ever you will leave your Posterity free from Faction and Rebellion, this is
the time.

This is the time to pull up this Heretical Weed of Sedition, that has so long
disturbed the Peace of our Church, and poisoned the good Corn.

BUT, says another Hot and Cold Objector, this is renewing Fire and Faggot,
reviving the Act De Heret. Comburendo: This will be Cruelty in its Nature, and
Barbarous to all the World.

I answer, IT IS Cruelty to kill a Snake or a Toad in cold Blood, but the Poison
of their Nature makes it a Charity to our Neighbors, to destroy those
Creatures, not for any personal Injury received, but for prevention; not for
the Evil they have done, but the Evil they may do.

Serpents, Toads, Vipers, etc. are noxious to the Body, and poison the
sensative Life; these poison the Soul, corrupt our Posterity, ensnare our
Children, destroy the Vitals of our Happiness, our future Filicity, and
contaminate the whole Mass.

Shall any Law be given to such wild Creatures? Some Beasts are for Sport, and
the Huntsmen give them advantages of Ground; but some are knocked on the Head
by all possible ways of Violence and Surprise.

I do not prescribe Fire and Faggot, but as Scipio said of Carthage, Delenda
est Carthago, They are to be Rooted out of this Nation, is ever we will Live in
Peace, serve God, or enjoy our own: As for the Manner, I leave it to those
Hands who have a Right to execute God's Justice on the Nations and the Church's
Enemies,

BUT if we must be frighted from this Justice under the specious Pretenses, and
odious Sense of Cruelty, nothing will be effected: 'Twill be more Barbarous to
our own Children, and dear Posterity, when they shall reproach their Fathers,
as we do ours, and tell us, ' You had an Opportunity to Root out this Cursed
Race from the World, under the Favor and Protection of a true English Queen;
and out of your foolish Pity you spared them, because, forsooth, you would not
be Cruel, and now our Church is Suppressed and Persecuted, our Religion trampled
under Foot, our Estates Plundered, our Persons Imprisoned, and dragged to
Jails, Gibbets and Scaffolds; your sparing this Amalekite Race is our
Destruction, your Mercy to them proves Cruelty to your poor Posterity.

HOW just will such Reflections be, when our Posterity shall fall under the
merciless Clntches of this uncharitable Generation, when our Church shall be
swallowed up in Schism, Faction, Enthusiasm, and Confusion; when our Government
shall be devolved upon Foreigners, and our Monarchy dwindled into a Republic.

'Twou'd be more rational for us, if we must spare this Generation, to summon
our own to a general Massacre, and as we have brought them into the World Free,
send them out so, and not betray them to Destruction by our supine Negligence,
and then cry it is Mercy.

Moses was a Merciful Meek Man, and yet with what Fury did he run through the
Camp, and cut the Camp, and cut the Throats of Three and thirty thousand of his
dear Israelites, that were fallen into Idolatry; what was the reason? 'Twas
Mercy to the rest, to make these Examples, to prevent the Destruction of the
whole Army.

How many Millions of future Souls we save from Infection and Delusion, if the
present Race of poisoned Spirits were purged from the Face of the Land.

IT IS vain to trifle in this matter, the light foolish handling of them by
Mulcts, Fines, etc. it is their Glory and their Advantage, if the Gallows
instead of the Counter, and the Galleys instead of the Fines, were the Reward
of going to a Conventicle, to preach or hear, there would not be so many
Sufferers, the Spirit of Martyrdom is over; they that will go to Church to be
chosen Sheriffs and Mayors, would go to forty Churches rather than be Hanged.

If one severe Law were made, and punctually executed, that who ever was found
at a Conventicle, should be Banished the Nation, and the Preacher be Hanged, we
should soon see an end of the Tale, they would all come to Church; and one Age
would make us all One again.

TO talk of 5 s. a Month for not coming to the Sacrament, and 1 s. per Week for
not coming to Church this is such a way of converting People as never was
known, this is selling them a Liberty to transgress for so much Money: If it be
not a Crime, why don't we give them full License? And if it be, no Price ought
to compound for the committing it, for that is selling a Liberty to People to
sin against God and the Government.

If it be a Crime of the highest Consequence both against the Peace and Welfare
of the Nation, the Glory of God, the Good of the Church, and the Happiness of
the Soul, let us rank it among capital Offenses, and let it receive a
Punishment in proportion to it.

We Hang Men for Trifles, and Banish them for things not worth naming, but an
Offense against God and the Church, against the Welfare of the World, and the
Dignity of Religion, shall be bought off for 5 s. this is such a shame to a
Christian Government, that it is with regret I transmit it to Posterity.

IF Men sin against God, affront his Ordinances, rebel against his Church, and
disobey the Precepts of their Superiors, let them suffer as such capital Crimes
deserve, so will Religion flourish, and this divided Nation be once again
united.

And yet the Title of Barbarous and Cruel will soon be taken off from this Law
too. I am not supposing that all the Dissenters in England should be Hanged or
Banished, but as in cases of Rebellions and Insurrections, if a few of the
Ringleaders suffer, the Multitude are dismissed, so a few obstinate People being
made Examples, there is no doubt but the Severity of the Law would find a stop
in the Compliance of the Multitude.

To make the reasonableness of this matter out of question, and more
unanswerably plain, let us examine for what it is that this Nation is divided
into Parties and Factions, and let us see how they can justify a Separation,
or we of the Church of England can justify our bearing the Insults and
Inconveniences of the Party.

ONE of their leading Pastors, and a Man of as much Learning as most among them
in his Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled, An Enquiry into the Occasional
Conformity, has these Words, P. 27. Do the Religion of the Church and the
Meeting-bouses make two Religions? Wherein do they differ? The Substance of the
same Religion is common to them both; and the Modes and Accidents are the
things in which only they differ P. 28. Thirty nine Articles are given us for
the summary of our Religion, Thirty six contain the Substance of it, wherein we
agree; Three the additional Appendices, about which we have some differences.

Now, if as by their own acknowledgment, the Church of England is a true
Church, and the Difference between them is only in a few Modes and Accidents,
why should we expect that they will suffer Galleys, corporeal Punishment and
Banishment for these Trifles; There is no question but they will be wiser, even
their own Principles will not bear them out in it, they will certainly comply with
the Laws, and with Reason, and though at the first, Severity may seem hard, the
next Age will feel nothing of it, the Contagion will be rooted out, the Disease
being cured, there will be no need of the Operation, but if they should venture
to transgress, and fall into the Pit, all the World must condemn their
Obstinacy, as being without ground from their own Principles.

Thus the Pretense of Cruelty will be taken off, and the Party actually
suppressed, and the Disquiets they have so often brought upon the Nation,
prevented.

THEIR Numbers, and their Wealth, makes them Haughty, and that it is so far from
being an Argument to persuade us to forbear them, that it is a Warning to us,
without any more delay, to reconcile them to the Unity of the Church, or remove
them from us.

AT present, Heaven be praised, they are not so Formidable as they have been,
and it is our own fault if ever we suffer them to be so; Providence, and the
Church of England, seems to join in this particular, that now the Destroyers of
the Nations Peace may be overturned, and to this end the present Opportunity
seems to be put into our Hands.

To this end Her present Majesty seems reserved to enjoy the Crown, that the
Ecclesiastic as well as Civil Rights of the Nation may be restored by her Hand.

To this end the Face of Affairs have received such a Turn in the process of a
few Months, as never has been before; the leading Men of the Nation, the
universal cry of the People, the unanimous Request of the Clergy, agree in
this, that the Deliverance of our Church is at Hand.

For this end has Providence given us such a Parliament, such a Convocation,
such a Gentry, and such a Queen as we never had before.

AND what may be the Consequences of a Neglect of such Opportunities? The
Succession of the Crown has but a dark Prospect, another Dutch Turn may make
the Hopes of it ridiculous, and the Practice impossible: Be the House of our
future Princes never so well inclined, they will be Foreigners; and many Years
will be spent in suiting the Genius of Strangers to this Crown, and the
Interests of the Nation; and how many Ages it may be before the English Throne
be filled with so much Zeal and Candor, so much Tenderness, and hearty
Affection to the Church, as we see it now covered with, who can imagine.

It Is high time then for the Friends of the Church of England, to think of
Building up, and Establishing her, in such a manner, that She may be no more
Invaded by Foreigners, nor Divided by Factions, Schisms, and Error.

IF this could be done by gentle and easy Methods, I should be glad, but the
Wound is corroded, the Vitals begin to mortify, and nothing but Amputation of
Members can complete the Cure; all the ways of Tenderness and Compassion, all
persuasive Arguments have been made use of in vain.

THE Humor of the Dissenters has so increased among the People, that they hold
the Church in Defiance, and the House of God is an Abomination among them: Nay,
they have brought up their Posterity in such prepossest Aversions to our Holy
Religion, that the ignorant Mob think we are all Idolaters, and Worshippers of
Baal; and account it a Sin to come within the Walls of our Churches.

The primitive Christians were not more shie of a Heathen-Temple, or of Meat
offered to Idols, nor the Jews of Swine's Flesh, than some of our Dissenters
are of the Church, and the Divine Service solemnized therein.

THIS Obstinacy must be rooted out with the Profession of it, while the
Generation are left at liberty daily to affront God Almighty, and dishonor his
Holy Worship, we are wanting in our Duty to God, and our Mother the Church of
England.

How can we answer it to God, to the Church, and to our Posterity, to leave
them entangled with Fanaticism, Error, and Obstinacy, in the Bowels of the
Nation; to leave them an Enemy in their Streets, that in time may involve them
in the same Crimes, and endanger the utter Extirpation of Religion in the
Nation.

What Is the Difference betwixt this, and being subjected to the Power of the
Church of Rome, from whence we have reformed? If one be an extreme on one Hand,
and one on another, it is equally Destructive to the Truth, to have Errors
settled among us, let them be of what Nature they will.

Both are Enemies of our Church, and of our Peace, and why should it not be as
Criminal to admit an Enthusiast as a Jesuit? Why should the Papist with his
Seven Sacraments be worse than the Quaker with no Sacraments at all? Why should
Religious-houses be more intolerable than Meeting Houses -- Alas the Church of
England? What with Popery on one Hand, and Schismatics on the other; how has
She been Crucified between two Thieves.

Now let us Crucify the Thieves. Let her Foundations be Established upon the
Destruction of Her Enemies: The Doors of Mercy being always open to the
returning Part of the deluded People: Let the Obstinate be ruled with the Rod
of Iron.

Let all true Sons of so Holy and Oppressed a Mother, exasperated by her
Afflictions, harden their Hearts against those who have Oppressed Her.

And may God Almighty put it into the Hearts of all the Friends of Truth, to
lift up a Standard against Pride and Antichrist, that the Posterity of the Sons
of Error may be rooted out from the Face of this Land for ever --.

A brief Explanation of a late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Shortest Way with the
Dissenters.
THE Author professes he thought, when he wrote the Book, he should never need
to come to an Explication, and wonders to find there should be any reason for
it.

If any Man take the Pains seriously to reflect upon the Contents, the Nature
of the Thing, and the Manner of the Style, it seems Impossible to imagine it
should pass for any thing but an Irony.

That it is free from any Seditious design, either of stirring up the
Dissenters to any Evil Practice by way of prevention; much less of animating
others to their Destruction, will be plain, I think, to any Man that
understands the present Constitution of England, and the Nature of our
Government.

But since Ignorance, or Prejudice has led most Men to a hasty Censure of the
Book, and several poor People are like to come under the Displeasure of the
Government for it, in Justice to those who are in danger to suffer for it; in
Humble submission to the Parliament and Council, who may be offended at it; and
in Courtesy to all mistaken People, who it seems have not Penetrated into the
real design: The Author presents the World with the Native Genuine Meaning and
Design of the Paper, which he hopes may allay the Anger of the Government, or
at least satisfy the minds of such as imagine a design to Inflame and Divide
us.

The Paper, without the least retrospect to, or concern in the Public Bills in
Parliament, now depending; or any other Proceedings of either House, or of the
Government relating to the Dissenters, whose Occasional Conformity the Author
has constantly opposed, has its immediate Original from the Virulent Spirits of
some Men who have thought fit to express themselves to the same Effect, in
their Printed Books, though not in Words so plain, and at length, and by an Irony
not Unusual; stands as a fair answer to several Books Published in this Liberty
of the Press; which, if they had been handed to the Government with the same
temper as this has, would no question have found the same Treatment.

The Sermon Preached at Oxford, the New Association, the Poetical Observator,
with numberless others; have said the same thing, in terms very little darker,
and this Book stands fair to let those Gentlemen know that what they design can
no farther take with Mankind than as their real meaning stands disguised by
Artifice of words; but that when the Persecution and Destruction of the
Dissenters, the very thing they drive at, is put into plain English, the whole
Nation will start at the Notion, and Condemn the Author to be Hanged for his
Impudence.

The Author humbly hopes he shall find no harder Treatment for plain English
without Design, than those Gentlemen for their Plain Design in Duller and
Darker English.

Any Gentlemen who have Patience to peruse the Author of the New Association,
will find Gallows, Galleys, Persecution and Destruction of the Dissenters are
directly pointed at, as fairly intended, and designed as in this shortest way,
as, had it been real, can be pretended; there is as much Virulence against a
Union with Scotland, against King WILLIAM's Government, and against the Line of
Hannover there is as much Noise and Pains taken in Mr. S -- s Sermon to blacken
the Dissenters, and thereby to qualify them for the Abhorrence of all Mankind,
as is possible.

The meaning then of this Paper is in short to tell these Gentlemen,

1. That it is Nonsense to go round about, and tell us of the Crimes of the
Dissenters, to prepare the World to believe they are not fit to Live in a
Humane Society, that they are Enemies to the Government, and Law, to the QUEEN,
and the Public Peace, and the like; the shortest way, and the soonest, would
be to tell us plainly that they would have them all hanged, Banished and
Destroyed.

2. But withal to acquaint those Gentlemen who fancy the time is come to bring
it to pass, that they are mistaken, for that when the thing they mean, is put
into plain English, the whole Nation replies with the Assyrian Captain, Is thy
Servant a Dog, that he should do these things? The Gentlemen are mistaken in
every partlcular, it will not go down, the QUEEN, the Council, the Parliament
are all Offended, to have it so much as suggested, that such a thing was
possible to come into their Minds; and not a Man, but a Learned Mercer, not far
from the Corner of Fanchurch-street, has been found to approve it.

Thus a poor Author has ventured to have all Mankind call him Villain and
Traitor to his Country and Friends, for making other Peoples thoughts speak in
his Words.

From this Declaration of his real design, he humbly hopes the Lords of Her
Majesty's Council, or the House of Parliament, will be no longer offended, and
that the poor People in trouble on this Account shall be Pardoned or Excused.

He also desires that all men who have taken Offense at the Book, mistaking the
Authors design; will suffer themselves to think again, and withhold their
Censure till they find themselves qualified to make a Venture like this for the
good of their Native Country.

As to Expressions which seem to reflect upon Persons or Nations; he declares
them to be only the Cant of the Nonjuring Party Exposed, and thinks it very
necessary to let the World know that it is their usual Language with which they
Treat the Late KING, the Scotch Union, and the Line of Hannover.

It Is hard, after all, that this should not be perceived by all the Town, that
not one man can see it, either Churchman or Dissenter.

That not the Dissenters themselves can see that this was the only way to
satisfy them, that whatever the Parliament might think fit to do to restrain
Occasional Communion, Persecution and Destruction was never in their intention,
and that therefore they have nothing to do but to be quiet and easy.

For any thing in the manner of the Paper which may offend either the
Government, Parliament, or private Persons, the Author humbly begs their
Pardon, and protesting the Honesty of his intention, resolves, if the poor
People now in Trouble may be excused, to throw himself upon the Favor of the
Government rather than others shall be ruined for his mistakes.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A DISSENTER AND THE OBSERVATOR. CONCERNING The Shortest way
with the Dissenters.
Dissen. PRAY Sir, are you the Author of the Observator?


Obser. Suppose it Sir, what then?


Dis. Nay, don't be Angry, are you the reputed Author? A. Come off you Taught
me in one of your Papers about Mr. F.


Obs. And what then?


Dis. Why I wanted a little Discourse with you.


Obs. If it be Civil, as you say, you are Welcome, but you begin odly.


Dis. My Questions may be Blunt, but you are not bound to Answer them, but let
that be as you like 'em.

First, Pray who do you reckon is the Author of this Devilish Book, called, The
Shortest Way?


Obs. I shall Answer most of your Questions with a Question, I believe, and
begin with you here.

Do you think my Name is Mr. Bellamy, that you take me for an Informer? Read
the Gazette, there you have the Man with the Sharp Chin, and a Dutch Nose.


Dis. Ay, but Sir, we begin to doubt that is not the true Author, that he has
been only made the Tool of some other Party, who now they find the World
Exasperated at it, have slipped out of the Noose, and left him it; we begin to be
afraid the thing is a Reality, and there is such a design on foot.


Obs. Your Answer, like Parson Jacobs Text, ought to be taken a pieces and
Explained.

1, If you are not sure he is the Author, you Dissenters have done him a great
deal of wrong, for you have railed at him more than all the rest of the World,
and charged him with more Crimes than it is well possible for one Man to be
Guilty of.

2. And yet by supposing him not to be the Author, yon suppose him to be very
Honest to his Friends, that he bears all this without discovering them

3. As for your fears of a real design, to put the Shortest way in practice
upon you, no Question there are abundance of People in the World, who would be
glad there was not one of you left; I believe no Body doubts it.


Dis. Pray who do you think they are?


Obs. Sir your humble Servant; no Bellamy, I tell you not I Sir: If I were in a
Plot with the Devil, I le never Evidence, besides Sir, I have no mind to have
my Nose and Chin described, but if you please I Will answer you Negatively, who I
believe is not concerned in it.


Dis. That may be some Satisfaction, Sir.


Obs. Not the Queen Sir, not the Parliament, not the Council, not the Army, not
the Ministers of State, not the Government.


Dis. Thou art a safe Man, thou wilt never go to Newgate for Negatives.


Obs. No Sir, nor for Positives neither if I can help it; but you have had your
Will at Catechizing, and I ought to have my turn, let me ask you a few
Questions too.


Dis. You are welcome.


Obs. Pray why are you Dissenters Angry at the Book called, The Shortest Way;
It Is a little Mysterious, Sir, that tho the Church Men are Affronted, because
'twas Written against them, and the Dissenters are Affronted, because it is
Wrote against them too, I don't well understand it, one sort must be Fools,
that is certain.


Dis. I don't care whether I understand it or no, he is a Rogue, a Villain, and
I wish the Government had him, if I knew where he was, I Would deliver him up, and
abate them the 501.


Obs. Spoken like a Dissenter truly, so that I find you are Angry at him,
because you don't understand him and the Government because they do.


Dis. You are so sharp upon me, I do understand a little too, I understand he
meddl'd with that he had nothing to do with, and he is a Man they say who has
been the occasion of all this Persecution which is coming upon us, by railing
at Occasional Conformity.


Obs. If he exposed you for Occasional Conformity, it is what you ought to have
Rectified your selves, that you need not have been exposed for it; and in that
he was your Friend, for had you took the hint, and exploded the Practice, there
had been no need of an Act of Parliament to force you to it.


Dis. But what had he to do with that?


Obs. Nay, what had Mr. How to do to meddle with it afterward, I Will assure you
his Name is down in my Pocketbook, and when any Man in England defends a Cause
worse, I Will put his name out, and put to others Name in: But pray Sir, why do
you call this bringing Persecution upon you; do you suppose the Occasional Bill
will be a Persecution?


Dis. Without doubt it will.


Obs. What sort of Persecution can you call it? it cannot be a Persecution for
Conscience sake.


Dis. Why so Sir?


Obs. Why pray Sir, suppose one of your Brethren Dissenters, who can go to the
Meeting to Day, and to the Church to Morrow; take the Sacrament to Day fitting,
and to Morrow to get a good place, go to Church and take it kneeling; wipe his
Mouth and go home to Dinner, and so to Meeting again; suppose this Gentleman
should be put up for Sherriff, or Lord Mayor, can this Man pretend Conscience
not to Conform? I tell you Sir, Mr. How must make a better Answer to the matter
before I can be convinced, you may call it Persecution but it can never be for
Conscience sake.


Dis. Persecution is Persecution, let it be for what sake it will, every man
ought to be at liberty.


Obs. Ay that is true, I am for Liberty for every man to serve God as is most
agreeable to his Conscience: But this is not serving God at all: besides Sir, I
could easily make it appear, this Act is for your Advantage, if you were a sort
of People to be convinced.


Dis. Pray, how Sir?


Obs. Why Sir, it will purge you of all your half in half Professors. That Is
one thing; then it will put all those Gentlemen into a capacity of being in
places and Parliaments, who though by this Act they are separated from you, and
rejoined to the Church because they can conform, will still be friends to your
Interest in all Public Concerns; and therefore had I been to word the Bill so
as to have done most harm, it should have excluded all that ever were
Dissenters, and have forced you to continue so, and not have accepted your
return to the Church without a public Repentance.


Obs. Well, well, you may persuade us it is for our advantage, but we don't like
it, and therefore we hate him for meddling with it; for what had he to do with
it?


Obs. About as much as you and I have to do with him, if a man meddles with
what does not concern him, that is his Fault, and if we who really have nothing
to do with him, meddle with him, that is our Fault, let the Government alone
with him, have you nothing else to talk no?


Dis. Why all the Town has talked of him as well as we.


Obs. Yes, and reckoned up all his Faults, all the sins that ever he committed
in his Life, and abundance more; be the man who he will, and what he will, I
don't see but the best of us would be loath all the Faults we have should be
reckoned up and writ in our Foreheads, as his are.


Dis. Oh, he has been a most wicked Wretch.


Obs. You force a man to be an Advocate for One he has no kindness for; a
wicked wretch you say; why has he been a Thief, a Murderer?


Dis. No no, I don't mean that way.


Obs. What has he been Clipper or Coyner?


Dis. No no, nor that neither.


Obs. Has he been a Whoremaster or a Drunkard, or a Swearer?


Dis. No, I cannot say so neither, but he broke and cannot pay his Debts.


Obs. If you had said he had broke and will not pay his Debts, you had said more
to the purpose.

But I must do one piece of Justice to the man, though I love him no better than
you do, that is this: That meeting a Gentleman in a Coffee-House, where I and
every body else was railing at him, the Gentleman took us up with this short
Speech.

Gentlemen, said, he, I know this D' Foe as well as any of you, and I was one
of his Creditors, and I Compounded with him, and discharged him fully; and
several Years afterward he sent for me, and though he was clearly discharged he
paid me all the Remainder of his Debt Voluntarily, and of his own accord: And
he told me, that as fast as God should enable him, he Intended to do so with
every Body; when he had done, he desired me to set my Hand to a Paper to
acknowledge it, which I readily did, and found a great many Names to the Paper,
before me, and I think my self bound to own it, though I am no Friend to the Book
he has wrote, no more than you. What do you think of this Story?


Dis. Think of it, I don't belive it!


Obs. I cannot help that, nor I care not whether you do or no, but I assure you
after I heard it, I never railed at him any more.


Dis. Ay, but I Will rail at him for all that.


Obs. You Dissenters are in something like Case with the Pharisees; when the
Question was put to them by our Savior about John's Baptism; whether it was
from Heaven or of Men. If a Man should ask you of the Shortest Way, was it
wrote for you or against you? If you should say for us, you would be asked why
then are you so mad with the Author? And if you should say against you, the
People would laugh at you; for all Men but you see into it, and that a
Dissenter wrote it; you must say therefore, we cannot tell, and consequently,
that you rail at the Author for you cannot tell what.


Dis. But we don't count him a Dissenter.


Obs. He has all the Marks of a Dissenter upon him, but want of Brains.


Dis. Why are we so empty of Brains pray?


Obs. There is reason for it, God has given you Equivalents.


Dis. I don't understand you.


Obs. That Is a further Testimony of your being a Dissenter; why if you will
have it, take it, I say, God Almighty would have seemed unkind to you, if he
had not given you a great deal of Grace? For he has given you but little Wit.


Dis. Well, I hope they will take him still, I should be glad to see him hanged
for it, I am sure he deserves it, I heard one met him a little while ago, would
I had been there.


Obs. Alone do you mean Sir, or to have helped the other?


Diss. Any how, so I could but have taken him.


Obs. Ay, and they say 'twas one of your own Party too, and one that would fain
have got the 50 l. but that he drew upon him, Frighted him out of his Wits and
made him down of his Knees and Swear that if ever he met him again, he should
shut his eyes till he was half a mile off him.


Diss. I don't think he is such a fighting Fellow.


Obs. Do you know him?


Diss. No not I.


Obs. So I thought by your Charity and good Nature; I know him not neither, but
the man has the Government upon his Back already, and if they take him they will
avenge your Quarrel for you. Let him alone, it is Ingenerous, as I said before
in print, to triumph over a Man in his Affliction: 'Twas but a little while ago
he wrote a Book that pleased you, and then you cried him up as much as now you
cry him down.


Dis. What Book pray?


Obs. Why the New Test of Church of England Loyalty.


Dis. Did he write that Book?


Obs. I told you I was no Informer, go ask Mr. Bellamy;


Dis. Why truly that was a good thing, I liked it fully. 'Twas well done, but
this cursed Shortest-way is the Devil, he must be turned Rogue now, what ever
he was then.


Obs. Why, this it is to oblige a Dissenter, if you serve them a hundred times
it is well, but once get your Head in the Pillory for them, and they will be the
first to palt you with rotten Eggs; what cannot you set down one good thing and
one bad, and balance with him: You understand Accounts well enough; but you
Dissenters, are like a Shopkeeper I knew, who having Traded 20 Year with a
Gentleman, and served all his Family and gotten a great deal of Money by him,
at last the poor Gentleman fell to decay, and owing him 40 s. the Shopkeeper
abused him, and called him all the Knaves and Rogues for cheating him of 40 s.


Dis. No, no, this has spoilt all.


Obs. Well, but we'll go back further with you There Is the Reformation of
Manners, and the True-born Englishman there he pleased you for certain, for he
is for reforming your Magistrates.


Dis. I don't understand them, I am for Reformation as much as any Body.


Obs. But what say you to the Legion Paper?


Dis. Ay that was a good thing indeed.


Obs. Well, but if he had been taken in doing that, would you not have called
him as many Rogues then as you do now?


Dis. No indeed, should I not?


Obs. But I don't find you call him one Rogue the less for it now, and that is
hard.


Dis. Well, But you see he denies it, and challenges you to prove it.


Obs. Ay, deny it, I told you he was no Fool, indeed I am not glad I Printed
it, for though it is charged upon him by common Fame, I am not for hanging Men
upon suppositions as you do.


Dis. Well, you do well, and I think it is a little hard; the man is gone, and
though he has done ill, he might mean no harm, and so let him alone, I reckon you
will not be long before you follow him.


Obs. And when I am gone, you will call me as many Rogues as you do him, will not
you?


Dis. No, it may be I shall not, but I can tell you of some that do already.


Obs. It Is all one to me, common Fame like a common Strumpet, jilts every Body,
but methinks Slander and Reproach, out of the Mouth of a Dissenter comes with
some more than common ill savor.


Dis. They think they have good reason for it upon you.


Obs. And I think not, pray what are their good Reasons?


Dis. For abusing your Friends?


Obs. My Friends, prithee who are they? I know but very few I have, and I am
very sure I never abused them.


Dis. They all agree you would not be permitted to write so long, but the Party
would have ruffled you before now, only you court them and please them by a
Side-Wind, with your railing at King William's Friends sometimes.


Obs. King William's Enemies you mean; look, Sir, I have as much Veneration for
the Memory of King William as any of you, and do but once prove them to be King
William's Friends, and I Will own all you say, and recant all I have wrote.


Dis. It Is easy to prove they were his Friends.


Obs. Pray Sir, don't you Tax me with abusing King William, and abuse him your
self, I have proved sufficiently they were the Nations Enemies: Now if you can
prove the Nations Enemies were K. William's Friends, you will make a fine spot of
Work on it indeed.


Dis. The Nations Enemies! That is, because being in great places, they got as
much Money as they could, and so would you do, and so have all the Favorites
that ever were or will be.


Obs. When ever Favorites did, do or shall get Money by rapine or injustice,
and oppression of the Subject, they were and will be the Nations Enemies and
their Sovereigns too.


Dis. But what have you to do with it? It Is none of your Business.


Obs. It Is every Man's business to discover mischief, fraud and ill design, as
much as every Man who first spies Fire, has a duty upon him to raise the
Neighbors: I am a Subject, and am Cheated among the rest.


Dis. You Cheated, why what have you to lose?


Obs. Why, my Liberty, which you said but now, every Man had a Right to, and my
Money when I have it; what is that to you, how little, or much I have, and how
do you know how much I may have hereafter.


Dis. Nay, they say you get Money by Railing, and so you may soon be Rich.


Obs. Then I Rail for something, and you get none, and yet you Rail; Pray who
has the best Excuse for it?


Dis. He that has the best Reason for it, not he that gets the most Money by it.


Obs. I believe if you could get Money by Railing, you would count it the best
Reason in the World.


Dis. Why so?


Obs. Because you are so willing to Rail at any Body, when you know not for
what, nor why, and charge People with Crimes they never Committed; of all your
Christian Duties, you make the least use of your Charity.


Dis. Why, since you put so hard, I can tell the time when you abused King
William himself, as openly as you durst speak it, or any body dare Print,
particularly in a Poem of yours, called the Foreigners.


Obs. How do you prove 'twas mine?


Dis. Nay, they say 'twas yours, you were the Reputed Author, as you said in
another case.


Obs. I tell you, there is no People in the World so forward to Condemn a Man
upon hear say, as the Dissenters, when they have a Mind to slander a Man, they
take every thing upon trust, it is their Shortest Way.


Dis. These Scribbling People are always meddling with things they have nothing
to do with; what have you to do with Kings and Favorites, or that the other
Fellow with the Shortest Way: You Pamphleteers are always Quacking with the
State.


Obs. Come let us turn the Tables, now it is my Play, what have you to do with
Acts of Parliaments; you Dissenters are always thrusting in your Oar too; what
have you to do to talk of Persecution and Acts against Occasional Conformity,
you are Mountebanking with the State too in every Coffee-House, Pray meddle
with your own Business.


Dis. We shall have to do with it, when we feel it.


Obs. I am persuaded if you were put to it severely, few of you would stay to
feel it, at least few of your Wealthy Members, few of Mr. Hows Mind, few of
such Dissenters as go from Meeting to Church, and can back-stroke and
fore-stroke, Communicate on both sides.


Dis. I wish they may not, but we are afraid 'twill not only be a Persecution,
but a very long one.


Obs. Why then you are beholding to the Author we talked of, for you see he is
for putting you out of your Pain, but I am of a different Opinion from you in
several of your darkest thoughts about Persecution.


Dis. Pray what is your Opinion?


Obs. 1. I am of Opinion that if your Enemies were true Masters of Politics,
they would not Persecute you at all, I take you to be a declining Party,
Toleration will be your Ruin; and if God in Mercy to you don't send a
Persecution among you, you are lost, you will all dwindle back into the Church
again; your old stock of Ministers dye off, your Owens, Mantons, Charnocks,
Clarksons, Baxters, and Bates's are gone; and Pray what can you name out of the
new Generation of your Leyden Doctors fit to succeed them.

2. The Occasional Bill at once carries off your Wealthy Members, who are the
support of your Clergy, and as Mr. William's very well observed at
Salters-Hall, If the Rich ones forsake you, the Party will be weakened so as to
make you fear the Dissolution of the whole. Indeed the Gentleman was in the
right, if the Wealthy Members quit the Congregations, 'twill make poor work for
the Ministers, and they like other People Generally do their Work best where
they have best Wages.


Dis. I thought you had Loved the Dissenters better than to abuse them at this
rate.


Obs. I don't abuse them, I wish them clear of all their Hypocrites, and that
there were none among them but what were Dissenters for mere Conscience: If
that were so, 'twould make their Enemies at Peace with them, they would never be
Persecuted; the Government would Cherish them, and be as tender of them as they
would desire. But to be plain with you, it is your own Pride, and Pushing at
great things has made you Obnoxious, and withal your discovering by an
Alternate double faced Conscience, that while you pretend to Dissent, and to
have tender Consciences, you can nevertheless Conform, if you please; this
makes your Enemies suspect your Honesty, and apprehend more trick and design in
you, than I hope they need. Nay, this gives your Enemies such advantage against
you, as you can never Answer.


Dis. I do not think any Man ought to be confined by Laws and Acts of
Parliaments about his Religion.


Obs. It may be I think so too; but Men ought to be Honest to their own
Principles, whether there were Laws or no; and if I see a Man pretend he cannot
Conform, and upon occasion I find he can, it makes me suspect his Honesty, and
if I once think a Man a Knave, I am not to blame to fence my self against him
by Laws: I tell you an Act of Parliament to keep you Honest, can never be
called Persecution.


Dis. Ay, if there was no more in it.


Obs. If there be any more in it, I wish there was not, I Am sure I know not
what is in it, and I believe you don't neither; Pray have you seen the Bill?


Dis. No not I, but I hear it is a very Terrible Bill.


Obs. True to the old way still, always to Judge before you Hear. Indeed I
forgot to ask you, but on my Conscience I don't believe you ever read the Book
of the Shortest way; Come, be Honest.


Dis. Read it, why the very Outside of that is enough for any Man to read; I
thank God I spend my time better.


Obs. I think you ought to spend your time better too, than to give your
Verdict upon any thing before you read it.


Dis. You are a strange Man, why every body says it is a horrible Book, and not
fit to be read, but what is that to this Act of Parliament?


Obs. Why thus much it is, that you cry out Persecution from this Act of
Parliament, and there is not a word of Persecution in it.


Dis. I think it is Persecution, if I must not be at Liberty to Worship God as I
think fit.


Obs. Still you are without Book, why you may be a Dissenter all the days of
your Life, and go to Meetings as long as you live, and never be troubled by
this Act.


Dis. I cannot imagine what you mean, why I must Pay, God knows what, if I am
seen at a Meeting.


Obs. Ay, Sir, that is after you have strained your Conscience from the Meeting
to the Church; after you have bob'd your Religion to be Sheriff of London, or
the like; and then want to go back again; but if you, to keep your Conscience,
can be content to be without these gay things called Places, you may be a
Dissenter to the end of the Chapter: So that this will only be a Persecution
for Honor sake, not for Conscience sake, and never fall upon you neither, till
you bring it upon your self.


Dis. Well, I hope it will not pass for all that.


Obs. I hope so too, but if it don't, it must be the Lords doing, and it will
be mavelous in our Eyes.


Dis. The House of Lords you mean, I suppose.


Obs. I must mean as you will have me, let it be how it will, but if I hope it
will not pass, it is from different reasons with you.


Dis. Pray, your reasons?


Obs. Because I am against (and ever shall be) Imposing any Religious Ordinance
or part of Worship as a Qualification for any Temporal Employment. Let the
Princes be at full liberty to employ who, or what sort of their Subjects they
see Cause. 2. Such impositions are a Bait to People to Banter their
Consciences, and to comply with that for a Preferment, which otherwise they
would not, and so seem to lead them into Temptation: But I don't know the
Contents of the Bill, therefore I Will say no more.


Diss. And I would not have it pass, because I take it to be a Foundation of
Persecution; it is but pulling down the Toleration next, and then we are all
undone.


Obs. You Faithless and Perverse Generation! Has not the QUEEN promised to
maintain your Toleration? Besides, what is that to the Bill?


Diss. Why should not we be afraid of it, as well as some of the Church-Party
have the confidence to hope it? Nay, to condemn the Toleration as
Antichristian, and threaten us with the having it overthrown.


Obs. Why these are for the Shortest way; you ought to rail at them as much as
you do at the Man with the hook Nose, and sharp Chin, and more too; and no
doubt but if you would turn Informer, you might hook their Noses into the
Gazett too, to be sure the Government would not allow of it; they would never
suffer the QUEEN to be so affronted.


Diss. I don't know how it is, such things are suffered daily. I heard our
Parson the other day say at a Public Dinner 'twou'd never be well with England
till some Course was taken to reconcile all Dissenters to the Church, Longest
way, or Sherrest, 'twas all one to him; he said he hoped to see the Church
flourish without them; and a great deal more, and worse than this.


Diss. That was a topping high-flying Gentleman indeed, and why did you not
acquaint the Government with it?


Diss. What do you think I am an Informer? My Name is not Bellamy any more than
yours, but pray why do you make so strange of it? Don't we hear daily People
expressing their high flying hopes that a Parliament in Scotland will restore
Episcopacy there, and yet has not the Queen given Her word, and published it in
our Gazett, that she will maintain the Presbyterian Government there.


Obs. Has she so? Then though they have the impudence to hope, you ought not to
have the ignorance to fear it. The QUEEN gave her Word to maintain it! be not
slow of Heart to believe. She has taken up the famous Motto of Q. Elizabeth,
Semper Eadem, and can you so much as doubt she will deface it, for a few Scotch
Bishops.


Diss. I am sorry for my fears, I beg Her Majesty's Pardon, there are so many
Turns and Windings in Law and State matters, that we know not what to say to
things.


Obs. Say! Why a promise is a promise, and you may depend upon it, she has
never broke her Word with us yet.


Diss. Aye, but what if the Parliament should do it?


Obs. Nay, if the Parliament does it, we do it our selves.


Diss. Very good, so that we may be undone, and the Toleration Bill taken away;
and yet the QUEEN be as good as Her Word still.


Obs. Yes Sir, so you may, whenever an Act of Parliament becomes so without the
Royal Assent, and when do you think that can be.


Diss. Why then these High-Flying Churchmen are very impudent Fellows, to
suggest such things of the QUEEN, and to bully us with overturning the
Toleration, and put us in such fears of what they will do to us, when it can
never be done without the QEEN's acting so directly against Her Royal-Promise.


Obs. Well, and what then?


Dis. Why I think they ought to be used as they used the Author of the Shortest
Way, Gazetted and a Reward for the Discoverer.


Obs. Or as you have used him rather, viz. Rail at them, for being of your own
side: you Dissenters are rare Fellows for Punishments, if God should have no
more Mercy on you, than you show to all Men that offend you, we should have
Plagues, Pestilence, and Famine every Year upon us; so now you are come about
again, these High-Flying Churchmen have Bully'd you with the fears of losing
your Toleration, come confess.


Diss. Yes.


Obs. And made you distrrst the QUEEN's Veracity.


Diss. Yes, GOD and the QUEEN forgive us.


Obs. And have Terrified you with what things they will do when they have pulled
down your Antichristian Toleration, have they not?


Dis. Ay, Ay.


Obs. And so you thought the Shortest Way was Wrote to make a beginning with
you, and to set the Dragoons of the Church upon your Backs; did you not?


Dis. It Is very true.


Obs. And continued of the same mind like an Ignoramus, though you heard 'twas
Wrote by one of your own Party.


Dis. Indeed I did.


Obs. Now pray, after so much patience as I have had with you, have a little
with me; and if I can, I Will set you right in your Thoughts of these things.

There are a sort of People among the Dissenters who can either Dissent or
Conform, as they find their Inclinations or Interest rather directs them, these
by their Wealth and Interest have always put themselves into good places, and
qualified themselves for that purpose, by taking the Sacrament: Of these
People, even the most moderate Church Men have an ill Opinion, and truly so
have Two Thirds of your own Friends, for it looks as if they were Men of no
Principles at all.

Against these Men the Act against Occasional Conformity is principally
designed, and if there was nothing else in the Bill, I believe no good Man
would be against it.

Concerning these things, Two sorts of People have been very grossly mistaken,
and upon their Mistakes have proceeded to Act very Foolishly.

First, The high Flying Church Party begun to think, all was a going their own
way, and that the Government would fall in with them, and do your business for
you, and away they run with the Notion, and Preach you down, and Print you
down, and Talk you down like Mad Men; there is Sermon upon Sermon, Pamphlet
upon Pamphlet: One says you are all Rogues and Hypocrites, another says you are
Enemies to the Government, one Flies at the Toleration, and tells the World
it is Destructive to the Nations Happiness, and the Politicians must pull it
down; another says it is Antichristian, and we cannot be true Sons of the Church
of England, if we don't pull it down; others like hare-brain'd Huntsmen that
over run the Hounds roar you down with full Cry, till they run themselves out
of Breath; others are for having you deprived of Voices in Elections of
Parliaments, in hopes of Arriving to that Blessed Day, when they shall have a
Parliament of their own Mind; and thus they Run before they are Sent, and
without Reflecting upon their ill grounded Zeal, without examining any
Authorities, other than their Passions, without regard to good manners, taking
no Notice of the Preamble of the Act of Parliament, which Declares against
Persecution, or the Honor and Sacred Promise of Her MAJESTY, given to make Her
Subjects easy, they blow up the Fire of Persecution and Destruction, whether
the Government will or no.

You are the next sort of People, who are mistaken, for being Naturally a
little Hypish, as the Beaus call it, troubled with the Spleen, and
Hypocondriack Vapors, this Cloud of Raillery so darkened your Understanding,
that you presently take these People and the QUEEN, these People and the
Government, these People and the Parliament, to be all of a mind; and the QUEEN
having displac't all your Friends, as it is but just, That all Princes should
employ who they please: And the Parliament falling on your Occasional
Conformers, and this Book of the Shortest way coming out altogether, the high
Church Party Thundered at you from the Press and the Pulpit: Away you run with
the Notion that you are all to be blown up, that all these Things aimed at your
Destruction, and that Fire and Faggot was at the Door.

But the Government is steady, and the QUEEN still has maintained her Motto,
the Parliament steers in the middle way, going about to restrain, but not to
destroy you; and taking no notice either of the heat of one party, or Folly of
the other, they hold the Balance of your Liberty between your exorbitant
License, and the other party's unchristian Fury; and in my opinion, thus far
are you safe.


Dis. But then why has not the Government thought fit to disown the Zeal of
these High-flyers, by punishment, and make Examples of some of them?


Obs. I told you, the Dissenters were all for Punishments and Examples, for the
same reason that they have not punished you for supecting the QUEEN's Honesty
to her word, charging the Parliament with going about to persecute you, and the
like; for this reason, because they are more merciful than both parties deserve.


Dis. 'Twould have convinced us very plainly of two very significant Things.
First, That there is such a Design, and then that the Authors of it received no
Countenance from Court.


Obs. Good Manners and Common Justice ought to have convinced you of the last,
and your Author of the Shortest way, to his Cost, opened your Eyes in the
first, if you had not wilfully shut them against the Light.

1. Good Manners would inform you, not to doubt the Word of your Prince, 'till
you had some reason from Her MAJESTY her self.

2. Common Justice commands us to suppose every Person just and honest, till
something appears to the contrary; and it is a very unchristian, uncharitable
way of teaching the QUEEN, That because some of the high Churchmen have had
the Indiscretion, without her Authority, to swagger you out of your Senses;
therefore you must suppose her Promise broken, and her Word of no value.

The Author of the Shortest way comes with a Lanthorn for you, and he sums up
all the black Things this high Party had published, into one General, and if
you had any Eyes, you might learn two Things from which he is like to pay dear
enough for teaching you.

First, From the general abhorrence Mankind showed of the Book, you might learn
that the destruction of our Party is a Cruelty not to be found in the English
Nature.

Secondly, From the Outcry made against it by that Party in particular, you
might learn who they were that were touched in the Book, and where the design
against them lay.

As to the Quarrel you Dissenters have at the Book, That Is a Mystery no Man can
Unriddle but your selves. It Is like Mr. Mead's Wheel within a Wheel, and a
further Testimony to the World that you are a most unaccountable People, whose
ways are past finding out.


Dis. So that you would go about to persuade me the Book was writ of our side.


Obs. First, Sir, it is hard to know what side you are of, and

Secondly, Sir, I know you too well to go about to persuade you to any thing,
whose peculiar Talent is to be unperswadeable; but if you will please to answer
me a few Questions you may perhaps persuade your self of something or other.


Dis. What Questions?


Obs. Why are the high Churchmen angry with him, while at the same time they
openly declare it is the only way to deal with you, and what they would feign be
at?


Dis. Truly you puzzle me a little there.


Obs. They are angry, because they take the Book as the Author meant it, and
you, because you take it as he wrote it, they as he meant, viz. to expose them,
and though they are heartily willing to do you a Kindness that way, and have
shown their good Will by their words, yet knowing they wanted Power to Execute
it, and being conscious to themselves that the Government was not of their
Opinion; they are enraged to have all their designs laid open in Minature, and
an Abridgment communicated to the World in true Billingsgate.


Dis. There may be some truth in this, but Pray why then is the Government so
angry with him? I believe I have puzzled you now.


Obs. No, no, the Government may have Reasons to be Angry that You nor I know
not of, nor have nothing to do with: But what if I should suppose,

That the Government not thinking any Person could be so Barbarous to harbor
such a Villainous Design as the Book suggests; are displeased at it as an
affront done to the Church of England to Father Principles of Cruelty and
Destruction upon her Members, which they are not guilty off.

I say, if I suppose this to be a Reason, I believe you cannot suppose a better.


Dis. I confess, I begin to have better Thoughts of the Government than I had.


Obs. I Am glad of that.


Dis. I begin to hope they will not Persecute us now, and as for Occasional
Conformity, what care I? I shall never be Lord Mayor or Common Councilman; If I
am called to it, it is time enough to come off then.


Obs. God Almighty is wonderfully beholden to you, when he calls you from a
middle State to a good place, you will take it for granted He calls you from the
Meeting to the Church, and you will be sure to come. But I tell you, you ought to
be so far from the fear of a Persecution, that if you have any respect to your
Party, you ought to pray for a Persecution upon them, or ye are all undone.


Dis. Why, thou art mad, thou art for the Shortest Way.


Obs. No, no, I an't for such Persecution neither, but I told you my mind
before, I am sure you have received more damage in your Interest as Dissenters,
and more weakened your Reputation as well as your Number, since the late
Tolleration, than ever your Enemies did for you by all the Penal Laws,
Informers, Fines, and Prisons of the last Persecution.


Dis. Well, but here is another danger upon us that we have not talk of yet, and
fear it will come upon us too.


Obs. Pray what is that?


Dis. We are afraid that this restless Party will overthrow our Settlement,
for they do not stick to talk that way.


Obs. We afraid, who do you mean by we? Are not the Church of England as much
concerned in the Settlement as you and more too, as they are the major part of
the Nation? And We (if you will give me leave to talk your way) We Protestants
fear nothing for our Settlement, and for this, I Will give you a Quotation from
the Man with the hook Nose, and sharp Chin, it may be you will not like it because
of the Author, but his words are these, The Settlement of the Crown (says he)
is the Basis of our Religion, Laws and Liberties. This is the solid Bottom on
which we all stand, and of which, with Respect to Civil Right, may be said
Other Foundation can no Man lay than that which is laid. It Is the Rock on which
we are all Built; and that Stone of which, according to the Scripture, it may
without Profaneness be said, Whosoever it falls upon, he will be broken to
pieces, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to Powder.

It Is the last thing the People of England will part with after all their
Estates, Wives and Children, Churches and Houses are destroyed.

It Is the Pledge of the Divine Goodness to the Nation, which they purchased at
the expense of 50 Millions of Money, and the Blood of above 100000 Englishmen
in eleven Years War.

'Twas one of the great things King William did for us, and the Treasure God
and His Majesty left in our Hands in trust for our Posterity; which if we part
with, our Children will curse our Memory, and digg us out of our Graves.

It Is a thing so Sacred the dissolving of it cannot be mentioned without a
Crime, nor so much as intended without being Guilty of Treason in the most
intense degree.

It Is the Solid Prop, upon which stands Her present Majesty's Throne, and the
right and just Title She has to Govern us.

It Is like the two Pillars in the House of Dagon whoever pulls them down will,
like Sampson be Buried in the Ruins, and pull the whole Nation upon their Heads.

I Fear nothing for this Settlement; the Parliament of England are the Trustees
for the seeing it forth coming to the People of England, and a Parliament of
England will never betray their trust.

The Parliament will not, and all the rest of Humane Power dare not attempt to
dissolve it, no Weapon formed against it can prosper.


Dis. Is this done by our Shortest Way Man?


Obs. The very same.


Dis. Well, I shall love him the better for it: But there is one thing more
still, what say you to the Prince of Wales? If ever he comes again you will be
Hanged, that is for certain.


Obs. And if ever we let him come we ought all to be Hanged, I can do no better
than refer you to the same Author.

The Act of Settlement (says he) and the Prince of Wales are the two Bucketts,
keep one but up and the other must be down, and put the one down, and the other
comes up of Course: There can be no pretense made to alter or dispose the
Settlement, but the bringing in the Prince of Wales; therefore whoever they are
that mention it, we ought to suppose they would be so understood.


Dis. So that you are of Opinion we are in no danger of our Settlement.


Obs. Indeed I am of the Opinion your Fears both of the Prince of Wales, and of
altering the Settlement, and of Persecution, are all groundless and equally so.
I would only advise the Dissenters to be honest to their own Principles; if
they can conform they ought to do it, if they cannot, no body forces them; let
them dissent, and not for the desire of preferment bring such a Scandal upon
their integrity, as if they were Men of no Principles. It Is scandalous to the
very Name of a Dissenter, and injurious to all the rest of that Body who are
honest and conscientious.


And so I bid you Farewell.
LEX TALIONIS. OR, AN ENQUIRY INTO The most Proper Ways to Prevent THE
PERSECUTION OF THE Protestants in France.
EVROPE has now for nine Years past been afflicted with a Bloody, a Cruel, and
a Destructive War, carried on with a vast Effusion of Blood and Treasure; and
in all Parts of it managed with more Eagerness and Fury, than any War among the
European Princes ever was in the Memory of Man.

The French, who are Masters of Address, used all the Skill and Cunning with
the Roman Catholic Princes, especially those of Italy, to have made it pass
for a War of Religion, thinking by that fineness to have drawn them off from
the Confederacy. But Innocent XI. who, 'twas likely, knew as much of Religion,
and the Interest of the Church, as the Statesmen of France, saw through that
Artifice, and readily agreed with the Emperor, and the King of Spain, That the
Growing Greatness of France, and the Measures laid for the Subjecting Europe to
her Government were really more dangerous things, and of more immediate
Consequence to the Public Liberty, than the Matter of Religion could be: And
therefore, though the Court of Rome made some seeming Difficulties at first; yet
the French having thrown off the Mask, and fallen upon his Catholic
Confederate the Duke of Savoy, the most Bigoted Romanist made no scruple to
entertain the Heretic Soldiers, to recall the banished Vaudois, to fight under
the Command of Protestant Generals, to accept of the Subsidial Supplies of
Protestant Money, and the protection of Protestant Armies; thereby evidently
declaring to the World, that this was a War of State, not of Religion; and that
the real Interest of Princes, is to preserve themselves, and their Subjects,
against a too powerful Invader, by Leagues and Assistances, let their Religious
Interests be what they will.

Nor have the Protestant Princes though their Forces in this Confederacy have
been much Superior, been backward to push on the Common Interest with their
utmost Vigor, but have with extraordinary cheerfulness assisted the Roman
Catholic Confederates with their Armies, Fleets, and Moneys; witness the
Subsidies paid to the Duke of Savoy, by the English and Dutch; the Army
maintained, under the Command of Duke Schombergh in English pay in Piedmont;
the Forces Shipped from England to Catalonia, to aid the Spaniard, which saved
the City of Barcelona a whole Year; Witness also the English Fleet Wintering at
Cadiz, under Admiral Russel; the Squadron sent to the West Indies, to Relieve
Carthagena: And indeed the whole Series of the War has been one continual
Instance of the Safety and Protection the Roman Catholic Countries have
enjoyed by the Sword and Power of the Protestant Interest.

So that it has been apparent beyond the power of Contradiction, that this has
been a War of State, not a War of Religion: Nor can I imagine, generally
speaking, that it can ever be the Interest of the Powers of Europe, take them
together, to Commence a War of Religion: For though it is true, That the Pope
always Exalted both his Power and Credit, in the blind Ages of bigoted
Devotion, by his Crusadoes and Holy Expeditions; yet since, the World has more
Years over its Head, and the Cheat has been discovered, Interest has prevailed
too much upon Devotion to be deceived any more at that rate: And the Reformed
Kingdoms of Europe, are too potent to be used so any more.

It Is true, the Protestant Religion has lost Ground in France; and that Kingdom
where once the Protestants were Strong enough to Contend with their Governors
for their Liberty, is now wholly Roman, at least seems to be so. But
notwithstanding that, I believe the Protestant Interest in Europe, very well
able to stand a shock with the Popish, when ever the Pope thinks fit to publish
another Bloody Jubilee, and display the Standard of St. Peter against St. Paul.
And not to descend to particulars, I shall only Draw up the several Kingdoms,
on each Side, who would form this Great Division in Case of such a War.

On the Roman Catholic Side,

There would be the Emperor, the Pope, the King of France, the King of Spain,
the King of Portugal, the King of Poland, the Princes of Italy, Five Electoral
Princes of Germany, and the Catholic Cantons of Swisserland.

On the Protestant Side,

The King of England, King of Denmark, King of Sweden, the Czar of Moscovy,
States of Holland, Three Electoral Princes of Germany, but those by far the
Strongest; the Protestant Cantons of Swisserland, the Grisons, Hungarians,
Transilvanians, and Moldaviaens.

In the first place, I think it would easily be granted, That the English,
Dutch, Dane, and Swede, United; would be able to Maintain so absolute a
Dominion of the Seas, as would entirely Ruin the Negotiation of the Catholic
Party, Beggar their Merchants, Starve their Islands, and Destroy all their
Trade: They should never be able to Build a Ship without Leave; their Ports
should be Bombarded and Destroyed, their Open Country be Ruined by Descents,
and all their Coasts continually Harrass'd and Alarmed by Fleets, and Volant
Parties.

What the Armies at Land could do, I referr to the History of the Present War,
and of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden; who, barely on a War of Religion, and
with only his Own single Force, and the Protestant Princes of Germany, who were
then much Weaker than they are now, in Two Years and a half passed the Rhine
and the Danube, and shook the Imperial Crown on the Head of Ferdinand the
Second.

It would take up too much room in this short Treatise, to Consider the
Proportion of the Force of these Nations in general; it is true that the weight
of the Force of the Catholic Party, lies in the Power of the French; who must,
in such a Case, be the Bulwark and Support of their Cause.

As to the Spaniard, he would as he has in all Cases have Work enough to Secure
his Own; the Empires separated from the Protestant Party, with the Swede, Dane,
Brandenburghers, Saxons, and all the Prince of the Augustane Confession on its
Front, with the Protestants of Upper Hungaria and Transylvania in the Rear,
with the Switz and Grisons in the Flank, would be very hard bestead, having no
Power but the Bavarian, and the small Electorates of Ments, Triers and Cologne,
which are of no Consideration to uphold it. Some Support might be drawn from
Italy indeed; but the French must give a powerful Assistance, or the Emperor
would be Devoured in two Campaigns, the English, Dutch, and Eastern Germans, as
the Lunenburghers of Hannover and Brunswick, would be the Opposites to the
French on this side, and there the Contention would be strongest.

I believe no Wise Man wishes for so Universal a Distraction as such a War
would make in Europe, but it is needful to suppose such a Thing, in order to
Examine whether we ought to apprehend any Danger from it, in case such an
Attempt should ever be made in Europe; for it is apparent, some Princes of the
Roman Catholic Party, have Will enough to such an Enterprise, and the Pope
would be forward enough to set it on Foot, if he were but sure of the Success.

The glorious Peace of Reswick, in which all the World must acknowledge the
French have been very much reduced, has but One Clause that any way Eclipses
the Honor of its Conclusion on the Protestant side, and that is, that it left
the Poor Protestant Subjects of the King of France, without any shelter from
the Violences of their Persecutors; as if the Protestant Princes had so much
excluded the Interests of Religion from the Articles, that they had not one
Compassionate Thought for their Distressed persecuted Brethren. It Is true, the
War was wholly a War of State, as is before noted, and the Invasion of Property
was the Occasion of it; and therefore the Surrender of Luxemburgh to the
Spaniard, who is a Roman Catholic, nay, a few Villages in the Chattelany of
Aeth, made more Bustle in the Treaty, than the Restoration of Three Hundred
Thousand banished Christians to their Country and Estates.

Some have presumed to say, That had the Restoration of the Edict of Nants been
insisted on with the same Vigor as the Duchy of Lorrain, it would as easily
have been obtained; and these People, among whom some of the French Refugees
are of that Mind, think the Protestant Interest was not so much Considered in
that Treaty as it ought to have been. I could easily Answer such Objectors, by
telling them, That the Ground of this War being only Matter of Right, to reduce
the Power of France to a Balance, and to oblige her to restore what she had by
Force and Injustice taken from her Neighbors; this being obtained, the End was
answered, and the Confederate Princes had no farther Pretense for a War: As to
the Protestant Refugees, they were the Subjects of the King of France, and
strictly speaking with respect of Princes, no body had any thing to do with it,
let him use them how he would.

Besides, to have made it an Article of the Peace, it could not be expected
that the Catholic Branches of the Confederacy would have insisted on it, or,
indeed, have desired it, and the Treaty being Managed in one Body, by the
Resolutions and Measures of several Princes and States in Congress, the
Catholic Princes would have immediately protested against it, and the Union
must have been Dissolved.

So that there was no room to Espouse the Interests of the Protestant Subjects
of France in the General Treaty, any other Way than by Intercession with their
King to use them Mercifully: And this has been done by all Parties, though
hitherto without Success.

It remains now to examine what Methods are further to be used, in order to
oblige the King of France to use his Protestant Subjects with more Humanity,
and if possible, either to preserve them that Peace and Enjoyment of their
Properties and Estates, which is their Natural Right; or to procure them some
other Equivalent which may give them some kind of Satisfaction and Repose.

To Commence a War against the King of France, for the Prosecution of His
Protestant Subjects, seems to be very Unjust; because Speaking of Right and
Wrong, we are not Interested in the Quarrel. I make no Question but the
Protestants of France themselves have, by the Laws of Nature and Reason, a
right to Defend their own Possessions and Inheritances, and to Maintain
themselves in them by Force, if they had a Power; and by the same Rule might by
Strength of Hand recover and take Possession of their own Rights, be they never
so Just. Only thus far it is plain, That by the particular Article of the Peace
of Reswick, respecting the Kings of England and France; England is fore-closed
from such an Attempt, both Sides having expressly Stipulated not to Assist the
Subjects of either against their Sovereign. The Fourth Article of the said
Treaty, ptoviding as follows, (viz.)

And since the most Christian King was never more desirous of any thing, than
that the Peace be Firm and Inviolable, the said King Promises and Agrees for
Himself and His Successors, That he will on no Account whatsoever disturb the
said King of Great Britain in the free Possession of the Kingdoms, Countries,
Lands or Dominions which He now Enjoys, and therefore Engages His Honor, upon
the Faith, and Word of a King, that He will not give or Afford any Assistance,
directly or indirectly, to any Enemy or Enemies of the said King of Great
Britain; and that He will in no manner whatsoever favor the Conspiracies or
Plots which any Rebels, or ill-disposed Persons, may in any Place Excite or
Contrive against the said King; and for that End Promises and Engages, That He
will not Assist with Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, Ships, or Money, or in any
other way, by Sea or Land, any Person or Persons, who shall hereafter, under
any Pretense whatsoever, Disturb or Molest the said King of Great Britain in
the free and full Possession of His Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and Dominions.
The King of Great Britain likewise Promises and Engages for Himself and
Successors, Kings of Great Britain, That He will Inviolably Do and Perform the
same toward the said most Christian King, His Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and
Dominions.

There seems to be but one way left, either to make any amends to these poor
desolate People, or to bring to pass their Readmission; I do not say, that the
Princes of Europe will find it their Interest to put it in practice any more
than I believe it is really the Interest of the King of France, to Ruin so
many Thousand Families of his Peaceable Subjects; I mean, the Old Standard Law
of Retaliation. But if it might be a Means to re-establish those poor People in
Peace and Liberty, the Sacrificing Ten Thousand Families of other Persons, as
Innocent as them, seems to be a Justice their present Case calls for.

Lex Talionis seems to me to be the Foundation-Law of Right and Wrong; the
Scripture is full of Instances of this Nature: Adoni-bezek, Agag, declare it to
be agreeable to the Divine Method of Executive Justice; the reason of Rewards
and Punishments, seems to be wholly measured by it; and if exactly administered,
it carries so convictive a Force, that no Person who ever fell under the
severest part of it, could object against the Execution of it. Adoni-bezek,
abovementioned, made a Confession of the Justice of his Punishment, when his
Thumbs and great Toes were cut off, as a Retaliation of his Barbarities. Judge.
1. 7. And Samuels Return upon Agag, That as his Sword had made Women Childless,
so should his Mother be Childless among Women; declares both the Reason and the
Justice of Gods Decree against him, 1 Samuel xv. 33.

It Is true, this Retaliation is strictly Personal; and all Retaliation ought to
be so, if possible: But in some Cases it differs; and where a Personal
Retaliation is not practicable, then People are considered in Collective
Bodies, Nations, Families, and States. Thus, in a War, the Subjects of either
Party account is very justifiable, to make themselves satisfaction for Injuries
received, on any of the Subjects of the contrary Party, though the Wrong
particularly suffered, is not chargeable on those particular Persons who suffer
for it.

By the same Rule, it seems justifiable, if we cast the whole Body of Europe
into Two sorts, Popish and Protestant, that while the one part commit
Hostilities and Depredations on the other, the injured Party should have a
Right of Retaliation on any Member of the same Body, of what Nation or
Government soever they shall be, where the Power is properly put into their
Hands: for Power, in such a case, may pass for a sufficient Right of Directing
the said punishment, since nothing but want of Power interrupts its being
Personal.

The French King has given a Challenge to all the Protestant Princes of Europe,
in his present Usage of the Reformed Churches of France: He has carried on,
though not with much Success, a War for above Eight Years, against the whole
United power of Europe; at last he has made a Peace, not at all to his
Advantage, nor much for his Honor: And now the War of State is at an end, he
seems to be beginning a War of Religion, and that he may lay the Foundation of
it safely, he has began it upon his own Subjects.

I cannot imagine why all the Protestant Princes of Europe should not think
themselves concerned in this Invasion of their Religion, since nothing is more
certain than that they are all struck at, though more remotely: And by all the
Rules of Human Policy, prevention ought to extend as far as the Evil is
designed.

If the weakening the Protestant Interest in general, were only the Design; the
strengthening that Interest ought to be the care of the other: Besides, the
Papists are the Aggressors, as they always have been, and the Injustice of
their Cause so great, that they have hardly ever attempted to make any other
pretenses for all their Barbarities, than the Absolute Will and Pleasure of
their Omnipotent Monarch, who will have but one Religion within his Dominions.

I confess, to me it seems very proper, for the Ease of all Parties, That
Religion should really divide the whole Body of Europe, and that all the Roman
Catholics, and all the Protestants, if they could but agree it among
themselves, should live by themselves: That if the French King will have no
Protestants in his Dominion, the Protestants should suffer no Roman Catholics
in theirs; and when all Parties are withdrawn to their own sort, and the
Division completed, let the Roman Catholics begin a War of Religion as soon
as they please.

It is, in my Opinion, the unjustest thing in the World, that since the
Spaniards and Italians suffer no Protestants to live amongst them, but the
Bloody Inquisition destroys them, and the French have Dragoon'd Three Hundred
Thousand of their Protestant Subjects to Mass, and hurried Three Hundred
Thousand more out of their Country, to seek Comfort from the Charity of
Neighbor States. The Duke of Savoy has Exiled all his Protestant Vaudois: And
hardly any Popish Country admit the Protestants among them, some few parts of
Germany excepted, yet the Protestant-Governments, at the same time, suffer
Three Millions of Papists to live among them, and enjoy their Liberties and
Estates unmolested.

Nor is this all, the Protestants of France, Savoy, and Hungary, have been
persecuted, under the Assurances of the most solemn Treaties, the most sacred
Edicts, and the firmest Peace that could be made; they have never (their
Enemies themselves being Judges) been guilty of the Breach of their Faith or
Loyalty. Henry III. of France, acknowledged it, when he had recourse to them
for Protection against his own mutinous Catholic Subjects. The Duke of Savoy
acknowledged it, in his Speech to those Vaudois whom he had Released out of the
Citadel of Turin. We never read of any War begun by the Protestants, they were
always Defendants: We have not one Instance of a Massacre committed, or a King
Assassinated, or of Nobles Undermined, in order to be blown up by them; they
have always been Men of Peace, till Self-Defence has obliged them to be Men of
War. On the contrary, the Roman Catholics have been always uneasy to the
Governments they have lived under. Our Histories are full of their Treasons.
Ireland has twice been Deluged in Blood by their Rebellions and Cruelties. Two
Kings of France have been Murdered by their Assassinations, and innumerable
Protestants Massacred and Butchered in cold Blood, under the pretenses of
Friendship, and assurance of a Treaty.

The Reigns of all our Kings and Queens in England, since Henry VIII. have been
strangely disturbed by the Plots, the Treasons and Rebellions of the Papists;
they have often forfeited their Estates and Liberties to the Public Justice of
the Nation, had they been dealt with by the Rules of strict Retaliation.
England Scotland and Ireland have such Reasons for Entire removing them out of
their Dominions, as no Nation in the World can have greater; and yet here they
live in Peace, under the protection of those very Princes they refuse to swear
Allegiance to, and under the shelter of those Laws they refuse to be bound by.
It Is no Plea in Bar of any Right, that the Plaintiff is a Papist; our Courts of
Justice are as open to them, as to any of the Kings most faithful Subjects: Of
which more hereafter.

On the contrary, the Protestants of France, tho charged with no Disloyalty,
nor guilty of no Crimes are Dispossessed of their Estates, Banished their
Native Country, Dragoon'd, Shipped to the Galleys, and many of them Hanged, their
Children torn from them by Violence, and buried alive in Monasteries and
Nunneries, and all the Cruelties an unbridled Soldiery can inflict, acted upon
them, without any manner of Crime alleged but their Religion, and this when
that very Religion was secured to them by the solemnest Leagues and Treaties in
the World, Declared in the famous Edict of Nants, Entered, Received and
Registered in all the Parliaments of the Kingdom.

The King of France, in persecuting his Protestant Subjects, acts not only the
part of a Tyrant over them, as they are his Subjects, but is guilty of the
Breach of the Faith and Honor of a King, oppressing those People who had their
Religion tolerated and allowed to them by his Ancestors, in the most sacred
manner possible; and he is also guilty of the greatest Unkindness to those very
People who were the Instruments and Agents of the Glory of his Family, and of
his Person.

To make good which Reflection, that I may not seem to be guilty of Disrespect
to the Majesty of the King of France, it is needful to examine a little the
Ground on which the Protestant Interest in France stood for the last Century of
Years, and the History of the present Royal Family of France, and how they came
to the Crown.

In the Year 1571. on the 24th. Day of August, Charles IX. being King of
France, the Third War with the Hugonots having been lately ended, and a Peace
made with the Protestants, the Cities of Rochel, Montauban, Coignac, and la
Charity, being put into their Hands for Security, and the Chief of the
Protestants wholly resting on the Faith and Honor of the King, in full
Satisfaction of his sincere Intentions, being come to Court, was acted the
Massacre of Paris; at which, in the space of Five Days, above Thirty Thousand
Protestants were barbarously Surprised and Butchered in Cold Blood.

Upon which followed the Fourth and Fifth Civil War; during which, King Charles
IX. died; and the Crown fell to Henry III. the last of the House of Valois, and
then newly Elected King of Poland. The Beginning of his Reign being entangled
with Civil Broils, the Protestant Interest grew very strong; and though the
League forced the King to make Three several Wars with them, yet they still
maintained their Liberty and Religion.

At length the Faction of the Guises, known by the Name of the Catholic
League, Declared themselves so absolutely against the King, and grew so
powerful, especially after the Death of the Duke and Cardinal of Guise, whom
the King had caused to be killed, that they had almost driven him out of the
Kingdom. In this Exigence, the Protestants, against whom they had carried on
Four Persecutions and Wars, and therein destroyed many thousands of their
Brethren, undertook his Defense, and joining all their Forces, in order to
Restore him, marched with him to the very Gates of Paris; where, while he was
preparing for a general Attack of the City, he was barbarously Assassinated by
Jacques Clement, a Jacobin Monk, sent out of the City on purpose, being stabbed
in the Belly with a Poynard, of which he died the Day after.

Henry IV. the present King's Grandfather, was then King of Navarre, and a
Protestant; and being Lawful Heir to the Crown, as also recommended to the
Nobility by the deceased King, at his death, took upon him the Style and Title
of King of France. The League, backed by the Power of the King of Spain,
opposed him with all the vigor imaginable; and many of the Catholic Nobility
deserted him, on the Account of his being an Heretic.

The Protestants served him with all the Glory and Loyalty that ever was shown,
perhaps, in any War in the World; and, as is computed, during the Years War he
maintained against the League, and the Spanish Power, above an Hundred and
Sixty Thousand Protestant Soldiers lost their Lives in his Service. At length,
to put an end to the War, and assure himself of the Kingdom, he deserted his
Religion, and turned Roman Catholic; by which means he obtained a full
Possession of the Crown, ruined the League, the Chief Heads of it making their
Peace with him, one by one; and at last concluded the War with the Spaniard, at
the Peace of Vervin.

The Protestants, however, never withdrew their Loyalty nor their Services from
him: The famous Marshall de Biron, the Dukes de Bouillon, du Plessis, and de
la Tremouille, continuing to do him the most faithful and important Services
against the Spaniards to the last.

Having settled himself in the Kingdom, and made peace with all the World, the
Protestants, who had served him so faithfully, and who expected no other Reward
than the Security of their Religion and Estates, obtained from him the famous
Edict of Nantes; in which is particularly stated and stipulated, the Terms of
their Liberty, in what places they should erect their Temples, how they should
hold their Synods and Assemblies: Money was allotted out of the public
Revenues, to maintain their Ministers; Cities were allotted to them, for their
Security, the Garrisons whereof were to be paid by the King: And the Edict was
made perpetual and Irrevocable, by being Entered and Registered in the
Parliaments, and Courts of Justice all over the Kingdom.

But all the Services of the Protestants to this Great King, by which he was
brought to the Crown of France, nor the solemn Engagement of this Edict, could
not preserve them, but that in the Ministry of Cardinal Richlieu, under the
very next Reign, they were again attacked, and driven to the necessity of
taking Arms in their own Defense: Which Cardinal, after three times making
Peace, and breaking it again at his pleasure, completed the Conquest of them,
in the Taking of Rochelle; the Protestants being miserably deserted by the
English, and Thirteen Thousand People Starved to Death in the Town.

Since this, in the Infancy of the present King, while the Contests between the
Prince of Conde and the Queen Mother were so hot as to break out into a War,
the Protestants, as Subjects only, were not a little instrumental to the
maintaining him in that very Power, which now he makes use of to their
Destruction.

I think this History fully makes good the Assertion that the present Usage of
the Protestants is both Perfidious and Ungrateful. Perfidious, as being acted
while under the Protection of a Sacred League and Solemn Treaty, and Ungrateful
as it is exercised on those very People, who with their Lives and Estates,
raised the present Fortune of the House of Bourbon, to the Greatness it now
enjoys.

I have been the more particular in this Account, because from hence it will
appear that the Protestants of France stand on a different foot from other
Subjects of that Monarchy, and that his right of Dealing with them, differs
from his Power over the rest of his Subjects, for they are his Subjects by
express Stipulations and Agreements, whose Obedience to him has been always
allowed to be Conditional; they have made Peace and War with their Kings, not
as Rebels, but as Persons having a Lawful Right to Plead and to Defend, their
Kings have given them Cautionary Towns for the Performance of the Treaties made
with them; a Thing which in its own Nature implies that they might hold those
Towns against him, if he did not perform the Postulata of those Treaties,
without the Scandal of Rebellion.

So that their Right to the Liberty of their Religion, had an Authority
sufficient to justify them in taking Arms; nor does any of the French
Histories, that ever I saw, though wrote with the greatest Partiality, ever call
it a Rebellion, but a War with the Hugonots, and the Conclusions were always
called, A Peace with the Hugonots, as is Evident through D' Avila's whole History
of the Civil Wars of France.

The History of the Protestants of the Upper Hungary and of Bohemia, might in
many respects bear a parallel with this, the Persecutions and ill-Usage of
them, having been after the solemnest Agreement and Treaties with them that
could be made; insomuch as that poor Unhappy People being so absolutely
separated from any Relief of their Brethren of Germany, have been forced to fly
for Protection to the Enemies of Christianity, the Turk, with whom however they
have this Satisfaction, that whatever Bargain they make for their Religion,
they are sure they will keep it. And I remember very well a Banished Hungarian
Minister told me, Discoursing of this very Case, he was sorry to say it, That
the Turks, though they made them pay Dear for it, were Juster and Truer to their
Leagues and Treaties than the Imperialists, who called themselves Christians.

It may possibly be objected here, That while we Exclaim against the French and
Germans for their Violence to their Subjects, if we should do the same thing to
the Papists, it would be Practicing what we Condemn and doing Evil that Good
may come.

The Answer to this is included in what goes before, viz. taking the whole
Roman Catholic and Protestant Party in Europe asunder, and considering them as
two Collective Bodies divided in Interest and Religion, it seems to me to be
just that a Retaliation of the Injuries done upon the Members of one Party in
one place, may be made upon the Members of the same Party in another place, by
the same Rule that Depredations of the Subjects of one Prince in War, may be
paid by Reprizal upon sny of the Subjects of the same Prince.

But this may be more fully answered thus, That if the Popish Subjects of some
Protestant Governments have so behaved themselves to their Governors, as to
make their Extirpation just, that Justice however suspended in Mercy to them
hitherto, will absolutely justify removing them from those Governments, and by
that means Lex Talionis be Executed by the Hands of Public Justice, and one
Banishment be at the same time both a Punishment of their several Crimes, and a
Retaliation of the Oppressions of their Party. This is a Method God Almighty
often takes himself, while he suffers a Punishment for a public Crime of less
Guilt to be the Executor of his Vengeance for some Crime of a higher Nature not
known.

To go no farther than Ireland for an Instance of this, the present
Inhabitants, I mean the Popish Irish by a Bloody Massacre of Two Hundred
Thousand Protestants in 1641. by little less intended, and as much as they were
able, executed this late War, have deserved no doubt to have been used at the
Discretion of the English; and Oliver Cromwell was more than once consulting to
Transplant the whole Nation from that Island. If he had done it, or if it had
now been done, I am of the Opinion, no Nation in the World would have Taxed us
with Injustice, and I do verily think Oliver Acted with more Generosity than
Discretion in omitting it; for this is certain, that if he had done it, this
last War and the Expense of so much Treasure as it cost this Nation, and the
Ruin of so many Thousand Protestant Families, who were driven from thence by
King James, all the Destruction at Londonderry, the Sickness at Dundalk, and
the Blood of 150000 people, who at least one way or other, on both sides,
perished in it, had been prevented.

It may be enquired whithere Oliver designed to Transplant them, I could answer
directly to that also; but it is sufficient to my purpose to say, had he cleared
the Island of them, it had been no matter at all to us whither they had gone,
and the King of France has set a Rule for such as Banish their Subjects to let
them go where they please, and then they certainly separate; whereas had he
sent the Protestants to any particular place, they would have been so many and
so United, they might possibly have come back again with Swords in their Hands,
and have bidden fair for another Hugonot War,

I have also seen among the Letters of State written by Mr. Milton, who was his
Secretary for the Foreign Dispatches, a Letter written to the States of
Holland, wherein by way of Argument to prevail for some Ease to the Protestants
of Piedmont, he proposes a Confederacy with the Dutch, and all their Reformed
Friends, to reduce the Duke of Savoy to a Necessity of giving better Conditions
to the Vaudois; and seems to Threaten to Expel all the Roman Catholics in
Engiand, Scotland and Ireland, out of his Dominions. I remember upon
Discoursing of this passage in some Company one asked, What if he had? and
another by way of Repartee, made Answer, Then there would have been none left.
I repeat it not for any great Wit in the Answer but to Introduce the Question,

What if he had?

1. If he had, possibly we had not been troubled with any Popish Plot in 1678.
nor none of the Bloody Consequences of it; we had had no Sham-Plot upon that,
no Russel, Sidney, nor Armstrong Murdered; no Blood lost in an Invasion by the
Duke of Monmouth, nor Cruel Executions in the West; we had had no Popish
Successor, no Standing Army, no Bishops sent to the Tower, no Invasion of
Charters nor Privilege of Universities; no Ecclesiastical Commission, etc.

2. We had had no Nuncio from Rome, to take his Progress over the Kingdom, no
Fireworks for a Sham-Prince of Wales, nor no Mass Sung in Windsor Chapel, no
Seminaries or Priests, nor Nunneries of Whores, at Chelsea, Lincoln-Inn Fields,
or Hammersmith.

3. In short, we had had no War of Nine Years to restore a Popish King, the
Nation had not spent 60 Millions Sterling, nor lost 200000 of the Stoutest of
her Inhabitants to Maintain her Liberty; King William had been King in Right of
his Wife, and a Peaceable Admission had been given him.

In all probability this had been the Consequence, if Oliver Cromwell had sent
them all out of the Kingdom. I beshrew his Heart he did not.

I do not pretend to lead my Reader to any Political Reasons why this should be
done now; our Governors are best Judges of the public Interest. But thus far,
I think, may be assumed without danger of Religion.

If the Nation should think fit in Compassion to the Miseries of our poor
Distressed Brethren of France to Retaliate their Usage upon the Roman
Catholics of England and Ireland, the following Consequences would in all
probability ensue, which whether it would be just in the whole, or Beneficial
to England and Ireland in particular, I leave to the Judgment of Impartial
Readers to Consider.

1. It might be a means, by the Intercession of Parties, to procure some
reasonable Conditions for the poor Protestants of France, as the Stopping the
Marshall Boufflers at the Surrender of Namure procured Justice to the
Imprisoned Garrisons of Deinse and Dixmude. This is a Practice too well known
in the War to need any Contention, where the putting a Prisoner of War to
Death, or any other Breach of Articles has been requited buy putting some other
Prisoner of War to Death on the contrary Side; and though the latter be an
innocent Person, Lex Talionis is the Word, the Justice of it is not disputed.

2. It would put these Kingdoms in a Condition to Entertain and Relieve that
great Multitude of Distressed Christians, with the very Substance of their
Adversaries, and the King of France might, if he pleased, make the Roman
Catholics Amends, by giving them the Estates of the Hugonots, or what other
Way he thought fit.

This is most certain, that the Roman Catholics of England, would not have
half the Reason to Complain of hard Usage that the Protestants of France have,
they have no Leagues or Capitulations to show for their Permission; the Laws of
the Kingdom are expressly against them, and they have in all Reigns for 150
Years past, been the Disturbers of the Peace of it; they refuse now to Swear
Allegiance to the Government, and if they do not Disturb it, it is Owing to
their want of Power, not their want of Will.

But if they had all those Defenses to make, which have been hinted, on behalf
of the Protestants of France, they would have no body to thank for such Usage,
but their own Friends. And the Pope, if he owed them so much Care, might use
his Interest with the King of France, to let the Protestants enjoy their
Liberty, in order to save them from the same Fate.

Some, indeed, object against the receiving such vast Numbers of Foreigners
among us, as Prejudicial to the Interest of Trade, and to our own Manufacturers
and Inhabitants, by Eating the Bread out of our Months, and Starving our own
Poor.

This is an Argument would require a little Volume to Answer; but in General, I
presume to Affirm, That no Number of Foreigners can be Prejudicial to England,
let it be never so great. Number of Inhabitants, is the Wealth and Strength of
a Kingdom; and if we had a Million of People in England, more than we have, let
them be of what Nation they would, it would be far from being a Damage to us.

It Is true, if these Million of People were all Artisans, Manufacturers, it
would be some detriment to our Poor who are employed in those particular
Manufactures: But allow one third to be Artisans, one third Laborers,
Husbandmen or Sailors, and one third Merchants, Shopkeepers or Gentlemen; and
if the greatest Number that can be supposed came to settle in England, it could
be no Injury, but a vast Advantage to the Kingdom in general: And it will
appear by this One particular, well examined.

An Addition of a Million of People, suppose that were the Number, would devour
a proportioned quantity of Corn and Flesh for Food and Drink, and a
proportioned quantity of Manufactures for Cloth and Housholdstuff; the one
employs more Land, and the other more People? Now it is apparent, we have in
England more Land lies unimprov'd, common, and waste, than would feed a vast
many People more than we have; and we have a Staple of Wool, never to be
exhausted. In Manufactures, the more Lands we improve, the greater the Rents
will be, and the greater the general Stock of the Nation will be; and the more
Manufactures are made, the better the Poor are employed, and the Richer the
Manufacturer is made.

Many other Arguments might be used, to prove, That the coming Over of
Foreigners can be no general prejudice to the Nation, as to Trade. But that is
not the main thing here. If the Roman Catholic Princes pursue their Protestant
Subjects with such Cruelty, and drive them into Banishment and Exile, to seek
Relief in Foreign Countries the Case seems to speak for it self, the
Protestants can have no readier way, either to prevent the Miserics of those
poor persecuted People, or to relieve them in their Exile, than by dealing with
the Papists in their Dominions in the same manner, and Inviting the said
persecuted French to come and live in the Estates and in the Places of their
Adversaries. This is Lex Talionis: And this is a way that would soon tire the
Papists out. For I think I may be allowed to suppose there are much the greater
number of Papists among the Protestants, than there are of Protestants among
the Papists; and the Exile of the Parties would also dister, as to Place. For,
generally speaking, the Protestant Countries are the best for Strangers to live
in, the Protestant People are the Trading People of the World; therefore the
Exile of the Protestants of France and Hungary would be less to their
disadvantage, than the Papists of England, Ireland and Holland, who must apply
themselves to Countries where there are few Manufactures, small Trade, and but
very indifferent Means for a Stranger to Live. So that the Popish Exiles would
be in much the worse Circumstances: And there is no question, but whenever the
Protestant Princes of Europe shall find it needful to use this Remedy, the
Roman Catholic Powers will find it for their Interest to make some Cartel, or
Condition, upon which all their Subjects, though they are Protestants, may enjoy
some sort of Liberty in their own Native Countries; and so Persecution, as well
as War, might end in an an Universal Happy Peace to Europe, both in Matters of
Religion, as well as Civil Affairs, which has so often been attempted by other
Methods, to so little purpose.

A LETTER to Mr. HOW, By Way of REPLY TO HIS CONSIDERATIONS OF THE PREFACE TO
AN Enquiry into the Occasional Conformity of DISSENTERS.
SIR,
AFTER such an Account as you have given of your self in the Five first Pages
of your Book, with the Aversion you have to any thing which should interrupt
you in your more Recluse Studies; I presume no Man could imagine you would break
thorough your own Measures to attack a poor Prefacer, as you call me, and
wholly quitting the Argument, amuse the World, and content your self to Lash
the Author with the Severity of your Wit.

Herein, Sir, I must own, that not only your Opponent, but all the Town seem
Disappointed exceedingly, that Mr. How, who thinks the Subject not worth
Answering, should trouble his Head, or spend his Time about the Impertinence of
a sorry Prefacer.

When I Addressed the Preface to you, I thought I had so carefully Revised both
it and the Book, that, as I mentioned to you, I could nowhere be Taxed with
Exceeding the Rules of Charity and Good Manners.

And though I would always make them both my Rule, yet I thought my self obliged
to it more now than ordinarily, by how much the person to whom, and the persons
of whom I wrote, were equally known and very much valued by me; and I did not
question but I should either not be Replied to at all, or it would be done with
the Charity of a Christian, the Civility of a Gentleman, and the Force and
Vigor of a Scholar.

But since it seems good to you, Sir, to descend so far below your self as to
quit the Dispute offered, and fall upon me personally, and to mix Raillery and
Reproach with your Argument, which, I am sure, you know too well to think
betters the Cause: You must blame your self, Sir, for Obliging me in my own
Defense to be a little freer with you than otherwise I should have thought had
become me.

Nor, Sir, should I have engaged with you, even in my own Defense, knowing I am
to struggle with so unequal a Match both as to your Learning and Reputation,
had I not seen your Book differ so much from your constant Character; and
pardon me, Sir, for the Word, in many Places from the Truth.

And since I am obliged thus publicly to Animadvert upon my Superiors, for
such I own you to be both in Learning and Office,

I shall ask your Leave to lay down several Mistakes upon which I must be
allowed to suppose you have gone in the Censures which you have made; which
Suppositions I draw from the whole Tenor of your Writing.

I presume, Sir, that you are mistaken in these Four Points, in the Person,
Temper, Profession, and Intention of the Author,

Which Mistakes, I shall venture to suppose, are the Reasons which moved you to
treat your Adversary with so much indecent Contempt.

As to my Person and Temper: It Is true, Sir, I have chosen to conceal my Name;
and though bating Humane Frailty, Sins and Misfortunes, I know no Reason why the
Argument should be ashamed of the Author, or the Author of the Argument: Yet
when I considered how constant a practice it is in the World to Answer an
Argument with Recriminations instead of Reasonings, I thought it best to
continue retired, that the Case I had entered upon might not come clogged with
the dead Weight of the Meanness and Imperfections of the Author.

I need not go back to the Instance of our Savior, whose Arguments were
Confronted with the Contempt of that Question, Is not this the Carpenter's Son?
For I find that even Mr. How himself would have searched my Character to have
completed his Remarks with Personal Reflections.

And yet I cannot imagine what Relation my Name has to the Argument; it could
be only useful to furnish you with something in my Character to Reproach me
with; which, God knows you might have found enough of.

But what would all this be to the Point in hand? The Occasional Conformity of
Dissenters is not Condemned or Defended by the Names of Authors on either side,
but by Truth, Scripture, and Reason.

Thou was it altogether born in Sin, says the High Priest, and the Elders of the
Sanhedrim to the Poor Man whom Christ had healed; and do thou Teach us? And
yet the poor Man was in the Right; and if I am so, though I was the meanest and
most scandalous of Scriblers, is my Argument the worse?

But, Sir, to Answer all those Particulars, and let you know that I am not
altogether so shy of my Name as you imagine, I shall give you a Genuine honest
Account of my self, and then my Name is at your Service.

First, Sir, I am to tell you, that I am, and acknowledge my self to be,
possessed with a strong Aversion to Doubling and Shifting in Points of
Religion; and do think that the Case in hand is be allowed no less: And
therefore wrote the Enquiry with Two very honest Designs, viz, To see if by
Strength of Argument I could receive Satisfaction; and to Explode, and, as far
as in me lies, to Oppose the Practice.

Secondly, Had your Book given me, or any Body else that I can meet with, whose
Judgment is to be valued, the Satisfaction I desired; I assure you, I am so
little fond of an Opinion, because it is mine, that I should not have been
ashamed to have owned my self mistaken; and possibly have shown as much
Humility in Acknowledging it, as you think I have Pride in Opposing.

As to Personal Miscarriages and Misfortunes, of which no Man has more, and
which, perhaps may weaken the Reputation of the Author, but I am sure ought not
of my Argument: To them I shall only say, God in his Merciful Providence has
healed the Last, and, I hope, has Pardoned the First: And if so, I am upon even
Terms in point of Reasoning.

By this you may see I am sensible of the Beam in my own Eye, and have for some
years taken up the part of a Penitent on that very account; but did never
understand that thereby I was barred from Enquiring into what I judged
Scandalous to the Profession of a Party in General, of whom, though unworthy, I
was a Member.

Nor, Sir, am I any-where guilty of Judging another, where the Case is not so
plain, as that it really seems to speak it self: For I must remember also, that
we are no more to call Good, Evil, or Evil, Good, than we are to Judge one
another.

Thus, Sir, I am gone over my own Character; and shall only demand this from
you of Right, That, so far as Truth and Honesty is on my side, it may not, nor
ought not to be despised for being ushered in by an unworthy instrument.

And it is strange, Sir, that you who Animadvert upon me for Judging, should so
severely judge me, and that wrongfully too, as shall appear in the Particulars
of this short Discourse.

I could not be satisfied to say less to this point on these Accounts, because
I must put in a Caveat against Personal Reflections as unfair in the Dispute:
He that pleases first to Confute the Argument, is welcome to show his Wit in
Satyrizing upon the Follies and Afflictions of the Author: And there I leave
it, and proceed to what I conceive is your third Mistake about me.

Viz. My profession. And this you seem to make plain, while from the 13th, to
the 24th page, you treat me as an Independent, and spend your time to Reply to
the p^rticular Te^en^s in dispute between You and Them: which, with Submission,
I conceive to be nothing at all to the purpose.

After this, P 30, 31, 32, I am talked with as a Fifth-Monarchy-man, and
Leveller; what of these Principles any where appears in the Enquiry, I confess
I am at a loss to know; nor, Sir, have you been so kind to lay it down.

Indeed I own my self somewhat surpised to see you run on in Answering the
scrupulous Independent about Kneeling at the Sacrament, and the Extravagant
Fifth-Monarchy-man, about seizing the Properties of Mankind for the Use of the
Saints; and such things as these, by way of Reply to an Enquiry about
Occasional promiscuous Conformity: and am still at a Loss to find an Antecedent
to this Relative.

I assure you I am no Independent, nor Fifth-Monarchy-man, nor Leveller. You
have shown your Learning, Sir, and Confuted an Error inconsistent with Civil
Society: Very well; but this had been better done by it self; it had no more
relation to the Case in hand, than a Lecture against the Alchoran; and you may
as well conjecture me to be a Mohammedan, as a Fifth-Monarchy-man, from any
thing in the Book that looks like either. But, Sir, since I am led by you to
give an account of my profession, which, I hope I shall always be ready to do;
I shall do it in few words: That I am of the same Class, and in the same
Denomination of a Dissenter with your self, your Office excepted, and am
willing to be guided by, and to practice the Great Rule of Christian Charity in
all the proper and legal Extents of it: Indeed I have more need to practice it
than you, because I stand more in need of it from others, with respect to the
Causes already named. And however, by wresting Words, and mistaking my
Intentions, you are pleased to see nothing of it; I am not yet convinced that I
have broken that Great Christian Rule of Charity, in any thing I have written.

I come now to the Fourth Thing in which you are mistaken, which is in my
Intentions; in which you rashly, and, I assure you, wrongfully judge me,
however cautious you would have me be of judging others: But, Sir, Humanum est
Errare; you are no more Infallible, I see, than I, and are fallen into the same
rash Error you Reprove me for with so much Severity; by judging, that the
principal Design of this Book was to reflect upon a Worthy Gentlemen, who is
named in the Preface: And in one place you are pleased to join me with the
Party who Opposed him, and bring me in making my Court to them.

All these, Sir, I shall make appear to be not only Mistakes, but groundless
Mistakes; such as nothing but the same Thoughts which put you out of Temper,
could lead you into: And I can solemnly Appeal in the Form you have set down,
that you have wronged me in your Censure.

First, Sir, the Enquiry was published Three years ago, and therefore could not
be designed as a Personal Invective against the Gentleman you speak of: All
that can be said, is, That the Cause being again given, the Re-printing it was
designed as a Reproof to the Practice: and so much I own. As for Persons I am
indifferent; if the Coat fits any Body, let them wear it.

Secondly, Sir, I declare my self, if of any Party, I am, and ever was for the
English Liberty, and for the putting such Men into Magistracy, who, in
Concurrence with the King, our Supreme Magistrate, would protect and preserve
that Liberty. And, as a Person every way qualified to execute a Trust of so
much Honor, whether profitable or not, I will not examine, I gave my Vote for Sir
Thomas Abney, and should have done so, If I had the power of Ten Thousand
Voices; and no Man has more Respect for, or Opinion of his Honesty and Ability
than my self: Nor have I, God be thanked, any Occasion to say this to flatter
him; for I neither want his Favor, nor fear his Anger.

Herein therefore I presume to say you have been entirely mistaken; and these
Errors have led you to waste your Time, and the Reader's too, in making
needless Remarks, and Answering those People who never Opposed you.

I come now to that part of your Book which respects the Case in hand; which,
as it is the least part, and indeed seems to agree with the Title, that it is
only a Consideration of the Preface; for really with submission, there is very
little Answer to the Fact: So it requires not that I should Reply to the
Argument; for I see none, but that drawing back the Curtain which you have
spread over the Subject, I should set it in a True Light, that all Men may
judge by their own Consciences, and the Scripture-Rule, and take care they be
not distinguished out of their Reason and Religion by the Cunning and Artifice
of Words.

Please therefore, Sir, to admit me to run over your Book with as modest
Animadversions as my just Defense will allow; and I am content to stand
Corrected, where I fail in point of Decency.

First, You quarrel with me for a Breach of Kindness and Equity, in hiding my
own Name and Revealing yours. Designing my self to fight in the Dark, and
expecting you to do it in open Light. And you give us Five whole Pages,
including the Quotation of your self in your Preface to the Inhabitants of
Torrington, to show your indifferency in Controverted Disputes, and
consequently your Unwillingness to engage in this.

Truly, Sir, as to the First, I thought a public Appeal to you, who are a
public Person, had been no Sin apainst Kindness or Equity; if it be, I ask
your Pardon.

As to my Concealing my Name, I have given you my Reasons already; and as to my
Exposing yours, had you thought fit to have Replied to the Book which lay Three
years unanswered, without being addressed to any person in particular, you had
been at Liberty to have remained as unexpos'd as the Author.

But the Enquiry being unanswered, gave some people more prejudice against the
Integrity of Dissenters in general, than I could wish to have found; upon which
I thought it necessary to have the Matter discussed, if possible; and knew no
Man more concerned to do it, nor more capable than your self.

Nor is your Answering me such a Disappointment as you are pleased to mention;
but that you should attempt it, and do it to no more purpose, is, I confess,
more Disappointment to me than any thing I could have met with.

Whether, Sir, the Indifferency you are so pleased with in your Temper, be
Congruous to your Profession as a Gospel Minister, I shall not examine: Whether
you that are Pastor of a Dissenting Church, and Administer the Ordinances of
Christ to a Select People, in a way Dissenting from the Established Church, and
thereby maintain a Schism in the said Established Church, ought to be so
indifferent as to boast that you never persuaded any Man to Conform, or not to
Conform, I leave it to your self to consider; I am sure, if I was arrived to
that Coldness in the matter my self, I would Conform immediately; for I think
what I affirmed in the Enquiry Page remains a Truth unanswered by you: That
Schism from a True Established Church of Christ, is a great Sin; and if I can
Conform, I ought to Conform.

From this Declaration of your own indifferency to meddle in Matters of
Controversy, with your Reasons for it, which I suppose you would have taken as
Introductory to what follows, you are pleased to proceed very angrily to
examine why I engage you in this Quarrel: I have given you an Account of it
already with all the Honesty and Plainness I can, and I thought a Person in
your Place would never have Resented the being put upon the Defense of his
Profession, or being Civilly asked a Question about it; and I cannot but
observe how carefully you avoid being engaged in the present Dispute.

I ought to have been well assured, you say, (1.) That you did advise one way
or the other; Or, (2.) That you ought to have done so.

Really, Sir, I think it immaterial whether you were, or on; or, whether you
ought, or no; for I never Charged you with the first, or affirmed the last; but
only asked this fair Question:

Whether it was allowed by Dissenters in general, or by your Congregation in
particular? To which Question you give no Answer.

But I shall answer you honestly and directly: I am assured, as far as
Rationally I can be, by consequences of things, that you have not advised one
way or other? Nor do I affirm you ought to have done so, unless the Person
concerned, applied to you for Advice in Point of Conscience on the Case; if he
did, I do not see how you could decline it. So that to me, it seems, you either
were obliged, or not obliged, as the Application of the Person concerned might
alter the Case: I do not say you were obliged officiously to tender your Advice
in the Case: If I am wrong here, I shall acknowledge my Error when I am better
informed.

The next thing will come close to the Point, Whether it be a Fault, an
unlawful Action, or no, for a Dissenter, as such, to hold Occasional Communion
with the Established Church, and, at the same time continue in, or return to
his Relative conjunction with a Separate Church?

That it is not a sinful Act simply to have Communion with the Established
Church, I willingly agree. But since on this Point depends the Weight of our
present Dispute, I must conclude, That I think it is a sinful Act
circumstantially and conjunctively.

And because I would be rightly understood, I shall endeavor to be Explicit,
though I run the hazard of being counted impertinent.

I have laid down the Case, I thought, fairly, and of which you are pleased to
take no Notice, in the Enquiry, Page 12.

He who Dissents from an Established Church from any other Reasons but such as
these; That he really believes the said Established Church is not of the purest
Institution, but that be can serve God in a Form more agreeable to his Will;
and that accordingly it is his Duty to do it so, and no otherwise: Such a one
ought to Conform, because to make a Wilful Schism in the Church, is doubtless a
great Sin, and if I can avoid it, I ought to avoid it.

If then I am guided by this real Principle of Conscience to Dissent, how can I
Conform without Sinning against that Conscience, by which only my Dissenting is
made Lawful?

And thus, Sir, I am brought to my Argument again: Of which I shall give you
this short Abstract; and you or any body else, are welcome to be angry with me,
if you will be pleased first to Answer it:

That he who Dissents from the Established Church, except from a true Principle
of Conscience, is guilty of a great Sin.

That he who Conforms to the Established Church against his Conscience, is
guilty of a great Sin.

That he who both Dissents and Conforms at the same time and in the same Point
of Religion, must be guilty of one of these great Sins.

That he who has committed either of these Sins, ought not to be received again
on either side on any other Terms than as a Penitent.

I do not examine, as I hinted then, whether the Gentleman you would embroil me
with, be thus guilty; be that to himself.

But I must now come to your Distinctions: Indeed Sir, I believe as you say,
that taking which side you will, you may puzzle the most of plain people, who
are but of ordinary Understandings in the Controversy about Ceremonies: And
give me leave to add, That such is the Subtilty and Nicety of Sophistical
Reasonings, that Men may almost Distinguish themselves into, and out of any
Opinion; and some People, who are Masters of the Art of Nice Arguing, too often
lose both Themselves and their Religion in the Labyrinchs of Words: School
Divinity and Practical Christianity are Two things, and seldom understood by
the same Heads.

But, Sir, with the greatest Respect, and some Concern, let me tell you, I did
not think to find all the Difference between the Dissenters and the Church of
England dwindl'd into Three additional Appendices, in which we have some
Difference, and so: and this from Mr. How, who is Pastor of a Separate Church.

If we differ from them in Trifles, or have but a Trifling Difference, I think
we can never justify making so large a Chasm in the Church; we have much to
answer for, without question, in the too fatal Divisions of this Nation, if it
has all been occasioned by a few small Appendices.

If our Differences are not Matters of Conscience I have no more to say; if
they are, it is a Mystery yet hidden from the Common Understandings, how they
can be first insisted on from a Principle of Conscience, and then waved without
acting against that Conscience, which only could justify the first insisting on
them: If you can Distinguish us into this, I am mistaken.

I allow your Distinctions of Sins, which are Consistent or Inconsistent with
the Christian State to be Orthodox and Right.

I allow your Distinctions of Negative and Affirmative Precepts, and, according
to my weak Talent, agree with you in them.

But the Consequence you draw, with submission, does not reach the Case; which
is, That scrupulous Persons ought to be fully persuaded in their own Minds; and
Fellow Christians were not to Judge, but to Receive them.

This you have answered your self, P. 13. to be meant in dubious and small
Matters: And if we must stick here, we are next to Examine, Whether the
Difference between Us and the Established Church be only in dubious and small
Matters; if it be, I know not how we shall Ward off the Below of being guilty
of Schism; the Sin of which I suppose you will not dispute. Wherefore to
descend to some Particulars -- If I know why we Dissent from the Established
Church, it is principally on such Accounts as these. 1. On account of the
Episcopal Clarkson's No Scripture-Evidence for Diocesan Bishops.
Hierarchy, Prelatical Ordination and Super-intendency. 2. On account of their
imposing things owned to be indifferent, as Terms of Communion. 3. On account
of their imposing things owned to be otherwise indifferent, as made necessary
by the Command of the Civil Magistrate.


As to Partial Conformity, Dissent in some things, and Conforming in others,
which you mention Page. ^. it does not seem to concern this Case. No Man among
the Dissenters, I believe, pretended to Dissent in every thing; but we are
speaking of Conforming in those very Points in which we Dissent, and that no
less than the Article of Communion.

If these are your small things, I am content to stand by it, and ready to
prove, as I said in the Enquiry:

That whoever Separates from this Church, and at the same time Conforms to it;
by Conforming, denies his Dissent being Lawful; or, by his Dissenting, Damns
his Conforming as Sinful.

All this, Sir, you have not thought fit to touch upon, for Reasons which you
know best; and I really wonder you should take so much pains to Cavil at me and
a simple Preface, which really was not worth your while; and when you have led
your self into the Argument, take no notice of the thing it self, as it is
Objected, but Distinguish so nicely about the smaller matters, and omit the
greater.

If we differ from the Established Church in small things only, we are to blame
to make the Breach so wide. Was it for small and dubious Things only that we
suffered Process of the Law, Excommunications, Seizures of our Estates, and
Imprisonment of our Persons? And since you are pleased to bring in that
Honorable Gentleman, speaking in the first Person to the Point, as an
Inference drawn from your Distinctions, and your self telling us what he may
perhaps do;

Give me leave to go through those Supposititions Cases with you, Sir. As to
the particular Person, you concern him in it, not I.

1. You say, He may have Arguments so specious, that supposing he Err, may
Impose upon the Judgment, and thereby Direct the Practice of a very
Intelligent, Discerning; and Vpright-hearted Man, so as to make him think that
which is perhaps an Error, his present Duty, and so not offer Violence to his
Conscience.

I Answer: Admit he does so; yet while you at the same time allow he Errs, that
is, Sins; why ought not he to be admonished to Repent of that Sin, before he be
received again into Communion? This is what I mean by being received as a
Penitent: You grant ( P. 9.) a Man is to do the part of a Penitent for a Fault;
and this Error is a Fault, though it were an Error of Ignorance.

2. Then you say, P. 18. As judging such a Church true as to Essentials, he may
think (Occasion inviting) he has greater Reason, though it be Defective in
Accidents, to Communicate with it sometimes, than to shun its Communion always.

Pardon me, Sir, I must say this seems a Sophism in Religion; for allow he may
think so, you must allow he ought not to think so. And why Occasion inviting?
Why not Occasion compelling? It Is manifest, For^ could not compel, why should
Occasion invite?

I confine not my Argument to this Gentleman; but of Others I can prove, That
Force could not compel them, but Occasion, that is, Honor and Preferment could
invite them. Now if you please to Reconcile this for me, I shall be gotten over
one Point; Whether a Man can justify suffering to the Ruin, perhaps of his
Family, rather than comply with that which he may do without imposing upon his
Conscience, and which, Occasion inviting, he may judge lawful?

You have another Distinction which, I confess, hardly think to be Rational,
that is, Unprofitable Preferment, Page. First, I neither understand that the
Instance you are upon is Unprofitable, nor believe it; nor that the Epithet
can be proper to the word, for that which is unprofitable, cannot be a
Preferment.

I must also observe here, Sir, that the Conformity exacted in the late Reigns,
was not so large as what these Gentlemen are pleased to comply with
voluntarily. Now as to the Ceremonies you insist on, and which indeed I do not,
as the way of Administration Kneeling, etc. it was allowed to be so indifferent
than, that many received in the Church Standing. But when these Unprofitable
Preferments, as you please to call them, invite, they seek of themselves what
before they could not be forced to.

3. You ask us another Question: What if some have thought that alone a
sufficient Reason for their Occasional Communion with a Church, with whom they
have not a constant Communion, That they may testify to the World they Decline
it not as no Church, but so far practically own it as the Reason of the thing
requires; may not be supposed to do this, as thinking it a good Reason, whether
it be so or no, without going against Conscience herein?

Truly, Sir, I must suppose these It may be's, and Why may not's, are put in to
make out what you said Page. that you could puzzle a mean Understanding both
ways; and, I thank God, you are driven to the Necessity of these Arts. But to
let you see these Suppositions may be replied to;

1. Sir, the Church of England however, must own Her self very much obliged to
such Gentlemen who will Conform only to Vindicate her Reputation.

2. They may be supposed to do thus, but they cannot be supposed to do so
without a manifest gross ignorance, and taking that for a good Reason which is
none at all: For if, Sir, you will admit that a Man is in the Right as to
himself, while he thinks he is so, then you open the way to the fatal Latitude
of all manner of Error; for no Man is guilty of an Error, as an Error, but as
his Judgment may be perverted to believe himself right, when he is wrong.

Page 19. you are pleased to Object for me: Since, Sir, you think it not
unlawful to Communicate with such a Church sometimes, why should you not (for
Common Order sake) do it always?

Sir, if you please to give me leave to ask Questions for my self, I would
state it something more fairly to the Case in hand, thus: Since, Sir, you think
it not Unlawful to Communicate with such a Church sometimes, why should you
not, to avoid the just Imputation of Schism, which is a great Sin, have done it
always? And why never do it, but when upon an Occasion of Preferment inviting,
you find it necessary to protect you from the penalty of the Law?

I should have been very glad you had stated this Question fully, and suppose
what Answer you please; for upon my word, I can suppose none, unless I would
bring him in, owning the Crime, and repenting of it; which I should be glad to
hear of.

What you say, I shall stare at, Page 20. I willingly admit, that what is
simply best, may not be best for Practice in present Circumstances. And I must
likewise remind you, Sir, That what may be simply Lawful, may be unlawful
Circumstantially: And so I affirm this to be and dare undertake to prove it so,
without coming in the Number of Solomon's Fools, with whom you have ranked me
for proposing hastily beyond Seven Men that can render a Reason.

Here, Sir, viz. at your 20th Page, I must leave you to combat with the
Independents and let them answer for themselves; I am not at all concerned in
the Quarrel.

And you spend three or four Pages as an Advocate for the Church of England,
concerning Modes and Gestures; in which, I am sure, I am far from placing the
least Weight, where serious Christianity is to be found; and God forbid either
you or I, Sir, should be found making a Rent in the Christian Union of this
Church and Nation, if their Kneeling at the Sacrament, or the Use of a Liturgy,
were all the Dispute; it is you have led me into saying any thing of the
Difference between the National Church and the Dissenters.

I know that the (...) of the Primitive Church included the Forms of their
Administrations and Public Services; and need not recite my Authorities for it
to you, who know it better than I; nor that they are found in the Time of
Tertullian, and long before him. But I know also, and the contrary has never
been proved, that those Forms were not imposed as Terms of Communion, and under
the Penalty of Laws, at least till the Divisions of the Church between the
Arrians and the Orthodox, when Error and Persecution got into the Church, and
the Evil Spirit Reigned, to the Destruction of both sides.

And now, Sir, I find you no more talking to me till you come to Page 25, where
you are pleased to Satyrize upon my Title and Preface.

Really, Sir, I believe my self capable to Defend my Book against all that the
Power of Cavil and Sophistry can suggest; and therefore I am not sollcitous for
my Preface and Title Page.

But that I may satisfy your Request: and telling you first, that you oblige me
to it: I shall be plain.

You desire me to examine my own Heart, what I meant by that Suggestion? in
Cases of Preferment, mentioned in the Title; was it not to insinuate, that
Preferment was the inducement to that Worthy Person to act against his
Conscience?

Sir, Will you be pleased to Examine your own Reason, how that can be, when the
Words were printed Three Years before the Fact; and I Appeal to God and the
World, whether you have not wrongfully Judged me then. But to make it more
plain:

I do not say he, or any Body else does it for Preferment; you are pleased
strangely to mistake me: I say they may have the Preferment without it.

It Is done to save their Money, to save the Five hundred Pounds, which is the
Penalty of the Act: I am sorry you have not Read the Book before you ventured
to make so severe a Remark. For your better Information, therefore, Sir, I
refer you to p. 19. in the Enquiry, where my Words are plain.

As to the Worthy Gentleman, whose Cause you would have this to be; you say
this has been his known Judgment and Practice several Years.

Though it were true, yet, Sir, this is no Argument to prove the thing lawful, or
to prove that it is not practiced, even in every part that I have laid down, by
others before him, and like to be so after him; it only quits him of doing it
against his Conscience, to q^ellsie himself for the unprofitable Preferment you
mention: and this I never Charged him with.

That he had done the Fact, no Body Disputes, but that he did it against his
Conscience, I never alleged; you put that upon me, Sir, unjustly: Be his
Conscience to God and himself, I know better than to judge him, nor can you
without a Breach of Charity suggest it of me.

Nor do I any-where say that others have acted against their Consciences that
do so; possibly they may by the help of nice Distinguishing, Reason themselves
into a Belief of their being in the Right.

But the Point in Debate is, Whether whatever their Opinions may be in the
Case, the Act it self be not, as I have said, Circumstantially sinful: For I
hope you will grant me they are never the more in the Right for its being their
Opinion: Truth is always unmoved, sullen, and the same, whatever Gloss our
Fancy or Interest puts upon it.

But since you will have it be this Gentleman's practice, which I think no
Reputation to him, nor Defense of the Practice: Nor do I think you or he can
justify your Dissenting from the Church of England, and that Practice
together: Since, I say, you will have it be that Gentleman's practice; all you
gain by that in point of Argument, is, That he did not do it against his
Conscience, nor to serve the present Turn. And what then? I affirm to you, I
neither meant him nor any Man else, but him that is Guilty; and I meant him,
and every Body else, if they are guilty. And what is all this to the purpose?
The Question is not here, Who is, or is not guilty of it; but whether the thing
in its own Nature, aggravated with the Circumstances of Turn and Return, timed
for Preferment, with all the black Et cetera's of it, as it is lately practiced,
and as I have laid it down, be a Crime, or no?

If this Gentleman you would Embroil me with, did formerly live in a general,
or ordinary Communion, both with the Church of England, and a private
Congregation, before eit^ the Preferments, I mention, invited, or the Penalty
of the Law forced him to it; Then he stands clear of this part of the Charge,
that he did it for the protection of his Interest; but still the Matter of Fact
is true.

Thus, Sir, I have said what I thought my self obliged to by way of Reply to
your Considerations: And as to your Censures, though I have a great Opinion of
your Charity, however you seem to be out of Temper in this Case; yet I appeal
from your Judgment, to the Judgment of Truth; and waving all your puzzling
Distinctions, which my Respect for your Person and Character, will not permit
me to Descant upon; give me leave to make this short Conclusion.

Sincerity is the Glory of a Christian; the Native Luster of an honest Heart is
impossible to be hid; 'twill shine through all his Life in one Action or
another in spite of Scandal; and it wants no Artifice to set it out.

If the Practice we Discourse of be to be Defended, let it be a Practice; I
mean, let it be Voluntary, let it be Free and Spontaneous; and if Gentlemen,
who have such a Latitude in their Opinions, would not have it thought they are
moved to it by their Interests, let them practice it openly, and not Time it so
to the very Eve of an Election, as to have it speak of it self, and, as it
were, force Men to believe it done on purpose; nay, let them not put such a
Reproach in the Mouths of their Enemies, as to have it spoken in Contempt, with
Circumstances that stop the Mouths of Argument, and are as Convincing as
Demonstration.

You have given your Blessing to them at the Conclusion of your Book, with a
Let them go on and prosper. I wish you have not spoken Peace where there is no
Peace: As to its being a Secret between God and Them; I shall only say, Enter
not into their Secret, O my Soul! It Is an Arcana that is hidden from my Eyes,
and I doubt very much how it can consist with consulting the Rule with the
serious Diligence you recommend: For certainly were the great Christian Rule
consulted, it would instruct them, that the Profession of the Christian
Religion is not a thing, the Forms whereof are of such indifference, as you
seem to make it; that it is not a light thing to shift and change Communion with
an Established, and with a Separate Church, as often as Convenience, or Reason
of State, or Interest invite.

And whether I set my Name to this, or no? Whether I am an Independent? I hope
they are Christians too as well as other folks. Whether I am a
Fifth-Monarchy-man? Whether the Book was designed against my Lord Mayor, though
'twas wrote Three Years before he was Chosen? Or, whether any thing else you
Censoriously charge me with be true, or no, seems to me not worth your while to
Examine? Since if I should grant them all, the Argument of Occasional
Conformity remains untouched.

If the Truth be made the worse for my Temper, I am sorry for it: But this is
another of Mr. How Is Paradoxes, and something like your Unprofitable
Preferment, that Truth, though it be mixed with the worst Temper in the World,
should thereby be so debased as to become worse than Error.

Sir, I had ended here, but for a Clause you force me to Reply to, concerning
the Old Puritans, who you tax me with abusing: Indeed 'twas as remote from my
Thoughts, as 'twas, that ever it was possible you could treat an Adversary with
such Language.

And, but that I shall not suffer my self to be transported beyond the Bounds
of Civility, and so fall into your Error, I could allow my self to be very much
moved, That such a Man as you should venture to Charge me with what is neither
true in Fact, nor can be suggested by Consequence from any thing I have wrote:
And, Sir, you must give me leave to say, I am sorry you should lay your self so
open, and force me to so severe a Remark.

You are pleased to affirm, That I industriously represent the Primitive
English Puritans, as if they were generally of my stingy, narrow Spirit.

And here you run upon me with ill Language, How I could think to Impose upon
the World in a matter of so recent Memory; and, How I could have the
Confidence, etc. This is really a new sort of Style from Mr. How.

Sir, I have industriously examined the Book I wrote; and, as I am sure I never
entertained a Thought in prejudice of the best Character that can be given
those Primitive Reformers; so I cannot find one Word in the whole Book which
can, no, not with the help of an Innuendo, be so much as pretended to look that
way.

Wherefore Sir, unless you can make it out, or, by the help of some of your
Distinctions, come off from it; I hope you will do me so much Justice, as you
are a Man of Truth and Honesty, to recant the Scandal, and acknowledge your
self mistaken.

And that I may leave it to every body to Judge, whether I have not just Ground
for what I say; I shall quote here all that I have said relating to the
Puritans, and impartially lay down the Matter of Fact.

After I had given a short Abridgment of our Reformation, and recited the
Controversy between Bishop Ridley and Bishop Hooper, I proceeded thus, Page
the 6th. When Queen Elizabeth Restored the Protestant Religion, and the Church
enjoyed its Peace again, the Debate revived: But the first Establishment of
King Edward, obtained so on the Minds of Men, that the farther Reformation was
rejected: The other Party being not at all Convinced, though Overruled,
submitted their Persons to the Laws, but not their Opinions; affirming, That it
was the Duty of every Christian to endeavor to serve God with the greatest
Purity of Worship as was possible; and that this was the purest Worship which
came nearest the Divine Institution, which they believed the Established
Liturgy did not; and therefore in Conscience they must be Dissenters.

Having made this Quotation, which I have sufficient Authority to prove
genuine, from a Manuscript of a famous Man in those days, which I have seen,
and on occasion am ready to produce: I go on thus:

It must be owned, that the Original Authors of these Disputes were Learned,
Devout, and Singularly Pious, strict in Conversation to Excess, if that were
possible; and from thence in a sort of happy Derision, were called Puritans: Of
whom I shall say nothing, but leave for a Record the last Speech of a famous
Foreigner; Sit anima mea cum Puritanis Anglicanis.

This is all the Words that have the least Retrospect on the Puritans, unless
you will pretend that a few words, Page 24. is meant of them, which no Man can
have any Color of Reason for: But lest that should be pretended, I shall quote
them also, Page 24.

The Dissenters can never pretend to be Dissenters upon the mere Principle of
Purity of Worship, as I have related in the beginning of this Discourse, if
such shall be received as blameless into their Communion, who have Deserted
them upon occasion of Preferment.

This refers back to Page 12. where, I say, I shall give my Essay as to what I
understand a real Dissenting Protestant is, nor can it refer to any other
place: But if you should still say it looks back to the Puritans, 'twou'd
puzzle a better Head than mine to find out a Reflection on them in it.

But this is not the only thing in which you are pleased to injure both me and
the Truth: For, Page 28. you tell me with some Heat too, That throughout my
Book, such as are so stingily (your Favorite word, Sir) bigoted to a Party,
as I, are treated with this sort of Charity, to be styled Painted Hypocrites,
such as play Bopeep with God Almighty, That if such an Occasion offer it self
to any of them to serve God and their Country in a public Station, do what the
Law requires, and which they may sinlesly do in order to it, do trespass upon
their Consciences, and D^ their Souls to save their Countries.

Sir, for God-sake, how came you to let your Passion thus outrun your Memory?

There is not one word of all this true: Pardon me that I am obliged in my own
Defense to say so: I refer you to the Criginal to convince your self of it, and
I Will take the pains to go along with you in the Examination.

First, As to Painted Hypocrites, it is spoken of the whole Body of Protestants
in England, in haec Verba.

P. 8. I must acknowledge it fares with the Chsrch of England, and with
Dissenters both, as it has always fared with Christ's Church in the whole World;
that while suppressed and persecuted, their Professors were few, and their
Profession more severe: But when Religion comes to be the Mode of a Country, so
many Painted Hypocrites, there is the Word, get into the Church, that Guile is
not to be seen till it arrive to Apostasy.

Pray, Sir, who can these Painted Hypocrites refer to, that you should say,
Innuendo, All those that are not of my Party, or that are not so stingy as I?

These painted Hypocrites must belong to that Religion which is the Mode of the
Country: which must rather mean the Church of England than the Dissenters: and
yet if I meant either of them, it cannot be made a Reflection, because it is
confined only to such as are Apostates from Religion, not such as continue to
Conform to both or either of them.

This is Judging me indeed neither with Charity nor Truth: The next Words are,
Such as play Bo-peep with God Almighty. Pray, good Sir, reflect on Solomon, and
what is said of such as judge of a Matter before they hear it: I am persuaded
you did not read the Clause; which is thus:

I had been Examining the Woeful Excuse of some people, and too many such we
had, who would take the Sacrament at the Church, and pretend 'twas done only as
a Civil Action; on which I made such Remarks as, I think, so profane a
Practice deserved; and at last added, This is playing Bo-peep with God Almighty.

And, pray Sir, if I may be so free with you, do but examine the Circumstance
as I have laid it down, and tell me from the Sincerity of your Soul, if you are
not of the same Mind.

The other Reflection is on such, who, though it be against their Consciences,
pretend it is to serve their Country: Of these, I say, They are Patriots indeed,
who will Damn their Souls to save their Country: Not that thereby I imply, that
to take the Sacrament with the Church of England, would Damn any Man's Soul, if
he communicated with a right Principle; but to do it to serve a Turn, which is
the Question in hand, I will not answer for, though it were inverted from the Church
to a Dissenting Congregation.

All these Instances, Sir, and more which I could reckon up, serve to make me
admire wherein I have so provoked you, as to remove you from your wonted
Candor: And since my Writing on a Cause, which I expected fairer Quarter in, so
exceedingly moves you, I shall choose rather to lay down the Controversy, than
to engage with a Person, who I should be very much concerned to see exceed the
Rules which he has with so much Success, and so much Applause prescribed to
others.

I always thought Men might Dispute without Railing, and Differ without
Quarrelling; and that Opinions need not affect our Tempers: But since it is not
to be found, I leave it to those who have a better Talent that way than I.

POSTCRIPT.
Besides your Book, Sir, which I think treats me Coursly enough; I am since
threatened to be worse used by a Gentleman, who thinks himself concerned in my
affronting you, as he calls it.

I assure you, Sir, I do not charge you with any part of it; I believe you to
be more a of a Christian, and more of a Gentleman, nor am I sensible I gave you
any affront, I am sure I intended you none.

But because that Gentleman, I understand, expects some Answer this way, I have
this to say to him;

That if he thinks himself capable to give me Personal Correction, he knows me
well enough, and need never want an opportunity to be Welcome.


D. F.

FINIS.

