Mr. William Hogarth.


CIBBER in the Character of Ancient PISTOL.


THE HARLOT's PROGRESS; OR, THE RIDOTTO AL' FRESCO: A Grotesque Pantomime
Entertainment. As it is performed by his Majesty's Company of Comedians AT THE
THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane. Composed by Mr. Theophilus Cibber, Comedian. The
SONGS made (to old Ballad Tunes) by a Friend.

Printed for the Benefit of Richard Cross the Prompter; and Sold at the
Theater. 1733. [Price Six Pence.]

THIS ENTERTAINMENT Is Dedicated to the Ingenious Mr. HOGARTH, (On Whose
Celebrated Designs it is Plan'd,)

By his Well wisher, and obliged Humble Servant, Theo. Cibber.
Saturday, March 31st, 1733.
Persons in the Harlot's Progress.
Harlequin, Mr. Le Brun. Beau Mordecai, Mr. Stoppelaer. Old Debauchee, Mr.
Berry. Justice Mittimus, Mr. Mullart. Mons. Poudre, Mr. Oats. Constable, Mr.
Jones. Keeper, Mr. Burnet. Porter, Mr. Peploe. Pompey, Y. Grace. Beadles, Mr.
Gray. Mr. Wright.
Miss Kitty, Miss Raftor. Madam Decoy, Mrs. Mullart. Jenny, Mrs. Grace. Bess
Brindle, Mr. Leigh.
Persons in the Ridotto al' Fresco.
Les Capricieux by Mr. Essex and Miss Robinson. The Hungarians by Mr. Houghton
and Mrs. Walter. The Fingalians by Mr. Lally Sen. and Miss Mears. Scaramouch,
Pierot, and Mezetin by Mr. Lally, Junior, Mr. Tench, and Mr. Stoppelaer. Ladies
of Pleasure by Miss Mann, Miss Atherton and Miss Price. The Marquess de Fresco
by Monsieur Arlequin en Chien.
THE HARLOT's PROGRESS; OR THE RIDOTTO AL FRESCO:
AFTER the Overture, the Curtain rises; -- the Scene represents an Inn; The
Bawd, the Country Girl, the Debauchee and the Pimp, all ranged as they are in
the first Print. -- The Parson on the Right Hand, reading the Letter, soon goes
off -- while the Bawd is persuading the Girl to go along with her, Harlequin
appears at the Window, and seeing the Country Girl, jumps down, and gets into a
Trunk which belongs to her, while the Bawd sings.

AIR I. What though I am a Country Lass.
Let Country Damsels plainly nice,
In Homespun Russet go, Sir;
While, Frolic we, cheerful as wise,
More pleasing Transports know, Sir.
They dull and coy,
Refuse the Joy,
All bashful void of Skill-a:
We gay and free
To each fond He*
Yield up our selves at Will-a.
At last our Youth and Charms decayed,
Like old experienced Sinners,
We follow the procuring Trade,
And train up young Beginners.
Thus ample Gains,
Reward our Pains;
Then mock not our Profession,
Like Courtiers we,
Secure the Fee,
And laugh at the Transgression.
After the Song, the Bawd beckons a Porter, orders him to take up the Trunk and
follow her and the Girl, which he does, with Harlequin in it. -- Then the
Debauchee comes forward, who seems to be enamored with the Girl; the Pimp
assures him he can procure her for him, upon which the Debauchee seems rejoiced
and sings in Praise of Women and Wine.

AIR II. Brisk Tom and Jolly Kate.
Brisk Wine and Women are,
The Sum of all our Joy;
A Brimmer softens every Care,
And Beauty never can cloy:
Then let us Drink and Love,
While still our Hearts are gay,
Women and Wine, by turns shall prove,
Our Blessings Night and Day.
After the Song he follows her -- the Pimp struts about and sings.

AIR III. Maggy Lawther.
Pimping is a Science, Sir,
The only Mode and Fashion,
To Virtue bids Defiance, Sir,
It Is the Glory of the Nation.
In City, Country, or in Court,
It is the Coup d' Grace, Sir;
If you your Patron's Vice support,
You need not fear a Place, Sir.
The Lawyer pimps to gain a Coif,
While Porters pimp for Hire;
Kind Betty serves his Worship's Wife,
The Page pimps for the Squire.
It Is pimping gains a large Estate,
Makes Valets wear their Swords, Sir,
For Pimps often look as big and great,
As any Duke or Lord, Sir.
After the Song he follows the Debauchee. -- The Scene changes to the Street;
the Debauchee having found Harlequin in Company with Miss Kitty, turns her out
of Doors, and the Pimp kicks out Harlequin; Kitty goes out in the greatest
Distress -- Harlequin by his Action signifies he is in Love, and is in doubt
whether to hang or drown himself, or cut his Throat, etc. At length he resolves
to follow her, and determines to dress himself like a smart Cadet, in order to
address her: To accomplish which he strikes the Ground, and there rises a
Dressing-Table fixed in a Cloud, furnished with all necessary Appurtenances. --
After he is dressed, the Table vanishes and he goes out. The Scene changes to the
Lodging that Beau Mordecai has provided for Kitty, whom he has just taken into
high Keeping. (This Scene is taken from the Second Print) she is discovered
lolling upon a Settee, attended by her Maid and Black-Boy, admiring the
Grandeur of which she is possessed, and then sings.

AIR IV. Oh! what Pleasures will abound.
Who would not a Mistress be,
Kept in Splendour thus like me?
Decked in golden rich Array,
Sparkling at each Ball and Play!
Gaily toying,
Sweets enjoying
Foreign to that thing a Wife,
Flirting, flaunting,
Jilting, jaunting,
Oh the Charming happy Life!
After the Song Harlequin creeps from under her Toilet, in the Habit of the
Cadet, and courts Miss Kitty; she appears Coy at first, but at length yields to
him. -- Then sings.

AIR V. Lad's a Dunce.
Thus finely set out,
I Will make such a Rout,
And top all the Rantipole Girls of the Town;
With Glances so bright,
Lords and Dukes I Will delight,
And make all the Rakes with their Ready come down,
The Stock-jobbing Cit,
For a hundred I Will hit,
While me he is rifling, I Will riftle his Purse;
With Saint-like Smile
I Will Zealots beguile,
And make the fond Hypocrite freely disburse.
Thus, thus in full Power,
I Will sweeten, I Will sour,
I Will whindle, I Will bluster, I Will wheedle, I Will cant,
I Will bubble, I Will blind,
Make Fools of Mankind,
Each Cully shall think he is my only Gallant,
With such Supplies
To Grandeur I Will rise,
And revel in Pleasure, in Plenty and Ease,
While in the dark,
A favorite Spark,
I Will keep at my Call to enjoy when I please.
After the Song they retire to the Bed; immediately is heard a knocking at the
Door; the Maid looks out and perceives it to be the Jew, upon which she runs
and tells her Mistress, who comes out with Harlequin in the utmost Confusion.
-- But she advises him to retire to the Bed, which he does; she sits down upon
the Settee, and orders the Maid to let Mordecai in -- when he enters he seems
angry that she made him wait so long at the Door, but is soon pacified when he
sees Kitty alone. -- He sits down by her, and is very fond of her; then orders
the Maid to get Tea, which she does -- while they are drinking it, Kitty
appears in Confusion, and makes Signs to the Maid to let Harlequin out; but
while he is attempting to steal away, he accidentally drops his Sword and Cane,
which surprises the Jew, who turning about perceives Harlequin, upon which Miss
Kitty in a Passion over-sets the Tea-Table. -- The Jew enraged, runs to secure
the Door, and is in the greatest Passion with her, she laughs at him, and they
sing the following Duette.

AIR VI. Maidens as fresh as a Rose.
Kitty.
Farewell, good Mr. Jew;
Now I hate your tawny Face;
I Will have no more to do
With you or any of your Race.
Jew.
Begone; you saucy Jade,
I will never believe thee more;
Follow the Drury Trade,
Thou shall never deceive me more.
Kitty.
Then take your self away,
Since I have choused you well, you Cull;
But come another Day,
When you have got your Pockets full.
Jew.
Be not so pert, my Dear,
This Pride may shortly have a Fall,
Soon shall I see or hear,
Madam, in Bridewell, milling Doll.
Repeat. Soon shall I see or hear, etc.
She repeats with him. Never more will I come near,
Such a pitiful pimping Fool.
After the Song he turns her and her Maid out of Doors, then pursues Harlequin.
-- A Picture falls down, Harlequin jumps through the Hangings, and the Picture
returns to its place and conceals him. -- The Subject of the Picture, which was
before an Historical Story, is now changed to a Representation of the Jew with
Horns upon his Head. -- While he stands in astonishment the other Picture
changes likewise, and represents Harlequin and Kitty embracing -- upon which
the Jew runs out in the greatest surprise. Scene changes to the Street.
Harlequin meets the Jew, who immediately draws; Harlequin catches him by the
Leg, and throws him down, jumps over him, and runs off, the Jew pursues him. --
The Scene changes to a poor Apartment in Drury Lane. (This is taken from the
Third Print) Kitty is discovered sitting disconsolate by the Bedside, drinking
of Tea, attended by Bess Brindle (a Runner to the Ladies of Pleasure) Harlequin
jumps in at the Window; she seems overjoyed to see him -- just as they are
going to sit down to drink Tea, they hear a Noise without -- Harlequin looks
through the Keyhole, and discovers it to be the Justice, Constable, Watch, etc.
He is very much surprised, and jumps into a Punch-Bowl that stands upon a
Table, to hide himself -- Justice Mittimus enters with the Constable, etc. the
Watch seize Kitty and the Runner, and carry 'em off. -- The Constable stays
behind to pilfer what he can, during which, Harlequin creeps from under the
Table; the Constable seeing him, goes to seize him, but he jumps through the
Window and escapes -- the Constable runs off. -- The Scene changes to the
Street. A melancholy Tune is played, while several Ladies of Pleasure (alias
unfortunate Women) are led cross the Stage as going to Bridewell, with Kitty
and her Maid, the Bawd, etc. Three Justices bring up the Rear. -- Scene changes
to Bridewell. The Women are discovered all leaning in an indolent manner upon
their Blocks. -- The Keeper enters, and seeing them so idle, threatens to beat
'em -- as they take up their Hammers and Beetles, and are going to beat, the
Blocks all vanish, and in their stead appear Harlequin, Scaramouch, Pierrot,
and Mezetin, each takes out his Lady to dance, and signify they will go to the
Ridotto al' Fresco; the Keeper runs away frighted, they all dance off. -- Scene
changes to the Street. A great Number of People pass over the Stage, as going
to the Ridotto, among whom appears the Marquess de Fresco, performed by the
little Harlequin Dog.

The Scene changes to the Ridotto al Fresco, illuminated with several Glass
Lustres, (the Scene taken from the place at Vaux-Hall.) Variety of People
appear in Masquerade, and a grand Comic Ballad is performed by different
Characters to English, Scotch, Irish and French Tunes, which concludes the
whole.

Then follows the Masque of the Judgment of Paris, etc.

FINIS.

