A Short TREATISE OF THE VIRTUES OF Dr. BATEMAN's Pectoral Drops: The Nature of
the Distempers They Cure, and the Manner of Their Operation.

Published by the KING's Letters Patents under the Great Seal of Great Britain.

The Seal of each Bottle.


Any Shopkeeper etc. may be furnished with these Drops, with good Allowance to
sell again, directing a Letter, or sending the Carrier, to J. Cluer in Bow
Churchyard, who is the only Person that sells the same Wholesale in London:
They are also sold Wholesale by W. Dicey in Northampton, and R. Raikes in
Gloucester.

The INTRODUCTION.
AS the Universal Good of Mankind is, or, at least, ought to be, as well the
particular End of every private Member of that large Community, as the more
general Aim and Ambition of all public Societies; it consequently follows,
That all Actions, Designs, and Inventions, tending mediately, or immediately,
to the promoting that great and glorious Design, must, in themselves, be
essentially good, and therefore Praiseworthy; and to be encouraged and
supported by all those who, partaking of that Nature, are in a Capacity to
receive the Benefit and Advantage of ^uch Undertakings: And if so, as there is
no Blessing in the Treasure of Providence of so true and inestimable a Value as
HEALTH, which (as a good Ground in a Consort of Music, modulates and forms the
Variety of Sounds, into a most agreeable and delightful Harmony) is the very
Basis and Foundation of all other subordinate Pleasures, Delights and
Satisfactions, so, on Course, the promoting, preserving, or, if lost, restoring
so precious a Jewel, must necessarily be one of the principal and most
acceptable Designs in the Latitude of humane Application; and, as such, worthy
the Encouragement and Approbation of every one, who is desirous of advancing
the Good of his Country, without this Consideration, (which, nevertheless, may
be an accidental, additional Motive) That himself may, at one time or other
probably stand in need of so great and useful a Benefit.

Now of all the numerous Train of Diseases of all the vast Variety of
Distempers, which at any Time affect the human System, there are none more to
be dreaded, none hard^r to be by Art removed, and, what is worst of all, none
more Epidemical, than the Gout, the Rheumatism, the Stone, the Jaundice, and
Asthma's; not to mention the more accidental, though frequently fatal Attacts,
which Colds, Surfeits, Agues, Fevers, Colics, Pleurisies, Melancholy, Rickets,
and a Thousand other Distempers, arising from Crudities, Flatuities, and a
Thousand other different Causes, make upon our Constitutions; each of which, if
not timely and strongly repelled, is sufficient to subvert, and at length
wholly destroy the Order and Method of the Animal Economy; and thereby procure
our certain, hasty, and, probably, unprovided Dissolution from the Life, which
it is our great and main Care and Study to preserve and prolong; which Repulse
can no how better, nor more effectually be made, than by the speedy Application
of such Remedies as are best calculated to resist, break, absorb, and expel the
noxious Particles of the morbific Matter, whose Mixture with the Particles of
the Blood, and violent Attraction of one another, causing irregular
Circulation, unequal and languid Motion, viscid Grumes, unnatural Rarefactions,
rapid Collisions, or violent Impetus therein, or other how altering the
Quality, disturbing the free Circulation, or disordering the natural Texture
and Moment of that Fluid, necessary for the Support and Preservation of Health
and Life; do by the Means give Birth to the most fatal and acute Distempers,
and dispersing themselves and their dire Effects through all the Vessels and
Channels of the Body, do in Time, if not speedily and vigorously repelled,
impair, corrupt, and destroy the Solids also, and lay the Foundation of all
those grievous and almost incurable Cronic Diseases, whereof some wretched
Part, or other of Mankind is daily and hourly complaining; among whom not a
few prolong their Misery, or hasten their End, by a tedious, unprofitable
Course of Methodical Experiments; whereby they rather pall and weaken Nature,
than relieve and restore her; being resolved, as I have often heard them
express themselves, To dye by the Hands of the Learned: While others, out of a
contrary Prejudice to all Means in general, perish for want of a timely
Application of such Remedies, as the Piety, Learning, and Industry of some
private Person, inspired with the Love of his Country, and Good of Mankind,
has, with great Pains and Labor, found out, and produced to the World, as a
more near, immediate, and effectual Preserver and Restorer of that Health they
seem so desirous to obtain, yet are so backward and unwilling to procure, though,
by that Means, attainable with very little Trouble, and less Charge.

Among which Productions, for the Good of Man kind, and cheap and easy
attaining, restoring, and preserving of Health, there never yet has been any
Thing made known to the World of that prodigious and almost incredible Virtue
and Efficacy, as Dr. BATEMAN's PECTORAL DROPS, which are justly to be preferred
to, and distinguished from all others, for their wonderful, and almost
infallable Effects, not only in Colds, Agues, Fevers, Colics, Melancholy, and
Rickets; but also in curing those great and implacable Enemies of our Health
and Ease, the Gout, Rheumatism, Jaundice, Stone, Gravel, and Astma's. But
before I can enter upon an Explanation of their Use and Manner of operating in
all these several Cases, I will, previous thereto, lay before you in short, the
Nature, Case, Rise, and Progress of those Distempers; whereby you shall
yourselves be able to judge of the Efficacy of these DROPS in relieving them:
In doing whereof, I shall not abuse your Patience, as is too commonly done,
with improbable Conjectures, incoherent Notions, unnatural Opinions, and
fantastical Inventions of the ignorant and unlearned Pretenders to Physic; but
I shall deliver you the stanch and undoubted Judgments, Decisions and Opinions
of the best and most approved Physicians and Philosophers, both ancient and
modern, such as Hippocrates, Serapion, Averrois, Galen, Sydenham, Radcliffe,
Keil, Quincey, and others of indisputed Authority and Reputation in the Arcana
of Nature. And first of the GOUT.

CHAP. I. Of the GOUT.
THIS is a Distemper of that inveterate and malignant Nature, as to be a
continual Foil and Reproach to the best Physicians of all Ages: No Method of
Physic, Diet or Habit, however regular, reasonable and orderly, no
Prescriptions, though bearing the specious and plausible Sanction of Academic
Graduate, and Collegate Learning, being able to give a Turn to this Distemper,
or reach its secret Recesses; for, retiring into the Extremities of the fine
Capillary Vessels, where, by reason of the unequal Celerity and languid Motion
of the Blood in those Parts, its venomous Particles are suffered to attract one
another with great Violence: It bids Defiance to all their Art, and will oftener
yield to one lucky Nostrum, than all the repeated Assaults of what they call
Regular Practice, which is never more ineffectual and at a Loss, than in this
Case; and more especially, if that Nostrum be prepared as These DROPS are, for
such a Species of Simples as are capable of being rendered, by such
Preparation, fit to pierce the very inmost nervous Colls, increase the Impetus
of the Vital and Animal Fluids, and follow the Particles of the morbific Matter
through all the fine Meanders of the Blood, till having disturbed their
Attraction, and broke them, by repeated Collisions, one against another, into
the minutest Parts, it forces most of them through the Pores of the Body by
Perspiration, obtunding, absorbing, and carrying the rest away with it in its
Course, till arriving at the Kidneys, they are secreted there from the Blood,
and pass away by Urine. All which Operations, These DROPS to a Miracle perform,
by Virtue of their Diaphoretic, Absorbent, and Detergent Qualities; opening at
once all the Emunctories of the Body, and forcing off, through them, the very
Root and Basis of the Distemper they are to cure; and that this is the only
effectual, rational Method of treating this obstinate Distemper the Gout, I
appeal to that great Searcher of Nature, Dr. Sydenham, who says, Whatsoever is
assistant in discharging the foul, vicious Humors, out of the Body, can never
fail of answering the Intention of Cure for which it is designed, whether in
the Gout, Rheumatism, or any other Cronic Distemper. And his Authority, I
should think, ought not reasonably to be disputed in the Cure of this
Distemper, whom, not only a vast Stock of acquired Learning, together with a
prodigious natural Capacity, improved by long and great Practice, and
Experience upon Others; but also a continued and unconquerable Gouty Habit in
his own Body, confirmed in this Opinion, That there was no other Method of
treating this terrible Distemper; which is also confirmed by what those two
admiral Physicians, Dr. Keile, and Dr. Quincey, have told us concerning the
Cause of it; which, say they, is created by the mucilaginous Glands in the
Joints becoming gritty and stiff, by Means of a sharp acid Humor flowing
thereon, which, coagulating the oily Liquor secreted by them for lubricating
the Ends of the Bones at their several Articulations, to render them apt and
ready for Motion, makes it, instead of promoting and assisting that Motion,
impeed, and prevent it, by clogging the Interstices so that they cannot move at
all, at least, not without very great Pain, hard'ning, by Degrees, into white,
chalky, gritty Stones, which are forced to be cut, or otherwise taken out by
Art, from the Joints of the Hands and Feet of the miserable Patient, as daily
Experience manifests.

Now you are to observe, That the Particles which compose this sharp acid
Humor, are surrounded with little pointed Needles, which wound and irritate
the Vessels through which they move, and the very Globules of the Blood itself,
beating and coagulating thereby any Fluid with which they mix; but these being
either obtunded and blunted, and the Points of them, as it were, sheathed and
wrapped up in some of the Particles of this Medicine, or else drove violently
against one another with a Force sufficiently to break off those little pointed
Spears, and render them capable of flying off by Perspiration by others; or
else so disturbed and separated by this new Auxillary Force, that they cannot
attract one another, but un willingly disperse themselves in the Blood, and are
many of them secretted and carried off by Urine; This, I say, must necessarily
answer the Intention of Cure; for by this Means they are rendered incapable of
irritating, loading, or coagulating any of the Fluids; and then, on Course, the
Distemper before caused by them, must by Degrees abate, and at length
absolutely cease. To which Ends and Purposes, These DROPs are so excellently
adapted and prepared, and are in their Nature so very Absorbent, Detergent and
Diaphoretic, that it is morally impossible they should fail of working a Cure,
which can only be performed by the joint Operation of those three Qualities,
which are scarce to be met with, in any considerable Degree, in any one
Medicine in the World, but THIS alone.

But, perhaps, some who understand no more of this Distemper than the Pain and
Torture it gives them, will say, That, probably in the former Stage of this
Distemper, these Drops may be effectual; but, say they, mine is in my Stomach,
Bowels, etc. and they will not be able to reach it there. But how weak and
trivial an Objection this is, will appear from a Reflection upon this Phase of
the Gout, which is only caused by a Weakness and debility of Nature, through
frequent Debauches, hard Drinking, long Courses of useless Physic, etc. whereby
the Impetus of the Blood becomes so weak and languid, and its Motion so slow
and irregular, as to permit the morbific Particles to attract one another in
the Blood Vessels of those Parts, which can only be remedied by such Things as
warm and increase the Blood's intestine Motion, so breaking and disturbing the
Attraction of the venomous Particles, and sending them back again to the
extreme Parts, where they are to be treated as before: For which Purpose,
nothing in Nature can be better fitted than These Drops, which have such a fine
invigorating Alexiterial Property in them, as to render them one of the best
Cardiacs in the whole Materia Medica.

THE Dose, in the former Phase of the Distemper, is a large Spoonful, in any
warm Vehicle, as Mountain Wine, strong Ale, etc. made as hot as you can drink
it, repeated three Nights successively, going to Bed, and, by the Blessing of
GOD, you need not fear Ease.

But in the latter Phase, where the morbific Matter is not only to be repelled,
but the faint and languid State of Nature enlivened, and invigorated, it is
necessary that you increase your Dose as the Cause may require, in any warm
Vehicle, as before; composing your self after it, and encouraging the Sweat by
all proper Methods.

After this, in order effectually to rout this most ^errible Enemy; it is
necessary you continue to take a small Dose of about 100, or 150 Drops, every.
Three Nights alternately; taking three Nights, and missing three Nights; till
such time as you find the Strength of the Distemper to abate, which it will
sensibly do in a small time, and at length quite go off.

Instances of the Cure of this Distemper, by These DROPS, might be given in
great Numbers, from Persons of undoubted Credit, and Reputation, on enquiry,
would satisfy the Curious of their wonderful Effect in that Intention; but not
being willing to tire the Reader; and these Drops by their continual Success,
so strongly recomending themselves; I shall out of a very great multitude only
trouble you with a few, as you will find at the end of this Treatise.

CHAP. II. Of the Rheumatism.
HAving in the foregoing Chapter, been so very particular in describing the
Origin, Nature, Rise, Progress and Cure of the Gout; there will be the less
need of enlarging in this upon a Dissemper, so near a kin to it as the
Rheumatism; even so near, as, in many Constitutions, to be owing to the same
Cause, with this only Difference in the Effect, that as the former preys
chiefly upon the Joints, and extreme parts of the Body; This, for the most part
affects the Membrana communis Musculorum, or rather, to speak more properly,
the Membrana adeposa; at least that part of it which lies between the Muscles,
and the Cutis, and is the Basis or the Cellulae adeposae; being full of small,
fine Glands for the secretion of that Oily. Sulphurous Matter, of which the
Adeps or Fat is composed, which Sulphurous Oil being coagulated, by the same
means, says a learned Author, and from the same Causes, as the Juices of the
Mucilaginous glands in the Joints, are in the Gout; that is to say, from the
Attraction of sharp, acid Particles, secreted from a viscous Blood; this
Membrane, in which those Glandulae adeposae are situated, becomes suff, harsh
and rigid, and unapt for Motion, the Oil which those Glands continually
discharge for lubricating the Muscles, being all turned by Coagulation into a
fizey thick Jelly: So that every time the Muscle or Muscles, round which that
part of this Membrane is wrapped, contract, in order to perform Muscular Motion;
they are, instead of being assisted therein by that lubricating Oil, impeeded
and confined by the stiffness of the Coagulum, and the Rigidity and Harshness
of the surounding Membrance, 'till, by force of the nervous fluid flowing into
the Fibers, and extending them in the Contraction, they force it to give way;
which is not without great Pain, and consequent Weakness and Soreness of that
Part: Not to mention the Pains caused by the unnatural Distentions of the
Vessels, from the Quantity of Viscid Serum obstructing them and hindering the
free Circulation of the Blood; especially in the fine Capillary Channells,
without a considerable Dilatation; from whence, not seldom proceed Astma's,
Pleurisyes, Peripneumonys, Inflammations, Fevers and Death.

This is only to be remedied by Diluents and Evacuating Medicines, as in the
Gout; but not by any common Evacuators; many or most of which weaken Nature too
much in their Operations, and being used without proper Diluents, will
evap'rate all the real natural Serum, and leave nothing but a sort of Serous
Jelly in the Blood; which thereupon will either immediately Stagnate, or
Effervesce in such a manner, as to cause a violent putrid Fever, and, without
almost a Miracle, the certain Death of the Patient: It is true, they may ease
the violent Pains of this Distemper, but if at the same time they increase the
Inflammation, and Effervescence of the Blood, the Fever proportionably
increases, and the poor deluded Patient dies; as too many do by common
Practice: Whereas these DROPS dilute and expel what is redundant; whereby the
Blood is restored to its natural Crasis, it is due Velocity, and Impetus
recovered, the Pains cease, the Fever abates, perfect Health ensues. Besides
which by their Alexiterial, Cardiac Qualities, at the same time that they thus
increase the Impetus and Moment of the Fluids to the Discharge of the Morbific
Matter in Prespiration; they also warm and comfort the whole nervous Sistem,
assist mightily in repairing the Waste of the animal Spirits, occasioned
thereby; which is evident in what has been already said of them concerning the
Gout in the Stomach, and Bowels, proceeding from a real Weakness and Decay of
Nature.

In short, no Preparation was ever yet found out so suitable to the very Nature
of this Distemper as these DROPS; which will plainly appear from the vast
number of Certificates of Cures wrought by them every Week, out of which I have
thought fit to trouble you with but a few.

THE Dose and manner of ordering your self, is the same as before directed in
the Gout; to be varied according to the Distempor, and strength of the
Patient's Constitution, from 80, to 150 or 200 Drops, in any convenient
Vehicle; which need not be so strong and spiritous as in that Distemper; but
must be drank as warm as possible going to Bed, and Covering your self up warm,
as before.

CHAP. III. Of the JAUNDICE.
TO give you an exact Theory of this Distemper, would tak^ up more room than
this short Treatise will admit of: I shall therefore, as I have done by the
other Distempers, in the foregoing Chapters, open it so far to you, as to
convince you, tha^ these DROPS are the best Specific (if I may be indulged
tha^ Term) in the whole Materia Medica, to break through it is Schirrous
Obstructions, and finally eradicate it and all its dreadful Symptoms ou^ of the
humane Body.

This Distemper arises from obstructions in the Glands of the Liver thereby
preventing a due Secretion of the Gall from the Blood, by them, in that Viscus,
which Bilious Particles circulating therewith gives a Yellow Tiucture to the
Mucus or Corpus Reticulare spread under the Cuticula, which from thence appears
of that Color: This is the first and common Phase of this Distemper; but it
will sometime^ and more especially in hard Drinkers, arrive to that height, as
to Cause a frequent Spitting and Vomiting of Blood, which is generally reckoned
a Mortal Symptom; for it is caused by the Obstructions it the Hepatie Glands
becoming schirrous, and so indurated, as with great Difficulty (if at all) to
be opened again; which straitens the Motion of the Blood through that Viscus so
much, as to cause it to revulse with a great Motion into the Gastrick Arteries,
which go of from the Hepatic, insomuch, that breaking through them, it drains
into the Stomach, and by that means the Course of that fluid is altered the
Secretion of the Bile at an End, and the whole System destroyed. So that this
latter Stage of the Distemper is seldom or never to be cured; but may easily be
prevented by taking the former Phase in time; powerfully deterging those
tartarous obdurating Particles ou^ of the Blood; which can only be by strong
Detergents and Diaphoreticks, (which I have already proved to you these DROPS
are and therefore cannot fail of Curing, if taken in time, and followed up,
till by a Continuation they become perfect Alteratives:) And if any thing will
cure the latter Phase of this Distemper, these DROP^ will, having done Wonders
in it, even when the Patients have been given over by their Physicians, and the
Distemper baffled their utmos^ Skill.

THE Dose, and manner of ordering your self with them, is a^ before directed,
in the Gout.

CHAP. IV. Of the Stone and Gravel.
THESE are one and the same Distemper, in two several Degrees; the Stone being
only concreted Gravel, and the Gravel the Matter whereof the Stone is formed;
and in some wha^ is washed off it by powerful Nepritics and Lytholutics; both
of them being in their Degree an aggregate of the tartarous Particles of the
Urine, pent up by the Straitness of the Urinary Ducts; which is only to be
cured by dissolving the Stone, widening and deterging the Passages; and ridding
the Blood of those tartarous Particles by Diaphoretics, before the Secretion of
Urine is performed: All which several Operations these DROPS perform to a
Wonder, and have, by their Detergent Diuretic Quality, brought away, from
several Persons, STONES of the Size of a small Nut Kernel, when every other
Remedy has failed to give them Ease; and, by being continued afterward, have
cleans'd the Blood of its tartarous Particles, so as to prevent another Fit for
many Years.

THE Dose is as in the Gout, in a Cup of White Wind Posset Drink, Old Hock,
Green Tea, or any other potent Diuretic; made very warm, and sweetened with an
Ounce of Syrup of Mash-Mallows, going to Bed immediately on taking them, and
they give Ease instantly.

CHAP. V. Of ASTHMAS.
THE prodigious Variety of Causes from whence this Distemper proceeds, in
different Constitutions, gives it so many various Species and Degrees, as to
render it one of the most difficult Disorders to be skilfully managed of any
affecting the human System. But the chief sorts are, the Humid, the Dry, and
the Nervous Asthma; of each of which I will separately give a few Hints
concerning their Causes and Systems, and then proceeding to the Description of
the Effects of these Drops in all those Intentions.

But first, it is necessary to premise what an Asthma is in general; That it is
a frequent, difficult, and short Respiration, or Breathing, joined with a
hissing Sound, and a Cough; especially in the Night, in cold Weather, and in a
prone Posture, or lying down: The former because the Pressure of the Atmosphere
is greater in the Night than in the Day, when the noxious Vapors are exhaled
and dispel'd by the Force of the Sun Beams. In the Night, by reason of the
Pores of the Body being contracted by the circumambient Cold, our Transpiration
is lessened, and consequently a Gravedo or Weight of perspirable Matter ensues;
which being flung upon the Lungs, clogs them, and renders them less apt to
perform their Office; and in the last Case, from the Pressure which the
Contents of the Abdomen, when the Body is in that Posture, make upon the
Diaphragm, thereby lessening the Capacity of the Thorax or Breast, so that the
Lungs are too much confined, and cannot dilate themselves sufficient to receive
a due Quantity of Air.

This being premised, it will be easily understood, how these several Kinds of
Asthmas are produced: The first or Humid, called also the Pleuretic Asthma,
arises from the Redundance of Rheumatic Serum, and viscous Humors in the
Blood, which being too thick to pass through the small Fibers of the Lungs
stick close to the Sides of those Vessels, and obstruct the Blood in its
Circulation; the Parts swell and often ulcerate, with great Pain, feverish
Habbits, and difficulty of breathing: Or else the pituitous Particles are
spewed out into the Bronchiae, especially if not impregnated with a due
Proportion of Salts, causing a continual irritating Cough: In both which Cases
all inciding Pectorals are good, all Diaphoretics, and whatever attenuates and
lessens the Quantity of Serum; by that means depleting the extended Vessels,
and working a Revulsion of the stagnating Humors: Which nothing can better
effect than these DROPS, which evacuate both by Perspiration and Urine, and are
certainly, at the same time, one of the very best Cardiacs in the whole World.

The next Species of this Distemper, is the dry or plethoric Asthma, caused
either by too great a Repletion of a cachochy mious Blood called a Plethora, or
else by too great a Rarefaction of that Fluid in its Vessels; so that the fine
Canalls of the Lungs are too far distended; and consequently there is not room
enough for the Air to inflate the Vessels, which produces an Inability of
Respiration, for want of a due Degree of Expansion in that Viscus: Such Persons
are generally crying out for Air; they always seem as if girted hard upon their
Chest, and are almost become Victims to a long Scorbutic Cachetic Habit; of
which this is the last, and oftentimes, for want of proper Remrdies applied in
time, fatal Symptoms; for in this Case there is no time to use Alteratives,
which work but slowly in the Mass of Blood; whereas, here we want an immediate
Assistance; which can only be obtained by a Conjunction of Cardiacs and
Diapheretics, both which Qualities are eminently distinguishable in these
DROPS; which can therefore never fail the Intention of Cure in this Distemper.

The Third and last Sort of Asthma I ment^on'd, was the Nervous; which is
occasioned by a Deficiency of the Pectoral Muscles, for want of a sufficient
Quantity of Spirits to nourish and contract them; and is the dire Effect of a
nervous Atrophy; and to be remedied by high, and vigorous Cardiacs; to rouse
and invigorate decaying Nature, and, as it were, re-enkindle the almost
extinguished Lamp of Life; which nothing can perform more effectually than
these DROPS, which have a prodigious Influence in reviving the drooping
Spirits, warming and comforting the Nerves, increasing the Moment of the Blood,
and doing every other Office requisite to call back the almost fleeting Life,
by their admirable Cardiac Quality; insomuch that many have been restored to a
Miracle, from even Death's Door by them alone, both in this and other Cases.

THE Dose in all these three Cases, is as before in the Gout, in any convenient
Vehicle, but good Mountain Wine is best, if it can be procured, made very warm,
as before; and taking Care you do not get Cold after it.

CHAP. VI. Of Colds, Agues, Fevers, etc.
I Put these Distempers all in one Class, because they have a mutual Relation
the one to the other, as the Cause has to the Effect, and Econtia, and as
different Effects produced from the same Cause have to one another; for it may
generally be allowed, that what we call Colds are the Basis, or Groundwork of
most of those Epedemic Fevers, which so commonly rage in this Kingdom: for
perspiration being diminished through a Contraction of the pores, caused by the
perception of external Cold, the perspirable Matter flies off in a less
Quantity than when the pores are more relaxed; and that part thereof which
cannot get out, returns back into the Blood, which it heats and irritates more
or less, according to the Quantity of Matter retained, forcing it to distend
it is Vessels, and producing thence frequently a Solutio continui, whence
follows the Idea of pain in that part, with a Gravedo or He winess of the whole
Frame, but especially of the diseased part; or else, a Coryza or Defluxion of
serous, sharp Humors from the Glands of the Head, through the Eyes, Nose, Mouth,
etc. from whence, if speedy Care is not taken, are engendered Asthma's,
Consumptions, Fevers, etc. and a whole Train of Evils which may be easily and
certainly prevented, by a timely Use of some proper Evacuator, which shall by
its Diaphoretic Quality, discharge the Blood of its Load of foreign deleterious
Matter; and force off the offending Particles through the Pores; which we call
Sweating: To which Purpose, there is no one Thing in Nature more effectual than
these Drops, which are a most powerful Diaphoretic, and never fail of Success
in the most stubborn Cold whatever. It is an old and indeed most excellent
Maxim.

"venienti occurrite morbo. Prevent a threatening Disease, for as the English
Proverb has it, A Stitch in Time saves nine. And so it is here, a single Dose
seldom or never fails curing a Cold, whereas if you let that Cold grow into a
Fever, it may be the Work of several to complete the Cure; and glad you may be
to come off so; for nothing corrupts the Blood more than a Cold, by irritating,
and inflaming it to the highest Degree; whence proceed Putrefactions, which if
not evacuated by proper Remedies, increase the Fervor, and often generate
acute, putrid, and malignant Fevers, whose dire Effects daily Examples
sufficiently demonstrate to every one's Experience. These deleterious and
malignant Particles are therefore to be evacuated, both by augmenting the
before diminished Perspiration, and the ^^^^ary Secretion; for by that means, a
great Quantity of them pass off with the discharged Sarum, and on Course leffen
the Fermentation in the Blood: But unless at the same Time, you use proper
Cardiacs to refresh Nature, she will sink under this vast Burden, for the
Hurry and Heat the Blood is in, necessarily consumes a vast Quantity of the
animal Spirits, which decaying faster than N^^ure can possibly return them, she
must certainly ^all beneath the prodigious Wast; unless relieved by some
auxiliary Force. Now as I have often mentioned before th^se Drops are both
Draphorene, D^^^er^e, and Ca^^iac; containing in themselves all those three
gr^^^ Qualities, absolutely necessary in a complete Febr^^uge, and ^^^^elves by
the Blessing of God effect a perfect Cure without (...) drop of any other
Medicine.

As for Agues they are only the Intermissions of Fevers, the cold Fit being
only an accidental, and not an essential Property thereunto; so that as they
are properly a Species of a Fever, they are to be treated after the same
Manner, and the Method and Intention of Cure, is the very same; and if so then
consequently the same Remedy that prevails against one, cannot fail in the
other.

And here, I cannot omit mentioning one peculiar Property in these Drops,
sufficient of its self to recommend them effectually to all the reasonable Part
of Mankind; who are not wedded to methodical Error; and that is, their most
powerful Energy in clearing the Blood from the Dregs of that fashionable (but
in many Cases pernicious) Drug the Bark of Peru; commonly called, The Jesuits
Bark. This is the public Asylum of Mankind, the Panacea of the World, the
sovereign and universal Orvietem against all the Diseases of Pandora's Box, and
what not, in the Opinion of those valetudinarian Wretches, who dare not eat a
Meal's Meat, open a Chamber Window, or so much as go to Stool, without the
Leave of their Physician; whose constant Prescription is still the Bark, in
some Form or other: If Madam has got a Fit of the Vapors, the Bark will cheer
her Spirits; If she has taken too plentiful a Dose of Ratifea, the Bark will
make her as sober as a Nun; If she is Lovesick, the Bark is to moderate her
Desires; and if she is in the raging Fever of Jealousy, the Bark is to make her
believe that her Husband is as constant as a Turtle: In short, whenever the
Privy-Counceller of Health is at a Loss what to do for his Guinea, he persuades
his Patient she has an Intermitting Fever, and Bark is the Word to save the
Expense of further thinking. Now by this you may judge, whether this gigantic
Protean Drug, which is whimsically applied to so many chimaerical Evils, is of
any valuable Use, any substantial Benefit to Mankind in real Disorders, and
Maladies, arising from a vitiated State of the Fluids. We seldom play with
serious Matters, nor make Children Rattles of Diamonds. One learned
Practitioner says, the Bark is a violent Styptic, and Astringent; another, it
is solutive, and will of it is self, without proper Alteratives, pass
immediately downwards; One says it consists of a fixed Salt. another of a
volatile, and a third that it is a Composite of both: One that it gives a Spur
to the intestine Motion of the Blood; another that it locks up every Thing in
the Blood, Some and those of Note too assert, that if given in large
Quantities, it will by it is attenuating Property create an Anasarca, or Dropsy;
others that it is itself sufficient if taken in Time to cure a Dropsy: One
forbids the Use of it in Rheumatick Fevers, for fear it is attenuating Virtue
rarely the Mass of Blood, and thereby enlarge the Dimensions of it is Vessels,
so far, as to occasion an Aneurisma or Rupture, or at least greatly increase
the Idea of pain, of which Opinion, are no less Men then the famous Morton and
Sydenham; whereas another later practitioner, no ways inferior to either, by
all means indicates the Bark in this Case, grounding his Notion upon Reason,
and to use his own Words, conte^^ing and changing the common and trite but
deceitful Method of Practice by Observation.

Now if this be the Case, that these great and learned Men cannot agree among
themselves, neither as to the Nature, nor Effect of this magical Drug; is it
not greatly to be feared, and that with very good Reason, that if one is
mistaken, they may all of them be so; the Consequence whereof will be, that
this famous panacea, like the Jay in the Fable, stripped of all it is borrowed
pomp, will appear to be of no other Use, but to fill up the Variety of Nature's
Works; receiving a value only from Opinion, grounded on the Weakness of one
part of the World, and the Wileyness of the other.

But if there be ana Virtue in this Drug, the Taste itself seems to point it out
to be Styptic, and Astringent, which is also generally allowed by all who have
any Skill in it; while for Fashion sake they admit of other Qualities, as it
were by prescriptive Right; and for Interest invent new ones to authorize it is
Administration in some present Necessity: Now, if once it is allowed, the Bark
is Styptick and Astringent, it points out directly to the Manner of it is
Operation and Effect; in seemingly giving a Turn to some certain periodical
Exacerbations; for which it is more generally adminisser'd, as intermitting
Fevers, Hemicranea's, Haemoptoes, Epilepsies, and Hysteries; which says a great
and learned Author, are to be relieved by the Cortex only; but what Way is this
Relief to be had? why, says the same Author, the Cortex locks up the febrile
Ferment in the Blood; and, says he, in another Place, If Catharticks be given
soon after it they make the Type of the Fever return in it is old Shape, for
when the Bark is carried off, what locks up the Distemper? From whence I
conclude, that this mighty Medicine, like a cunning Mountebank, deludes us with
plausible Appearances, and instead of really working a Cure, only postpones the
Exacerbation, it may be for a Week, or a Fortnight, by locking the Cause up in
the Veins; which upon any accidental Cold, little Irregularity, or imprudent
Management, breaks out again with double Violence; the Consequence whereof is
not seldom attended with the Death of the Patient, as common Experience daily
confirms; unless with Morton you continue dosing your Patient with it every ten
Days, till the next Syzygy; or else with another great Physician give him as
much after the Distemper is taken off as was sufficient to take it off in order
to prevent a Return, supposing that

'que facta liberant, si ante fiant, prohibent. And pray what must the
Consequence of this be; why, the Mass of Blood is impregnated with so
prodigious a Quantity of Styptic Particles, that the Price you pay for your
imaginary Cure is a valetudinary State as long as you live; becoming entailed
upon your Physician, as much as his Patrimony, since few that have been weak
enough to be persuaded into this Habit, have the Resolution to get rid of the
Poison afterward, unless by the same Hand that gave it them: whereas would
they be wise at lest, and get rid of their troublesome, dangerous Inmate as
soon as they can, by dete^ging and cleansing their Blood, they might in time,
by the Blessing of providence, restore that Fluid to it is natural Crasis, and
by Deg^^es, overcome the malevolent Effects of their fashionable physic, for
which purpose, as well at the other Intentions in this Treatise, these DROPS
have been greatly commended by several who have happily experienced their
Effects; and those among the learned World, of both our Universities, and by
them recommended in this very Intention to the World, for the general good of
Mankind.

CHAP. VII. Of the other VIRTUES of these DROPS.
HItherto I have laid before you the particular Effects of these DROPS, in
particular Cases; and that not by a dogmatical Assertion of their Virtues, or
any canting Declaration of their specific Influence, and occult Qualities,
Terms only serving to cover Ignorance and Imposition: But I have carried you
through all the Meanders of Nature, in her several Turns and Windings, in her
several various Phases, and Symptomical Appearances upon every Case affecting
the humane System; which this noble and efficacious Medicine is capable of
searching: And from thence drawn such easy and rational Conclusions upon their
Operations, as to make it visible to every Capacity that has but the least
Notion of the Connection between Causes and their Effects, etc. that they cannot
fail in the several Intentions wherein they are advised; a Task which not any
Self-Interest, nor any sinister View of serving my own Turn, has in the least
indu'd me to; but purely the universal Good of Mankind, and Charity to my
Fellow Creatures; as is plainly evident from the established Reputation these
Drops have already gained in the World, the surprising Cures they have wrought,
and the vast Quantities of them sold throughout the whole Kingdom: So that,
there was no Occasion upon any of these Accounts to have been either at the
Trouble or Charge of this Treatise, but purely to convince G^nsayers of their
admirable Nature and Efficacy in the Intentions aforementioned, to inform the
ignorant of the Nature of their several Cases, and where they may meet with a
speedy, certain, and safe Cure for their respective Maladies. And lastly, to
assure the whole World that these Drops are no Quack Preparation o^ Drugs
injudiciously mixed and ^umbled together, without either Art or Design, but such
as are grounded on both, and carefully suited to answer the several Intentions
to which they are designed; which any one capable of forming a right Judgment
of Things, may on the reading this short Treatise, be sufficiently convinced
of: Wherefore I shall enlarge no further on this Subject, only to assure you,
that besides the several foregoing Intentions, these Drops are also wonderful
in their stopping Diarrhea's and luxes of all Kinds; Vomitings, Hamoptoes, and
other dangerous unnatural Discharges which weaken and destroy the entire humane
System; They give immediate Ease in Colics of what Kind soever, whether St^ne,
Wind, B^^^us or Hysterie; raise the languishing Frame of Nature (...)
Consumptions, and Marasmi, if taken before the Lungs are ent^^ely corrupted,
raise and cheer the Spirits in melancholy Despondency, Hypocondriac and
Hysteric Vapors; give a new Life in all Paralytic Evils; restoring Sense and
Motion to the almost perished Limb; They bring out the Small Pox, Measles and
Rashes, to a Wonder; cure the Rickets in Children, ease After-Pains, prevents
Miscarriages to a Miracle, and are in short the greatest Restorer and
Strengthner of Nature in the whole World.

Note, No Person ever yet afflictied with the most violent Cough and Cold, took
this Medicine, but what has been cured by taking one Bottle only.

A Printed Bill of Directions is given with each Bottle.

Here follows some few, out of the many Thousands of Certificates of Cures
effected by these DROPS; which Certificates are not extorted by any sinister
Means; but they are the true, genuine and spontaneous Declarations which the
Persons receiving Benefit from these Drops have voluntarily made to let the
World know their great Efficacy and Virtue; many of which Persons who have been
violently and grievously afflicted with intolerable Pains, etc. have begged for
God's sake, that it might be published for the Good of Mankind, That these
Drops alone restored them to their Health and Strength.
I Gregory Cripwell, of Bunny, near Nottingham, was for a long time grievously
troubled with the Rheumatism, and had not the least Use of one Limb or Joint
about me, insomuch that I have often desired to dye to be out of my Misery: All
the Medicines that I took was to no Purpose: At length, by the Advice of Sir
Thomas Parky^s, of Bunny abovesaid, Bart. I took a Dose of Dr. Bateman's Drops,
and immediately found Ease, and slept the greatest part of the Night, though I
had not slept for above a Week before, and am now, blessed be God, as well as
ever I was in my Life.

Witness my Hand, June 4. 1725. George Cripwell.

We whose Names are underwritten, are Witnesses to the Truth of the abovesaid
Certificate.

Sir Thomas Parkyns, Bart. Nathaniel Henson, Thomas Henson, Thomas Lineker,
John Lineker, Thomas Hornbuckle, Henry Shepherd, Joseph Street, John
Shepherd, John Brown, * George Smith, Henry Cooper, Humphrey Wainwright.

* This Man was cured of the Ague by taking one Dose only.

I Mary T^^slove, Boddice-maker in Northampton, was for many Years afflicted
with intolerable ^ains in the Back, not in^erior to those I had felt in
Travail. I could find no Relief, 'till I made use of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral
Drops, Two Doses of which entirely freed me from all my pain and Misery. Mary
Treslove.

I Richard Row of Moulton-Marall Lodge, in the County of Warwick, was for many
Months troubled with a Third Day Ague and Fever, and could find no Relief,
'till I made use of Dr. Bateman's Drops, which restored me to my former
Strength. Richard Row.

I Mary Wright of Stapleton in Leicestershire, was for many Years troubled with
the Rheumatism, insomuch that I had entirely lost the Use of one Arm. Tongue
could not express my pain, physicians could do me no good; but blessed be God,
Bateman's Drops eased me of all my pains. Witness my Hand, Mary Wright.

I William Kempion, Farrier, of Dainton in Northamptonshire, had lost the Use
of my Arms with the Rheumatism, and could find no Relief 'till I took Dr.
Bateman's Drops, which perfectly restored me to the Use of my Limbs. Witness,
William Kempion.

I Edward Thirst of Rushden in Northamptonshire, was brought so low with an
Ague, that I could not walk cross the Room; and no Medicine did me any good,
'till I took Dr. Bateman's Drops, which restored me to my former Strength.
Edward Thirst.

I Robert Abbott, Servant to Mr. Martin of Cotesbrook in Northamptonshire,
having lost the Use of my Limbs by a Numbness or dead Palsy, was restored to
my former Strength by Dr. Bateman's Drops. Robert Abbott.

I William Emlee of Shaftsbury, having been for above ten Years past so
violently afflicted with the Gout, that my Life was burdensome to me, was
restored to perfect Health and Strength by Dr. Bateman's Drops, and can ride or
walk as well as ever. William Emlee

I Robert Hinton of Shaftsbury has been for near twenty Years past grievously
afflicted with the Gout and Rheumatism, and for the last five Years was forced
to use Crutches, and lived in continual Pain and Misery, in spite of all the
Physicians or Remedies that could be procured for Money; was by Dr. Bateman's
Drops restored to the Use of my Limbs, and I thank God I have now thrown away
my Crutches. Robert Hinton.

The following Letter came from Mr Johnson of Chelsea.

HAving for a long time been violently troubled with the Gout and Rheumatism, I
was advised to make use of Dr. Batemans Drops, which I did, and, to my great
Surprise, and the Wonder of my Friends, in two Hours I found so much Ease, that
I thought my self in Paradise; and (blessed be God) (...)


