PATIE and PEGGY: OR, THE FAIR FOUNDLING.

A SCOTCH BALLAD OPERA. As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane. By
His MAJESTY's Servants.

Vix ea nostra Voco. With the MUSIC prefixed to each SONG.

LONDON: Printed for J. WATTS at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court, near
Lincoln's End Fields. MDCCXXX. [Price 1 s.]

PREFACE.
THAT I am indebted to Mr. Ramsay's GENTLE SHEPHERD, ( a Scotch Pastoral
Comedy, wrote Originally in Five Acts) for the greatest Part of the following
Piece, was not owing to my Idleness, but a Doubt of my Abilities to produce any
Thing entirely New of this kind, that might plead so much pretense to Favor:
As Nature is the same in all Ages, and Climes, I thought, the Simplicity of
Characters, Manners, Sentiments, and Passions, which has gained THAT POEM its
Reputation, could not prove unentertaining to an ENGLISH AUDIENCE; which
induced me to turn it into a Ballad Opera: and as the Beauties of the Original
have been thought many, I have scarce ventured to make any farther Alterations
than were absolutely necessary, in bringing the Tale within the Compass of One
Act, adding to the Number of the Songs, and changing it into the English
Dialect, without which, it had not been intelligible to our Auditors; nor
indeed had I time to vary it more, my Benefit being fixed before I had laid my
Design, which was plan'd and finished in one Day. When I mention my Benefit, I
cannot omit the Opportunity of returning my grateful humble Thanks, to All
whose Favors I have been so frequently honored with, and hope I am not too
vain, when I declare, it ever was, and will be, my utmost Ambition to deserve
such Kindness, by my frequent Endeavors, whenever I may have Power, (and as
far as my poor Capacity will allow) to add to the Variety of public
Diversions. The Warmth of my Heart might make me tedious, and impertinent,
should I proceed; I shall therefore only add, though the CHARACTERS in this OPERA
are low, I flatter myself, they will not appear distasteful to the politest
Circle of our ENGLISH BEAUTIES.

Theater Royal, April the 20th, 1730. T. C.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir William Worthy, Mr. Williams. Patie, Mrs. Roberts. Roger, Mr. Cibber Jun.
Glaud, Mr. Roscoe. Simon, Mr. Berry.
WOMEN.
Peggy, Miss Raftor. Jenny, Mrs. Grace. Margery, Mrs. Shireburn.
PATIE and PEGGY.
SCENE a Village. Enter Patie and Roger. AIR I. The bonny grey-ey'd Morn.
^ PATIE THE bonny gray-ey'd Morning begins to peep,
And Darkness flies before the rising Ray,
The hearty Hind starts from his lazy Sleep,
To follow healthful Labors of the Day.
Without a guilty Sting to wrinkle his Brow,
The Lark and the Linnet he hears with Glee,
And he joins their Concert driving the Plow;
From Toil of Grimace and Pageantry free.
While fluster'd with Wine, or madden'd with Loss
Of half an Estate, the Prey of a Main,
The Drunkard and Gamester tumble and toss,
Wishing for Calmness and Slumber in vain.
Be my Portion Health and Quietness of Mind,
Placed at due distance from Parties and State,
Where neither Ambition nor Avarice blind,
Reach him who has Happiness linked to his Fate.
How wholesome it is to snuff the cooling Air,
And all the Sweets it bears, when void of Care!
Freely, Friend Roger, say, what ails thee then?
Tell me the Cause of thy ill-season'd Pain.

Rog. I Am born, O Patie, to a froward Fate!
I Am born to strive with Hardships sad and great.
Tempests may cease to swell the raging Flood,
And prowling Wolves to suck our Lambkins Blood.
But I, oppressed with never-ending Grief,
Must still despair of lighting on Relief.
You have so soft a Voice, and smooth a Tongue,
You are the Darling both of Old and Young;
Charmed by your Throat, our Woods with Echoes ring:
The Lasses jeer me if I try to sing.
Nature unkind denies me that sweet Art,
And all my Harmony is in my Heart.

Pat. The Bees shall loath the Flower, and quit the Hive,
Willows on marshy Grounds shall cease to thrive,
E're scornful Maids, or Loss of worldly Gear,
Shall spoil my Rest, or ever force a Tear.
AIR II. A New Scotch Tune.
^ My Peggy smiles so kindly,
Whenever I whisper Love,
That I look down on all the Town,
That I look down upon a Crown.
My Peggy smiles so kindly,
It makes me blithe and bold;
My Peggy is a gay young Thing,
And I Am not very old.
In vain from me you would your Sorrows hide,
Your well-seen Love, and scornful Jenny's Pride:
With freedom to your Friend, your Grief impart;
I Will share your Griefs, or case your o'er-fond Heart.
Confess, fair Jenny causes all this Smart.

Rog. I wish I could not love her, but in vain,
I still must dote and feed her proud Disdain;
No other Lass, though fair, my Heart alarms,
They but remind me of my Jenny's Charms;
Not Time or Absence can abate my Flame,
She still is beauteous, and my Love the same.

Pat. Fond Swain! leave off that silly whining Way;
Seem careless, there is my Hand, you will win the Day.
AIR III. Fie Gar rub her over with Straw.
^ Never feed her Pride with fond Respect,
Who pays your Kindness with a Slight;
Seem unconcerned at her Neglect:
All Women in a Man delight:
But them despise who are soon defeat,
And with a simple Face give way
To a Repulse, -- then never retreat,
Push boldly on, and win the Day.
When Maidens, innocent and young,
Their fond and tender Hearts belie;
Never mind their pretty lying Tongue,
But mark the Language of the Eye:
If these agree, and she persist
To answer all your Love with Hate,
Seek elsewhere to be better blessed,
And let her sigh when it is too late.
[Exeunt.
Enter Peggy and Jenny. Peg. Nay, tell me now, dear Jenny, why the Swain
Who Loves so well you treat with cold Disdain;
Faith, you will repent it, should his Love grow cold.
What Is like a scornful Maiden, when she is old?
AIR IV. Polwart on the Green.
^ Coy Jenny, you will repent,
Should Roger's Heart grow cold;
None will your Smiles regard,
Soon as your Face looks old.
The froward Child thus in a Pet,
Though it is by Hunger pressed,
Whimpers and quarrels with its Meat,
'Till laughed at by the rest,
They jest it till the Dinner's past;
Thus by it self abused,
The foolish Chit's obliged to fast,
Or eat what they have refused.
Ah, Jenny, think, and do not lose your Time.

Jenny. I never thought a single Life a Crime.

Peg. Indeed! -- but Love in whispers tells me then,
That Men were made for us, and We for Men.
But do you as you list; for me, I find,
I shall be yielding, as my Patie's kind.

Jen. We soon shall hear what a distracted Life.
You two will lead, when once you're Man and Wise.

Peg. I Will run the Risque, nor have I any Fear,
But rather think each tedious Day a Year,
'Till I with Pleasure mount my Bridle Bed,
Where on my Patie's Breast I Will lean my Head.
Then he may kiss as long as kissing's good,
And what we do, there is none dare call it rude.

Jen. He may indeed, for ten or fifteen Days,
Be fondly lavish of his Love and Praise;
But Love once cloyed, what then are your Delights?
Dull tedious Days, and lonesome restless Nights!
AIR V. O dear Mother, what shall I do.
^ O dear Peggy, Love's beguiling,
We ought not to trust his smiling;
Better far to do as I do,
Lest a harder Luck betide you.
Lasses, when their Fancy's carried,
Think of naught but to be Married;
Running to a Life destroys
Gladsome, free and youthful Joys.

Peg. Such homespun Thoughts as these want Force to move
My settled Mind, I am far gone in Love.
My Patie speaks with such a taking Art,
His Words they thrill like Music through my Heart.
And his good Sense will long his Love secure;
Ill Nature rests in Souls are weak and poor.
AIR VI. As down in a Meadow, etc.
^ How can I be sad, when a Husband I Have chose,
That has better Sense, than any of those
Sour weak silly Fellows, that study like Fools,
To sink their own Joy, and make their Wives Tools.
The Man who is prudent never brawls with his Wise,
Or with dull Reproaches encourages Strife;
He praises her Virtue, and never will abuse
Her for a small Failing, but find an Excuse.

Jen. But what if some young Wanton he should spy,
With dimpled Cheek, and a bewitching Eye?

Peg. No more of that -- dear Jenny, to be free,
Some Men in Love more constant are than we:
Nor is the Wonder great, when Nature kind
Has blessed 'em with Solidity of Mind.
AIR VII. Corn Riggs are bonny.
^ My Patie is a Lover gay,
His Mind is never muddy;
His Breath is sweeter than new Hay,
His Face is fair and ruddy:
His Shape is handsome middle size,
He Is comely in his walking,
The shining of his Eyes surprise,
It Is Heaven to hear him talking.
See yon two Elms, that grow up side by side;
Suppose 'em some Years since Bridegroom and Bride;
Nearer and nearer still each Year they have pressed,
Till wide their spreading Branches are increased,
And in their Mixture now are fully blessed.
This shields the other from the Eastern Blast,
That in return defends it from the West;
Such as stand single (a State liked by you!)
Beneath each Storm from every Corner bow.

Jen. Peggy, I Have done -- dear Lassie, I must yield;
Your better Sense has fairly won the Field.
AIR VIII. Nancy's to the Green Wood gone.
^ I yield, dear Lassie, you have won,
And there is no denying,
That sure as Light flows from the Sun,
From Love proceeds complying;
For all that we can say or do
Against Love, no Thinker heeds us,
They know our Bosoms lodge the Foe,
That by the Heartstrings leads us.
[Exeunt.
Enter Glaud and Simon. Glaud. Good Morrow, Neighbor Simon.

Sym. -- Ah old Boy!
I Have gathered News will fill your Mind with Joy;
It Is fifteen Years since wise Sir William fled,
And left a fair Estate to save his Head;
But with the King returned, each. Thing's in Tune,
And we shall see our dear Sir William soon.

Glaud. This makes me blithe indeed, -- but, is it true?
Tell over your News again -- and swear it too.

Sym. They who sore gripped us 'till they made us groan,
Have lost their Power, and away are flown;
And good Sir William shall enjoy his own.
AIR IX. Moggy Lawther.
^ Unhappy be the Rebel's Fate,
Oppressors base and greedy,
Who with hard and cruel Hearts,
Alike gripe Rich and Needy:
Blessed be he of Worth and Sense,
And ever high his Station,
That bravely stands in the Defense
Of Conscience, King, and Nation.

Glaud. My Heart's o'erjoy'd; dear Neighbor, will you stay,
And take your Dinner here with me today?
I Will yoke my Beast, and send to the next Town,
To fetch a Stoop of Ale, both Stout and Brown.

Sym. Spoke like your self, old Glaudy; never fear,
But at your Banquet I will strait appear.
Glaud. In Faith, we'll fill each Can, and look so bold,
'Till we forget all Cares, or that we are old;
Old, said I? -- Troth! I Am younger by a Score,
With this good News, than what I was before.
[Exeunt.
Enter Sir William, Solus. Whilst thus I view around each fertile Plain,
Which once I lost, which now are mine again,
Amidst my Joys some Prospects Pain renew,
Whilst I my once fair Seat in Ruins view.
But that shall be repaired; and now my Joy
Forbids all Grief. -- When I Am to see my Boy,
My Patrick, now sole Object of my Care,
Since Heaven too soon called home his Mother fair:
Him, ever the Rays of Reason cleared his Thought,
I secretly to faithful Simon brought,
And charged him strictly to conceal his Birth,
'Till we should see what changing Times brought forth.

Enter Simon. Sym. My Master! my dear Master! blessed Sight!
How your Return will all our Plains delight!

Sir Will. Rise, faithful Simon, in my Arms enjoy
A Place, thy Due, kind Guardian of my Boy:
But pr'ythee, honest Simon, quickly run
Over all your Observations on my Son.
A Parent's Fondness easily finds Excuse;
But do not, with Indulgence, Truth abuse.

Sym. To speak his Praise, the longest Summer's Day
Would be too short. -- would I his Worth display.
In Word and Deed his Birth's so well confessed,
That out of Sight he runs before the rest:
With a firm Look, and a commanding way,
He makes the proudest of our Herds obey.
Whenever he walks to Edinborough Port,
He buys some Books of History, Songs, or Sport:
About one Shakespeare, and the famous Ben,
He often speaks, and calls them best of Men.

Sir Will. He Is now arrived the Age when little Loves
Flutter around young Hearts, like cooing Doves;
Has no young Maiden, with inviting Mein,
And rosy Cheek, the Wonder of the Green,
Engaged his Eye, and caught his youthful Heart?

Sym. I feared the worst, but knew the smallest Part,
'Till lately I have seen him, Sir, more sweet
With Glaud's fair Neice, than I thought right or meet.

Sir Will. This Night must end his unambitious Fire,
When higher Views shall greater Thoughts inspire.
Hasten then, Simon, bring him quick to me,
None but yourself shall our first Meeting see.
[Exit Simon. When wished for Pleasures rise like Morning Light,
The Pain that is past, enhances the Delight.
These Joys I feel, that Words can ill express,
I never had known, without my late Distress.
But from his rustic Business and Love,
I must, in haste, my Patrick soon remove,
To Courts, and Camps, that may his Soul improve.
Like the rough Diamond, as it leaves the Mine,
Only in little Breakings shows its Light,
'Till artful Polishing has made it shine:
Thus Education makes the Genius bright.
[Exit.
Enter Patie and Peggy. Peg. Oh Patie! let me go, I must not stay;
We Are both called home, and Jenny, she is away.

Patie. I Am loath to part so soon, now we are alone,
And Roger is away with Jenny gone;
They Are as content, for ought I hear or see,
To be alone themselves, I judge, as we.
Here, where Prim-roses thickest paint the Green,
Near to this purling Riv'let, let us lean.
Hark, how the little Larks chaunt round our Heads,
How soft the western Winds sigh through the Reeds.

Peg. The scented Meadows, Birds, and healthy Breeze,
For ought I know, may more than Peggy, please.

Pat. You wrong me, Fair, to doubt my being kind;
In speaking so, you call me Dull and Blind.
Thy Breath is sweeter than the sweetest Brier;
Thy Cheek and Breast the finest Flowers appear;
Thy Words excel the most delightful Notes,
That warble through the Nightingale's soft Throats.
The sweetest Fruits that hang upon the Tree,
Are far inferior to a Kiss of thee.

Peg. I feel your Power, nor dare I listen long,
Unless you swear never to do me Wrong.

Pat. Sooner a Mother shall her Fondness drap,
And wrong the Child, sits smiling on her Lap;
The Sun shall change, the Moon to change shall cease,
The Goats to climb, the Sheep to yield their Fleece,
E're Infidelity in me you prove.
No Power on Earth can shake my constant Love.

AIR X. Auld Rob. Morris.
^ Peg. When first my dear Patie went to the Green Hill,
And I at Ewe-milking first tried my young Skill,
The Toil of the Day no Pain was to me,
So at Close of the Evening I met but with thee.
Pat. When the Corn it waved yellow, the fair flowery Field,
If my Peggy was absent, no Pleasure could yield;
But Briars and Thorns gave no Trouble to me,
If I found the Berries right ripened for thee.
Peg. When you Ran, or Wrestled, or pleasingly Danced,
And came off the Victor, my Heart was entranced;
Thy each manly Sport gave Pleasure to me;
For none can Dance, Wrestle, or Run swift as thee.
Pat. Young Jenny sings softly the Cowden Broom knows,
And Kitty sings briskly the Milking the Ewes;
There Is few Jenny Nettles like Nancy can sing;
With Through the Wood Laddie, Bess makes our Ears ring.
But when my dear Peggy sings with better Skill,
The Boatman, Tweedside, or The Lass of the Mill,
It Is many times sweeter, and pleasing to me;
For though they sing nicely, they sing not like thee.
Peg. How soon we believe whatever we desire!
And Praise from our Lovers increases Love's Fire;
Give me still this Pleasure, my Study shall be
To make my self better and sweeter for thee.

AIR XI. As Jockey and Jenny, etc.
^ Peg. You need not to pull me thus, gently I fall
Into my kind Patie's Arms, for Good and all;
But your Wishes confine to this kind Embrace,
And offer no farther 'till the Priest has said Grace.
Pat. My dear charming Angel! my Cares hence away;
Thus I Will kiss my Treasure all the Live-long Day;
Those Kisses at Night I will dream over again,
'Till that Day arrive, that rewards Love's soft Pain.
Both. Those Kisses at Night, etc.

AIR XII. Over the Hills and far away.
^ Both. Sun, gallop down the western Skies,
Go soon to Bed, and quickly rise;
O lash your Steeds, post Time away,
And haste about our Bridal Day;
And if you're wearied, honest Light,
Sleep, if you please, a Week that Night.
Repeat. And if you're wearied, etc.
[Exeunt.
Enter Roger and Jenny. Rog. I must speak, Jenny, though I risk your Scorn;
You're never from my Thoughts, Night, Noon, or Morn.
Ah! could I love you less, I Would happy be;
But happier far, could you but fancy me.

Jen. And who knows, honest Lad, but that I may?
You cannot say, that ever I said you Nay.

Rog. Alas! my frighted Heart begins to fail,
Whenever I strive to tell you out my Tale,
For fear some worthier Lad, more rich than I,
Has won your Love, and near your Heart may lie.

Jen. I love my Father, and my Cousin love;
But to this Day, no Man my Heart could move,
Except my Kin; each Lad's alike to me,
And from you all I best had keep me free.

Rog. Oh dearest Jenny, say not that again;
What Pleasure can you take in giving Pain?
I Am glad however that you yet stand free;
Who knows you may relent, and pity me?

Jen. What softening Words from Wooers Lips can fall!
But palling Marriage comes and ends 'em all.
I Have seen with shining Fair the Morning Rise,
And soon a lowering Cloud dark all the Skies.
I Have seen the Silver Spring awhile run clear,
And soon in Mossey Puddles disappear.
The Bridegroom may rejoice, the Bride may smile,
But soon Contentions all their Joys beguile.

Rog. I Have seen the Morning rise with fairest Light,
The Day unclouded, sink in calmest Night.
I Have seen the Spring run winding through the Plain,
Increase and join the Ocean without Stain.
The Bridegroom may be blithe, the Bride may smile,
Rejdice through Life, and all your Fears beguile.

AIR XIII. Katharine Ogie.
^ Jen. I well could pass my Days with thee,
Could I with Love secure thee;
But when thou'st had thy Fill of me,
How shall I then allure thee?
Alas! I fear too soon to love,
Lest thou should soon forsake me;
Yet from thy Sight I cannot remove:
Then ease my Heart, and take me.

Rog. Oh! I Am too happy. Let my aching Head
Upon thy snowy Bosom be reclined;
The rushing Joy I fear will strike me dead.
Is It possible! and is my Jenny kind!

AIR XIV. Yellow-hair'd Lady.
^ Jen. Oh Roger, I own since now you speak free,
'Bove all other Swains I liked your Company;
And ever a Warmness I felt in my Breast,
That made you still dearer to me than the rest.
And ever, etc.

Rog. O let me press thee, Dearest, to my Heart,
And round thy Waste my fondling Arms entwine;
Delightful Thought! we'll never, never part!
Be hushed my Fears, my charming Jenny's mine.

AIR XV. The blithsome Bridal.
^ Jen. Well, I agree to Wed you.
Now to my Father go,
Nor doubt that he will forbid you;
Lads wealthy are seldom said No.
Your Flocks and Possessions are large,
So he will commend you well;
But Love, he says, soon grows cold,
Where Bairns want Milk and Meal.
But fear not; while I not scorn ye,
He Would contradict in vain;
Had all my Kindred forsworn ye,
I Will have no other Swain:
Then learn not to change your Love,
Like those in high Degree:
If constant for ever you prove,
You Will find no Fault in me.
[Exit.
Rog. This kind Confession has my Bosom fired;
We'll Love for ever, and be never tired:
We'll smile and kiss, the Sun and Stars away,
And wonder at the quick Return of Day.

Enter Patie. AIR XVI. The Lass of Patie's Mill.
^ Duty, and Part of Reason,
Plead on the Parents side;
But they against Love talk Treason,
Whose Power will be obeyed:
Though now I Am of the Gentry,
My Truth Falsehood repells,
Nor in my Heart finds Entry;
My Peggy there excells.

Rog. Friend Patie, Jane who broke my Heart, this Morn
Has taught her tender Heart no more to scorn.
I spoke my Mind -- She heard -- I spoke again,
She smiled -- I kissed -- I wooed, nor wooed in vain.

Pat. But now a Father took me to his Breast
With Looks all Kindness, Words that Love confessed:
Possessed of Lands that lifts me 'bove the rest.
Such were the Eyes, he said, thus smiled the Mouth
Of thy loved Mother, blessing of my Youth!
Who set too soon! and while he Praise bestowed,
A-down his graceful Cheeks a Torrent flowed.
My newborn Joys, and this his tender Tale,
Did (mingled thus) over all my Thoughts prevail.
That speechless long, my late-known Sire I viewed;
While gushing Tears my panting Breast bedewed.
But he has heard -- too-faithful Symon's Fear!
Has brought my Love for Peggy to his Ear,
Which he forbids; -- It Is this confounds my Peace;
While, thus to beat, my Heart must sooner cease.
Fixed in my Soul the Shepherdess excells,
And part of my new Happiness repells.

Rog. Enjoy 'em both; your Father may be won,
Your Peggy's bonny -- you his Darling Son.

Pat. She Is mine by Vows, and stronger ties of Love;
And from those Bonds, not Fate my Mind shall move.

Rog. Is not your Father and yourself to stay
Among us here, or must you hence away?

Pat. Tomorrow we to Edinburgh advance,
To London next, and afterward to France;
Then it is designed, when I can well behave,
That I must be some Purse-proud Maid's dull Slave.
But Peggy, dearer to me than my Breath,
Sooner than hear such News, shall hear my Death.
My Vows I Will keep, and she shall be my Bride:
But I some Time this last Design must hide.
Keep you the Secret close, and leave me here,
I sent for Peggy: Yonder comes my Dear.
[Exit Roger. With what a Struggle must I now impart
My Father's Will to her that holds my Heart:
Kind Heaven, propitious smile upon my Fair,
And let her Comfort claim your tenderest Care.
Alas, she weeps --
Enter Peggy. -- My Peggy, why in Tears?
Smile as you wont, allow no Room for Fears:
But chide 'em hence, nor let thy Heart repine;
Though I Am no more a Shepherd, yet I Am thine.

AIR XVII. Waes my Heart, that we should sunder.
^ Peg. Speak on, speak thus, and still my Grief,
Hold up a Heart that is sinking under
These Fears, that soon will want Relief,
When Patie must from Peggy sunder.
A gentler Face, and Silk Attire,
A Lady rich in Beauty's Blossom,
Alas poor me! will soon conspire,
To steal thee from thy Peggy's Bosom.
No more the Shepherd who excelled
The rest, whose Wit made them to wonder,
Shall now his Peggy's Praises tell;
Ah! I can die, but never sunder.
Ye Meadows where we often strayed,
Ye Banks where we were wont to wander;
Sweet scented Fields round which we played,
You Will lose your Sweets when we are asunder.

Pat. My Father has forbid our Loves, I own;
But Love's superior to a Parent's Frown.
Sir William's generous; leave the Task to me,
To make strict Duty and true Love agree.

AIR XVIII. Tweed-Side.
^ Peg. When Hope was quite sunk in Despair,
My Heart it was going to break;
My Life seemed unworthy my Care,
Which now I will save for thy sake.
Pat. Wherever thy Love travels by Day,
Wherever he lodges by Night,
With him thy dear Image shall stay,
And his Soul keep thee ever in Sight.
Peg. With Patience I Will wait the long Year,
And study the gentlest Charms;
Hope Time away 'till thou appear,
Then lock thee for aye in these Arms.
Whilst thou wast a Shepherd, I prized
No higher Degree in this Life;
But now I Will endeavor to rise
To a height is becoming thy Wife.
Pat. The Beauty that is only Skin-deep,
Must fade like the Flowers of May;
But inwardly rooted, will keep
For ever without a Decay.
Both. Nor Age, nor the Changes of Life,
Can quench the fair Fire of Love,
If Virtue's ingrain'd in the Wife,
And the Husband have Sense to approve.

Pat. Sure Heaven approves. -- And be assured of me,
I Will never swerve from what I Have sworn to Thee:
If at my Foot were Crowns and Scepters laid,
To bribe my Soul from thee, delightful Maid;
For thee, I Would soon leave those inferior Things,
To such as have the Patience to be Kings.
Wherefore that Tear? believe, and calm thy Mind.

Peg. I weep for Joy, to hear my Love so kind;
With Patience then I Will wait each wheeling Year,
Dream through that Night, 'till my Day Star appear:
And all the while I Will study gentler Charms
To make me worthy of my Lover's Arms.

AIR XIX. Bush aboon Traquair.
^ At setting Day and rising Morn
With Soul that still shall love thee,
I Will ask of Heaven thy safe Return,
With all that can improve thee.
I Will visit often the Hawthorn Bush,
Where first you kindly told me
Sweet Tales of Love, and hid my Blush,
Whilst round thou did enfold me.
To all our Haunts I will repair,
By Green Wood-Shade, or Fountain;
Or where the Summer-Day I Would share
With thee, upon yon Mountain.
There will I tell the Trees and Flowers,
From Thoughts unfeigned and tender;
By Vows you're mine; by Love, is yours
A Heart which cannot wander.
Both. By Vows you're mine, etc.

Enter Sir William, Glaud, Simon, Roger, Jenny, and Margery. Sir Will. What
Maiden's this who does my Son embrace?
Beauty and Innocence are in her Face;
How sparkling are her Eyes! what is this I find!
The Girl brings all my Sister to my Mind.
Such were the Features once adorned a Face,
Which Death too soon deprived of sweetest Grace.
Is this your Daughter, Glaud? --

Glaud. -- Sir, she is my Niece,
And yet she is not -- but I should hold my Peace.

Sir Will. This is a Contradiction. What do you mean?
She is and she is not: old Man, explain!

Glaud. Troth, Sir, I doubt if I can make appear
What I have kept a Secret Fifteen Year.

Mar. You may reveal what I can fully clear.

Sir Will. Speak soon, I Am all Impatience!

Pat. So am I;
For much I hope, and hardly yet know why.

Glaud. Then since my Master orders, I obey, --
This pretty Fondling, one clear Morn of May,
Close by the Threshould of my Door I found,
All sweet and clean, and carefully wrapped round,
In Infant Weeds, of rich and gentle Make.
What could they be, thought I, did thee forsake?
I took her in my Arms, the Infant smiled
With such a Look, would make a Savage mild.
The Story I concealed, and since that Time,
She passed, Sir, for an Orphan Niece of mine.

Sir Will. This Tale seems strange!

Pat. -- The Tale delights my Ear.

Sir Will. Command your Joys, young Man, till Truth appear.

Marg. That be my Task -- Now, Sir, bid all be hush,
Peggy may smile, thou have no Cause to blush.
Long have I wished to see this happy Day,
That I might safely to the Truth give way;
That I may now Sir William Worthy name
The best and nearest Parent she can claim.
At first he saw it -- and with quick Eye did trace
His Sister's Beauties in her Daughter's Face.

Sir Will. Good Woman, do not rave; prove what you say;
It Is dangerous in Affairs like this to play.

Marg. Sir, view me well; has fifteen Years so plowed
A wrinkled Face that you have often viewed,
That here I as an unknown Stranger stand,
Who nursed her Mother, that now holds my Hand?
Yet stronger Proofs I Will give, if you demand.

Sir Will. My honest Nurse! where were my Eyes before?
I know thy Faithfulness, and need no more.

Marg. Know, Sir, 'twas I that saved her Infant Life,
Her Death being threatened by an Uncle's Wife.
The Story's long; but I the Secret knew,
How they pursued with avaricious View
Her rich Estate, of which they are now possessed:
All this to me a Confident consest.
I heard with Horror and with trembling Dread,
They Would kill the helpless Orphan in her Bed.
That very Night, when all were sunk in Rest,
At Midnight-Hour the Floor I softly pressed,
And stole the sleeping Innocent away,
With whom I traveled some few Miles e're Day.
All Day I hid me, -- When the Day was done,
I kept my Journey, lighted by the Moon,
Till Eastward fifty Miles I reached these Plains,
Where needful Plenty glads your cheerful Swains.
Fearful to be found out, I to secure
My Charge, did lay her at this Shepherd's Door,
And took a Neighboring Cottage here, that I,
Whatever should happen to her, might be by.
Wonder I see is fixed in every Eye.

Pat. Sir, with Paternal Love survey her Charms,
And blame me not for rushing to her Arms;
She Is mine by Vows, and would, though still unknown,
Have been my Wife, when I my Vows durst own.

Sir Will. My Niece, my Daughter, welcome to my Care,
Sweet Image of thy Mother, good and fair;
My Boy, receive her from a Father's Hand,
With as good Will as either would demand.
[They embrace and kneel.
Pat. With as much Joy this Blessing I receive,
As one would Life, just sinking in a Wave.

Marg. I hope your Honor now will take amends
Of them that sought her Life for wicked Ends.

Sir Will. The base unnatural Villain soon shall know,
That Eyes above watch the Affairs below:
I Will strip him soon of all to her pertains,
And make him reimburse his ill-got Gains.

Peg. To me the Views of Wealth and Grandeur prove
Trifles, when put in Balance with my Love.
For his sake only I Will still thankful bow,
For such a Kindness, best of Men, to you.

AIR XX. I Will never leave thee.
^ Pat. No more, my dear Peggy, let Sorrows oppress ye;
For while my Blood's warm I Will kindly caress ye.
Peg. Dear Patie, thy Sweets in my Heart are indented,
And Love will preserve still, what Love has imprinted.
Both. O dearest Jewel, you may believe me,
Let Fortune smile, or frown, I Will never deceive thee.
Rep. O dearest Jewel, etc.

Good Margery! how shall I grateful be
For all thy matchless Kindness shown to me?

Marg. The flowing Pleasures of this happy Day
Does fully all I can require repay.

Sir Will. She in my House shall calmly close her Days,
With naught to do, but sing high Heaven's Praise.

Pat. Sir, here is a trusty Friend, that always knew
My Bosom Secrets, ever I wealthy grew;
Glaud's Daughter Jenny ( Jenny owns the same)
Raised and maintains in him a Lover's Flame:
Be pleased to speak to Glaud for his Consent,
That none may wear a Face of Discontent.

Sir Will. My Son's Demand is fair -- Glaud, let me crave,
That trusty Roger may your Daughter have.

Glaud. You crowd your Bounties, Sir; what can we say,
But that we are Debtors that can never repay?
Whatever your Honor wills, I shall obey.

Rog. I never was good at speaking in my Days,
Nor ever learnt a Courtly flattering Phrase;
But for my Master, Father, Friend and Wife,
I will employ the Cares of all my Life.

AIR XXI. An thou were mine ain Thing.
^ Jen. When I am to my true Love wed,
I will love him, I will love him:
Soon as the Priest the Grace has said,
How dearly will I love him.
To Merit I no Claim can make,
But that I love, and for his Sake,
What Lass could do, I Would undertake,
So dearly do I love him.

Sir Will. My Friends, I Am satisfied you will all behave,
Each in his Station, as I Would wish or crave.
I shall remain Friends with you from this Day,
And never from these Fields again will stray.
Let Courtiers sweat in State, and toil for Fame,
The Poor and Rich but differ in the Name;
Content's the greatest Bliss we can procure
Beneath the Sun -- Without it Kings are Poor;
While over the Moor, the Shepherd, without Care,
Enjoys his sober Wish, and wholesome Air.

AIR XXII. Muirland Willy.
^ Pat. The Shepherd early with the Dawn
Rises as fresh as Roses blown,
And ranges over the Heights and Lawn,
After his bleating Flocks.
Peg. Healthful, and innocently gay,
He chaunts and whistles out the Day;
Untaught to smile, and then betray,
Like Courtly Weather-Cocks.
Pat. Life happy, from Ambition free,
Envy and vile Hypocrisy,
When Truth and Love with Joy agree,
Unsullied with a Crime:
Peg. Unmoved with what disturbs the Great,
In propping of their Pride and State,
We live, and unafraid of Fate,
Contented spend our Time.
CHORUS of All. Unmoved with what disturbs the Great,
In propping of their Pride and State,
We live, and unafraid of Fate,
Contented spend our Time.

Sir Will. Be ever virtuous: Soon or late you will find
Reward and Satisfaction to your Mind.
The Maze of Life sometimes looks dark and wild;
And often when Hopes are highest we are beguiled.
Often when we stand on Brinks of dark Despair,
Some happy Turn with Joy dispels our Care.

FINIS.

