THE WORLD IN A VILLAGE; A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS, AS PERFORMED WITH UNIVERSAL
APPLAUSE AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

WRITTEN BY JOHN O'KEEFE, ESQUIRE.

AUTHOR OF Tony Lumpkin in Town; The Son-in-Law; The Dead Alive; Agreeable
Surprise; Castle of Andalusia; Fontainbleau, or Our Way in France; The Positive
Man; The Poor Soldier; Love in a Camp, or Patrick in Prussia; The Farmer; The
Young Quaker; Beggar on Horseback; Peeping Tom; The Prisoner at Large; The Toy,
or Hampton Court Frolicks; Wild Oats, or the Strolling Gentlemen; Little
Hunchback; The Siege of Curzola; Modern Antiques, or the Merry Mourners; The
Highland Reel; Birthday, or Prince of Arragon; Sprigs of Laurel; The London
Hermit, or Rambles in Dorsetshire; etc. etc.

LONDON: Printed for J. DEBRETT, opposite Burlington House, Piccadilly.

PROLOGUE.
Written by MR. TAILOR. Spoken by MR. HOLMAN.
In these dread times, when WAR's unsated rage
Crowds with disasters LIFE's eventful stage,
When the full trumpet and embattled ire
Drown the soft warblings of the slighted Lyre,
The MUSES' lonely haunts no more display,
Among their withering blooms, the POET's BAY
The partial soil, THE LAUREL only rears,
For martial wreaths, that vegetate in tears.
At such a time, superfluous seems the art,
To melt with fabled woes the sadden'd heart;
The sorrowing MUSES need themselves relief,
And FANCY droops in sympathetic grief.
The TRAGIC MAID, indeed, may sooth her care,
And future scenes from passing ills prepare;
But for the LAUGHING NYMPH, alas! can she
At ease presume with her untimely glee!
Is there a place, amidst the world's alarms,
In safety still to heed her frolic charms?
Yes -- in the shades of BRITAIN's happy Isle,
Still may the COMIC MUSE securely smile;
Still with her tuneful Sisters shelter here,
Nor savage ANARCHY's vain menace fear!
Here no DIRE RUFFIANS, dead to generous joy,
All that endears and brightens life destroy;
Or, drenched in blood, with impious rage combine,
Trampling over THRONES, to crush the HALLOWED SHRINE!
No DESPOT here exacts a slavish awe,
The casual impulse of his passions LAW.
Here on a rock, secure amid the storm,
Dwells LIBERTY, in fair monarchic form.
Around her FAME, with venerable grace,
THREE MATCHLESS COLUMNS, fortify the place.
Enthroned within, pre-eminently great,
Sits awful JUSTICE, in majestic slate,
Of LQUAL LAWS the animating soul,
And station'd HIGHEST, to survey THE WHOLE;
Her SWORD by MERCY checked, as urged by MIGHT,
Her CROWN the SANCTION of a PEOPLE'S RIGHT.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir Henry Check Mr. POWELL. Captain Mullinahack Mr. JOHNSTONE. William
Bellevue Mr. MIDDLETON. Charles Mr. HOLMAN. Captain Vansluisen Mr. CUBITT.
Willows Mr. HULL. Hedgeworth Mr. EVATT. Briers Mr. M'CREADY. Allbut Mr. QUICK.
Master Jack Mr. FAWCETT. Grigsby Mr. LEWIS. Jollyboy Mr. MUNDEN. Edward
Bellevue Miss SYMONDS. Louisa Mrs. ESTEN. Mrs. Bellevue Mrs. FAWCET. Mrs.
Allbut Mrs. MATTOCKS. Maria Mrs. MOUNTAIN. Margery Mrs. PLATT.
SCENE, a Village about fifteen Miles from London.

THE WORLD IN A VILLAGE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A neat Parlour. Margery discovered adjusting it and singing.
Enter Jollyboy. AH, dame! so that Miss Louisa's room is dizen'd out, all the
rest of the house may go at sixes and sevens!

Marg. Husband! How crusty you have got with our lodger Miss Louisa, only because
she is a lady, and you think she has a deal of money.


Joll. Why to be sure her money did not do much mischief when it bought tidy
warm clothing for half the poor of our village, and the setting up the little
school and paying you for teaching the children, as our rascally rich folks
here refused to establish one; our gentry expect forsooth, 'cause I Am a miller,
think I must cringe and sneak; but I Will never bow to the golden calf! People to
get money stick at no villainy or meanness, and then they are as saucy -- Dame,
I Have been round the customers to gather in rent for my landlord Master Allbut.
Here. (Takes out a bank-note.)


Marg. Ten pounds! I suppose its having so much money that is made you so saucy
this morning.


Joll. Ecod, wife, I believe so. As I come up street could not tell what was the
matter with me; met honest Dick the cobbler -- came out with his "good morrow,
Master Jollyboy." I felt a sort of a -- thought he might as well have said
nothing. Tom the farrier gave me a friendly smack of the shoulder; I had a mind
to knock him down for his joke: then, now, coming into my own house, forgot to
stoop, and bump'd my forehead against the top of the door-case. Oh, ho! then
it is the cash has done all this! I wish 'twas gone, for while I have it I feel
I shall be as impudent as the devil.


Marg. Madam Louisa, (looking out.)


Joll. Doctor Grigthy with her! Though he is now our apothecary, and sets up also
to be a wine-merchant, the lady would not be so proud of his company, did she
know he was once our barber.


Marg. Be quiet, husband. Doctor Grigsby is a fine man!


Joll. What, because when you were sick his bottles came in packets, till I
tasted, and found all the while the doctor had been supplying you with
cherry-brandy.


Enter Louisa. Louisa. Well, my kind good friend, (looking about.) Why how very
handsome you have made my room look! how much I Am obliged to you.


Joll. Dr. Grigsby! I would not let him cure my cat of a toothache. The fellow
has made money out of people's folly, and now don't know how to behave himself.


Marg. I wish you would learn how to behave yourself; strutting about with your hat
on, and a lady in the room.


Joll. I know nothing about ladies or gentlemen. That fellow was a good barber
till money spoiled him -- my hat! (takes it off), my hat's here -- and now it is
there, (puts it on.) What signifies where a man's hat is? Hats and beads --
ladies -- gentlemen -- good as another -- hem! (siruts off muttering.)


Marg. Plague take you for a fool! -- as good-natured a man as ever broke
bread, but when he gets these fancies in his noddle.


Louisa. Where there is real worth these little oddities of humor rather
excite pleasantry than resentment.


Marg. Od, I Will give it him!


Louisa. Never mind now, my kind Margery -- I Am sorry I must leave you.


Marg. Leave us! Well, if I didn't expect my silly husband's behavior would
bring it to this.


Louisa. Hush! your husband has nothing to do in it: -- I Am certain I can
confide in you; -- you know little of me; -- I Am a stranger; -- but I Will not
trouble you with more of my affairs than just necessary. You doubtless
concluded from the trisling sums I expended on my first coming here into your
village, that I must of course be some very rich body or other.


Marg. La, Ma'am, I didn't expect you for that!


Louisa. I believe it. From certain family circumstances, immaterial to any but
myself, I have been obliged to -- however, you know I came from Ireland -- have
been in France, and -- I am unfortunately not on the best terms with my
friends, till a make up can be brought about to my wish. Not being over strong
in purse, I planned a frugal retirement; the variety of calls upon the feelings
of my heart have at length exhausted my little finance; therefore -- but mind,
I Am not cast down -- no, I Am as happy --


Marg. Dear, I Am so sorry --


Louisa. Come, if you go to pity me I shall be very much affronted.


Marg. I affront you!


Louisa. Lord! I never was more gay or cheerful in my whole life: but I Will tell
you -- You know, you and your husband are very honest people, and get nothing
but what you hardly earn; now, why should I from my extravagance become a
burden to you?


Marg. Extravagance! 'twas your charity -- burden! your stay will be a blessing
to us -- pay us when you can, or never, (weeping.) Oh, my sweet lady!


Louisa. Come, perhaps I may not leave your village. But yet, better some
strange place -- though who here knows me -- (aside.) Margery, I Have conceived a
thought to stay among you without inconvenience to any one; I think I could be
useful to your Mistress Allbut, here. From her character of a passion for
literary amusements, she might, perhaps, afford me a situation to read, or
translate French; transcribe her poetry, for I am told she has wrote a number
of pretty things; or could, upon occasion, dress up a cap for her -- eh,
Margery, could you recommend me? You know you told me she sometimes reads her
poems to you.


Marg. Eh -- Well, I Will call on her, my lady.


Louisa. Come, none of your lady's to me -- I must soon unlady myself. Upon my
honor I shall be exceeding angry if you are not even merry. There now, that is
a dear good woman, (shakes hands cordially, and goes to a chest of drawers.)


Re-enter Jollyboy. Joll. Wife, if 'Squire Allbut's corn comes, tell 'em it
must wait; for I Have got first a bushel to grind for old Budget the tinker.


Marg. Don't talk to me.


Joll. Eh! -- What have you found a pot of gold under an old wall?


Marg. Ah, husband! this dear young lady our lodger --


Joll. Ay, well.


Marg. Her distress!


Joll. Well, if she is distressed about any one's poverty, her hand knows the
way to her pocket, a road it has so often gone upon like occasions.


Marg. Ay, but I may as well put my hand into my pocket.


Joll. Deuce of your riddles -- What Is the matter with with you and she?


Marg. I tell you at last, she herself is really distressed, and will not stay
because she cannot pay us.


[Exit melancholy.] Joll. Distressed! Oh, dear! -- one that was so ready to
relieve every body else, now to want it herself. (Louisa advances, Jollyboy
takes off his hat with great respect,) Madam, I Am sure I Am vastly concerned
that any past conduct of mine should have given you the least uneasiness.
You Have done us too much honor in coming under our roof; and if any improper
freedoms of ours have given you offense, you have only to blame your own
condescension. Madam, we are but ignorant people, and if we have failed in our
respect, I humbly crave your pardon.


Louisa. Then Margery has told him. This is an attempt at irony -- Become the
subject of ridicule! I thought I could endure poverty, but I was wrong --
(aside.) Sir, it is not immediately in my power to discharge what I already owe
you, but hope soon; for I can assure you it would give me infinite pleasure.


Joll. Would it? then -- though I go to jail for my own rent -- (aside.) True, I
forgot -- Ma'am, this was left for you just now; 'twas enclosed in a paper --
thought at first 'twas for myself, so broke it open -- I beg pardon -- though
there was nothing written in it.


Louisa. Ten pounds! Who left it?


Joll. I did ask, but cannot find who.


Louisa. Then my circumstances are known! Is there such benevolence? However,
how to appropriate this does not want a consideration. Pray let me know what I Am
indebted to you.


Joll. Oh, Madam.


Louisa. I request --


Joll. Well, Madam, since here now have I given what I had to pay my own rent;
'twill grind my heart to apolgoise to Landlord Allbut -- but I Have set her heart
at ease, and that is good amends.


Grig. (without.) No: I want my chay; so put that hamper of wine, and take the
medicines round in the little cart.


Joll. Madam, now you should look above this Master Grigsby -- you don't know
him -- a fellow taken from sitting with numbed fingers, wig-weaving, into a
doctor's service, to brush his coat and frizzle his pate, picking up hard words
from the apothecary's boys, marrying the housekeeper, -- throwing her
purloinings into a brandy vault and drug-shop (she poisoned herself in one of
them,) and now, by jargon, smiles, lies, and cringes, has glided into the good
graces of every family in the village -- Oh, he is not dressed in his physical
pomp! When he wants to show his consequence, pops himself into one of the
famous fine velvet and gold suits left him by his old master the physician.


Marg. (without.) Indeed, Doctor --


Grig. (without.) But I will visit my patient.


Joll. Ay, now for Dr. Grigsby's chatt'ring! 'Till he is gone, we may put our
tongues in our pockets. Zounds, I wish I could shut my ears in my tobacco-box.


Marg. (without.) I tell you, Doctor, Miss Louisa is not in the humor for
jaunting.


Enter Grigsby and Margery wrangling, and Boy. Grig. Teach me humors,
defluxions, catarrhs, and cataplasms!


Boy. But, Sir, had not you best come back to shop?


Grig. Shop! Get home, you dog, and mix up that stuff.


Boy. But, Sir, I forgot what I was to put in it.


Grig. A table spoonful of any four bottles behind the counter.


Boy. But, Sir, there is Humphrey the wheelwright stops for you to bleed him.


Grig. Sirrah! My compliments, and I Will wait on his Lordship. [Exit Boy.] Hem!
Duke Humphrey! -- But the ladies must always have the preference.


Louisa. Sir, (curtseying.) Teazing man! I wish he would go away, (apart to
Margery).


Marg. Doctor, the lady wishes you would --


Louisa. Hush!


Grig. My dear Madam, never deceive your doctor -- but that is impossible.


Louisa. For me to think of attempting a deception! -- Upon my word, Doctor,
you have the happiest mode of compliment --


Grig. Yes, Ma'am, the compliment I put in that mixture was two grains, or, as
we of the faculty write in our Latin proscriptions, dux graniorum, six
scruples, or caterscrupolibus; and, Madam, I Will venture to assirm, that the
whole material medicar does not furnish a cure of more efficacious efficasey,
that is, when we talk of a case, razorcase -- hem! I mean the soul-case; the
body being the case of the soul, as a bottle is of a bottle of old port; the
wine being the spirit; and so we doctors wax the cork to prevent evaporation or
somentation; just as if a gentleman, to shave his chin, would lather his
occiput; that is, what we of the faculty call the whole healing art --
scammony, wild poppy, the sublimate of styptic water, anthelmintic wine, hicra
picra, and the nervous system.


Louisa. Sir, you have certainly a prodigious deal of skill; but nature prevents
me from opportunities of putting it in practice.


Grig. True, Miss, I have an immense deal of practice -- so much -- the fatigue
-- knocked up at all hours!


Marg. Ah, Doctor, you're such a fine midwife, 'twou'd comfort one's heart to
be your customer; and so I told my husband the other night!


Grig. I Am capital in the obstetric art and --


Louisa. Sir, now pray excuse me, I Am a little indisposed, and company is --


Grig. If indisposed, Madam, what is better company than your doctor? For in
your case, as we of the faculty say, no aliment so mucilaginous as sheep's head
broth: some prefer buttermilk, and it is indeed as a lacteal lachrymoligon; --
for, Madam, when the disease proceeds from a viscid pituitous substance
obstructing the vessels of the lungs, we of the faculty call it a spurious
peripneumony; therefore ripe fruits roasted, baked, or boiled, such as
greengoose, young parsneps, extract of saturn, -- then we throw in the bark,
and that is, my dear Madam, the -- the -- nervous system.


Marg. But, Doctor, Miss Louisa wants a little rest.


Grig. Ha, ha, ha! that is very well -- then I know nothing of what a lady
wants. I see she likes me by her wishes to turn me out. (Aside.) -- But, Madam,
to promote an emulsive dormitory, or, as Celsus says, a nice bit of sleep or
rest, nothing equal to a simple goss lettice.


Louisa. Thank ye, Doctor; but I don't need soporisics.


Grig. Soap! Them this barber! how all my patients will be slapping suds in my
teeth -- but she must be some great heiress here incog. by her having dispersed
so much money through the village, (aside.)


Louisa. Sir, I wish you a good morning.


Grig. Rest! the nurse of disease! You see, as a doctor, I speak against my own
interest. Nothing but exercise and open air can brace and strengthen the animal
functions when the caninus rabies, or dog-madness, which we of the faculty call
vertigo of the foot, comes -- the -- the -- and that is, Madam, the nervous
system. Do me the honor of taking an airing in my chaise; you may trust to my
whiphand, -- steady as if touching a vein -- I Will drive you --


Joll. No: but I Will drive you out of my house, if you stay to -- Don't you see
that you have already bother'd the lady with your damned nonsense?


Grig. I Have what? Oh, this is pretty! What Is that you said I did to her?


Jolly. Poh! Go along.


Grig. Go along! Very well, that! Do you know, man, when you talk to a
physician -- Madam, my chaise is at the door -- permit me the honor of
whipping you round the circuitous circle in the grand tour of Esher, Weston
Green, Molesey, Hampton Court, Bushy Park, and Ditton Marsh -- the sight of so
fine a dressed lady as you sitting by my side -- no other barber -- hem! wine
merchant -- physician --


Louisa. Doctor, your politness comes particularly acceptable, for I should
like a little excursion, and I assure you my purse now cannot afford the
expense of post-chaises -- Well, Margery, you will speak -- Come, Doctor, now for
your whip-hand.


Grig. Afford! Expense! Any thing broke? (apart to Margery.)


Marg. Ah, we are all broke! our hearts are broke!


Grig. Eh! All her flash end in smoke! Oh, ho! (aside).


Louisa. Come, Doctor, you shall set me down at Mr. Allbut's.


Grig. Eh! Mem! Your bill did you say? We never commit such trifles to book --
carry it in my head -- "For best frontignac -- hem! raisin wine (aside,)
lavender water, low de lucy, and magnesiar holbar" -- You are indebted to me
the sum of three pounds three shillings and three pence three farthings.


Louisa. But, Sir, the jaunt.


Grig. It rains, Mem -- no head to my chaise, -- Margery, hav'n't you, as we of
the faculty say -- A miller should always have a parvifol to keep off the rain,
(puts on his hat, whisiles, and walks about cracking his whip.)


Joll. (staring). Eh!


Grig. (cracking his whip.) All good for the nervous system! Mem, I Am making up
some money, and if you can oblige me by discharging that trifle --


Louisa. Then better remain in my landlord's debt than -- This wretch --
(aside) -- there, Sir, take your bill out of that -- (gives the bank-note to
Grigsby.)


Grig. Yes, Mem: I Will bring you the change in a frizzling of a toopee; but I Will
advise you, Madam, to exercise. Miller, put up a swing in your garden between
two cherrytrees -- swing, Mem -- nothing but exercise and open air can brace
and strengthen the animal functions -- swing! Rest is the nurse of disease --
you see, as a doctor, I speak against my own interest. In your case, Madam,
nothing so mucilaginous as sheep's head broth -- then we throw in the bark, and
-- from ten pounds deduct three pounds three shillings and three pence three
farthings, and that is what we call the -- nervous system --


Exit. Joll. Carried off my bank-note! -- Holla, nervous system!

Runs off after him.
Louisa. Come now with me to Mrs. Allbut's.


Marg. Ah, I Am sure you will not like her. A deuced temper!


Louisa. I understand that Mrs. Allbut is haughty and overbearing -- that Mr.
Allbut, puffed up with the pride of riches, is the great despot of the village
-- that all their wealth really belongs to a poor widow, Mrs. Bellevue, that
lives in the cottage by the warren yonder; but if Mrs. Allbut is so proud, I
must only temporize into humility: Doctor Grigsby's behavior has convinced me
that I should use every exertion to keep myself above pecuniary obligations. A
pity it is not so! but, when destitute of particular defense and protection,
the world should be guardians to a lone and helpless woman.


Exeunt. SCENE II. A Chamber in Allbut's House.
Enter Willows and Maria. Will. There, the instrument's open. (Points to a
piano forte.)


Maria. But Mr. and Mrs. Allbut may return, and if she finds me at it --


Will. My dear child, if you don't practice you will lose your music; and that
will be a pity, Maria, considering the proficiency you made in it.


Maria. Ah, father! my attempt now to retain any elegant accomplishment is but
vanity. What might have been received with indulgence when we were in easy
circumstances, in our present humble situation at best will be overlooked, or,
most likely, made the object of ridicule.


Will. Why, indeed, my Love, this reverse of fortune comes with a double
severity, when it subjects us to the insults of this purse-proud, mean, and
illiberal Mr. and Mrs. Allbut. Come, my dear, -- there, if your lady should
hear you, I don't think she can be offended. -- Since I am Mr. Allbut's clerk,
I must to my business in the coumpting-house.


Exit. Maria. I have little heart: but, as my father thinks it an object, I
will practice.


Maria sits and plays. Maria. Oh, Master Jack!


Mast. J. Play on, Molly: I love it, fall, lal, (sings out of tune.)


Maria. If your Mamma should come in and hear me?


Mast. J. Never mind: she will think it is I. (Maria plays.)


Mast. J. (interrupting.) Molly, do you know, I wish Mamma would not be writing
her poetries -- she troubles the house with them. Come, do play to oblige me.


Maria. Now, I recollect, I Have no reason to oblige you, Master Jack; how could
you go to turn that poor woman and children from the door yesterday, when I
desired her to wait while I stepped in to bring her something.


Mast. J. Why 'twas Mamma herself. She was reading in the front parlour that
poem about humanity, and just as her heart and her eyes were melting with the
tender pathos of sorrow, (as she calls it,) the poor hungry brats set up such a
piping -- so discomposed Mamma's fine nerves, already unstrung by pity, that
she flew out like an angry turkey, and drove the mother and her infants all out
of the courtyard. Do play. (Maria plays, Master Jack interrupting.) Molly! ha!
ha! ha! Don't you think Mamma very silly, to go and set Papa too at making
poesies, and now he begins to trouble the house.


Maria. True, and all his idea of poetry is making a jingle of rhyme, no matter
for measure, time, place, or reason, -- but if you will hear me play now, hold
your tongue.

Plays.
Enter Mrs. Allbut, reading. Mrs. A. My servant maid at my instrument!


Mast. J. What a pretty hornpipe!


Maria. You Have an excellent ear!


Mast. J. Yes: I Have a fine ear for hearing.


Mrs. A. And feeling! (pulls him, Maria starts up.)


Mast. J. Now Mama, what is that for?


Mrs. A. Oh! enchanting powers of poetry, (reading.) Sigh to the silent streams
that softly seek the seas,
Mar the meek murmuring melodies that mark the marine breeze.
You vile jade!


Mast. J. Molly play on -- Mamma, Poll plays better nor you, -- she tickles it
so lightly with her little finger; but you thump it down with your fists as if
you were breaking biscuits -- then she sits so quiet -- sit Molly -- and here,
Mamma, you go wagging your head about like an artichoke, (sits down and mimicks
extravagantly.)


Mrs. A. (curtseys to Maria.) Oh, do pray, Miss; oblige us with a canzonet,
(ironical.)


Mast. J. Molly made this song herself; I know she did.


Mrs. A. Writes poetry! Here Is a saucy slut! (aside) -- What my Ariosto!
Heavens! if she hasn't been pulling my books out of my study -- Perhaps we have a
Sappho in the house and don't know it! -- I dare say you have the assurance to
be full of tender sentiment and sensibility.


Maria. No, Ma'am; -- you cannot think I Have any feeling.


Mrs. A. Upon my honor she fancies herself a young lady!


Mast. J. Well, Mamma, all the village calls her Miss Maria.


Mrs. A. Miss! ha, ha, ha! -- Oh! I shall faint -- the Maria! -- Had Not you
better at once call yourself Laura Maria? there is my son that will have a
tolerable fortune, he is called by every body plain Jack.


Mast. J. By'r leave, Mamma, -- even Dr. Grigsby calls me Master Jack.


Maria. Ma'am, it is a matter of indifference to me, what I am called,


Mrs. A. Very true! "That we call a rose, by any other name would smell as
sweet."


Mast. J. Aye: Mamma. -- Molly's cheek colors like a rose -- but you blush
like a red cabbage.


Mrs. A. Then, Miss, could your humility -- sweet rose -- fragrant flower,
condescend to dust out my dressing room?


Mast. J. Now, Mamma, will you have done? you have made Papa too as bad as
yourself, and now there is no speaking a word before him but he comes out with a
rhyme to it.


All. (without.) I Am just in time to it.


Enters. Mrs. A. Mr. Allbut, is this a time for your folly?


All. I Will leave it to Polly.


Mrs. A. Oh, very well, Sir; but I assure you you sha'n't go to London again in
haste without me -- A pack of your wits and geniusses could not take you to one
of their clubs.


All. The Namby-pampy club.


Mrs. A. And only one night -- but you bring home such a parcel of stuff, and
wherret every body with your rhymes and your rubbish!


All. Yes! but when my head is stuck up in poet's corner, there will be rubbish!


Mrs. A. Mr. Allbut, you're a brewer; mind your malt and your hops.


All. Oh! you unreasonable woman! when it was you that set me on, and made me
even lay out six shillings at the stall at the corner of Chancery Lane, for
Bushe's Art of Poetry, and only to get myself ready at versifications.


Mrs. A. Yes! but, Mr. Allbut, having traveled all over Italy in the first
circles of fashion, I had hopes you might turn out a poet of nature -- to run
extempore with a string of beautiful verses on every occasion, as it may offer,
like the charming Italian Improvisatore.


All. Well, I Am the great English Improvisitory.


Mrs. A. I have heard the harmonious Metastasio, the Pastor Fido, the Goldoni
--


All. On his poney.


Mrs. A. I protest to heaven, if you don't -- A pretty thing! I cannot go to
take an airing in my chariot to inhale the balmy odours of the roseate spring,
but my maid comes with her steps stately into my drawing room, and with her
delicate paws, rattles my instrument out of tune. This accounts for your
negligence -- letting me go to the play only the other night without a
pocket-handkerchief, and when all the boxes were in tears for the sorrows of
Yarico, I was obliged to wipe my sympathizing, moistened cheek in --


All. Cheek! Ay! that was so rosy-colour'd that night -- hussy, your lady was
fain to twitch the tears from off it with her white kid-gloves, so that the
finger and thumb looked as if she had been taking brazil snuff -- that could not
save some drops falling on your neck-handkerchief; what with that and your
grievous face, my love, the titter went round. One lord with a blue ribbon
whispered, "by the heavens! that lady sitting next to the pretty well-behaved
little gentleman, is Maudlin Muzzy. (Jack laughs.)


Mrs. A. (enraged) Retire! (Maria curtseys and exit.)


Mast. J. Mamma, Molly makes a better curtsey than you -- you do it with a bob
and a duck and shake yourself about so. (mimicks.)


Mrs. A. 'Pon my word, Master Jack, this is most unpretty behavior, Molly!
Hey! (calls.)


All. Rare times when the hen crows, and the little cock is vnot head of the
flock! Willows! eh, eh!


Mast. J. I Am the white legged chicken -- Molly! -- Willows! eh, eh!


Enter Maria and Willows. Mrs. A. Did you rub the chairs in my chamber, (to
Maria.)


Will. My poor child! (aside)


All. Rub chairs! my dear, that is business for the housemaid -- you should
recollect that Polly was well bought up -- Did you carry that corn to the mill?
(to Willows.)


Maria. My dear father! (aside.)


Mrs. A. Carry corn! nay, Mr. Allbut, are there not men enough about the house?
-- Should not forget that Mr. Willows has seen better days -- though now he
totally depends upon our humanity.


Will. Why, Sir, as Madam observes, one of the men in the brewery might as well
do this -- I have sufficient use for my time over your books.


Maria. Besides, Sir, consider my father's years -- indeed he hasn't strength!


Exit Willows. Mast. J. Molly, "rattle up the Piano" -- 'twill make us all
merry.


Mrs. A. No, Miss; you sha'n't show off your graces to entrap the affections of
my child.


Maria. I can bear all this: but to witness the injurious treatment my father
receives, wounds me to the soul,


Exit. Masi. J. Ecod! I Will go after, and kiss Molly's tears away. (aside, and
going.)


Mrs. A. Now, where are you going, Master Jack?


Mast. J. Going to read a fine soft sympathy book -- Mamma -- he! he! he! Yes,
I Will kiss Molly. (aside, and exit.)


Mrs. A. Is Not that -- Mrs. Bellevue under my roof! (looking out).


All. Gad! it is widow Bellevue -- but, love, our roos would still be here is, but
for my prudent dexterity in tricking her out of it. While her husband, my old
master, lived, he was sharp over me: but, no sooner the hatchment clapped upon
the wall, than all her ancient noble blood flushed in her face at the sight of
the blue dragons, and the three white azure rampant fishing-hooks.


Mrs. A. That slut Maria! though we pay handsomely for poor's rates to bring the
paupers out of the roads and hovels.


All. Ay! Mrs. Bellevue's a poor pauper in the hovel now, yet she was once too
grand to have her great name posted in ledgers -- no, she must have the
business carried on under my firm, so rather than hurt her dignity, my little
bit of an insignificant name sneaked into the lease, glided into the consols,
stole into the East India stock, and my little bit of a self popp'd into her
house and land -- like the New Church in the Strand.


Mrs. A. Yes, it is certainly Maria encourages her to come here; I dare say I Am
cut up finely. (listens.) Gone into the parlour! impudence! (going.)


All. Now for a neat rhyme! (aside, and holding her.) Gone into the parlour,
impudence -- just like a -- a -- (Seems puzzled for a rhyme, and not hitting on
it, holds down his head, puts his hands in his coat-pockets and runs into the
house -- Mrs. Allbut follows in a rage.


END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE I. Allbut's House.
Enter Maria and Mrs. Bellevue, with a Book. Maria. INDEED I Am glad to see you.

Mrs. Bell. Once I could be happy to bid you welcome here.


Maria. Aye! Mrs. Bellevue, this houle when yours, was the seat of politeness
and hospitality -- hasn't Sir Henry since sent to you?


Mrs. Bell. No, my Love, he is no more a brother. His late acquisition of a
baronet's title, which he never expected, has raised him so much above me, that
I Am now out of sight -- every spark of fraternal affection; even compassion for
my sufferings has been long extinguished!


Maria. Oh, Madam, I Am out of all patience with him -- his family pride, so
provokingly unreasonable -- to take such a vast alarm at your marrying a
tradesman, when he himself, though a baronet, is still in business -- your
husband was a brewer -- your proud brother is a banker -- and where the end is
money, I cannot see any great difference in the means used to acquire it.


Mrs. Bell. Candor should in some measure incline me to excuse my brother,
when I reflect that my present destitute situation is partly the consequence of
that very family pride; which in his conduct to me wears the appearance of
cruelty -- of inhumanity!


Maria. Aye, Madam, on the sudden death of your worthy husband, what a pity
that you could not suppress your own ideas of rank and birth, by being above all
concern for the business, in trusting it into the hands of this designing fool
-- this knavish Mr. Allbut!


Mrs. Bell. A villain! -- He abused my considence -- I placed him in a trust --
and then instead of clearing; to puzzle and perplex --


Maria. His purpose was to get all into his own power!


Mrs. Bell. He has done it -- possessed himself of my fortune, here -- even of
my house -- and drove me to --


Maria. The vulgar Mrs. Allbut -- indeed the great lady of the village --
rattling by your cottage-door in her chariot -- (Mrs. Bellevue weeps.) But I Am
wrong to revive in your mind --


Mrs. Bell. My kind Maria -- in the bud of years; yet bloom of discretion! --
had I then such an early friend! but those whom misfortune has doomed to
participate in friendship, only by receiving, may seem interested for a
grateful mention of its sacred blessings. I am poor -- you have been good to me
-- if I thank you, you will do justice to my intention --


Maria. Don't grieve, Madam.


Mrs. Bell. I didn't know the worth of your mind when my son set the just value
upon your person and accomplishments -- He could discern genuine merit, I was
dazzled with the blaze of transitory riches; and when I should have blessed him
with a real treasure, I wronged both him and you! -- Forbid your union; and to
prevent it for ever, sent my child over seas far -- far from me! Perhaps now a
wandering fugitive. Oh! I have been wicked, cruel, unnatural! I Am punished, but
not enough! -- I should be resigned -- I am.


Maria. Dear Madam, all will be better -- No news yet of your William?


Mrs. Bell. No, my dear; and since the unhappy change of affairs, I scarce wish
for my son -- I have now no home to receive him -- no smile of welcome -- my
blessing and my tears are all I Have lest to give him.


Maria. As my brother Charles was led to go abroad merely with the hopes of
finding your William, they may have met; the two boys were here exemplary in
their friendship -- they may, they will afford mutual assistance should either
want it.


Mrs. Bell. There too, from my unworthy conduct, you and your father are now
deprived of comfort and protection from a brother and a son. Was Charles here,
the Allbuts dare not treat you as they do. But I know nothing of William since
his quitting the captain that I sent him with, and proceeding by himself to the
East Indies. My Boy has a relation there in power -- but no accounts from him.


Maria. My father and I remain in the same uncertainty -- You Will stay and take
some refreshment.


Mrs. Bell. Excuse me, my dear -- I Will not be the cause of drawing Mrs.
Allbut's displeasure upon you.


Maria. She never wants a cause for that. Step into my room -- I Have had a
trifling present from some friends in town -- I must beg your acceptance of a
part of it.


Mrs. Bell. You Have too much concern for me -- I gave you evil, and you return
every good.


Maria. My dear Ma'am, be cheerful. (Takes her by the hand and exeunt.)


SCENE II. A Green. Enter Charles in a Sailor's Dress.
Charles. How every well-known object delights. -- Captain Vansluisen!


Enter Capt. Vansluisen. I find you received my letter.

Capt. Van. Yaw, Mynheer; and I Am com'd at de very day it bid me meet you here.
My ship have brought you riches from Batavia, safe to Amsterdam, and now safe
to London.


Cha. Pleasure, indeed! My riches I acquired by labor, difficulty, and danger
-- had a hard struggle for my life too, since, Captain -- you know impatience
to re-visit England, would not suffer me to wait for your sailing.


Capt. Van. I did hear de littal ship you embark in was cast away.


Cha. Wrecked here on the coast -- dead of night -- had just time to throw on
any jacket that came to hand -- I got on shore with only life -- no cath --
knew nobody -- dispatched that letter to you, took a short stick in my hand,
pushed off on soot, and with a hale constitution and jovial heart, here am I
returned to my dear native village, worth two hundred thousand pounds, which
ten years ago I quitted, not master of --


Capt. Van. I did lost all your riches at sea, but I did found them again -- Ve
vere taken by a Frenchman --


Cha. By a Frenchman! zounds!


Capt. Van. Dey did board -- clapped us all under hatches -- but van of my
crew, a brave young Englishman, in de mid vatch, crept out of a port up de
sides of the ship, snatch up a hanger, overpower de French sentry, released us,
and ve did retook our vessel.


Cha. What, one man -- Huzza! Well done little England! (takes off his hat and
waves it.)


Capt. Van. De capitan of de enemy was an Irishman -- sought like de dyvil --
in despair to see his prize, gone, darted on de English boy -- clasped him in
his arm, and jumped overboard down in de vater -- a heavy sea -- could not slack
sail -- saw them no more!


Cha. My fortune preserved by the loss of a brave fellow lessens the enjoyment!
-- My heart throbs once more to behold -- Now for my father's; but first a rub
thwart my chin, and, (looking out,) is n't this Grigsby the barber, dressed
very odd for a friseur! A worthy fellow he is -- there I can get -- How glad am
I to come home. Ah, no place like old England, not a house that will not fling
open its doors to me; not a table without a plate, or a parlour without a nail
for my hat! Bells rung! bonfires, I warrant! ch,


They retire* Enter Grigsby and some Villagers. Grig. Don't interrupt -- I am
considering a case -- I love good eating. (Aside.)


1st Vill. Now the Doctor's head is splitting with judgment.


Grig. I must ingratiate myself with Mrs. Allbut -- without her countenance I
may shut up shop, and cork up my wine vaults. I take fifty pounds a year of her
money for only chatting at her tea-table on Italians, Della-Cruscas, and the
nervous system.


2d Vill. But, Doctor, my brother Tummas be main bad.


Grig. Oh! what you have a bad brother.


2d Vill. Sick.


Grig. You're all impertinent. A sine thing if I Am to have studied the material
medicar, Southampton-port, alder-sloe juice, and marrow-pomatum of
Pharmacopolia, British coniac, turnip-cyder of Tooley-street, malaga surgery,
tawny bottle-crusts, essence of Burganny, curling-iron and apothecaryship, to
throw away my time and skill upon all the ragged mussins of the place; but this
is the curse of a man's getting into reputation.


2d Vill. Ay, Doctor, 'cause you roots out a disease.


Grig. So I do. I Am for none of your worthless radical cures.


Cha. What, has Grigsby the barber turned doctor apothecary?


1st Vill. Our cousin Ralph be got sick again, Doctor.


Grig. Oh, his malady was -- I perfectly remember his case; he was ill of a --
a -- Camera Obscura. How did you treat him?


1st Vill. Bless you! I cannot afford to treat people. When I be's in company,
every man pays his own shot.


3d Vill. Doctor, my son George that listed for a soger -- I got un off, but
he is now at huome sick on my hands.


Grig. As we of the faculty say, much depends on diet. What Is his regimen?


3d Vill. The old Buffs.


Grig. The devil! I mean what does he eat!


3d. Vill. He Is fond of eggs for breakfast, and --


Grig. Stop. What does he do with the shells?


3d. Vill. The shells -- let us see, (pausing) ecod, I think he throws 'em
behind the fire.


Grig. There it is! How the devil can a man expect health that throws his
egg-shells behind the fire? Here, (writes with his pencil on a bit of paper)
he is a little deafish.


3d Vill. Yes, with all the drumming --


Grig. Then we must twiddle up his optic nerve; (writes) scrupolorum Glaubers,
vermifuge, squills, ay -- As he is your son you must give him sal. prunell, sal.
polychrest, and sal. almonic.


3d Vill. Yes: but the damned dog will be always running after Sal. Johnson.


Grig. My boy will mix that up for you, (giving the paper.) You Will pay him half
a crown. Confuse it in a basin of water -- in that let him throw his
egg-shells, and after shaking the bottle, fling bowl and all out at -- mind --
the street-window -- that may get me another patient, (aside,) first consulting
the thermometer. Begone! I Will give no more advice this morning.


1st Vill. Ay, Doctor, times are turned -- You don't mind poor folks now you have
got a broken-knee'd mare, and a new old whiskey.

Exit.
Grig. Broken-knee'd mare -- old whiskey -- ah, no chance of being looked on
till I step into my chariot.


Cha. Is this our village?


Enter a Servant in a Livery. Serve. Sir, my master --


Grig. (smiling and cringing.) What, is your master taken ill? Dear gentleman!
I Will run to him. (Aside.) He pays me thirty pounds a year, and will not venture
out in a morning till I come and tell him which way the wind lies.


(Going hastily.) Serve. No, Sir; but he desires you will send him in a dozen of
your best old port.


Grig. Ha! -- What my black strap?


Cha. A wine-merchant too!


Grig. Very well. (Exit servant.) When he drinks my port he will soon want
something out of my shop. My red seal bottles, always bring one with a long
cravat round his neck.


Cha. Now, Captain, you will see how glad he will be to find I Am returned. My
father was a good friend to him; and now for a specimen of gratitude and early
faithful attachment. Ah, honest Grigsby -- your hand, my old lad.


Grig. Rather free. (drawing back.)


Cha. Stop!


Grig. Stop! -- any business with me, master? (looks strange).


Cha. Ha, ha, ha! -- Don't you remember Charley Willows?


Grig. What, is it you? Come home in rags -- this is the fuss made about him by
his family! I said how 'twou'd be, (aside -- surveying Charles with contempt,)
hem -- (going.) Whose chariot? (looking out.) Oh! Madam, your most profound
humble servant (bows off obsequiously.) Smart gig that! How do you do, Sir? (bows
off more familiar.) A good stout gelding! -- hows goes it Mr. -- (nodds off
slightly.)


Cha. Well, Grigsby! Youv'e done this devilish well. I was going to your shop
for a rub and a scrub -- you always had a little soap and water!


Grig. Scrubs come to my house for soap and water.


Cha. How! (with surprise and indignation.)


Grig. (Aside, not regarding him.) This fellow's sister Maria though, is pretty
-- but then, that Miss Louisa -- a report that she is daughter, or somewhat to a
lord -- was not it? -- an odd mystery that -- hiding at Jollyboy's -- poor though,
and tisn't what were you, but what are you.


Cha. Hark'ee, Grigsby! -- (angry.)


Grig. (smiling placid and contemptuous, takes snuff.) Madam Allbut is my first
object and attention -- eh, is n't that Squire Hedgworth and young Briers going
out shooting? A present of some game for Mrs. Allbut might -- one should never
make presents but to them that can afford to buy -- How fashionable they are
equipped for the sport! I must kick up a rummage in my old master's wardrobe --
see if it cannot afford me a smart shooting-jacket; every gentleman in the
country should shoot -- hey, my glove, (searches.) A physician to feel pulses
should have his hand warm, soft, and white -- my hand (displays it) 'till I can
sport the chariot, should get a muff -- a ring -- my sweet old patient found
dead with with a brace of guineas clench'd in his fist -- ready see for the
doctor -- the punctual honest soul! -- the old nurse and I dividing I shou'dn't
have given her half -- the two would have compassed a smart ring, ha! -- hum!


Exit pompous. Capt. Van. He Is gone to set de "plate of pudden for you, and
knock up de peg for your hat."


Cha. This a sample of my welcome!


Capt. Van. I tink I hear "de bells ringing" -- I long for "de bonfire."


Cha. Damn the village! I wish 'twas on fire -- but hold, there may be only one
Grigsby in it. Yes, 'twas certainly my forlorn appearance! the rascal thinks
I Am come home poor.


Capt. Van. If you had, mynheer Villows, you see your welcome!


Cha. Aye: but unjust to draw a conclusion from the behavior of this low-born
murdering mountebank. (A shot heard at some distance.)


Bri. (without.) You Have certainly winged her.


Cha. (looking out.) Oh, now you will see a different affair. Here are a couple
of gentlemen, my former school-fellows, who, except Willy Bellevue, whom to
follow abroad I first left my home, were my most particular and intimate
companions. -- Yes, it is --


Enter Briers and Hedgeworth, ( with fowling pieces.) Hedge. I think it fell in
the marsh.


Bri. No getting it without wetting one's self, and I Have no great wish for Dr.
Grigsby's stuff -- hey, Nero! (whistles) if I don't shoot that dog! badly made,
good for nothing, (perceiving Charles.) Oh, here, you sir, leap the hedge and
bring me the bird -- it fell yonder -- damn the fellow, how he stares! Oh, he
must be paid beforehand -- there -- (flings halfpence on the ground) Now, hey
over!


Char. (with joy and cordiality.) My dear Bob Hedgeworth, how do you do? -- Nick
Briers! here I am come home to you again (they look at each other, then at
Charles with strangeness.)


Capt. Van. De gentlemen seems to have forgotten you.


Cha. Aye, I am sunburn'd and weatherbeaten -- but, my boys, don't you remember
Charley Willows?


Hedge. (to Briers -- charging his gun.) Do you recollect? -- I shall be out of
powder.


Bri. Oh, yes, very well -- It Is the -- the -- poh! Willows -- aye, brother to
the pretty girl there below, at -- Allbut, the brewer's. -- My lad, if you
don't take care you will be pressed.


Hedge. Nick. you should give the poor devil something. I remember his sister
was always your partner at the assembly at Guildford.


Bri. Nonsense!


Cha. Well, but lads -- what news? -- I hav'n't even seen my father yet.


Bri. Free and easy -- any thing of a former acquaintance got down out of one's
line -- a cursed boar -- no shaking off.


Enter Grigsby in a shooting dress (accoutred.) Grig. Gentlemen, your most
obedient --


Bri. (hollowing out.) Oh, dem'me, here is the doctor too.


Grig. (charging.) I Have forgot wadding -- oh! my head! 'pon my soul, gentlemen,
I was going to charge with a bank note -- oh! doctor Boerhaave's proscription
-- could not read it -- but no matter -- the mixture is gone home and the
patient will soon follow it, (aside.)


Enter Margery and Louisa, behind. Marg. Ma'am, this is the shortest way to our
mill.


Louisa. Aye! my good Margery, your character of Mrs. Allbut has so frightened
me, that I believe I must sojourn with you a little longer; how shall we get by
these gentlemen? I wish they wouldn't shoot till we are past.


Grig. (apart to Louisa) Oh, Ma'am, want your change -- hav'n't so much in the
till -- send you in a choice chest of florence. (To Briers and Hedgeworth,
smiling,) Gentlemen, will you permit me to make one in your very salubrious
amusement? -- I promised some game to a lady -- I Am an excellent shot -- mark,
(presents.)


Marg. Stop, Ma'am! Duce of that doctor!


Bri. Zounds, doctor -- that is a cow! --


Grig. That a cow! I know it, my dear Sir; but don't you see the little bird
perched on the top of her horn? -- my game has hopp'd the twig -- it is wise --
for, gentlemen, rest is the nurse of disease, "You see as a doctor, I speak
against my own interest; nothing but exercise and open air can brace and
strengthen the animal functions, and when the caninus rabies, which we of the
faculty, call vertigo in the foot, comes; rest brings a polyphus in the lungs,
symptomatic of the epigastic region; and then nothing better than sudorific
antimony, parsimony, and ready money, dismembering the whole animal economy
with the syrrup of wild pop" -- (Briers fires close at his cars -- be runs off.)


Louisa. Ah! (shricking.)


Cha. Frighten a lady! (snatches the piece from Briers, and throws it over the
bedge) "Hey over!"


Briers. Them me, what do you mean by that?


Cha. Oh, I Will tell you. (Briers taking Hedgeworth under the arm, they both
sing and walk off.)


Louisa. Those are our young men of fashion, devoid of breeding or humanity! --
and this spirited young man -- You're a gallant fellow! Those brutal wretches!
Oh, what mistakes Fortune does make in the distribution of her gifts! (aside)


Exeunt Louisa and Margery. Cha. A lovely creature! But why did I not speak to
her? Those puppies rascally conduct has stupefied me! -- Charming girl! -- The
scoundrels! (pauses and looks confused.)


Capt. Van. And these scoundrels were your intimate companions? Why, Mynheer
Villows, you did keep good company!


Cha. This my reception -- the joys I promised myself! They certainly imagine
I Am come home pennyless -- it is plain, if I had, how 'twou'd be.


Capt. Van. Ah, Mynheer Villows, dis is your home! -- Ah, ha! a man may love
his own country vidout crowing over dat of another,


Cha. Why true, Captain. It is not this or that spot that stamps the character;
Nature will not change for climate, customs, or complexion: the villain, black
or white, is of one nation, and the benevolent are fellow countrymen, though
born at the extremities of the globe -- Yes, Briers and Hedgeworth's scorn, all
to my seeming poverty!


Capt. Van. Suppose den you seem to be poor, only to prove which of your
friends deserve to be bettered by your riches.


Cha. Thank ye, I will. A most excellent thought! -- my dress too so lucky --
Oh, but Captain, my property is consigned to the banking-house, Sir Henry Check.


Capt. Van. Yaw.


Cha. Then, master of a princely fortune, I Will sally through the village in my
old trowsers -- Is that a good shipwrecked, rueful phiz? (looks dejected.)
Come, Captain.


Exit singing, Captain follows. SCENE III. Before an elegant Villa.
Enter Grigsby. Grig. Cannot kill a bird. Just as I cover mark, and touch
trigger, damn it, I always shut the wrong eye -- How to pay court to Mrs.
Allbut --


Enter a Man in a Soldier's Coat, with a Musket and Wallet. Man. What a sap
was I to come this way, just under Mr. Allbut's nose, and he is a justice of
peace! (Sees Grigsby, endeavors to hide the wallet, and sneak by.)


Grig. That fellow's been poaching: since I cannot bring down game with lead,
I Will try silver. Ho, you infernal damned dog! I know you're a poacher,
destroying the nobleman's game, you vile thief! Give up what you have got!


Man. Zounds, I shall go to quod for my marauding! -- Master, don't hurt a poor
man with a family.


Grig. This is a lucky stroke -- our great Madam Allbut will esteem this such a
prodigious compliment -- besides the credit of shooting so capital -- Well, say
nothing of this business -- there, I buy your game, (gives him money, and takes
the wallet.) [Exit Man.] Here Is Allbut, and I hav'n't time to put the birds
into my net.


Enter Allbut from the House. All. So, Doctor, in visiting your patients, you
shoot by the way? -- 'gad, that is killing two birds with one stone.


Grig. (smiling.) Yes, Sir, I Have had tolerable sport -- I Have shaved a good many
birds.


All. You Have been shaving the birds?


Grig. Hem -- I mean killing -- powder-puff and washball -- that is, powder and
ball -- shot -- I Have brought here the produce of my success humbly to present
to Mrs. Allbut.


All. Ha! You're right to make presents; she is in a high passion -- but this
politeness of yours will soften her.


Enter Mrs. Allbut from the House. Mrs. A. Locked themselves up! This audacious
Mrs. Bellevue to dare to come into a house of mine!


All. My love, here is our worthy friend Doctor Grigsby has been shooting this
morning early, and he begs you will accept of a few birds.


Mrs. A. Shooting is a cruel sport! the pretty innocent feathered tenants of
the air -- the tuneful minstrels that wake the rosy morn with carols sweet --
it shocks me! -- my feelings are perhaps too exquisite.


All. Feeling! Yes, my love, and your taste is not bad -- over a roast
pheasant! We shall have a nice supper. Doctor, you will come and eat a morsel of
your own good cheer?


Mrs. A. Do pray, Doctor. (curtsies.)


Grig. Madam, I shall do myself that honor.


All. A few partridges here, eh, Doctor? -- and some woodcocks? (taking up the
wallet.) Oh, you feared they would break your net.


Grig. I trust, Ma'am, these dainties will suit the delicacy of your ladyship's
palate. (Bows.)


All. (opens the wallet.) What the devil, a goose!


Grig. Ha! (surprised and confused.) Ay, a wild goose!


All. "Here Is the pretty innocent feathered tenant of the air" -- By the Lord,
here is a wild pig! -- "Here Is the little bird that wakes the rosy morn with
carols sweet!"


Grig. (confused.) By the heavens, this must have been done by the magic
lantern!


All. Thank ye, Doctor -- but rather too light food for supper. However, as
you're our apothecary, it is very well intended.


Mrs. A. Sir, be assured you shall not affront your betters.


Grig. Affront! Let me tell you, Madam, we of the faculty think that my present
is wholesome and good eating -- so says Doctors Boerhaave, Crook Shanks,
Cheney, and Sir John Pringle.


All. Yes, -- but, Doctor, damn me if here is not a wild old woman's petticoat
-- Why, instead of giving, you're come here to make game! (Grigsby steals off.)
Holla, Doctor, does Johnny Pringle recommend this for good eating?


Mrs. A. An audacious villain! Peter! (calling.)


Enter Peter. But I must compose my mind with divine poesy: (takes up paper,
and reads,) "Seraphic souls sublime, celestial food, soft circumambient air" --
I desire, Mr. Allbut, you will have him turned out of the parish, next Vestry --
Tell the cook that is for dinner tomorrow. (Pointing.)


Peter takes up the wallet, and exit. All. No, my love, we have company tomorrow
-- piggy looks so nice, we'll keep it till we are by ourselves.


Mrs. A. Something else to think on than Doctor Grigsby's vagaries -- and you
to join --


All. Love, instead of snubbing, you should take care of me -- give me nice
cordials, to make me live long; for, once you're a widow, as I did with Mrs.
Bellevue, some smart rogue will come and jockey you out of all. Aye, now I Am
brisk -- but when I Am flat -- dead -- you will be for marrying some flashy young
gentleman.


Mrs. A. I desire, Mr. Allbut, you will not flatter me with such hopes.


All. Of two such popes.


Mrs. A. Hush! They Have broke up their consultation.


They retire. Enter Maria and Mrs. Bellevue from the House. Mr. and Mrs. Allbut
steal in, and shut the door. Mrs. B. Bless you, my dear Miss; my kind, good
angel!


Maria. Farewell, Madam.


Mrs. B. What must have become of me but for you?


Maria. Nay, now, indeed --


Mrs. B. If heaven has a store for the benevolent, your comforts will be many.
You nor yours were never obliged to me -- you owe nothing, but give all. Your
conduct, contrasted with the ungrateful possessors of this house -- for they
have shared my bounty -- they rose high upon my ruins, though now they will not
know me. When we'd win the heart by increase of favors, each added obligation
but renders the claim of benevolence more insupportable; and, though a kind
wish is the only return expected, pride often quits the debt by an ungenerous
endeavor to disown it.


Maria. Dear Madam, be cheerful -- the Allbuts are unworthy of your resentment:
their repeated cruelties to my father and me cancel what they compliment by the
name of charity -- we must bear. If my father receives any news from abroad,
you shall hear -- and you will do the same by us.


Mrs. B. Aye; was my William returned -- the letters you have received from
Charles, though long back, never once mention him.


Maria. Be assured, Madam, William is still here, (points to her breast;) but
why should I flatter myself he has yet a heart for me!


Mrs. B. If he lives, dear Maria, could his generous, his faithful heart make a
reparation for past injuries! Perhaps in my boy's honest affection you may
forget the unkindness of his mother -- Ch; that I could atone! -- in that sweet
hope, his return will give me the first delight -- Well, well --


Maria. Come, all will be well. If I can slip out, I Will bring you some
newspapers -- they will amuse you.


Mrs. B. I thank you; I Will send my little Edward for them, if I can prevail
upon him -- oh, here he is -- my child! -- now look, is not Edward shooting up
very like your -- I beg your pardon -- his brother, my dear William.


Enter Edward. Maria. (tender.) Edward, how do you do, my dear?


Edward. Very well, I Am obliged to you. Mamma, you staid so long, I feared Mr.
Allbut had affronted you, and I Would have asked him what he meant by it?


Maria. Why, that is very valiant of you, Edward -- but the other day, when Master
Jack affronted you, you cried and walked away.


Edward. Aye, I didn't mind for myself, 'cause Master Jack was able to beat
three of me; but I would not suffer the biggest man in England to affront my
mother.


Mrs. B. My child, my love, come, we'll go home. -- (Going toward the house.)


Edward. Why, Mamma, we don't live in the great house now -- Mamma forgets our
home now is the cottage.


Mrs. B. True, my love (struggling with her tears.)


Exeunt Mrs. Bellevue, Edward, and Maria. ACT III.
SCENE I. Before Allbut's house (enter Maria, goes to a side door and pushes.)
Maria. I LEFT the door open -- some of Master Jack's tricks, I suppose,
(knocks, Mrs. Allbut appears at the window.)


Mrs. A. Who Is there?


Maria. Oh! (looking up) the door shut whilst --


Mrs. A. The Maria! I protest I didn't know you -- to pay me a visit! this is
an honor -- I -- but I don't imagine you have any very material business here,
Miss.


Maria. Madam!


Mrs. A. There was indeed a servant girl I had -- one Molly Willows -- but she
got so pert and idle -- I am determined never to let her into my house.


Maria. But, Ma'am, sure you will not --


Mrs. A. Cannot avoid it, Miss. (Maria weeps.)


Enter Jollyboy. Joll. They said our smart Doctor Grigsby came this way -- walk
off with the money I had to pay my rent! (looking about.) No! holla! Madam
Allbut! do your folks intend to bring that sack of corn up today? mayhap you
don't bake your own bread any more; because if you want the flour, send the
grist up to mill, tol, lol, lol, (sings.) Miss Willows, what is the matter with
my pretty chick? If it is a man has made you cry -- tell me who -- I Will see if I
cannot dust his jacket, and if it is a woman, I Will tell her she is a damned
hell-cat.


(Allbut appears at another window.) Mrs. A. Then you're a busy fool.


All. Because the air's so cool.


(Mrs. Allbut seems to sit and read.) Joll. Turned, poor soul, into the street!
Ecod, Madam seems very easy after doing an action a Grand Turk would be ashamed
of.


Mrs. A. "In tranquil hours it gave the smile serene." (reading.)


All. (at the other window.) You I have not seen, (To Jollyboy.)


Mrs. A. I desire, girl, you will not bring a mob about my house.


Joll. Am I a mob?


All. For you I Have a job.


Mrs. A. No doing any thing for this man. (Retires.)


All. To grind my corn -- but beware of the horn. (Mrs, Allbut appears at the
same window with Allbut.)


Mrs. A. Come in I desire.


All. I beg leave to retire, (he draws in -- she takes his place at the window,
and is going to speak -- he puts his head over her shoulder) I Will go sit at the
fire.


Mrs. A. (to Maria.) Contrary to my commands, you brought Widow Bellevue to my
house, and be assured that you shall find my door for ever shut. (Shuts window
and retires.)


Joll. Turned out for relieving the distressed -- poor soul! too good to be
sheltered by a house, and now her roof is the canopy of heaven! Miss Louisa,
our lodger, has left us -- might again let the little box -- but was it to
bring me a guinea a day -- I Would rather you would occupy it for nothing.


Maria. I Am obliged to you, but cannot think of --


Joll. I Would be no loser by the bargain; for prosperity hangs over the house that
contains a humane and charitable heart.


Maria. Whither turn -- separated from my father! leave him with those cruel
people!


Enter Master Jack. M. Jack. Molly! hark'ee --


Maria. (joyful.) Has your Mamma, relented? Has she sent for me?


M. Jack. Oh, no, my dear; but I Am softened into a power of compassion for you.


Joll. Why now that is well -- I always said Master Jack was the flower of the
slock -- you think Miss has been badly treated, and pity her, eh?


M. Jack. Yes, I pity her. My dear, since Mamma has discharged you -- sooner
than you should come to want -- if you abide at Mrs. Bellevue's cottage; I Will
pay her a shilling a week, and give you half-a-crown now and then, if you will
only let me come and kiss you at all times when I Am in a humor?


Maria. How! (with indignation.)


Joll. Why you ungenerous hound! is that your pity? Do you come and affront her
with your rascally proposals at the very time that her sorrowful situation
renders her an object of respect and protection?


M. Jack. Hark'ee, Dick Jollyboy! I Will protect you with a douse of the chops.


Joll. You whelp! (strikes him.)


M. Jack. (crying.) Oh, that is pretty usage to your landlord's son -- see if I
don't make Mamma turn you out of your mill -- fine doings! a young gentleman to
be dous'd only for asking to keep a Miss! Exit blubb'ring.


Joll. Keep a miss! pretty buck! no wonder curs like you, when the tip-top of
the nation set before you decent examples. -- My dear you will be safer in my
little cottage than in this great house.


Maria. I believe you -- I accept your kindness, and thank you.


Joll. Why now that is hearty!


Enter Grigsby, full dressed, with large wig, muff, and cane. Grig. Though I was
deceived, by that foraging son of a Scarlet fever, yet my present was as
sweetly astringent as rough Alicant -- I Will show these good people that a
Physician is somebody. I see respect is all paid to appearance; and by heavens
I Will have a chariot though it draws me to St George's Fields, hem; (looks
important.) Young woman, -- this girl loves me (aside) -- Is your master or
mistress at home?


Joll. She has no master or mistress.


Grig. How old are you? (to Jollyboy.)


Joll. Why? suppose I Am three and forty -- what then?


Grig. You're not a physician?


Joll. No, thank heaven.


Grig. Then you're a fool. -- Every man at forty is either a fool or a
physician. (Struts.)


Maria. (to Jollyboy.) I think I shall put you to inconvenience -- suppose I go
to the Doctor's, till I see what father determines.


Grig. Come to me! oh! this is what we call love-powder. (Aside.)


Joll. Hold, Miss. Doctor, give me a ten pound note.


Grig. Give you a ten pound note?


Joll. Yes; that Miss Louisa gave you.


Grig. So, when my patients give me a see, I must give it to you? ha, ha, ha!
but I Am not to laugh. (Looks grave.)


Joll. Come -- ten pounds! -- touch!

(Holds out his hand.)
Grig. A touch -- in the pericranky -- bid he bite you? (to Maria.)


Joll. No: nor you shall not bite me. Give me the ten pounds.


Grig. He Is got the hydrofogy! bring me out a basin of water. (to Maria.)


Joll. Never mind either soap or water -- I Am shaved already -- but return the
money, or I Will take up your old trade and dress your wig upon your own block --
here is my little twiggling comb! (Shakes his cudgel.)


Grig. A Robbery!


Joll. A fellow loarns to bleed upon the veins of a cabbage leaf, and draws
teeth, by clapping a red-hot poker to our noses! -- must pick our pocket as a
wine-merchant and a doctor with sloc-juice and powder of post. Deliver! (Shakes
his cudgel, and Grigsby gives the note.)


Grig. Witness, Miss; on the King's highway he says "stop, Sir, stand and
deliver!"


Maria. Nay, but Mr. Jollyboy, this is a very dangerous practice, and what
nobody could believe from a man of your character -- oh! my poor dear father!
(Looking out and exit.)


Enter Allbut in a rage. All. Jollyboy, Mrs. Allbut has ordered me to treat you
like a scoundrel.


Joll. Ah; you will find it easy to obey her!


All. How dare you abuse my wife and beat my child? -- I Will give you --


Joll. This is quarter day, and there is your rent, (gives the note to Allbut.)


All. I Will give you a -- receipt.


Joll. No: my word is a voucher that I have paid you -- tol, lol.


Exit. All. What an honest man!


Grig. Honest! this is the most barefaced, impudent, way of paying rent! "An
honest man" is plundered, and you are the receiver.


All. Plundered! -- is this your way of making presents? -- if you have got at
robbing hedges and hen-roosts, your old practices, my boy; -- how dare you make
me the receiver?


Grig. By heavens, Sir; I Am of a sanguine and adust complexion, and --


All. 'Sblood, Sir, who cares for your dusty complexion!


Grig. Return it, for at present --


All. I Will not return the present -- the goose is plucked -- the pig is
scalded, and damn me, if you shall have any thing back, but the old woman's
petticoat.


Enter Shopman with a packet of bottles. Shop. Master, I Am going to take the
medicine to --


Grig. Take medicine -- zounds! take ten pounds from that gentleman.


Shop. (staring) Sir!


All. Take ten pounds from me?


Grig. If he will not give up it quietly, trip up his heels.


All. Trip up my heels! touch me, and I Will lay you by the heels in a jail,
(runs in.)


Grig. Never mind -- if he does, I Will visit you.


Shop. Thank'ee, Sir, but I Will save you the trouble.

Exit.
Grig. He shall restore it, else -- it is quite opake and clear to me -- I Will
ossify his very hones -- a miller and brewer take and give my money, hand to
fist! enough to dislocate my brain-pan -- but that my wrongs brought out the
loving concern of that comely servantmaid, Maria -- my money! oh! by the -- as
I Am now bemuff'd and bewig'd, I must support the condign dignity of a
physician. -- hum! ha!

Exit into house.
Enter Charles. Cha. Ay; it is a bad world, I see that. My threadbare jacket
drives every body away from me -- some look with pity -- some with contempt --
but not one offers to relieve me! -- oh! this is Mrs. Bellevue.


All. (within.) Give you ten pounds you barberizing rascal! out with him,
Peter! (Peter and Allbert seen at door thrusting Grigsby out.)


Grig. Here Is a diascordium! -- here is a nostrum!


All. And a rostrum -- and a cuff -- and a muff -- (kick out the muff and shuts
the door.)


Cha. A new thing -- people turned out of Mrs. Bellevne's house! why it is our
generous doctor!


Grig. Here Is ptisan and diet drink -- they took me by the nose!


Cha. Well: that is only returning your former compliments -- you have got a
scratch, but you have your own shop.


Grig. I never take any thing out of my own shop.


Enter Master Jack (from the house.) Master J. Oh, ho! Father and Peter have
been having fine sport here -- kicking Doctor Grigsby out, and never called me
to join in the fun, oh, --


Grig. Pounded crab's-eyes! (Master Jack gives him a blow on the back and runs
in.) -- Had my man but backed me -- he shall never again pound mortar of mine
-- my lad, you may want employ, as your father and sister are -- besides his
sister loves me, (aside.)


Cha. What! speak!


Grig. You can carry out parcels -- I have been sprain'd and battered like
opodeldoc -- no cutaneous hurt -- but quite external -- it has put me into such
a rage, I mean the Illiac passion and woe to Panado! -- look at my caput -- is
n't there a fracture in the abdomen? -- its dense as a feather -- oh, business
for Bow-street -- patients -- I must now visit the Brown-bear. Cure from my own
shop! may do for a porter, but you will never make an apothecary, oh, no, -- no,
no, (Picks up the muff, adjusts his wig and clothes.) the law shall -- to give
me such a diameter on my nose! I Will consult Mr. Fudge the attorney, he shall
take out a supersuijet -- follow me!


Exit. Cha. What does he mean by my father and sister? carry out parcels --
porter -- scoundrel! but though the people here thought me poor; yet they might
suppose my father would instantly replenish my purse -- he, thank heaven, cannot
be subject to their glum frosty looks -- he has competence, and I hope health.
Enter Willows, from an out-office, carrying a small sack full, which he
immediately lays down. Is not that my father?


Will. I shall never be able of myself -- (looking out, sees Maria.) My child!
I must not grieve her! I must seem to make light of it.


Enter Maria. Maria. Nobody dare disobey Mr. Allbut's orders to carry it for
him, nor should I add to his grief by telling him their usage to me -- now,
Sir, don't attempt it.


Will. Child, we are now servants to Mr. Allbut, and to eat his bread and
neglect our duty, is dishonest and ungrateful.


Cha. Servants to Mr. Allbut! reduced indeed! oh, this accounts fully for my
reception here.


Maria. Sir, I fear 'twill hurt you.


Cha. My beloved sister -- brought up with tenderness! -- my kind parent! --
are these the comforts of his age! -- but then is not it in my power to -- oh!
till this moment, I never tasted the sweets of riches! the delightful
reflection that I can make others happy!


Maria. Sir, indeed you cannot. (Helping Willows to lift the sack on a
pitching-block.)


Cha. They don't seem to know me. (In a broad blunt voice.) How do you do, Sir?
-- servant Miss.


Will. How do you do? how do you do?


Cha. Seem past your labor?


Will. Yes, my lad; but those that wo'n't labor may be compelled to do worse.


Cha. Have you now no son to work a little for you in your old days?


Will. Why I may have a son abroad, but perhaps my poor boy finds work hard
enough himself.


Cha. Where was this to go?


Maria. Only up to the mill yonder -- kind Sir, (curtseys) Lord if he would
(aside, joyful.) (Charles whips up the sack and stalks off singing) then
blessings on you! (looking after him with delight.)


Will. Now, child, this is very indiscreet -- how do you know who this man may be?


Maria. He Is poor certainly -- but he is an English sailor, and an honest
fellow, I warrant him.


Will. Holloa! Master!


Exit hastily. Maria. (looking out.) You're right, Sir, there is the windmill,
(points.)


Exit. SCENE II. The outside of a windmill.
Enter Charles and Margery, from the mill. Marg. It is the dear soul, and I
hav'n't packed up her things. (Goes in, Charles retires.)


Enter Louisa and Maria. Louisa. Well, it is certainly very good of him.


Maria. Now was not it, Madam? (looking toward Charles.) Oh, then he has left
it,


Louisa. (surprised.) Why that is he --


Cha. How beautiful! my experiment don't require looking so very bad -- may rub
the dust off my face -- 'tho the doctor refused me; yet old Margery has soap
and water.


Exit. Louisa. The very delightful young man that interposed when those rude
gentlemen -- and, here now, to assist the weak and aged! one would think he
watched for occasions of rendering services where most wanted -- what an
excellent heart must he have!


Maria. Don't you think, Ma'am, if well dressed -- really I believe he is very
handsome!


Louisa. Oh, have a care! young women must never think men handsome -- nothing
more dangerous to our peace -- alas! I feel it so. (Aside.)


Maria. Well, Ma'am; I Will step down and apprize Mrs. Bellevue of the honor you
intend her.


Louisa. I thank you. This very atrocious circumstance you have told me of the
miller has confirmed my determination to abide no longer with him.


Maria. Madam, it astonished me! his conduct would make one suspect that the
honesty of the world exists only in appearance.


Exit. Louisa. You believe he is and some -- how very weak and inconsiderate is
our sex! -- that girl now must be filly to take such notice of men -- to my
fancy, if I dare have a fancy, he is the most amiable person I ever saw.
(Looking.)

Re-enter Charles. My heart beats quick -- I tremble -- I wish I -- had never
seen him -- he has been making himself look more agreeable -- now that is
really very malicious. (Aside.)


Cha. Madam, your most obedient, (bows respectful.) I Would talk a thousand things,
and yet I don't know what to say (aside) -- Ma'am, here within is great
lamentation -- your intention of removing will break the heart of your poor old
landady.


Louisa. I Am not going far, Sir -- only to Mrs. Bellevue's there, below --
look, Sir, that --


Cha. Oh, Ma'am, I see.


Louisa. (aside.) Looking quite the wrong way. -- Sir, it is -- Lud! what am!
about? absolutely making an assignation! -- I fear I Am farther gone than I
thought I was (aside) -- I thank you, Sir, for the concern you took in my
fright this morning.


Cha. Oh, Ma'am; no merit of mine; concern for a lady who must interest all
that see her is involuntary. (bows.)


Louisa. (curtseys.) Since my coming here, I Have sauntered a good deal about,
but don't recollect having ever had the pleasure of seeing -- lately come Sir?
been abroad, I presume? -- but don't answer me. You see women will be
impertinent.


Cha. They will be charming, and men be captivated -- oh, you most lovely --


Louisa. What! Sir -- (looks cold and serious) -- I deserve this, (aside.) --
Sir, I retract all the information I gave you just now, (smiles archly) --
people tell me, and it may be so, that often I don't know what I Am saying; yet
pray don't you now by a contrary meaning take an interpretation of heart.


Cha. Then, Madam, you have a heart?


Louisa. I Am afraid not, (aside thoughtful.) I thought I told you, you wer'n't
to mind what I say -- I Am not going to live yonder -- look there (points) I
shall never walk through that meadow in an evening -- I desire not to know if
your heart is engaged to the young maiden for whose old father you carried the
corn to the mill. (Aside.) Lud! if I hav'n't got to flirtation with a man I
know nothing about! I the niece to a peer! and he -- but love is a most cruel
democrat! murders all distinction, and levels hearts by exaltation to a mutual
equality of sweet affection!


Exit. Cha. Now who is she? -- good and charming! and that is a volume! --
(looking out.) Is Not this Allbut's wife? the mistress of my father and sister!
who when I went abroad was little more than -- what tricks has fortune been at?
-- Oh, my new valet --


Enter Valet. Well, John, the people at the Rose don't suspect you belong to me?

Valet. Oh, no, Sir.


Cha. Right, for if I Have a welcome from a foul here, it shall not be for my riches.


Valet. Sir, Captain Vansluisen bid me tell you that Sir Henry Check wishes to
see you.


Cha. Very well; (Exit servant.) but I Will be a poor fellow for another five
minutes -- yes; (looking out.) Mrs. Allbut. I Will try what effect my
out-at-elbows has upon her.


Enter Mrs. Allbut in a rage. Mrs. A. I don't know what is come to all the
common people! -- an impudent miller to dare strike a son of mine! but paying
his rent shall not cajole me as it has done Mr. Allbut.


Cha. (advances.) Ah, Mrs. Allbut! How do you do, Ma'am?


Mrs. A. Who is this fellow?


Cha. (aside.) Oh, ho! -- I hope my father and sister are well.


Mrs. A. (aside.) I protest it is Young Willows -- come home a beggar as I
expected!


Cha. I Have been very unfortunate.


Mrs. A. Unfortunate indeed! to return in this plight -- where is this man?


Cha. Yes; but if my friends here are only so good as to assist me with a few
comfortable meals, and a little money to supply me with decent clothes, I might
soon be able to go out again and make another trial.


Mrs. A. The impertinence of such people -- (aside.)


Cha. Sorry to hear my family is fallen so much to decay; however it is not lost
what a friend gets -- glad to find you have since got so much up in the world --
I hope for your kindness -- ashamed to appear about this figure, a few guineas
would rig me handsome; then I should not disgrace your table.


Mrs. A. My table! guineas! my friend, I never meddle in the parish affairs;
but I fancy, if you have no visible means of a livelihood, that the beadle knows
his duty.


Cha. Me! Beadle! Madam, I hoped for a kinder reception --


Mrs. A. Do you suppose that Mr. Allbut is keeper of the workhouse?


Cha. Workhouse! the time has been when you thought it the highest honor, my
father's even hinting at a marriage between my sister and your son.


Mrs. A. I shall burst with rage! -- Yet really -- ha, ha, ha! its diverting --
pray, friend, stand a little farther off, ha, ha, ha! my table! the elegant and
select circle of literature, my fashionable friends might indeed stare to see a
Naples Lazaroni sit at my table -- this creature too I suppose, "plays the
Piano," and "reads Stern."


Cha. Yes, Ma'am; but "the recording angel has no tears for you."


Enter Allbut. Mrs. A. Oh, Mr. Allbut, here is the pleasantest thing! This
ragged man has a sister, and expected you would give our son in marriage to her.


All. His sister marry --


Mrs. A. Yes, our son Jack.


All. He deserves a whack. Who is he, my dear?


Mrs. A Oh, it is that -- Molly, our maid's brother.


All. What Charley Willows, that went to sea after Willy Bellevue? -- poor man,
seems bad times with you! My dear, he may have the run of the kitchen for a
week?


Enter Willows and Maria. Mrs. A. Well, Miss Maria, now you have time, see will
you exhibit your airs and graces at your piano forte?


Cha. Then, Ma'am, no pity for my distress?


Mrs. A. Pray take your distresses somewhere else.


Cha. Don't you know me, sister? Father! (kneels.]


Maria. Oh, Sir, it is my brother! Heavens! I not to know him before!


Will. My dear, dear boy, rise!


Mrs. A. Ah, lord! he cannot spoil his clothes! Ha, ha, ha! Such folks pretend
to feeling, its really amusing!


Maria. Well, Charles, eh? how, just arrived?


Cha. Father, though I didn't go abroad rich, I Am come home poorer.


Will. Never mind, my boy, -- better bring home an empty pocket than a bad
conscience. If you're clear of cash, I hope you're likewise free from dishonor.


Maria. Heard any thing of William Bellevue?


Mrs. A. Are we to stand all day lift'ning to their dismal stories? --
Absolutely their croaking has an effect upon one's spirits.


Cha. And I hope upon your heart. You once yourselves felt the bitterness of
poverty, and a sympathising recollection might now incline you to pity ours.
(Taking off his hat.)


Mrs. A. Mr. Allbut, have you got any silver?


All. A shilling -- hem, I Have got a sixpence. If there is no hole in your hat,
let it hold that. (Drops it in his bat, Maria, with an air of dignity, takes it
out, and places the hut on Charles 's head.)


Mrs. A. A very elegant chariot stopped yonder (looks out) -- some visit to us
-- Lord, Mr. Allbut, pray come a little farther -- Willows, you're son is
absolutely a disgrace! I desire he may not be seen hovering about our house.
Enter Footman in a sull Dress, mourning livery. I saw your master give the
message for us. (Footman passes Allbut, walks up to Charles, bows respectful,
and presents a card.)


Cha. (reads aloud.) "Sir Henry Check's compliments to Mr. Willows,
congratulates him on his arrival in England, hopes --


Footman. Sir, my master himself is coming to you -- but it is here I Am to
inquire for this Lady Louisa. (Goes into mill.)


Mrs. A. Dear! I vow it is Sir Henry Check! (apart.)


All. (apart.) Mrs. Bellevue's proud brother, that will not know her -- he is a K.
B. and an M. P. fiddle de dee -- bravo! (Walks up joyful.)


Enter Sir Henry Check in mourning, and re-enter Footman. Footman (whispers Sir
H.) Sir, a young lady of the description has been here, and they have directed
me where to find her.


Sir H. (apart.) Oh, pray where is --


All. I Am here, Sir Henry.


Mrs. A. Had we expected this honor --


All. Mr. Conner, (Bows. Mrs. Allbut frowns, and walks away ashamed.)


Sir H. Oh, you're Mr. -- the brewer, that -- (with contemptuous indifference,
then to Charles with ceremony and respect) Mr. Willows, I presume. (All look at
Charles with astonishment.)


Cha. Most obedient, Sir Henry. I understand some property of mine is consigned
to your house.


Sir H. It is, Sir. I left town, on a visit to my Lord Oakwood's here in this
neighborhood, and understanding from Captain Vansluisen, that you had just
arrived, took the opportunity of paying my respects with hopes of the pleasure
of introducing you to his Lordship.


Cha. Sir Henry, you're very obliging -- I Have some affairs to adjust, and then
I Am at your service. I shall dress and --


Sir H. Oh, my dear Sir, the perils you have been in sufficiently apologize --


Cha. Sorry, Sir Henry, for what may have been the cause of your present
appearance.


Sir H. Thank'ee, Sir, I Have had a severe loss indeed -- but come, Mr. Willows
-- I attend you.


Cha. My father -- sister -- Sir Henry --


Sir H. Sir, (bows to Willows.) Madam, your most devoted. (Very respectful to
Maria.)


Grig. (without.) No; you ungrateful cur. I discharge you -- I Have got a new
servant. -- Enter Grigsby. I Will see it Doctors are to be robbed of their fees,
and flung out of Brewer's houses like empty oyster-shells -- you may skip --
(to Charles.) Bring up my horse from the Jolly Mariners.


All. Get along. (To Grigsby.)


Grig. I will -- and you shall get along to the Poultry Compter. Enter Shopman
with a basket of phials. You shall do nothing for me, (snatches the basket from
him, and places it on Charles's head) Here Is my servant now -- go you the
rounds with them.


All. (takes the basket and flings it off.) Come here affronting noblemen, you
blundering fool!


Grig. My medicine spilt! so you take physic off people's shoulders, you most
obnoxious paroxysm, I Will send you such a bill you shall have symptons of a
bilious complaint -- (turns, sees Sir Henry) Noblemen -- (bows) -- mourning --
good family for a doctor, (bows.) -- Sir, it is my way to invite people of
condition to my house -- hope you will honor my oxycrate -- the moralists
considered health preferable to sickness -- and, my lord, nothing like exercise
-- rest is the nurse of disease -- you see as a doctor, I speak against myself
-- and for exercise, no ailment so mucilaginous as sheeps-head-broth; some
prefer butter-milk; and it is indeed as a lacteal lachrymoligon --


Sir H. Poh! turn! (speaking off.)


Excunt Charles and Sir Henry in conversation Foot. Oh, Mr. Allbut, our
butler's compliments to you, desires you will send in a cask of small beer for
the servants.


Exit. Grig. Sir! poh! turn! here you, my old chronic servant, take to your
quadruped, and ungroundfel my simples in a limback scalager of immense
featherfew.


Exit. (They all look at each other. Maria. Father!


Will. Why, Maria!


All. Mrs. Allbut!


Mrs. A. (confused and embarrassed.) Mr. Willows, I -- could -- have -- wished
-- Sir, that you had told us --


Will. The first I knew of it myself.


All. I suspect he has brought home the pelf.


Mrs. A. Mr. Allbut, I die with shame, for the scandalous treatment you have
given him.


All. Me!


Mrs. A. 'Pon my word, he is improved -- when dressed, I dare say he is a fine
young man. Mr. Willows, you're very happy -- Miss, I give you joy. (Curtseys.)


Enter Charles. Cha. (joyful to Willows.) Sir, I Have brought home wealth, and I
shall think my perils and labors in the acquisition nobly repaid, if it can
contribute to the ease and comfort of my dear, my honored parent!


Will. My child!


Maria. My good Charles! oh, now I may be enabled to raise the widow from her
couch of sorrow!


Mrs. A. (with great respect and gentleness.) Well, I presaged, when but a boy,
and the sweet child used to make such a graceful bow; taking bread and
currant-jelly out of my hand, I said Charles was born to ride in his coach.


All. Yes, my love, and you remember, that day you gave him the smart box of the
ear, (Mrs. Allbut walks up angry.) Mrs. Allbut, I call you to witness, when he
was a little master, I said, says I, "if that beautiful young gentleman was
thrown into the sea, he would rise again, with a bag-wig and a sword by his side."


Mrs. A. Sir, we have now a very genteel neighborhood -- form little social
parties -- happy if you will make one, at a concert -- or take a hand at Cassino,
or Rouge et Noir -- Mr. Willows, if you will honor our house --


Cha. Sir, are you keeper of the workhouse?


All. Me! -- we hope you will dine --


Cha. To take the run of the kitchen -- father, shall I trouble you to order
every inn in the village, open to all comers? -- ah! my good Sir and Madam,
thank heaven, I can now choose my company, and I Would sooner steep my crust in the
brook, than sit at a table that had not a dinner for the poor man that wants one.


Exeunt Charles, Maria and Willows. Mrs. A. Oh, I shall die with vexation!


Exit. All. Did my dear and I know, Charley'd bring home the rhino,

We'd have squeak'd, Oh, be joyful, and scraped violino.


END OF ACT III.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. Before Allbut's House. Music and Shouting without.
Enter Jollyboy. AY, there is the rich man's welcome, the full-mouthed gratitude
of beef and beer; what, and the Allbuts too going to partake of Mr. Willows'
bounty! then Old Nick choke you in the shape of a pound cake.


Enter Mrs. Allbut richly dressed from the House. Madam Allbut! Going up to
Mrs. Willows's huzza at the Bear?

Mrs. A. Huzza! -- but we should pity the misfortune of tradespeople that want
the advantages of early cultivation.


Joll. Ay; we brewers and millers cannot be expected to know much!


Enter Master Jack from the House awkwardly dressed. Mast. J. Mamma, a'n't I
too finely dressed to visit out servant maid?


Joll. Ay, Master Jack, you're finer than ever your grandfather was.


Mast. J. Mamma, Jollyboy will not let me talk about Molly.


Mrs. A. You must now say Miss Maria, she will have an immense fortune.


Mast. J. Then, Mamma; I mustn't say, hey the Molly, hand me the toast and
butter?


Enter Allbut, intoxicated. All. Let my coach wait at my iron-gate.


Mrs. A. This my indulgence, to let you dine out!


Joll. So, then, after your shabby conduct you have been swilling Mr. Willows's
wine -- the devil's in your assurance!


Mast. J. And now he cannot behave himself.


All. Why? don't you go up to the Rose and halloo for Mr. Willows? -- "You Have
no veneration for rich people."


Joll. Not I. If a man has riches, so much the better for himself. I thank
heaven and my own industry -- want none on it: nor if I did would he give it --
so what is any mah's riches to me?


All. You will not even make one at our parish feasts and vestry-dinners, you
churl!


Joll. Why should you have feasts and dinners?


All. To settle business. Would you have us meet in a field?


Joll. Meet in a horse-pond, with your chins just above water, rather than
feast upon the poor.


Mrs. A. My coach, John!


Joll. Ay; you have scrapes, bows, and bareheads; but it is only to your coach --
give me the cordial smile of solid esteem in my chay-cart.


Mrs. A. Draw up! I must pay my respects to Miss Maria:


Joll. Respects! -- the poor girl you turned into the street!


Mast. J. Mamma, Jollyboy's always prating, will not let me talk. (Whistles.)


Mrs. A. Here, Master Jack, by the way, you read me Orlando Furioso. (Gives him
a book.) The Maria shall peruse my poem over our tea. (Aside.) As a rehearsal
I Will condescend -- poetry may civilize this person -- a brute! that could
strike my child. (To Jollyboy.) Have you ever read sympathy, sensibility, and
humanity?


Joll. No; but I wish you would get 'em by heart.


Mrs. A. Man, do you visit the muse? (emphatical.)


All. Ay, when was you in Cockspur-street? (imitating.)


Mrs. A. Have you transcribed my poem as I bid you? -- Genius is above writing
a mechanic fine hand.


All. Yes; but genius might know how to spell; and you write such a damned
scrawl, my love.


Mast. J. Ay, just like on an India tea-chest.


All. Oh, here I Have copied it out in a neat hand. (Gives the paper to Mrs.
Allbut.)


Mrs. A. Gentlemen have no opinion of female literature; indeed we have not
distinguished ourselves in blank verse.


All. She Will be delighted with my improvements on it.


Mrs. A. A Jeu d'esprit of mine -- (to Jollyboy) you may read it out. (Gives
paper.)


Joll. (reads.) "Tall torrents tumble from the towering cliff,


All. "With a two-penny tiff.


Joll. "The wild winds whistle with the roaring wave,


All. "Dr. Grigsby for a penny did shave."


Jollyboy throws down paper and exit. Mast. J. Oh, my father! (laughs.)


All. (bawling after Jollyboy.) Mind the "tiff" and the "shave" are mine --
I Will give up any thing but my fame: I saw you was poz'd for a rhyme, my dear;
not one in the whole poem, my chick!


Mrs. A. Rhyme! -- Do you know what blank verse is, you wretch you!


All. Well didn't I fill up the blanks? Sweet!


Master Jack continues laughing. Mrs. A. Dare to interpolate! Oh! I must get a
transcriber -- some half-boarder at a top school -- a reduced clergyman's
daughter -- no! that young person Margery recommended.

(Shouting without.)
All. Oh, Widow Bellevue sneaking to her hovel.


Enter Mrs. Bellevue and Edward. Mrs. Bell. Let Us avoid this noise and
festivity -- joys are not for me! the Allbuts --


Mrs. A. One should endeavor to do something for this poor woman, as Miss
Maria was partial to her -- How do you do, Mrs. -- could not you make it out more
comfortable, by a trial of -- selling, some -- trifling wares in -- throw your
cottage -- into a little -- sort of -- shop-window -- a few children's toys,
penny books, or -- might keep a little school. You Have capacity to teach the
infant rustics to spell, I should imagine -- Mr. Allbut, you will advance the
widow a few pounds for a set up?


All. I have it -- there is one of my alehouses, the Fox and Gridiron -- people
run away, (sings) It Is a pretty little reputable public house. -- I Will put you
into that: and for stock, I Will send you in a pin of beer or two.


Mrs. Bell. Hear me! You who have possessed yourselves of my right by rapine,
and keep it by fraud -- there is an eye that marks ye, a hand that holds a
sword -- the hour will come to strike! wealth that should give exalted luster,
renders you eminently despicable! Wretches, intoxicated! that drinks the widows
and the orphans tears! Oh! let the oppressor of the poor, restless on his bed
of down, look within -- there feeds the worm of conscience -- whilst the
patient object of his cruelty enjoys sweet slumber on his bed of straw --
patience, oh, heavens! where is mine? (weeps) but I will be proud! (recovering
herself looks with dignity and contempt on Mrs. Allbut, and exeunt with Edward.
Mrs. Allbut confused, bridles and exit -- Allbut puts his hands in his coat
pockets, holds down his head and exit -- Master Jack pulls down his ruffles and
struts off.)


Enter William and Captain Mullinahack. Will. Ay, Captain, since the sharks
have missed us, and we have got a firm footing on old England.


Capt. M. I don't know what sort of breakfast I Would be for a fish; but at this
moment I could eat a piece of a shark without oyster sauce, and yet I hav'n't
the price of a red herring.


Will. Here I promise you every comfort that affluence and hospitality can
bestow; that is my mother's house, (pointing to Allbut's.) She Will give us roast
beef, a bumper of stout Madeira, and humming strong beer of her own brewing,
Captain.


Capt. M. Faith; I wish we were sitting down to it.


Enter Edward. Edw. Now they are all gone out, if Miss Maria could see me -- I Am
afraid to -- (Gives an casy rap at the door.)


Enter Master Jack. Mast. J. (knocks loud.) Peter, chuck Mamma's snuff box out
at window. (Door opens.)


Will. Now, Captain, I Will introduce you to my mother.


Mast. J. (stopping him.) What do you want?


Will. The lady of the house.


Mast. J. But she does not allow poor folks to come about door.


Will. Then she is much altered for the worse -- Cannot I go in?


Mast. J. Sha'n't!


Capt. M. (to Jack.) Pray, my boy, didn't you learn with the cook and eat with
the chaplain?


Mast. J. What?


Capt. M. Nothing: only you're better fed than taught.


Will. But I Would speak with Mrs. Bellevue.


Exit Jack into the house and slaps the door. Edw. That Is now Mr. Allbut's --
Mrs. Bellevue, Sir, is my mamma.


Will. (aside.) This my brother.


Edw. She lives in the cottage here.


Will. (aside.) And is it so?


Capt. M. (aside.) Upon my honor I Am afraid the roast beef is all eat up --
the Madeira is all supped up, and the strong beer turned four -- William, the
first interview with your mother will not admit of a stranger -- I Will wait for you
in the cabaret yonder -- don't be ashamed -- as an enemy, when you retook my
prize you cut me down with your hanger -- as a friend after we were saved in
the waves, and since partners in adversity, you have been kind and gentle, and
millions of gold cannot increase my respect where I admire courage, and honor
humanity. --


Exit. Shouts without. Edw. That Is joy for a great rich gentleman that is come.


Exit. Well. Joy!


Exit melancholy. Enter Charles and Sir Henry Check ( laughing.) Sir H. For
your good cheer now you're the greatest creature, ha, ha, ha! Your pretending
pennyless, an excellent trial!


Cha. Ha, ha, ha! -- And the damned Allbuts too -- their fulsome compliments --
But you had something to say, Sir Henry?


Sir H. A thought has struck me -- your sister is very amiable -- under any
engagement?


Cha. Why, there was a young gentleman, a very dear friend of mine; but I fear
he is dead -- for --


Sir H. I Have loft my only son -- our family, title, and my fortune, must now go
to a nephew, for some time not upon terms with his mother -- I may have been
wrong -- if we could bring about a match between your sister and this my nephew.


Cha. With my sister's consent, you have mine, Sir Henry.


Sir H. Best not introduce my sister Bellevue till she can make some
appearance, (aside.) -- Full of business, Mr. Willows -- Oh, did you see an
Irish French officer about here, since -- But you will consider -- adieu! excuse
me.

Exit.
Cha. Abrupt enough! A marriage of fashion and business proposed by the baronet
and banker. Now to comfort poor Mrs. Bellevue -- but this is the charming
stranger's forbidden cottage and meadow. Is my visit here love or charity?


Re-enter William. Will. I Will walk in the air till she wakes.


Cha. By heavens, William Bellevue! (surprised.)


Will. Find my mother reduced! and I returned to her with one shilling!


Cha. My poor fellow! (aside). William!


Will. (surprised). My dear Charles! I heard you followed me out to sea.


Cha. Just returned to England.


Will. Sorry to see you too come home with a shattered hulk.


Cha. Not yet heard of my good fortune (aside.) I think no occasion, but I Will
try him too (aside). Aye, William, and no hope from my father or sister! all
gone badly since with them too.


Will. My beloved Maria and my friend! (Turns aside.)


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, does your honor wish --


Cha. Damn the fellow, (shoves him off.) Eh, William -- well? Strange we never
met abroad. Though your mother did send you off from my sister, I think she will
be softened to see me come home thus. Come, we'll step into her house, and over
a bottle and a crust we'll talk of our voyages. Oh, Bill, you have a snug, warm
birth to come home to -- but poor me --


Will. Charles, that is my mother's habitation now. -- (Charles affects surprise
and concern.) A gentleman waits for me at the Grapes -- step across -- I Will see
my mother, and come to you.


Cha. But, should any thing prevent you, I Have no -- (touching his pocket.)


Will. Here, Charles, (gives him money.)


Cha. Perhaps I deprive you.


Will. Oh, no, I Am still a few shillings strong -- good bye.


Exit. Cha. (joyful). Give my sister with a hundred thousand pounds to baronets
and bankers! -- My generous poor friend have her. But. hearing nothing from him
so long, may she not since have chosen another -- so fine a girl must have had
many dying swains -- (looking out). Doctor Grigsby! Your agreeable apothecaries
know all that is done, said, or thought in every family -- I Will ask him.


Enter Captain Mullinahack. Capt. M. Their open alehouses! I must watch for my
friend in the street: in the state of my pocket I Am afraid to venture into a
tavern yet, though I Am just hungry enough. If I dine with a gentleman, it shall
be at his own private table -- Oh, they tell me this is the great man that pays
the piper -- An airy kind of a morning dress -- May be he would invite me. Sir,
your most obedient -- (Bows.)


Cha. Sir, (bows) you have the advantage of me.


Capt. M. No, 'faith, Sir, it is you that have the advantage of me -- You know
where to find a dinner, and I must first find the philosopher's stone (aside.)
You Have charming air here -- so sharp and keen, gives one such a nice appetite.


Cha. Sir, it is wholesome air.


Capt. M. Yes, Sir; but it is not toothsome.


Cha. Sir!


Capt. M. No, he will not (aside). Sir, (bows) since my mouth must be idle, I Will
try if my nose cannot get a little employment (aside.) Sir, a pinch of your
snuff, if you please.


Cha. Sir, I don't take any.


Capt. M. Oh, these are bad times indeed, when a sea officer can neither get
snuff or mutton. (Half aside.)


Cha. A gentleman by his air and manner, but seems an oddity.


Enter Grigsby and Constable. Grig. My patients cannot spare me to go to London
-- besides this rich man will be now for cramming himself with turbots and
turtles eggs.


Capt. M. May be he would invite me. Sir, I am yours also. (To Grigsby.) (Grigsby
stares.) Nor you neither.


Grig. What!


Capt. M. Poh!


Exit. Grig. Then poh! for you. Constable, you will catch my thief!


Constable. But who is he?


Grig. If he knocks out your teeth, I Will give you a fine tooth I bought of a
blackamoor. (Sees Charles.) The nabob -- how lucky his believing I didn't know
him this morning -- his sister loves me -- (aside.) (Cringes) Sir, if you dance
in the evening, that is, a minuet, now lose a little blood -- my lances so
sharp and obtuse -- my sweet little parlour -- satin hair -- bottomed chair --
handled China coffee cups -- Sir, your arm shall be tied with your own
philastic garter -- stretched out, hold one of my fluted silver candlesticks,
and to divert your thoughts by a pleasing object before you in a glass-case, my
skeleton of Levi Barrabbas -- none of your sixpenny London bleedings, pewter
porringer, yard of list and a broom-stick -- by the heavens, Sir, I Will charge
you two guineas -- there will be bleeding! (Pompous.)


Cha. But now for information -- Doctor, as well as the body, you're often
consulted on the state of the mind? --


Grig. The Munro? Ha! -- Theraptica, (looks cunning.)


Cha. Why, Doctor, you seem to have acquired astonishing skill in your anatomy,
pharmacy --


Grig. Dear Sir, only symptoms in pharmacy, I have a pretty meadow, some corn
--


Cha. Blockhead! (aside.) Pray have you heard -- do you think my sister has
formed any particular attachment!


Grig. In the Pleura she was in danger, but I dispersed it -- young women
subject to these periodical diagonals.


Cha. I mean love attachments, since -- speak out -- the man that can make her
happy shall have her.


Grig. Shall he? When only Allbut's maid, I never minded Miss Maria's leers at
me, and how she took my part when Jollyboy, (aside.) -- Sir, your sister has
long formed a most lasting attachment.


Cha. Long! (aside.) Oh, William -- but a doctor I don't mean --


Grig. There is a certain worthless, cephilalgical poor dog -- the very thought
of him is her elexir cardialgia.


Cha. Then she has kept her heart for -- (aside.) -- His povrty is nothing to
any body.


Grig. Certainly, Sir, you have a caustic for that!


Cha. I think him worthy of the finest woman in England!


Grig. Oh, dear Sir, (bows.)


Cha. I Am certain he is endowed with every generous quality --


Grig. Oh, Sir, (bows.)


Cha. And doctor, the poor cephalalgical dog, as you call him, shall have her,
in preference, even to the nephew of a baronet.


Grig. Shall I? -- then shake hands my generous brother!


Cha. What, yourself! You? (agitated.) -- (aside.) Impossible! this can exist
only in his own folly.


Enter Louisa. Louisa. Yes, here he is; but what brings me here?


Grig. What, your change -- hav'n't so much in the 'till -- send you a bag of
camomile. (Apart.)


Louisa. So, Sir, for all my caution, you would come hovering about the
cottage, and my walk in the meadow! (Archly.)


Cha. Oh! you most charming!


Louisa. Hold! I never listen to heroics.


Cha. As you say, Ma'am, they are very ridiculous, (confused, (looking out.) My
sister -- to think of this fellow, but she cannot -- yet the sex fall into such
unaccountable inconsistencies.


Louisa. Mrs. Bellevue is a very charming widow, so don't you follow me in
there.


Cha. As you say, Ma'am, excuse me a moment, there is a lady coming that --


Louisa. Oh, Sir, I don't wish to interrupt you and the lady -- I deserve this,
for my forward indiscretion.


Aside. Exit. Enter Maria dressed. Maria. Oh, brother, have you seen Mrs.
Bellevue?


Cha. (aside.) If ever so depraved, she will be ashamed to own it to me -- I must
draw conclusions from her manner -- (aside.) -- Maria --


Enter Jollyboy. Joll. Mr. Charles Willows -- fling your money about among
drunken mobs! -- I wish with all your joy, you would let your golden sun shine upon
the house of sorrow.


Char. Thank'ee, my honest monitor.


Grig. (to Constable.) Apprehend the honest monster! I Will swear he robbed me --
here will be fractures -- as I Am going to be married, must take care of myself
for the good of posterity. (aside.)


Exit. Constable. Was Not it Mr. Jollyboy -- he rob! -- did you (to Jollyboy.)


Joll. No.


Constable. An honest man's word against the oath of a -- good by'e, (shakes hands
and exit.)


Cha. Here must be probity (gives Jollyboy a paper.) -- My almoner -- go! you
"find out the house of sorrow," and dispense joy.


Joll. A hundred pounds! "I shall get saucy again." Huzza! I give you leave to
roar and be happy, though you are a rich man, or you shall laugh by proxy -- I Will
be your representative in joy, as well as charity; and a blessing on you as you
give it -- Tol, lol, lol.


Exit, singing and dancing. Maria. Brother, you're very wrong to entrust --
you're deceived -- he is not the man you think him; I assure you, he used the
poor doctor most horridly --


Cha. (aside.) Her poor doctor! Oh, her partiality is evident, -- for him,
slander such genuine integrity! -- love a wretch that could deny me! who, when
he supposed me in indigence -- take him -- let him be a husband; but I am no
more a brother.


Exit. Maria. What can he mean? (looking out.) Heavens! sure that is William --
he returned too! -- Then 'twas my dear William that Charles meant -- perhaps
they met abroad -- why at first conceal it? Could my love be unkind to him? oh,
no, my William, the delight I received from even a thought that I might see you
again, and now is it thus my wish is accomplished; my father loves us, he will
remonstrate with Charles; better his gold had stayed in the mine than make him
violate the dearest ties of duty, love, and friendship.


Exit. SCENE II. A Cottage, a Table with Books, Work, and Newspapers.
Enter Mrs. Bellevue. Mrs. Bell. Maria has sent me the newspapers, sweet girl!
she takes every occasion to amuse and oblige me, (looks out). Eh! what
stranger, Edward?

Enter Edward. What, you brought the poor man in, to relieve him? that was
right, my love -- your brother William is a sailor, if he lives -- and for his
sake, though we have only a little, you know it is always my wish to spare -- when
distress takes the shape of a forlorn seaman.


Edw. But, Madam, he --


Mrs. Bell. When in danger, England looks to a sailor for protection -- but
that no longer wanted, gratitude should forbid us to neglect the disinterested
improvident; too generous to layish only on himself, the fruits of present
success, and too thoughtless to provide against future misfortune.


Edw. Mamma, he has some great business with you, yet, when I told him you was
asleep, he gently looked over you -- oh, but I never saw such a look! tears
fell down his cheeks -- and then, for fear of disturbing you, he stole so
softly out again -- Sir! (calling.)


Exit. Mrs. Bell. (looking out.) Perhaps brings news of --

Enter William. It Is himself -- my William! -- my dear beloved son, (he kneels,
she throws her arms round him.)


Will. Mother, can you forgive --


Mrs. Bell. No, the mother should ask pardon of her child -- I banished you, my
life's comfort, from my arms -- from your country -- I wronged, and heaven has
avenged you -- Ah! William, look, I Have no home for you, and it is now you seem
most to want a home.


Will. Edward has told me. Could Allbut be such a villain! didn't my uncle
interpose with his advice? his fortune? -- is he in London, I Will --


Mrs. Bell. No, William, I must now forget I had a brother! Since your
departure he has had an heir to his estate -- a Baronet's title too! No! Sir
Henry now never sees me!


Will. But why?


Mrs. Bell. My fault is adversity, and that the prosperous cannot forgive.


Will. Then, Madam, I must not face my uncle -- With hopes to raise a fortune
for Maria, I quitted the Captain with whom you sent me -- rambled to the East
Indies -- but our relation would not encourage my disobedience -- I left him in
disgust -- and after many perils, was returning in a Dutch India Ship -- we
were taken by a Frenchman, but in the night, I got upon deck and --


Mrs. Bell. (snatching up a news-paper.) Your ship was re-taken: then the brave
youth was not drowned! -- Was it you, my William, that preserved -- it was! I
said I knew none so likely to perform such an action as my son, my gallant
William -- oh, my child! in this threadbare jacket ten thousand times more
welcome to your fond Mother, than if clad in jewels acquired by the plunder of
the unfortunate! -- my son! my son! (embraces him; looking out.) Oh, the lady
that Maria told me of.


Will. And my appearance --


Exit, hastily. Enter Louisa. Louisa. Madam, pardon my intrusion --


Mrs. Bell. Madam, you do me honor; Maria has informed me, that you wished to
come --


Louisa. I do, Madam; the miller and his wife are good people, but coarse --
the man blunt -- yet, as Maria tells me, not too honest -- an asylum with you
will make me happy.


Mrs. Bell. Madam, it shall be my endeavor --


Louisa. You should know something of me though -- a family disagreement drove my
father, a man of rank, from his country -- I followed him to France -- he was a
Captain in their navy. -- I hav'n't heard of him some years, which gives me
much doubt and uneasiness -- I retired, Madam, to this village, 'till I either
hear of him or am recalled by my friends.


Mrs. Bell. Here you may have tranquillity; but cheerfulness you must bring
with you.


Louisa. Yes: but 'twas taken from me by the way, by a most unkind young man --
just come from over seas -- I believe only to vex me.


Mrs. Bell. Over seas? What sort of man?


Louisa. Oh, very handsome.


Mrs. Bell. A stranger -- must be my William!


Louisa. Aye: I thought he looked like a false William.


Mrs. Bell. My son!


Louisa. Indeed, your son! but do you think he has given away his heart?


Mrs. Bell. He loves, and is beloved, (looking out) and here comes the very
amiable girl.


Louisa. (looking.) Aye: the very, very same that -- What could she mean by her
finesse to me at the mill this morning -- as a mere stranger -- express such
feeling for his service to her father! (aside.)


Enter Maria. Maria. Oh, Madam, where is William?


Louisa. And she left him this very moment (aside.)


Mrs. Bell. Not far off -- Maria, you're very fine, what is this?


Maria. Hav'n't you heard? Ah, Madam, I fear an union with William is now far
distant.


Louisa. (joyful.) Is it? -- I ask your pardon, Ma'am, I Am very rude, but I --
I -- (confused.)


Enter Grigsby. Grig. (to Maria.) Now, my beloved, (sees Louisa.) here again?
-- want your change -- hav'n't so much in the till -- send you seven bottles of
peppermint -- (aside.) I Will celebrate our brother's success by illuminating my
windows -- the village shall not blaze in bonfires, and my house dark -- wish I Would
a few squibs, or some little guns to make revolutions.


Enter Edward. Edw. (to Louisa.) Miss, a servant in mourning asks for you.


Louisa. Madam, your pardon,


Exit hastily. Mrs. Bell. That seaman was your brother, my love; go to him.


Edw. What, William!


Exit. Mrs. Bell. But, Maria, you astonish me -- what can have turned your
heart against my William?


Grig. Talk not of Williams or Georges -- her heart must turn to nobody but
Jack Grigsby -- her noble brother! to give her to me, in preference to the
nephew of a baronet!


Maria. To you? impossible that Charles can be so absurd!


Mrs. Bell. Nephew of a baronet -- must mean my boy -- Is Charles this rich
man, whose arrival has occasioned such universal joy? -- Oh, then his contempt
for my William is accounted for -- here is the world! step this way, my son --
never mind your dress.


Enter Edward. Edw. Madam, my brother's gone. He overheard you all talking,
and went out greatly troubled.


Mrs. Bell. How!


Maria. Which way, Edward?


Exeunt Mrs. Bellevue, Maria, and Edward. Grig. Her brother giving her to me --
very handsome -- but I must dress terrible smartish -- with the ecclat of her
fortune, I shall indeed be a physician -- Doctor! Beautiful! -- I will buy a
deplomar -- job-coach -- pretend to be reading -- own footman thump muffled
knocker -- door opened by lady of the house -- step slowly up stairs -- shoes
creak -- chair placed -- patient's bedside -- all silent, reading my looks --
pinch of snuff -- stop-watch -- squeeze pulse -- touch guinea -- beautiful!
thrice beautiful! ha! hum!


Exit. SCENE III. A Road. Enter William, agitated.
Will. Maria false! My mother in indigence -- this my home! Where shall I turn
my face? -- Heavens!


Enter Allbut and Waiter. Waiter. You Will sup at our house, Sir?


All. (seeing William.) I don't like your straggling strangers -- it is Willy
Bellevue! -- He come back too shabby! Yes: he wants to play on us the same game
that Charles did -- certainly rich -- seems poor, only to try us.


Waiter. (apart to Allbut.) Aye, Sir; gad, you have hit it! like Mr. Willows, he
certainly has brought home the shiners -- and I Will tell 'em so up at our house
-- (Aside. Runs off.


All. He Will play the devil with me for ransacking his Mamma! -- Oh, this, 'twas
that puffed her up when she trimmed us so this morning! -- I Will seem to think
him poor -- then the greater merit in my kindness. Willy Bellevue! (joyful.)


Will. (aside.) The wealthy brute that oppressed my mother.


All. So glad to see you come home again!


Will. If I had even gone away in your debt, I have brought no money to pay you.


All. Sly! (aside.) -- Talk of money between friends -- I said when you went
abroad, you were too honest, like Charley Willows, to make fortunes, by cutting
Rajahs throats -- and running off with their coats.


Will. Has Charles brought home money?


All. He has, my Honey. My sweet Boy, he has been as great a rogue to get pelf
-- as yourself, or myself (aside.) He has been ransacking abroad -- brought
home rupees enough fill a porter-butt. -- No, give me the honest conscientious
man, though he hasn't a halfpenny to buy his dog a roll -- and Billy, I respect
you by my soul!


Will. Charles make fortunes! This does not correspond with his story to me --
perhaps, flashing away to procure a little civility, or to marry off his sister
--


(Shuting and oy-bells without.) All. That dog of a waiter has been blowing
this all about, (aside.) -- Don't mix with that rabble at the Rose -- come to
my house, Billy though you hav'n't a souse.


Will. But my Mother.


All. You are my Brother.


Exeunt. END OF ACT IV.
ACT V.
SCENE I. An elegant Drawing Room in Allbut's House.
Enter Allbut, Peter, and Maid. Allbut. QUICK, Peter! Put wax in the girandoles
and lustres -- blazing clusters.


Enter Mrs. Allbut surpised. Mrs. A. I hope you hav'n't asked Mr. Willows and
his party here?


All. No; but there is another young old friend of ours arrived in England
(running about and adjusting furniture) Jenny! -- bid cook bustle.


Mrs. A. What do you mean by your bustles and illuminations?


All. I tell you here is a gentleman -- there he is -- give me a kiss?


Mrs. A. With sweet consent to conjugal endearments thus the turtle-dove -- but
oh, fie! (going to him smiling.)


All. Lord! I don't want to kiss you -- I only said it for the rhyme's sake.
(run off.)


Mrs. A. Perhaps here is indeed some person of condition, and my dress -- (goes
to the glass.)


All. (without.) This way, dear Sir, -- Mrs. Allbut waits the honor of
receiving you.


Reenters. Mrs. A. Why didn't you give me more notice?


Allb. Pray walk in, Sir, (stands ceremoniously expecting.)


Enter William. Mr. Bellevue, Mrs. Allbut. -- (introducing.)


Mrs. A. (starts.) Ah! -- introduce your filthy tarpaulins to me -- who is
there! Show the fellow out.


Will. Madam, though its quite a novelty my being desired to quit this house --
yet as it was once my mother's, I think I can find my way. (going.)


All. Stop! (Holds him. Apart to Mrs. A.) The devil's in you -- are you going
to make the same blunder with him you did with Charley Willows? You will not be
convinced that he is come home with the cash till you see the banker's chariot.
-- Billy, be seated.


Mrs. A. Upon my sopha! (pulls it away.) Go about your business.


All. Stay, Peter! -- A bottle of sack for me and my friend.


Will. Now is it the wife or the husband that gives me the real welcome?
(aside.)


Peter serves wine. All. Here Is friendship without interest, and a speedy kick
up to all scoundrels. (Drinks and coughs.)


Mrs. A. One would think, Sir, that you got the wine out of the rivers -- I
insist --


All. (apart.) So rich -- brought home from the Indies -- my dear Billy (shakes
hands) cargoes of nankeens, bamboos, pepper, tea, china, fontaragree, lacca,
and bagatapaex. -- Love, does not Billy look charmingly? The dolts without there
think him quite a man of gold -- and I humored them in it, though I know 'twas
no such thing -- (apart) he has money enough to ruin us for chousing his mother.


Mrs. A. (changing manner.) Protest I did not know him at first!


All. There, you see she did not know you at first -- (apart) seem to think him
poor and behave kind to him.


Mrs. A. And the Willows' family -- this crowd of success so provoking!
(aside.) My dear William, I Am sorry for your own sake you have had no better
fortune abroad; but you are as welcome --


All. As the postman!


Will. When I reflect on certain proceedings toward my mother, I am at a loss
how to account for this very extraordinary kindness to myself.


All. Billy -- didn't I tell you the good lady could not stoop to live in this
scene of business?


Mrs. A. Mrs. Bellevue, my dear, you know, was a woman of quality -- despised
every mechanic idea, and we indulged -- let her have her own way.


All. I Have plagued myself with the whole property merely to rid the dear
gentlewoman of trouble of business -- I Have toiled, while she lives snug in the
cottage without a care to make a gray hair. Peter, has John taken the coach for
Mrs. Bellevue?


Mrs. A. (aside.) My coach!


Will. Sir, I Will call and bring --


All. I suffer the dear lady to shuffle through the mud! -- What should a
gentleman keep a coach for, but to accommodate people that are genteel and
honest -- Go! (to Peter.)


Peter. Our coach for the poor widow -- well!


Exit. Will. (Aside.) Some balance this against Charles's unkind --


All. Billy, conceal your poverty and you will get enough to help you; for your
sordid rascals are always thrusting their money on those they are sure don't
want it -- your travels may have exhausted your cash -- command my purse.
(Gives money to William.)


Mrs. A. Nay, my love; you musn't engross all Mr. Belevue's compliments -- my
dear William accept -- I Will not be refused -- (giving him her purse.)


Will. Eh! the world seems better than I thought it -- yet this unexpected
(aside) -- Pray, Sir, how long has the marriage been talked of between Maria
and your Doctor here?


Mrs. A. The first I heard of it. (Apart.)


All. Or I, (apart) hush! -- Only from their finding out your empty pockets.


Will. Really!


All. (Aside.) I Will get the doctor's bones broke -- offer to take ten pounds
from me? Grigsby's a terrible rival! abused you at such a rate only for
thinking of his Maria -- my love, you know he said he would kick Billy.


Will. Scoundrel! but is he worth my anger? I Will consult my Irish friend the
Captain. (aside) (A loud knock without.) My figure! -- if you expect company
permit me --


All. Poh! What Is a man's outside? We'll pack 'em off, and then us three will
make party quarri over a snug bit of supper. Ecod, my love, Billy shall have
share of Doctor Grigsby's little wild pig -- hey, diddle dig!


Exeunt William and Allbut. Mrs. A. (looking out.) Mrs. Bellevue in my house!
this is indeed a sacrifice to one's interest!


Enter Peter. Peter. Ma'am, Mrs. Bellevue would not come in the coach.


Mrs. A. Proud wretch! ay^ she will not join in William's deception upon us --
our sudden notice of her will appear so unaccountable, I scarce know what
color to give it. (Retires.)


Enter Mrs. Bellevue. Mrs. Bell. These people must have some motive for their
reverse of conduct -- has Providence wrought it in their hearts, or do they
dread my son's indignation: and yet who is faultless! If their contrition is
real, I should meet it with forgiveness -- I hope you will excuse my warmth this
morning.


Mrs. A. Oh, Madam, pay don't mention it, as the poet says, The heart that is
wounded by the dart of fate,
Assumes in dire distress sublimer state.
It hurts me, Madam, to think -- that -- still some little misunderstanding or
other should have unluckily kept us at such a distance. I fear -- I have been
wrong -- the sight again of your dear William revived sparks of former kindness.


Mrs. Bell. Accept my thanks for the reception you have given him -- he left me
just now in great trouble of mind.


Mrs. A. Madam, will not you please to sit -- Peter! Chocolate.


Peter. Chocolate too!


Exit. Mrs. A. Now, Madam, you should be happy -- how astonishingly Mr.
William's improved!


Mrs. Bell. He Is certainly very good, and I am sure he has gratitude -- he is
hurt exceedingly at some change in his friend Charles, but your attention to
him in his present circumstances --


Mrs. A. Circumstances! Gratitude! Can she too give into this little artifice
her son is playing off upon us? I Will try her farther. (Aside.) Life is subject
to vicissitude, and did we withdraw our countenance from our friends in the
hour of calamity we should be barbarians, Mrs. Bellevue.


Mrs. Bell. But, Madam; though my son is now distressed, and has found me in
extreme indigence --


Mrs. A. Distressed!


Mrs. Bell. The hour may yet come when --


Mrs. A. Stop, Madam; (rises) answer me -- Is your son's poverty real? It must
be so -- this creature is above a falsehood.

Enter Peter, offers Chocolate to Mrs. Bellevue -- Mrs. Allbut put its aside.
What Is the blockhead about? Mr. Allbut! (calling.)


Enter Allbut. That fellow is not worth a shilling!


All. What my sweet Willy! No?


Mrs. Bell. I Am sure he could not attempt to impose the contrary upon you.


All. He did! Because he said he was poor, I thought he was rich -- it is such a
damned lying world! Give him a supper! -- Betty! Take the pig from the fire!


Mrs. A. He took my purse!


Mrs. Bell. So then, all this humanity that I --


Mrs. A. I like people chatt'ring of humanity, that have nothing to lose by it!


All. Fine talk of hospitality, when they cannot lay in coals enough to boil an
egg for their sallad! Peter! (bawls) Where Is the sailor?


Peter. Sir, he went out, he said, to look for some Irish Captain.


All. Bring an Irish Captain upon us!


Mrs. A. We Are robbed!


Exit. All. And bobb'd!


Exit. Mrs. Bell. What can they mean? What new mischief to my unhappy child?


Enter Captain Mullinahack. Capt. M. Pray, my pretty lad, was there ever a
young William come in here?


Mrs. Bell. I fancy you mean my son, Sir,


Capt. M. Your son! Oh, then may be, Madam, you're his mother? -- a most noble
presence! I vow to my honor I should like to sit down by her side to a piece
of roast beef. (aside.) Stop! (to Peter who is removing) suppose I partake of
these people's kindness, and save them the trouble of an invitation -- Madam,
will you do me the honor to take a dish of chocolate?


Mrs. Bell. Sir, have you seen my son? -- What do these people intend? -- I am
tortured with the most extreme and perplexing solicitude!


Capt. M. Poor lady! Then I Will divert her sorrows with an account of my own
misfortunes (aside.) First, Madam, it may be necessary to inform you I Am an
Irishman and a foreign officer; but when I did accept a French commission,
England had no share in the quarrel; for, Madam, let me be blown into chops and
griskins from the mouth of a cannon, when I turn my face as an enemy against
George my beloved King, and Ireland my honored country!


Mrs. Bell. Well, Sir; your acquaintance with my son?


Capt. M. Oh, we sought ourselves into the strictest amity -- Madam, I took a
Dutch prize and he took it from me -- so when my kicking and cussing about
could not save it, I jumped overboard --


Mrs. Bell. How, Sir --


Capt. M. And to secure myself a welcome in 't'other world, I brought the brave
boy, your son, along with me.


Mrs. Bell. Oh, heavens! then it is --


Capt. M. We were picked up together, and got to shore -- our little money was
soon spent -- loyalty forbids my return to France.


Mrs. Bell. To what perils have I exposed my boy!


Capt. M. My brother, Ma'am, is a Lord; no fault of his, he was born to it --
not, Madam, a humpy Lord; but a real right honorable, that can row a boat and
play cricket -- that walks about the town in an old coat with a star tacked to
it, that the people might take off their hats and say -- oh, he is a duke!


Mrs. Bell. But, Sir; -- (with anxiety.)


Capt. M. Madam, I don't know how it was; but we could not agree, and you know
that must have been his fault, because I happened to marry one day -- my wife
had only beauty and virtue, and I spent my own little fortune in all the
splendour of a younger brother; then I came away in a huff.


Mrs. Bell. Sir; will you be a friend to my son?


Capt. M. Ay, Madam; and I hope I can be a friend to him: for our family estate
and title descend only in the mate line; to be sure my elder brother's wife,
the Lady CastleSomers was just brought to bed; but I left Ireland in such a
hurry, that I don't know this moment, whether I am an aunt or an uncle.


Enter Allbut. All. I Will have him!


Capt. M. Sir, will you take a dish of chocolate? (drinks.)


All. What! (staring.)


Enter Mrs. Allbut. Capt. M. Madam, do you prefer some dry toast, or plumcake?


Mrs. A. We Are not at all ambitious of this honor --


Mrs. Bell. The intrusion was not my choice.


Capt. M. Nor mine; but since they are here make free.


Mrs. A. You make very free!


All. To sup our tea.


Capt. M. Oh, you're come here to drink tea; never mind being ashamed about it
-- you're heartily welcome.


Mrs. A. Can the man know that we are in our own house?


Capt. M. (surpised sets down his cup.) Oh, you're Mrs. Allbut -- then there is
sixpence for your cup of chocolate, and keep the halfpenny yourself, (throws
down money.)


Allb. Here Is an affront! (pockets the money.)


Mrs. Bell. Sir, can I speak with you? -- you can give me information that my
son's modesty will not suffer him to discover.


Capt. M. (bowing, takes her hand.) Mr. Allbut, Sir, have the honor to --
(Allbut bows) despise you.


Exit leading Mrs. Bellevue. (A shot heard at a distance.) Enter Peter. Peter.
Oh, Ma'am, I fear I Have done mischief -- I lent a case of pistols out of the
hall to Mr. Bellevue and --


All. William taken pistols -- ah, true -- gone after Doctor Grigsby -- then I
know where to find my purse -- Peter -- my justice wig -- musn't lose my money!
I Am a magistrate, and authority begins at home.


Exit. SCENE II. Before Grigsby's House. Candles at a Window.
Enter Grigsby and Shopman. Shop. Sir, do you think we have candles enough up?


Grig. No. I wish we had colored lamps -- a fine transparent C. W. Mr. Willows
would take that for such a high compliment -- They Have made a bonfire at the
Rose and Crackers -- since I Have no pateraroes, I Will give another double shot.
(takes pistols.)


Shop. Oh, Sir, you will alarm the whole village!


Exit. Grig. (Bawling) Tom! touch 'em with turpentine, and they will be ready to
light up as soon as dark. Have I the squibs? -- yes. Dam'me how I Will fling 'em
about! -- Landlord of the Rose will not take his wine from me, though I made him a
present of two decanters, sixteen to the dozen -- a nice occasion to break his
windows -- the glazier's my customer! Now I Will go up to drink tea with my
bride, and lay my vardi against Jollyboy -- a few links to my palisadoes --
noble blaze! (goes in.)


Enter Captain Mullinahack. Capt. M. Let Sir Henry Check, whoever he is, wait!
Business must give way to honor. William says that his rival is one of the
learned professions; but whether in the law or the army I quite forget.
However, my friend cannot be degraded by fighting him. I must deliver my message
in a decent manner --

Re-enter Grigsby. But which is -- oh, Mr. Jack Pudding!


Grig. What! Oh, I remember you.


Capt. M. Which is Grigsby's?


Grig. Sir, what do you want with Mr. Grigsby!


Capt. M. Faith I Am come to call him out.


Grig. Well, he is out already.


Capt. M. Oh, you mean he is not at home. Now here I Am making a blowing-horn of
this business, and we shall have the sheriffs and beadles all about us --
(aside.) I don't come about any quarrel.


Grig. Who cares whether you do or no -- What the devil do you want with me?


Capt. M. You! Oh, this is a comical looking learned professor. (aside.) Then
you are the gentleman?


Grig. Gentleman -- he, he, he! -- civil enough -- but his brogue, most
infernal hellebore. (aside.)


Capt. M. First, Sir, I Am an officer.


Grig. Custom-house! (aside) -- come to search? dam'me, Sir, down into my
cellar -- I have a few gallons of nullage among my pieces of wine, so flourish
your gauging-rule -- who cares for your excise scratching-irons, and
measuringgallopers.


Capt. M. Softly, softly, with your scratching and galloping. I Am come from a
gentleman.


Grig. (aside.) Oh, an order! Sir, besides my old bottl'd, I Have neat wine in
the wood.


Capt. M. Wood! yes, you seem to have a sup in your head -- be quiet -- I am
come from --


Grig. Oh, a patient!


Capt. M. My friend is --


Grig. Dropsical.


Capt. M. No! my friend is --


Grig. Feveretical.


Capt. M. No! he is --


Grig. Gout or rheumatical.


Capt. M. Not in the least; he is --


Grig. Erisypelatical.


Capt. M. No! I tell you he is --


Grig. Sanguine apoplectical.


Capt. M. (impatient.) No, no! Sir! no! he is exceedingly hurt --


Grig. Hurt! oh, a fracture in the os caries.


Capt. M. No, Sir! but --


Grig. A luxation of the os humerum.


Capt. M. No such thing, Sir! it is --


Grig. A dislocation of the membrum funerum.


Capt. M. Zounds, Sir! no, it is --


Grig. A gibbous body in the latera.


Capt. M. 'Sblood, Sir, no, no! I tell you no! -- Why my friend's coming here
to shoot magpies. (aside.)


Grig. Then, zounds, Sir, tell me what is his complaint, for it is impossible I
can guess.


Capt. M. Sir, he does not complain about it; but you might have known that he
has an affection --


Grig. Oh, a convulsive affection in the midriff -- these arise from ill
humors in the --


Capt. M. He Is good-humored enough, Sir, -- yet he cannot digest --


Grig. A bad digestion -- I understand -- alexipharmic -- then, Sir, after
speaking aloud, singing, running, or drinking, as we of the faculty say,
dilutifactitious liquification of swallow's-nest -- he should take four
scruples, two drams --


Capt. M. He is a gentleman, and despises drinking drams -- Sir, I don't know
what you mean?


Grig. I mean, Sir, water gruel, if his stomach's ill.


Capt. M. He has a very good stomach; so have I -- water gruel! By the smoke of
all your chimnies, your pots and spits go merrily, but a man may walk about and
look at the outside of your houses --


Grig. What!


Capt. M. Sir, don't talk of water gruel.


Grig. Why true, Sir, as we of the faculty say, some prefer butter-milk -- but
--


Capt. M. Oh, here is a national reflection! Hark'ee, friend, talk again of
potatoes and butter-milk, and --


Grig. Why, Sir, sheep's-head broth is more mucilaginous, as a lacteal
lachrymoligon, with an emmolient mixture of Jews-ears and pulverish'd
cockle-shells --


Capt. M. Stop! -- don't say another word, but tell me what you mean!


Grig. What do I mean -- Album grecum -- a decoction of logwood -- there is
expectoration for you!


Capt. M. Will you give my friend the meeting?


Grig. Certainly.


Capt. M. And will you give him satisfaction?


Grig. I flatter myself I am able to do that -- I don't fear giving
satisfaction to him and his whole family -- I Will cure him --


Capt. M. Here comes my friend!


Grig. Abroad! here is variety! -- a patient coming out without the help of an
undertaker!


Enter William. Will. This affair, end as it may, must alarm my mother,
(aside.) Well, Captain, have you told him? -- But would not a caning -- (apart.)


Capt. M. Fie, fie, to be sure he is a foul-mouthed man; but he is ready to
answer what he says.


Will. I Am ashamed to tell my friend this fellow's so despicable; yet, then
he would not think of urging a serious contention.


Grig. Why it is Willy Bellevue! -- his pia matter! -- (looking at his forehead.)
How do you do? (shakes hands.)


Capt. M. That Is right! Courage without malice -- We'll all step yonder, and in
five minutes time perform the operation.


Grig. Operation! -- my instruments --


Capt. M. Seems a very good case in your hand.


Grig. These! ha, ha, ha! That will be one way of curing indeed! -- very good
-- after a leaden pill, the patient could never complain of the doctor!


Will. Trifling with this fool! -- I Will see Maria and upbraid her -- No! I Will
insist upon an explanation from Charles --


Exit. Capt. M. Stop, William! Come this way, and among the trees we'll --


Grig. The trees! Step into my little parlour.


Capt. M. Little parlour! Oh, you don't want to settle the affair 'cross a
table.


Grig. I Will tie him in a chair.


Capt. M. Will you?


Grig. Then with my saw --


Capt. M. Saw! -- Death and 'oons, if you're so desperate, have you got a
second?


Grig. He Is gone out for candles! Bring my razor -- hem -- my amputating knife!


Capt. M. Do you think we are in America going upon ascalping party! (draws a
knife) -- and by the Heavens I Will -- (in a low tone.)


Grig. Bring my salve-box, diachylon, and tourniquet.


Capt. M. None of your tourniquets or tomahawks.


Grig. I Will handle you as gently -- The lint and bandage -- I Will give you such
a dressing --


Capt. M. Handle me! I Will give you a dressing!


(Beats Grisby.) Grig. Help! Murder!


Enter Allbut, ( in Justice-wig) with a Constable and Jollyboy. All. Here,
Constable, knock him down and take him up!

Exit Grigsb roaring. He has broke the peace! Why didn't you beat him? --
Justice! Where Is William?


Capt. M. Oh, I Will have you! (looking out.) I Have heard of your justice!
(collars Allbut.) Listen, oppressor of the widow -- plunderer of the orphan --
you call for justice! As I now shake your ugly body before this blessed sun
that is going down upon your head, let your villainous soul tremble at night
upon your pillow, you scoundrel!


Exit. Joll. Bravo, Captain! Oh, how I should like to cross the rough ocean of
life in consort with such a man of war -- we'd chase affliction, take
distressed merit under our convoy, and bring it safe to the harbor of comfort.


All. What do you talk of, Captain -- I Would keep up a fire with ever an admiral in
the navy.


Joll. Yes, in a snug parlour with a poker in your hand. Mrs. Allbut has
promised, instead of wiping away her tears at fictitious woe, when real misery
appears, she will put her hand in her pocket -- and now a word with you.


All. At church I Will sit in my pew.


Exeunt. SCENE III. The Village. Enter Charles, dressed.
Cha. I will not be accessory to Maria's certain disgrace and future
unhappiness, by tacitly complying with her caprice; her union with this sorry
fellow must not be.


Enter Sir Henry and Louisa, dressed. Louisa. You're very good, Sir Henry.


Sir H. Sir -- Miss Louisa Somners. Madam --


Louisa. Oh, Sir Henry, I could have introduced this gentleman to you. We have
met before -- hav'n't we, Sir?


Cha. To my infinite pleasure, Madam. (Bows.)


Sir H. Oh, this is very well -- then, since you're already acquainted, I hope
a similarity of sentiments will save me even a wish for a more tender
intercourse between two such amiable persons. (Going.)


Louisa. Now, Sir Henry, pray don't go.


Sir H. Madam, didn't I promise to find a very unexpected friend for you?


Louisa. True -- to oblige me, will not you excuse Sir Henry? (To Charles.)


Cha. Self-interest, Madam, when the cause leaves me with a lady I so much
admire.


Sir H. (apart to Charles.) Follow that, Mr. Willows -- niece to an srish peer
-- a desirable alliance! When your sister Maria gives her hand to my nephew,
our family will be very leading in both kingdoms.


(Sir Henry and Charles confer.) Louisa. This Mr. Bellevue's experiment to
prove his friend was well enough; but his conduct to his mother and this young
lady is very equivocal -- leaves one in a cottage, and breaks a solemn
engagement to the other. (Aside.)


Sir H. Most obedient.


Exit. Louisa. Sir, I wished for an occasion to talk to you a little, and you
shall not again send me out of the way. (mimicks.) "Ma'am, I beg your pardon, I
must speak to this lady" -- and the poor savored -- this lady, soon follows me
in a shower of piteous tears -- don't be offended; but I must inquire -- What
reason had you to break off that match?


Cha. Then she has heard of my sister Maria and -- (aside.) Madam, 'twas
disproportionate -- a very vulgar connection.


Louisa. (aside.) True; I heard she was servant to Mrs. Allbut, but I thought
her a very elegant woman though.


Cha. Madam, she reflected a disgrace upon me; I Would wish to have concealed it
from you; but since it is notorious, her partiality for the barber surgeon here
--


Louisa. Oh, then you're jealous of Dr. Grigsby.


Cha. Jealous, Madam!


Louisa. Now I Have done that pretty well, I Will question him on his treatment to
his poor mother. (aside.) Sir, you have acquired a fortune abroad -- don't you
blush not to take a little more notice of your honored parent?


Cha. Madam, I have taken every notice that obedience and duty can dictate --
my honored parent shall never want an easy chair and a cheerful bottle.


Louisa. Oh, this is a horrid man! -- he would insinuate -- Sir, no aspersion can
injure Mrs. Bellevue in my opinion; and I Am sorry that your conduct has turned
it so very much against her son -- but a child's protection the parent shall
never miss whilst. I can prove myself the friend and comforter of aged
benevolerce.


Exit. Cha. Very odd this! What can she mean -- what conduct of mine could
change her opinion of William Bellevue? -- Why angry that my old father should
have an easy chair and a bottle -- but the sweet character of her charity
prepared my heart for the impression made by her beauty. As Sir Henry observes
-- if I could obtain her with all my wealth, a respectable introduction into
life is an object -- but my sister and this Grigsby! no! she shall have Sir
Henry's nephew -- a splendid thing! her affections are alienated from William,
so I don't injure him.


Enter William. Will. Why it is he -- so dressed! the report's then true of my
dear Charles -- I give you joy, though your motive for concealing your success
from me -- but answer me; do you know of your sister's change?


Cha. Ay, William! let her go -- she is not worthy of such an honest fellow.


Will. Then she has your approbation of her perfidy?


Cha. (aside.) Call me to an account! this is rather building too much upon our
former intimacy. I should despise myself if pride of riches, or hope of more
honorable alliance, could warp my heart from an old friend -- yet -- look'ye,
Sir --


Will. Sir!


Cha. Your marrying my sister is now out of sight; but to atone for her
perfidy, as you indeed justly call it, and in consideration of our former
acquaintance --


Will. Acquaintance! (much hurt.)


Cha. Whatever pecuniary embarrassments you may labor under, if the sum you will
find here is not sufficient to extricate you, you may command -- (gives a small
pocket book.)


Will. Sir, I thank you -- for -- your -- bounty -- my heart will burst --
(aside) your humane -- feelings -- for -- my abject poverty -- (with great
emotion flings down the pocket book.) Enter Mrs. Bellevue, agitated. Madam, I
have lost my Maria!


Mrs. Bell. Then Char les retaliates upon you my former endeavors to separate
you from his sister -- unkind at such a time! but what I Have just heard is a
treasure of triumph! -- Sir, was not the vessel that brought your wealth to
Europe captur'd at sea? -- And but for the intrepidity of one brave young man,
might you not, at this moment, be as much the wretched object of scorn, as you
now suppose my son? -- Behold the preserver of your fortune!


Chas. Was William the seamen that -- (astonished.)


Mrs. Bell. He was. My gallant son! who forgot he had a life to lose, when
called by honor, and impelled by duty --


Will. The owner of Captain Vansluisen's cargo! (surpised.)


Cha. My friend! The companion of my youth! -- I Have pierced the heart that
loves me -- I see, now, pride did bias me when I -- my generous benefactor too!
-- that gave me his last shilling! (Aside.)


Enter Sir Henry Check. Sir H. Now, Sir, where is your sister? -- Give me leave
to introduce my nephew --


Cha. I know nothing about your nephew, Sir Henry.


Enter Maria. Here, sister, take your William; and if ever I hear a word of
your infernal Doctor Grigsby; I Will cut his throat.


Enter Grigsby. Grig. Ladies and gentlemen, your most obedient -- brother,
yours -- how do you, Widow? Your most humble Gally Pot -- I Am just coming from
the most pleasing adventure -- a certain officer was misfortunate enough to
fall into my hands -- he! he! he! affronted me! but dem'me I sick'n'd him of
such aquatic frolics -- my little cane here emancipated the pulverized
ligaments of his cinabar lobster-shell -- I switch'd him -- I knocked --


Capt. M. (without.) I Will catch you, you rascal; where is the dog?


Grig. Some gentleman lost his dog -- hey, Pompey -- Pompey -- (whistles and
runs about.)


Enter Captain Mullinahack. Capt. M. I Will beat you as black --


Grig. A black dog -- a pretty dog. (Whistles.)


Capt. M. Oh, you're there.


Grig. Where Pompey -- poor fellow. (Whistles.)


Capt. M. I Will razor and tomahawk you; you rascal, I asked for a second, and he
said he was gone to buy candles!


Grig. I take shelter in your arms -- oh! my love!


(Runs to Maria -- William pushes him back.) Capt. M. Depart! or by the powers!
--


Grig. Depart? Oh, by the powers of medicine, I Will make some of you depart! --
lost my wife! -- I Will --


Capt. M. You Will what?


Grig. Squibs and aquae fortis! (Enter Louisa.) Want our change -- hav'n't so
much in the till -- send you a pound of bees wax -- a fine crocodile. (Runs
off.)


Maria. Dear William! -- brother! -- why suppose I could think of such a wretch?


Cha. Then our errors all proceeded from his absurd vanity.


Sir H. Here, Madam, is the friend I promised -- (pointing to the Captain.)


Capt. M. Eh! (looking.)


Louisa. Heavens! Do my eyes deceive me, or -- it is --


Capt. M. Louisa!


Louisa. My father!


Capt. M. Ladies and gentlemen, will not you wish me joy? Why this is my cherub!
my darling! that followed me to France and back again -- flying after me
through all my wars like a dove with an olive branch in her mouth.


Louisa. Dear father, by letters, through the medium of Sir Henry, my uncle
acknowledges his unkindness; and entreats you to return in the most cordial
terms of affection.


Capt. M. This morning I walked about here, and did n't know where to break my
fast. -- If he gives me a bit of an estate, I Will build such a country house!
the sign, my family arms, and my motto -- walk in and eat, all that want a
dinner! Ah, child! there is only one thing more you could do, to make me happier
-- here is the neat boy, that cut and slashed your dear Father about -- that
stood upon the deck, shaking the bullets out of his hair like a mermaid. --
With your leave, Madam; (to Mrs. Bellevue.) Louisa, take from my hand William
Bellevue.


(Louisa looks surpised at the Captain and Charles.) Cha. Nay, William, this
will be punishment, if you reject my sister, and rob me of happiness for ever.


Louisa. Ha, ha, ha! I see it! Oh, what a ridiculous mistake have I been under!


Cha. Then, Madam, you supposed that my name was Bellevue. (To Louisa.)


Capt. M. Sir, might I aspire to render myself acceptable to your charming
daughter?


Will. My honored mother! My dear Charles! -- Here, first set his lordship an
example. (To Maria.)


Joll. (without) Come along! -- don't be ashamed of some good, by way of
variety! --


Enter Jollyboy and Allbut, in Apron and Sleeves, with a Box. Give them! Madam,
there are all your papers.

Mrs. Bell. Who are you? (to Allbut.)


Joll. Your clerk.


Capt. M. What! the great justice of peace!


All. Ay, honest little Jack Allbut.


Capt. M. Oh! little honest Jack Allbut.


Joll. He restores your house, and all yours -- his ill-got possessions.


All. Ay, I Am a man of conscience, I despise wronging the widow and the orphan,
because I don't like to go to law -- with a long claw.


Louisa. So, my worthy landlord, when people owe you money, you make them pay
you in your own coin -- but Margery taught me to thank you for your ten pounds.


Maria. And me to retract my ill opinion of a good man.


Cha. My dear William, by a look back to our past adventures, you will enjoy the
recollection that you have borne unmerited adversity -- and I, whilst my pride
in undeserved prosperity is punished, shall be taught by my reception here,
that when distress presents itself before me, the bitterest drop in the cup of
human misery is, the world's contempt.


Mrs. Bell. Thus you will deserve your wealth -- and when inspired by Heaven to
dispense the blessings it has sent you alone for that benign purpose, wait not
for the application of modest indlgence -- seek her in her sad retreat, cheer
her with your smiles, wipe away her tears, comfort and relieve her.


Will. Charles, begin your acts of benevolence by showing your gratitude to
this worthy man, (pointing to Joll.)


Joll. Thank you, Madam. But as the wind sometimes diverts itself by playing in
the sails of my mill, and people will obstinately persist in this odd whim of
eating bread, I think I may do pretty well as I am. Ay, we may see the world in
our village! But a fig for the world -- Let industry secure independence; and
if wealth or poverty will come, let the rich man be proud only of his power to
be the poor man's friend.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Written and spoken by Mrs. ESTEN.
THE World in a Village! -- Lord help the silly man!
Where could he stumble on such an old fashioned plan!
Here Is a fine Lady for me, exhausting her store
In discharging of debts and relieving the poor;
And, instead among Bucks of making a racket,
Falls in love with a swain, oh, faugh! in a jacket.
The Lover too, rich, young, without one tonish vice --
No racing, no betting, no intriguing, no dice.
The World in a Village! -- I declare I Would as soon
Expect natural traits from a World in the Moon.
Well, if they give me such parts, I Will so it manage,
Commence an Authoress myself, and write for the Stage.
The World in a Village! it is the World in a Town --
That Is your sort, that is the go, and, 'faith, I Will write 'em down.
Give to the Poor!
It Is what Ladies in high life cannot afford to do,
They have Dress, Equipage, Balls, Concerts, Pharo, Loo,
Debts, Duns, and Fees for every secret Billet-doux.
Lady Fanny Dawdle, just risen from her down bed,
In the hard talk of nicely blending white and red,
Glancing her languid eyes from the dear glass a minute,
Cries, "Betty, unfold that paper, -- see what is in it".
"Yes, my Lady:
"It Is a petition, Mem, from a poor soldier's wife,
"Laying in of twins, Mem, just as he lost his life!" --
"Bless me, Betty, this freckle spoils every feature;
"I Am vastly sorry I cannot serve the poor creature:
"I Have too much feeling for an income so small --
"Don't forget Lady Froth's ticket for my grand Ball."
Then the men, oh, they are precious niddy noddies,
With their throats tied up, false calves, and taper bodies:
Pert men at seventeen, insolvents at twenty;
At twenty-five, invalids -- old men at thirty.
Here Is dashing Dick Squanders the great Nabob's rich heir,
With cash at his banker's, and ten thousand a year,
Would he his associates of fashion disgrace
By rememb'ring a friend with a sorrowful face?
No, demme, not he, he is up to all that there gig --
Know a poor friend! -- Oh, curse it, that is a pretty rig.
But one likeness, I own, is successfully taken,
A likeness so strong, it cannot be mistaken;
In the true British sailor how often we meet
Generosity's home -- Liberality's seat!
Who, though hardy, humane; if improvident, just;
Ever constant in love, ever true to his trust;
Who invites the unhappy to share in his mess,
Who never turned his back on a friend in distress;
Who, 'midst danger and death, will courageously sing,
May our arms be victorious, and long live the King!


