THE True-Born Englishman: A SATYR, Answered, Paragraph by Paragraph.

Nescio, qua Natale solum dulcedine cunctos
^ucit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
Ovid. London: Printed in the Year 1701.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir Charles Duncomb, Knt. And Alderman of the City of
London.
SIR,
THOUGH Your Merit has such an established Basis, that neither the Malice of the
Evil Speaker, nor the restless Attempts of the Evil Doer can shake it; and Your
Memory stands secured of Fame and Immortality, in spite of the Murmurs of the
Seditious, and the prevailing Numbers of a sort of People who are unacquainted
with Justice or fair Dealing; yet it is but fitting that some should stand up in
Vindication of what every one should defend, and Assert the Cause of a
Gentleman whose Works of Charity deserve better returns than the Base and
Uncharitable Reflections that are flung upon him.

But you have this Consolation amongst the Clamours of the Ungrateful, that the
same Person who makes it his Business to misrepresent Your Virtues and render
'em Odious (if possible) to Posterity, has done the same by Your Country; and
as you have alway's stood up for the Kingdoms good against all manner of
Opposers, so you are now a sufferer with it, from the Calumnies that are
equally darted against Both.

To be a Patriot in these days, is to provide a Task for the Tongues of the
Envious, and to give Alms and Relieve those that are in want, is immediately
set down for an Act of Ostentation; else, Sir Charles Duncomb had seen his
Countrymen Reap the Fruits of what he Sowed, and the Voice of the People had
blessed him for giving Ear to the Cry of the Prisoners, and plentifully dealing
part of what he was possessed of to People in Distress.

But I give more Offense to your Patience in remembering you of the Good you
have done, than the Poetaster, who has occasioned the following Remarks, by
putting on the Readers belief by the Ill you have not; and it is equally
troublesome to be accused of Faults you are not Guilty of, as it is to be told
of Virtues which are inherent in Your Temper, and shine with such a continued
Luster in all Your Actions.

I shall therefore only leave my Petition behind me, for Your Acceptance, of
what the knowledge of Your Worth has occasioned; and if the Papers I have
written, have not done that Justice, either to my Country or Your Self, Which
both deserved, that You would give me leave to beg pardon for their Defects,
and impute 'em to the too hasty Zeal of,

Sir, Your most Humble And most Obedient Servant.

THE PREFACE.
THere being nothing material in the Preface to this scurrilous Satyr, that has
not been repeated over and over again in the Body of it; I cannot but think it
very suitable to the Business in hand, to forbear making any further Remarks on
the Poets Indecencies, and apply my self to make Excuses for my own.

If the Performance I have let loose into the World is Bad, I have nothing to
urge in my own defense, but the have I was obliged to make in the finishing it,
through the desire of two or three Friends, and the difficulty there is in
answering a Pamphlet Paragraph by Paragraph, which has such a Redundancy of
Tautologies, as this has.

I should indeed have made my Reply to it in Verse, that being counted the
fairer way of entering the Lists with a Poet, but as I never had any great
Inclination to Dactyls and Spondees, so I was afraid I should show my self as
great a Bungler at the Trade of Rhiming as the Person has convinced the World
he is, whom I write in opposition to.

However, since he ends his Preface in Verse, I hope I shall stand excused, if
I make use of the same Method, and give the Reader a short Specimen of my
Poetry, after he has tired him with a large one of his. My Intent at first,
notwithstanding my small Acquaintance with the Nine Water drinking Ladies the
Muses, was to have taken up the Cudgels with him in Verse, but such a Design
requiring more Time than I have to bestow upon Poetry, I thought it advisable
to lay it aside, that I might drudge on in the Beaten Way of good Honest,
Humble Prose, and have flung by the following Lines which were written as so
many Answers to his two first Paragraphs. Satyr, Arise, Thy Whips and Stings
provide,
And shake thy Scorpions on thy Country's side,
While her own Sons their Parents Bowels tear,
And meditate a more than Civil War.
Speak, speak the Cause that make's the Vip'rous Breed
The Rules of Modesty and Truth exceed,
Eager to deal about their want of Shame,
And impiously Elaspheme BRITANNIA's Name.
The Land has yet, though punished for it is Crimes,
Patriots who dare be just in thankless Times,
Whom neither Gifts nor Pensions can Persuade
Tamely to see their Liberties betrayed,
Or Foreigners their proper Rights invad^.
Not that they would Alliances disclaim,
But D -- ch-Men are at Home at Am -- am,
And it has been a Customary thing
For Englishmen to serve an English King.
Else had our Senators with Patience heard
Mine Here to Pr -- cip -- lity preferred
And H -- deservedly the Nation's Boast,
Forborne Reflections on a P -- g -- 's Post.
But since Excess of R -- y -- l Bounty falls,
And He Commands within the P -- lace Walls;
Since on his Leg the British Order shines,
And He disdain's His Belgic Father's Loins,
The Golden-Key not make's the Patriot speak,
But England's Honor, and His Countrie's sake.


THE True Born-Englishman. A SATYR, Answered Paragraph by Paragraph.
AS it is the Duty of every one, that breaths English Air, to stand up for the
Place of his Nativity, and Vindicate the English Nation from the Reproaches
which Malice would fasten on it; so I cannot but think my self obliged to take
notice of a Libel which has stolen into the World, under the Name of a Satyr,
and dispersed its Venom in a concealed manner, against a People whose
Reputation in the Arts of War and Peace has rendered 'em Famous throughout all
Christendom. Had the Author of it been an open Enemy, perhaps, I could have
born it, but he is our Acquaintance, and our familiar Friend, a Man subject to
the same Laws as Englishmen are, and Liable to the same Obligations;
entertained by 'em, when he was forced to fly from the Scourges of Ireland; and
Hospitably received, when he had not where to lay his Head in a Kingdom which
owes her Obedience to this. The Printer also is known for what he is, a Sour,
Discontented, Canting Fellow, as ever Murmured at falling Manna, or found fault
with the Bounties of the Almighty. He has formerly been made City Surveyor, for
a Crime of the same Nature, and taken a Prospect of its Buildings from his
Wooden Edifice in the middle of the Street; and one might have thought, unless
he was in love with that Scandalous Office, he would have avoided all manner of
Occasion of bring lifted up above his Neighbors again. But He Is arrived to
such a height of Malignancy, such an inveteracy of Temper, as to be his
Author's Humble Servant, while he was Lampooning his God, and making Sport with
the Divine Existence of Him that made Him. Therefore it is not to be supposed he
would stick at lending his helping Hand toward Abuses upon the Country where
he would have us think him Born, after he had been forward in promoting
Blasphemous Expressions, against the Holy One of Israel that gave him Breath. I
shall have Field enough elsewhere to take the Author to task, who acknowledged
he expected it in his Preface, though for other sort of Indecencies, than His
mean Style, rough Verse, and incorrect Language, and make appear he labors
under a greater scarcity of Manners, than the Country he shows his Teeth at
ever can. We are happy indeed that a Man of his Character has no great esteem
for us, and it is a certain sign a People is Good when those who are notoriously
Wicked, speak reproachfully of 'em; since it must be granted, few Men fall out
with their own likeness, or are at variance with their own Resemblance. But a
Man is known by his Works, and the way to make him appear in his true Colors,
is to search into 'em, and find out the Blackness of his Soul, by the foulness
of his Thoughts. It Is fitting therefore we fall into the SATYR, and examine
whether the Poet be as infamous as the Subject, or he has the same Talent of
ingratitude in Verse, as he is celebrated for in Prose. Mr. T -- has a fit of
Mortification coming upon him, or he would have less value for the Hungry
Entertainments on Mount Parnassus, and is reconciling himself to his old
Jesuitical Abstinence and Days of Fasting, or he would scarce fall in Love with
telling his Fingers, and making wry Faces for adequate Epithets, as he now
certainly does. While his versifying Folly gives us Occasion to examine his
other faults, and make an Estimate of the last from the wretched Ingredients
the first is composed of. But his Poetry carries such an invitation with it,
that it is pity the Reader should be any longer detained from it. I shall begin
therefore with the Invocation of his Muse which I find is but a very scurvey
one by her Name and to avoid Confusion, make Remarks on this Celebrated Piece,
Paragraph after Paragraph.

The Introduction.
Speak, Satyr; for there is none can tell like thee,
Whether it is Folly, Pride, or Knavery,
That makes the discontented Land appear
Less happy now in Times of Peace, than War:
Why Civil Feuds disturb the Nation more
Than all our bloody Wars have done before.
Satyr, is too mild a Name, and the Design of it too good to be made use of by
such a Person as the Poet; had he desired the assistance of a Bilingsgate
Amazon, 'twould have been more agreeable to the Matter contained in the Poem.
For Reformation is very far from his Intentions, since to create Jealousies and
Uneasiness amongst us, has been always the business of Incendiaries like
himself; and if the Land is discontented, he is mistaken in the Cause of it,
which probably is, we have had so much Money spent to support a War, that some
People have very little left to enjoy after a Peace.

Fools out of Favor grudge at Knaves in Place,
And Men are always honest in Disgrace:
The Court-Preferments make Men Knaves in course:
But they which would be in them would be worse.
It Is not at Foreigners that we repine,
Would Foreigners their Perquisites resign:
The Grand Contention's plainly to be seen,
To get some Men put out, and some put in.
For this our S -- rs make long Harangues,
And florid M -- rs whet their polished Tongues.
Statesmen are always sick of one Disease;
And a good Pension gives them present Ease,
That Is the Specific makes them all content
With any King, and any Government.
Good Patriots at Court-Abuses rail,
And all the Nation's Grievances bewail:
But when the Sovereign Balsam's once applied,
The Zealot never fails to change his Side.
And when he must the Golden Key resign,
The Railing Spirit comes about again.
The Parliament, in general, is much obliged to him for some Expressions in
this Paragraph, and Mr. H -- in particular, who I am satisfied loves his
Country better than any Golden Key whatsoever. Every true Patriot ought to
stand up for his own Countrymen; and if Foreigners jump into Posts, that our
Civil Constitutions allow Natives only to be instated in, it is their Business
as they are English Representatives, to take care of the Peoples Prerogatives
they are entrusted with. And if those florid Members that stand up for the
Liberties of the People, do it for the sake of a Pension, he passes a very odd
Compliment on His Majesty, by insinuating as much, as when they are sick of the
Money-Distemper, there is a certain Court Elixir which has been infallible in
the Cure of 'em.

Who shall this Bubbl'd Nation disabuse,
While they their own Felicities refuse?
Who at the Wars have made such mighty Pother,
And now are falling out with one another:
With needless Fears the Jealous Nation fill,
And always have been saved against their Will:
Who Fifty Millions Sterling have disburs'd,
To be with Peace and too much Plenty cursed,
Who their Old Monarch eagerly undo,
And yet uneasily obey the New.
Search, Satyr, search, a deep Incision make;
The Poison's strong, the Antidote's too weak.
It Is pointed Truth must manage this Dispute,
And downright English Englishmen confute.
If the Nation's Bubbled, it is well for the Gamesters at the other end of the
Town; but I am a better Subject than to think so. I hear of no Members that
refuse their own Felicities, but are against giving away their Birthright to
Strangers. And how we come to be saved against our will, it is impossible for me
to conjecture, when if we had not forwarded our own Salvations, Matters would
scarce have been as they now stand, and our New Monarch had not had the Gift of
our Obedience, had not we eagerly undone our Old, which is far from being an
Act that is involuntary. But our Author is as good at Sense, as he is at
Surgery, when he is for making Incisions instead of giving proper Antidotes
to repel Poison.

Whet thy just Anger at the Nation's Pride;
And with keen Phrase repel the Vicious Tide.
To Englishmen their own beginnings show,
And ask them why they slight their Neighbors so,
Go back to Elder Times, and Ages past,
And Nations into long Oblivion cast;
To Old Britannia's Youthful Days retire,
And there for True-Born Englishmen enquire.
Britannia freely will disown the Name,
And hardly knows her self from whence they came:
Wonders that They of all Men should pretend
To Birth and Blood, and for a Name contend.
Go back to Causes where our Follies dwell,
And fetch the dark Original from Hell:
Speak, Satyr, for there is none like thee can tell.
Our Author's Keen Phrase is made ill use of in this Place, and the question
about slighting our Neighbors very improper. Because we don't think any of 'em
worthy of the Pr -- pal -- ty of Wales, is that any injury to 'em? Or that we
repine at the Gift of a Blew -- G -- when our own Noblemen go without it, does
that bear the Face of a Slight. The common Principle of Nature persuades us to
consult our own good first, and he gives a small increase to the Nobility of
the D -- ch by depretiating the Original of the English, who though they have
underwent the common Fate of other Conquered Countries, have no Lords among 'em
that were Oil-men, or Statesmen with Coronets on their Coaches, that yesterday
shouldered a Bunch of Turnips from the Market.

THE True-Born Englishman, Answered, etc. PART I.
An English Proverb, Where God has a Church, the Devil has a Chapel.
Wherever God erects a House of Prayer,
The Devil always builds a Chapel there:
And 'twill be found upon Examination,
The latter has the largest Congregation:
For ever since be first debauched the Mind,
He made a perfect Conquest of Mankind.
With Uniformity of Service, he
Reigns with a general Aristocracy.
No Nonconforming Sects disturb his Reign,
For of his Yoke there is very few complain.
He knows the Genius and the Inclination,
And matches proper Sins for every Nation.
He needs no Standing-Army Government;
He always rules us by our own Consent:
His Laws are easy, and his gentle Sway
Makes it exceeding pleasant to obey.
The List of his Vicegerents and Commanders,
Outdoes your Caesar's, or your Alexanders.
They never fail of his Infernal Aid,
And he is as certain never to be betrayed.
Through all the World they spread his vast Command,
And Death's Eternal Empire's maintained.
They rule so politickly and so well,
As if they were L -- J -- of Hell.
Duly divided to debauch Mankind,
And plant Infernal Dictates in his Mind.
To begin with an English Proverb, looks very much as if our Author was no
great Doctor at English Poetry; and though T -- smells very much of a Church
with a Chimney in it, some Roguish sort of Wags will be apt to say, he is one
of those that plies at the Devil's Chapel. I don't mean the Supposititious
one, which he would have the Church of England go by the Name of, from its
Uniformity of Service, but Calves Head Assemblies, where Nonconformists meet
together, on the 30 th of January, to give Glory to God for his Permission, in
suffering the best of Kings to be murdered by his Subjects that Day before his
own Palace Gates.

Pride, the First Peer, and President of Hell,
To his share Spain, that largest Province, fell.
The subtle Prince thought fittest to bestow
On these the Golden Mines of Mexico;
With all the Silver Mountains of Peru;
Wealth which would, in wise hands, the World undo:
Because he knew their Genius was such;
Too Lazy and too Haughty to be Rich.
So proud a People, so above their Fate,
That if reduced to beg, they will beg in State.
Lavish of Money, to be counted Brave,
And Proudly starve, because they scorn to save.
Never was Nation in the World before,
So very Rich, and yet so very Poor.
If Pride had Spain for her Province, Ireland, it is certain who had its
Inhabitants from thence came in for a share of it Governess's Favors, and
there must needs be a smack of it in the Poet 's Constitution who (as I have
been told was a Priest of that Nation. But how it is a Wise thing to undo the
World, I cannot imagine, unless Mischief is an instance of Policy, and Barbarity
a great Token of Wisdom. That Is certain if his Doctrine be true, the World's in
as fair a way to be undone, as a Wicked Man can wish, if the Gold of Peru being
in Wise hands (viz.) French Refiners, can make it so.

Lust chose the Torrid Zone of Italy,
Where Blood ferments in Rapes and Sodomy:
Where swelling Veins overflow with living Streams,
With Heat impregnate from Vesuvian Flames:
Whose flowing Sulphur forms Infernal Lakes,
And human Body of the Soil partakes.
There Nature ever burns with hot Desires,
Fanned with Luxuriant Air from Subterranean Fires:
Here undisturbed in Floods of scalding Lust,
The Infernal King reigns with Infernal Gust.
Italy is indeed a hot Country, but some degrees cooler than the West Indies,
which are beyond the Line, and placed under the Torrid Zone. Had the Poet
amongst his other Enquiries consulted the Celestial Globe, he would have said
otherwise: but it may be a mistake, and probably he designed the Satyr upon
Jamaica or Barbardo's, which had been proper enough, because so many Letcherous
Whores and Rogues, have made choice of those Places to reside in. I have heard
likewise, that Air has blown up and kindled a Fire, but never was informed
before, that it was the Effect of Fire, since I am rather apt to believe it is
the Cause.

Drunk'ness, the Darling Favorite of Hell,
Chose Germany to rule; and rules so well,
No Subjects more obsequiously obey,
None please so well, or are so pleased as they.
The cunning Artist manages so well,
He lets them Bow to Heaven, and Drink to Hell;
If but to Wine and him they Homage pay,
He cares not to what Deity they Pray;
What God they Worship most, or in what way.
Whether by Luther, Calvin or by Rome,
They sail for Heaven, by Wine he steers them home.
I perceive now that the Spark has read Heylin's Cosmography, and taken the
Character of Germany on trust from him. But he cannot assign the same Reasons
for their Drunkenness, as he does for the Italians Lust, since it is certain
these Men Intemperance, are no more influenced by the Temperate Zone, which the
greatest part of it lies directly under, than those Children of Lust are
affected by the Torrid. But if none please the Devil so well as they, how comes
he in his Virulent Expressions against the English, to say, they are his Chief
Favorites. Contradiction is a Talent peculiar to himself, and evil speaking
altogether his own; else he would not make 'em Sail for Heaven, with old Nick
at the Helm, plying at the Steerage, or make the Devil bring 'em all into Hell,
notwithstanding their Attempts to gain Heaven, by following the Doctrines of
Luther, Calvin, or Rome. An instance of our Author's Thoughts of the weakness
of Prayer, and the inefficacy of any sort of Devotion whatsoever.

Vrgovern'd Passion settled in France,
Where Mankind lives in haste, and thrives by Chance.
A Dancing Nation, Fickle and Untrue:
Have often undone themselves, and others too:
Prompt the Infernal Dictates to obey,
And in Hell's Favor none more great than they.
Just before none pleased the Devil so well as the Germans, but now the Scene's
altered to France, and none are more great in his Favor than the People of
that Nation. How to reconcile the Superiority of 'em Both, to Sense, I know
not, no more than I do the Character he gives the French Men of thriving by
Chance, when their Industry is so well known, as to make their Misfortunes the
Effect of Chance, not the Success which generally attends their Endeavors in
matters of Trade.

The Pagan World be blindly leads away,
And Personally rules with Arbitrary Sway:
The Mask thrown Off, Plain Devil his Title stands;
And what elsewhere he Tempts, he there Commands.
There with full Gust the Ambition of his Mind
Governs, as he of old in Heaven designed.
Worshipped as God, his Painim Altars smoke,
Embru'd with Blood of those that him Invoke.
One might have thought after he had surrendered the greatest part of
Christendom into Satan's Hands; he would have had some Compassion on his
Brother Infidels. But however it happens he falls foul upon them too, as an
Enemy of Mankind in general, and either believing the Turks to be true
Christians, or numbering them with Cannibals, commits an Error in making them
who are part of the Pagan World, worship the Devil as God, and offer Humane
Sacrifice, at his Altars, which is a sort of Ceremony not used in the Eastern
Countries, who notwithstanding our Author's boasts of an upright Life, making
less Application to the Devil than his Worship, who seems to have a great
interest with him.

The rest by Deputies he rules as well,
And plants the distant Colonies of Hell.
By them his secret Power he maintains,
And binds the World in his Infernal Chains.
That may be; but I am apt to think, that He that made the World has the
Government of it, notwithstanding Satan's Deputy Lieutenants. And one would
think from his planting the distant Colonies of Hell, he was settling
Plantations beyond the South Seas, or had taken possession of some Countries
beyond the Moguls, after he had given him the Dominion of all Paganism; but he
seldom advises with his Maps, as will be seen by the Country which comes next
in Play.

By Zeal the Irish; and the Rush by Folly:
Fury the Dane: The Swede by Melancholy:
By stupid Ignorance, the Muscovite:
The Chinese by a Child of Hell, called Wit:
Wealth makes the Persian too Effeminate:
And Poverty the Tartars Desperate:
The Turks and Moors by Mah'met he subdues:
And God has given him leave to rule the Jews:
Rage rules the Portuguese; and Fraud the Scotch:
Revenge the Pole; and Avarice the Dutch.
By my Shoul, Dear Joy is much in the right, to give his own Country the Post
of Honor: Ireland has Zeal for her Lord Deputy, forsooth, when Ignorance had
been more proper for it, as being that which is most predominant there. And the
Swedes are Tyrannically dealt with, by the Hypochondria; a Character no Person
that knows their way of living can justly give 'em. If Wit be a Child of Hell,
our Author is certainly a Child of Heaven; if those who have no manner of
Dealings with it deserve that Name. But what is chiefly observable in this
Paragraph, is, that the Dane and Portuguese are so much of the same Complexion,
that Fury rules one, and Rage the other; which in my poor sentiments, is, they
have the same Constitution of Mind: A miraculous thing, for certain, that two
Nations should so sympathize, when the last is so near the Sun, and then first
so far from it.

Satyr be kind and draw a silent Veil,
Thy Native England's Vices to conceal:
Or if that Task's impossible to do,
At least be just, and show her Virtues too;
Too Great the first, Alas! the last too Few.
Upon my Conscience he need not request his Satyr to be kind, it is inoffensive
enough in every thing but Impudence: But he knows his own Temper best, and
doubts, that it is impossible for him to treat a Country with any manner of
Humanity that has used him better than he deserved, though he makes a show of
exposing her Virtues to balance her Faults, but has not the heart to do it.

England, unknown as yet, unpeopled lay;
Happy, had she remained so to this day,
And not to every Nation been a Prey.
Her Open Harbors, and her fertile Plains,
The Merchants Glory these, and those the Swains,
To every Barbarous Nation have betrayed her,
Who conquer her as often as they Invade her.
So Beauty guarded but by Innocence,
That ruins her which should be her Defense.
For my part, I cannot find where the Happiness of England had been to have lain
unpeopled, when without doubt it was designed at the Creation for Inhabitants,
as well as the rest of the World; neither can I imagine that Person has any
great skill in History, who affirms, that every Barbarous Nation, that
attempted to invade Her, gained their Ends, and were Conquerors; even Rome her
self, the Empress of the rest of the World, acknowledged repulses from Her, and
Julius Caesar's conquering Arms found a stop to 'em, for a time, by the Valor
of Her Natives.

Ingratitude, a Devil of Black Renown,
Possessed her very early for his own.
An Ugly, Surly, Sullen, Selfish Spirit,
Who Satan's worst Perfections does inherit:
Second to him in Malice and in Force,
All Devil without, and all within him Worse.
If Ingratitude be one of the Ingredients which make up an Englishman, the Poet
has a Title to be called one of the Blood, for treating him after such an
infamous manner: But it is a Mystery to me, how this Devil of Black Renown,
could be Second to Satan in Malice and in Force, when he was preferable to his
Sovereign Lord by being much worse than Him, which in Hell is a mark of
precedence.

He made her Firstborn Race to be so rude,
And suffered her to be so often subdued:
By several Crowds of Wandering Thieves o'er-run,
Often unpeopl'd, and as often undone.
While every Nation that her Powers reduced,
Their Languages and Manners introduced.
From whose mixed Relics our compounded Breed,
By Spurious Generation does succeed;
Making a Race uncertain and unev'n,
Deriv^d from all the Nations under Heaven.
Very good, Devil-Ingratitude had an excellent hand at Temptation, if he could
persuade the Firstborn to be ungrateful before they had any Benefactors. I
always took it for granted, that an ill requital of kind Offices fell under
that Name, and no Person could be unthankful for a Courtesy before it was
received. But this Paragraph affords the Reader great choice of Observations: I
shall only remark on as often unpeopled, and as often undone, and desire 'em to
consider how that agrees with part of a foregoing Paragraph, that actually
says, the Land had been happy had it remained unpeopled to this very day.

The Romans first with Julius Caesar came,
Including all the Nations of that Name,
Gauls, Greeks, and Lombards; and by Computation,
Auxiliaries or Slaves of every Nation.
With Hengist, Saxons; Danes, with Sueno came,
In search of Plunder, not in search of Fame.
Scots, Picts, and Irish from the Hibernian Shore:
And Conquering William brought the Normans over.
The Romans, Danes, and Saxons, that is certain, Conquered us, but the same may
be said of each of those Countries, the Goths and Vandals, having broke in upon
the first in such a manner, as to destroy their very Language, and the other
two fallen under the Fate of Vanquished Kingdoms. So that we have no great
reason to undervalue our selves on the account of Conquest, when scarce a
Nation in all Christendom has not had Revolutions of the same Nature. But what
is the greatest, and most scandalous Reflection, he numbers the Irish amongst
our Conquerours, when it is well known that Kingdom is now dependent on the
English Crown by the Right of Conquest, and that they been have ever since
their Settlement such an inconsiderable People, as our Kings did not think
worth while for a long time to reduce 'em to their present Obedience.

All these their Barbarous Offspring left behind,
The Dregs of Armies, they of all Mankind;
Blended with Britains who before were here,
Of whom the Welsh have blessed the Character.
In the Nonage of Time there was not that distincton made betwixt Man and Man,
as there is now; and when Armies were undisciplined, they had no swelling
Titles to distinguish one Fellow Creature from another; neither is it probable
that a Country so inviting as he owns this to be, should have only the Dregs of
Arms for its Possessors.

From this Amphibious Ill-born Mob began
That vain ill-natured thing, an Englishman.
The Customs, Sirnames, Languages, and Manners,
Of all these Nations are their own Explainers:
Whose Relics are so lasting and so strong,
They have left a Shiboleth upon our Tongue;
By which with easy search you may distinguish
Your Roman-Saxon-Danish-Norman English.
The Epithet of Amphibious to People who live in an Island, when the Sea is its
defense is not so scandalous as he designed it, though the Title he gives our
Ancestors of an Ill-born Mob sounds very hard. I believe he is so little
Conversant in Heraldry as to know nothing of their Originals, neither, while
there was a sort of equality among Men, has he any just excuse for lessening
the Pedigree of those Forefathers, from whence we sprung. As for his finding
fault with the Cadence of our Language, I have heard from several hands he has
been dabbling at an alteration of it several times to no effect, and I Will defy
him to tell me of any modern Tongue which is not made up of a Compound of
others, as well as ours, which has risen from the same Cause.

The great Invading William the Conq.
Norman let us know
What Conquerors in Aftertimes might do.
To every Or Archer.
Musqueteer he brought to Town,
He gave the Lands which never were his own.
When first the English Crown he did obtain,
He did not send his Dutchmen home again.
No Reassumptions in his Reign were known.
D'avenant might there have let his Book alone.
No Parliament his Army could disband;
He raised no Money, for he paid in Land.
He gave his Legions their Eternal Station,
And made them all Freeholders of the Nation.
He cantoned out the Country to his Men,
And every Soldier was a Denizen.
The Rascals thus enriched, he called them Lords,
To please their Vpstart Pride with new-made Words;
And Doomsday-Book his Tyranny records.
What Parallel is there between the Case of William the Conqueror, and that of
our late Revolution? In his days King Harold gave him Battle, and opposed Force
to Force, which occasioned a Conquest; but in our Times, His present Majesty
was received by the Consent of the People, invited over by the Nobility and
Gentry, and Established in a Throne: The whole Power of Holland could not have
placed him in without our own Concurrence. Therefore as Matters were different
between the Conqueror and him, it was but reasonable that those who had made
him King, should send away the Troops that came to our Assistance, since we had
not folly enough to think they would have came to rescue us without assurance
of being paid, nor Estates enough to spare to make a Gentleman of every Foot
Soldier. Six hundred thousand pound was a greater reward to the States, than
Queen Elizabeth had for saving 'em when they wrote themselves, DISTRESSED; and
he might have spared the Story, which was more to show King William might have
done the same, than to disgrace the Original of our Nobility, though what
follows shows that also was intended by it.

And here begins the Ancient Pedigree,
That so exalts our Poor Nobility:
It Is that from some French Trooper they derive,
Who with the Norman Bastard did arrive:
The Trophies of the Families appear;
Some show the Sword, the Bow, and some the Spear,
Which their Great Ancestor, forsooth, did wear.
These in the Heralds Register remain,
Their Noble Mean Extraction to explain.
Yet who the Hero was, no Man can tell,
Whether a Drummer or a Colonel:
The silence Record blushes to reveal
Their Vndescended Dark Original.
As Kings are the Fountains from whence Honors are derived, so William the
Conqueror had as much Right to bestow Titles on his Subjects, as another Prince
has on his; and if the Poet was to search into some Foreign Noblemens Families,
he has such an Esteem for because they are not English, it would be a good
while before he could find either Sword, or Bow, or Spear, for their Crest. But
he is a Leveller, and though he flatters King William, is but for making one
Estate of the Three the Nation is composed of, and reducing the People under
the Government of the People, as in the Year 48.

But grant the best, How came the Change to pass,
A True-Born Englishman of Norman Race?
A Turkish Horse can show more History,
To prove his Well-descended Family.
Conquest, as by the Dr. Sherl. De Facto.
Moderns it is expressed,
May give a Title to the Lands possessed:
But that the Longest Sword should be so Civil,
To make a Frenchman English, that is the Devil.
To Answer that Question, it is not the Blood makes an Englishman, but the
Climate; and it is allowed by the Civil Law, that whatsoever Kingdom a Person is
born in, though of Foreign Parents, he is actually at the time of his Birth a
Denizon of it.

These are the Heroes that despise the Dutch,
And rail at new-come Foreigners so much;
Forgetting that themselves are all derived
From the most Scoundrel Race that ever lived.
A horrid Medly of Thieves and Drones,
Who ransacked Kingdoms, and dispeopl'd Towns.
The Pict and Painted Britain, Treacherous Scot,
By Hunger, Theft, and Rapine, hither brought.
Norwegian Pirates, Buccaneering Danes,
Whose Red-hair'd Offspring every where remains.
Who joined with Norman-French, compound the Breed
From whence your True-born Englishmen proceed.
We have no aversion for 'em, as they are Dutchmen, but as they are possessed
of Places of Trust the Natives of the same Country might reasonably expect to
have. And whatever our Primitive Original was, the Blood which gave us Being,
having issued through so many Channels, might in length of time purge it self
off; and it is known by experience, the most unclean things imaginable, thrown
into a running stream, leave no infection behind them; which makes against him,
if he allows the Circulation of the Blood, which I believe, notwithstanding all
his Equivocations, he cannot deny.

And lest by Length of Time it be pretended,
The Climate may this Modern Breed have mended,
Wise Providence, to keep us where we are,
Mixes us daily with exceeding Care:
We have been Europe's Sink, the Jakes where she
Voids all her Offal Outcast Progeny.
From our Fifth Henry's time, the Strolling Bands
Of banished Fugitives from Neighboring Lands,
Have here a certain Sanctuary found:
The Eternal Refuge of the Vagabond.
Wherein but half a common Age of Time,
Borr'wing new Blood and Manners from the Clime,
Proudly they learn all Mankind to Contemn,
And all their Race are True-Born Englishmen.
Here he seems to be apprehensive of the Argument that was made use of against
his last; and to fence it off guards himself with a known untruth. Henry the
Fifth, a Prince of the greatest Honor imaginable, after his Accession to the
Throne, is made to countenance Vagabonds and banished Fugitives, when there are
many instances to the contrary, if he will take the trouble upon him to read
his Life. But were it actually as he would have it, it was always reckoned no
small Reputation for a Kingdom to be a Sanctuary to the Distressed, and a
Refuge to poor People, who possibly might have other reasons for flying from
the Land of their Nativity, than the Crimes he seems to charge 'em with.

Dutch, Walloons, Flemings, Irishmen, and Scots,
Vaudois, and Valtolins, and Hugonots,
In good Queen Bess's Charitable Reign,
Supplied us with Three hundred thousand Men.
Religion, God we thank thee, sent them hither,
Priests, Protestants, the Devil and all together:
Of all Professions, and of every Trade,
All that were persecuted or afraid;
Whether for Debt or other Crimes they fled,
David at Hackelah was still their Head.
This Paragraph being much of the same nature with the former, and written to
reproach the Memory of the best of Queens, after he had too hastily shot his
Bolt against the most Glorious of our Kings, I shall jump over the repeated
Crambe he tires the Reader with, to take notice of his expression, God we thank
thee: Full of as much Impiety as could come from an Atheist's Mouth, and one
who denies all manner of revealed Religion. He could have uttered forth no
worse complaints against the Goodness of that infinite Being, had he said, God
you are only to be blamed for putting such Whims in the Fools, as the Notions
of Religion, and instilling into their empty Skulls the Fears of offending an
incensed Deity, which has forced them to quit their own Country, and lie a
Rentcharge on our Hands. Which is downright Blasphemy, or nothing can deserve
that Name.

The Offspring of this Miscellaneous Crowd,
Had not their new Plantations long enjoyed,
But they grew Englishmen, and raised their Votes
At Foreign Shoals of Interloping Scots.
The King Jam. 1.
Royal Branch from Pict-land did succeed,
With Troops of Scots and Scabs from North-by-Tweed.
The Seven first Years of his Pacifick Reign,
Made him and half his Nation Englishmen.
Scots from the Northern Frozen Banks of Tay,
With Packs and Plods came Whigging all away:
Thick as the Locusts which in Egypt swarmed,
With Pride and hungry Hopes completely armed:
With Native Truth, Diseases, and No Money,
Plundered our Canaan of the Milk and Honey.
Here they grew quickly Lords and Gentlemen,
And all their Race are True-Born-Englishmen.
And what could hinder them from deserving the Name, if they were born in
England? Since they were obliged to perform all the Offices of true-born
Englishmen, where is the hurt to give them the Title of such? K. James the II.
was an excellent Prince, and his Subjects were truly happy under his Reign,
which he by way of ridicule calls Pacifick. And we cannot deny but several
Families of Scots came with him into England; but it is worth his Observation to
take notice, that his chiefest Favorite was an Englishman, notwithstanding his
Affection to his own Nation.

The Civil Wars, the common Purgative,
Which always use to make the Nation thrive,
Made way for all that strolling Congregation,
Which thronged in King Cha. II.
Pious Ch -- -s's Restoration.
The Royal Refugee our Breed restores,
With Foreign Courtiers, and with Foreign Whores:
And carefully repeopled us again,
Throught his Lazy, Long, Lascivious Reign,
With such a blessed and True-born English Fry,
As much illustrates our Nobility.
A Gratitude which will so black appear,
As future Ages must abhor to hear:
When they look back on all that Crimson Flood,
Which streamed in Lindsey's and Caernarvon's Blood:
Bold Strafford, Cambridge, Capel, Lucas, Lisle,
Who crowned in Death his Father's Funeral Pile.
The Loss of whom, in order to supply
With True-Born English Nobility,
Six Bastard Dukes survive his Luscious Reign,
The Labors of Italian C -- -- -- n,
French P -- -- -- h, Tabby S -- -- t, and Cambrian.
Besides the Numerous Bright and Virgin Throng,
Whose Female Glories shade them from my Song.
It Is but an odd sort of an Observation, that Countries thrive by Civil Wars,
since it is evident that where the Seat of a War is, the Trade of that People
is at a stand; and had not that injured Prince, whom he, for want of due
respect to his Memory, brands with the Name of a Refugee been forced by
Rebellious Subjects from the Land of his Inheritance, he would have had no
Obligations to return to Foreign Courts. But a Party, which our Author glories
in being a Member of, having been the occasion of his Exile, we may thank them,
if he was withdrawn from a due Exercise of those admirable Parts he was the
happy Master of; and when he was Possessor of a Genius the fittest that could
be for business, that he gave himself up too much to his Pleasures. The same
reason that persuaded him to a due respect of His late Majesty's Natural
Daughters, might have with held him from abusing his Princely Sons, some of
which have been and are a Pattern of true behavior to the English Court: But
where Manners are not, they cannot be expected.

This Offspring, if one Age they multiply,
May half the House with English Peers supply:
There with true English Pride they may contemn
S -- -- -- g and P -- -- -d, new-made Noblemen.
If we had no worse sort of Gentlemen amongst our English Nobility, we need not
care how many we had of the Breed; no disparagement to S -- -- -- g and P -- --
-- d, his new made Noblemen.

French Cooks, Scotch Pedlars, and Italian Whores,
Were all made Lords, or Lords Progenitors.
Beggars and Bastards by his new Creation,
Much multiplied the Peerage of the Nation;
Who will be all, ever one short Age runs over,
As True-Born Lords as those we had before.
These six Lines should have been explained, if he would have any Body know the
meaning of them: For I am well assured no French Cooks, or Scotch Pedlars were
ever made Noblemen in the King's Reign, whose Ashes he disturbs so basely. And
for the Italian Whores he makes mention of, they might possibly have been made
Ladies; though I never heard the Duchess of Mazarine had any English Title
conferred on her: But if he is not abandoned to the want of Sense, as well as
good Manners, he must agree with me, their Sex would not permit them to be made
Lords.

Then to recruit the Commons he prepares,
And heal the latent Breaches of the Wars:
The Pious Purpose better to advance,
H' invites the banished Protestants of France:
Hither for God's sake and their own they fled,
Some for Religion came, and some for Bread:
Two hundred thousand Pair of Wooden Shoes,
Who, God be thanked, had nothing left to lose;
To Heaven's great Praise did for Religion fly,
To make us starve our Poor in Charity.
In every Port they plant their fruitful Train,
To get a Race of True-Born Englishmen:
Whose Children will, when riper Years they see,
Be as Ill-natured and as Proud as we:
Call themselves English, Foreigners despise,
Be surly like us all, and just as wise.
Had our Author any sense of Shame or Christianity in him, he would never blame
a Prince for an Action, that has rendered his Name Famous in all the Courts of
Europe. When the Professors of Christ's Holy Gospel were expelled from the
Place of their Nativity, he received them -- Omnium egenos, Vrbe, domo Daeos:
And more than imitated the Queen of Carthage's Noble Saying of Non ignora mali
miseris succurrere disco. He had been hospitably dealt with himself, by the
same People, whose Prince's persecuting Genius flung them upon his Protection;
and if there had been Two Millions, instead of Two Hundred Thousand, his Name
ought to be had in Everlasting Remembrance; since to Feed the Hungry, and Cloth
the Naked, is so far from the Transgression of a Duty, that it is an actual
Performance of our Savior's Command.

Thus from a Mixture of all Kinds began,
That Het'rogeneous Thing, An Englishman:
In eager Rapes, and furious Lust begot,
Betwixt a Painted Britain and a Scot:
Whose gend'ring Offspring quickly learnt to bow,
And yoke their Heifers to the Roman Plough:
From whence a Mongrel half-bred Race there came,
With neither Name nor Nation, Speech or Fame.
Infused betwixt a Saxon and a Dane.
While their Rank Daughters, to their Parents just,
Received all Nations with Promiscuous Lust.
This Nauseous Brood directly did contain
The well-extracted Blood of Englishmen.
The word thus, seems to intimate we Englishmen had our Original from the
French Refugees, who have been admitted into the Kingdom these last thirty
Years, for no Persecution began in Charles the Second's Reign before. But the
Poet being not very good at Connection, and unsatisfied with abusing us in the
same Nature before, falls again into the very same malicious Account of our
Primitive Rise, on purpose to whet our Memory, and stamp impressions on it of
his great Civilities, that we might think of suitable returns.

Which Medly cantoned in a Heptarchy,
A Rhapsody of Nations to supply,
Among themselves maintained eternal Wars,
And still the Ladies loved the Conquerors.
It seems there were Ladies in the time of the Heptarchy, though he allows of
no such things as Lords before William the Conqueror; but though he seems to
have a respect for the Fair Sex by the Title he gives 'em, he deserves to lose
much of their esteem (if he ever had any of it) for the Character he gave the
Women in those Times of being Mercenary, and in Love with the strongest side.

The Western-Angles all the rest subdued;
A bloody Nation, barbarous and rude:
Who by the Tenure of the Sword possessed
One part of Britain, and subdued the rest.
And as great things denominate the small,
The Conquering Part gave Title to the Whole.
The Scot, Pict, Britain, Dane submit,
And with the English-Saxon all unite:
And these the Mixture have so close pursued,
The very Name and Memory's subdued:
No Roman now, no Britain does remain;
Wales strove to separate, but strove in vain:
The silent Nations undistingush'd fall,
And Englishman's the common Name for all.
Fate jumbl'd them together, God knows how;
Whatever they were, they are True-Born English now.
We have had as much before, in good honest Prose, which has more Beauties in
it than his lamentable Verse, that the Western-Angles Conquered the rest; but
the Parts which were Conquered, as the East Angles, etc. helped to give the
whole Country the Name of England, as well as that which had subdued 'em. Which
shows the Poet lies under a mistake, and is guilty of some escapes in matters
of History. But what deserves our notice more particularly, is his making the
Conquerors who were Inhabitants of the Western Parts, Bloody, Barbarous, and
Rude, when it is apparent in our Chronicles those of the North were the most
Cruel, on purpose to taint the Nation in general, which had submitted to the
Conquest of those Inhumane People, with the said Vices.

The Wonder which remains is at our Pride,
To value that which all wise Men deride.
For Englishmen to boast of Generation,
Cancels their Knowledge, and lampoons the Nation.
A True-Born Englishman's a Contradiction,
In Speech an Irony, in Fact a Fiction.
A Banter made to be a Test of Fools,
Which those that use it justly ridicules.
A Metaphor invented to express
A Man akin to all the Universe.
Pride was wholly attributed to the Spaniards sometime before, but now it is the
property of the English. Either his Memory is very treacherous, or he has been
so lavish of the Vices he has charged us with, that he is forced to have
recourse to those he has flung upon others, because of the lowness of his
Stock. And if we are akin to all the Universe, we have a multitude of Noble
Relations for certain, which renders us above the common dregs of all Mankind,
without any manner of Question.

For as the Scots, as Learned Men have said,
Throughout the World their Wandering Seed have spread;
So open-handed England, it is believed,
Has all the Gleaning of the World received.
The Traveling of the Scots, is an Argument of their enquiries after
Knowledge, a Virtue for which they are unreproachable; therefore our Author
does very ill to make use of Cleaveland's Word (Wandering) unless he had been
gifted with Cleaveland's Wit: But how he can prove that England has received
all the Gleanings of the World, unless he can make appear we had any
Forefathers from Japan and China, I cannot imagine.

Some think of England 'twas our Savior meant,
The Gospel should to all the World be sent:
Since when the blessed Sound did hither reach,
They to all Nations might be said to Preach.
Though he pretends to make out our Original, he is more than Presumptious to
explain our Savior's Doctine after that manner. I am apt to think, those are
no ones Sentiments but his own; and notwithstanding the dangerous Opinion he
has of no such Person in the Blessed Trinity, no Man that has the Name of a
Christian, but will conclude that Christ's Predictions will be fullfill'd,
without any such mean Evasion as he impiously lays hold on.

It Is well that Virtue gives Nobility,
Else God knows where we had our Gentry;
Since scarce one Family is left alive,
Which does not from some Foreigner derive.
Of Sixty thousand English Gentlemen,
Whose Names and Arms in Registers remain,
We challenge all our Heralds to declare
Ten Families which English-Saxons are.
It Is well (to use his own words) he will acknowledge any such thing as Virtue
to be amongst us. It Is a Condescension he has not before been guilty of; and if
we have Sixty Thousand English Gentlemen, it is no Matter whether they are
derived from the Saxons or no, since we had People that have Conquered us of as
great Antiquity as them.

France justly boasts the Ancient Noble Line
Of Bourbon, Mommorency, and Lorrain.
The Germans too the House of Austria show,
And Holland their Invincible Nassau.
Lines which in Heraldry were Ancient grown,
Before the Name of Englishman was known.
Even Scotland too her Elder Glory shows,
Her Gourdons, Hamiltons, and her Monroes;
Douglas, Mackays, and Grahams, Names well known,
Long before Ancient England knew her own.
France, and both the Germany's, High and Low, have changed their Masters as
often as us; and though they have great swelling Names, some of our Families
may be no more obscure than theirs, since we have the same Reasons to boast of
their Antiquity. And our Poetaster had paid never the less Difference to the
Invincible Nassau, had he placed his Grandfathers Family ( viz. that of the
Stewarts) which is the most Ancient in Scotland, before that of Monroe, which I
never heard was Famous for any Member of it, but one Mr. Monroe, who is a
celebrated Tobaconist.

But England, Modern to the last degree,
Borrows or makes her own Nobility
And yet she boldly boasts of Pedigree:
Repines that Foreigners are put upon her,
And talks of her Antiquity and Honor:
Her S -- lls, S -- ls, C -- ls, De -- M -- rs,
M -- ns and M -- ues, D -- s and V -- rs,
Not one have English Names, yet all are English
Your H -- ns, P -- llons, and L -- liers,
Pass now for True-Born English Knights and Squires, Peers.
And make good Senate-Members, or Lord-Mayors.
Wealth, howsoever got, in England makes
Lords of Mechanics, Gentlemen of Rakes.
Antiquity and Birth are needless here;
It Is Impudence and Money makes a P -- r.
The Names may be French, on Account of the Norman Invasion; but it is the Title
that makes the Nobleman, which cannot be said to be borrowed. If the Kings of
England could not make their own Peers, they would have less Prerogative than
the meanest Sovereign Princes, who have a Right to multiply the number of 'em
as they please; and if Impudence and Money make a Peer in these Days, he has
made a pretty sort of a Complement to His present Majesty, whom we shall find
he has Written a most Bombast Harangue in Verse upon, and been after his
laudable Custom, exceeding Civil to the Duke and Earl, whom he would have
preferable to King Charles the Second's Sons.

Innumerable City-Knights we know,
From Blewcoat Hospitals and Bridewell flow.
Draymen and Porters fill the City Chair,
And Foot-boys Magisterial Purple wear.
Fate has but very small Dictinction set
Betwixt the Counter and the Coronet.
Tarpaulin Lords, Pages of High Renown,
Rise up by Poor Men's Valor, not their own.
Great Families of yesterday we show,
And Lords, whose Parents were the Lord knows who.
It Is a sign, when People rise in the World, and make a Figure from small
Beginnings, Industry has had a great hand in their Promotion; and when People
of indifferent Circumstances are advanced to Honor, there is an encouragement
of Virtue going forward. The Common Seaman's Labors may do much toward the
gaining a Naval Victory; but it is the Admiral's Conduct that brings it to
pass; and though English Pages for their Bravery at Sea are made Lords, it is
not a thing to be wondered at, since a certain Gentleman, belonging to a Nation
he is so fond of, has had more than the same Honor done him, for none of those
Performances.

PART II.
THE Breed's described: Now, Satyr, if you can,
Their Temper show, for Manners makes the Man.
Fierce as the Britain, as the Roman Brave;
And less inclined to Conquer than to Save:
Eager to Fight, and lavish of their Blood;
And equally of Fear and Forecast void.
The Pict has made 'em Sour, the Dane Morose;
False from the Scot, and from the Norman worse.
What Honesty they have, the Saxon gave them,
And That, now they grow old, begins to leave them.
The Climate makes them Terrible and Bold;
And English Beef their Courage does uphold:
No Danger can their Daring Spirit pall,
Always provided that their Belly's full.
This Paragraph makes our Author look like a Roman himself, though he will
allow none of us to be any thing like them, (when they have left their Brood
behind them, without doubt, as well as any of our other Conquerors;) and he
seems like Janus to carry his Head two ways: One while, he commends us for our
Valor; another, rails against us for our Falsehood: He names the Nations that
bequeathed us the Vices he makes mention of; and for our Stock of Honesty,
because he would make it as small as he could, the Saxons forsooth, above all
other People, must be our Benefactors in leaving us that: A valuable sort of
Gift, indeed, when according to his Challenge, out of 60000 Families, ten of
them had not so much as a drop of their Blood in them.

In close Intriegues their Faculty's but weak,
For gen'rally whatever they know, they speak:
And often their own Councils undermine
By their Infirmity, and not Design.
From whence the Learned say it does proceed,
That English Treasons never can succeed:
For they are so open-hearted, you may know
Their own most secret Thoughts, and others too.
If the English betray the Secrets that are committed to them, by Infirmity,
not by any Design, it is as plain as the Nose in his Face they are Honest; which
contradicts the Character he gave of them in the foregoing Paragraph: And as
that implies a contradiction to Sense, so the Character he gives them, of
having Faculties too weak for Intriegues, is a downright contradiction to
Truth; since we have Statesmen now in being, and Englishmen too, not inferior
to the Richlieu's and Mazarine's of France; or to any hard Names whatsoever the
Dutch are distinguished by. And it is beyond all manner of doubt certainly true,
that the last might have been glad to have got back to the Texel again, had not
some Wise Gentlemen, that lived near the Names, laid their Heads together, in
order to forward the Happy Revolution they boast of.

The Laboring Poor, in spite of Double Pay,
Are Saucy, Mutinous, and Beggarly?
So lavish of their Money and their Time,
That want of Forecast is the Nation's Crime.
Good Drunken Company is their Delight;
And what they get by Day, they spend by Night.
Dull Thinking seldom does their Heads engage,
But Drink their Youth away, and hurry on Old Age.
Empty of all good Husbandry and Sense;
And void of Manners most, when void of Pence.
Their strong Aversion to Behaviour's such,
They always talk too little, or too much.
So dull, they never take the pains to think;
And seldom are good-natured, but in Drink.
He Is Almanzor-like for killing all, and making a complete Victory over the
whole English Race. The Nobility and Gentry have had a Taste of his Fury, and
he will be impartial, and fall upon the Poor also; when if they were so lavish of
their Money and Time, as he would persuade us they are, few of them would come to
wear Gold Chains, which he blames them for, or show their Charity in
Magisterial Purple, which has been such a Mortification to him, and if they had
not given themselves Time to think, they would never have arrived at.

In English Ale their dear Enjoyment lies,
For which they will starve themselves and Families.
An Englishman will fairly drink as much
As will maintain Two Families of Dutch:
Subjecting all their Labors to the Pots;
The greatest Artists are the greatest Sots.
I never heard but the Dutch were as good Toss-pots as our selves, though he
would have us believe, one Englishman can drink as much as will maintain two
Families of 'em. However he has made amends for that known Lie, by giving his
Assent to a known Truth, which is, that we are more dext'rous at Business than
them, and are the greatest Artists by consequence, since he has the ill manners
to call us the greatest Sots.

The Country Poor do by Example live;
The Gentry Lead them, and the Clergy drive:
What may we not from such Examples hope?
The Landlord is their God, the Priest their Pope.
A Drunken Clergy, and a Swearing Bench,
Has given the Reformation such a Drench,
As Wise Men think there is some cause to doubt,
Will purge Good Manners and Religion out.
The way to abolish Religion, which has been the main design of our Author, is
to make the Clergy look little in the Eyes of the Laity; and he has laid hold
of effectual means to further his intentions, nothing being more capable to
draw the People from the respect which is due to them, so much as the
imputation of Drunkenness, unless they open their Eyes and examine into the
Character of him that charges them with it. But God be thanked, we have the
soberest Clergy in the World; our Ministers are Men of exemplary Lives, as well
as great Learning; and our Gentry's Tenants are so far from standing in such a
reverential Awe of their Landlords, that they are Gentlemen themselves in
respect of the Boors beyond Sea.

Nor do the Poor alone their Liquor prize,
The Sages join in this great Sacrifice.
The Learned Men who study Aristotle,
Correct him with an Explanation-Bottle;
Praise Epicurus rather than Lysander,
And The Drunkards Name for Canary.
Aristippus more than Alexander.
The Doctors too their Galen here resign,
And gen'rally prescribe Specific Wine.
The Graduates Study's grown an easier Task,
While for the Urinal they toss the Flask.
The Surgeons Art grows plainer every Hour,
And Wine's the Balm which into Wounds they pour.
The reason he has for pecking at our Universities, is, because the
Vice Chancellor of one of them, civilly desired him to withdraw himself from
it, for fear of his corrupting young Gentlemen-Student's Morals, which he had
an excellent Talent at; otherwise common Justice would have forced him to own,
there are the most excellent Scholars in them, which are to be found in any
place of Learning throughout all Europe; and the Statutes are so regularly put
in force against all manner of Licentiousness, that he has no manner of excuse
for the Scandal he charges them with. English Physicians also are Men of the
best Reputation in that Faculty throughout the whole Universe. And to speak
against our Practitioners dexterity in Surgery, is to give the lie to
demonstration, and vent a known falsehood, in the room of that which is true.

Poets long since Parnassus have forsaken,
And say the Ancient Bards were all mistaken.
Apollo's lately abdicate and fled,
And good King Bacchus reigns in his stead:
He does the Chaos of the Head refine,
And Atom-thoughts jump into Words by Wine.
The Inspiration's of a finer Nature;
As Wine must needs excel Parnassus Water.
One may perceive by his hungry insipid Lines he is a Fresh Water Poet, and that
Wine is very far from having any such thing as Inspiration in it, if he makes
use of it; that is, for certain Apollo would abdicate, if he was in danger of
having good Sense and Verse murdered by the rest of his Subjects, as he has
done; and Helicon would be soon drunk up, were the rest of the Fraternity
troubled so much with the Heart-burning as he is. But your Man of Verse knows
better, that would acquire Fame by his Writings, and to perpetuate his Memory
like one of his Predecessors, always goes, -- Been Potus ad Arma.

Statesmen their weighty Politics refine,
And Soldiers raise their Courages by Wine.
Caecilia gives her Choristers their Choice,
And lets them all drink Wine to clear the Voice.
As for our Statesmen, without Question, the making their Heads hot is not the
way to make their Thoughts sedate and cool, and it is evident from the success
of their Counsels, our Author is no great Politician himself. It Is apparent
also he is no Songster, since he understands the Customs of Singing-Men so
little, as to make them drink, when Liquors are the most Pernicious things to a
good Voice, and the likeliest imaginable to take their livelihood from 'em.

Some think the Clergy first found out the way,
And Wine's the only Spirit by which they Pray.
But other less profane than so, agree,
It clears the Lungs, and helps the Memory:
And therefore all of them Divinely think,
Instead of Study, it is as well to drink.
For certain he is not one of the less profane, by the wicked Expressions that
come from him; And seems to agree with the Belief of the Jews, who said the
Apostles were drunk with New Wine, when they declaring the Message of the most
High God. So that the Reader may find what Sect he belongs to, since he is
against the Response, of, with thy Spirit let us pray.

And here I would be very glad to know,
Whether our Asgilites may drink or no.
The Enlight'ning Fumes of Wine would certainly
Assist them much when they begin to fly:
Or if a Fiery-Chariot should appear,
Inflamed by Wine, they would have the less to fear.
He Is resolved to pull every Body in by the Neck and Shoulders, and Mr. Asgil
is mauled off next for his notion of Translation; but in such a manner, that
any Man would deserve the Name of a Wise one, that could find out where the
Satyr Bit. He asks a Question, and answers it himself; for if it would give
Wings to Asgel's Disciples, and guard 'em from the Fear of Death, without doubt
Mr. Asgil would not forbid 'em the use of a Liquor, which would be very
instrumental in forwarding their Translation.

Even the Gods, themselves, as Mortals say,
Were they on Earth, would be as drunk as they:
Nectar would be no more Celestial Drink,
They Would all take Wine, to teach them how to Think.
But English Drunkards, Gods and Men outdo,
Drink their Estates away, and Senses too.
Colon's in Debt, and if his Friends should fail
To help him out, must die at last in Gaol:
His Wealthy Uncle sent a Hundred Nobles
To pay his Trifles off, and rid him of his Troubles:
But Colon, like a True-Born Englishman,
Drank all the Money out in bright Champaign;
And Colon does in Custody remain.
Drunk'ness has been the Darling of the Realm,
Ever since a Drunken Pilot had the Helm.
What he brings the Gods in for, is a secret to me, unless he would show he has
read Poetry, though he is Master of none of the Beauties of it. And whom he
means by Colon I cannot tell; but if it be any particular Person, he points his
harmless Satyr at, it is foreign to the purpose, since he designs it as a
Reflection against the English in general. For though there may be a Colon or
two, or many more in the Nation, he has no Authority to infer from thence, that
Drunkenness is the darling Vice in it; or to show the Partiality of his Spleen,
if it were so, by dating it from the Reign of a Prince whom he had before
rendered infamous for a Vice which is not consistent with it.

In their Religion they are so unev'n,
That each Man goes his own By-way to Heaven.
Tenacious of Mistakes to that degree,
That every Man pursues it sep'rately,
And fancies none can find the Way but he:
So shy of one another they are grown,
As if they strove to get to Heaven alone.
Rigid and Zealous, Positive and Grave,
And every Grace, but Charity, they have:
This makes them so Ill-natured and Uncivil,
That all Men think an Englishman the Devil.
Any one may perceive he is for voting an Act of Comprehension, and that he
would all have the the straggling Sects whatsoever enjoy the same Privileges
with those that are actually in common with the Established Church; though by
his saying they are tenacious of mistakes, he seems to conclude every different
sort of Religion Practiced in these Realms is false, and none but the
fantastical Schemes he proposes to us as Matters of Faith, true.

Surly to Strangers, Froward to their Friend;
Submit to Love with a reluctant Mind;
Resolved to be ungrateful and unkind.
If by Necessity reduced to ask,
The Giver has the difficultest Task:
For what is bestowed they awkwardly receive,
And always Take less freely than they Give.
The Obligation is their highest Grief;
And never love, where they accept Relief.
So sullen in their Sorrows, that it is known,
They Will rather die than their Afflictions own:
And if relieved, it is too often true,
That they will abuse their Benefactors too:
For in Distress their Haughty Stomach's such,
They hate to see themselves obliged too much.
Seldom contented, often in the wrong;
Hard to be pleased at all, and never long.
As for the Character he gives us in the beginning of this Paragraph, it is so
inconsistent with an English Temper, that he needs nothing but his own Words to
refute him; and if we take less freely than we give, it is a plain Argument
against that lowness of Birth, he would tax us with, and shows our Generosity
to be such, that we take more Pleasure in having our own Beneficences accepted,
than to give our acceptance of those of others: Which is so far from any thing
that tends to our disparagement, that it is a Virtue we ought to be prized
above our Neighbors for, and an Excellence of that uncommon Nature, that makes
us Superior to the rest of those Nations that People the World.

If your Mistakes their Ill Opinion gain,
No Merit can their Favor reobtain:
And if they are not Vindictive in their Fury,
It Is their unconstant Temper does secure ye:
Their Brain's so cool, their Passion seldom burns;
For all is condensed before the Flame returns:
The Fermentation's of so weak a Matter,
The Humid damps the Fume, and runs it all to Water.
So though the Inclination may be strong,
They Are pleased by Fits, and never angry long.
If we are inconstant in our Temper, we should certainly, by the frequent
changes it is guilty of, sometime or other fall into a Vindictive Fury, and
resent Affronts which are put upon us; but if we are such Strangers to Passion,
what a-murrain is become of the Danish Fury, and the Porteguese Rage, which he
not long since said had such an Ascendant over us? And for the Humid to damp
the Fume, he might have as well said, one moist thing adds moistness to
another, which proceeds from no Antipathy of one different Quality to another,
as he ignorantly would have it.

Then if Good Nature shows some slender proof,
They never think they have Reward enough:
But like our Modern Quakers of the Town,
Expect your Manners, and return you none.
The last Distich agrees very little with the first, and I find he is over-happy
in making Similitudes; for if we are the Benefactors (which he call's a slender
Proof of good Nature) it is our Business; to receive acknowledgments, and not
return 'em before any such thing is paid us.

Friendship, the abstracted Union of the Mind,
Which all Men seek, but very few can find:
Of all the Nations in the Universe,
None talk on it more, or understand it less:
For if it does their Property annoy,
Their Property their Friendship will destroy.
As I take it, Friendship is the Union of two distinct Minds, and not of one;
neither is it an Abstract of Agreement, which is a sort of an Epitome of
Happiness; but an entire, perfect, and complete Enjoyment betwixt one Soul and
another. And if we were so unhappy as to deserve the Character he gives, since
very few Nations are Masters of this Friendship, we have this comfort, as to
have a great many Countries (and amongst them perhaps his beloved Dutchland)
who share with us in the want of it.

As you discourse them, you shall hear them tell
All things in which they think they do excel:
No Panegyric needs their Praise record;
An Englishman never wants his own good Word.
His first Discourses gen'rally appear
Prologu'd with his own wond^rous Character:
When, to illustrate his own good Name,
He never fails his Neighbor to defame:
And yet he really designs no wrong;
His Malice goes no further than his Tongue.
But pleased to Tattle, he delights to Rail,
To satisfy the Lech'ry of a Tale.
His own dear Praises close the ample Speech,
Tells you how Wise he is; that is, how Rich:
For Wealth is Wisdom; he that is Rich is Wise;
And all Men Learned Poverty despise.
His Generosity comes next, and then
Concludes that he is a True-born Englishman;
And they, it is known, are Generous and Free,
Forgetting, and Forgiving Injury:
Which may be true, thus rightly understood,
Forgiving Ill Turns, and Forgetting Good.
Were our Author an Englishman, as he would persuade us he is, he would have
contradicted himself in this point, and been so far from giving himself his own
good Word, that he would have shown he had picked out the worst he could find
in the whole English Vocabulary. But he is more partial than so, and being of
another Nation, flings all the dirt that is possible upon us: Though I dare swear
he is in the wrong, for charging our Rich Natives with boasting of their
Riches, since it is manifest there is no People in the Universe, that are more
cautious of having their Wealth known than the generality of Ours; witness the
Numbers in this Kingdom that are possessed of vast Sums, and yet would have the
World believe nothing like it. As for our forgiving Ill Turns, we thank him for
the Character, and take it for our own, being in hopes he will apply that of
forgetting Good to himself, since he has been so unthankful for the Favors he
has received here, and so ungenerous as to return the Mercy of a Nation, who
might have handed him very severely for his impious Writings, with so barbarous
a Treatment.

Cheerful in Labor when they have undertook it;
But out of Humor, when they are out of Pocket.
But if their Belly and their Pocket's full,
They may be Phlegmatic, but never Dull:
And if a Bottle does their Brains refine,
It makes their Wit as sparkling as their Wine.
His Satyr now bears the countenance of Panegyric, and he has taken off the
Scandal, he before fastened on us, of being a lazy People, by putting that of
our being cheerful in Labor in its room; and if a Bottle refines our Brains,
and gives a spirituous influence to our Wit, it very much makes against his
side, who has blamed us for diverting our selves over it.

As for the general Vices which we find
They Are guilty of in common with Mankind,
Satyr, forbear, and silently endure;
We must conceal the Crimes we cannot cure.
Nor shall my Verse the brighter Sex defame;
For English Beauty will preserve her Name.
Beyond dispute, Agreeable and Fair;
And Modester than other Nations are:
For where the Vice prevails, the great Temptation
Is want of Money, more than Inclination.
In general, this only is allowed,
They Are something Noisy, and a little Proud.
We have all manner of reason to thank him for his great condescension, in
being graciously pleased to show his compassion in concealing our Vices, after
he has charged us with all the Devil could put in his Head; and, if he must not
divulge the crimes he cannot cure, he has already broke through that
prohibition, by making mention of so much as one single Fault, since very few
Patients will accept of a Cure, where Old-Nick is known to be the Doctor. As
for the Ladies, they are in his favor, though I question whether he will be in
theirs, since to make them Noisy and Proud is enough to put them out of Humor.

An Englishman is gentlest in Command;
Obedience is a Stranger in the Land:
Hardly subjected to the Magistrate;
For Englishmen do all Subjection hate.
Humblest when Rich, but peevish when they are Poor;
And think whatever they have, they merit more.
If an Englishman is gentle in Command, and does not curb in those who are put
under him with too stiff a Rein, he is certainly praiseworthy, and is
deservedly had in esteem: But if Obedience be a Stranger, in the Land, how
comes it about that His present Majesty is owned as such throughout all the
Three Kingdoms. To be humblest when rich, is also a certain token of an innate
Goodness; but to reconcile what follows with it, is beyond my Ability, since if
their increase of Wealth is an increase of their Humility, they can never be
unsatisfied, and think they merit more.

Shamwhig pretends to have served the Government,
But balked of due Reward, turns Malecontent.
For English Christians always have regard
To future Recompenses of Reward.
His forfeit Liberty they did restore,
And gave him Bread, which he had not before.
But True-born English Shamwig lets them know,
His Merit must not lie neglected so.
As Proud as Poor, his Masters he will defy;
And writes a Piteous Satyr in Praise of Folly and Knavery.
Satyr upon Honesty.
Some think the Poem had been pretty good,
If he the Subject had but understood.
He got Five Hundred Pence by this, and more,
As sure as he had never a Groat before.
To call Tutchin a Shamwig, is directly to affirm, he has not half the ill
Qualities of a Whig, as he would have him. For my part, I must own, I think he
has the particular Characteristic of that Rebellious, and Whining Sect, if a
Murmuring Genius, and an Unsatisfied Temper, can point him out as a Member of
so scandalous a Society. But how two such Brothers in Iniquity, who so directly
Tally in every thing, but their Opinion about Foreigners should fall out,
that is a Riddle to me. Every Body knows Tutchin was deservedly ordered to be
whipped, through the West Country Market Towns, and that he was set at Liberty,
and entertained by some People of no small note after the Revolution, and how
that he like a True Whig, and Villain, afterward abused his Benefactors, by
writing a Satyr in Praise of Folly and Knavery, incomparably better then his
True-Born Englishman, but I never could hear any Body say Tutchin was worse
then T -- d.

In Business next some Friends of his employed him;
And there he proved that Fame had not belied him:
His Benefactors quickly he abused,
And falsely to the Government accused:
But they, defended by their Innocence,
Ruined the Traitor in their own Defense.
This is also a Truth, which he has picked out of the Reverse which was an
Answer to the Foreigners, and which, as I take it, intimates he had a Place
given him at the Victualling-Office; but accusing the Commissioners before the
Lords of the Admiralty, and not able to make out what he charged 'em with, he
himself was divested of his own Post. By this the Author may perceive I am not
so bad, and so abandoned to Wickededness, as to be a Friend of Tutchin's,
neither have I so little Judgment; as to have a good Opinion of the Person who
rails at him.

Thus kicked about from Pillars unto Posts,
He whets his Pen against the Lord of Hosts:
Burlesques his God and King in Paltry Rhimes:
Against the Dutch turns Champion for the Times;
And Huffs the King, upon that very score,
On which he Panegyrick'd him before.
It Is natural for Men of both their Kidneys to change sides as occasion offers;
and if Tutchin's design in writing the Foreigners, was only for the Good of his
Nation, he was far enough from Huffing the King, who is an English Prince,
since he Reigns over us, by taking part with the English who are the Subjects,
that have stood by him with their Lives and Fortunes, and lost abundance of
Treasure in his Defense, when the Dutch have been Gainers by the War.

Unhappy England, have thou none but such,
To plead thy Scoundrel Cause against the Dutch?
This moves their Scorn, and not their Indignation;
He that Lampoons the Dutch, Burlesques the Nation.
If England's be a Scoundrel Cause, for God's sake what must that of Holland
be? And if we move their scorn, it is our own Fault, since we have had it in our
power to Command their Fear; and might have Lampoon'd the Dutch, without
Burlesquing the Nation, had we been so wise as to have less dealings with 'em.

The meanest English Plough-man Studies Law,
And keeps thereby the Magistrates in Awe:
Will boldly tell them what they ought to do,
And sometimes punish their Omissions too.
Certainly, he has been in Wales, or Yorkshire, by the Character he gives the
Plough-men; and the Gentlemen of the long Robe have no Reason to thank him for
casting such a Reflection on the Study of the Law. For their Part, those are
wise Magistrates indeed that are kept in awe by 'em; and for mine, I have never
heard of any such, but one City-Justice, and he has a Shoemaker to read Law to
him.

Their Liberty and Property's so dear,
They scorn their Laws or Governors to fear:
So bugbear'd with the Name of Slavery,
They cannot submit to their own Liberty.
Restraint from Ill is Freedom to the Wise;
But Englishmen do all Restraint despise.
Slaves to the Liquor, Drudges to the Pots,
The Mob are Statesmen, and their Statesmen Sots.
If he blames us for our Liberty and Property being dear to us, he cannot be a
Friend to the late Revolution, which he would be taken for a Champion of; and
he would do well to explain his unintelligible Assertion of our not being able
to submit to our own Liberty: The next two Lines are applicable to no
Englishmen, but those of his own Persuasion; and the Contents of 'em put in
practice by no sort of Persons, but those who are under a perpetual uneasiness,
and have the Impudence to call our Statesmen Sots; which reflects upon the
Wisdom of him that made choice of 'em.

Their Governors they count such dangerous things,
That it is their custom to affront their Kings:
So jealous of the Power their Kings possessed,
They suffer neither Power nor Kings to rest.
The Bad with Force they eagerly subdue,
The Good with constant Clamours they pursue:
And did King Jesus reign, they would murmur too.
A discontented Nation, and by far
Harder to rule in Times of Peace than War:
Easily set together by the Ears,
And full of causeless Jealousies and Fears:
Apt to revolt, and willing to rebel,
And never are contented when they are well,
No Government could ever please them long,
Could tie their Hands, or rectify their Tongue.
In this to Ancient Israel well compared,
Eternal Murmurs are among them heard.
He goes on with the known Qualities of his own Sect, and being seemingly
ashamed of owning 'em himself, flings 'em on those who have no manner of
relation to 'em. He acknowledges there are but too many of this Temper in this
Kingdom, and that Rebellion, Dissatisfaction, and the other Crimes he falsely
Charges us with, has a Multitude of Disciples ready to side with either of 'em.
But let us seek for the Fountain which gives Being to this Sea of Wickedness,
and which for other causes then the River Nile, hides its Head, and we shall
soon find the source of those mischiefs, that are our perpetual Disturbers, is
on that side which he is the ungrateful Defender of.

It was but lately that they were oppressed,
Their Rights invaded, and their Laws suppressed:
When nicely tender of their Liberty,
Lord! What a Noise they made of Slavery.
In daily Tumults showed their Discontent;
Lampoon'd their King, and mock^d his Government,
And if in Arms they did not first appear,
'Twas want of Force, and not for want of Fear.
In humbler Tone than English us^d to do,
At Foreign Hands for Foreign Aid they sue.
And where was the Harm to think our selves injured, if we really were; and to
complain of Grievances, if we had a just cause for it? King James was led
aside, and we did not make our Addresses to the Dutch, who treading in wrong
Paths themselves could not set His Majesty in the right: but sent our
Remonstrances over to the Princess and Prince of Orange, in order to let them
know, whose principal Concern it was, that they had a Jealousy there was no
fair Play going forward at the English Court. They addressed them in no humbler
Tone, than was fitting to be made use of to Princes of their High Birth; and
invited their Highnesses to England, not so much for want of Force, but because
it was necessary that the Persons whose Concern it was to examine into the P --
of Wales his Birth, should be at the Head of them to countenance what otherwise
would have born the Face of a Rebellion.

William the Great Successor of Nassau,
Their Prayers heard, and their Oppressions saw:
He saw and saved them: God and Him they praised;
To This their Thanks, to That their Trophies raised.
But glutted with their own Felicities,
They soon their New Deliverer despise;
Say all their Prayers back, their Joy disown,
Vnsing their Thanks, and pull their Trophies down:
Their Harp of Praise are on the Willows hung;
For Englishmen are never contented long.
It is not our business to question what he says on His Majesty's part; and he
says nothing on the part of the People but what is true, since they gave their
Deliverer no other Thanks than those he deserved. But it is the greatest of
Falsehoods to say we soon despised him; when if any Sect of People were guilty
of that piece of Ingratitude, those that call themselves Dissenters are the
Persons, who are not satisfied of having a free Exercise of their Religion,
according to the Dictates of their Conscience; but will murmur on till theirs
is the Established Faith, and their Meetings have the same Royal Authority in
their behalf, as the Kirk of Scotland; which, I presume from His Majesty's
great Knowledge of the Church-of- England Loyalty, will never come to pass.

The Reverend Clergy too! and who'd have thought
That they who had such Non-resistance taught,
Should ever to Arms against their Prince be brought?
Who up to Heaven did Regal Power advance;
Subjecting English Laws to Modes of France.
Twisting Religion so with Loyalty,
As one could never live, and the other dye.
And yet no sooner did their Prince design
Their Glebes and Perquisites to undermine,
But all their Passive-Doctrines laid aside;
The Clergy their own Principles denied:
Vnpreach'd their Non-Resisting Cant, and prayed
To Heaven for Help, and to the Dutch for Aid.
The Church chim'd all her Doctrines back again,
And Pulpit-Champions did the Cause maintain;
Flew in the face of all their former Zeal,
And Non-Resistance did at once repeal.
Non-Resistance in Things that are lawful, was the Doctrine of our Church; and
the greatest part of our Clergy preached up Passive Obedience only where their
Prince did not violate the Rights of his Subjects. A great number of them, I am
well assured, would have suffered the greatest Extremities for the sake of
their Religion; though when the Church Lands were called in question, and the
Possessors of them were likely to be forced from them; then Judgment began at
the House of God; and a certain Time-server, who is in his Party's Interest,
and lives not a Mile from the Temple, cut asunder the Gordian Knot which he had
before made indissoluble; which does not at all affect the Church-of- England
Loyalty, since that fulsome Harange-maker is looked upon as one of its rotten
Members.

The Rabbis say it would be too prolix,
To tie Religion up to Politics:
The Church's Safety is Suprema Lex.
And so by a new Figure of their own,
Do all their former Doctrines disown.
As Laws Post Facto in the Parliament,
In urgent Cases having obtained Assent;
But are as dangerous Presidents laid by;
Made lawful only by Necessity.
The Safety of the Church is the Preservation of the Laws; and as the
infringement of the Privileges of the one, is a downright violation of the
other, so unless the Authority of Religion be kept up; and the Ministers of
God's Holy Ordinances had in Reverence, the Statutes of the Kingdom will be but
an ill Fence to restrain the Violence of Licentious Men, who will break in upon
the other Laws, after they have destroyed that which is their Fundamental.

The Reverend Fathers then in Arms appear,
And Men of God became the Men of War.
The Nation, fir^d by them, to Arms apply;
Assault their Antichristian Monarchy;
To their due Channel all our Laws restore,
And made things what they should have been been before.
But when they came to Fill the Vacant Throne,
And the Pale Priests looked back on what they had done;
How English Liberty began to thrive,
And Church-of- England Loyalty outlive:
How all their Persecuting Days were done,
And their Deliv'rer placed upon the Throne:
The Priests, as Priests are wont to do, turned Tail;
They Are Englishmen, and Nature will prevail.
Now they deplore the Ruins they have made,
And Murmur for the Master they Betrayed.
Excuse those Crimes they could not make him mend;
And suffer for the Cause they cannot defend.
Pretend they would not have carried things so high;
And Proto-Martyrs make for Popery.
The Reflection which he designs upon the Lord Bishop of London (for none of
our other Fathers in God took Arms on that occasion) is of so little force,
that his Lordship has nothing to fear from it. His Lordship was suspended by an
Ecclesiastical High Court which was unlawfully established, was under
apprehensions of suffering every day worse and worse, and had every Misfortune
to provide himself against, that either a Subject or a Christian ought to stand
in fear of; and therefore is very much to be excused, though I don't vindicate
taking Arms against a Sovereign. But the Priests whom he joins the Epithet of
Pale to (meaning the Non-Jurants) are falsely traduced; they gave no more
Assistance to the then Prince of Orange, than their Prayers for his Success,
and their continued Vows to the Almighty to crown an Undertaking, for the sake
of Religion, with an happy Issue. And notwithstanding they were Men of such
tender Consciences, as not to be led by any hopes of Gain to take Oaths to a
Prince, who was established in the Throne during the Life of the King they had
sworn to, I am well persuaded they are so far from turning Martyrs for Popery,
that no People whatsoever are more against that idolatrous Opinion than
themselves.

Had the Prince done as they designed the thing,
Have set the Clergy up to rule the King;
Taken a Donative for coming hither,
And so have left their King and them together,
We had, say they, been now a happy Nation.
No doubt we had seen a Blessed Reformation:
For Wise Men say ^t's as dangerous a thing,
A Ruling Priesthood, as a Priest-rid King.
And of all Plagues with which Mankind are cursed,
Ecclesiastic Tyranny's the worst.
It was not only the Priest's thoughts, that His present Majesty would have
settled Affairs on their Ancient Establishment, and been contented with the
Glory of rescuing Three Nations from Propery and Slavery, but his Majesty's own
Intentions, as may be seen in his Declaration, in the year 1688. was agreeable
to their thoughts; till the Parliament was so importunate with him to accept
the Three, that he could not have refused them, without leaving the People he
had freed to the same dangers they were before exposed to.

If all our former Grievances were feigned,
King James has been abused, and we trepanned;
Bugbear'd with Popery and Power Despotick,
Tyrannick Government, and Leagues Exotic:
The Revolution's a Phanatick Plot,
W -- a Tyrant, S -- a Sot:
A Factious Army and a Poisoned Nation,
Unjustly forced King James's Abdication.
No true Protestant, I am persuaded, believes our Grievances were feigned, but
is heartily glad they are redressed. However, though I have a greater
Veneration for the Person and Merit of W -- than to say he is a Ty -- -nt, I am
ready to affirm one S -- as I know (perhaps not the Person he means) guilty of
a greater Crime than Sottishness, for betraying so kind a Master.

But if he did the Subjects Rights invade,
Then he was punished only, not betrayed:
And punishing of Kings is no such Crime,
But Englishmen have done it many a time.
I must needs acknowledge I don't understand the Doctrine of punishing Kings;
though the Murder of good King Charles has been such a Barbarous Instance of
it, that if Divine Punishment does not overtake the Authors of it, certainly
there is no Vengeance in store for the vilest Offenders.

When Kings the Sword of Justice first lay down,
They are no Kings, though they possess the Crown.
Titles are Shadows, Crowns are empty things,
The Good of Subjects is the End of Kings;
To guide in War, and to protect in Peace:
Where Tyrants once commence, the King's do cease:
For Arbitrary Power's so strange a thing,
It makes the Tyrant, and unmakes the King.
If Kings by Foreign Priests and Armies reign,
And Lawless Power against their Oaths maintain,
Then Subjects must have reason to complain.
If Oaths must bind us when our Kings do ill;
To call in Foreign Aid is to rebel.
By Force to circumscribe our Lawful Prince,
Is wilful Treason in the largest sense:
And they who once rebel, most certainly
Their God, and King, and former Oaths defy.
If we allow no Maladministration
Could cancel the Allegiance of the Nation;
Let all our Learned Sons of Levi try,
This Eccles'astick Riddle to unty:
How they could make a Step to Call the Prince,
And yet pretend to Oaths and Innocence.
If I mistake not, the two first Lines in this Paragraph are not clear from
Exceptions; for according to the rules of common sense, whether a King reigns
justly or unjustly, he is nevertheless a King, beyond all dispute, while he
sits upon the Throne. But great Disputants are sometimes out in their
Consequences; therefore I shall skip over the rest of his Argument, as what is
heard every day over Coffee and Tea, and examine into the last Verses, which
seem to bear all the strength of Reason he is capable of mustring up. If we may
call a Person to the Relief of a Kingdom, without any design of presenting him
with the Throne of it, as certainly we may, there is no question but the People
who called him, are innocent, and free from the breach of their Oath to their
then Sovereign; since to take up Arms is one thing, and to petition for
Assistance to remove Priests, and Evil Counselors, another.

By the first Address they made beyond the Seas,
They Are per^ur'd in the most intense Degrees;
And without Scruple for the time to come,
May swear to all the Kings in Christendom.
And truly did our Kings consider all,
They Would never let the Clergy swear at all:
Their Politic Allegiance they would refuse;
For Whores and Priests do never want excuse.
Perjury is the Violation of an Oath, taken after a serious and premeditated
manner; but to break an Oath of Allegiance to one King, without swearing to
another, makes it impossible that the Non-juring Clergy should fall under the
Censure of so notorious a piece of impiety. However, the whole Fraternity,
Swearers or Non-swearers, are extraordinarily obliged to their good Friend, Mr.
Author, who makes them as ready, if they are in the wrong, to prove themselves
in the right; and as good at furnishing themselves with Excuses, as a
thorough-paced Whore before a Magistrate, or a venerable Hypocritical Bawd
before one of the Society for Reformation of Manners. A great token of the
respect he has for God's Ministers.

But if the Mutual Contract was dissolved,
The Doubt's explained, the Difficulty solved:
That Kings when they descend to Tyranny,
Dissolve the Bond, and leave the Subjects free.
The Government's ungirt when Justice dies,
And Constitutions are Non-Entities.
It is impossible Justice should die, while the Fountain of it is living: The
Channels through which it passes may be choked up for a time; but as long as
there is wherewithal to feed it at the Springhead, can never wholly be stopped.

The Nation's all a Mob, there is no such thing
As Lords or Commons, Parliament or King.
A great promiscuous Crowd the Hydra lies,
Till Laws revive, and mutual Contract ties:
A Chaos free to choose for their own share,
What Case of Government they please to wear:
If to a King they do the Reins commit,
All Men are bound in Conscience to submit:
But then that King must by his Oath assent
To Postulata's of the Government;
Which if he breaks, be cuts off the Entail,
And Power retreats to its Original.
The design of this Paragraph, is to show, that the Kingly Power is the Gift of
the Subjects, and that whenever a Prince fails in the Duty of his Office, the
People may recall their Gift, and bestow the Crown on whom they please. This
Doctrine might do very well in Poland, amongst the Radziouskies and Potoskies,
who are for an Elective Kingdom; but never will suit with a Nation, whose
Kingdom has been Hereditary upwards of six hundred years, and always went to
the next Heir of course, notwithstanding the defects of the King, for the time
being, might occasion his Dethronement.

This Doctrine has the Sanction of Assent,
From Nature's Universal Parliament.
The Voice of Nations, and the Course of Things,
Allow that Laws superior are to Kings.
None but Delinquents would have Justice cease,
Knaves rail at Laws, as Soldiers rail at Peace:
For Justice is the End of Government,
As Reason is the Test of Argument.
If Laws are superior to Kings, the Creature may pretend a Sovereignty over
the Creator, since they are the product of their Royal Assent, and never
capable of being put in Force without their approbation: The Potsherd may as
well say to the Potter, Wherefore have thou made me? as the Law put a Question
to the King, and ask him, Why have thou done thus?

No Man was ever yet so void of Sense,
As to debate the Right of Self-Defence;
A Principle so grafted in the Mind,
With Nature born, and does like Nature bind:
Twisted with Reason, and with Nature too;
As neither one nor the other can undo.
Self-Defence is acknowledged by Universal Consent for the Voice of Nature, and
enjoined by her Laws to be put in Practice; that is, upon any sudden Attack of
an Enemy, or any causeless Provocation that may be given us, to take care of
our selves. But the Divine Law which is superior to it, and commands us not to
lift up our Hand against the Lord's Anointed; prohibits us to call Rebellion
Self-Defence; and even Humane Ordinance allows Kings to be the Head of their
People, and not liable to the Censure of those that are inferior to 'em.

Nor can this Right be less when National;
Reason which governs one, should govern all.
Whatever the Dialect of Courts may tell,
He that his Right demands, can never rebel.
Which Right, if it is by Governors denied,
May be procured by Force, or Foreign Aid.
For Tyranny's a Nation's Term for Grief;
As Folks cry Fire, to hasten in Relief.
And when the hated word is heard about,
All Men should come to help the People out.
That would be pretty indeed, and we should have a hopeful Nation of it, should
the same Reason, or rather want of it, which governs him, govern all. Every one
would cry such a Post of Honor was his Right; and if the King should deny him
the Grant of it, Rebellion would be the next Word; and every Fool would cry
Fire, on purpose to make his Neighbor as wise as himself.

S. Sergeants when a Prisoner they have beset
Cry out stop Thief, when all the Theft is Debt
Thus England groaned, Britannia's Voice was heard;
And Great Nassau to rescue her, appeared:
Called by the Universal Voice of Fate;
God and the Peoples Legal Magistrate.
Ye Heavens regard! Almighty Jove look down,
And view thy Injured Monarch on the Throne.
On their Ungrateful Heads due Vengeance take,
Who sought his Aid, and then his part forsake.
Witness, ye Powers! It was Our Call alone,
Which now our Pride makes us ashamed to own.
Britannia's Troubles fetched him from afar,
To court the dreadful Casualties of War:
But where Requital never can be made,
Acknowledgment's a Tribute seldom paid.
That is as much as to say, after his own way of expressing himself, England
cried Fire, and a Neighbor came in an instant, and quenched it, and received
the House, and all the Furniture for his Pairs. Not that I would detract from
the Debt of Gratitude, which will be ever due to His Majesty; but I Question
not but His Majesty holds himself contented with the large Acknowledgments of
both Houses of Parliament. Since 700000 per Annum more than the Crown Revenue,
is a Gift never given to any Prince before, though this Impudent Author in
defrance of the Donors, calls down for Vengeance on their ungrateful Heads.

He dwelt in Bright Maria's Circling Arms,
Defended by the Magic of her Charms,
From Foreign Fears, and from Domestic Harms.
Ambition found no Fuel for her Fire,
He had what God could give, or Man desire.
Till Pity ^^^z'd him from his soft Repose,
His Life to unseen Hazards to expose:
Till Pity moved him in our Cause to appear;
Pity! That Word which now we hate to hear.
But English Gratitude is always such,
To hate the Hand which does oblige too much.
No Body doubts but the late Queen of Blessed Memory, was an inestimable
Present to His Majesty; but to say, he had all that God could give in the
Possession of Her, was to set Bounds to the Power of the Deity, and say unto
the Almighty, Hither could thou go, and no farther. A thought too big for him
that made use of it, and too little for that Infinite Being for whom he made
use of it.

Britannia's Cries gave Birth to his Intent,
And hardly gained his unforeseen Assent:
His boding Thoughts foretold him he should find.
The People Fickle, Selfish, and Unkind.
Which Thought did to his Royal Heart appear
More dreadful than the Dangers of the War:
For nothing grates a Generous Mind so soon,
As base Returns for hearty Service done.
I don't believe His present Majesty's Assent was so unforeseen as our Author
would have it; neither can it enter into my thoughts, that his Majesty's
thoughts foretold to him, that we are a fickle, selfish, and unkind sort of
People; since his Majesty would not have thought it worth his while to accept
of the Government of a Kingdom, he foresaw he should be uneasy in; or yield to
the repeated desires of such Petitioners, as would be unthankful for the Grant
of their Request.

Satyr, be silent, awfully prepare
Britannia's Song, and William's Praise to hear.
Stand by, and let her cheerfully rehearse
Her Grateful Vows in her Immortal Verse.
Loud Fame's Eternal Trumpet let her sound;
Listen ye distant Poles, and endless Round.
May the strong Blast the welcome News convey
As far as Sound can reach, or Spirit fly.
To Neighboring Worlds, if such there be, relate
Our Hero's Fame, for theirs to imitate.
To distant Worlds of Spirits let her rehearse:
For Spirits without the helps of Voice converse.
May Angels hear the gladsome News on high,
Mixed with their everlasting Symphony.
And Hell it self stand in suspense to know
Whether it be the Fatal Blast, or no.
That Injunction's well enough! And the Whore, his Satirical Muse, has
exhausted her Magazine of Venom so much, that it is time her Draggle-tail-ship
should have a Holiday for silence. But the Panygerical Lady is the Devil and
all for her part, she cannot Quaver a Note, unless both the Poles give their
Attention, and loud Fame lends her a Trumpet to sound her bombast unmusical
Notes in. As for the Subject's part, it deserves a better hand to undertake it:
And as for the Undertaker, one would think that a worse part might be more fit
for him. However, let us hear what Words he puts in Britannia's Mouth; though
Hell's acquainted with his way of Sounding too well to take it for the last
Fatal Blast.

BRITANNIA.
The Fame of Virtue it is for which I sound,
And Heroes with Immortal Triumphs crowned.
Fame built on solid Virtue swifter flies,
Than Morning Light can spread my Eastern Skies.
The gathering Air returns the doubling Sound,
And loud repeating Thunders force it round:
Echoes return from Caverns of the Deep:
Old Chaos dreams on it in Eternal Sleep.
Time hands it forward to its latest Vrn,
From whence it never, never shall return,
Nothing is heard so far, or lasts so long;
It Is heard by every Ear, and spoke by every Tongue.
The Trumpeter's out of Tune at the first Note; that is, he has no manner of
Music in the first Line, which is discouragement enough to give any farther
attention: But since the Winds, and the Poles, and the Endless Round, wait his
Motions, it will be presumptious in us not to do the same. So -- now it is a
comical sort of a sound indeed -- the Devil-a-bit of any Echo comes from it,
which is the Beauty of Music; it has taken a flight into Old Time's long Ears,
which though they are hollow enough to return any manner of Voice; yet the
Miser is of so greedy a Temper, as to keep it all to himself.

My Hero, with the Sails of Honor furled,
Rises like the Great Genius of the World.
By Pate and Fame wisely prepared to be
The Soul of War, and Life of Victory.
He spreads the Wings of Virtue on the Throne,
And every Wind of Glory fans them on.
Immortal Trophies dwell upon his Brow,
Fresh as the Garlands he has worn but now.
Sweet! The Sails of Honor furled, shows a vast reach of Thought, and an
exuberancy of Fancy! though I know the meaning of it no more than him that
wrote it. But they are Words, and that is enough; for it is uncivil to expect
more, when he is made up of nothing else. Fans them on, too, is a very elegant
Expression; though he does our Great and Good King very little Service by the
Wind he raises for him.

By different Steps the high Ascent he gains,
And differently that high Ascent maintains.
Prime for Pride and Lust of Rule make War,
And struggle for the Name of Conqueror.
Some fight for Fame, and some for Victory.
He Fights to Save, and Conquers to set Free.
All this is to be confessed, and that is a Madman who will not own it, though I
believe His Majesty has those Heroic Virtues in him, as to love the Name of a
Conqueror, at the same time that he sets us Free, since none but a Conqueror
can deserve that Glorious Appellation.

Then seek no Phrase his Titles to conceal,
And bide with Words what Actions must reveal.
No Parallel from Hebrew Stories take,
Of God-like Kings my Similies to make:
No borrowed Names conceal my living Theme;
But Names and Things directly I proclaim.
It Is honest Merit does his Glory raise;
Whom that exalts, let no Man fear to praise.
Of such a Subject no Man need be shy;
Virtue's above the Reach of Flattery.
He needs no Character but his own Fame,
Nor any flattering Titles, but his Name.
If Phrases conceal His Majesty's Titles, it may be taken for granted our
Poetical Man of Prose, or rather our Prosaical Man of Poetry, has published
more than is consistent with the true sense of him. Since to say, he will
directly proclaim Names and Thing of Him, when he takes care to speak very
little of either, is as much as to say, Your Majesty's gracious Favors will be
an Encouragement for me to speak more.

William's the Name that is spoke by every Tongue:
William's the Darling Subject of my Song.
Listen ye Virgins to the Charming Sound,
And in Eternal Dances hand it round:
Your early Offerings to this Altar bring;
Make him at once a Lover and a King.
May he submit to none but to your Arms;
Nor ever be subdued, but by your Charms.
May your soft Thoughts for him be all sublime;
And every tender Vow be made for him.
May he be first in every Morning-thought,
And Heaven never hear a Prayer where he is left out.
May every Omen, every boding Dream,
Be Fortunate by mentioning his Name.
May this one Charm Infernal Powers affright,
And guard you from the Terrors of the Night.
May every cheerful Glass as it goes down
To William's Health, be Cordials to your own.
Let every Song be Chorust with his Name.
And Music pay her Tribute to his Fame.
Let every Poet tune his Artful Verse,
And in Immortal Strains his Deeds rehearse.
And may Apollo never more inspire
The Disobedient Bard with his Seraphick Fire.
May all my Sons their grateful Homage pay;
His Praises sing, and for his Safety pray.
The Reader will infallibly conclude with me, that William is a Name too good
for his hoarse Instrument, that sounds more like a Lancashire Horn-Pipe than a
Trumpet; and that the Virgins may listen to Eternity, and not hear such a thing
come from him as a Charming Sound. But I am amazed to see him turn Pimp, while
he is laboring at the painful Vocation of a Panegyrist, and seek out for
Maidenheads for His Majesty, after having offered up his Wishes that he may be
a Lover as well as a King. How soft Thoughts can be sublime without altering
the property, I confess I am to seek: And the next is the uncharitablest Wish
imaginable, viz. that Heaven should never hear a Prayer where his Name is left
out; since we ought to pray for our Enemies: And some disaffected People who
don't own His present Majesty for their King, without doubt pray for Another.
But this is the most diverting Passage of All, after he has blamed the Men for
taking a Cup so freely, he encourages the Ladies to take a cheerful Glass, and
drink about as a sort of a Cordial for them.

Satyr return to our Unthankful Isle,
Secured by Heaven's Regard, and William's Toil.
To both Ungrateful, and to both Untrue;
Rebels to God, and to Good Nature too.
Saytyr may return, if it pleases; but no body will take notice of its
scandalous Appearance. How we have been either ungrateful or untrue to our King
and Country, may be seen by the large Sums we have advanced for the Service of
both.

If ever this Nation he distressed again,
To whomsoe'er they cry, they will cry in vain.
To Heaven they cannot have the Face to look;
Or if they should, it would but Heaven provoke.
To hope for Help from Man would be too much;
Mankind would always tell 'em of the Dutch:
How they came here our Freedoms to maintain,
Were Paid, and Cursed, and Hurried home again.
How, by their Aid, we first dissolved our Fears,
And then our Helpers damned for Foreigners.
It Is not our English Temper to do better;
For Englishmen think every Man their Debtor.
That is more than he knows; Six hundred thousand pounds is a great deal of
Money; and there are People in the World would jump at it once more, should we
have occasion for their Assistance. And the best Instance that can be thought
on to prevail with any of our Neighbors, will be, that we paid the Dutch
before we sent them home again. As for Abuses upon us for damning them for
Foreigners, 'twas done by Vote of Parliament, and had the King's own Royal
Assent to it; and if he has any thing to remonstrate it, against the Sixth of
February is near at Hand, when he may see what thanks our Senators will give
him, for finding fault with their wise Consulation.

It Is worth observing, that we never complained
Of Foreigners, nor of the Wealth they gained,
Till all their Services were at an End.
Wise men affirm it is the English way,
Never to Grumble till they come to Pay;
And then they always think their Temper's such,
The Work too little, and the Pay too much.
That Observation is a very wrong one, to my Knowledge; for the Dutch were
found fault with some Years before the Peace, though we stood in need of Troops
for our Quota toward the War, and 'twas more advisable to pay Foreigners which
were Veterane Troops, than raise new ones of raw and unexperienced Natives.

As frighted Patients, when they want a Cure,
Bid any Price, and any Pain endure:
But when the Doctor's Remedies appear,
The Cure's too Easy, and the Price too Dear.
We never thought that we paid the Dutch too much, though they were of such an
unsatisfied Temper, as to think it too little; so that his Simile is very
little to the purpose, that relates to the Doctor and his Patients.

Great Portland never was banter'd, when he strove
For Us his Master's kindest Thoughts to move.
We never Lampoom'd his Conduct, when employed
King James's Secret Councils to divide:
Then we caressed him as the only Man,
Which could the Doubtful Oracle explain:
The only Hushia able to repel.
The Dark Designs of our Achitophel.
Compared his Master's Courage to his Sense;
The Ablest Statesman, and the Bravest Prince,
On his Wise Conduct we depended much,
And liked him never the worse for being Dutch,
Nor was he valued more than he deserved;
Freely he ventured, faithfully he served.
In all King William's Dangers he has shared;
In England's Quarrels always he appeared:
The Revolution first, and then the Boyne;
In Both his Counsels and his Conduct shine.
His Martial Valor Flanders will confess;
And France Regrets his Managing the Peace.
Faithful to England's Interest and her King:
The greatest Reason of our Murmuring.
Ten Years in English Service he appeared,
And gained his Master's and the World's Regard:
But it is not England 's Custom to Reward.
The Wars are over, England needs him not;
Now he is a Dutchman, and the Lord knows what.
Great Portland at the time of the Revolution, was plain Mine Here Bentnick, and
Possessed no Place which Englishmen were wont to be Masters of; so that he gave
no occasion of murmuring to a People, who stand mightily upon their
Birthright. And no Body questions but he performed his Embassy in France, with
an Extraordinary Conduct, but we never caressed him as the only Man sit for so
great an Employment; being well satisfied that his Lordship, notwithstanding
his great Abilities, has those who are Natives of this Kingdom, that can equal
him. But I shall never be of the Opinion, that France regrets his managing the
Peace, till what passed between his Lordship, and the Duke de Boufflers, be
made public, which perhaps may lead me into a lower esteem of the French
Politics; and England ( though it is not her Custom to reward) has recompensed
that Noble Peer's Services, by giving his Royal Master such an addition to the
Crown-Revenue, as to enable him to make his Lordship what returns His Majesty
shall think fitting.

Schonbergh, the Ablest Soldier of his Age,
With Great Nassau did in our Cause engage:
Both joined for England's Rescue and Defense;
The Greatest Captain, and the Greatest Prince.
With what Applause his Stories did we tell?
Stories which Europe's Volumes largely swell,
We counted him an Army in our Aid:
Where he commanded, no Man was afraid.
His Actions with a constant Conquest shine,
From Villa-Vitiosa to the Rhine.
France, Flanders, Germany, his Fame confess;
And all the World was fond of him, but Us.
Our Turn first served, we grudged him the Command.
Witness the Grateful Temper of the Land.
If he means the old Marshall de Schonberg, (as certainly he must by what he
relates of him) he is very much in the dark as to his Knowledge; for that
General was never Ill spoken of by the People of England; but deservedly
counted next His Majesty, their support in time of War: Or if he would have us
understand him, as to the Present Duke his Son, and Generalissimo of the Forces
in England, whose Post has chiefly been since the Reduction of Ireland here in
England; and who has been so far from extending his Conquests from
Villa-Vitioso to the Rhine, though without question he has Courage and Conduct
to do it enough, if Opportunity should offer, though I never heard his Grace had
orders to attempt any thing, but the taking Furnes, and Dixmude. Some malicious
People perhaps have spoken disrespectfully of him; but it is so far from being a
natural affront put upon him, that it is nothing else but the Resentments of
some Soldiers under his Command.

We blame the K -- that he relies too much
On Strangers, Germans, Hugonots, and Dutch;
And seldom does his great Affairs of State,
To English Counselors Communicate.
The Fact might very well be answered thus;
He has so often been betrayed by us,
He must have been a Madman to rely
On English G -- ns Fidelity.
For laying other Arguments aside,
This Thought might mortify our English Pride,
That Foreigners have faithfully obeyed him
And none but Englishmen have ever betray him.
They have our Ships and Merchants bought and sold,
And bartered English Blood for Foreign Gold.
First to the French they sold our Turky-Fleet,
And Injured Talmash next at Camaret.
The King himself is sheltered from their Snares,
Not by his Merit, but the Crown he wears.
Experience tell us it is the English way,
Their Benefactors always to betray.
Without doubt His Majesty would find himself more assured of the Hearts, and
Purses of his English Subjects, (if it could be possible) if none but They were
admitted into His Majesty's Council, in relation to English Affairs. For
certainly a reliance on their Fidelity, who have run all Hazards, ventured
their Lives and Fortunes, and every thing that was dear to them for his
Service, would not be improper at a juncture of Time when the Hearts and Purses
of those Subjects may be very necessary. I know of no Englishman in a Place of
Trust that has betrayed Him; ^ut in His Majesty's younger Days in Holland,
there were De Wits who would, had not Providence hind'red their Designs: And as
for the Loss of the Turkey-Fleet, and the brave General Talmash, few Men of
Understanding but know both those unhappy Miscarriages lie at a Country's door,
who have no great Aversion to Herrings and Butter.

And lest Examples should be too remote,
A Modern Magistrate of Famous Note,
Shall give you his own History by Rote.
I Will make it out, deny it he that can,
His Worship is a True-born Englishman,
In all the Latitude that Empty Word
By Modern Acceptation's understood.
The Parish-Books his Great Descent record,
And now he hopes e're long to be a Lord.
And truly as things go, it would be pity
But such as he bore Office in the City:
While Robb'ry for Burnt-Offering he brings,
And gives to God what he has stole from Kings:
Great Monuments of Charity he raises,
And good St. Magnus whistles out his Praises.
To City-Gaols he grants a Jubilee,
And hires Huzza's from his own Mobile.
Lately he wore the Golden Chain and Gown,
With which equipt he thus harangu'd the Town.
If our Author was capable of blushing, he might exert that Faculty now, when
he is going to abuse a Gentleman, whose Name is as Ancient as that of most
Families, and who has advanced his Reputation and his Wealth to such a degree,
that never London-Magistrate acquired such deserved Esteem, during the
Execution of his Office, and never one went out of it with more good Wishes,
and Money, after he had bestowed so much in Charitable Uses. But as these
Calumnies were written on purpose to lessen the Number of those who had
espoused his Party, against the ensuing Election for Members of Parliament for
the City, and the Author of it was in Fee with that scandalous, hypocritical
Sect, that gave Bills out against him: So Sir Charles Duncomb has the less to
be concerned at, from the known Partiality and Inveteracy of those that are his
Enemies; and may stand secured of those Rewards for his Good Works, which no
Hireling-Scribler can detract from; and which shall deduce his Name to
Posterity, when such a Fellow as the Author represents himself to be, shall not
be known so much as to have been born.

Sir C -- -- s D -- -- b's Fine Speech, etc.
WIth Clouted Iron Shoes and Sheepskin Breeches,
More Rags than Manners, and more Dirt than Riches:
From driving Cows and Calves to Layton-Market,
While of my Greatness there appeared no Spark yet,
Behold I come, to let you see the Pride
With which Exalted Beggars always ride.
It Is well known to all People, who have any knowledge of the Gentleman he
insolently spits his Venom at, that his Father had not wherewithal to educate
him, as his sprightly Genius deserved; yet he was so far from making him a
Cow-Driver, which sort of People are seldom thought to write and read, that he
had all the Education necessary for one who being born to no great Matters of
Possession, was one day to launch out into the World to make his Fortune.

Born to the Needful Labors of the Plough,
The Cart-Whip grace't me as the Chain does now.
Nature and Fate in doubt what course to take,
Whether I should a Lord or Plough-Boy make;
Kindly at last resolved they would promote me,
And first a Knave, and then a Knight they vote me.
What Fate appointed, Nature did prepare,
And furnishd me with an exceeding Care.
To fit me for what they designed to have me;
And every Gift but Honesty they gave me.
Liars, they say, ought to have good Memories, and the Poet should have
bethought himself of his making Sir Charles a Cow-driver in the preceding
Paragraph, before he made him a Carter in this; else he must never expect the
Character of a Man of exceeding Care, which he has given a Person that deserves
it without an Irony.

And thus Equipt, to this Proud Town I came,
In quest of Bread, and not in quest of Fame.
Blind to my future Fate, an humble Boy,
Free from the Guilt and Glory I enjoy.
The Hopes which my Ambition entertained,
Were in the Name of Footboy all contained.
The Greatest Heights from Small Beginnings rise;
The Gods were Great on Earth, before they reached the Skies.
If he had not been Equipped otherwise than our Author would have him, and been
furnished with Honesty which all Persons, who have had any dealing him are
ready to testify, yet even then he had exceeded him that makes his Speech for
him, and all his fancied Acquirements. And if to come up to Town in order to
advance his Fortunes, may fall under the diminutive way of Business, that Men
follow who are in Quest of Bread then every Clergyman, Physician, and Person of
other Creditable Callings may fall under the same imputation.

B -- -well, the Generous Temper of whose Mind,
Was always to be bountiful inclined:
Whether by his Ill Fate or Fancy led,
First took me up, and furnished me with Bread.
The little Services he put me to,
Seemed Labors rather than were truly so.
But always my Advancement be designed;
For it was his very Nature to be kind.
Large was his Soul, his Temper ever Free;
The best of Masters and of Men to me.
And I who was before decreed by Fate,
To be made Infamous as well as Great,
With an obsequious Diligence obeyed him,
Till trusted with his All, and then betrayed him.
Sir Charles D -- mb has often made appear, that he was never ungrateful for
the Kindnesses he received of Alderman Backwell, and is ready to own him now in
the midst of his Prosperity, for the first, and some occasion of his rising in
the World. And if the Alderman was His Master (as possibly he might, though not
in the low Station the Poetaster fixes him in) it is a sign he was an Excellent
and Faithful Servant, or a Man of that Famous Banker's Penetrancy of Judgment,
and cautious way of Proceeding, would never have trusted him with his All.

All his past Kindesses I trampled on,
Ruined his Fortunes to erect my own.
So Vipers in the Bosom bred, begin
To hiss at that Hand first which took them in.
With eager Treach'ry I his Fall pursued,
And my first Trophies were Ingratitude.
If he had ruined his Fortunes, the Son of that Honest and unhappy Bankrupt
would have shown his Resentments for it. But Mr. B -- -- -- ll who is now
living, is satisfied of other things, and none at this time has a greater
respect for Sir Charles D -- -mb, and visits him oftener in the Country upon all
Occasions.

Ingratitude's the worst of Human Guilt,
The basest Action Mankind can commit;
Which like the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
Has least of Honor, and of Guilt the most.
Distinguished from all other Crimes but this,
That it is a Crime which no Man would confess.
That Sin alone, which should not be forgiven
On Earth, although perhaps it may in Heaven.
We have nothing to urge in defense of the Sin of Ingratitude, or to speak in
behalf of any Person who is guilty of it; but when it is applied to a Gentleman
who has it not in his Temper to Reward Good with Evil, we should be guilty of
the Sin our selves, should we not stand up in his Vindication. The Sin against
the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, and is the highest Offense any Human Being can
commit; but he makes a Comparison between it and Ingratitude which is Venial
with God and Man, which shows he does not rightly understand the Nature of the
Crime he writes about.

Thus my first Benefactor I o'rethrew;
And how should I be to a second true?
The Public Trust came next into my Care,
And I to use them scurvily prepare:
My Needy Sovereign Lord I played upon,
And Lent him many a Thousand of his own;
For which, great Interest I took care to Charge,
And so my Ill-got Wealth became so large.
That is as much as to say he Broke the Alderman's Back by not holding it; when
it is apparently true King Charles the 2d's shutting up the Exchequer was the
Cause of it; and he had never been forced out of his Native Country by his
Creditors, had not his Faithful Services been overbalanc'd by the Treachery of
some Persons who managed his then Sovereign's Treasury. I believe the Author is
no great Conjurer of a Grammarian by making the word Them which is of the
Plural Number, agree with Public Trust, which is certainly the Singular; but
to take notice of his Faults and Incoherences that way, would Employ us too
much; and it is so well known that when Sir Charles farmed one of the Crown
Revenues, no Person that ever managed a Place of Trust, behaved himself more to
the Satisfaction of his King and Country than himself.

My Predecessor Judas was a Fool,
Fitter to have been whipped and sent to School,
Than Sell a Savior: had I been at hand,
His Master had not been so Cheap Trepanned;
I would have made the eager Jews have found,
For Thirty Pieces, Thirty thousand Pound.
This is a High Rant indeed! The Poet might have as well Compared himself to
one of the most Faithful among the Apostles, as the Gentleman whose good Name
he takes such Liberty with, to the most Faithless.

My Cousin Ziba, of Immortal Fame,
(Ziba and I shall never want a Name:)
Firstborn of Treason, nobly did advance
His Master's Fall for his Inheritance.
By whose keen Arts old David first began
To break his Sacred Oath to Jonathan:
The Good Old King, it is thought, was very loath
To break his Word, and therefore broke his Oath.
Ziba's a Traitor of some Quality,
Yet Ziba might have been informed by me:
Had I been there, he never had been content
With half the Estate, nor half the Government.
The Person whom he rail's at under the Name of Ziba, has so signalized himself
in his Services to the English Government, that his envious Reflections on him,
return upon himself; and without doubt if the King was loath to break his Word,
he would have had some scruple at breaking his Oath, since Perjury is a Crime
infinitely greater, than the Breach of a Promise.

In our late Revolution 'twas thought strange,
That I of all mankind should like the Change:
But they who wonder^d at it, never knew,
That in it I did my Old Game pursue:
Nor had they heard of Twenty thousand Pound,
Which never was lost, yet never could be found
The Report this Paragraph is grounded upon, is as false as Hell, and Sir
Charles was so far from getting such a large Sum by the Revolution, that it is
well known to some Persons who are more Acquainted with him than the Author, he
lost considerably by several belonging to the Court of St. Germains. Yet he
Valued the Interest of the Country he was born in, more than his own, and
Rejoiced at his present Majesty's Accession to the Throne, purely out of a
Principle of Love to the Kingdom, not because he had outwitted the King.

Thus all things in their turn to Sale I bring,
God and my Master first and then the King
Till by successful Villainies made bold,
I thought to turn the Nation into Gold;
And so to Forg -- y my Hand I bent,
Not doubting I could gull the Government;
But there was ruffl'd by the Parliament.
And if I 'scap'd the Unhappy Tree to climb,
'Twas want of Law, and not for want of Crime.
The very Vote of the House of Commons, which has been Printed by his Enemies
to hinder his Election in the City speaks otherwise; and though there were not a
few who gaped more after his large Possessions than the good of their Fellow
Subjects, the Wisdom of the Parliament thought fit to drop the Pursuit of the
Matter, notwithstanding an Enemy of his who was against Reassumptions, and is
now above being a Member of the House, pushed on the Matter in Dispute as far
as possible. And if such a Crime as Forgery could have been proved against him,
there was Law enough at that time in Force against him, and they would scarce
have put Themselves to the trouble of Voting for a new Act of Parliament for
him.

But my The Devil.
Old Friend, who printed in my Face
A needful Competence of English Brass,
Having more business yet for me to do,
And loath to lose his Trusty Servant so,
Managed the matter with such Art and Skill,
As saved his Hero, and threw out the B -- l.
If the Devil stood Sir Charles's Friend, and hindered the Bill from passing;
the Parliament of Consequence must have been influenced by him. Which is a very
disrespectful Reflection on so venerable an Assembly.

And now I Am graced with unexpected Honors,
For which I Will certainly abuse the Donors:
Knighted and made a Tribune of the People,
Whose Laws and Properties I Am like to keep well:
The Custos Rotulorum of the City,
And Captain of the Guards of their Banditti.
Surrounded by my Catchpoles, I declare
Against the Needy Debtor open War.
I hang poor Thieves for stealing of your Pelf,
And suffer none to rob you but my self.
Sir Charles no more made an Interest to be dubbed a Knight, than he did to be
made a Sheriff; but since it was His Majesty's and the Cities Pleasure, that he
should have those unexpected Honors conferred on him, he was ready to do what
lay in his Power for the Service of both. Though he was so far from declaring War
against Needy Debtors, that he made even their Enemies to be at Peace with 'em,
and reconciled their Creditors to 'em, by assisting those that were Insolvent.

The King commanded me to help Reform ye,
And how I Will do it Miss -- -- - shall inform ye.
I keep the best Seraglio in the Nation,
And hope in time to bring it into Fashion.
No Brimstone-Whore need fear the Lash from me,
That part I Will leave to Brother Jeffery.
Our Gallants need not go abroad to Rome,
I Will keep a Whoring Jubilee at home.
Whoring's the Darling of my Inclination;
A'n't I a Magistrate for Reformation?
For this my Praise is sung by every Bard,
For which Bridewell would be a just Reward.
In Print my Panegyricks fill the Street,
And hired Goal-birds their Huzza's repeat.
Some Charities contrived to make a show,
Have taught the Needy Rabble to do so:
Whose empty Noise is a Mechanic Fame,
Since for Sir Beelzebub they would do the same
Our Author who has it not in his Nature to be tender of any ones Reputation,
would have given us the Name of the Lady as he has done that of the Knight,
were there any thing of Truth in what he Affirms. But he knows so little of the
Matter, that he cannot so much as give us the first Letter of her Name, an
infallible Argument of his insufficiency in Matters of Proof. If Bridewell be
the Reward of those that Cry up the Great Actions of Worthy Persons, Newgate
certainly should be the place of Residence for those that publish their Praises
on the Unworthy. And though I scarce believe any of the first will be sent to
beat Hemp, yet if common Discourse be not false, one of the last is likely to
be sent to the Chequer Inn in Newgate street, if Captain Darby in St.
Martins-Lane be taken up by a Messenger, as it is reported.

The Conclusion.
THen let us boast of Ancestors no more,
Or Deeds of Heroes done in days of Yore,
In latent Records of the Ages past,
Behind the Rear of Time, in long Oblivion placed.
For if our Virtues must in Lines descend,
The Merit with the Families would end:
And Intermixtures would most Fatal grow;
For Vice would be Hereditary too;
The Tainted Blood would of necessity,
Involuntary Wickedness convey.
The Conclusion bears very little proportion to the Premises, for the Close of
the Poem is filled with a Libel against Sir Charles Duncomb only, who is so far
from boasting of his Ancestors, that he is very ready to acknowledge he did not
come into the World with that Advantage as some do. If he did actually value
himself on the Account of his Descent; what Relation does that bear to the
Nation in General? Or what Plea has the Author to Justify himself with, for
Taxing above two Millions of People with a Folly which he only charged one in
particular with.

Vice like Ill Nature, for an Age or two,
May seem a Generation to pursue;
But Virtue seldom does regard the Breed;
Fools do the Wise, and Wise Men Fools succeed.
Ill Nature is certainly a Vice, therefore the Consequence of his Simile is,
that Vice is like Vice, which every one knew before. And if Virtue does not
regard the Breed, I am inclinable to think he deserves no manner of Excuse, for
making Vice an Attendant of it, and tainting the whole English Posterity with
the Baseness of their Forefathers: Since a Love of Virtue without doubt has as
much prevalence, and run's in the Blood, as an Inclination toward Actions that
are Vicious. --

What is it to us, what Ancestors we had?
If Good, what better? Or what worse, if Bad?
Examples are for Imitation set,
Yet all Men follow Virtue with Regret.
That question is resolved without any Difficulty, for if our Ancestors were
good, than the remembrance of their Brave Actions would excite us to tread in
the same Paths of Honor; if Bad, the Reflections on their dishonorable
Practices would create in us a Detestation of Vice, and make us endeavor to
degenerate from 'em.

Could but our Ancestors retrieve their Fate,
And see their Offspring thus degenerate;
How we contend for Birth and Names unknown,
And build on their past Actions, not our own;
They Would cancel Records; and their Tombs deface,
And openly disown the vile degenerate Race:
For Fame of Families is all a Cheat,
It Is Personal Virtue only makes us great.
This Paragraph seems to contradict the main Design of all that went before;
for the Intent of the Satyr was to render our Ancestors Infamous, but now he
says we Degenerate from 'em, which in plain English is, we do nothing that is
not Praise worthy. A^ I am glad to hear from him that Personal Virtue ^^ly
makes us Great, since he is likely to go without any great Stock of Fame, who
has so little Virtue to Truck for it by way of Exchange. For if he has as small
a share of Honesty, as he has shown of good Nature, through his whole
lamentable piece of Poetry; he may more properly be styled a Bankrupt, than a
Dealer in that sort of Commodity.

FINIS.

