AN ELEGY WRITTEN AMONG THE RUINS OF AN ABBEY. By the AUTHOR of the NUN.

LONDON: Printed for J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall.

MDCCLXV.

[Price Six Pence.]

AN ELEGY.
WHERE sighs the Zephyr to yon lonely Tree,
A solemn Grove its leafy Mantle spread:
Where bend yon mouldering Turrets over the Sea,
A venerable Dome once reared ^ts Head.
The solemn Grove, the venerable Dome,
Were erst frequented by a numerous Train,
Even chaste as they who Dian's Mountain roam,
But not subjected to her gentle Reign:
Far other Goddess did this Train obey,
Far other Temples, other Altars raised,
Far other Meaning breathed their Choral Lay,
Far other Incense on their Altars blazed:
Veiled Superstition waked her magic Sound,
Bad Albion's Sons forsake the splendid Court,
Forsake Amusement's variegated Round,
And to her ^able Standard here resort:
Alas! obsequious to her stern Command,
A sullen-pensive Brotherhood they came,
Refused to trace the Paths by Nature plan'd,
And razed from Glory's Page their ancient Name.
Nor these alone were found incloister'd here,
Here also dwelt the simple-minded Swain,
Who wrapped in Sloth dreamed out the lazy Year,
'While Industry sat weeping on the Plain.'
The many Temples rising fair to view,
Which towering Superstition called her own,
With Hand unerring radiant Truth o'erthrew,
And snatched the Impostor from her tinsel'd Throne:
On yon Dust-level'd Spire the crafty Maid,
With Indignation brooding in her Breast
Sits gloomily -- Her Vot'ries all are fled,
Her Lamps extinguished, and her Rites suppressed:
Within her Hand a vacant String she holds
That one connected many a hallowed Bead:
The blotted Scroll the other Hand unfolds,
Contains the Maxims of her slighted Creed:
Couched at her Feet, behold a mouldering Shrine
(Of various Relics once the dread Abode)
Where runs the Spider over his treacherous Line,
Where lurks the Beetle, and the loathsome Toad:
On Darkness' wing now sails the midnight Hour,
When for the grateful Sound of choral Prayer,
The shrieking Owl from yon disparted Tower,
With Notes of Horror wakes her trembling Ear.
Of human Grandeur mark the fleeting Day,
How frail each Purpose, and each Wish how vain!
The strong-built Domes, the cloistered Fanes decay,
And Ruin hovers round the desert Scene.
The Path that leads to yonder shattered Pile
Is now perplexed with many a sordid Brier:
No Crowd is seen within the sacred Isle,
The Sabbath mourns its long-deserted Quire.
The golden Crozier blended with the Dust
In horrid Folds the Serpent clasps around:
The powerful Image, and the sainted Bust,
Defamed, unhallowed, press the weedy Ground.
Not distant far, her gold-encircled Tower
The inviolable Dome majestic reared,
On whose dread Altar breathed some hidden Power,
By Terror guarded, and by Kings revered:
To which Asylum even the Assassin came,
(His Hand audacious still imbrued with Gore)
The Boon of full Impunity to claim,
While feeble Justice wept her baffled Lore.
So Truth at length dissolved the mental Chain,
And banished Error from the enlightened Shore:
So closed at length the busy-acted Scene,
The Curtain dropped, and Folly's Mask was over.
Then gladsome Ceres raised her drooping Head,
(While yellow Harvests gilt the smiling Plain)
Beheld a youthful Band around her spread,
With Sickles armed to reap the bearded Grain.
The Warrior then beneath the trailing Vest,
The peaceful Cassock, or the drowsy Cowl,
No longer quenched the Flame within his Breast,
Or lulled the Purpose of his daring Soul:
But rushed undaunted to the doubtful War,
Pursued where Glory led the radiant Way,
Till Neptune rising on his coral Car,
Resigned his watery World to Britain's Sway.
The Virgin Fair by venal Guardians doomed,
By Error prompted, or subdued by Force,
No more in Cloisters drear their Days consumed:
Like Flowerets strewn around the senseless Corse.
Triumphant Hymen hailed the blissful Hour,
And saw a white-rob'd social Train approach,
For whom the Pleasures dressed the happy Bower,
And scattered Roses over the destined Couch.
Still other Blessings from this Change appeared,
No injured Family did then behold
On loit'ring Monks its native Wealth conferred,
Nor spacious Altars covered with its Gold.
Full many trod that crooked Path to Fame,
Yet from her Hand received no lasting Meed,
She from her Annals rends their fading Name,
And gives to Infamy the worthless Deed:
But Vengeance some pursued with dire Disgrace,
Pursued beyond the Circle of its Sphere,
Even to the Cemetery's dark Recess,
Nor spared them sleeping on the peaceful Bier:
Beside the spreading of that sombrous Yew,
Where yawns with hideous Chasm the vaulted Cave,
Presenting to the fixed astonished View,
The Profanation of a rifled Grave:
The large-endowing Rufus lay inurn'd
With many a sculptured Image on his Shrine,
That smit with Sorrow over his Ashes mourned,
The Sister-Graces and the tuneful Nine.
Imprinted on Tradition's storied Leaf
Is found (to this sepulchral Spot confined)
A Terror-breathing Tale that wins Belief,
And often repeated by the neighb^ring ^ind!
From where yon Mountain shades the dreary Pla^
Attracted by the Scent of human Blood,
A Troop of Wolves voracious scoured amain,
And at this Charnel Vault required their Food:
When, horrid to relate! they burst the Tomb,
And swift descending to the deepest Shade,
Up-tore the shrouded Tenant from its Womb,
And over the mangled Corse relentless preyed.
The paly Stars with dim reluctant Light,
Like Tapers glimmer'd on their Orgies foul,
While gliding Specter scream'd with wild Affright,
Re-echo'd loud by their tremendous Howl.
Ah! what availed the solemn-moving Hearse?
The sabled-mantled Cars, the Funeral Throng?
Engraved on his Monument the soothing Verse?
The Priests, the Torches, and the choral Song?
Misjudging Wretch! while thou with Hand profuse,
Thy Treasures on this Mansion did entail,
And pour down Riches on the vowed Recluse,
Thine Orphan Babes partook a scanty Meal:
Thy widowed Fair, her Cheek bedewed with Tears,
Approached with suppliant Knee the Cloister-Gate,
There often disclosed in vain, her poignant Cares,
Returning still to weep her haploso Fate.
FINIS.

