Mr. CONGREVE's Last Will and Testament, WITH CHARACTERS OF HIS WRITINGS.

BY Mr. DRYDEN, Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE, Mr. ADDISON and Major PACK.

To which are added, Two Pieces, viz. I. Of rightly Improving the present Time.
An Epistle from Mr. CONGREVE to the Right Honorable RICHARD Lord Viscount
COBHAM. II. The GAME of QUADRILLE. An ALLEGORY.


LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL in the Strand, 1729. (Price One Shilling.)

A TRUE COPY OF THE Last Will and Testament of William Congreve, Esquire
E' Registro Curiae Praerogat. Cantuar. Extract.

In the Name of God, Amen.
THIS is the last Will of me William Congreve, of the Parish of St.
Clement-Danes, Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire made the
twenty-sixth Day of February, Anno Dom. 1725; And first I desire, and direct,
that my Funeral shall be privately performed, without the least Ostentation,
and the Place where, I refer to my Executor to appoint.

I give to the several Persons herein after named, the respective Legacies
following (that is to say) To * * * * * * * * * * Sic Orig.
my Intention is, that the following Legacies be given to the respective
Persons herein named, as if they were inserted in the blank Space left in this
Will for that purpose.

IMPRIMIS, I give and bequeath to Anne Jellet, twenty Pounds a Year during her
Life.

Item, To William Congreve, Son of Colonel William Congreve of Highgate, and my
Godson, three hundred Pounds.

To Mrs. Anne Congreve, Daughter to my late Kinsman Colonel Ralph Congreve of
Clarges-street, two hundred Pounds.

To Mrs. Anne Bracegirdle, of Howard-street, two hundred Pounds.

To Mrs. Francis Porter, fifty Pounds.

Item, To Mrs. Deborah Rooke, one hundred Pounds, with all my Linen and
Apparel; for other less Legacies, I leave them as specified in a Codicil
enclosed in the Duplicate of this Will, and left in the Custody of the Duchess
of Marlborough * * * * * * * Sic Orig.


ALL the Rest and Residue of my Estate, the same consisting in personal Things
only (not having any Lands, or other real Estate) I give and bequeath to the
Duchess of Marlborough, the now Wife of Francis Earl of Godolphin in the
County of Cornwall; but not so as to vest in him the said Earl of Godolphin,
the equitable Right and Interest of such Rest and Residue, but that the same
and every Part thereof; and the Interest, Produce, and Benefit thereof; shall
and may, at all times, from and after my Decease, be had and received by her
the said Duchess, namely, Henrietta, Duchess of Marlborough, to her sole and
separate Use, and wherewith her said Husband, or any after-taken Husband, of
her the said Duchess of Marlborough, shall not intermeddle, or have any
controuling Power over, nor shall the said Rest and Residue, or the Interest
and Produce thereof, be liable to the Debts and Encumbrances of the said Earl
of Godolphin, or of any after-taken Husband, of her the said Duchess of
Marlborough, in any wise; but shall be had and received, issued and paid, as
she the said Duchess of Marlborough, shall by writing under her Hand, from
time to time direct and appoint; and her own Acquittance shall be a sufficient
discharge for all, or any Part of the Estate so given to her as aforesaid. And
in Confidence of the Honesty and Justice of him the said Francis Earl of
Godolphin, I do hereby constitute and appoint him, the sole Executor of this my
Will, in Trust, for his said Wife, as aforesaid. In Witness whereof, I have
hereunto subscribed my Name, and set my Seal, the Day and Year aforesaid.

William Congreve (L. S.)

Signed, sealed, and declared by the, said William Congreve Testator, to be his
last Will, in the Presence of Us, TIMO. KIPLIN, THOMAS SWAN.


THE Duplicate WILL and CODICIL.
In the Name of God, Amen.
THIS is the last Will of me William Congreve, of the Parish of St.
Clement-Danes, Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire made the
twenty-sixth of February, Anno Dom. 1725. And first I desire and direct, that
my Funeral shall be privately performed without the least Ostentation, and the
Place where, I refer to my Executor to appoint. I give to the several Persons
herein after-named, the respective Legacies following (that is to say) To * * *
* * * * * * Sic Orig.


Legacies intended to be inserted in the blank Space of this Will, and which I
desire may be paid, though any Thing should prevent my inserting them with my own
Hand, in Manner as I have filled up the other Blanks in the same.

IMPRIMIS, To Anne Jellet, twenty Pounds a Year for her Life.

Item, To my Godson William Congreve, Son of Colonel William Congreve of
Highgate, three hundred Pounds.

Item, To Anne Congreve, Daughter of the late Colonel Ralph Congreve of
Clarges-street, two hundred Pounds.

Item, To Mrs. Anne Congreve, Her Mother, and to Colonel William Congreve of
Highgate, each twenty Pounds.

Item, To Mrs. Anne Bracegirdle of Howard-street, two hundred Pounds.

Item, To Mrs. Deborah Rook, one hundred Pounds, and all my wearing Apparel and
Linen of all Sorts.

Item, To Mrs. Francis Porter, fifty Pounds.

Item, To Peter Walter, Esquire of St. Margaret Westminster, twenty Pounds.

Item, To Richard Lord Viscount Cobham, and Richard Lord Viscount Shannon,
twenty Pounds each.

Item, To Charles Mein, Esquire and Mr. Edward Porter, and Mr. Joshua White, twelve
Pounds each.

Item, To her Grace Henrietta Duchess of Newcastle, I give and bequeath the
Duchess of Marlborough's Picture, by Kneller.

Item, To the Lady Mary Godolphin, youngest Daughter to the Duchess of
Marlborough, I give and bequeath her Mother's Picture Enamelled, in Miniature,
together with my white Brilliant Diamond Ring.

Item, To Colonel Charles Churchill, twenty Pounds, together with my
Gold-headed Cane.

Item, To all and each of my Domestic Servants, a Year's Wages, and proper
Mourning.

Item, To the Poor of the Parish, ten Pounds.

ALL the Rest and Residue of my Estate, the same consisting in personal Things
only (not having any Lands, or other real Estate) I give and bequeath to
Henrietta, Duchess of Marlborough, the now Wife of Francis Earl of Godolphin
in the County of Cornwall; but not so as to vest in him the said Earl of
Godolphin, the equitable Right and Interest of such Rest and Residue, but that
the same and every Part thereof; and the Interest, Produce, and Benefit
thereof; shall and may, at all times, from and after my Decease, be had and
received by her the said Duchess of Marlborough, to her sole and separate Use,
and wherewith her said Husband, or any aftertaken Husband, of her the said
Duchess of Marlborough, shall not intermeddle, or have any controuling Power
over, nor shall the said Rest and Residue, or the Interest and Produce thereof,
be liable to the Debts and Encumbrances of the said Earl of Godolphin, or of
any after-taken Husband, of her the said Duchess of Marlborough, in any wise;
but shall be had and received, issued and paid, as she the said Duchess of
Marlborough, shall by writing under her Hand, from time to time direct and
appoint; and her own Acquittance shall be a sufficient Discharge for all, or
any Part of the Estate so given to her as aforesaid. And in Confidence of the
Honesty and Justice of him the said Francis Earl of Godolphin, I do hereby
constitute and appoint him, the sole Executor of this my Will in Trust, for his
said Wife as aforesaid. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my Name,
and set my Seal, the Day and Year aforesaid.

William Congreve, (L. S.)

Signed, sealed, and declared by the, said William Congreve the Testator, to be
his last Will, in the Presence of Us, WILLIAM HUMPSTONE, GEORGE THORPE,
JONATHAN WHITE.


WHEREAS I William Congreve, did by my last Will and Testament, bearing Date
the sixth Day of February 1725; affix a Schedule of Legacies, written in my own
Hand, over a blank Space left for that Purpose in the said Will; I do hereby
revoke and annual those Legacies, excepting such as are bequeathed to Persons
related to me, and bearing my own Hand; as also what is therein bequeathed to
Mrs. Anne Jellet, and Mrs. Anne Bracegirdle; which said Legacies, I do hereby
confirm, and do hereby revoke and annul, all other Legacies therein mentioned,
or in the Counter-part of the said Will, more at large set down; which
Counter-part is by me left in Custody of her Grace, Henrietta, Duchess of
Marlborough, my sole Executrix, as is specified in the said Will and
Counter-part thereof; be it understood, that my Intention is by this Writing to
revoke those Legacies, not herein confirmed as abovementioned, in such manner
only as to leave them absolutely in the Power and Determination of the
abovenamed Henrietta Duchess of Marlborough, my sole Executrix, either to pay,
or refuse to pay to them, to take from them, or add to them, as she shall judge
the Persons therein named, especially my Domestic Servants, therein mentioned,
or not mentioned, may have merited of me,

William Congreve, (L. S.)

Signed and sealed, in Presence of, JOSEPH LEE. WILLIAM HUMPSTONE.


PROBATUM Londini cum quatuor Codicillis sive schedulis testamentis, annex:
tertio Die Mensis Februarij 1728. Coram venli viro Georgio Paul, legum Doctore
surrog: etc. Jurato prenobilis, and honli viri Francisci Comitis: de Godolphin,
Extris unici, etc. Cui, etc. De been and Jurat. Lata prius sententia definitiva
pro valor, and validitate dicti testamenti prout, ex actis curiae liquet.

LINTHWAITE FARRANT, Registrar: Deputat: Assumpt.

Mr. CONGREVE died about five o'Clock, on Sunday Morning, January the 19th
1728-9, at his House in Surrey-street in the Strand, in the 57th Year of his
Age; and on the Sunday following, January 26th, his Corpse lay in State in the
Jerusalem Chamber; from whence, the same Evening, between the Hours of Nine and
Ten, it was carried, with great Decency and Solemnity, into King HENRY the
VIIth's Chapel in Westminster-Abbey, and Interred near the late Earl of
Godolphin. The PALL was supported by, I. the Duke of Bridgewater. II. Earl of
Godolphin. III. Lord Cobham. IV. Lord Wilmington. V. The Honorable George
Berkeley, Esquire VI. BrigadierGeneral Churchill. And Colonel Congreve followed the
Corpse as Chief Mourner.

CHARACTERS OF Mr. CONGREVE.
IN easy Dialogue is FLETCHER's Praise:
He moved the Soul, but had not Power to raise.
Great JOHNSON did by Strength of Judgment please,
Yet doubling FLETCHER 's Force, he wants his Ease:
In differing Talents, Both adorned their Age;
One for the Study, the other for the Stage.
But Both to CONGREVE justly shall submit,
ONE matched in Judgment, BOTH o'er-match'd in Wit.
In Him, All Beauties of this Age we see;
ETHEREGE 's Courtship, SOUTHERN 's Purity;
The Satire, Wit, and Strength, of manly WYCHERLEY.
DRYDEN. Mr. Addison's Character OF THE Old BACHELOR. See, The TATLER, No 9.

IN the Character which gives Name to this Play, there is excellently
represented the Reluctance of a battered Debauchee to come into the Trammels of
Order and Decency: He neither languishes, nor burns, but frets for Love. The
Gentlemen of more regular Behavior, are drawn with much Spirit and Wit; and
the Drama introduced by the Dialogue of the first Scene, with uncommon, yet
natural Conversation. The Part of Fondlewife is a lively Image of the
unseasonable Fondness of Age and Impotence.

Sir Richard Blackmore's CHARACTER OF THE Mourning Bride. See, His Preface to
Prince ARTHUR, Fol. 1697.

THIS Poem has received, and in my Opinion, very justly, universal Applause;
being looked on as the most perfect Tragedy that has been wrote in this Age.
The Fable, as far as I can judge at first Sight, is a very artful and masterly
Contrivance; the Characters are well chosen and well delineated; that of ZARA
is admirable. The Passions are well touched, and skilfully wrought up. The
Diction, proper, clear, beautiful, noble, and diversified agreeably to the
Variety of the Subject. Vice, as it ought to be, is punished; and
oppressed-Innocence at last rewarded. Nature appears very happily imitated
(excepting one or two doubtful Instances) through the whole Piece; in which there
are no immodest Images or Expressions; no wild unnatural Rants, but (some
Exceptions being allowed) all Things are chaste, just, and decent.

This Tragedy, as I said before, has mightily obtained, and that without the
unnatural and foolish Mixture of Force and Buffoonery; without so much as a
Song, or a Dance, to make it more agreeable. By this it appears, that as a
sufficient Genius can recommend itself, and furnish out abundant Matter of
Pleasure and Admiration, without the paultry Helps above named; so likewise,
that the Taste of the Nation is not so far depraved, but that a regular and
chaste Play will not only be forgiven, but highly applauded.

Major PACK's SENTIMENTS IN His Essay on Study.
CONGREVE of all the Moderns, seems to me, to have the rightest Turn for
Comedy. In all his Plays there is a great deal of lively and uncommon Humor,
and such as yet, for the most Part, is a Picture of true Life. Besides, he has
raised the Vein of Ridicule, and made the STAGE, which had been too much
prostituted to the Mob, edifying to Persons of the first Condition. And as his
Fable is Diverting, so is it wrought according to the strictest Rules.

The following EPISTLE, Of rightly improving the present Time, written to Lord
Cobham, is here printed from a Manuscript of the Author, with which I was
obliged by a Person of the first Rank: The Public having been notoriously
abused, by a very erroneous Copy, surreptitiously obtained, by one LEWIS in
Covent Garden, and vended under the Cover of A. DODD, and E. NUTT.

VERSES To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Cobham.
Of Improving the present Time.
SINCEREST Critic of my Prose, or Rhyme,
Tell how thy pleasing STOWE The Name of his Lordship's SEAT in Buckinghamshire.
employs thy Time.
Say, COBHAM, what amuses thy Retreat?
Or Stratagems of War, or Schemes of State?
Do thou recall to Mind with Joy, or Grief,
Great MARLBRO's Actions? That immortal Chief,
Whose slightest Trophy raised in each Campaign,
More than sufficed to signalize a Reign?
Does thy Remembrance rising warm thy Heart,
With Glory past, where Thou thy self had Part,
Or do thou grieve indignant, now to see,
The fruitless End of all thy Victory?
To see the Audacious Foe, so late subdued,
Dispute those Terms for which so long they su'd,
As if BRITANNIA now were sunk so low,
To beg that PEACE she wonted to bestow,
Be far that Guilt! be never known that Shame!
That ENGLAND should retract her rightful Claim,
Or ceasing to be dreaded and adored,
Stain with her Pen the Luster of her Sword.
Or do thou give the Winds a-far to blow,
Each vexing-Thought, and Heart-devouring Woe,
And fix thy Mind alone on rural Scenes,
To turn the levelled Lawns to liquid Plains,
To raise the creeping Rills from humble Beds,
And force the latent Springs to lift their Heads,
On watery Columns, Capitals to rear,
That mix their flowing Curls with upper Air.
Or do Thou, weary grown, these Works neglect,
No Temples, Statues, Obelisks erect,
But catch the morning Breeze from fragrant Meads,
Or shun the Noontide Ray in wholesome Shades,
Or slowly walk, along the mazy Wood,
To meditate on all that is wise and good,
For Nature bountiful, in Thee has joined,
A Person pleasing with a worthy Mind,
Not given the Form alone, but Means, and Art,
To draw the Eye, or to allure the Heart.
Poor were the Praise in Fortune to excel,
Yet want the Way to use that Fortune well.
While thus adorned, while thus with Virtue crowned,
At Home, in Peace; Abroad, in Arms renowned;
Graceful in Form, and winning in Address,
While well you think, what aptly you express,
With Health, with Honor, with a fair Estate,
A Table free, and elegantly neat.
What can be added more to mortal Bliss?
What can he want that stands possessed of This?
What can the fondest wishing Mother more,
Of Heaven attentive for her Son implore?
And yet a Happiness remains unknown,
Or to Philosophy revealed alone;
A Precept, which unpracticed renders vain,
Thy flowing Hopes, and Pleasure turns to Pain.
Should Hope, and Fear thy Heart alternate tear,
Or Love, or Hate, or Rage, or anxious Care,
Whatever Passions may thy Mind infest,
(Where is that Mind which Passions never molest?)
Amidst the Pangs of such intestine Strife,
Still think the PRESENT DAY, the LAST of LIFE;
Defer not till to Morrow to be Wise,
To Morrow's SUN, to Thee may never rise.
Or should to Morrow chance to cheer thy Sight,
With her enlivening and unlookt-for Light,
How grateful will appear her dawning Rays!
As Favors unexpected doubly please.
Who thus can think, and who such Thoughts pursues,
Content may keep his Life, or calmly lose;
All Proofs of this Thou may thy self receive,
When Leisure from Affairs will give thee Leave.
Come, see thy Friend, retired without Regret,
Forgetting Care, or striving to forget;
In easy Contemplation soothing Time
With Morals much, and now and then with Rhyme,
Not so robust in Body, as in Mind,
And always undejected, though declined;
Not wondering at the World's new wicked Ways,
Compared with those of our Forefathers Days,
For Virtue now is neither more or less,
And Vice is only varied in the Dress:
Believe it, Men have ever been the same,
And Ovid's GOLDEN AGE, is but a Dream.
WILLIAM CONGREVE. THE TRUE COPY OF AN AFFIDAVIT, Made before one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Westminster.
THAT four LADIES, whom the Deponent does not care to Name, repair nightly to a
certain convenient Place, near St. James's, to meet their GALLANTS of the first
Rank; whom your Deponent will not Name, but so far describe them, that two of
them are Sallow, and two of the ruddy Complexion; and that he verily believes,
they were most abominably painted.

The LADIES when they begin their Gambols, call their GALLANTS by the fond
Nicknames of Hercules, Cupid, Pit, and the Gardener. After a plentiful Service
of the most costly Fare, they begin their Tricks which they play like the
Tumblers in Bartholomew-Fair upon a Carpet, strip is the Word; nay, your
Deponent has known them strip a Gentleman who came accidently into the House.
At first, they begin pretty courtly, at least in their Expressions, as, Madam,
by your leave, or so; which the LADIES are so good as seldom to deny.
Afterward, it is shameful to describe the Tricks that are played by this lewd
Pack. By an established Rule, each Lady has the Choice of her Gallant in her
Turn, and some have been known so unreasonable, after they have had Three, to
call for a Fourth. Your Deponent has seen a Lady on her Back, a Man o'Top of
her, and a Lady o'Top of him; and he avers, it has been known, that a Court
Valet has stripped them all. Sometimes they are thrown on their Backs, sometimes
on their Bellies now higgledy piggledy, and anon, they are all o'Top of one
another; and if any one is called upon, they are obliged to show ALL. Of the
same Nature is their Discourse, your Deponent has often overheard them talking
of their A -- es, with the same Familiarity as their Faces; I have a Black one,
says one, and named the Thing directly; mine is better than yours, says the
other, and Names her Thing; must I be laughed at, says a Third, because I have a
red one. There is one monstrous Thing that your Deponent is almost ashamed to
mention; after Six, a Lady has asked if they could do no more; nay, a certain
Lady has been known to play all the Tricks over by her self. Your Deponent
likewise avers, that he has full Proof, after the LADIES have been tired with
their GALLANTS, they have called for fresh ones: In short the aforesaid LADIES,
have not only, spent their Pin-Money, but their Husband's Estates, upon
Hercules, Cupid, Pit, and the Gardener, and when they want more Money, they
commonly Pawn their Jewels, etc.

Westminster ss. Jurat. Coram me, T. T.
P.S. The above Information is a faithful Description of the GAME of QUADRILLE,
not to be Literally, but Allegorically, understood.

THO. WOOLSTON.



There is now in the Press,

MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS and Familiar Letters. By William Congreve, Esquire To which
will be prefixed, Memoirs of his Life, Writings, and Amors. By Charles Wilson,
Esquire

NEW BOOKS Printed for E. Curll in the Strand.
I. THE LADIES PRESERVATIVE, in the three Chief Characteristicks of BEAUTY, the
HAIR, COMPLEXION, and TEETH. Most humbly Addressed to her Royal Highness,
Princess Amelia, and which was presented to her, by the Author Mrs. SUSANNA
GRAY, March 6th 1728-9. Price 6 d. II. The Knowledge of Play. Written for
Public Benefit, and the Entertainment of all Fair Players. Wherein, I. It is
demonstrated, that Fortune has not that Power in Play, which is commonly
ascribed to her. II. The Chances of the Games of Hazard, Pharao, and Basset,
are calculated and determined; proving, that in Games of Judgment, Skill will
always get the better of Chance. III. By detecting the Frauds in Play, that
Eagerness for Gaming might be suppressed, to the Preservation of Estates, and
the Advancement of the Sciences. Translated from the Latin Original of John
Rizzetti, with Improvements by Richard Seymour, Esquire Author of The Court
Gamester, and Designed as a second Part of that Work. Addressed to the Prince
of Wales. Price 2 s. Bound. III. The Court Gamester. Being full Instructions
for Playing at Ombre, Quadrille, Picquet, etc. Price 2 s. 6 d. IV. The Complete
Gentleman and Gentlewoman. Being a Treatise of the politest Manner of educating
Persons of Distinction of both Sexes, and the Qualifications requisite in
People of all Ranks, from the Prince to the Private Gentleman. Interspersed
with curious Dissertations on the Accomplishments of Statuary, Painting,
Poetry, Music, Dancing, Dress, Love, Marriage, etc. Translated from the
Italian Original of Balthazar Count Castiglione. In four Books. Price 6 s. V.
The Supernatural Philosopher: Or, the Mysteries of Magic, in all its Branches,
clearly Unfolded. Containing, I. An Argument proving the Perception which
Mankind have, by all the Senses, of Demons, Genij, or Familiar Spirits, and of
the several Species of them both Good and Bad. II. A Philosophical Discourse
concerning the Second Sight, demonstrating it to be Hereditary to some
Families. III. A full Answer to all Objections that can be brought against the
Existence of Spirits, Witches, etc. IV. Of Divination by Dreams, Specter,
Omens, Apparitions after Death, Predictions, etc. V. Of Enchantment,
Necromancy, Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, Pyromancy, Chiromancy, Augury, and
Aruspicy. 8vo Price 5 s. N.B. Notwithstanding the many Attempts to suppress so
learned and curious a Work, there is just published in Two Volumes Octavo.
(Price Half a Guinea) the Second Edition of, 1. Dr. BURNET's State of the Dead,
and Those that are to rise. Showing, 1. That the Soul is an immortal Substance,
distinct from the Body and from Matter. 2. Of the future State of the Soul,
after the Corporeal Dissolution; or, concerning the Middle State of Souls
betwixt Death and the Resurrection, as to the Degrees of Happiness and Misery.
With an Appendix concerning Prayers for the Dead. 3. The Natural State of Souls
during the Interval of Death and the Resurrection, whether they are naked and
separated from all Manner of Corporeal Substance, or are united to an Aerial
one, or to some other. 4. Of the Supreme Judgment, its Apparatus, Manner, End,
and Effect. 5. Of the Resurrection of the Dead; the State of the raised, and of
their Bodies. 6. What Bodies we are to have at the Resurrection; whether the
same with our present, or different ones therefrom. 7. Of Heaven and Hell; what
is the Heaven of the Christians, and how far Local; what is Hell, and whether
there is a subterraneous one or not; or any other Local, corporeal and external
one before the Day of Judgment and the Conflagration of the World. 8. Of the
Pains of Hell; whether they are infinite, or finite, or no.

How I have treated Dr. Burnet, I leave to the general Sense of Mankind; I have
translated him faithfully, answered him impartially, dealt with him coolly, and
set him right for public Reading. M. EARBERY.

VI. Dr. Burnet's Appendix to the State of the Dead. Translated from the Latin
Original (published by ^. Wilkinson, late of Lincoln's Inn, Overseer of Dr.
Burnet's Will) by Mr. Foxton. With some Account of the said Wilkinson's last
Will and Testament. Price 2 s. 6 d. VII. Monsieur Simon's Dissertation
concerning the Heathen Notions of the State of the Dead. Done from the French
by Mr. Morgan. Price 1 s. VIII. Dr. Burnet's Archaeology. Being a Critical
Enquiry into the Mosaic Account of the Creation of the World, the Seat of
Paradise, and the famous Dialogue between Eve and the Serpent. Also, His
Commentary on his own Theory of the Earth, etc. Now published after a seven
Years Suppression (by Injunction) in the High Court of Chancery. In two Parts.
Price 6 s. The Lives and Last Wills and Testaments of the following Persons.
WILLS of the, 1. Earl of Halifax, 2. Mr. Addison, 3. Mr. Prior, 4. Mr. Lock,
5. Mr. Nelson, 6. Dr. Radcliffe, 7. Dr. Williams, 8. Dr. South, 9. Dr. Hickes,
10. Dr. Burnet, 11. Bp. Burnet, 12. Mr. Partridge, 13. Mr. Mahomet, Servant to
his late Majesty.
Any of these may be had single.

LIVES of, 1. Archbishop Tillotson, 2. Bishop Atterbury, 3. Bishop Curll, 4.
Elias Ashmore Esquire 5. Duke Hamilton, 6. Duke of Leeds, 7. Earl of Godolphin, 8.
Earl of Ranelaugh, 9. Earl Rivers, 10. Lord Mohun, 11. Lieut. Genesis Wood, 12.
Ar. Manwayring Esquire 13. Mr. Richard Cromwell.
The four first may be had single, the nine last are all in one Volume.

(Price 6 s. Bound.)


All sold by E. Curll.



