AMABELLA, A POEM.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, BOOKSELLER, AT THE FEATHERS IN NEW BOND STREET.

M DCC LXVIII.

TO MRS. MONTAGU, THIS LITTLE POEM (WROTE AT HER SUGGESTION, IN THE FORM OF AN
ELEGIAC DIALOGUE) WITH THE GREATEST ESTEEM FOR HER JUDGMENT, IS INSCRIBED BY
HER RESPECTFUL HUMBLE SERVANT,

EDWARD JERNINGHAM.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE subject of this poem is founded on a circumstance that happened during the
late war. -- A young lady, not meeting with the concurrence of her relations in
favor of an officer for whom she expressed her regard, was prevailed upon, by
his solicitations, to consent to a clandestine marriage; which took place on
the day he sat out to join his regiment abroad, where he was unfortunately
killed in an engagement.

AMABELLA.
HARMODIUS breathed the rural air, nor found
His ruddy health with length of years decrease:
By duty prompted, AMABELLA crowned,
His silver forehead with the wreath of peace:
BY partial nature framed in beauty's mould,
Adorned with every grace, unspoil'd by art,
To friendship's circle still did she unfold,
The lovelier beauties of a feeling heart.
ENDEARED to all she met, each welcome day,
By fortune's hand, with various blessings fraught:
When, lo! her gayety's accustomed ray
Was quenched, untimely, with the gloom of thought.
WHAT fixed the bosom-thorn, affliction knows,
Where peace sat brooding as the gentle dove:
What blasted on her cheek the summer rose,
Or slow disease, or unsuccessful love,
REMAINED unknown. -- 'Twas by the many guessed,
That love to her soft vows had proved unkind:
Beyond the power of her weak frame oppressed,
Insanity o'erthrew her lovely mind.
AT length recov'ring, yet to grief devote,
To solitude she gave the unsocial day;
Like a pale vot'ry from the world remote,
Uncheer'd, unvisited of pleasure's ray.
OFTEN did HARMODIUS (at her state dismayed)
Solicit from his child her secret pain:
Her vague reply still from his question strayed,
And each repeated effort proved in vain.
To speed the moments of the loit'ring hour,
And by their plaintive strains perchance allured,
Within a spacious myrtle-woven bower,
Two turtle doves the pensive fair secured.
"YE little captives, would she often say,
"Though here secluded from the fields of air,
"Through yonder vernal grove forbid to stray,
"And join the kindred train that wanton there;
"'AGAINST you the gunner never lifts his arm,
"Nor over this mansion does the falcon sail;
"You live unconscious of the storm's alarm,
"The rain impetuous, and the beating hail.
"NOR here, by kind compassion unimpress'd,
"The schoolboy ever rears his impious hand,
"To fill with agony the feathered breast,
"And raze the little domes that love had plan'd."
THEIR harmless joys disease too soon effaced:
One fatal morn, her Turturella's mate
She found, with flagging wing subdued, oppressed,
And just sinking at the blow of fate:
WHILE down her cheek compassion's shower distilled,
She gently raised it to her anxious breast;
But death's cold blast life's crimson current chilled,
And thus the fair her breathless bird addressed:
"ILL-FATED turtle, round whose peaceful bower,
"The jocund loves so lately wont to play:
"How sunk, alas! in youth's exulting hour,
"To fell disease, to death the untimely prey:
"How silent is the voice, which, void of art,
"Along the tender day was heard to coo!
"How still, how frozen is the constant heart,
"Which to its dear companion beat so true!
"THAT dear companion, that now widowed dove,
"To screen from every harm, be mine the care;
"And, while she mourns her never reviving love,
"Her grief to me the mourner will endear:
"LIKE thee, a widow too, condemned to mourn:
"No more to me does life unfold its charms,
"Death, death forbids him ever to return!"
She said -- and sunk into the attendant's arms.
HER swift relapsing to her former state,
With boding fears, approached the serving train:
This scene's dread period tremblingly they wait,
Nor were their boding fears indulged in vain:
AWAKNING from her trance, around she threw,
Distressful fair, her much disorder d deyes;
And wild'ring said -- "repeat that kind adieu:
"Ah no! from love to war, to death he flies.
"DID ye not hear the clash of hostile spears?
"Ah! mark ye not that breast plate stained with gore?
"What groan was that which pearc'd these fearful ears?
He falls, he falls -- my warrior is no more:
"NOR was, Oh heaven! his AMABELLA near,
"To sooth his Pain and echo sigh to sigh,
"Drop on the gaping wound a balmy tear,
"Kiss his cold lip, and close his fading eye."
OF her distress the alarmed HARMODIUS taught,
With trembling steps approached the unconscious fair:
"Give me, he cried, with grief paternal fraught,
"Give me, Oh AMABEL'! to sooth thy care:
"SAY what affliction has thy soul impress d?
"Reveal what storm thy bosomed calmness breaks?
"Reveal -- and thus relieve this anguish d breast:
"The tender father to his daughter speaks.
AMABELLA. "AH what avails the praise the brave obtain!
"Through his white bosom rushed the hostile steel:
"'It Was his to swell the number of the slain,
"And mine affliction's keenest point to feel."

HARMODIUS. "HER roving thought no trace of reason bears:
"To her racked mind, Oh heaven! thy peace impart:
"A loving parent bathes thy cheek with tears;
"HARMODIUS holds thee to his breaking heart."

AMABELLA. "To thee, I grateful kneel, Oh generous seer!
"Who do, to one unknown, thy care extend:
"Along thy path may Peace her olives rear,
"And heaven, in battle, shield thy dearest friend:
"FOR me, who droop beneath misfortune's shower,
"I had a father, -- now, alas! a foe, --
"Thou Wilt blush to hear, -- in sorrow's darkest hour,
"He leaves his child, abandoned to her woe:
"BUT to thy heart, that is framed of softer mould,
"What can, to thee, a wretch like me endear!
"The spring, the motive of thy love unfold:
"Say, say, for me why flows that friendly tear!
"YET soft awhile, -- methinks that hoary brow --
That plaintive voice -- Ah bear with my distress! --
"Or much remembrance is effaced, or now,
"A tender father's tear-dew'd cheek I press."

HARMODIUS. "ON knees of gratitude, I bless the skies,
"That AMABELLA to herself restore."

AMABELLA. "Ah wherefore do thou joy! thy daughter dies:
"Support me to yon couch -- I can no more -- "
"I FEEL, I feel, the pulse of life retire!
"Ah deign to hear thy dying child reveal,
"What, in rebellion to thy just desire,
"Locked in her breast, she dared so long conceal:
"BY thee, unsanction'd, did I plight my love,
"And, all to thee unknown, a bride became."

HARMODIUS. "HARMODIUS will to both a father prove."


AMABELLA. "To him thy pardon thou can never proclaim:
"THREE fleeting hours had scarcely called me bride,
"When he was summoned to the martial plain:
"And there, -- forgive these tears, -- in beauty's pride,
"The much lamented valiant youth was slain.
"WHAT though unworthy of thy care I prove,
"To thy remembrance let thy child be dear;
"Thy kind compassion let the daughter move,
"When this weak frame shall press the untimely bier."
MORE would she say, -- her voice began to fail,
From her faint eye life's lingering spark retired,
The ripening cherry on her lip grew pale,
She heaved a sigh, and in that sigh expired.

FINIS.

