THE ROSCIAD.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.]

THE ROSCIAD. BY C. CHURCHILL.

Unknowing, and unknown, the hardy Muse
Boldly defies all mean and partial Views;
With honest Freedom plays the Critic's Part,
And praises, as she censures, from the Heart.
THE SECOND EDITION, Revised and Corrected, with ADDITIONS.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by W. FLEXNEY, near Gray's-Inn-Gate,
Holborn. MDCCLXI.

THE ROSCIAD.
ROSCIUS deceased, each high aspiring play'r
Pushed all his interest for the vacant chair.
The buskined heroes of the mimic stage
No longer whine in love, and rant in rage;
The monarch quits his throne, and condescends
Humbly to court the favor of his friends;
For pity's sake tells undeserved mishaps,
And their applause to gain, recounts his claps.
Thus the victorious chiefs of ancient Rome,
To win the mob, a suppliant's form assume^
In pompous strain fight over the extingui^^
And show where honor bled in (...)
BUT though bear merit might (...)
It Is not the strongest plea (...)
We form our judgment in another way;
And they will best succeed, who best can pay:
Those who would gain the votes of British tribes,
Must add to force of merit, force of bribes.
WHAT can an actor give? in every age
Cash has been rudely banished from the stage;
Monarchs themselves to grief of every play'r,
Appear as often as their image there:
They cannot, like candidate for other seat,
Pour seas of wine, and mountains raise of meat.
Wine! they could bribe you with the world as soon;
And of roast beef, they only know the tune.
But what they have they give; could CLIVE do more,
Though for one million he had brought home four?
S^R keeps open house at Southwark fair,
And hopes the friends of humor will be there.
In Smithfleld, Y^s prepares the rival treat,
For those who laughter love instead of meat.
F^TE, at Old House, for even F^TE will be
In self-conceit an actor) bribes with tea;
Which W^K^S^N at second hand receives,
And at the New pours water on the leaves.
THE Town divided, each runs several ways,
As passion, humor, interest, party sways.
Things of no moment, color of the hair,
Shape of a leg, complexion brown or fair;
A dress well chosen, or a patch misplaced,
Conciliate favor, or create distaste.
FROM galleries loud peals of laughter roll,
And thunder SHUTER'S praises -- he is so droll.
Embox'd the ladies must have something smart,
PALMER! Oh! PALMER tops the janty part.
Seated in pit, the dwarf with aching eyes
Looks up, and vows that BARRY'S out of size;
Whilst to six feet the stripling vigorous grown,
Declares that GARRICK is another COAN.
WHEN place of judgment is by whim supplied,
And our opinions have their rise in pride;
When, in discoursing on each mimic elf,
We praise and censure with an eye to self;
All must find friends; and A^M^N bids as fair
In such a court, as GARRICK for the chair.
At length agreed all squabbles to decide,
By some one judge the cause was to be tried;
But this their squabbles did afresh renew,
Who should be judge in such a trial: -- Who?
FOR J^HNS^N some; but J^HNS^N, it was feared,
Would be too grave; and ST^NE too loose appeared:
Some called for MAY, but that sound soon died,
And Desert Island rang on every side:
Others for F^KL^N voted, but 'twas known,
He sicken'd at all triumphs but his own:
For COLMAN many, but the peevish tongue
Of prudent age found out that he was young.
WITH sleek appearance, and with ambling pace,
And, type of vacant head, with vacant face,
The Proteus H^LL put in his modest plea --
Let favor speak for others, worth for me.
For who like him his various powers could call
Into so many shapes, and shine in all?
Who could so nobly grace the motley list,
Actor, Inspector, Doctor, Botanist.
Knows any one so well, sure no one knows,
At once to play, prescribe, compound, compose?
Who can? -- But WOODWARD came, -- H^LL slipped away,
Melting like ghosts before the rising day.
COLD-BLOODED critics, by enervate sires
Scarce hammered out, when Nature's feeble fires
Glimmer'd their last; whose sluggish blood, half froze,
Creeps laboring through the veins; whose heart never glows
With fancy-kindled heat -- A servile race,
Who in mere want of fault all merit place;
Who blind obedience pay to ancient schools,
Bigots to Greece, and slaves to musty rules;
With solemn consequence declared that none
Could judge that cause but SOPHOCLES alone.
Dupes to their fancied excellence, the crowd
Obsequious to the sacred dictate bowed.
WHEN, from amidst the throng a youth stood forth,
Unknown his person, not unknown his worth;
His looks bespoke applause; alone he stood,
Alone he stemmed the mighty critic flood.
He talked of ancients as the man became
Who prized our own, but envied not their fame;
With noble reverence spoke of Greece and Rome,
And scorned to tear the laurel from the tomb.
" BUT more than just to other countries grown,
" Must we turn base apostates to our own?
" Where do these words of Greece and Rome excel,
" That England may not please the ear as well?
" What mighty magic's in the place or air,
" That all perfection needs must center there?
" In states, let strangers blindly be preferred;
" In state of letters, merit should be heard.
" Genius is of no country, her pure ray
" Spreads all abroad as general as the day.
" Foe to restraint, from place to place she flies,
" And may hereafter even in Holland rise.
" May not, to give a pleasing fancy scope,
" And cheer a patriot heart with patriot hope;
" May not some great extensive genius raise
" The name of Britain 'bove Athenian praise;
" And, whilst brave thirst of fame his bosom warms,
" Make England great in letters as in arms?
" There may -- there has -- and SHAKESPEARE'S muse aspires
" Beyond the reach of Greece; with native fires,
" Mounting alost he wings his daring flight,
" Whilst SOPHOCLES below stands trembling at his height."
WHY should we then abroad for judges roam,
When abler judges we may find at home?
Happy in tragic and in comic powers,
Have we not SHAKESPEARE? -- Is not JOHNSON ours?
For them, your natural judges, Britons vote;
They Will judge like Britons, who like Britons wrote.
HE said, and conquered. -- Sense resumed her sway,
And disappointed pedants stalked away.
SHAKESPEARE and JOHNSON, with deserved applause,
Joint-judges were ordained to try the cause.
Mean-time the stranger every voice employed,
To ask or tell his name. -- "Who is it?" -- LLOYD.
THUS, when the aged friends of JOB stood mute,
And tamely prudent gave up the dispute,
ELIHU, with the decent warmth of youth,
Boldly stood forth, the advocate of Truth;
Confuted Falsehood, and disabled Pride,
Whilst baffled Age stood snarling at his side.
THE day of tryal's fixed, nor any fear
Lest day of trial should be put off here.
Causes but seldom for delay can call
In courts where forms are few, fees none at all.
THE morning came, nor find I that the sun,
As he on other great events has done,
Put on a brighter robe than what he wore
To go his journey in the day before.
FULL in the center of a spacious plain,
On plan entirely new, where nothing vain,
Nothing magnificent appeared, but Art,
With decent modesty, performed her part,
Rose a tribunal: from no other court
It borrowed ornament, or sought support:
No juries here were packed to kill or clear,
No bribes were taken, nor oaths broken here:
No gownsmen, partial to a client's cause,
To their own purpose tuned the pliant laws.
Each judge was true and steady to his trust,
As MANSFIELD wise, and as old FOSTER just.
IN the first seat, in robe of various dies,
A noble wildness flashing from his eyes,
Sat SHAKESPEARE. -- In one hand a wand he bore,
For mighty wonders famed in days of yore;
The other held a globe, which to his will
Obedient turned, and owned the master's skill:
Things of the noblest kind his genius drew,
And looked through Nature at a single view:
A loose he gave to his unbounded soul,
And taught new lands to rise, new seas to roll;
Called into being scenes unknown before,
And, passing Nature's bounds, was something more.
NEXT JOHNSON sat, -- in ancient learning trained,
His rigid judgment Fancy's flights restrained,
Correctly pruned each wild luxuriant thought,
Marked out her course,nor spared a glorious fault.
The Book of Man he read with nicest art,
And ransacked all the secrets of the heart;
Exerted Penetration's utmost force,
And traced each passion to its proper source.
Then, strongly marked, in liveliest colors drew,
And brought each soible forth to public view.
The coxcomb felt a lash in every word,
And fools hung out their brother fools deterred.
His comic humor kept the world in awe,
And Laughter frightn'd Folly more than Law.
BUT, hark! -- The trumpet sounds, the crowd gives way,
And the procession comes in just array.
Now should I, in some sweet poetic line,
Offer up incense at APOLLO'S shrine;
Invoke the Muse to quit her calm abode,
And waken Memory with a sleeping ode.
For how should mortal man, in mortal verse,
Their titles, merits, or their names rehearse?
But give, kind Dullness, Memory and Rhyme,
We'll put off Genius till another time.
FIRST, Order came, -- with solemn step, and slow,
In measured time his feet were taught to go.
Behind, from time to time, he cast his eye,
Lest This should quit his place, That step awry.
Appearances to save, his only care;
So things seem right, no matter what they are.
In him his parents saw themselves renewed,
Begotten by Sir Critic on Saint Prude.
THEN came drum, trumpet, hautboy, fiddle, flute;
Next, snuffer, sweeper, shifter, soldier, mute:
Legions of angels all in white advance;
Furies, all fire, come forward in a dance:
Pantomine figures then are brought to view,
Fools, hand in hand with fools, go two by two.
Next came the treasurer of either house;
One with full purse, the other with not a sous.
BEHIND a group of figures awe create,
Set off with all the impertinence of state;
By lace and feather consecrate to fame,
Expletive kings and queens without a name.
HERE H^V^D, all serene, in the same strains,
Loves, hates, and rages, triumphs and complains;
His easy vacant face proclaimed an heart
Which could not feel emotions, nor impart.
With him came mighty D^s: -- On my life,
That D^s has a very pretty wife! -- -
Statesman all over! -- In plots famous grown! --
He mouths a sentence, as -- ours mouth a bone.
NEXT, H^LL^ND came. -- With truly tragic stalk,
He creeps, he flies. -- An hero should not walk.
As if with Heaven he warred, his eager eyes
Planted their batteries against the skies:
Attitude, action, air, pause, sigh, groan
He borrowed, and made use of as his own.
By Fortune thrown on any other stage,
He might, perhaps, have pleased an easy age;
But now appears a copy, and no more,
Of something better we have seen before.
The actor who would build a solid fame,
Must Imitation's servile arts disclaim;
Act from himself, on his own bottom stand. --
I hate even GARRICK thus at second hand.
BEHIND came K^G. -- Bred up in modest lore,
Bashful and young, he sought Hibernia's shore;
Hibernia, famed, 'bove every other grace,
For matchless intrepidity of face.
From her his features caught the generous flame,
And bid defiance to all sense of shame:
Tutored by all her rivals to surpass,
Amongst DRURY'S sons he comes, and shines in Brass.
Lo Y^s! -- Without the least finesse of art
He gets applause! -- I wish he would get his part.
When hot impatience is in full career,
How vilely "Hark'e! Hark'e!" grates the ear?
When active Fancy from the brain is sent,
And stands on tip-toe for some wished event,
I hate those careless blunders which recall
Suspended sense, and prove it fiction all.
W^D^D, endowed with various powers of face,
Great master in the science of Grimace,
From Ireland ventures, favorite of the Town,
Lured by the pleasing prospect of Renown.
His wit and humor in Distortion lie,
And all his merit enters at the eye.
We laugh, we clap, -- but, on Reflection's birth,
We wonder at ourselves, and curse our mirth.
His walk of parts he fatally misplaced,
And Inclination fondly took for Taste.
Hence has the Town so often seen displayed
Beau in burlesque, high-life in masquerade.
Merit he had, some merit in his way,
But seldom found out in what part it lay.
In Bobadil, indeed, such praise he bore,
Such worthy praise, that Kitely scarce had more.
BY turns transformed into all kinds of shapes,
Constant to none, F^TE laughs, cries, struts, and scrapes:
Now in the center, now in van or rear,
The Proteus shifts, Bawd, Parson, Auctioneer.
His strokes of humor, and his bursts of sport,
Are all contained in this one word, Distort.
Does a man stutter, look a-squint, or halt;
Mimics draw humor out of Nature's fault:
With personal defects their mirth adorn,
And hang misfortunes out to public scorn.
Even I, whom Nature cast in hideous mould,
Whom having made, she trembled to behold,
Beneath the load of mimicry may groan,
And find that Nature's errors are my own.
SHADOWS behind of F^TE and W^D^D came;
W^K^S^N this, OB^I^N was that name.
Strange to relate, but wonderfully true,
That even shadows have their shadows too!
With not a single comic power endued,
The first, a mere mere mimic's mimic stood.
The last, by Nature formed to please, who shows,
In JOHNSON'S Stephen, which way Genius grows;
Self quite put off, affects, with too much art,
To put on WOODWARD in each mangled part;
Adopts his shrug, his wink, his stare; nay more,
His voice, and croaks; for WOODWARD croak'd before.
Thus the dull copyer simple grace neglects,
And rests his Imitation in -- Defects.
ARMS crossed, brows bent, eyes fixed, feet marching slow,
A band of malcontents with spleen overflow;
Wrapped in Conceit's impenetrable fog,
Which Pride, like Phoebus, draws from every bog;
They curse the Managers, and curse the Town,
Whose partial favor keeps such merit down.
BUT if some man, more hardy than the rest,
Should dare attack thief gnatlings in their nest;
At once they rise with impotence of rage,
Whet their small stings, and buzz about the stage.
" It Is breach of privilege! -- Shall any dare
" To arm Satyric Truth against a play'r?
" Prescriptive rights we plead, time out of mind;
" Actors, unlash'd themselves, may lash mankind."
WHAT! shall Opinion then, of Nature free
And liberal as the vagrant air, agree
To rust in chains like these, imposed by Things
Which, less than nothing, ape the pride of kings?
No, -- though half-poets with half-players join
To curse the freedom of each honest line,
Though rage and malice dim their faded cheek,
What the Muse freely thinks, she will freely speak.
With just disdain of every paltry sneer,
Stranger alike to Flattery and Fear,
In purpose fixed, and to herself a rule,
Public Contempt shall wait the Public Fool.
A^ST^N would always glisten in French silks,
A^KM^N would NORRIS be, and P^CK^R WILKS.
For who, like A^KM^N can with humor please?
Who can, like P^CK^R, charm with sprightly ease?
Higher than all the rest, see BR^NS^Y strut:
A mighty Gulliver in Lilliput!
Ludicrous Nature! which at once could show
A man so very High, so very Low.
IF I forget thee, BL^K^S, or if I say
Ought hurtful, may I never see thee play.
Let critics, with a supercilious air,
Decry thy various merit, and declare,
Frenchman is still at top; -- but scorn that rage
Which, in attacking thee, attacks the age.
French follies, universally embraced,
At once provoke our mirth, and form our taste.
LONG from a nation, ever hardly used,
At random censured, wantonly abused,
Have Britons drawn their sport; with partial view
Formed general notions from the rascal few;
Condemned a people, as for vices known,
Which from their country banished seek our own.
At length, however, the slavish chain is broke,
And Sense, awakened, scorns her ancient yoke:
Taught by thee, MOODY, we now learn to raise
Mirth from their foibles; from their virtues, praise.
FROM C^v^nt-G^rd^n crowds promiscuous go,
Whom the Muse knows not, nor desires to know.
Vet'rans they seemed, but knew of arms no more
Than if, till that time, arms they never bore.
Like Westminster militia, trained to fight,
They scarcely knew the left hand from the right.
Ashamed among such troops to show the head,
Their chiefs were scattered, and their heroes fled.
S^RKS at his glass sat comfortably down
To separate frown from smile, and smile from frown.
SM^H the genteel, the airy, and the smart,
SM^H was just gone to school to say his part.
R^SS (a misfortune which we often meet)
Was fast asleep at dear STATIRA'S feet;
STATIRA, with her hero to agree,
Stood on her feet as fast asleep as he.
M^KL^N, who largely deals in half-form'd sounds,
Who wantonly transgresses Nature's bounds,
Eager to touch up some new comic scene,
Lay happily concealed behind a screen.
SH^T^R,who never cared a single pin
Whether he left out nonsense or put in,
Who aimed at wit, though, levelled in the dark,
The random arrow seldom hit the mark,
At Islington, all by the placid stream.
Where city swains in lap of Dullness dream,
Where, quiet as her strains, their strains do flow,
That all the patron by the bards may know;
Secret as night, with R^LT'S experienced aid,
The plan of future operations laid,
Projected schemes, the summer-months to cheer,
And spin out happy Folly through the year.
BUT think not, though these dastard chiefs are fled,
That C^ve^nt-G^rd^n troops shall want an head:
Harlequin comes their chief! -- See, from afar,
The hero seated in fantastic car!
Wedded to Novelty, his only arms
Are wooden swords, wands, talismans, and charms.
On one side Folly sits, by some called Fun,
And, on the other, his arch-patron LUN.
Behind, for Liberty a-thirst in vain,
Sense, helpless captive, drags the galling chain.
Six rude misshapen beasts the chariot draw,
Whom Reason loathes, and Nature never saw;
Monsters, with tails of ice, and heads of fire;
Gorgons, and hydras, and chymaeras dire.
Each was bestrode by full as monstrous wight,
Giant, Dwarf, Genius, Elf, Hermaphrodite.
The Town, as usual, met him in full cry:
The Town, as usual, knew no reason why.
But Fashion so directs, and Moderns raise,
On Fashion's mouldering base, their transient praise.
NEXT, to the field a band of females draw
Their Force; for Britain owns no Salique Law:
Just to their worth, we female rights admit,
Nor bar their claim to Empire or to Wit.
FIRST, giggling, plotting chamber-maids arrive,
Hoydens and Romps, led on by General CLIVE.
In spite of outward blemishes she shone
For Humor famed, and Humor all her own.
Easy, as if at home, the stage she trod,
Nor sought the Critic's praise, nor feared his rod.
Original in spirit and in ease,
She pleased by hiding all attempts to please.
No comic actress ever yet could raise,
On Humour's base, more merit or more praise.
WITH all the native vigor of sixteen,
Among the merry troop conspicuous seen,
See lively POPE advance in jig and trip,
Corinna, Cherry, Honeycomb, and Snip.
Not without Art, but yet to Nature true,
She charms the Town with Humor just, yet new.
Cheered by her promise, we the less deplore
The fatal time when CLIVE shall be no more.
MIGHT Figure give a title unto Fame,
WHAT rival should with Y^T^S dispute her claim?
But Justice may not partial trophies raise,
Nor sink the Actress in the Woman's praise.
Still, hand in hand, her words and actions go,
And the heart feels more than the features show;
For through the regions of that beauteous face,
We no variety of passions trace;
Dead to the soft emotions of the heart,
No kindred softness can those eyes impart;
The brow, still fixed in Sorrow's gloomy frame,
Void of distinction, marks all parts the same.
WHAT IS a fine person, or a beauteous face,
Unless Deportment gives it decent grace?
Blessed with all other requisites to please,
Some want the striking elegance of Ease;
The curious eye their awkward movement tires;
They seem like puppets led about by wires.
Others, like statues, in one posture still,
Give great ideas of the workman's skill;
Wondering, his art we praise the more we view,
And only grieve he gave not motion too.
Weak of themselves are what we beauties call,
It is the Manner which gives strength to all.
This teaches every beauty to unite,
And brings them forward in the noblest light.
Happy in this, behold, amidst the throng,
With transient gleam of grace, H^T sweeps along.
FORMED for the tragic scene, to grace the stage,
With rival excellence of Love and Rage,
Mistress of each soft art, with matchless skill
To turn and wind the passions as she will;
To melt the heart with sympathetic woe,
Awake the sigh, and teach the tear to flow;
To put on Frenzy's wild distracted glare,
And freeze the soul with horror and despair;
With just desert enrolled in endless fame,
Conscious of worth superior, C^BB^R came.
WHEN poor ALICIA'S madding brains are rackd,
And strongly imag'd griefs her mind distract;
Struck with her grief, I catch the madness too!
My brain turns round! The headless trunk I view!
The roof cracks, shakes, and falls! -- New horrors rise,
And Reason buried in the ruin lies.
NOBLY disdainful of each slavish art,
She makes her first attack upon the heart:
Pleased with the summons, it receives her laws;
And all is, silence, sympathy, applause.
BUT when, by fond Ambition drawn aside,
Giddy with praise, and puffed with female pride,
She quits the tragic scene, and, in pretense
To comic merit, breaks down Nature's fence;
I scarcely can believe my ears and eyes,
Or find out C^BB^R through the dark disguise.
PRITCHARD, by Nature for the stage designed,
In person graceful, and in sense refined;
Her Art as much as Nature's friend became,
Her voice as free from blemish as her fame.
Who knows so well in majesty to please,
Attemper'd with the graceful charms of ease?
WHEN CONGREVE'S favored pantomine to grace,
She comes a captive queen of Moorish race;
When Love, Hate, Jealousy, Despair, and Rage,
With wildest tumults in her breast engage;
Still equal to herself is Zara seen:
Her passions are the passions of a queen.
WHEN she to murder whets the timorous Thane,
I feel Ambition rush through every vein;
Persuasion hangs upon her daring tongue,
My heart grows flint, and every nerve's new strung.
IN comedy -- "Nay, there," cries critic, "hold.
" PRITCHARD'S for comedy too fat and old.
" Who can, with patience, bear the gray coquette,
" Or force a laugh with overgrown Julett?
" Her speech, look, action, humor, all are just;
" But then, her age and figure give disgust."
ARE foibles then, and graces of the mind,
In real life, to size or age confined?
Do spirits flow, and is good-breeding placed
In any set circumference of waist?
As we grow old, does affectation cease,
Or gives not age new vigor to caprice?
If in originals these things appear,
Why should we bar them in the copy here?
THE nice punctilio-mongers of this age,
The grand minute reformers of the stage,
Slaves to propriety of every kind,
Some standard-measure for each part should find;
Which, when the best of actors shall exceed,
Let it devolve to one of smaller breed.
ALL actors too upon the back should bear
Certificate of birth; -- time, when; -- place, where.
For how can critics rightly fix their worth,
Unless they know the minute of their birth?
An audience too, deceived, may find, too late,
That they have clapped an actor out of date.
FIGURE, I own, at first, may give offense,
And harshly strike the eye's too curious sense:
But when perfections of the mind break forth,
Humour's chaste sallies, Judgment's solid worth;
When the pure genuine flame, by Nature taught,
Springs into Sense, and every action's Thought;
Before such merit, all objections fly;
PRITCHARD'S genteel, and GARRICK six feet high.
OFTEN have I, PRITCHARD, seen thy wondrous skill,
Confessed thee great, but find thee greater still.
T^^ worth, which shone in scattered rays before,
C^^^ected now, breaks forth with double power.
The Jealous Wife! -- On that thy trophies raise,
Inferior only to the Author's praise.
FROM D^bl^n, famed in legends of romance
For mighty magic of enchanted lance,
With which her heroes armed victorious prove,
And, like a flood, rush over the land of Love;
M^SS^P and B^R^Y came. -- Names never designed
By Fate in the same sentence to be joined.
RAISED by the breath of popular acclaim,
They mounted to the pinnacle of Fame:
There the weak brain, made giddy with the height,
Spurred on the rival chiefs to mortal fight.
Thus sportive boys, around some bason's brim,
Behold the pipe-drawn bladders circling swim;
But if, from lungs more potent, there arise
Two bubbles of a more than common size,
Eager for honor, they for fight prepare,
Bubble meets bubble, and both sink to air.
M^SS^P, attached to military plan,
Still kept his eye fixed on his right hand man:
Whilst the mouth measures words with seeming skill,
The right hand labors, and the left lies still.
For he resolved on scripture-grounds to go,
What the right does, the left hand shall not know.
With studied impropriety of speech,
He soars beyond the hackney critic's reach;
To epithets allots emphatic state,
Whilst principals, ungrac'd, like lacquies wait;
In ways first trodden by himself excels,
And stands alone in indeclinables:
Conjunction, preposition, adverb, join
To stamp new vigor on the nervous line:
In monosyllables his thunders roll,
He, she, it, and, we, ye, they fright the soul.
IN person taller than the common size,
Behold where B^Y draws admiring eyes!
When laboring passions, in his bosom pent,
Convulsive rage, and struggling heave for vent;
Spectators, with imagined terrors warm,
Anxious expect the bursting of the storm:
But all unfit in such a pile to dwell,
His voice comes forth like Echo from her cell;
To swell the tempest needful aid denies,
And all adown the stage in feeble murmurs dies.
WHAT man, like B^Y, with such pains can err
In elocution, action, character?
What man could give, if B^Y was not here,
Such well-applauded tenderness to Lear?
Who else can speak so very, very fine,
That Sense may kindly end with every line?
SOME dozen lines before the ghost is there,
Behold him for the solemn scene prepare.
See how he frames his eyes, poises each limb,
Puts the whole body into proper trim, --
From whence we learn, with no great stretch of art,
Five lines hence comes a ghost, and, ha! a start.
WHEN he appears most perfect, still we find
Something which jars upon, and hurts the mind.
Whatever lights upon a part are thrown,
We see too plainly they are not his own.
No flame from Nature ever yet he caught,
Nor knew a feeling which he was not taught:
He raised his trophies on the base of art,
And conn'd his passions as he conn'd his part.
Q^N, from afar, lured by the scent of Fame,
A Stage-Leviathan, put in his claim.
Pupil of BETTERTON and BOOTH. Alone,
Sullen he walked, and deemed the chair his own.
For how should moderns, mushrooms of the day,
Who never those masters knew, know how to play?
GRAY-BEARDED vet'rans, who, with partial tongue,
Extol the times when they themselves were young;
Who, having lost all relish for the stage,
See not their own defects, but lash the age,
Received, with joyful murmurs of applause,
Their darling chief, and lined his favorite cause.
FAR be it from the candid Muse to tread
Insulting over the ashes of the dead.
But just to living merit, she maintains,
And dares the test, whilst GARRICK'S Genius reigns;
Ancients, in vain, endeavor to excel,
Happily praised if they could act as well.
BUT, though Prescription's force we disallow,
Nor to Antiquity submissive bow;
Though we deny imaginary grace,
Founded on accidents of time and place;
Yet real worth of every growth shall bear,
Due praise, nor dare we, Q^N, forget thee there.
His words bore sterling weight, nervous and strong,
In manly tides of sense they rolled along.
Happy in art, he chiefly had pretense
To keep up Numbers, yet not forfeit Sense,
No actor ever greater heights could reach
In all the labored artifice of speech.
SPEECH! Is that all? And, shall an actor found,
An universal fame on partial ground?
Parrots themselves speak properly by rote,
And, in six months, my dog shall howl by note.
I laugh at those who, when the Stage they tread,
Neglect the heart to compliment the head;
With strict propriety, their care's confined
To weigh out words, while Passion halts behind.
To Syllable-dissectors they appeal,
Allow them accent, cadence, -- Fools may feel;
But, spite of all the criticizing elves,
Those who would make us feel, must feel themselves.
His eyes, in gloomy socket taught to roll,
Proclaimed the sullen habit of his soul.
Heavy and phlegmatic he trod the Stage,
Too proud for tenderness, too dull for rage.
WHEN Hector's lovely widow shines in tears,
Or Rowe's gay Rake dependant Virtue jeers;
With the same cast of features he is seen
To chide the Libertine, and court the Queen.
FROM the tame scene which without passion flows,
With just desert his reputation rose.
Nor less he pleased, when, on some surly plan,
He was, at once, the Actor and the Man.
IN Brute he shone unequalled: all agree
GARRICK'S not half so great a Brute as he.
When Cato's labored scenes are brought to view,
With equal praise the Actor labored too.
For still you will find, trace passions to their root,
Small difference 'twixt the Stoic and the Brute.
IN fancied scenes, as in life's real plan,
He could not, for a moment, sink the Man.
In whatever cast his character was laid,
Self still, like oil, upon the surface played.
Nature, in spite of all his skill, crept in:
Horatio, Dorax, Falstaff, -- still 'twas Q^N.
NEXT follows SH^R^D^N. -- A doubtful name,
As yet unsettled in the rank of Fame.
This, fondly lavish in his praises grown,
Gives him all merit; That, allows him none.
Between them both, we'll steer the middle course,
Nor, loving Praise, rob Judgment of her force.
JUST his conceptions, natural and great:
His feelings strong, his words enforced with weight.
Was speech-fam'd Q^N himself to hear him speak,
Envy would drive the color from his cheek:
But step-dame Nature, niggard of her grace,
Denied the social powers of voice and face.
Fixed in one frame of features, glare of eye,
Passions, like Chaos, in confusion lie:
In vain the wonders of his skill are tried
To form Distinction Nature has denied.
His voice no touch of harmony admits,
Irregularly deep and shrill by fits:
The two extremes appear, like man and wife,
Coupled together for the sake of strife.
His Action's always strong, but sometimes such
That Candor must declare, he acts too much.
Why must Impatience fall three paces back?
Why paces three return to the attack?
Why is the right leg too forbid to stir,
Unless in motion semicircular?
Why must the Hero with the Nailor vie,
And hurl the close-clench'd fist at nose or eye?
IN Royal John, with Philip angry grown,
I thought he would have knocked poor D^V^S down.
Inhuman tyrant! was it not a shame
To fright a king so harmless and so tame?
BUT, spite of all defects, his glories rise;
And Art, by Judgment formed, with Nature vies.
Behold him sound the depth of HUBERT'S soul,
Whilst in his own contending passions roll.
View the whole scene, with critic judgment scan,
And then -- deny him Merit if you can.
Where he falls short, it is Nature's fault alone;
Where he succeds, the Merit's all his own.
LAST, GARRICK came. -- Behind him throng a train
Of snarling critics, ignorant as vain.
ONE finds out, -- "He Is of stature somewhat low, --
" Your Hero always should be tall you know. --
" True natural greatness all consists in height." --
Produce your voucher, Critic. -- "Sergeant KYTE."
ANOTHER cannot forgive the paltry arts
By which he makes his way to shallow hearts;
Mere pieces of finesse, traps for applause. --
" Avaunt unnat'ral start, affected pause."
FOR me, by Nature formed to judge with phlegm,
I cannot acquit by wholesale nor condemn.
The best things carried to excess are wrong;
The start may be too frequent, pause too long.
But only used in proper time and place,
Severest judgment must allow them Grace.
IF Bunglers, formed on Imitation's plan,
Just in the way that Monkies mimic Man;
Their copied scene with mangled arts disgrace,
And pause and start with the same vacant face;
We join the critic laugh; those tricks we scorn,
Which spoil the scenes they mean them to adorn.
BUT when, from Nature's pure and genuine source,
These strokes of acting flow with generous force;
When in the features all the soul's portray'd,
And passions, such as GARRICK'S, are displayed;
To me they seem from quickest feelings caught:
Each start, is Nature; and each pause, is Thought.
WHEN Reason yields to Passion's wild alarms,
And the whole state of Man is up in arms;
What, but a Critic, could condemn the Play'r
For pausing here, when Cool Sense pauses there?
Whilst, working from the heart, the fire I trace,
And mark it strongly flaming to the face;
Whilst, in each sound, I hear the very man;
I cannot catch words, and pity those who can.
LET Wits, like Spiders, from the tortured brain
Fine-draw the critic-web with curious pain;
The Gods, -- a kindness I with thanks must pay, --
Have formed me of a coarser kind of clay;
Nor stung with Envy, nor with Spleen diseased,
A poor dull creature, still with Nature pleased:
Hence to thy praises, GARRICK, I agree,
And, pleased with Nature, must be pleased with Thee.
Now might I tell how silence reigned throughout,
And deep attention hushed the rabble rout;
How every claimant, tortured with desire,
Was pale as ashes, or as red as fire:
But, loose to Fame, the Muse more simply acts,
Rejects all flourish, and relates mere facts.
THE judges, as the several parties came,
With Temper heard, with Judgment weighed each claim,
And in their sentence happily agreed,
In name of both, Great SHAKESPEARE thus decreed:
" IF Manly Sense; if Nature, linked with Art;
" If thorough Knowledge of the Human Heart;
" If Powers of Acting, vast and unconfined;
" If fewest Faults, with greatest Beauties joined;
" If strong Expression, and strange Powers, which lie
" Within the magic circle of the eye;
" If Feelings which few hearts, like His, can know,
" And which no Face so well as His can show;
" Deserve the Pref'rence; -- GARRICK take the Chair;
" Nor quit it -- 'till Thou place an Equal There.
FINIS.

