THE SEDITIOUS INSECTS:

OR, THE Levellers Assembled IN CONVOCATION.

A POEM.

At cum Incerta volant, caeloque Examina ludunt,
Contemnuntque Favos, and frigida tecta relinquunt,
Instabiles Animos ludo prohibebis Inani
Nec magnus prohibere labor. Tu regibus alas
Eripe --
Virg. Georg. lib. IV. But when the Swarms are eager of their Play,
And loath their Empty Hives, and idly stray,
Restrain the wanton Fugitives, and take
A timely Care to bring the Truants back,
The Task is easy: But to clip the Wings
Of their Highflying Arbitrary Kings.
Dryden. LONDON: Printed, and Sold by Benj. Bragg, at the Raven in
Paternoster Row. 1708.

THE Seditious Insects, etc.
NEAR the Cool Verge of that Delightful Strand,
Where winding Thames rowls over Golden Sand,
Where Western Breezes fan the Gentle Air,
And Britain's brightest Ornaments appear,
An Ancient Hive of Aristaean Bees,
With pleasure swarmed among the Fragrant Trees.
Long did their Labors over the Land diffuse
Aerial Honey, and Ambrosial Dews,
Collected from the Meads, and Rosy Bowers,
And Morning Sweets, that tip the gaudy Flowers
Of their gay Pride, despoiling every Plain,
To feed with Heavenly Juice the humble Swain,
And load with labored Sweets the flowing Land again.
Safe was their Hive from all oppressive Harms,
No Dreams of Danger discomposed their Swarms;
But famed for Peace and Order they were known,
True Bees due Homage to Superiors own.
This was their State, when busy Moths arose,
And Wasps Insidious, equally their Foes.
Hornets and Drones, and all the humming Tribe
Whom Hate could Summon, or whom Interest Bribe.
Gnats, Beetles, Locusts, all the Worthless kind
Of hateful Insects in the Riot joined,
Buzzing false Dangers, and distracting Fears,
In new Confusions now the Hive appears;
Customs unknown to Ages heretofore
Corrupt the Breed, the Virgin Race deflow'r.
So when False Teachers in the Church arise,
Schism prevails, and true Religion dies;
Faith takes her flight, unable to sustain
The Mighty Shock, Reason persuades in vain;
Till Heavenly Energy our Breast inspires
With Sacred Sense of true Etherial Fires,
Then the dark Clouds of Error fly apace,
And Revelation reassumes her Place.
Now the warm Foe their Io Paeans sing,
In every Vale loud Peals of Conquest ring;
The painted Butterfly with empty Sound,
Proclaimed the gaudy Triumph all around;
Every vile Insect to the Hive repairs,
Foments the Tumult, and the Plunder Shares.
Sated with Spoil, with Victory elate,
The Hostile Vermin whet their pointed Hate:
Each Envious Thought they sooth, and proudly drive
The Bees dejected from the Luscious Hive;
When their Just King touched with a Princely Zeal,
To save his Subjects, and their Pressures heal,
Gives up the Counselors who ill-advis'd,
And their Immoderate Enterprise chastis'd,
Another Set of Ministers he chose,
And freed the Hive from their Vexatious Foes.
With Rays of Heavenly Light returning Peace
Smiled on the Great Design, and Crowned it with Success;
Such is the Power of Majesty Divine,
When in full Luster it vouchsafes to shine.
The Rebel Brood struck with amazing Dread,
In trembling Horror and Confusion fled.
So have the Zealots of our Church appeared,
(If Little Things may be with Great Compared,)
Busy with specious Dangers to amuse,
With Patriots Fears the Populace abuse,
When 'twas the Churches Honey raised the Cry,
Joined with the Sweetness of the Ministry.
Had they still loll'd in Soft Luxurious Ease,
The Church had flourished in Triumphant Peace,
The Synods too been Safe, secure from Harm,
(Though even in them some Holy Vermin swarm:)
O say, Bright Goddess, whence this Temper flows,
And show how first the Fatal Schism rose.
Long has the Papal Power aspired to reign
With Universal sway: Why will they strive in vain?
Some Angel still by a Divine Command
Will interpose to save the British Land.
Successive Plots, and Jesuitick Wiles,
Open Attempts, and seeming Friendly Smiles,
Have in their Turns, with the same vile Intent,
Contrived the Ruin of this Government.
This to promote, some Fathers heretofore
Lavish of Labor, prodigal of Gore,
Fain would their Hands in Royal Blood imbrue,
And blessed the Deed as Meritorious too,
Since the Libation to the Church was due.
This Sainted Herd, this Vile, Deceiving Race,
Now in Rich Fresco at See Mr. Addison's Remarks on Italy,
Loretto blaze;
Where Speaking Marble does their Story tell,
This for the Faith, that for Religion fell;
When for the worst of Crimes the Hellish Breed,
Did by the Justest Law of Nations Bleed.
Such Saints as These England too much has known,
Who Clemens and Ravilliac's Maxims own;
King-killing Doctrines, and Deposing Crowns,
Too often have been the Theme of Servile Gowns.
Peter's and Ferguson may surely claim
A Share with Garnet in Immortal Fame.
Lacy and Marion too in time may vie
With either kind for Gifts and Prophecy;
The same Seditious Spirit forms their Will
For Mischief, Armed alike with Blind Ungoverned Zeal.
Whole Ages have such Emissaries tried,
This much too fickle Nation to divide
With open Violence. In Eighty-eight
They lead their easy King, and rid the yielding State.
Law fell before their Arbitrary Sway,
And now they Smiled, and Blessed the Happy Day,
When British Liberty no more should stand
In opposition to Supreme Command.
Thus were we crushed by the Intrigues of Rome,
Till Glorious Nassau had reversed our Doom;
He came to save us with extended Arms,
Restore our Laws, and break the Tyrants Charms,
Rescue the Church from her insulting Foes,
And leave the Nation in a Blessed Repose;
This done, he fled to his Congenial Sphere,
And shines upon the Land a Bright Auspicious Star.
Forgive, Immortal Hero, if my Muse,
Conscious of Weakness, her own Theme pursues,
Nor aims to Praise so Excellent a King,
None but a Virgil should a Caesar Sing.
With Mortal Pangs they saw the Romish Yoke
Thus by our Happy Revolution broke
By open force; despairing to succeed,
On New Designs their Factious Agents lead
Various Intrigues, their Cursed Engines try,
No Difficulties daunt their Industry,
But what the Sword denies they attempt by Prophecy.
Earth, Hell, and Seas, they will compass to deceive,
And Glory in the Toil if Proselites believe.
So when Imperial Juno had implored
The Thunderer's Aid to crush the Trojan Lord,
The Awful God denying her Request,
Told her, Aeneas must in Latium rest;
But she Impatient, by strong Passion moved,
(So much a Female Jesuit she proved)
Besought the Powers beneath to be her Friends,
And went to Hell to gain her Pious Ends.
Sure 'twas from thence this Gifted Spirit came,
No Heavenly Fire, but an Infernal Flame,
Designed by Jesuits to destroy Our Ease,
And pall the Joys of our United Peace.
For this, Seditious Spirits in disguise
Swarm in the Church, though they that Church despise:
Loudly they boast her Ancient Rights and Fame,
Whilst underhand they play a Popish Game.
The Seed of Loyold with Artful Pains
First fixed this High-Church Poison in our Veins,
Infecting too too many of our Youth,
Who, blindly led, fell from the Cause of Truth.
Isis no more can boast of healing Streams,
The Deity has long withdrawn his Beams;
Displeased that they polluted his Abode,
That High-Church Victims now his Altars load,
And Priests no Incense offer worthy of a God.
Hence we derive the Cause of all our Woes,
From hence the Dangers of the Church arose;
Hence empty Libertines with Modish Air,
At Mystery laugh, and all Religion jeer;
When Fountains are corrupt, how can the Streams be clear?
So when at Athens the Degenerate Race
Left their old Morals, new Ones to Embrace,
The Guardian Deities their Shrines forsook,
In vain the Victims on their Altars smoke;
In vain the Fragrant Gums in Spheres ascend,
Th'unhallow'd Incense did but more offend:
Then Highflown Priests their new Distinctions brought,
And Faction for Religion first was taught;
Then Piety and Ancient Faith decayed,
And Synod-Men the Churches Right betrayed;
Then Vice and Virtue were in Schools defined,
As the Declaiming Stagyrite inclined;
But Truth abandoned did in Secret Mourn,
And begged the Blooming Goddess to return.
O say, Celestial Muse, the Reason tell,
Why in those Heavenly Men such Passions dwell?
Why those who preach Religion, Zeal profess,
And for the Church such Flaming Love confess,
Shall in vile Terms of their Superiors speak,
Slight their Authority, their Orders break;
In open Disobedience live, and rail,
And hope by Innovations to prevail,
With Intermediate Sessions, why confound
The Churches Peace, the Convocation wound?
By Rights Usurped why Presbyters prepare
Their Primate's Power without Consent to share,
And fill without his leave the Prolocutor's Chair?
Why to their Members they pretend to give
Commissions to absent? Why grant 'em leave,
And by what Right, with what assuming Face,
They substitute their Proxies in their Place?
Why Actuaries they chose? But with intent
T'infringe the Power of their President,
Whose most Undoubted Right 'thas always been
As well for to Prorogue as to Convene.
T'appoint his Register, of Deputation,
To act in either House or Convocation.
And why such grateful Thoughts these Men retain,
Of the Transcendent Mildness of this Reign,
So warmly to oppose the Lords Address, The Bishops Address of Thanks refused
by the Lower House.

Where in the Humblest Terms they did express
Their Thanks to Heaven for that Illustrious Queen,
In whom such Wondrous Piety is seen;
Whose unexampled Bounty has declared
How much the Churches Welfare she revered;
Such true diffusive Charity reveals
What Sense of Goodness in her Soul she feels.
A Charity which in its Nature shows
Heaven for its Birthplace, where it first arose,
From whence descending to her Royal Breast,
The Radiant Virtue Kind'red Flames Confessed,
And owned the Bright Abode, worthy the Godlike Guest.
For me, the first Desire which does Control
The Secret Springs which move my rising Soul
Is, that her Glorious Reign I might rehearse
In equal Numbers, and distinguished Verse.
But far, O far above the Poet's Flame
Is her Bright Story, and Immortal Name.
Could I, like H^x, in lasting Strains
Transcend the Mantuan or Moeonian Swains,
Then should her more than Mortal Virtue shine,
And Heavenly Eloquence adorn each Line;
Then should my Happy Muse record her Fame,
And ANNA's Glory be my endless Theme;
But whether does the Ravished Muse Aspire?
Not Phoebus boasts a more exalted Fire,
Or touches with more Art the sweetly sounding Lyre.
In vain our Monarch labors to engage,
With all her Clemency, these Men of Rage,
Who their Defect of Duty would supply,
By wrangling for their Independency.
Who without Precedent insist to use
Forms of their own, and their own Methods choose;
Though former Synods always in like Case
Complied with the Directions of his Grace,
And Suffragans; but these too Wise are grown
T'acknowledge Duty, or Dependence own:
These claim a Right Coordinate with theirs,
And Model as they please the Church Affairs.
So Puritans of Old in the same Strain,
Did of the Bishops Legal Power complain.
A Presbyterian Parity they taught,
In the same Language which by these is brought,
To vindicate the Lower House's Claim,
By Advocates of the same Strength and Fame.
This Levelling Contention to promote,
Full many then, as well as now, have wrote,
Though none with more Asperity appears
Than Gifted Urim, void of Filial Fears;
He treats the Bishops with the same regard,
As if he for Presbytery declared.
Such foul Mistakes, such groundless Calumnies,
Occur in all this Vide Bed-maker University.
Sunburned Author says,
That Charity apart, one might believe
He did from Hell his Influence receive.
With Scorn of others, full of Self-conceit,
This Scribler undertook the Grand Debate,
Misrepresenting every thing that made
Against his Cause, and did with Art evade
The Force of Truth, as if deceiving was his Trade.
Thus to his Cause he Courted Partial Praise,
With all the Sophistry his Wit could raise.
But whilst his Eloquence profusely Toils,
Old Anarchy reviews his former Spoils,
Pleased with the Thought the Shapeless Monster Smiles.
Here the Episcopate in mournful hue
Appears, there falling Mitres strike the view.
For this Incestuous Twigg in Zealous Strains
Of President and Upper-House complains,
Quarrels with Bishops Rights and Dignities,
Since the Coy Lawn his fond Embraces flies.
For this Bold B^s in that dark Orb declaims,
He both the Church and Churches Head Blasphemes;
No Sense of Piety or Grace restrain
The Heterodox Effusions of his Brain,
Who for his Party sticks at no Abuse,
But for the Cause will even his A 30th of January Sermon, where he lessens
Christ to extol the Martyr.
God traduce.
Elaborate H^ with the same Intent
Engages in this weighty Argument:
But of Bright Truth afraid, he soon retreats,
Still safe behind some puzzling Theme he gets,
Where in round Periods, and Sonorous Words,
A Barren Entertainment he affords.
No Cogent Reas'nings in his Thoughts abound,
His Sense in Fairy Circles dances round,
And never is without some Labor found.
Nay, though the M^ dignifies his Brows,
He still their Levelling Designs avows.
With flagrant Marks of most Irreverend Spleen
Loose S^n is in his Letter seen.
There Inbred Calumny, and Native Spite,
Wrangle by turns for Lower-House's Right;
There High-Church Zeal defends Fanatic Claim,
Softening Sedition by a milder Name,
To save the Church with Scorn her Fathers Treats,
Such Rage of Schism in his Bosom beats.
So Patriots of old, to save the Crown,
Destroyed its Power first, then pulled their Sovereign down.
Against Conviction, and the clearest Light
Of Sacred Truth, did railing N^m write
With Artificial Strokes of Party Skill,
He gilds their Errors with the Name of Zeal,
And the deluded Herd believe the lying Oracle.
To such mean Shifts those Scribblers must descend,
Who an ill Cause avowedly defend.
Among these Champions A^ too appears
With Vide Oxford Alman. 1706.
Hieroglyphics of the Parties Fears;
No wonder they the Church's Danger see,
Who would destroy the Church's Polity;
Pull down her Bishops, and their Rights betray,
And modelize the Church the shortest Way.
What would the Parliament of Forty-one
Have given for such a Convocation?
Such Levellers as these, such Sons of Zeal,
Sure at that time must have succeeded well,
When every Schismatic and gifted Saint,
Who cried down Bishops Power in saucy Cant,
Found such Rewards, and such Encouragement.
Wise Against Episcopacy and Church Discipline.
Pennington's Petition had appeared
More Just, if Presbyters, like these, had shared
In the Church Hierarchy with less Disgrace,
Sacred Episcopists had yielded Place
TO Inferior Clergy of Reforming Race.
These are the Insects which the Hive infest,
And these give Life and Motion to the rest.
Numerous Meetings of the lesser Fry
Take Influence from these to raise the Cry
Of Danger to the Church from too assuming Prelacy.
Not far from that most Celebrated Hall,
Where the Rich Trophies of the Conquered Gaul,
The Glory of the British Host display,
And show the Wonders of that dreadful Day,
When Marlbro' great in Arms the Foe subdued,
And stopped with Heaps of Slain the rolling Danube's Flood.
There stands a Dome, Bell-Tavern, King Street, Westminster.
as Modern Stories tell,
Distinguished from its Neighbors by a Bell;
There the A Club of Priests, so called.
Grand Inquest of Religion meet,
To forge new Scandals for the Church and State.
Thither the Tippling Priesthood flock in Shoals,
And leave to Heaven the trifling Care of Souls.
It Is there the Tories find out Means to raise
Funds of Reproach, Volumes of Lying Lays,
T'asperse the Queen, the Ministry disgrace;
Whilst their own Peers of a distinguished Name,
Their B's, and R's, and N's, of Recent Fame,
Promote the Farce, and Glory in their Shame.
There the Irreverend Sots their Goblets Crown,
And in full Bowls all Moderation drown.
A Cast there is from this Mellifluous Swarm,
Who Nightly meet their Principles to warm,
Where Bloated Bacchus in gay Triumph rides,
And Shut^h provokes Salacious Tides;
Hither the High-Church Vermin do retreat,
For where but at the Devil should they meet?
Drunk with Priest Wine new Dangers they perceive,
And for the Church in strong Gallicia grieve.
To rail secure, and fence against Alarms,
They shift and vary their industrious Swarms;
Now the Three Shut^h and her Two Daughters, so called.
Conies-Court, and then the Royal Arms.
Where Ben^y Brews with Lusitanic Port
True English Redstreak, thither they resort,
And warm with Zeal perceive not the Abuse,
But for true French mistake the blended Juice;
There mock Committees judge of each Debate,
And Convocation Business regulate.
There florid S^ in strong Oration shows
How far the Lower House the Upper may oppose;
With early Zeal he did their Cause embrace,
And in this Session claims the Chair-man's Place.
Sure some Malicious Star, an Enemy to Peace,
Shone over his Head when first he joined with these;
Too strong for the Bright Rays of Truth or Sense,
Virtue Innate, or Sey^r's Influence,
To hinder his Conjunction with that Crew,
Who seek to ruin Church and Nation too;
His solid Judgment want of heat Supplies,
And speaks him only Tory in disguise.
H^n next in the Black List appears,
This Butter-flie a sullen Aspect wears;
No Saints his Gloomy Calenders contain,
But such as of the sinking Church complain.
The Tack he vindicates in Senseless Tone,
Does none but Tories for true Patriots own,
And is in Church Disputes a mere pretending Drone.
The next Vile Insect of the High-Church Clan
Says Grace to Northern Metropolitan;
He from his Lord whole Paragraphs purloins,
And mingles Nonsense with most Reverend Lines;
Roars for the Church, Triumphant in his Drink,
But rarely, very rarely, condescends to think.
D^g, a Wasp of the same Shape and Hue,
To Passive Principles and High-Church true,
Comes next in Place, though higher in Degree,
This Reverend Thing subscribes himself D. D.
He for Dragooning Learnedly declares,
Such Zeal for Mother Church this fluttering Insect bears.
Nor S^h for Plagiary is accused in vain,
A Furious Bigot of the Tory Strain;
He knows to value Oaths far less than Gold,
And how both Wife and Fellowship to hold;
Who lest the Church should think, as Bards report,
Will make the Playhouse work for its Support.
O! Collier lay aside thy Manly Rage,
Since thy own Priests in Buskins tread the Stage,
To raise dejected Merit, and maintain
The Grandeur of the Church without a stain,
That Gold for Injured Rights no more atone,
Be these peculiar to the Whigs alone.
VVell-natur'd Pei^n I lament thy Fate,
Mistaken Reasoning prompted thee to hate
That Moderation which adorns the Mind,
And what alone in Modern Whigs we find;
High-Church apart thy Character is fair,
Thou have no other Fault but being there.
To this The Common Regale at Bently's.
Grand Oatcake Club of quaint Divines,
Gross R^n his Guts and Malice joins;
A Greezy Ionian of Amphibious Breed,
Who can for Gain with any Party lead;
But in his Nature opposite to those
Who healing Peace and Unity espouse;
All the Extremes of the vile Tory Brood,
In him conjoin, with no Alloy of Good.
To him alike all Languages are known,
With the same Truth he understands his own;
This Paedagogue lives undisturbed by Cares,
Nor minds the Widows Tears nor Orphans Prayers,
But rakes for Money for Foundation Boys,
Which he for Coals and Candles ends employs,
Whilst he poor Man but Five Pluralities enjoys.
Unknown in Morals, Character, and Fame,
To the Great Founder, of Illustrious Name,
Whose Boundless Charity, and High Deserts,
He Impiously Lessens, and perverts.
Of Irish Extract, and Hibernian Sense,
(Qualifications for an Evidence,)
R^ Supercilious, Haughty, Dull, Morose,
Does to the Board his Genuine Thoughts disclose;
So burning is his Zeal, that he declares
The Government too moderate appears
To those who from his Principles dissent,
Such Smithfield should convert, and not the Parliament.
J^n a Locust of the Factious League,
For Birth and Learning famed as his Colleague,
He Prayers and Preaching primitively blames,
And against Priestly Offices declaims;
Unhappy Barthol'mew, who must confide
In the loose Notions of this wandering Guide,
Whom neither Goodness, Chastity, nor Peace
Adorn, nor any other Christian Grace;
T^d a Priest or Bishop, which you please,
Loose in his Morals, stiff in his Address,
Does both the Club and Principles Caress.
From Tweed to Roterdam this Hornet shines,
And for the Cause in Florid Fustian whines.
In this Cabal all Vices you may trace,
Or in it O^r had found no place;
If lying qualifies, or ardent Love
For Pious Theft, none can a better Title prove.
Arrowsmith's Sermon Preached before the May'r,
To Plagiary his Aversion must declare;
This Zealot to the Tory's High Priest bows,
And offers up at F^ all his Vows;
The Solid B^ smiles on his Address,
And in Propitious Dullness does him Bless;
Conceited H^ with Melancholy Mien,
Adds to the Club his Piety and Spleen;
But both affected, both uneasy sit,
For that can boast no Truth, and this no Wit.
Firm to the Cause, he would at something aim,
Though strong in Zeal, he is in Performance lame;
And after all his Pious Pains are over,
Though Lady F^ge his Fate deplore,
He Is but the same dull Mortal that he was before.
If Arduous Spite, and most obdurate Hate,
To that Dear Name which must be ever Great,
Weigh with this Club, none can more justly claim,
Than F^n a Patent to defame.
This Debauchee, as Playhouse Annals say,
Plied at the Theater in hopes of Pay,
But proving there too awkard to succeed,
Finding his Genius did to Action lead,
He Listed in the Service of High-church,
And left his pompous Buskins in the Lurch.
With these the L^ds too demand a Place,
Two drowzy Beetles of the Tory Race;
Both of our Modern Dangers were appriz'd,
And at the falling Church seemed much surpised;
They thought the Lords too Fearless and Supine,
And with Tripe Higgons at her Ease repine.
These Grand Intrigues most Zealous to assist,
D^n's appears a vile traducing Priest;
His Fruitful Malice pleasingly beguiles
Their Cares, on him the Black Assembly smiles,
Whilst Ten^n and William he reviles.
When O^y has his yawning Flock dismissed,
And from her Pain St. Peggy is released,
This Mortal mounts a second time on high,
Once more the Sacred Text to crucify.
He from the Scriptures evidently proves,
The Modern Church on a false Axis moves;
Says she is to blame to tolerate her Foes,
That Persecution better would compose
The Wavering Minds of her Rebellious Sons,
If once convinced by Orthodox Dragoons.
These are the Club who for the Church appear,
And for her Discipline and Rights declare;
No Blemishes their Characters distain,
No Private Piques, no Sordid Hopes of Gain,
Corrupt the Dictates of their Sounder Sense,
Who act from Tory Principle and Influence.
Besides these constant Members there are some
Who casual Volunteers do thither come;
T^tt and lovely G^tt both have been,
Though not of late, with these Reformers seen.
Nature Rebels when Interest comes in play,
And Principles to stronger Tithes give way.
Some too there are whom Penury deters
From being in this Harvest Laborers;
Not that they want foul Slanders to defame
And brand the Ministers with Marks of Shame.
Fruitful in Impudence they still are found,
And with their Parties Villainy abound;
Skilbec, and P^r Show, and Thousands more,
Too Black for Honest Satyr to explore.
Others with Griping Avarice repleat,
In viler Liquors one another treat;
These frugal Sinners can supinely rail,
As warmed by muddy Influence of Ale. Cross-Keys St. Martin's- Lane.

On clumsy Wings their feeble Spirits rise,
Before 'em hated Moderation flies,
And base Detraction want of Wit supplies.
Here F^d and B^r of Noisie Fame,
With Hotspur F^n for the Church declaim,
And sink her Credit to exalt her Name.
Here S^t and K^ys do for the High-Church lie,
Damnation drink to Nassau's Memory,
O Spar^g have a Care of such vile Company.
Some not admitted, qualified appear
To taste the Sweetness of this High-Church Fare;
Thrifty and Gripewell an Insipid Drone,
Do both the Spirit of the Party own;
Their Pious Spite and Sordid Thirst of Gain,
Betray their Patron's Temper in each Vein;
Unlike the happy St. Martyn.
Saint whose Arms they bear,
No part of Cloak or Money will they spare.
Such Zeal for Perquisites of every kind
Dwells in the secret Foldings of their Mind,
That those The Under Officers of the Church.
who Scorn their Profits to divide,
Still feel the Weight of their Oppressive Pride.
Gripewell in plenty rowls, deep sunk in Ease,
He leaves his Drudgery to Refugees.
Long have they been of that Tenacious Fry,
Who for Exaction even with Jews may vie,
Oppressing all who are beneath their Care,
So Gripewell does the Gain, Thrifty the Odium share.
They wisely know that to be Rich in Grace
They frugally must manage their Increase,
And make the most they can of Curates Place.
Such Evangelic Doctrines they disclose,
That Scared Communicants forsake their Vows,
Forced by these Vermin from the Face of Day,
Their Minds in wild Imaginations stray,
And in the Maze of Error lose their Way.
With these Divines Pert H^d may sit
In close Debate, a Vain Sarcastic Wit!
He threw of Moderation's easy Rule,
Impatient to expose a High-Church Fool,
In flaming Print the Wou'd-be-Wit appears,
Thundering loud Peals in Peaceful He^y's Ears.
But whilst with noisie Eloquence he roars,
And Hells Abyss for Scandal he explores,
Bright Liberty her Sacred Pinnions tries,
The Saint confessed the Glory of her Eyes,
Drops his Design, and in a Sarcasm dies.
To close the Rear of this Highflying List,
Comes Ghostly M^ the Cambridge Exorcist.
He in the Cause has so much Heat expressed,
He scarce with more his Landlady carest,
When from the Tunns she Nightly did repair,
To taste the Sweetness of St. B^tts Air:
But now those mean Embraces are no more,
His Amorous Soul does more Sublimely soar,
And though of High-Church Make can stoop to C^r's Power.
These of Inferior Class which those combine,
And in the Convocation Riot join.
These Sow Sedition in the Peaceful Land,
And in the Gap of Comprehension stand.
Such Priests as these Embarass our Affairs,
And fill the giddy Populace with Fears;
Divide and Rule their Grand Apostle cries,
Then Liberty shall fall, and High-Church Power rise.
But all are not of this Degenerate Race,
Some Noble Prelates their Religion Grace,
Whom no Sinister Aims, or Party Spleen,
Could ever Bribe the Church to undermine.
No Popular Attempts prevail with these,
Who most sincerely cultivate her Peace,
Those vile destructive Measures to pursue,
Which would infallibly the Church undo.
They saw with Horror what her Foes designed,
And for her Ancient Legal Right combined,
With all those vast Advantages to Sense,
Which Truth can furnish out for Eloquence.
Judicious Lin^n for his Worth Renowned,
With Piety, and every Virtue Crowned,
In this Dispute acquired a Bright Applause,
And well defended his Illustrious Cause.
Courageous Car^le his distinguished Parts,
And finished Learning to the Cause imparts;
The routed Argument before him flies,
And in its Primitive Confusion dies;
Urged by strong Principles of Truth and Right,
Illumined Fr^n did with Judgment write,
To crush the growing Schism which might tend
To sink the State, and Church Dominion end.
But he to save 'em pushed his just Design
And with him Fifty more in Protestation join.
That Presbyters Subordination owe
To Bishops, S^k did most plainly show,
And Learnedly their Danger did disclose,
Who held the Doctrines of the Lower House.
Trim^ll for Innate Piety revered,
Against these furious Levellers declared;
With unaffected Modesty and Sense,
He proved the Primate's just Pre-eminence.
Gib^n with Oratories pleasing Force,
With Streams derived from the Immortal Source
Of Heaven and Lambeth, zealously maintained
Th'Archbishop's Power, and Reputation gained.
Learned in Church History, and Ancient Use
Of former Synods, Ken^t did deduce
The Metropolitan's presiding Place,
And proved it with Inimitable Grace.
Full of the same most Excellent Design,
Pathetic Will^s in a Strain Divine,
Shows Ephraim how he may lost Peace restore,
And envy Judah's happy Race no more.
With what Excess of Joy does Vern^y tread
The Heavenly Paths of Peace, no Guilty dread
Can interrupt his Ease, no Black remorse
Stains with ungoverned Zeal his Learned Course.
Not melting Lovers when the Fair they Woo
Taste more Delight, nor with more Sweetness Sue,
Than these, when for the Churches Peace they move
With all the soft Artillery of Love.
Besides these Glorious Few, a numerous Train
Of Worthy Prelates the same Cause maintain;
Intrepid Sa^m, Nor^h all Divine,
E^y and Wor^r with true Luster shine.
Ox^d St. A^ Cov^y appear,
With Rays of Heavenly Light serenely clear;
Ban^r and W^m's, Her^d all claim,
With B^ll and Pet^h dear to Fame,
Among the Worthies of the Church a Name.
Gl^r and B^ll eminently true,
With Lan^ff, Win^r old Faith renew,
And the just Interest of the Church pursue.
These all in strict Obedience persevere,
And for the Queen's Supremacy declare;
These no Delusions ever could persuade,
To join with those who have her Right betrayed.
Long her Resentment glowed within her Breast,
And long her Mercy her just Rage deprest;
Even now in mildest Terms Queen's Letter to the Archbishop.
her Letter claims
Her Legal Right, it is with Concern she blames,
Her Priests, and with Regret their Disobedience Names.
With deepest Penetration she beheld
Their vile Designs, nor Force by Force repelled,
But in a Charming Style, with Heavenly Love,
The Lower House's Schism does reprove.
But they regardless of her Dread Command,
In Opposition to her Pleasure stand;
And though prorogued, her Mandates disobey,
And meet and act their own Seditious Way.
No wonder they have in Rebellion been
Against their Primate, who thus slight the Queen;
That Glorious Queen, who freely from the Throne
Has given such large Revenues of her own,
And to these Thankless Priests such true Compassion shown.
So when the Wanton Isra'lites Rebelled
Against their Heavenly Guide in Horeb's Field;
Nor did his Piety or Gifts avail,
The Ungrateful Levites vehemently rail;
Sated with Food Divine which Manna cloyed,
They murmur at the Blessings they enjoyed;
Forgetting all their Mighty Prophets Pain,
Of Power assumed the Factious Herd complain,
And Aaron's Legal Right invidiously Arraign.
Pleased with a Cause his Primate to oppose,
Seditious Korah and his Tribe arose;
Rights of the Hebrew Temple they diffuse,
To raise Rebellion, and they Church traduce;
To lessen Aaron, whom with Scorn they treat,
So near did Jewish Spite resemble High-Church Hate,
Aspiring Dathan's Soul, and On's, we see
Flaming in Pious B^'s and K^,
And Hot Abiram's Zeal betrays poor A^
These Modern Levellers like those Renowned,
Through our Blessed Aaron's Sides the Temple wound,
And on pretense of Rights her Sacred Peace confound.
By such as these the Church in every Age
Has felt the sad Effects of Party Rage;
But Heaven which always smiled on her Bright Fame,
And looked with Pity on the suffering Dame,
Has raised up Hero's to assert her Cause,
And rouse the Terror of Vindictive Laws,
T'avenge her Injured Honor upon those
Who dare Insinuate her lost Repose.
Begin Celestial Muse the pleasing Strain,
Record the Hero's of Great ANNA's Reign,
By whose Unerring Councils she endears
Her Peoples Love, and Europe's Fate declares.
Harmonious Co^r sing in Lays Divine,
By whose Bright Virtue Courts of Justice shine;
Such are the Charms of his Immortal Sense,
Union succeeds, and Happy Days Commence,
And Equity receives from him its Influence.
But Oh! What Numbers shall the Sprightly Muse,
Equal to Great God^n's Wisdom choose?
What Happy Strains his Management disclose,
Adored by Friends, and even revered by Foes?
Too weak alas is her aspiring Flame
To praise such Worth, such Merit to proclaim,
Such Scenes of Glory open to her view,
She Is lost in Thought, yet urges to pursue.
O Charming Ad^n, the Theme is thine,
The Subject as the Poet is Divine.
Thy Strength of Reason, sweetly flowing Verse,
Alone are fit Great Sp^r to rehearse;
To paint the Graces of that Godlike Mind,
Where Judgment is with strictest Honor joined,
And every Thought to Britain's Peace consigned.
Your Sense Sublime it is, which must relate
How So^rs, Ha^x Divinely Great
Appear, like Guardian Angels of the British State.
How they in every Art and Council join,
How wake for our Support, for our Defense combine.
A Muse like yours Superior to the Nine,
Alone is equal to the vast Design.
A Radiant List of Worthies I behold,
Whose Powerful Hands the Fate of Albion hold,
Whose Resolutions terminate in Law,
Peace to Preserve, and Rebels keep in Awe.
Among the Brightest of this Godlike Race,
A Heavenly Prelate stored with every Grace
Appears, Celestial Peace and Love
Through every Scene of his Bright Actions move;
In him true Piety and Zeal we find,
A Nervous Judgment and Sweet Temper joined,
The Ornament and Joy of Church and State,
The Jesuits Terror, and the Tories Hate.
The Best of Kings by Light from Heaven inspired,
And with just Ardour of his Virtue fired,
This Best of Bishops to the Temple gave,
To vanquish Error, true Religion save,
To fix her Throne secure on lasting Peace,
Till Time shall fail, and rolling Ages cease;
That no Attempts from Factious Priests or Rome
Might interrupt her Happiness to come.
For this his Enemies revile his Fame,
And load with Slander his Immortal Name;
But he at Peace within sedately bears
Their Hate, and unconcerned their Malice hears.
No gathering Clouds of Thunder yet appear,
Nor more amazing Premunire's scare;
No Censures interrupt the soft Repose
Of his Rebellious and Insulting Foes;
Like the Good Queen he all Forgiveness seems,
And the foul Rancour of their Spite contemns.
So when his Glorious Master was abused
By railing Jews, by their High-Church traduced,
Mildly he did their Insolence reprove,
For Murderous Hate he show'r'd down Heavenly Love,
And Healing Moderation from above.
FINIS.

