YARICO TO INKLE, AN EPISTLE.

By the AUTHOR of the ELEGY

Written among the RUINS of an ABBEY.

LONDON: Printed for J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall.

MDCCLXVI.

[Price One Shilling.]

AN EPISTLE.
WITH Falsehood lurking in thy sordid Breast,
And Perj'ry's Seal upon thy Heart impressed,
Dare Thou, Oh Christian, brave the sounding Waves,
The treacherous Whirlwinds, and wide-yawning Graves?
Regardless of my Woes securely go,
No curse-fraught Accents from these Lips shall flow;
My fondest Wish shall catch thy flying Sail,
Attend thy Course, and urge the favoring Gale:
May every Bliss thy God confers be thine,
And all thy Share of Woe comprised in mine.
One humble Boon is all I now implore,
Allow these Feet to print their kindred Shore:
Give me, Oh Albion's Son, again to roam
For Thee deserted my delightful Home:
To view the Groves that deck my native Scene,
The limpid Stream, that graceful glides between:
Retrieve the Fame I spurned at Love's Decree,
Ascend the Throne which I forsook for Thee:
Approach the Bower -- (why starts the unbidden Tear?)
Where once thy YARICO to Thee was dear.
The Scenes the Hand of Time has thrown behind
Return impetuous to my busy Mind:
'What hostile Vessel quits the roaring Tide
'To harbor here its tempest-beaten Side?
'Behold the Beach receives the ship-wreck'd Crew:
'Oh mark their strange Attire and pallid Hue!
'Are these the Christians, restless Sons of Pride,
'By Avarice nurtured, to Deceit allied?
'Who tread with cunning Step the Maze of Art,
'And mask with placid Looks a cankered Heart?
'Yet note, superior to the numerous Throng,
'(Even as the Citron humbler Plants among)
'That Youth! -- Lo! Beauty on his graceful Brow
'With nameless Charms bids every Feature glow.
'Ah! leave, fair Stranger, this unsocial Ground,
'Where Danger broods, and Fury stalks around:
'Behold thy Foes advance -- my Steps pursue
'To where I Will screen Thee from their fatal View:
'He comes, he comes! the ambrosial Feast prepare,
'The Fig, the Palm-juice, nor the Anana spare:
'In spacious Canisters nor fail to bring
'The scented Foliage of the blushing Spring:
'Ye graceful Handmaids, dress the roseate Bower,
'And hail with Music this auspicious Hour;
'Ah no! forbear -- be every Lyre unstrung,
'More pleasing Music warbles from his Tongue;
'Yet, utter not to me the Lover's Vow,
'All, all is thine that Friendship can bestow:
'Our Laws, my Station, check the guilty Flame,
'Why was I born, ye Powers, a Nubian Dame?
'Yet see around at Love's enchanting Call,
'Stern Laws submit, and vain Distinctions fall:
'And Mortals then enjoy Life's transient Day,
'When smit with Passion they indulge the Sway:
'Yes! crowned with Bliss we'll roam the conscious Grove,
'And drink long Draughts of unexhausted Love:
'Nor Joys alone, thy Dangers too I Will share,
'With Thee the Menace of the Waves I Will dare:
'In vain -- for smiles his Brow deep Frowns involve,
'The sacred Ties of Gratitude dissolve,
'See Faith distracted rends her comely Hair,
'His fading Vows while tainted Zephyrs bear!'
Oh Thou, before whose seraph-guarded Throne
The Christians bow and other Gods disown,
If wrapped in Darkness thou deny'st thy Ray,
And shroud'st from Nubia thy celestial Day!
Indulge this fervent Prayer to Thee addressed,
Indulge, though uttered from a sable Breast:
May gathering Storms eclipse the cheerful Skies,
And mad'ning Furies from thy Hell arise:
With glaring Torches meet his impious Brow,
And drag him howling to the Gulf below!
Ah no! -- May Heaven's bright Messengers descend,
Obey his Call, his every Wish attend!
Still over his Form their hovering Wings display!
If he be blessed, these Pangs admit Allay:
Me still her Mark let angry Fortune deem,
So thou may walk beneath her cloudless Beam.
Yet often to my wrapped Ear did Thou repeat,
That I sufficed to frame thy Bliss complete:
For Love's pure Flame I took thy transient Fires:
We fondly credit what the Heart desires.
I hoped, alas! to breathe thy native Air,
And vie in Splendour with the British Fair:
Ascend the speedy Car enchas'd with Gold,
With Robes of Silk this pearl-deck'd Form infold:
Bid on this jetty Hand the Diamond glow,
And chosen Rubies sparkle from my Brow.
Deluded Sex! the Dupes of Man decreed,
We, splendid Victims, at his Altar bleed.
The grateful Accents of thy candy'd Tongue,
Where artful Flattery too persuasive hung,
Like Flowers adorned the Path to my Disgrace,
And bade Destruction wear a smiling Face.
Yet formed by Nature in her choicest Mould,
While on thy Cheek her blushing Charms unfold,
Who could oppose to Thee stern Virtue's Shield?
What tender Virgin would not wish to yield?
But Pleasure on the Wings of Time was born,
And I exposed a Prey to grinning Scorn.
Of low-born Traders -- mark the Hand of Fate!
Is YARICO reduced to grace the State,
Whose impious Parents, an adventurous Band,
Imbrued with guiltless Blood my native Land:
Even snatched my Father from his regal Seat,
And stretched him breathless at their hostile Feet?
Ill-fated Prince! The Christians sought thy Shore,
Unsheathed the Sword, and Mercy was no more.
But Thou, fair Stranger, came with gentler Mind
To shun the Perils of the wrecking Wind.
Amidst thy Foes thy Safety still I plan'd,
And reached for galling Chains the Myrtle Band:
Nor then unconscious of the secret Fire
Each Heart voluptuous throb'd with soft Desire:
Ah pleasing Youth, kind Object of my Care,
Companion, Friend, and every Name that is dear!
Say, from thy Mind can thou so soon remove
The Records pencil'd by the Hand of Love?
How as we wantoned on the flowery Ground
The loose-rob'd Pleasures danced unblam'd around:
Till to the Sight the growing Burden proy'd,
How Thou o'ercam'st -- and how, alas! I loved!
Too fatal Proof! since Thou, with Avarice fraught,
Did basely urge (ah, shun the wounding Thought!)
That tender Circumstance -- reveal it not,
Lest torn with Rage I curse my fated Lot:
Lest startled Reason abdicate her Reign,
And Madness revel in this heated Brain:
That tender Circumstance -- inhuman Part --
I will not weep, though Serpents gnaw this Heart:
Frail, frail Resolve! while gushing from mine Eye
The pearly Drops these boastful Words belie.
Alas! can Sorrow in this Bosom sleep,
Where strikes Ingratitude her Talons deep?
When he I still adore, to Nature dead,
For Roses plants with Thorns the nuptial Bed?
Bids from the widowed Couch kind Peace remove,
And cold Indiff'rence blast the Bower of Love?
What Time his Guardian Power I most required,
Against my Fame and Happiness conspired!
And (do I live to breathe the barbarous Tale?)
His faithful YARICO exposed to Sale!
Yes, basely urged (regardless of my Prayers,
Even while I bathed his venal Hand with Tears)
What most for Pity called -- I can no more --
My future Child -- to swell his impious Store:
All, all Mankind for this will rise thy Foe,
But I, alas! alone endure the Woe:
Alone endure the fest'ring Hand of Care,
The bleeding Soul, and Swoonings of Despair.
Was it for this I left my native Plain,
And dared the Tempest brooding on the Main?
For this unlocked (seduced by Christian Art)
The chaste Affections of my Virgin Heart?
Within this Bosom fan'd the, constant Flame,
And fondly languish'd for a Mother's Name?
Lo! every Hope is poisoned in its Bloom,
And Horrors watch around this guilty Womb.
With Blood illustrious circling through these Veins,
Which never was checkered with Plebeian Stains,
Through Ancestry's long Line ennobled Springs,
From fame-crown'd Warriors and exalted Kings:
Must I the Shafts of Infamy sustain?
To Slav'ry's purposes my Infant Train?
To catch the Glances of his haughty Lord?
Attend obedient at the festive Board?
From Hands unscepter'd take the scornful Blow?
Uproot the Thoughts of Glory as they grow?
Let this pervade at length thy Heart of Steel;
Yet, yet return, nor blush, Oh Man, to feel:
Ah! guide thy Steps from yon expecting Fleet,
Thine injured YARICO relenting meet:
Bid her recline woe-stricken on thy Breast,
And hush her raging Sorrows into Rest:
Ah! let the Youth that sent the cruel Dart,
Extract the Point envenomed from her Heart:
The Peace he banished from this Mind recall,
And bid the Tears he prompted cease to fall.
Then while the Stream of Life is given to flow,
And sable Hue overspread this youthful Brow;
Or curl untaught by Art this woolly Hair,
So long, so long to me shall Thou be dear.
Say, lovely Youth, flow all my Words in vain,
Like Seeds that strew the rude ungrateful Plain?
Say, shall I never regain thy wonted Grace?
Never stretch these Arms to catch the wished Embrace?
Enough -- with new-awak'd Resentment fraught
Assist me, Heaven! to tear him from my Thought;
No longer vainly suppliant will I bow,
And give to Love what I to Hatred owe;
Forgetful of the Race from whence I came,
With Woe acquainted, but unknown to Shame.
Hence, vile Dejection, with thy plaintive Prayer,
Thy bended Knee, and still descending Tear:
Rejoin, rejoin the pale-complexion'd Train --
The Conflict's past -- and I Am myself again.
Thou Parent Sun! if ever with pious Lay
I ushered in thy world-reviving Ray!
Or as thy fainter Beams illum'd the West,
With grateful Voice I hymn'd Thee to thy Rest
Beheld with wondering Eye thy radiant Seat,
Or sought thy sacred Dome with unclad Feet!
If near to thy bright Altars as I drew,
My votive Lamb, thy holy Flamen, slew!
Forgive! That I, irrev'rent of thy Name,
Dared for thy Foe indulge the unhallowed Flame:
Even on a Christian lavished my Esteem,
And scorned the sable Children of thy Beam.
This Poniard by my daring Hand impressed
Shall drin? the ruddy Drops that warm my Breast:
Nor I alone, by this immortal Deed
From Slav'ry's Laws my Infant shall be freed.
And Thou, whose Ear is deaf to Pity's Call,
Behold at length thy destined Victim' fall;
Behold thy once-lov'd Nubian stained with Gore,
Unwept, extended on the crimson Floor:
These Temples clouded with the Shades of Death,
These Lips unconscious of the lingering Breath:
These Eyes uprais'd (ere closed by Fate's Decree)
To catch expiring one faint Glimpse of Thee.
Ah! then thy YARICO forbear to dread,
My fault'ring Voice no longer will upbraid,
Demand due Vengeance of the Powers above,
Or, more offensive still, implore thy Love.
FINIS.

