PEACE, IGNOMINY, AND DESTRUCTION: A POEM.

INSCRIBED TO THE RT. HON. CHARLES JAMES FOX.

Rompez, rompez tout pacte avec l'impiete. RACINE. LONDON: PRINTED FOR F. AND
C. RIVINGTON, ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD; AND R. WHITE, NO. 173, PICCADILLY.

1796.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES JAMES FOX.
SIR,
I CANNOT pay the Candor that accompanies your great Talents a higher
Compliment, than by dedicating to you a Poem, whose general Principle is
adverse to your political Sentiments.

I have the honor to be Your obedient humble Servant, THE AUTHOR.

PEACE, IGNOMINY, AND DESTRUCTION.
AROUND the enduring martyr's hallowed shrine
Their brightest flowers the holy Muses twine!
With roses blushing from the fields of war,
Their skilful hands adorn the victor's car!
And, for the candid brow of peace, they bring
The modest honors of the early spring!
But for the peace that lifts the imploring eye,
From whose frail breast escapes the coward's sigh,
No muse applauding one small leaf shall bring
Of all the foliage of the early spring;
But, from her bower, shall Ignominy rend
A branch of nightshade for her gentle friend!
THESE painful eyes behold an English Peer
(His weak Memorial sicklied over with fear,)
In humble attitude a suppliant stand,
To claim the friendship of a murderous band!
The plaintive breathings of the snow-wing'd dove
Ill suit the imperial messenger of Jove --
Who should, by long-excited vengeance driven,
Bear in his grasp the thunderbolt of heaven;
OH, my loved country! time-ennobled realm,
Where jealous honor still has watched the helm;
The unclouded glory long to Europe known
Which clasps thy loins like a refulgent zone:
Say, will thy hand the hallowed cestus tear,
And yield thy virtue to the tainting air?
For me -- unmarked by honors, wealth, or fame,
No swelling title blazoning round my name! --
To be a fleeting bubble of thy earth
Inflames my mounting soul with pride of birth!
Oh, sacred parent! still thyself revere;
To honor's call, to virtue's voice, be near:
Blur not the brightness of thy heavenly cause
With one dim moment's intervening pause.
Better to fall in glory's full career,
Embracing honor on the untimely bier;
Than weak, subdued, with agonising strife,
Waste (in the socket) the last gleams of life.
Say, if to cloathe with light the laughing skies
The God of Day were doomed no more to rise,
Were it not better, in the pomp of power,
In the rich ardour of meridian hour,
To rush abrupt from heaven with downward flight
A flaming chaos to the jaws of night;
Than tinge the ocean with a lingering ray,
Expiring in the silence of decay?
YET think not France from nature will depart,
And chase the fiend that grapples to her heart;
That the wild tigress will forego her prey,
Couch with the kid, and with the lambkin play;
That the fond child shall stretch his little hand
To lead the lion in a flowr'y band!
These beauteous emblems of the days of old
With this mock concord no resemblance hold:
No heavy drops of mandragora steep
The dragon's eyelids in the dews of sleep!
The gift extended by a faithless foe
Is the concealment of a lurking woe:
It Is like the pause that Nature's storm bestows,
An awful calm -- the thunder's dread repose!
MY anxious eyes solicit still in vain
Some sign that might my failing hopes sustain;
Some sacred altar, robbed in spotless white,
Where candour's priest performs the genial rite;
Where long-tried statesmen, fraught with wisdom's lore,
Whose hair the hand of peace has silvered over,
With learned fathers swayed by virtue's rule,
Whom peace has tutored in religion's school;
Where, pensive as they walked, the holy breeze
Flew through the shady cloister whispering peace.
For these best pledges, other scenes arise --
The enchanter's cauldron smites my wondering eyes!
Behold a troop of ghastly shapes advance
In frantic mood, and form a horrid dance;
Now bending low, these haggard forms of hell
Breathe the dark prayer, and mutter the dread spell:
And now into the turbid stream they throw
(With imprecations big with future woe)
The galling tears that flowed from beauty's cheek,
The voice of agony, and terror's shriek,
The blood that trickled from affliction's dart,
The sighs exhaling from a broken heart,
The burst of anguish, murder's piercing cry,
The screams that hurried through the midnight sky,
The famished infant's deep expiring groan,
The dungeon'd victim's solitary moan,
The clotted hair which desperation tore,
The milk of murdered mothers streaked with gore,
The plaint of innocence, the virgin's prayer
Which the rude ravisher consigned to air,
The hallowed edicts by religion planned,
And holy wedlock's desecrated band.
Behold the infernal sorcerers unite
To close their incantation's fearful rite,
And leering cast into the vase prosound,
The likeness of two skulls which once were crowned!
SAY, for these fiends, if England can descend
To weave the bond that grapples friend to friend,
Flown is the spirit of her living fame; --
And what remains? -- a carcass of a name!
COULD I like DRYDEN wield the bolts of war,
Or boast the warm exuberance of PARR?
The glow of mind, the piercing ray of heaven,
By nature's liberal hand to ORFORD given?
The zeal of him whose energetic strain
Unfolds the sorrows of the negro train,
Brings the heart-rending tale to Britain's ear,
And bids compassion pay her long arrear:
The arguments that flow from WYNDHAM'S sense,
Well guarded round by reason's strongest fence;
The sacred boon by CHATHAM'S SON possessed,
The muse of eloquence that sires his breast:
The quiver richly stored with attic darts,
Which genius to his SHERIDAN imparts:
The exalting winnow'd purity of soul
With which FITZWILLIAM soars beyond control;
Who, greatly daring, with a zeal severe
Stemmed the wild deluge of opprobious fear;
And, on the day eternally renowned,
Like ABDIEL, was the only faithful found: --
Had I these powers concentered in one form,
I Would pour on England the resistless storm,
To wake her soul, to rouse her mental part,
And chase her sombrous lethargy of heart.
Do some pretend that justice holds the scales
That over French councils honor now prevails?
Approach the dial in the dead of night,
Demand the hour by artificial light;
Then virtue seek with an inquiring eye,
Amid the system unillum'd from high.
November the 19th, 1793. The Convention decreed that a spot of ground should
be allotted for a burial pla^^ with this inscription..... "Death is an eternal
Sleep."
Mark yon sad cemetery's starless gloom,
Where time shall never unlock the ravenous tomb,
Where shadowy death shall a dread vigil keep,
'Midst the still horror of eternal sleep.
There the pledged maiden, at the approach of eve,
Over the dear relics of the youth shall grieve,
While her dark creed shall urge the sting of woe,
And bid her flowing tears for ever flow:
Hope dares not whisper to her clouded eye
To send a glance to time's unsolding sky,
Where pity weaves the amaranthine chain
To circle lovers never to part again.
THERE, too, the mother, with affliction wild,
Bends over the grave that holds her darling child,
For ever holds -- No pleasing vision cries,
"Suppress the tears that trickle from thine eyes,
"Ah! know thy child with angels soars on high
"In the bright regions of the upper sky,
"And, decked with wings that glitter to the ray,
"Plays on the sunbeams of eternal day." --
Her dark'ning creed, with no assuagement fraught,
Forbids her soul to grasp the cheering thought!
THERE, too, the friend his other-self shall mourn,
From his habitual sight for ever torn;
Forbid to look to that celestial shore
Whose blissful bowers shall friend to friend restore
Thus the strong chain their sacrilege has riv'n
Which bound in sacred union earth and heaven;
Made every future high reversion void;
The rights of immortality destroyed;
Compelled the claims of merit to be mute;
Creation's lord degraded to a brute;
And, what their hell-constructed thought designed,
Insulted nature, and dethroned the mind!
July the 11th, 1791. VOLTAIRE'S ashes were removed to St. Genevieve.
BEHOLD here flowerets deck the lengthening way,
The slow procession moves in bright array:
A gorgeous spectacle! ovation's car!
Pressed by no hero slaughtered in the war,
But pressed by him who scattered wild alarm,
And raised against virtue his destructive arm:
Who dared on truth's bright shield, in evil hour,
The poisoned shafts of blasphemy to shower.
His ardent vot'ries -- a licentious crowd --
Uplift their champion, fest'ring in his shroud,
And, while the grave-worms fasten on his frame,
High honors pay to his irrev'rent name!
Pale Irreligion comes with all her train --
Her atheist choir -- to act the rites profane;
She comes with all the witlings of the land,
Her grave Buffoons, her academic band!
The steps of the famed Porch they now ascend,
And through the pillar'd Isles their march they bend,
An host of praiseful voices rends the Fane
And impious echoes multiply the strain.
But when the corse was to the vault conveyed,
Night round the temple flung her darkest shade;
With terror heaved the sympathetic ground
From every altar breathed a sigh profound;
And fiends rejoiced, while angels wept around!
TIME was when France preferred her learned name,
And wore the wreath bestowed by classic fame:
Mark the dread change! -- the cold immoral blast
Has chilled the plants of science as it passed,
Nipt the young thought just bursting from its fold,
And froze instruction's current as it rolled.
SEE education weeping on the ground;
Her globes, her torch, her emblems scattered round;
Her children all are fled! -- the path, that leads
To her august abode, is choked with weeds:
She mourns her sabbaths, and her rites suppressed;
She mourns her silent hours' ignoble rest.
Who now appears the tutoress of youth,
To cheer the darkened mind with beams of truth?
(With those clear rays which her bright noon adorn,)
To streak and beautify her pupil's morn.
FROM the wide-yawning ground now bursts to view
A form gigantic, and of sable hue;
It Is Inhumanity -- she comes to trace
Instruction's precepts to the rising race:
She feasts their minds -- not with theatric show,
But with live scenes of dire en-sanguin'd woe!
Gluts their affections with atrocious food,
With acts of wrath, and festivals of blood!
A battalion of children, from ten to eleven, were organized at Rennes, who
were made to shoot old men of eighty.
Behold her children, new to war's alarms,
At her commandment grasp their little arms!
Behold yon aged group, whose silver hair
Demands compassion and entreats to spare!
Against these -- whose crimes are poverty and age,
She bids her pupils act their virgin rage;
And as they now impel the death-wing'd balls,
Some benefactor, or some parent falls!
With horror's deep'ning dye so early stained,
In massacrous employ so early trained,
Will they not terrify the future day
Whose rudiments of vice such proofs display?
-- Against these to war is Virtue's best crusade:
She cries "Oh, England! hasten to my aid!
"See atheist cruelty her weapons wield!
"Lift to her blow thy consecrated shield."
OH! that the warning voice to me was given,
Which once resounded through the vault of heaven,
Woe to the sons of Earth!
I would overwhelm
With sudden terror the unconscious realm;
Till grasping one great plan by truth designed
The will of many gathering to one mind,
With courage added to prophetic fear,
She should to France an iron aspect wear.
WOE to the land, which (shamefully secure)
Shrinks from the toil that wisdom bids endure,
Declines the steps of glory to retrace,
And shuns calamity to meet disgrace! --
Misfortune is the night expecting day;
Disgrace a stain that seas cannot wash away.
See Jeremiah, chapter 51.
A VOICE prophetic smote the passive air,
And cried to Media -- Haste! prepare, prepare!
Resume the shields, and make the arrows bright;
Direct to Babylon their hasty flight:
Oh! thou, who fill'st the trembling earth with woe,
Destroying mountain! I Am thy dreadful foe;
I will put forth my arm, and thou shal't rush,
With flaming ruin, and, descending crush
Deep to the intombing vale!
Could England hear,
The sound perchance would vibrate on her ear;
And she referring to that ruinous power,
Would catch the lesson of the present hour:
Like Media, she would dart a threatening eye,
Proud to perform the menace from on high,
And cry to heaven as she ascends the car,
"Thou art my battle-axe, my strength of war."
THEN cease, oh Britain! time-ennobled land!
Cease to implore what virtue cannot demand!
Yes! I adjure thee by thy days of yore;
By thine illustrious fame's untainted store:
By all the reverence thy great statesmen claim,
Who raised, on wisdom's plan, thy wondrous frame;
By all thy sons, who in thy cause have bled;
By all the tears their drooping widows shed!
By all thy sacred bards, whose magic lays
Sound in thy porch and dignify thy praise;
By thy benevolence -- that brilliant gem
Whose luster plays around thy diadem;
By all the charities that most endear;
By Emigrancy's meek imploring tear;
Thou Wilt not reject her at her utmost need,
Nor plant thy footsteps on the broken reed: --
Yes! I adjure thee by the sainted train,
Who heav'n-instructed reared thy awful fane;
Who for imperial Rome's gay pomp of lights,
Her pageant altars, and her scenic rites,
Gave to thy holy lips a purer prayer
Whose chaste ascension breathes celestial air.
OFTEN when in vain the art of medicine strives,
How nature trusting to herself revives!
So -- would our busy state-empirics cease
To pour the opium of reposing peace --
England would start from her ignoble ease,
And rise superior to her new disease,
And boldly grasp the madd'ning arm of France,
Alluding to AGAVE, who, in a delirium, slew her child....See Ovid's
Metamorphosis, book iii.
'Till, like AGAVE wak'ning from her trance,
She trembling casts her haggard eyes around,
And views her infant bleeding on the ground.
BUT if cold reason with her lengthening chain
Comes every vigorous purpose to restrain: --
Ah! then no time can England's fame restore,
The curtain drops, and glory's scene is over.
-- Resigned, submissive to my humbler ^tate,
Excluded from the conclave of the state,
It cheers me to reflect I Am not decreed
To make this bond of peace my act and deed!
'Ere I would fix th'irrevocable seal,
And legalise what shame can never repeal,
See a tedious composition in rhyme, entitled "The Progress of Civil Society."
I Would be the wretch whose infidel designs
Creep in his mawkish, cold, lethargic lines:
Who meanly caters from dim reason's ray,
While bright religion pours a flood of day,
Who from the gates of wisdom turns aside,
And takes Lucretius for his moral guide.
I Would rather (by the nine accursed) produce
The harsh crab vintage of the Baviad muse,
Whose cynic numbers not devoid of art
Spring from the workings of a bilious heart,
Coarse, unrefin'd, inelegantly keen,
The foul o'erflowings of self-tortur'd spleen.
THOU, who have long attained the immortal goal
While choral plaudits sound from pole to pole!
The glowing sunset of whose honored day
Expands the brilliance of meridian ray:
Who have from states removed the incumbent shade,
And the wide sphere of government displayed,
The distant azure of whose vague extremes
Thou have illum'd with Truth's unerring beams:
Our household deity! who warns, foretells,
Points to the den where the hushed monster dwells,
Presents our perils awfully to view,
And bids the Country to herself be true.
Oh, Sage of Beaconsfield! indulge the muse
Who the same track (thou have adorned) pursues;
Who gleans thy scatt'rings, grasps the falling grain
From the full harvest of thy loaded wane!
THE END.

