SOME ACCOUNT OF THE MEDICINAL WATER, NEAR TEWKESBURY; WITH THOUGHTS ON THE USE
AND DISEASES OF THE LYMPHATIC GLANDS.

IN A LETTER To EDWARD JOHNSTONE, M. D.

A Physician to the General Hospital, Birmingham, etc.

BY JAMES JOHNSTONE, M. D.

One of the PHYSICIANS to the GENERAL INFIRMARY, WORCESTER; FELLOW of the ROYAL
MEDICAL SOCIETY, EDINBURGH; of the PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, MANCHESTER; and
corresponding MEMBER of the MEDICAL SOCIETY, LONDON.

-- Sacros Ausus recludere fontes. SECOND EDITION, WITH ADDITIONS.

TEWKESBURY: PRINTED AND SOLD BY DID AND SON.

M,DCC,XC.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH Walton Water, is here held out, as possessing the same Properties and
Medicinal Powers as Cheltenham Water, it is not done with the most distant
View, to lessen the Reputation of that Water, and the Resort to Cheltenham. On
the contrary, it is presumed, it will be a Satisfaction to Invalids to be
assured of having within a small Distance, a Water of the same Kind, to which
recourse may be had, when the Numbers are so great at Cheltenham, as to be
insufficiently supplied from the Well there.

In this point of View, the Water near Tewkesbury must be useful to Cheltenham
in full Seasons, and, cannot injure it in any one, at its priority in use, and,
the habit of Resort for Amusement, as well as Health, will give Cheltenham the
Preference.

Tewkesbury, however, has equally a Right to the Benefit of its natural Riches,
and to the Advantages which may accrue to it from the Vicinity of Walton Waters
in particular. This Borough is situated on a fertile Plain, at the Conflux of
the River Avon with the Severn. The Town is well built, and now well paved,
and, Provisions of every Kind, particularly the finest Salmon, are in great
plenty. It communicates by a very good Road, to fine rides toward Worcester,
Upton, and Malvern, and is only nine Miles from Cheltenham.

In these rides, the various Views of a most Picturesque Country, charm the
Eye, and make the salutary Exercise of riding delightful. Malvern, rising in
b^nign, Majesty, diffuses all around a pure and temperate Air; a Water
exceeding all others in elementary Purity; which every Year manifests its
salubrity in curing Diseases which have bassied the Power of Medicine in other
Situations.

Tewkesbury, and its Environs, besides the striking beauties of the Country,
present to the Observation of the curious; A Field of Battle where Victory
fixed the Crown on the Head of Edward IV. A Church, one of the finest Gothic
Structures in England; in which lie the Remains of Edward Prince of Wales, Son
of Henry VI. cruelly murdered in cold Blood, with the Duke of Somerset and many
other Noblemen and Gentlemen who shared his Fate after that decisive Battle.

-- Sacros Ausus recludere fontes. My Motto, is proper in more Senses than one;
for taking advantage of the Epistolary Form; I have attempted to illustrate the
Use of the Lymphatic Glands, acknowledged to be hitherto undiscovered, as well
as to make known the Properties of a new Medicinal Water.

SIR,
AT length, I send you, an account of the Experiments, made on the Medicinal
Water near Tewkesbury, of which, so much has been said at Cheltenham, in the
course of this Season and the last.

I FIRST heard of this Water in passing through Tewkesbury in 1786. It had been
for some time resorted to, by Persons in the Neighborhood, and, was reported
to have effected Cures in the Diseases for which Cheltenham Water is sound to
be so efficacious, and, on account of which, Persons of every Rank, resort to
that Place in such Numbers, as to exhaust sometimes the Spring on which they
rest their hopes of recovery.

THIS Well is situated near Walton, a Village about a mile from Tewkesbury,
upon an Estate belonging to Nicholas Smithsend, Esquire. The Ground about the
Well is a deep Clay Soil, under which, at the depth of about seven or eight
yards, runs a Stratum of blue slaty Stone; on piercing this Bed of Stone,
plentiful Springs of Water arise, which are always more or less impregnated
with Salt.

THE Well, of which I write, is about twenty feet deep.

THE Water from the Pump, or soon after, hasa soft, almost Oleaginous taste,
numerous Air Bubbles rise, and sparkle in the Glass; after it has been drank,
it leaves the Chalybeate, and Saline tastes on the tongue, and when shook in
the Bottle, the Hepatic smell is very perceptible.

ITS resemblance in taste, and other appearances to the Cheltenham Water,
strikes every one who makes the comparison.

ITS operation on the Body, also, is exactly the same, a Pint or more, acts as
a gentle Laxative and Diuretic: And it occasions a slight giddiness in some
persons, in others a sort of heavy pain in the head.

THESE tests, though of themselves, sufficiently convincing, will be confirmed
by the Experiments which I made on the Walton Water, in the Summer of 1786, and
this Summer, in which I had the assistance of the worthy Surgeons and
Apothecaries, at Tewkesbury. 1. When the Walton Water is mixed with Clear
siltered Lime Water, it becomes immediately cloudy, and, a copious white scaly
precipitation ensues.

THE same cloudy appearance arises in Lime Water, when the Air, separated by
Heat from the Walton Water, is conveyed by a Pipe and Bladder, connected with
the two Bottles, into the Bottle, containing the Lime Water, and shaken with it.

IF the Walton Water has been taken from the Well, twelve or more hours, the
precipitation by Lime Water, does not take place immediately, in the manner it
does in a Glass of Water from the Pump.

WHITE Arsenic, dissolves more readily in the Walton Water, than in common
Water, and renders the Hepatic smell thereof, stronger and more perceptible.

2. WHEN Walton Water, fresh from the Pump, is mixed with an Infusion of Green
Tea, the mixture assumes a Purple Color, and by standing, the Color becomes
deeper,

3. SOLUTION of Saccharum Saturni, mixed with fresh drawn Water, becomes brown,
and is followed by a blackish precipitation. This is a test of the presence of
Hepatic Air, which also discovers itself in this Water, by its characteristic
Sulphurous smell. This often is produced by putrefying Vegetables. Bishop
Watson, observes, that Sulphurous Waters are produced in Morasses and Bogs,
from rotten Wood; that Shale, a stone so called, of which there is a Stratum,
extended all over the Country about Harrowgate, and from which the Sulphur
Springs there arise, contains both Vitriolic Acid and Phlogiston, the
constituent parts of Sulphur; and some pieces of Shale, when calcined properly,
have been found to communicate the Sulphurous impregnation to Water, Ph.
Trans. 1786. It is sufficient to observe, that Walton Water emerges from a bed
of stone, and, of a blue Sulphurous soft Pyrites, probably similar to this,
and that the Soil abounds with the remains of rotten Vegetables resolved into
it, and that from one or both these sources, it derives the Hepatic Gas
perceived in it.

THE blue Sulphurous Pyrites found in digging the Ground in the Field
belonging to the Well-house near Walton, has exactly the same appearance and
properties as that dug, to make a New Well, near Fauconberg-house, by order of
his Majesty.

4. AFTER Walton Water has been drawn from the Pump ten or twelve hours; it no
longer becomes purple or blackish, by the addition of astringents, (No. II.)
and a precipitation with Lime Water, does not immediately ensue, (No. I.)

5. ITS Color neither becomes Green nor Red, with Syrup of Violets.

6. IT does not effervesce with the Vitriolic or Nitrous Acids.

7. IT becomes milky by mixture, with the fixed Alkali, and more so with the
Volatile Alkali prepared with Lime.

8. SOLUTION of Silver, makes it milky and a flaky precipitation subsides.

9. TWO ingenious friends, and accurate observers, found the whole fixed
contents of the Water left by evaporation, amounted to one ounce in a gallon.

10 AFTER various evaporations, I found it yielded exactly that quantity.

WHEN a Gallon of the Water is reduced by evaporation to two ounces and under,
a considerable quantity of an earthy powder remains in the vessel in which it
was boiled. And when the liquid is set to cry stallise, Crystals, in shape and
size, resembling the Vitriolated Magnesia are formed. They are hexagonal, and
when dried in the Sun, are calcined into a white powder. The taste cool and
bitter.

SOME cubical Crystals of marine salt, and a deliquescent bitter lixivium
remain.

THE powder, dropped by boiling in the vessel, consists of Magnesia, and an
absorbent earth, which entirely dissolve in Vinegar, with considerable
esservescence.

THE quantity of large Crystals amounted to six drachms or more, from a Gallon
of Water, evaporated in 1786; but, by after experiments, I find this
impregnation is not constantly in the same quantity, and proportion.

11. LASTLY, the Crystals of the Walton Water, and, the white powder into which
these dried Crystals sall, when dissolved, the Solution is again perfect, and
clear in an exceedingly small quantity of Water.

SALT of Tartar, added to this Solution, becomes Milky, and a copious white
sediment subsides, sound to be Magnesia.

LIME Water added to the Solution, occasions a Milky whiteness, and a soft
Alkaline precipitation, but it does not happen near so soon as that made by
falt of Tarter.

SOME FARTHER EXPERIMENTS On WALTON WATER, Made in NOVEMBER, 1787, By JOHN
JOHNSTONE, B. A. Of MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD.
THE Water, on which the following Experiments were tried, had been drawn from
the Spring several weeks before it was used. And though it was conveyed from
Walton to Birmingham in Bottle^ well corked and covered with Wax, yet the
appearances which result from the presence of the Volatile Ingredients are not
to be expected in these Experiments.

1. THIS Water did not immediately become Purple with Tincture of Galls, but by
standing it contracted a dusky greenish color with a variegate Pellicle at the
top.

2. PHLOGISTICATED Alkali did not occasion any change of the color in the
Water.

THE fixed Air having escaped, the Iron was precipitated, and of course could
not exhibit those Appearances which it did in the Experiments made by my Father
at the Spring.

3. SYRUP of Violets made it of a light green Color, Tincture of Turnsole
became brown when mixed with it. Tincture of Brazil Wood gave it a blue cast.

THE Appearances produced by these three Precipitants were occasioned either by
Magnesia or Alkali, disengaged by the escape of the fixed Air.

4. ACID of Sugar discovered Lime, by precipitating it in the form of a white
Powder.

5. SALITED Terra Ponderosa, by attracting the Vitriolic Acid, occasioned a
white turbidness in this Water.

6. NITRATED Silver showed the presence of Marine Acid; its attraction for it
producing a white Cloud, which on standing, became of a black color.

7. AN Alkali, very copiously precipitated a white Powder, which appeared to be
Magnesia.

BY several Experiments, a quart of the Walton Water yielded, on Evaporation,
120 grains.

I. THE residue of a Quart of this Water, was first mixed with Alcohol, which
took up 6 grains of it. This, by its deliquescing in the air, was found to
consist of Magnesia.

II. Distilled Water dissolved 105 grains of it. As I could not crystallise the
whole, I cannot tell the proportion of each Salt, but I had reason, both from
what did crystallise, and from Experiment, to suppose, that Vitriolated
Magnesia is the most abundant in this Water. A quantity of Alcohol, sufficient
to precipitate the Bases of those Salts in which there was Vitriolic Acid, was
mixed with a pint of Walton Water. A copious Precipitation ensued, which on
examination proved to be Magnesia alone. For on adding Syrup of Violets to the
Magnesia in distilled Water, no evidence of Alkali appeared more than what
Magnesia would alone have given.

To a quart of Walton Water was added a quantity of Vegetable Alkali sufficient
to precipitate all the Magnesia. When the Precipitation was over, the whole was
siltered, and the Water set to crystallise. The Crystals in general, were those
of Vitriolated Tartar, and a few resembling those of Glauber's Salts appeared.
A very small quantity remained uncrystallised, which perhaps, was common Salt.

III. DISTILLED Vinegar was mixed with what the Water left, and took up 5
grains of it. On Examination this proved to be Lime. It had a remarkable
pungent taste, did not deliquesce in the Air, and formed on the Addition of
Vitriolic Acid, a kind of Gypsum.

IV. AN Alkali diminished the remainder 1 grain. I could not exactly tell what
the Alkali took up here, but it seemed to be a kind of Argillaccous Earth.

V. THE Alkali left nearly 1 grain of a black looking Earth. This was mixed
with diluted Marine Acid, which dissolved nearly the whole of it.
Phlogisticated Alkali, dropped into the Solution, immediately produced a very
bright blue Color. I therefore concluded that the grain and very small
quantity more which the Marine Acid had dissolved was Iron. The small quantity
of Earth which did not dissolve in the Acid, as it resisted all the above
mixtures, I concluded to be Siliceous Earth.

THERE appears then to be in a Quart of Walton Water,

Grains, I. OF Aerated Magnesia, 6 II. OF different Salts, but chiefly Epsom,
105 III. OF Aerated Lime, 5 IV. OF Earth, perhaps Argillaceous 1 V. OF Aerated
Iron, with a little Siliceous Earth 1

CHELTENHAM Water (of which I had a few Bottles) exhibited the same appearances
with Precipitants, only in some instances they were more striking.

A QUART of Cheltenham Water yielded, on Evaporation, 127 grains. I tried the
Experiments with Alcohol and Vegetable Alkali, on Cheltenham, with the same
Appearances as with Walton Water, only a large Crystal of Glauber's Salt
appeared in the Vessel with the Alcohol.

EXPERIMENT 1.
SHOWS Walton Water abounds with fixed Air. Lime becomes quick, calcined or
caustic, by the expulsion of this Air by fire; and being attracted again from
this Water, the Calcareous Matter before held in Solution, becomes mild and
precipitates in form of a clear and white powder. The immediate precipitation,
which takes place by the mixture of Walton Water with Lime Water, and still
more clearly the Air forced from Walton Water agitated with Lime Water, is
therefore a certain test of the presence of fixed Air in Walton Water.

2. BY this experiment, Iron in a small quantity, appears to be one of the
sugitive ingredients in the Walton Water. This, as well as some absorbent
earth, is kept in a dissolved state by the fixed Air and the Sulphurous Gas
contained in it: When the fixed Air flies off, which it does much sooner than
the Hepatic Gas, the Iron precipitates, and the Water is no longer capable of
becoming Purple by astringents. The action of heat carries off the Hepatic Gas,
which appears to hold the absorbent earths in Solution, which are left by
evaporation; and to which the soft, almost oleaginous taste, with which this
Water strikes the tongue, is probably owing.

3. THE addition of Saccharum Saturni discovers the presence of the Hepatic
Air, another fugitive principle contained in this Water, as well as that of
Cheltenham: But it is much less fugitive than fixed Air, being often perceived,
both in the Cheltenham and Walton Waters, after they have been bottled a
considerable time. This Sulphurous or Hepatic Air, found in this and in other
Waters, has been the occasion of much controversy among the Gentlemen who have
analyzed Waters: Mr. Kirwan, has, probably finally, settled the dispute, by
showing that Hepatic Air is no other, than actual Sulphur kept in Solution, in
an acrial State, by union with the matter of heat, Ph. Tr.

4. IT is evident, from this article, that the fixed Air only dissolves and
keeps Iron suspended in the Water. Its disappearance so soon, shows its very
volatile Nature, and, the necessity of resorting to these Springs, to have the
benefit of a principle and ingredient, which gives penetrability, and action to
the Saline contents of the Waters.

5, 6. SHOW the Salts contained in these Waters are neutral: And, that neither
the acid nor the Alkali, of which they are compounded, prevail.

7-11. DEMONSTRATE, that Vitriolated magnesia, is the principal Salt contained
in the Walton Water. The attraction of an alkaline Salt, and especially that of
the caustic Alkali, with the Vitriolic Acid, is greater than that of the
Magnesia, which is precipitated in these experiments.

8. THE existence of Sea Salt, is manifested by this experiment, and by the
cubic Crystals formed in the residuum.

9, 10. FROM all our experiments, fixed Air dissolving a small quantity of
Iron: Hepatic Air, united with an absorbent earth, appear to be the fugitive
ingredients of the Walton Water. The fixed ingredients discovered by
evaporation and crystallisation, appear to be a Vitriolated Magnesia, united
with a little Vitriolated Mineral Alkali, in the quantity of six or seven
drachms, in one Gallon of Water. Magnesia, Lime and absorbent earth, and a
deliquescent bitter Lixivium, consisting of salited Magnesia and Lime, with a
few grains of entire Sea Salt, altogether, about a dram or two to a Gallon.

THAT these also are the component Medicinal ingredients in the Cheltenham
Water, appears by the analysis, of the learned Dr. Fothergill, of Bath.

THIS Gentleman, in his very valuable experimental enquiry into the nature and
qualities of Cheltenham Water, p. 42. concludes, "from the preceding
experiments, a Gallon of the Water, wine measure, appears to contain the
subsequent principles, nearly in the following proportions: Native Glauber
Salt, with a portion of Epsom Salt, one ounce; Sea Salt, five grains; Iron
combined with fixed Air, five grains; Magnesia combined with fixed Air, twenty
five grains; Calcareous earth, or Selenite, forty grains; fixed Air, combined
with phlogisticated Air, twenty-four ounce measures. To these may, perhaps, be
added a small proportion of Hepatic Gas or Hepar Sulphuris converted into
Vapor by the separation of its phlogiston." This useful Work has been much
improved and enlarged in the Second Edition.


BY this ingenious Work, it appears, and is sufficiently known to all who
frequent Cheltenham, that the Iron is very soon precipitated from the Water,
after it is drawn from the Pump; and, in a short time it cannot be made to
assume a purple color, by the addition of astringents.

THE Salts of the Walton and Cheltenham Waters, are both soluble in a very
small quantity of Water, equal to their weight nearly: And their impression on
the human senses, and, their action in the bowels, is the same.

IN so many points, the Cheltenham and Walton Mineral Waters, are entirely like
each other; a pint or less of each opens the body; some find a small addition
of the Walton, necessary to produce the same effect in the same degree; others
find no difference; the purgative Salt is somewhat less, about a dram in a
gallon, in my experiments; but the quantity of fixed Air, and Steel are at
least equal. The Hepatic Air seems to prevail in the Walton Water, over the
Cheltenham, which gives it a most pleasing almost Oleaginous softness, and
makes it highly grateful in taste, and gentle in operation, and, far more
suitable in diseases of the kidneys, and urinary passages, than the Cheltenham
Water itself.

WITHOUT, therefore entering into a farther detail of Chemical research, I
apprehend the similarity of the Walton, to the Cheltenham Water, to be
sufficiently ascertained, to warrant its use and application in the diseases,
for which Cheltenham Waters have been used with advantage.

THE analysis of Mineral Waters, undoubtedly is highly useful; but
notwithstanding the perfection to which it is carried by discoveries in modern
Chemistry, I apprehend it gives a very imperfect idea of the real composition
of Waters; in short, such an idea as diffection gives of an animated body, a
view of its parts disjointed, and separate, very different from that union, on
which symmetry and life depend.

IT is on this account, that the exhibition of the ingredients found to compose
mineral Waters, and the imitations of many of them, administered as Medicines,
fall short of the Waters prepared by Nature, especially when drank at the
sources.

IT is the same in other parts of the Materia Medica: An analysis, in some
measure, assists in accounting for the operation of a Medicine, but seldom
enables us to prepare, and compound to perfection, the natural productions we
pretend to imitate. These Sentiments have been distinguished by the Approbation
of M. MARCARD, his Majesty's Physician at Hanover, in his learned Account of
the Waters at Pyrmout.


THE use, and advantage of Waters, is established by experience alone, as well
as that of every article in the Materia Medica. The advantages found from the
use of the Walton Well, in various eruptive diseases, and in old sordid ulcers,
as well as in many other diseases, has already been so considerable as to
confirm the expectation grounded on their being similar to the Cheltenham Water.

IT will undoubtedly be found as much like Cheltenham Water, as that Water is
like itself at different seasons. Seasons occasion accidental differences of
saturation in all Mineral Waters, the cause of which, is sometimes known, and
sometimes unknown. Rainy seasons, while they make Springs more abundant, render
the Mineral impregnation at the same time weaker. To this alteration, the
Walton Water must be sometimes liable, as it lies on a plain, part of which is
frequently overflowed with Water. But, if by experience, this shall be sound to
have any considerable influence, means will be used to remove the
inconvenience. An inconvenience which is very seldom likely to happen in dry
and warm seasons, in which, Waters of this class, are for the most part
resorted to.

AFTER all, I am persuaded, that the dilution of Mineral Waters is very seldom
any injury to the patient. The virtues and powers of Mineral Water, depending
principally on the quantity of Water, the medium, in which the Medicinal
ingredients are suspended; the vehicle which conveys them into the smallest
vessels, and makes them capable of removing obstructions fixed in them, and in
various glands; hence the same Medicinal ingredients, given in the usual forms,
have but little efficacy in removing such diseases.

THE healing powers of the Walton Well, and those of its Sister of Cheltenham,
are owing to the mixture of a neutral compound of vitriolated Magnesia,
commonly called Epsom. or Cathartic Salt; to vitriolated Mineral Alkali, or
Glauber Salt, with a small portion of salited Mineral Alkali, Magnesia, and
Lime, nearly to the quantity of a dram, in a pint of Water; also to a
considerable quantity of fixed Air, and Hepatic Gas, by the former of which
Iron, and by the latter Magnesia, and absorbent Earth, are held in Solution.

THE whole is a composition, friendly to appetite and digestion; as well as
soft, and pleasing to the taste. It is also a penetrating deobstruent, and,
attenuating medicine, and in sensible operation, a quick and gentle Laxative
and Diuretic; and when applied with discretion, it may be continued a long time
without any dimunition of strength.

IT is obvious, this Water contains Saline ingredients, and, others possessing
different attractive powers and assinities, which, though balanced in the
Water; yet, when mixed with animal fluids, and Salts in the course of
digestion, Chylisication, and in circulation with the blood, must be so
changed, and varied as to form new attractions, and combinations in their
course through the vessels, whence compounds possessing properties, different
from what existed before, will be produced, and the system itself will be
changed. It is well known, that cold is generated by dissolving Salts; and,
that while Saline Bodies, of different affinities, and attractive powers, are
forming new compounds; such Salts in the process of mutual attraction, and
incorporation, produce heat. In this manner, and from such causes, new stimuli,
with other alterations, take place in the glands, and remoter vessels of our
system, from the Salts, combined with other ingredients in Mineral Waters; and,
it is by these means, as well as evacuation, they become beneficial, and are
really valuable alterative Medicines.

THE Walton Waters, being a compound, sui geveris, similar to Cheltenham, they
both operate primarily, and principally on the intestines, as a gentle
purgative, "Their mode of operation, (says Dr. Smith, p. 21, 22,) upon the
intestines, producing an easy, sudden discharge, is explainable upon the
principle of the tenuity, and uniform diffusion of the ingredients in the
Water. For the Water, after having performed its strengthening, and
exhilarating office upon the stomach, passes quickly into the intestines as
sluids do, carrying along with it, more or less of all its ingredients, but
particularly its great dilution, and consequent dispersion all over the
internal surface of the canal, vellicates the innumerable, little exhalent
vessels, with which that cavity is crowded, into a plentiful secretion; and
notwithstanding the stimulus may be but slight on any particular part, on
account of the minuteness of the particles of the Salt; yet as they are
universally diffused, and act upon the whole system of exhalents at once, a
more eopious and expeditious evacuation is produced, than what is often
attainable from a much larger quantity of any of the other more stimulating
purgatives less attenuated; attended at the same time with these important
advantages; that as the stimulus is gentle, no griping pain is likely to be
excited, and as it is superficial, the particles must soon be washed off in the
general current, without leaving behind them any of those disagreeable feelings
that usually hang in the rear of other Cathartics." See Observations on the use
and abuse of Cheltenham Waters, by J. SMITH, M. D. Savilian Professor of
Geometry, Oxford.


COROLLARY. Mineral Waters in general, derive their healing powers much less
from the metals, earths and salts, often inconsiderable in quantity, which
remain after evaporation, than, from the volatile principles, united with them,
but diluted in a very great proportion of Water; and, they universally owe the
activity the whole possesses, to the incorporation of the volatile and sugitive
principles, both with the Water, and, with the grosser ingredients, combined
together most intimately.

THE taste of the Walton Water, fresh from the Spring, as has been already
observed, is at first soft, and afterward agreeably Saline; the Sulphur and
Iron, are also plainly tasted in it, in the quantity of a pint, and, often
less, it occasions two or three lax stools, and, operates without the least
sickness, griping or any kind of inconvenience.

THE quantity of urine is also increased: it sits easy on the stomach, and
appetite is promoted.

THE volatile principles fly off, soon after the Water is removed from the
Well; and, as these are so essential to its efficacy, and, render it agreeable
to the taste and stomach, and carry the Saline, invigorating, and deobstruent
contents of the Water into the vessels and glands; it is necessary to drink it
from the Pump, or very soon afterward.

THESE Waters not only remove costiveness, but increase appetite, and the
powers of digestion, The chylification of digested aliment is more perfectly
elaborated, and, the errors of the first digestion prevented, and remedied in
an effectual manner; whatever is injurious to health in the stomach and and
intestines, acidity, and ^ilious putrid matter are carried out of the body.
Worms, and their nidus are expelled. In this manner the seeds of disease will
be prevented in the chyliferous vessels; and the Chyle itself being highly
elaborated, and, withal, diluted with the Water, enters the lacteals,
possessing such qualities and powers, as bid fair to obviate, and remove
obstructions which have taken place in the channels of the chyle and lymph.

HENCE, obstructions in the mesentery and glands will gradually be resolved, as
this Water will be likely to dilute and dissolve any tenacious matter,
incapable of moving in the chyliferous vessels, on account of its glutinous,
cheese-like, and, steatomatous consistence, and, will stimulate the vessels,
and, mesenteric glands, by its Saline contents, so as to enable them to push on
any obstructing matter.

SOME portion of the Waters, being absorbed, will act as a powerful deobstruent
in obstructions of the liver.

BY thinning the Hepatic bile, and, carrying that fluid regularly into the
intestines. By preventing the stagnation of bile in the gallbladder. By gently
stimulating the biliary vessels, and increasing their action. In a word, by the
united insluence of these powers, recent obstructions, or older scirrhosities,
which have taken place either at home, or by residence in warm climates, will
be remodied.

CALCULOUS concretions in the biliary ducts, and, in the gallbladder, when of
a size capable of being carried into the intestines, will be disposed to be
moved thither, by that stimulus, which acting originally on the duodenum, will
extend its influence along the Ductus Choledochus. In like manner, new
concretions of the biliary kind, will be effectually prevented.

So that this Water will be found a very effectual remedy for jaundice arising
from gall-stones, as well as from other causes, obstructing the discharge of
the bile into the intestines. It will also be found useful in removing
obstructions in the substance of the Liver; and, in preventing hemmorrhoidal,
and other discharges of blood, which most frequently originate from
obstructions in the Liver.

HEMMORRHOIDAL swellings, and discharges of blood from other causes,
obstructing, or retarding its motion, and, return through the branches of the
vena portarum, will be eased or relieved by a seasonable use of this Water.

THE softness, which is peculiar to this Water, renders it proper in diseases
of the urinary passages; as it acts powerfully on the Kidneys, and occasions an
increased secretion there, as well as in the intestinal tube; gravelly
concretions will be prevented or washed away. As the secretion of urine is in
experience, sound essential, for carrying out of the body, the Salts and Oils,
which are prejudicial to health; purity of blood will be very greatly promoted
by the increase of this secretion; so that by the free discharge from this
emunctory, along with that from the alimentary canal, the skin will be cleansed
from hot red eruptions, and, from scaly, and scabby incrustations, which
notoriously arise from a blood, and habit overloaded with acrid, and impure
matter; when by excess in diet, or by improper food, by imperfect digestion, or
inadequate secretion and excretion, such acrid corrupt matter is formed, and
retained in our bodies. Gentle evacuation, by the use of such Waters, is
generally a certain relief under these circumstances; this has been experienced
by various persons, but very remarkably by one TANNER from Kidderminster, who
has had a leprous eruption removed from his face, and other parts, by drinking
the Walton Water, and, applying it externally; which relief, for six years
past, he had not obtained by any means whatever.

THE preserving the bile in a fluid state, and, the regular conveyance of it
into the duodenum, will powerfully operate in completing the digestion, and
Chylification of the food; and, will give the blood those properties, which
support the health, and, vigor of the body. -- With that, all cutaneous
soulness will disappear, and, the bloom of beauty reassume its charms, along
with the ease, and cheerfulness inseparable from wholesome sluids, and, from
good health.

BY removing the somes, which causes Scurvies, Scrophulous, Herpetic eruptions,
Leprosies, and, every kind of cutaneous soulness, whether of the red, and
pimply, or the scaly, and, ulcerous kinds; I say, by gradually draining off
this fomes, and, soliciting its exit from the emunctories, such foulnesses of
the skin, accompanied with itchings, sores, and, even scirrhous, and, cancerous
taints, will often be prevented, removed or palliated.

CHRONIC weakness, and, dejection of spirits, arising frequently from the same
latent sources, will receive relief from the salutary, though slow operation of
these Waters.

OBSTRUCTIONS in the uterine system, suppressions of the menstrual discharge,
and, other irregularities, and, excesses peculiar to it; the fluor albus,
scirrhous tumors, and other diseases of the womb, will in many circumstances
and constitutions, find a useful remedy in the Walton Water.

OBSTRUCTIONS left by the long continuance, and, the frequent return of
intermittent fevers, will, probably, yield to a prudent use of these Waters;
and, they will prepare the patient, and, put him in a fit state to receive
further benefit from the Bark.

OBSTRUCTIONS in the Lungs, from a scorbutic cause, and, acrid humors in the
blood, and inveterate ophthalmia's, have been relieved, and, are likely to be
successfully treated by the Walton Water.

I SHALL not give many directions concerning the use of this Water, professedly
similar to that of Cheltenham, the method of drinking, of which, has been long
ascertained by established usage, and, the public is possessed of the
directions of eminent, and, able practitioners explanatory of their experience,
in this point.

THE Summer Months are the season to drink the Walton Waters; as they will, in
these months, and, in dry weather be in their most perfect state of
impregnation.

LIKE Cheltenham, the Walton Waters are their own preparative; three quarters
of a pint, drank at the Pump, may be taken in the morning, and afternoon, this
quantity may be increased to three half-pints afterward, if the former
quantity does not sufficiently open the body.

BUT I would observe, that the middle doses, such as merely preserve the body
in a lax state, not exceeding three stools daily, are preferable to larger
doses, and to greater evacuation; the business and intention, being to carry
off the ill-digested remains of meals, perhaps of excess, and of luxury, and,
of all kinds of corrupt recrementitious matter lodged in the alimentary canal,
without impairing strength and digestion.

EARLY hours are necessary to an advantageous use of the Waters at the Well,
where only they are drank without the loss of the active Volatile ingredients,
which give power to those that are more fixed, to penetrate into the glands,
and smallest vessels.

EXERCISE sub dio, is also equally proper to second the operation of the Water,
and to strengthen the body.

AN easy digested nutrient diet, consisting, when it agrees with the stomach,
of milk in the morning and at night, of light meats and vegetables at dinner,
with general temperance, and moderation in the use of vinous liquors, rather
than total abstinence from them, is highly expedient.

IN a situation, where excellent fish is so plentiful, it is proper to observe,
that moderation in this article will be prudent, as a very frequent use of fish
is found often prejudicial in discases of the skin, and, sometimes produces the
more obstinate diseases of that class; diseases, for which these Waters are
peculiarly proper.

IT is almost superfluous to add, that, however useful it may be to entertain
the mind with pleasing society, and, an agreeable succession of amusements, it
is always necessary to retire to rest at an early hour, and, before eleven
o'clock at farthest to be in bed, that the constitution may have the advantage
of nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep.

IN the cutaneous diseases, and, many of the affections of the glands, for
which the internal use of these Waters is proper; Baths of different degrees of
heat from that of common cold Water, to that of one hundred degrees of
Fahrenheit's scale, will be highly expedient; this will appear in a stronger
light, from what I shall offer concerning the sunctions, and diseases of the
lymphatic glands. I apprehend, the diseases of these glands, are chiefly to be
reached by the means of remedies, which are applied, so as to be absorbed by
the lymphatic vessels, which pass to the glands. I am confident, that the most
obstinate cutaneous, and glandular diseases would yield to a due perseverance
in the external and internal use of Waters and other proper remedies. But what
these remedies are, and, also the use, whether external or internal of Mineral
Waters, and of Medicines of all kinds, which are to produce any important and
salutary consequence, can only be determined in particular cases, and
constitutions, by the judgment of an able, and experienced physician.

THOUGHTS ON THE FUNCTIONS AND DISEASES OF THE LYMPHATIC GLANDS.
THE use of Mineral Waters in diseases of the glands, leads me to offer some
thoughts, which, I believe, are either new, or have not been enough attended
to, concerning the use, and diseases of the lymphatic glands.

THE lymphatic system, which makes an important article in the anatomical
discoveries of the last century, has received much improvement in this. It is
not my business to assign to each improver or discoverer, his due proportion of
merit. I acknowledge my obligations to them all. To Haller, Meckel, Monro, Mr.
Hewson, Dr. William Hunter, and Mr. John Hunter, Mr. Sheldon, and Mr.
Cruikshank; who have all contributed, and, some of them very splendidly, to
perfect the knowledge of this important part of the animal system; and, let
them not deem it amiss, that profiting by their labors, I endeavor to make
them subservient to the knowledge of the animal economy, and to the healing
art.

THAT the lymphatic vessels arise from every viscus, and, from every cavity in
the body, as well as from the skin, and the cellular membrane investing the
body, in prodigious, and till lately, in undiscovered numbers, is an anatomical
truth of the greatest importance, now clearly demonstrated, and universally
acknowledged.

THE lymphatic vessels, and lacteals are of the same kind, and, constitute a
system of vessels, no where connected with the veins, containing red blood;
but, which universally terminate in the lacteal sac and duct, and convey chyle,
and lymph collected in every part into the subclaviam vein, where it mixes with
the blood, and no where else.

THE, sole and exclusive function of this system of vessels is absorption.

SOME, indeed, have held, that the red veins are supplementary absorbents,
especially on some occasions; and the illustrious Walther and others, with some
probability, have assigned this office to the vena portarum, especially in
diseases, in which the conglobate glands of the mesentery are scirrhous, or
obliterated by age, as some have supposed, or, the lacteal sac, and duct itself
is obstructed. The proofs of this are equivocal, and accounted for on different
principles, by the school of Hunter, particularly, by that accurate anatomist,
Mr. John Hunter, who first discovered that absorption is carried on by the
lymphatic vessels alone.

THE lacteal, and lymphatic vessels universally pass through conglobate glands,
before the fluid they convey, reaches the lacteal duct; those arising from the
intestines, enter the different orders of mesenteric glands, and, the chyle and
lymph deposited in these glands, is again absorbed from them by the vasa
lymphatica efferentia, in order to be conveyed to the thoracic duct. Cruikshank
passim. p. 76.


THIS law is universal, and, the lymphatic veins wherever they arise, in no
instance enter into the lacteal duct, without previously, and repeatedly
throwing the lymph into the conglobate glands, which are an essential part of
this system, a part of the greatest importance, for the advantage of which, the
lymph is absorbed, in order to be conveyed to them; and from them the lymph is
taken up in a more purified, and assimilated state, and is conveyed by the
lymphatica efferentia into the lacteal sac and duct.

THE structure of these glands is both vascular and cellular; into these cells
the lymph is thrown, and the absorbing lymphatics, the lymphatica efferentia,
are the only excretories, to all the conglobate glands; the uses of which are
acknowledged to be unknown and undiscovered, by gentlemen to whom anatomists
are so much indebted, Messrs. Sheldon and Cruikshank, the latest improvers of
the lymphatic system. The ingenious discoverers, who have lately so much
improved the knowledge of the lymphatic system, all acknowledge their ignorance
of the use of these glands. Mr. Cruikshank, the latest publisher on this
subject, says, "Though we know something more of the nature, structure and
diseases, of the lymphatic glands, we know no more of their real use than the
ancients. As they inform us, however, of the passage of infections matter into
the blood; and as from their state, we are enabled to judge of the presence or
absence, of other diseases the knowledge of them is of great importance, in the
practice of medicine." ANATOMY OF THE ABSORBING VESSELS OF THE HUMAN BODY, p.
68, 69. "Why the lymphatic's and lacteals terminate first in the glands. I do
not know." p. 18.

"It will appear strange, that I have said nothing of the use of the absorbent
glands. I avow absolute ignorance of this matter. There are none in turtle and
in fish, and, only two in the necks of some birds. Why there are so many in
men, and quadrupeds, I do not know, nor why they exist at all." p. 187, etc.

Once for all, I beg leave to express my opinion of the work now quoted, as one
of the most valuable and important acquisitions, both to anatomy and medicine,
this age has produced.




YET it is a matter not only interesting in the science of physiology, to
ascertain their use, but is likewise necessary to enable us to understand more
perfectly the diseases of the glands, and, to treat them with success: we will
therefore pursue the enquiry.

A FLUID is constantly exhaled into the cavities containing the viscera; this
fluid is liable to be altered, either by remora or mixture; the absorption of
this fluid is the function of the internal lymphatics, and, when it is
prevented, either by obstruction of the conglobate glands, or, by any other
cause; Dropsies in the brain, thorax, pericardium, abdomen, and the widely
diffused cellular membrane, arise.

THE lymph along with the chyle, and nutritious liquors prepared from the food
in the intestinal canal, is absorbed by the lacteal and lymphatic vessels, for
they are the same; these fluids are immediately thrown into the mesenteric
glands; and, they are more numerous there than in other parts, because their
office is peculiarly important, that of perfecting the chyle or nutritious
fluid, extracted by digestion from food. That fluid is perfected by
intercepting what is noxious in the cells of the conglobate glands, where it
undergoes a digestion before it is absorbed by the second and third orders of
the lacteal vessels.

NUMEROUS lymphatic vessels, arise also from the stomach, intestines, and from
the glandular viscera; from the pelvis, the bladder, and parts of generation,
both in males and females; they observe the same law, and pass through the
iliac conglobate glands, or others before they enter the lacteal sac; and,
their use is the same, to intercept crude, noxious, unassimilated matter, which
has been rendered unfit by disease, or other means to mix immediately, and
unaltered, with the blood.

THE food we take in, and the air we breathe, while they convey the necessary
supports of life, contain also the feeds of disease and death.

THE lymphatic vessels, which arise in the mouth, and, from the trachea and
lungs, (where their number is immense), convey the fluids they absorb, with
whatever extraneous matter has been taken up to the numerous conglobate glands
of the neck, to the thyroid gland, thymus, and the glands of the lungs, where
it is digested before it reaches the thoracic duct.

IN young animals who take in their food by suction, in which action much is
absorbed by the lymphatics; the glands are very large, numerous and
conspicuous, the more perfectly to digest, and animalise the crude fluids
received by suction, with the milk.

WHEN that period of life is passed over, the thyroid glands and thymus are not
quite so necessary, and abate in size, but are never totally obliterated.

IN pointing out the business of purifying, and animalising lymph, as the
function, of the conglobate glands in general, I believe I have discovered the
use of the thymus in infants, and, of the thyroid glands, hitherto one of the
hidden mysteries in anatomy. Cruikshank, speaking of the Thymus, says, "I know
not the use of this gland;" and of the Thyroid gland, "as I have not the least
conception of its use, I do not understand what functions in particular its
absorbents perform," p. 183.


THE external surface of the body, is no less absorptive, fluids are imbibed,
thirst abated, urine and weight increased from thence. Garlic, externally
applied is soon smelled in the breath. Turpentine gives the urine a violet
smell. Variolous matter, and the venereal poison introduced by the smallest
puncture, produce similar diseases, and, previous to universal infection and
diffusion, the inguinal and axillary glands, are swelled and inflamed by the
passage of the poison into them. Mercury, the antidote to this poison, also
enters freely by the skin. Blisters applied to the arms and shoulders inflame
the axillary glands; those of the neck in children, particularly are made hard
and sore by ulcers behind the ears, and in the head, and, by blisters to those
parts.

ULCERS and punctures in the legs, and other parts, often occasion swellings
along the lymphatics up to, the axillae, or inguinal glands. Purulent bubos
arise frequently from such ulcers, and, from matter formed in the joints. The
axillary glands are swelled by stagnating milk, by cancerous swellings, and
inflammations in the breast. Cancers in the lips and on the face, cause similar
swellings under the lower jaw, and, in the neck. The same glands are swelled by
gum boils, and by venereal sores in the lips. Acrid matter absorbed, inflames
the lymphatic vessel, and, the gland, universally, between the seat of the
matter and sore, and, the thoracic duct; and, its entrance into the body, may
be prevented by caustic, or, by the excision of the part. Powders scattered
over the surface of the body are absorbed, thus calomel is known to enter; and,
I remember a degree of salivation, and sore mouth, produced by a small quantity
of corrosive sublimate, rubbed with crude sal ammoniac and camphire scattered
on bed linen, in order to prevent a morbus pediculosus.

WHEN we consider these various facts, that all lymphatic vessels perpetually
enter the conglobate glands, and, in the cells, of which these glands
universally consist, deposite the lymph, which being absorbed once, and, again
by larger lymphatics, is at length conveyed by the great channel, the lacteal
duct, into the vena cava descendens, under the left calavicle. When we
recollect, that the Venereal Virus, Cancerous and Variolous poisons, enter the
body by these channels, and, and are primarily deposited in these glands,
occasioning there tumors, sometimes indolent, sometimes painful, inflamed and
suppurating. It seems clear, these glands are intended by nature, to purify the
lymph, before it enters the blood vessels, from matter, which may be noxious
there, by arresting it in the glands, universally connected with absorbents.

IN these glands, it is either altered by a concocting, and digesting power
inherent in them, or when it is too noxious to be subdued into a salutary
nature it remains in the form of a tumor, or escapes by suppuration. When it
cannot be subdued, nor removed by suppuration, and, those salutary efforts of
nature fail, it is then absorbed, and, diffuses disease in the constitution at
large.

THUS the glands in the neck, and the thyroid are interposed to intercept crude
matter, or noxious Virus taken up from the nostrils, mouth, trachea and lungs,
and other parts about the neck and breast, more especially in very young
animals.

THE mesenteric glands purify, and digest, whatever is absorbed with the lymph
and chyle from the intestines.

THE axillary, and inguinal glands, alter and intercept whatever extraneous
matter may happen to be absorbed from the surface of the body, or the cellular
membrane.

THE glands have the power of assimilating into a sound fluid, such noxious
matter, in very many instances. But when it is highly virulent as in the lues,
in scrophulous, and in cancerous diseases, that digesting and assimilating
function is overpowered, the gland remains scirrhous, or, is destroyed by
suppuration, and, the matter enters, and contaminates the habit.

IN fine, the use of these glands is to intercept as sponges, and to alter as
digestive organs, whatever is unfit to enter into the mass of blood. In
ordinary cases, this is effected without obstruction, or, inflammation, and,
then no apparent consequences detrimental to health appear, and, the deposited
matter is absorbed again, and, goes along with the sound lymph. In
extraordinary cases, the poison remains in the gland, and, destroys its powers
first, and its substance, and organization afterward.

THE fatal consequences, which have followed injections of undigested
alimentary fluids, directly into the red veins of living animals, are proofs
that the lymphatic glands have the use and function here alleged, and, show,
that without the lymphatic digestion, liquors apparently harmless, are unfit to
mix with the blood; and, produce fatal effects there. Haller, Elem. Phys. Tom.
1. p. 228.


HOW the glands alter, digest, and assimilate the matter absorbed, and
deposited in them, I know not, and shall not attempt to explain; I think that
power implanted in them, as well as in the stomach and intestines; and, we see
an important apparatus, set apart for the purpose, by Him! whose ability is too
great, in every instance to be fully comprehended, and interpreted by us his
creatures.

FROM the uses here ascribed to the lymphatic glands we see, why they are most
numerous, where absorption is greatest; and, particularly in those parts, where
crude matter is absorbed. We see, why the glands are nearly as numerous in the
neck as in the mesentery P. 130.
; for beside the matter absorbed from the inside of the mouth, nostrils, and
trachea; the absorbents from the brain join the glands of the neck. Though
these have not been traced by anatomists; as a copious exhalation, and,
absorption constantly take place in the ventricles of that organ; as we have
reason to believe, the Water in the internal hydrocephalus is sometimes
absorbed; from the general law, we may presume, that lymphatics exist in the
brain, though not certainly traced there P. 127, Cruikshank.
; this is confirmed by the internal cephalus often happening in scrophulous and
ricketty children, in whom the glands of the neck are scirrhous.

IT is well known, that swellings of the glands often follow cruptive diseases.
They arise after scarlet fever, measles and small pox. Dropsy, is sometimes the
consequence of them all. And I have known the hydrocephalus internus, as well
as other Dropsies succeed the scarlet fever; another presumptive proof, that
absorption in the brain, is carried on by lymphatic vessels, as well as in
other parts.

WE also, see why the glands are more numerous in the mesentery, through which
all the chyle passes and are smaller, and less numerous in the mesocolon,
through which hardly any chyle passes, whence Mr. Cruikshank is led to say,
"this looks as if the glands were intended to produce some remarkable change in
the chyle" P. 127. -- of Cruikshank.
.

THE mesenteric glands, as well as the conglobate glands in other parts, being
cellular, as well as vascular, contain a white milky fluid, most conspicuous
and abundant in young animals. Album perpetuo reperi, says, Haller, Elem. Phys.
T. 1.

THESE glands, though greatly less in adults than in young animals, are yet not
totally obliterated. The illustrious Haller, has seen the thymus in the
mediastinum, and the glands in the mesentery, and in the intestinum rectum in
adults; in children, they are very large and succulent, Elem. Phys. T. 1. p.
192.

THE lymphatic vessels being destitute of the moving impulse of the heart, and
having no other principle of motion to carry on the liquors absorbed, but that
of the irritability of the lymphatic system, the motion of the lymph is
necessarily liable to be obstructed. Hence obstructions happen more frequently
in the conglobate and lymphatic glands, than in the conglomerate glands. The
liver may be excepted, because the blood conveyed into it by the vena portarum,
undergoes a similar retardation in that very singular vein.

THE conglobate glands, are hence universally liable to scirrhosity and
obstruction. The mesenteric glands are notoriously liable to great enlargement
and hardness, and thereby often cause a slow consuming sever and atrophy in
infants. Similar swellings in the mesenteric glands are sometimes observed from
ulcerated intestines after dysentery. The neck is seldom strumous without
accompanying obstructions in the mesenteric glands.

THE thyroid axillary and mammary glands, as well as the iliac lumbar and
inguinal glands are all frequently sound obstructed and scirrhous. In a word
these glands are not only obstructed in venereal and cancerous habits; but the
scrophula and rachitis likewise originate in them, and are principally seated
in the glands.

IN all cases of obstructed glands, the chyle and lymph, being imperfectly
assimilated, the blood becomes gradually vitiated, and, unfit for nourishment.
Hence that acrimony often called scorbutic; an ulcerous and even cancerous
disposition of fluids originate. From the same source the bones become brittle,
break in some, and are rendered soft and flexible in others.

ALL these facts conspire to show the importance of the digestive, and
assimilating power of the glands, and, lymphatic system, in perfecting the
animal fluids.

IN diseased glands, the chyle is not sufficiently assimilated, and, that
defect gradually induces acrimony, and impurity in the lymph, which soon taints
the blood and habit universally.

IT is more from this defect, than from the entrance of the chyle into the
blood, being prevented by obstruction, that marasmus, and consumption follow
scirrhosities in the mesentric glands.

"IT is possible," says, the ingenious Cruikshank, "that children, and, even
grown persons, may have died of the tabes mesenterica from obstructions in the
glands, rendering them impervious to the chyle." But he never saw any such
stagnation of chyle, as these are supposed to cause, on any occasion whatever.
P. 107, Cruikshank.


THE lymph, and chyle, enter the blood but in a corrupted, crude, unanimalised
state.

I AM confirmed in this opinion, by the experiments of another excellent
Anatomist, Mr. Sheldon, which I shall quote from his splendid History of the
Human Lacteal Vessels.

IN subjects, in which the lymphatic glands of the mesentery, were found
entirely obstructed, sometimes by a curd-like substance, sometimes by
calcareous earth, Mr. Sheldon, could push injections of quicksilver from the
vessels, below the obstructed glands, to those above them, though not a single
particle of quicksilver, could be made to enter the glands in this obstructed
state. In this case, the collateral branches of the lacteal vessels, which
communicated with those above, were enlarged, and, had conveyed the chyle into
the lacteal duct.

THE ingenious Dr. Cheston, found the cavity of the lacteal duct totally
obstructed for a considerable length, by an earthy matter, in a man who had a
Spina Ventosa of the os ilium.

IT is probable, the chyle, in this case, was conveyed from below, into the
lacteal duct, above the obstruction, by one or more collateral anastomosing
branches, which are every where numerous in the lymphatic vessels, and,
frequent in the lacteal duct itself. This being a provision of nature, for
securing more certainly, a regular conveyance of the chyle into the blood
vessels.

I remember a melancholy case, which shows the thoracic duct, sometimes is
obstructed in a fatal degree; a young lady, high in rank, beautiful in person,
and amiable in disposition; had a swelling in the neck, which extended itself
under the left clavicle, and there obstructed the entrance of the thoracic duct
into the subclavian vein so completely, as to render her incurably dropsical in
every part of her body.

WHAT I have now offered, concerning the use of the glands, belonging to the
lymphatic system, will, I apprehend, derive support from the late discoveries,
and will be found useful in the treatment of diseases of the glands.

MEDICINES taken into the stomach, and mixed with the chyle, are, indeed, in
the direct channel, to reach the diseased glands of the mesentery.

BUT this is not the case, respecting the conglobate glands in other parts.
Medicines mixing with the blood never directly reach these glands. and, but
very remotely, and indirectly affect them; and, this is one of the reasons why,
diseases in these glands, have always appeared so stubborn, and have so rarely
yielded to the common treatment, and internal use of Medicine.

THE confiding alone to Medicines, conveyed by the lacteals into the channel of
circulation; the inattention to the only entrance into the external diseased
glands, that by absorption, are I am persuaded, causes why those diseases have
proved so obstinate, and rebellious to Medical treatment.

IT is the cause why scrophula, and scirhous glands, have become cancerous, and
finally incurable and fatal.

IT is evident then, that the remedies proper for removing obstructions should
be applied to such parts, from whence the lymphatics arise which may absorb and
conduct them to the glands, the obstructions of which are to be removed.

APPLICATIONS intended to remove glandular swellings in the neck, the thyroid
gland, the bronchocele etc. must be made to the head, neck, cheeks, and mouth
internally, as well as externally.

VAPORS inhaled by inspiration, are proper in the diseased glands of the lungs.

REMEDIES intended to pass into the axillary glands, must be applied to the
arms and breast.

IN diseases of the inguinal glands the remedies intended to pass into them,
and through them, must be applied to the genitals, and to the legs and thighs.

THE advantages found from the local application of Mercury in Venereal
swellings of the inguinal, and axillary glands, and in ulcers of the throat,
exemplify this doctrine in that disease.

THE holding Medicines intended to remove the the bronchocele, and swelled
neck, in the mouth and under the tongue, is essential to give efficacy to these
Medicines, as has been long experienced, in the Coventry Medicine. The saline
ingredients, whether alcaline, or neutral, of which such Medicines usually
consist, are absorbed by the lymphatic vessels arising in the inside of the
mouth, and, are conveyed directly to the diseased glands with constant good
effect.

INTERNAL obstructions in the mesentery in particular, are to be relieved by
internal Medicines; and in every kind of glandular obstruction Mineral Waters
have been found highly necessary and useful.

THE Chalybeate, the sulphurous, the saline, the hot, and the cold Waters,
have all been tried with advantage.

OF laxative Medicines, the purgative Mineral Waters, always operate with the
least diminution of strength, and with the least disturbance; the appetite is
for the most part mended under their use, and important alterations in the
whole system, arise from continuing to apply to them. Their operation
principally affects the first passages in clearing away what is
recrimentitious, and hurtful in that seat and source of corruption.

THEY next directly operate on the lacteal vessels and glands; they dilute the
chyle, and stimulate the lacteals themselves, which are sufficiently irritable;
and remove thereby, both the source of obstruction, and the obstructions, which
may have taken place, in the conglobate glands of the mesentery.

IN this manner they contribute to the purity, and perfection of the chyle and
lymph, and remove all obstacles, to its perfect digestion in the intestinal
canal, and in the lacteal vessels and glands.

HENCE this source of tainted fluids being taken away from the chyle and blood,
and no new acrimonious deposition falling on the remoter parts of the body; the
lymphatic vessels and glands, there reassume their functions, and, absorb and
digest, what was before lodged on the skin, and on the adjacent parts of the
surface of the body.

THUS, under the use of such Waters, continued for a sufficient length of time,
depositions, eruptions and defedations of the skin, with ulcers and glandular
swellings disappear. It is thus the Harrowgate, Cheltenham and Walton Waters
prove beneficial.

THE Sea Water, acts not only as a powerful internal remedy in the same
diseases; but has its efficacy greatly promoted by bathing; washing thereby
away much cutaneous foulness, and removing more by being directly absorbed into
the lymphatic's, and conveyed to the diseased glands; at the same time, that a
useful spring and vigor is given to the whole constitution.

I MIGHT illustrate the practical importance of these principles by cases, but
this letter being already too long, I now commit it to your consideration. To
you! who joining reading to experience and talents, make the healing art your
study and delight.

FROM you, my humble but zealous endeavors to excite the attention of the
younger and liberal Gentlemen of the profession, to improved methods of curing
diseases, are sure of a candid reception.

As to others whose sole pursuit and study is gain;

Quaerenda pecunia primum est, Virtus post nummos. I HAVE not wrote for them,
and have certainly no attention to expect from them.

I am, etc. JAMES JOHNSTONE.
Worcester, Aug. 20, 1787.
FINIS.

