MUSAEUS: A MONODY TO THE MEMORY of Mr. POPE, IN Imitation of MILTON's Lycidas.

T. Hayman inv. et del.
C. Grignion Sculp.


LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY at Tully's Head in Pall Mall, and sold by M.
COOPER at the Globe in Paternoster Row. 1747.

MUSAEUS: A MONODY.
SOrrowing I catch the reed, and call the muse;
If yet a muse on Britain's plain abide,
Since rapt MUSAEUS tuned his parting strain:
With him they lived, with him perchance they died.
For who ever since their virgin train espied,
Or on the banks of Thames, or that mild plain,
Where Isis sparkles to the sunny ray?
Or have they deigned to play,
Where Camus winds along his broider'd vale,
Feeding each white pink, and each daisie pied,
That mingling paint his rushy-fringed side?
Yet ah! celestial maids, ye are not dead;
Immortal as ye are, ye may not die:
And well I ween, ye cannot quite be fled,
Ever ye entune his mournful elegy.
Stay then awhile, O stay, ye fleeting fair;
Revisit yet, nor hallowed Hippocrene,
Nor Thespia's shade; till your harmonious teen
Be grateful poured in some slow-dittied air.
Such tribute paid, again ye may repair
To what loved haunt you whilom did elect;
Whether Lycaeus, or that mountain fair
Trim Maenalus, with piny verdure decked.
But now it boots you not in these to stray,
Or yet Cyllene's hoary shade to choose,
Or where mild Ladon's welling waters play.
Forego each vain excuse,
And haste to Thames's shores; for Thames shall join
Our sad society, and passing mourn,
Letting cold tears bedew his silver urn.
And, when the poet's widowed grot he laves,
His reed-crown'd locks shall shake, his head shall bow,
His tide no more in eddies blithe shall rove,
But creep soft by with long-drawn murmurs slow.
For often the poet roused his charmed waves
With martial notes, or lulled with strain of love.
He must not now in brisk maeanders flow
Gamesome, and kiss the sadly-silent shore,
Without the loan of some poetic woe.
Can I forget, how erst his osiers made
Sad sullen music, as bleak Eurus fanned?
Can I forget, how gloom'd yon laureat shade,
Ever death remorseless waved his ebon wand?
How, midst yon grot, each silver trickling spring
Wandered the shelly channels all among;
While as the coral roof did softly ring,
Responsive to their sweetly-doleful song.
Meanwhile all pale the expiring poet laid,
And sunk his awful head,
While vocal shadows pleasing dreams prolong;
For so, his sickening spirits to release,
They poured the balm of visionary peace.
First, sent from Cam's fair banks, like Palmer old,
Came Came Tityrus etc.] i. e. CHAUCER, a name frequently given him by Spenser,
vide Shep. Call. Ecl. 2, 6, 12, and Elsewhere.
TITYRUS slow, with head all silvered over,
And in his hand an oaken crook he bore,
And thus in antique guise short talk did hold.
"Great clerk of Fame' is house, whose excellence
"Ma^e well befitt thilk place of eminence,
"Mickle of well betide thy hours last,
"For mich good wirke to me don and past.
For syn the days whereas my lyre ben strongen,
And deftly many a merry lay I songen,
"Old Time, which all things don maliciously,
"Gnawen with rusty tooth continually,
"Gnattrid my lines, that they all cancrid ben,
"Till at the last thou smoothen 'hem have again;
"Sithence full semely gliden my rymes rude,
"As, (if fitteth thilk similitude)
"When shallow brook yrenneth hobling on,
"Ovir rough stones it maken full rough song;
"But, them stones removen, this lite rivere
"Stealen forth by, making plesaunt murmere:
"So my sely rymes, whosoever may them note,
"Thou maken everichone to ren right sote;
"And in thy verse entuneth so fetisely,
"That men sayen I make true melody,
"And speaken every dele to mine honor.
"Mich well, great clerk, betide thy parting hour!"
He ceased his homely rhyme.
When Colin Clout.] i. e. SPENSER, which name he gives himself throughout his
works.
COLIN CLOUT, Eliza's shepherd swain,
The blithest lad that ever pip'd on plain,
Came with his reed soft-warbling on the way,
And thrice he bowed his head with motion mild,
And thus his gliding numbers began essay.
I.
The two first stanzas of this speech, as they relate to Pastoral, are written
in the measure which Spenser uses in the first eclogue of the Shepherd's
Calendar; the rest, where he speaks of Fable, are in the stanza of the Faery
Queen.
"Ah! luckless swain, alas! how art thou lorn,
"Who once like me could frame thy pipe to play
"Shepherds devise, and cheer the lingering morn:
"Ne bush, ne breere, but learnt thy roundelay.
"Ah plight too sore such worth to equal right!
"Ah worth too high to meet such piteous plight!
II.
"But I naught strive, poor Colin, to compare
"My Hobbin's, or my Thenot's rustic skill
"To thy deft swains, whose dapper dities rare
"Surpass ought else of quaintest shepherd's quill.
"Even Roman Tityrus, that peerless wight,
"Mote yield to thee for dainties of delight.
III.
"Eke when in Fable's flowery paths you strayed,
"Masking in cunning feints truth's splendent face;
"Ne Sylph, ne Sylphid, but due tendence paid,
"To shield Belinda's lock from felon base,
"But all mote naught avail such harm to chase.
"Then Una fair 'gan droop her princely mien,
"Eke Florimel, and all my faery race:
"Belinda far surpast my beauties sheen,
"Belinda, subject meet for such soft lay I ween.
IV.
"Like as in villag'd troop of birdlings trim,
"Where Chanticleer his red crest high does hold,
"And quaking Ducks, that wont in lake to swim,
"And Turkeys proud, and Pigeons nothing bold;
"If chance the Peacock does his plumes unfold,
"Eftsoons their meaner beauties all decaying,
"He glist'neth purple, and he glist'neth gold,
"Now with bright green, now blue himself arraying.
"Such is thy beauty bright, all other beauties swaying.
V.
"But why do I descant this toyish rhyme,
"And fancies light in simple guise pourtray?
"Listing to cheer thee at this ruefull time,
"While as black Death does on thy heartstrings prey.
"Yet read aright, and if this friendly lay
"Thou nathless judge all too slight and vain,
"Let my well-meaning mend my ill essay:
"So may I greet thee with a nobler strain,
"When soon we meet for aye, in yon star-sprinkled plain."
Last came a bard of more exalted tread,
And Hight Thyrsis.] i. e. MILTON. Lycidas and the Epitaphium Damonis are the
only Pastorals we have of Milton's, in the latter of which, where he laments
Car. Deodatus under the name of Damon, he calls himself Thyrsis.
THYRSIS hight by Dryad, Fawn, or Swain,
Whenever he mingled with the sylvan train;
But seldom that; for higher thoughts he fed;
For him full often the heavenly Muses led
To clear Euphrates, and the secret mount,
To Araby, and Eden, fragrant climes;
All which the sacred bard would often recount:
And thus in strain, unused in grove or shade,
To sad MUSAEUS rightful homage paid.
"Thrice hail, thou heav'n-taught Warbler! last and best
"Of all the train! Poet, in whom conjoined
"All that to ear, or heart, or head, could yield
"Rapture; harmonious, manly, clear, sublime.
"Accept this gratulation: may it cheer
"Thy sinking soul; nor these corporeal ills
"Ought daunt thee, or appall. Know, in high heaven
"Fame blooms eternal over that spirit divine,
"Who builds immortal verse. There thy bold Muse,
"Which while on earth could breath Maeonian fire,
"Shall soar seraphic heights; while to her voice
"Ten thousand Hierarchies of Angels harp
"Symphonious, and with dulcet harmonies
"Usher the song rejoicing. I meanwhile,
"To sooth thee in these irksome hours of pain,
"Approach thy visitant, with mortal laud
"To praise thee mortal. First, (as first beseems)
"For rhyme subdued; Rhyme, erst the minstrel rude
"Of Chaos, Anarch old: she near his throne
"Often taught the rattling elements to chime
"With tenfold din; till late to earth upborn
"On strident wing, what time fair Poesy
"Emerg'd from Gothic cloud, and faintly shot
"Rekindling gleams of luster. Her the fiend
"Oppressed; forcing to utter uncouth dirge,
"Runic, or Leonine; and with dire chains
"Fettered her scarce-fledg'd pinion. I such bonds
"Aimed to destroy, mistaking: bonds like these
"'Twere greater art t'ennoble, and refine.
"For this superior part MUSAEUS came:
"Thou came, and at thy magic touch the chains
"Off dropped, and (passing strange!) soft-wreathed bands
"Of flowers their place supplied: which well the Muse
"Might wear for choice, not force; obstruction none,
"But lov'liest ornament. Wondrous this, yet here
"The wonder rests not; various argument
"Remains for me, all doubting, where to cull
"The primal grace, where countless graces charm.
"Various this peaceful scene; this mineral roof;
"This 'semblage meet of coral, ore, and shell;
"These pointed crystals fair, mid each obscure
"Bright glist'ring; all these slowly-dripping rills,
"That tinkling stray amid the cooly cave.
"Yet not this various peaceful scene; with this
"Its mineral roof; nor this assemblage meet
"Of coral, ore, and shell; nor mid the obscure
"These pointed crystals, glist'ring fair; nor rills,
"That straying tinkle through the cooly cave;
"Deal charms more various to each raptured sense,
"Than thy mellifluous lay -- "
"Cease, friendly swain;
(MUSAEUS cried, and raised his aching head)
"All praise is foreign, but of true desert;
"Plays round the head, but comes not to the heart.
"Ah! why recall the toys of thoughtless youth?
When flowery fiction held the place of truth;
"When fancy ruled; when trill'd each trivial strain,
"But idly sweet, and elegantly vain.
"O! in that strain, if all of wit had flowed,
"All music warbled, and all beauty glowed;
"Had liveliest nature, happiest art combined;
"That lent each grace, and This each grace refined,
"Alas! how little were my proudest boast!
"The sweetest trifler of my tribe at most.
"To sway the judgment, while he charms the ear;
"To curb mad passion in its wild career;
"To blend with skill, as loftiest themes inspire,
"All reason's rigor, and all fancy's fire:
"Be this the poet's praise. With this uncrown'd,
"Wit dies a jest, and poetry a sound.
"Come then that honest fame; whose sober ray
"Or gilds the satire, or the moral lay;
"Which dawns, though thou, rough DONE! hew out the line;
"But beams, sage HORACE! from each strain of thine.
"O! if, like these, one poet more could brave
"The venal statesman, or the titled slave;
"Brand frontless Vice, strip all her stars and strings,
"Nor spare her basking in the smile of Kings:
"Yet stoop to Virtue, though the prostrate maid
"Lay sadly pale in bleak misfortune's shade:
If grave, yet lively; rational, yet warm;
"Clear to convince, and eloquent to charm;
"He poured, for her loved cause, serene along
"The purest precept, in the sweetest song:
"For her loved cause, he traced his moral plan,
"Yon various region of bewild'ring man;
"Explored alike each scene, that frowned, or smiled,
"The flowery garden, or the weedy wild;
"Unmoved by sophistry, unawed by name,
"No dupe to doctrines, and no fool to fame;
"Led by no system's devious glare astray,
"As earth-born meteors glitter to betray:
"But, all his soul to reason's rule resigned,
"And heaven's own views fair-op'ning on his mind,
"Caught from bright nature's flame the living ray,
"Through passion's cloud poured in resistless day;
"And this great truth in all its luster showed,
"That GOD IS WISE; and ALL CREATION GOOD:
If this his boast, pour here the welcome lays;
"Praise less than this is impotence of praise."
"To pour that praise be mine," fair VIRTUE cried;
And shot, all radiant, through an opening cloud.
But ah! my Muse, how will thy voice express
The immortal strain, harmonious, as it flowed?
Ill suits immortal strain a doric dress:
And far too high already have thou soared.
Enough for thee, that, when the lay was over,
The goddess clasped him to her throbbing breast.
But what might that avail? Blind Fate before
Had opened her shears, to slit his vital thread;
And who may hope gainsay her stern behest?
Then thrice he waved the hand, thrice bowed the head,
And sighed his soul to rest.
Then wept the Nymphs; witness, ye waving shades!
Witness, ye winding streams! the Nymphs did weep:
The heavenly Goddess too with tears did steep
Her plaintive voice, that echoed through the glades;
And, "cruel gods," and, "cruel stars," she cried:
Nor did the shepherds, through the woodlands wide,
On that sad day, or to the pensive brook,
Or stagnant river, drive their thirsty flocks;
Nor did the wild-goat brooze the steepy rocks:
And Philomel her custom'd oak forsook;
And roses wan were waved by zephyrs weak,
As Nature's self was sick;
And every lilly drooped its velvet head;
And groaned each faded lawn, and leafless grove:
Sad sympathy! yet sure his rightful meed,
Who charmed all nature: well might Nature mourn
Through all her sweets; and flower, and lawn, and shade,
All vocal grown, all weep MUSAEUS dead.
Here end we, Goddess! this your shepherd sang,
All as his hands an ivy chaplet wove.
O! make it worthy of the sacred bard,
And make it equal to the shepherd's love.
Nor thou, MUSAEUS! from thine ear discard,
For well I ween thou hear'st my doleful song:
Whether 'mid angel troops, the stars among,
From golden harp thou call'st seraphic lays;
Or, anxious for thy dearest Virtue's fare,
Thou still art hovering over our tuneless sphere,
And mov'st some hidden spring her weal to raise.
Thus the fond swain on doric oate essayed,
Manhood's prime honors downing on his cheek:
Trembling he strove to court the tuneful maid
With stripling arts, and dalliance all too weak;
Unseen, unheard, beneath an hawthorn shade.
But now dun clouds the welkin 'gan to streak;
And now down-dropt the larks, and ceased their strain:
They ceased, and with them ceased the shepherd swain.
FINIS.

