THE BATTIAD.

CANTO the First.

LONDON: Printed for G. SMITH, near Temple Bar (Price Sixpence.) MDCCL.

THE BATTIAD.
CANTO the First.
AWAKE, my Muse, whatever thy Name may be,
Or sprung from heavenly seed, or low degree,
Whether thou equal'st Garth's majestic rage,
Or crawl'st, like Blackmore, through the drowsy Page,
Much it imports the Business to explain
That shook the puny state of Warwick Lane:
Then, thrice-invok'd, expand thy raven's wing,
Vast is the task, for thou have much to sing.
(...) ^o^k, to thee I dedicate my lays;
Though no Degree thy equal merit raise,
Yet shall your skill to latest times endure,
Like Graduates often you kill, like them you sometimes cure.
'Twas now the day when Fellows, Fellows meet,
To talk of weighty matters, then to eat;
Mean while the Patient, from his tyrant free,
Inhales fresh health, and lives without a Fee.
First BATTUS came, deep-read in worldly art,
Whose tongue never knew the secrets of his heart;
In mischief mighty, though but mean of size,
And, like the Tempter, ever in disguise.
See him with aspect grave, and gentle tread,
By slow degrees, approach the sickly bed:
Then at his Club behold him altered soon,
The solemn Doctor turns a low Buffoon:
And he, who lately in a learned freak
Poach'd every Lexicon, and published Greek,
Still madly emulous of vulgar Praise,
From Punch's forehead wrings the dirty bays.
But who is that whose gogling Eye Balls scowl,
Like the full Orbs of the Cecropian fowl?
Hail, POCUS, Hail! -- Ye Midwives, sound his fame!
Ye Nurses, sing in Lullabies his Name!
It Is his to ease from pangs the laboring wife,
And tug the little Offspring into life.
As blind Tiresias, on a luckless day,
Lost his first Sex, as ancient Poets say;
So purring POCUS, once scarce known to fame,
Of an unskilful Leach, a Matron grave became.
Him Granta saw, and bade her learned Vest
Bind his broad Shoulders, and embrace his Chest;
Yet never quaff'd he of her sacred stream,
No Muse inspiring waits his morning dream.
The Scarlet Robe its heavy Wearer mocks;
So sits a Racer's Saddle on an Ox.
As he passed by, a numerous tribe succeeds,
Thick as in standing corn the purple weeds;
Names you could hardly think did ever exist,
But that you see them in the College List.
Slow-footed The epithet swift-footed given to Achilles, who was famous for
slaying Mankind, is, by being reversed, a most high compliment on the Learned
Gentleman to whom it is applied.
Ad -- ms hobbled in the throng,
And D -- d, a Giant Spectre, slouch'd along;
Then Br -- n marched onward, deep in physic leer,
And chatt'ring Ch -- n-y wriggled in the rear.
Each Aesculapian Sage assumes his seat,
When BATTUS thus forestalls the promised treat.
"Ere yet we on the choicest viands dine,
"Ere the deep glass be died with generous wine,
"Think, think my friends, what mischiefs threat our State,
"Now Ruin perches on our College-gate;
"There Graduate Schomberg for his answer stands,
"Examined thrice, his ent'rance loud demands:
"But by yon Pile, where on the chissel'd stone
"The well-wrought Madman seems to live and groan,
"^here on clean straw, sequestered in the (...),
"The Patriot, Sage, and Bard immortal dwells,
"I swear, my soul detests the hated league,
"And Hell, if Heaven should fail, shall second my Intrigue.
"Sooner shall rivers to their springs return,
"Or Warwick Lane at sickly seasons mourn;
"Sooner shall roses bloom upon the main,
"Fish sport in woods, nay I turn The Ed^tor is in doubt with himself whether
it should not be Wig; for Battus is as apt to turn his wig for the
entertainment of his company, as his coat for his own private emolument.
Whig again;
"Than Schomberg in our College find a place:
"This interdicting hand shall crush his race;
"What though he claim admittance as his right,
The power of numbers makes a raven white.
"Our Alma-Mater shall in vain protest,
"'It Is mine to make her bow her haughty crest;
"Down, down with Came and Isis reverend schools,
"Shall we proceed on dull exploded rules?
"Now welcome those on Leman's banks who feed,
"The fat Batavian, and the Sons of Tweed;
"These in full swarms shall all our College fill,
"And claim an equal privilege to kill;
"While I superior to the rest shall fit,
"A Lect'rer, Mimic, Editor, and Wit.
"Nor ask what cause inflames my stubborn hate,
"My settled purpose is as fixed as Fate;
"Reject our Claimant, nor his threat'nings fear,
"OURSELF through Law's wild maze will guide you clear
"'Till every Court my deep address shall own;
"What! -- are your BATTUS' arts so little known?"
He said, and paused; the Midwife reared his size,
Rolling from side to side his An epithet that so much exalted the beauty of
Homer's Juno, must no doubt pass an high compliment on the grace of feature of
our incomparable Midwife.
Ox-like eyes;
And while the scarlet Heroes he addressed,
Thick eructations half his speech suppressed.
"By Aedepol.] It was the custom of the Roman Ladies to swear by Castor, as the
Men did by Hercules. An asseveration by the Temple of Pollux was made use of by
both sexes, and therefore aptly put in the mouth of the Midwife.
Aedepol, my BATTUS, here I swear,
"I undismayed with thee will greatly dare,
"With thee I Will misinterpret, meanings strain,
"Or wade through miry roads of deep chicane.
"As Hounds together in one couple tied,
"As Pope and Devil sitting side by side,
"As Mountebank and quaint Jack-Pudding join,
"So ever mix thy friendly name with mine.
"Nor think I Have idly slept, you know my trade
"Is Nature's dark recesses to invade;
"Through alleys groping, lo! I set to view
"The affidavit of an half-starv'd Half-starv'd Jew.] Pocus, by his great skill
in the occult sciences, found out a Jew in a certain corner of the town, and
got him to make an affidavit that Schomberg was born abroad; which was true in
fact, for he never saw England 'till he was two or three years old; and, in
consequence of not being a native, was incapable of being admitted Fellow, at
least this was the joint opinion of Battus and Pocus.
Jew;
"And did not I my critic skill display?
"See my epistle upon O and A] While Schomberg was carrying on his bill of
Naturalization, an anonymous letter was written to the Sp -- r of the H -- e of
C -- mm -- ns, purporting that Schomberg intended to impose upon the Par -- t,
for whereas he of late spelt his name with an O, he, or his father, used
formerly to write it with an A. The Midwife is, for many reasons, suspected to
be the author of this letter, for, among others, two witnesses are ready to
depose upon oath that he can write.
O and A.
"Man, haughty Man, indebted to the Brutes,
"Assumes that name which best his nature suits;
"Heroes are Lions in an human shape,
"A Fox the Statesman, and the Beau an Ape;
"Then, to reward the yearnings of my soul,
"Salute your Midwife by the name of Mole.
"Nor think I Will ever from your banners fly,
"I Schomberg hate, nor know the reason why:
"Perhaps too often his busy Sire I meet,
"That cursed chariot rolls through every street;
"Perhaps -- I know not what inflames my rage,
"But youthful ardor thaws my frozen age;
"Sleepless I lie, I foam, I toss, I rave,
"Mad as the Priestess in Apollo's cave.
"Let Heberden his views by truth direct,
"Let Reeve oppose, an obstinate Elect;
"Let Leatherland be stubborn to his trust,
"Faint-hearted wretch, who dares not be unjust;
"Ourselves sit here above the dread of law,
"Each powerful Fellow is a grim Bashaw;
"Though when from hence he drives his painted wain,
"He shrinks into his Nothingness again.
"Then hear your POCUS, my Associates dear,
"Drive Schomberg hence, nor yield to idle fear.
"So Child's and Batson's shall your triumphs tell,
"And every Parish toll her Passing Bell.
"Then, gentle Brethren, give your kind assent."
He ceased, the Rabble roared, "content, content."
Loud was the din -- Thus prouling out for food
The cackling mother leads the waddling brood;
If ought disturb them, all together cry,
And the hoarse clangor echoes through the sky;
Goose answers goose with dissonance of voice,
And Sarum's steeples catch the grating noise.
The End of the First Canto. Shortly will be published, The BATTIAD. Canto the
Second.

