HORAE LYRICAE.

POEMS, Chiefly of the Lyric kind. In Two Books.

I. SONGS, etc. Sacred to DEVOTION.

II. ODES, ELEGYS, etc. to VIRTUE Loyalty and Friendship.

By I. WATTS.

-- Si non Uranie lyram
Coelestem cohibet, nec Polyhymnia
Humanum resugit tendere barbiton.
Horat. Od. 1. Imitat. (...) Pythag. Aur. Carm. LONDON, Printed by S. and D.
Bridge, for John Lawrence at the Sign of the Angel in the Poultrey. MDCCVI.

PREFACE.
IT has been a long Complaint of the Virtuous and Refined World, that Poesy
whose Original is Divine, should be enslaved to Vice and Profaneness; that an
Art inspired from Heaven should have so far lost the Memory of its Birthplace,
as to be engaged in the Interests of Hell: and bring all her resistless Forces
of Metaphor, Wit, Rhyme and Number, and range them under the Banner of the
Great Malicious Spirit to assault the Honor of God and the Souls of Men.

The Eldest Song which History has brought down to our Ears was a noble Act of
Worship paid to the God of Israel, When his Right hand became glorious in
Power, when thy Right hand, O Lord, dashed in pieces the Enemy; the Chariots of
Pharaoh and his Host were cast into the Red Sea; Thou did blow with thy Wind,
the Deep covered them, and they sank as Lead in the mighty Waters, Exodus 15.
This Art was maintained Sacred through the following Ages of the Church, and
employed by Kings and Prophets, by David, Solomon, and Isaiah, in breathing the
Life of Angels into the Hearts of Men, and rearing their Minds Heavenward in
warm and tuneful Devotion.

In the Younger Days of Heathenism the Muses were devoted to the same Service:
The Language in which Old Hesiod addresses them is this. (...),
In English. Pierian Muses, famed for Heavenly Lays,
Descend, and sing the God your Fathers Praise.
And the pursues the Subject in ten Pious Lines, which I could not forbear to
Transcribe if the Aspect and Sound of so much Greek were not terrifying to a
nice Reader.

But some of the later Poets of the Pagan World have more debased this Divine
Gift, and many of the Writers of first Rank in this our Age of National
Christians have to their Eternal Shame surpassed the vilest of the Gentiles.
They have Exposed Religion to Drollery, and dressed her up in the most Ridiculous
Habit, for the Scorn of the ruder Herd of Mankind. They have painted the Vices
like so many Goddesses, added the Charms of Wit to Debauchery, and heightened
the Temptation where Nature needs the strongest Restraints. With Sweetness of
Sound and Delicacy of Expression they have given a Relish to Blasphemies of the
harshest kind, and when they rant at their Maker in Sonorous Numbers they fancy
themselves to have acted the Hero well.

Thus almost in vain have the Throne and the Pulpit cried, Reformation, while
the Stage and Licentious Poems have waged open War with the Pious Design of
Church and State. The Press has spread the Poison far, and scattered wide the
Mortal Infection; Unthinking Youth have been allured to Sin beyond the Vicious
Propensities of Nature, plunged early into Diseases and Death, and sunk down to
Damnation in Multitudes. How will these Allies of the Nether World, the Lewd
and Profane Versifiers stand aghast before the Great Judge, when the Blood of
many Souls whom they never saw shall be laid to the Charge of their Writings,
and be dreadfully required at their Hands. The Reverend Mr. Collier has set
this Awful Scene before them in just and flaming Colors; and if the
Application were not too rude and uncivil, that noble Stanza of my Lord
Roscommon on Psalm. 148. might be addressed to them, Ye Dragons, whose
Contagious Breath
Peoples the dark Retreats of Death,
Change your dire Hissings into Heavenly Songs,
And praise your Maker with your Forked Tongues.


But alas! there is a deep Silence among these Men of all Divine Subjects,
unless in Banter; The Wonders of Creating Power, the Mysteries of Redeeming
Love, and the mighty Works of Renewing Grace are neglected by those, whom
Heaven has endued with a Gift proper to adorn and cultivate 'em: An Art whose
sweet Insinuations might have almost conveyed Piety into resisting Nature, and
melted Souls of Iron to the Love of Virtue.

Will the Writers of this Age cite the French Critic on their side, and say, De
la Foy d'un Chretien les Mysteres terribles
D'Ornemens egayez ne sont point susceptibles:
That the Mysteries of Christianity are not capable of (...) Ornaments: The
Davideis and the two Arthurs (...) broke down this Obstacle, and experimentally
^^^futed the vain pretense.

Besides, the Christian Mysteries have no need of these Tinsel Trappings; the
Glories of our Religion in a plain Narration and a simple Dress have something
brighter and bolder in them, something more surprising and Divine, than all the
Adventures of Gods and Heroes, all the dazzling Images of false luster that
compose and garnish a Heathen Poem; here the Subjects themselves would give
wonderful Aids to the Muse; and the Heavenly Theme would so relieve a dull Hour
and a languishing Genius, that when the Muse nods, the Sense would burn and
sparkle upon the Reader, and keep him feelingly awake.

With how much less toil and expense might a Dryden, an Otway, a Congreve, or a
Dennis furnish out a Christian Poem than a Modern Play; there is nothing
amongst all the Ancient Fables or Later Romances, that have two such Extremes
united in them, as the Eternal God becoming an Infant of Days, the Possessor of
the Palace of Heaven laid to Sleep in a Manger, the Holy Jesus who knew no Sin
bearing the Sins of Men in his Body on the Tree, Agonies of Sorrow loading the
Soul of him who was God over all Blessed for ever; and the Sovereign of Life
stretching his Arms on a Cross, Bleeding and Expiring: The Heaven and the Hell
in our Divinity are infinitely more delightful and dreadful than the Childish
Figments of a Dog with three Heads, the Buckets of the Belides, the Furies with
Snaky Hairs, or all the Flowery Stories of Elysium. And if we survey the one as
Themes Divinely True, and the other as a Medly of Fooleries which we can never
believe, the advantage for touching the Springs of Passion will fall infinitely
on the side of the Christian Poet; our Wonder and our Love, our Pity, Delight,
and Sorrow, with the long train of Hopes and Fears, must needs be under the
Command of an Harmonious Pen, whose every Line makes a part of the Reader's
Faith, and is the very Life or Death of his Soul.

If the trifling and incredible Tales that furnish out a Tragedy are so armed
by Wit and Fancy as to become Sovereign of the Rational Powers, to triumph over
all the Affections, and manage our Smiles and our Tears at pleasure; how
wondrous a Conquest might be obtained over a wild World, and reduce it at least
to Sobriety, if the same Happy Talent were employed in dressing the Scenes of
Religion in their proper Figures of Majesty, Beauty and Terror. The Affairs of
this Life with their reference to a Life to come, would shine bright in a
Dramatick Description. The Anguish of inward Guilt, the secret Stings and Racks
and Scourges of Conscience, the sweet retiring Hours and Seraphical Joys of
Devotion, the Victory of a Resolved Soul over a thousand Temptations, the
Inimitable Love and Passion of a Dying God, the Awful Glories of the last
Tribunal, the grand Decisive Sentence from which there is no Appeal, and the
Consequent Transports or Horrors of the two Eternal Worlds. How would such a
Performance call back the dying Piety of the Nation to Life and Beauty: It
would make Religion appear like it self, and confound the Blasphemies of a
profligate World, ignorant of Pious Pleasures.

But we have reason to fear that the Tuneful Men of our Day have not raised
their Ambition to so Divine a Pitch; I should rejoice to see more of this
Celestial Fire kindling within them, for the Flashes that break out in some
present and past Writings betray an Infernal Source. This the Incomparable Mr.
Cowley in the latter End of his Preface, and the Ingenious Sir Richard
Blackmore in the beginning of his have so pathetically described and lamented;
and I rather refer the Reader to mourn with them than detain and tire him here.
These Gentlemen in their large and labored Works of Poesy have given the
World happy Examples of what they wish and encourage in Prose: The One in a
rich Variety of Thought and Fancy; the Other in all the Beauties of Profuse and
Florid Diction.

If shorter Sonnets were composed on sublime Subjects, such as the Psalms of
David, and the Holy Transports interspersed in the other Sacred Writings, or
such as the Moral Odes of Horace, and the Ancient Lyricks, I persuade my self
that the Christian Preacher would find abundant Aid from the Poet in his Design
to diffuse Virtue and allure Souls to God. If the Heart were first inflamed
from Heaven, and the Muse were not left alone to form the Devotion and pursue a
Cold Scent, but only called in as an Assistant to the Worship, then the Song
would end where the Inspiration ceases; the whole Composure would be of a
Piece, all Meridian Light and Meridian Fervor. And the same Pious Flame would
be propagated and kept glowing in the Heart of him that reads. Some of the
shorter Odes of the two Poets now mentioned, and a few of the Reverend Mr.
Norris's Essays in Verse are convincing Instances of the Success of this
Proposal.

It Is my Opinion also that the free and unconfined Measures of Pindar would
best maintain the Dignity of the Theme, as well as give a loose to the Devout
Soul, nor check the Raptures of her Faith and Love. Though in my feeble Attempts
of this kind I have most unhappily fettered my Thoughts in the narrow Numbers
of our Old Psalm-Translators, I have contracted and cramp't the Sense, or
rendered it obscure and feeble by the too speedy and regular returns of Rhyme.

If my Friends expect a particular account of this or any other Circumstance
relating to what I here Publish, they will be pleased to accept of this short
one.

The TITLE Assures them that Poesy is not the Business of my Life, and if I
seized those Hours of Leisure wherein my Soul was in a more sprightly and
tuneful Frame to entertain them or my self with a Divine or Moral Song, I hope
I shall find an Easy Pardon. The SONGS Sacred to DEVOTION Were never written
with a design to appear before the Judges of Wit, but only to assist the
Meditations and Worship of Vulgar Christians, to whom the Measures of Hopkins
by Custom are grown Familiar and Natural, and esteemed almost Sacred by being
bound up in the same Volume with Scripture. These are but a small part of two
hundred Hymns of the same kind which are ready for Public Use if the World
receive favorably what I now present. The Reason that sent these out first,
and divided them from their Fellows, is, that in most of These there are some
Expressions which are not suited to the plainest Capacities, and differ too
much from the usual Methods of Speech in which Holy Things are proposed to the
general Part of Mankind. The ODES to VIRTUE etc. Were formed when the Frame and
Humor of my Soul was just suited to the Subject of my Verse: The Image of my
Heart is painted in them; and if they meet with a Reader whose Soul is akin to
mine, perhaps they may agreeably entertain him. The Dullness of the Fancy and
Coarseness of Expression will disappear, the sameness of the Humor will create
a Pleasure, and insensibly overcome and conceal the Defects of the Muse. The
IMITATIONS Of that Noblest Latin Poet of Modern Ages Casimire Sarbiewski of
Poland would need no Excuse, did they but arise to the Beauty of the Original.
I have often taken the Freedom to add ten or twenty Lines, or to leave out as
many, that I might suit my Song more to my own Design, or because I found it
Impossible to present the Force, the Fineness, and the Fire of his Expression
in our Language. I wish some English Pen would import some of the Treasures of
that rich Genius and bless our Nation. The INSCRIPTIONS To particular Friends
are warranted and defended by the Practice of the two best Lyric Writers Horace
and Casimire: And though the Authority of the first be more Venerable, yet if in
some Instances I prefer the latter, I pray the Critics to forgive me; and I
hope my Friends will excuse the Freedom of the Address. In the POEMS of HEROIC
Measure I have attempted in Rhyme the same variety of Cadence, Comma, and
Period, which Blank Verse Glories in as its peculiar Elegance and Ornament. In
the PINDARIQUES I have generally conformed my Lines to the shorter Size of the
Ancients, and avoided to imitate the Excessive Lengths to which some Modern
Writers have stretched their Sentences, and especially the concluding Verse. In
these the Ear is the truest Judge, nor was it made to be enslaved to any
precise Model of Elder or Later Times.
After all, I must petition my Reader to lay aside the sour and sullen Air of
Criticism, and to assume the Friend. Let him come with a design to be
entertained and pleased, rather than to seek his own Disgust and Aversion,
which will not be hard to find. I am not so Vain as to think there are no
Faults, nor so Blind as to espy none: There is not one Copy that entirely
pleases me: The best of them sinks vastly below the Idea which I form of a
Divine or Moral Ode. He that deals in the Mysteries of Heaven, or of the Muses
should be a Genius of no Vulgar Mould; and as the Name of Vates belongs to
both, so the Furniture of Both is comprised in that Line of Horace, -- Cui Men's
Divinior, atque Os
Magna Locuturum --
But what Juvenal spoke in his Age abides true in ours: A complete Poet or a
Prophet is such an one -- Qualem nequeo monstrare, and sentio tantum.

Perhaps neither of these Characters in Perfection shall ever be seen on Earth,
till the Seventh Angel has sounded his Awful Trumpet, till the Victory be
complete over the Beast and his Image; when the Natives of Heaven shall join in
Triumphal Consort with Prophets and Tuneful Saints, and Sing unto their Golden
Harps, Salvation Honor and Glory to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever.

A TABLE OF THE Songs, etc. in the First Book.
THE Divine Sovereignty Page 1 The Transcendent Glories of the Deity 4 God
appears most Glorious in our Salvation by Christ 7 An Hymn of Praise to the God
of England for Three Great Salvations, ( viz.) from the Spanish Invasion, from
the Gunpowder Plot, and from Popery and Slavery by King William, in Two Parts
10 God Incomprehensible 16 Sickness gives a Sight of Heaven 18 The Universal
Hallelujah: Or Psalm 148 Paraphrased 21 The Love of Christ on his Cross and on
his Throne 25 Death a Welcome Messenger 27 Sincere Praise 29 God's Infinity 32
Longing for the second coming of Christ 34 The Sufferings and Glories of
Christ. A Song in Trissyllable Feet 37 The Day of Judgment, an Ode, in English
Sapphic 40 Confession and Pardon 43 Jesus the only Savior 48 A Song of Praise
to God, the 100th Psalm. In Trissyllable Feet 52
An Essay on a few Psalms in Language more suited to the Gospel.
The Happy Saint and Cursed Sinner, Psalm 1. 54 Doubts and Fears suppressed,
Psalm 3d. 56 Praise to the Lord from all Nations, Psalm 100. 59 Brotherly Love,
Psalm 133. 61 The Pleasure of Love to Christ present or absent 62 A Sight of
Christ 65 Longing for Heaven, or the Song of Angels above 70 God Sovereign and
Gracious 76
An Essay on Divine Love in several following Odes, in imitation of Solomon's
Song.
The Hazard of Loving the Creatures 78 Christ's Amazing Love and my Amazing
Coldness 80 Wishing him ever with me 82 The Absence of the Beloved 84 Sick of
Love. Solomon's Song 1. 3. 86 Sitting in an Arbor 88 Bewailing my own
Inconstancy 90 Forsaken, yet hoping 93 The Law and Gospel 95 The Death of
Moses: Deuteronomy. 32. 49, 50. and 34. 5, 6. or, the Enjoyment of God worth dying for
97 Ad Dominum nostrum and Servatorem Jesum Christum. Oda 100 Excitatio Cordis
Coelum versus. Ad Seipsum 106 Breathing toward the Heavenly Country 108 The
Glories of God exceed all Worship 110
A TABLE OF THE Odes, Elegys, etc. in the Second Book.
TO Her Majesty Page 113 To Mr. John Lock, retired from Business 117 To Mr.
John Shute, on Mr. Lock's last Sickness 119 To Mr. William Nokes. Friendship. (
See more p. 237) 121 To Nathanael Gould Esquire Lawful Ambition 123 To Dr. Thomas
Gibson. The Life of Souls 125 To my Brothers E. and T. W. False Greatness 128
To Mr. A. S. and Mr. T. H. Strict Religion exceeding rare 130 On the sudden
Death of Mrs. Mary Peacock 133 To the Reverend Mr. B. Row. It Is dangerous to
follow the Multitude 136 To my Sisters S. and M. W. an Epistle 138 To Mr. C.
and S. Fleetwood. The World vain, and the Soul Immortal 141 To Mr. William
Blackbourn. Life flies too fast to be wasted 144 To Mr. Robert Atwood. The
Kingdom of the Wise Man. Part 1. 145 Part. 2. Or the Bold Stoic 150 To the
Reverend Mr. Thomas Row. Free Philosophy 153 To the Reverend Mr. John How.
The Vanity of Humane Cares 155 To Mr. Nicholas Clark. Complaining of Vapors or
Disorders of the Head 158 Upon the dismal Narrative of the Afflictions of a
Friend 161 The Reverse, on the view of Remaining Comforts 164 To the Right
Honorable John Lord Cutts. The Hardy Soldier 167 To Mrs. B. Bendish. Against
Tears 169 A Word of Warning, or Few Happy Marriages 171 To Mr. Henry Bendish.
The Indian Philosopher, or Matches made above, but broke in coming down 175 To
David Polhill Esquire An Epistle 180 To David Polhill Esquire An Answer to an Infamous
Satyr against King William III. 182 To the Discontented and Unquiet. Virtue
alone makes the Mind Easy 189 To John Hartopp Esquire Youth and Pleasure tarry not
194 To Thomas Gunston Esquire Happy Solitude 197 To John Hartopp Esquire The Disdain of
Sensual Joys 201 Fratri suo Dilecto R. W. Epistola 203 To Dr. John Speed of
Southampton. An Epistle 207 Ad Reverendum Virum Dom. Johannem Pinhorne fidum
pueritiae meae Praeceptorem. Oda. 209 Votum. Seu Vita in terris Beata. Ad Virum
dignissimum Johannem Hartoppium Baronettum 215 To the Lady Abney. A Funeral
Poem on Tho. Gunston Esquire, 219 To Mr. Arthur Shallett Merchant: An Elegiac Ode
on the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gouge 247 An Epitaph on King William III. of
Glorious Memory 264
ERRATA.
Page 41. lin. 13. read upon. P. 42. l. 10. for arise r. ascend. P. 103. l. 4.
after fructus dele [,] P. 126. l. 19. r. beat. P. 134. l. penult r. Sphere. P.
159. l. 2. for How r. Now. P. 190. l. 5. r. Breast. P. 197. l. 3. for They r.
The. P. 204. l. 8. r. Patris. P. 214. l. 8. r. Numen, and.

BOOK I.
Songs and Hymns Sacred to DEVOTION.
THE Divine Sovereignty.
I.
GReat God, indulge a Mortal Tongue,
Nor let thy Thunders roar
Whilst little Notes and feeble Song
Attempt the Eternal Power.
II.
Life, Death, and Hell, and Worlds unknown
Hang on thy firm Decree;
Thou sit'st on no precarious Throne,
Nor Borrowest leave to Be.
III.
Thy Sovereign Voice bids ancient Night
Her Spacious Realms resign,
And Lo! ten Thousand Globes of Light
In Fields of Azure shine.
IV.
Thy Wisdom with Superior Sway
Guides this vast moving Frame;
Whilst all the Ranks of Being pay
Deep Reverence to thy Name.
V.
Vengeance attends to obey thy Frown,
And Blessings wait thy Smile;
A Wreath of Lightning arms thy Crown,
But Love adorns it still.
VI.
Unnumber'd Wonders in thee meet,
And various Glory shines;
The Crossing Rays too fiercely beat
Upon our fainting Minds.
VII.
Angels are lost in sweet Surprise
If thou unvail thy Grace;
And humble Awe runs through the Skies
When Wrath arrays thy Face.
VIII.
When Mercy joins with Majesty
To spread their Beams abroad,
Not all the fairest Minds on high
Are Shadows of a God.
IX.
Thy Mighty Works Great Gabriel Sings
In a too feeble Strain;
And labors upon all his Strings
To reach thy Thoughts in vain.
X.
Created Powers how weak they be!
How short our Praises fall!
So much akin to Nothing We,
And Thou the Eternal All.
THE Transcendent Glories OF THE DEITY.
I.
GOD is a Name my Soul adores;
The Almighty Three, the Eternal One:
Nature and Grace with all their Powers
Confess the Infinite Unknown.
II.
From thy Great Self thy Being Springs;
Thou art thine own Original;
Made up of Uncreated Things,
And Self-Sufficience bears them all.
III.
Thy Voice has formed the Seas and Spheres,
Bid the Waves roar, and Planets shine;
But Nothing like thy Self appears
Through all these Spacious Works of thine.
IV.
Still rolling Nature dies and grows;
From Change to Change the Creatures run:
Thy Being no Succession knows,
And all thy vast Designs are One.
V.
A Glance of thine runs through the Globes,
Rules the Bright Worlds, and moves their Frame:
Broad Sheets of Light compose thy Robes;
Thy Guards are formed of living Flame.
VI.
Thrones and Dominions round thee fall
And Worship in Submissive Forms;
Thy Presence shakes this lower Ball,
This little Dwelling Place of Worms.
VII.
Then how shall trembling Mortals dare
To sing thy Glory or thy Grace;
Beneath thy Feet we lie so far,
And see but Shadows of thy Face?
VIII.
Who can behold the Blazing Light?
Who can approach Consuming Flame?
None but thy Wisdom knows thy Might;
None but thy Word can speak thy Name.
GOD Appears most Glorious IN OUR Salvation by CHRIST.
I.
FAther, how wide thy Glory shines!
How high thy Wonders rise!
Known through the Earth by thousand Signs,
By thousand through the Skies.
II.
Those mighty Orbs proclaim thy Power,
Their Motions speak thy Skill;
And on the Wings of every Hour
We read thy Patience still.
III.
Part of thy Name Divinely stands
On all thy Creatures writ;
They show the Labor of thine Hands,
Or Impress of thy Feet.
IV.
But when We view thy Strange Design
To save Rebellious Worms,
Where Vengeance and Compassion join
In their Divinest Forms:
V.
Our Thoughts are lost in Reverend Awe,
We Love and we Adore;
The tallest Angel never saw
So much of God before.
VI.
Here the whole Deity is known,
Nor dares a Creature guess
Which of the Glories brightest shone,
The Justice or the Grace.
VII.
When we transgressed the Fathers Laws,
The dying Son atones;
Oh the Dear Mysteries of his Cross!
The Triumph of his Groans!
VIII.
Now the full Glories of the Lamb
Adorn the Heavenly Plains;
And the Young Cherubs learn his Name,
And try their choicest Strains.
IX.
O may I bear some humble Part
In that Immortal Song;
Wonder and Joy shall tune my Heart,
And Love command my Tongue.
AN Hymn of Praise TO The God of ENGLAND, FOR Three Great Salvations.
(VIZ.)
I. From the Spanish Invasion, 1588. II. From the Gunpowder-Plot, Nov. 5. III.
From Popery and Slavery by King William of Glorious Memory, who landed Nov. 5.
1688.

Composed Nov. 5. 1695.
I.
INfinite God, whose Counsels stand
Like Mountains of Eternal Brass,
Pillars to prop our Sinking Land,
Or Guardian Rocks to break the Seas.
II.
From Pole to Pole thy Name is known,
Thee a Whole Heaven of Angels praise,
Our Laboring Tongues would strike thy Throne
With the Loud Triumphs of thy Grace.
III.
Part of thy Church by thy Command
Stands raised upon the British Isles,
There, said the Lord, to Ages stand
Firm as the Everlasting Hills.
IV.
In vain the Spanish Ocean roared,
And rolled its Billows to our Shore;
The Billows sunk beneath thy Word,
And all the Floating War they bore.
V.
Come, said the Sons of bloody Rome,
Let us provide new Arms from Hell,
And down they dug through Earth's dark Womb,
And ransacked all the burning Cell.
VI.
Old Satan lent them fiery Stores,
Infernal Coal, and Sulfurous Flame,
And all that burns, and all that roars,
Outrageous Fires of dreadful Name.
VII.
Beneath the Senate and the Throne
Engines of Hellish Thunder lay,
There the dark Seeds of Fire were sown
To spring a Bright, but dismal Day.
VIII.
Thy Love beheld the black Design,
Thy Love that Guards thine England round;
Strange! how it quenched the fiery Mine,
And crushed the Tempest under Ground.
THE Second Part.
I.
ASsume my Tongue a Nobler Strain,
Sing the New Wonders of the Lord;
The Foes revive their Powers again,
Again they die beneath his Sword.
II.
Dark as our Thoughts our Minutes roll
While Tyranny possessed the Throne;
And Murderers of an Irish Soul
Ran threatening Death through every Town.
III.
The Roman Priest and British Prince
Joined their best Force and blackest Charms;
And the fierce Troops of neighboring France
Offered the Service of their Arms.
IV.
It Is done, they cried, and laughed aloud,
The Courts of Darkness rang with Joy,
The Old Serpent hissed, and Hell grew proud,
While Zion mourned her Ruin nigh.
V.
But lo! The great Deliverer Sails
Commissioned from Jehovah's Hand;
And Smiling Seas, and wishing Gales
Convey him to the longing Land.
VI.
The happy Day and happy Year Nov. 5. 1688.

Both in our new Salvation meet:
The Day that quenched the Burning Snare, Nov. 5.

And Year that burnt the Invading Fleet. 1588.

VII.
Now did thine Arm, O God of Hosts,
Now did thine Arm shine dazzling bright;
The Sons of Might their Hands had lost,
And Men of Blood forgot to fight.
VIII.
Brigades of Angels lined the way,
And guarded William to his Throne;
There, ye Celestial Warriors, stay,
And make his Palace like your own.
IX.
Thus, Mighty God, thy Praise Divine
From Heaven and Earth at once shall flow;
Angels and Men conspire and join
In Hallelujahs, here below.
X.
All Hallelujah, Heavenly King,
It Is thy Victorious Arm we sing;
Fly round the Globe, ye Ecchoing Joys,
And vaulted Skies repeat the Noise.
GOD Incomprehensible.
I.
FAR in the Heavens my God retires,
My God, the point of my Desires,
And hides his Lovely Face;
When he descends within my View
He charms my Reason to pursue,
But leaves it tired and fainting in the unequal Chase.
II.
Or if I reach unusual height,
Till near his Presence brought;
There Floods of Glory check my Flight,
Cramp the bold Pinions of my Wit
And all untune my Thought;
Plunged in a Sea of Light I roll,
Where Wisdom, Justice, Mercy Shines;
Infinite Rays in Crossing Lines
Beat thick Confusion on my Sight, and overwhelm my Soul.
III.
Come to my aid, ye Fellow-Minds,
And help me reach the Throne,
(What single Strength in vain designs,
United Force has done;
Thus Worms may Join, and grasp the Poles,
Thus Atoms fill the Sea,)
But the whole Race of Creature-Souls,
Stretched to their last extent of Thought plunge and are lost in Thee.
IV.
Great God; behold my Reason lies
Adoring; yet my Love would rise
On Pinions not her own:
Faith shall direct her humble Flight
Through all the trackless Seas of Light
To Thee the Eternal Fair, the Infinite Unknown.
SICKNESS GIVES A Sight of HEAVEN.
I.
OFTEN have I sat in Secret Sighs
To feel my Flesh decay,
Then groaned aloud with frighted Eyes
To view this tottering Clay.
II.
But I forbid my Sorrows now,
Nor dares the Flesh complain,
Diseases bring their Profit too;
The Joy o'recomes the Pain.
III.
My cheerful Soul now all the Day
Sits waiting here and Sings;
Looks through the Ruins of her Clay,
And practices her Wings.
IV.
Faith almost changes into Sight,
While from afar she Spies
Her fair Inheritance in Light
Above created Skies.
V.
Had but the Prison-Walls been strong,
And firm without a flaw,
In Darkness she had dwelt too long,
And less of Glory saw.
VI.
But now the Everlasting Hills
Through every Chink appear,
And something of the Joy she feels
While she is a Prisoner here.
VII.
The Shines of Heaven rush sweetly in
At all the Gaping Flaws,
Visions of Endless Bliss are seen,
And Native Air she draws.
VIII.
O may these Walls stand tottering still,
The Breaches never close,
If I must here in Darkness dwell,
And all this Glory lose.
IX.
Or rather let this Flesh decay,
The Ruins wider grow,
Till glad to see the Enlarged way
I stretch my Pinions through.
THE Universal Hallelujah, OR, PSALM 148. PARAPHRASED.
I.
PRAISE ye the Lord each Heavenly Tongue
That sits around his Throne:
Jesus the Man shall lead the Song,
The God inspire the Tune.
II.
Gabriel and all the Immortal Quire
That fill the Realms above,
Sing, for the formed you of his Fire,
And feeds you with his Love.
III.
Shine to his Praise ye Crystal Skies,
The Floor of his Abode,
Or vail your little twinkling Eyes
Before a brighter God.
IV.
Thou rolling Globe of Golden Light
Whose Beams Create our Days,
Join with the Silver Queen of Night
To own your borrowed Rays.
V.
Blush and refund the Honors paid
To your inferior Names;
Tell the blind World, your Orbs are fed
By his O'reflowing Flames.
VI.
Winds, ye shall bear his Name aloud
Through the Ethereal Blue,
For when His Chariot is a Cloud
He makes his Wheels of you.
VII.
Thunder and Hail, and Fires and Storms,
The Troops of his Command,
Appear in all your Dreadful Forms,
And speak his awful Hand.
VIII.
Shout to the Lord, ye Surging Seas,
In your Eternal Roar,
Let Wave to Wave resound his Praise,
And Shore reply to Shore:
IX.
While Monsters rolling on the Flood
In Scaly Silver shine,
Speak terribly their Maker-God,
And lash the foaming Brine.
X.
But Gentler Things shall tune his Name
To softer Notes than these,
Young Zephyrs breathing over the Stream,
Or whispering through the Trees.
XI.
Wave your tall Heads, ye lofty Pines,
To him that bid you grow,
Sweet Clusters, bend the fruitful Vines
On every Thankful Bough.
XII.
Let the shrill Birds his Honor raise,
And tune it in the Sky:
While grovelling Beasts attempt his Praise
With hoarser Harmony.
XIII.
Thus while the meaner Creatures sing,
Ye Mortals take the Sound,
Echo the Glories of your King
Through all the Nations round.
XIV.
The Eternal Name must fly abroad
From England to Japan;
And the whole Race shall bow to God
That owns the Name of Man.
THE Love of CHRIST ON His CROSS AND On His THRONE.
I.
NOW let my Faith grow strong and rise,
And view my Lord in all his Love;
Look back to hear his Dying Cries,
Then mount and see his Throne above.
II.
See where he Languish'd on the Cross;
Beneath my Sins he groaned and died;
See where he fits to plead my Cause
By his Almighty Father's Side.
III.
If I behold his Bleeding Heart,
There Love in Floods of Sorrow reigns,
He triumphs over the Killing Smart,
And buys my Pleasure with his Pains.
IV.
Or if I climb the Eternal Hills
Where the dear Conqueror sits enthroned,
Still in his Heart Compassion dwells
Near the Memorials of his Wound.
V.
How shall a pardoned Rebel show
How much I Love my Dying God?
Lord, here I banish every Foe,
I hate the Sins that Cost thy Blood.
VI.
I hold no more Commerce with Hell,
My dearest Lusts shall all depart;
But let thine Image ever dwell
Stamped as a Seal upon my Heart.
DEATH A Welcome Messenger.
I.
LORD, when we see a Saint of thine
Lie gasping out his Breath,
With Longing Eyes, and Looks Divine,
Smiling, and pleased in Death;
II.
How we could even contend to lay
Our Limbs upon that Bed,
And ask thine Envoy to convey
Our Spirits in his stead.
III.
Our Souls are rising on the Wing
To venture in his Place,
For when grim Death has lost his Sting,
He has an Angels Face.
IV.
Jesus, then purge my Crimes away,
It Is Guilt creates my Fears,
It Is Guilt gives Death its fierce Array,
And all the Arms it bears.
V.
Oh, if my threatening Sins were gone,
And Death had lost his Sting,
I could invite the Angel on,
And chide his lazy Wing.
VI.
Away these interposing Days,
And let the Lovers meet;
The Angel has a cold Embrace,
But kind, and soft, and sweet.
VII.
I Would leap at once my Seventy Years,
And fly into his Arms,
And (...) and all my Cares
(...) ^eavenly Charms.
VIII.
Joyful I Would lay this Body down,
And leave the lifeless Clay,
Without a Sigh, without a Groan,
And Stretch and soar away.
Sincere Praise.
I.
ALmighty Maker God!
How wondrous is thy Name!
Thy Glories how diffused abroad
Through the Creations Frame!
II.
Nature in every Dress
Her humble Homage Pays,
And takes a Thousand Ways to express
Thine Undissembled Praise.
III.
In Native White and Red
The Rose and Lilly stand,
And free from Pride their Beauties spread
To show thy skilful Hand.
IV.
The Lark mounts up the Sky
With Unambitious Song,
And bears her Maker's Praise on high
Upon her Artless Tongue.
V.
My Soul would rise and Sing
To her Creator too,
Fain would my Tongue adore my King,
And Pay the Worship due.
VI.
But Pride that busy Sin
Spoils all that I perform,
Cursed Pride, that creeps securely in,
And swells a haughty Worm.
VII.
Thy Glories I abate,
Or praise thee with Design;
Some of thy Favors I forget,
Or would have something mine.
VIII.
The very Songs I frame
Are Faithless to thy Cause,
And steal the Honors of thy Name
Unto their own Applause.
IX.
Create my Soul anew,
Else all my Worship's vain;
This wretched Heart will never be true
Until it is formed again.
X.
Descend Celestial Fire,
And seize me from above,
Melt me in Flames of pure Desire
A Sacrifice to Love.
XI.
Let Joy and Worship spend
The Remnant of my Days,
And to my God my Soul ascend
In sweet Perfumes of Praise.
GOD's Infinity.
I.
SOME Seraph, lend your Heavenly Tongue,
Or Harp of Golden String,
That I may raise a lofty Song
To our Eternal King.
II.
Thy Names, how Infinite they be!
Great Everlasting One!
Boundless thy Might and Majesty,
And Unconfined thy Throne.
III.
Thy Glories shine of Wondrous Size,
And wondrous Large thy Grace,
Immortal Day breaks from thine Eyes,
And Gabriel Vails his Face.
IV.
Thine Essence is a vast Abyss
Which Angels cannot sound,
An Ocean of Infinities
Where all our thoughts are drowned.
V.
The Mysteries of Creation lie
Beneath Enlightened Minds,
Thoughts can ascend above the Sky,
And fly before the Winds.
VI.
Reason may grasp the Massy Hills,
And stretch from Pole to Pole,
But Half thy Name our Spirit fills,
And Overloads our Soul.
VII.
In vain our Haughty Reason swells,
For Nothing's found in Thee
But Boundless Unconceivables,
And Vast Eternity.
LONGING FOR The Second Coming OF CHRIST.
I.
WHEN shall thy Shining Face be seen?
When shall our Eyes behold our God?
What lengths of Distance lie between,
And Hills of Guilt, a Heavy Load!
II.
Our Months are Ages of Delay,
And slowly every Minute wears;
Fly winged Time, and roll away
These tedious Rounds of Sluggish Years.
III.
Ye Heavenly Gates, loose all your Chains,
Let the Eternal Pillars bow,
Dear Savior, Cleave the Starry Plains,
And make the Crystal Mountains flow.
IV.
Hark how thy Saints unite their Cries,
And pray and wait the General Doom,
Come, thou the Soul of all our Joys,
Thou the Desire of Nations, come.
V.
Put thy bright Robes of Triumph on,
And bless our Eyes, and bless our Ears,
Thou absent Love, thou Dear Unknown,
Thou Fairest of ten thousand Fairs.
VI.
Our Heart Strings groan with deep Complaint,
Our Flesh lies panting, Lord, for thee,
And every Limb and every Joint
Stretches for Immortality.
VII.
Our Spirits shake their Eager Wings,
And burn to meet thy rolling Throne,
We rise away from Mortal things
To attend thy Shining Chariot down!
VIII.
Now let our Cheerful Eyes survey
The blazing Earth and melting Hills,
And smile to see the Lightnings play,
And flash along before thy Wheels.
IX.
O for a shout of Violent Joys
To Join the Trumpets thundering sound!
The Angel Herald shakes the Skies,
Awakes the Graves, and tears the Ground.
X.
Ye Slumbring Saints, a Heavenly Host
Stands waiting at your gaping Tombs,
Let every Sacred Sleeping Dust
Leap into Life, for Jesus comes.
XI.
Jesus the God of Might and Love
New moulds our Limbs of Cumbrous Clay,
Quick as Seraphick Flames we move,
Active and Young and Fair as they.
XII.
Our airy Feet with unknown flight
Swift as the motions of Desire
Run up the Hills of Heavenly Light,
And leave the Weltring World in Fire.
THE Sufferings and Glories OF CHRIST.
A SONG In Trisyllable Feet.
I.
I Long for a Consort of Heavenly Praise,
To Jesus the God, the Omnipotent Son,
My Voice should awake in Harmonious Lays,
Could it tell half the Wonders that Jesus has done.
II.
I would sing how he left his own Palace of Light,
And Robes made of Glory that dressed him above;
Yet pleased with his Journey, and swift was his Flight,
For he rode on the Pinions of Infinite Love.
III.
Far down to the Place of our distant Abode
He came (we adore him) to raise us on high;
He came to atone the Revenge of a God,
And he took up a Life to be able to die.
IV.
All Hell and its Lions stood Roaring around,
His Flesh and his Spirit with Malice they tore;
While Worlds of Sorrow lay pressing him down,
As vast as the Burden of Sins that he bore.
V.
Fast bound in the Chains of Imperious Death
The Infinite Captive a Prisoner lay,
The Infinite Captive arose from the Earth,
And leap't to the Hills of Ethereal Day.
VI.
Then mention no more of the Wrath of a God;
Of the Lions of Hell and their Roarings no more;
We lift up our Eyes to his Shining Abode,
And our loudest Hosannahs his Name shall adore.
VII.
We crown the Triumpher with the Honors he won,
Hosannah through all the Celestial Groves!
The God and the Man! how he fills up his Throne!
How He sits! how He shines! how He looks! how He Loves!
VIII.
O happy ye Heavens, and happy ye Hills
Where he treads with his Feet and diffuseth his Grace,
While Mercy and Majesty, Glories and Smiles
Play gently around the sweet Air of his Face.
IX.
Amongst a (...) Choir of Archangels and Songs
The Mighty Redeemer Eternally reigns,
And the Sound of his Name from a Million of Tongues
Flies over the bright Mountains and blesses the Plains.
THE Day of Judgment.
An ODE, Attempted in English Sapphick.
I.
WHEN the Fierce North Wind with his Airy Forces
Rears up the Baltic to a foaming Fury,
And the red Lightning with a Storm of Hail comes
Rushing amain down,
II.
How the poor Sailers stand amazed and tremble!
While the hoarse Thunder like a Bloody Trumpet
Roars a loud onset to the gaping Waters
Quick to devour them.
III.
Such shall the Noise be and the Wild disorder,
(If things Eternal may be like these Earthly)
Such the dire Terror when the great Archangel
Shakes the Creation,
IV.
Tears the strong Pillars of the Vault of Heaven,
Breaks up old Marble the Repose of Princes;
See the Graves open, and the Bones arising,
Flames all around 'em.
V.
Hark the shrill Outcries of the Guilty Wretches!
Lively bright Horror and amazing Anguish
Stare through their Eyelids, while the living Worm lies
Gnawing within them.
VI.
Thoughts like old Vultures prey upun their Heartstrings,
And the smart twinges, when their Eye beholds the
Lofty Judge frowning, and a Flood of Vengeance
Rolling before him.
VII.
Hopeless Immortals! how they scream and shiver
While Devils push them to the Pit wide Yawning
Hideous and gloomy, to receive them headlong
Down to the Center.
VIII.
Stop here my Fancy: (All away ye horrid
Doleful Ideas;) Come arise to Jesus,
How he sits Godlike! And the Saints around him
Throned and adoring!
IX.
O may I sit there when he comes Triumphant
Dooming the Nations: Then arise to Glory,
While our Hosannahs all along the Passage
Shout the Redeemer.
Confession and Pardon.
I.
ALAS my aching Heart!
Here the keen Torment lies;
It racks my waking Hours with Smart,
And frights my Slumbring Eyes.
II.
Guilt will be hid no more,
My Griefs take vent apace,
The Crimes that blot my Conscience over
Flush Crimson in my Face.
III.
My Sorrows like a Flood
Impatient of Restraint
Into thy Bosom, O my God,
Pour out a long Complaint.
IV.
This impious Heart of mine
Could once defy the Lord,
Could rush with Violence on to Sin
In presence of thy Sword.
V.
As often have I stood
A Rebel to the Skies,
The Calls, the Tenders of a God,
And Mercies Loudest cries.
VI.
He offers all his Grace,
And all his Heaven to me;
Offers! But it is to senseless Brass
That can nor feel nor see.
VII.
Jesus the Savior stands
To court me from above,
And looks and spreads his wounded Hands,
And shows the Prints of Love.
VIII.
But I, a stupid Fool,
How long have I withstood
The Blessings purchased with his Soul,
And paid for all in Blood?
IX.
The Heavenly Dove came down
And tendered me his Wings,
To mount me upward to a Crown
And bright Immortal things.
X.
Lord, I Am ashamed to say
That I refused thy Dove,
And sent thy Spirit grieved away
To his own Realms of Love.
XI.
Nor all thine Heavenly Charms,
Nor thy revenging Hand
Could force me to lay down my Arms,
And bow to thy Command.
XII.
Lord, it is against thy Face
My Sins like Arrows rise,
And yet, and yet (O matchless Grace)
Thy Thunder silent lies.
XIII.
O shall I never feel
The Meltings of thy Love?
Am I of such Hell-harden'd Steel
That Mercy cannot move?
XIV.
Now for one powerful Glance
Dear Savior, from thy Face!
This Rebel-heart no more withstands,
But sinks beneath thy Grace.
XV.
Overcome by dying Love I fall,
And at thy Cross I lie;
I throw my Flesh, my Soul, my All,
And Weep, and Love, and Die.
XVI.
"Rise, says the Prince of Mercy, rise;
With Joy and Pity in his Eyes:
"Rise and behold my wounded Veins,
"Here flows the Blood to wash thy Stains.
XVII.
"See, my Great Father's reconciled:
He said, and Lo the Father smiled;
The Joyful Cherubs clapped their Wings,
And sounded Grace on all their Strings.
JESUS THE Only SAVIOR.
I.
ADAM, our Head, our Father fell,
And Justice doomed the Race to Hell:
The fiery Law speaks all Despair,
There Is no Reprieve, nor Pardon there.
II.
Call a bright Council in the Skies:
"Seraphs, the Mighty and the Wise,
"Say, what Expedient can you give
"That Sin be damned and Sinners live?
III.
"Speak, are you strong to bear the Load,
"The weighty Vengeance of a God?
"Which of you loves our wretched Race,
"Or dares to venture in our Place?
IV.
In vain we ask: For all around
Stands Silence through the Heavenly Ground:
There Is not a glorious Mind above
Has half the Strength, or half the Love.
V.
But, O unutterable Grace!
The Eternal Son takes Adam's place;
Down to our World the Savior flies,
Stretches his naked Arms and Dies.
VI.
Justice was pleased to bruise the God,
And pay its Wrongs with Heavenly Blood;
Infinite Racks and Pangs He bore,
And rose. The Law could ask no more.
VII.
Amazing Work! Look down, ye Skies,
Wonder and gaze with all your Eyes,
Ye Heavenly Thrones stoop from above,
And bow to this Mysterious Love.
VIII.
See, how they bend! See, how they look!
Long they had read the Eternal Book,
And studied dark Decrees in vain,
The Cross and Calvary makes them plain.
IX.
Now they are struck with deep Amaze,
Each with his Wings conceals his Face;
Now clap their sounding Plumes, and cry,
"The Wisdom of a Diety.
X.
Low they adore the Incarnate Son,
And sing the Glories he has won,
Sing how he broke our Iron Chains,
How deep he sunk, how high he reigns.
XI.
Triumph and reign Victorious Lord,
By all thy flaming Saints adored;
And say, dear Conqueror, say, how long
'Ere we shall fly to join their Song?
XII.
Lo, from afar the promised Day
Shines with a well-distinguish'd Ray:
But my winged Passion hardly bears
These tedious Rounds of rolling Years.
XIII.
Send down a Chariot from above
With fiery Wheels, and paved with Love;
Raise me beyond the Ethereal Blue,
To Sing and Love as Angels do.
A Song of Praise TO GOD.
PSALM C. In Trissyllable Feet.
I.
SIng aloud to the Lord: Let the two Frozen Poles
Awake to the Song, and dissolve in the Praise;
At the Fiery Line will we kindle our Souls,
Nor the Worship be quenched by the Western Seas.
II.
Come Nations adoring the Infinite King,
With Zeal in your Bosoms, and Joy in your Eyes:
His Wonderful Name should eternally ring
Round the broad Globe of Earth to the Circling Skies.
III.
'Twas he that gave Life to our Souls with a Breath,
He fashioned our Clay to the Figure of Men;
And when we had strayed to the Regions of Death,
He reduced his own Sheep to his Pastures again.
IV.
We enter his Gates with Hosannahs and Songs,
The Arches resound with the Notes that we raise;
Thus while our Devotions are paid with our Tongues,
Thy Temple adores by repeating the Praise.
V.
Thy Power shakes the World, and makes it self known;
Thy Love like Eternity has never a Bound;
The Truth of our God must stand firm as his Throne
When the Wheels of old Time shall cease to go round.
An Essay on a few of DAVID's PSALMS Translated into Plain Verse, in Language
more agreeable to the clearer Revelations of the Gospel.
THE HAPPY SAINT AND Cursed Sinner.
PSALM I.
I.
BLESSED is the Man, whose cautious Feet
Shun the broad Path which Sinners choose,
Who hates the House where Atheists meet,
And dreads the Words that Scoffers use.
II.
He loves to employ his Morning Light
Reading the Statutes of the Lord,
And spends the wakeful Hours of Night
With Pleasure pond'ring over the Word.
III.
He like a Plant by gentle Streams
Shall Flourish in Immortal Green;
And Heaven will shine with Kindest Beams
On every Work his Hands begin.
IV.
But Sinners find their Counsels crossed:
As Chaff before the Tempest flies,
So shall their Hopes be blown and lost
When the last Trumpet shakes the Skies.
V.
In vain the Rebel crowds to stand
In Judgment with the Pious Race;
The dreadful Judge with Stern Command
Divides him to a different Place.
VI.
"Strait is the Way my Saints have trod,
"I blessed the Path and drew it plain:
"But you would choose the crooked Road,
"And it leads down to Eternal Pain.
Doubts and Fears SUPPRES'D.
PSALM III.
I.
LOOK, Gracious God, how numerous they
Whose envious Power and Rage
Conspiring my Eternal Death
Against my Soul engage.
II.
The lying Tempter would persuade
There Is no Relief in Heaven;
And all my swelling Sins appear
Too big to be forgiven.
III.
But God my Glory and my Strength
Shall tread the Tempter down,
And drown my Sins beneath the Blood
Of his Dear Dying Son.
IV.
I cried, and from his Sacred Hill
He bowed a listening Ear;
I called my Father and my God,
And he dispersed my Fear.
V.
He threw soft Slumbers on mine Eyes
In sight of all my Foes,
I 'woke, and wondered at the Grace
That guarded my Repose.
VI.
What, though the Hosts of Death and Hell
All armed against me stood,
Terrors no more shall shake my Soul,
Nor Tremblings chill my Blood.
VII.
Lord, I adore thy Wondrous Love,
And thy Salvation sing:
My God has broke the Serpents Teeth,
And Death has lost his Sting.
VIII.
Salvation to the Lord belongs,
The Lord alone can save;
Blessings attend thy People here,
And reach beyond the Grave.
Praise to the LORD FROM All NATIONS.
PSALM C.
I.
SING to the Lord with Joyful Voice,
Let every Land his Name adore,
The British Isles shall send the Noise
Across the Ocean to the Shore.
II.
With gladness bow before his Throne,
And let his Presence raise your Joys,
Know that the Lord is God alone,
And formed our Souls, and framed our Voice.
III.
Infinite Power without our aid
Figured our Clay to humane Mould;
And when our Wandering Feet had strayed,
He brought us to his Sacred Fold.
IV.
Enter his Gates with Thankful Songs,
Through his Wide Courts your Voices raise;
Almighty God, our Joyful Tongues
Shall fill thine house with sounding Praise.
V.
Wide as the World is thy Command,
Vast as Eternity thy Love,
Firm as a Rock thy Truth must stand
When rolling Years shall cease to move.
Brotherly Love.
PSALM CXXXIII.
I.
LO, what an entertaining Sight
Are Brethren that agree,
Brethren whose cheerful Hearts unite
In Bands of Piety.
II.
When Streams of Love from Christ the Spring
Descend to every Soul,
And Sacred Peace with Balmy Wing
Shades and bedews the whole;
III.
It Is like the Oil on Aaron shed
Which choice Perfumes compose,
Down softly from his Reverend Head
It trickled to his Toes.
IV.
It Is pleasant as the Morning Dews
That fall on Zion's Hill;
Where God his mildest Glory shows,
And makes his Grace distill.
THE PLEASURE OF Love to CHRIST Present or Absent.
I.
OF all the Joys we Mortals know
Jesus, thy Love exceeds the rest;
Love, the best Blessing here below,
And nearest Image of the Blessed.
II.
Sweet are my Thoughts, and soft my Cares
When the dear Heavenly Flame I feel;
(...) all my Hopes and all my Fears
There Is something kind and pleasing still.
III.
While I am held in his Embrace
There Is not a Thought attempts to rove;
Each Smile he wears upon his Face
Fixes and charms and fires my Love.
IV.
He speaks, and strait Immortal Joys
Run through my Ears, and reach my Heart;
My Soul all melts at that dear Voice,
And Pleasure shoots through every Part.
V.
If he withdraw a Moments space
He leaves a Sacred Pledge behind,
Here in this Breast his Image stays,
The Grief and Comfort of my Mind.
VI.
While of his Absence I complain,
And long, and weep as Lovers do,
There Is a strange Pleasure in the Pain,
And Tears have their own Sweetness too.
VII.
When round his Courts by Day I rove,
Or ask the Watchmen of the Night
For some kind Tidings of my Love;
His very Name creates Delight.
VIII.
Jesus my God; yet rather come;
Mine Eyes would dwell upon thy Face;
It Is best to see my Lord at Home,
And feel the Presence of his Grace.
The Substance of the following Copy, and many of the Lines as they here stand
were sent me by an Esteemed Friend Mr. W. Nokes, with a desire that I would
form them into a Pindarick Ode; but I retained his Measures least I should too
much alter his Sense.
A Sight of CHRIST.
ANgels of Light, your God and King surround
With Noble Songs; in his Exalted Flesh
He claims your Worship; while his Saints on Earth
Bless their Redeemer-God with humble Tongues.
Angels with lofty Honors crown his Head;
We bowing at his Feet, by Faith may feel
This distant Influence, and confess his Love.
Once I beheld his Face, when Beams Divine
Broke from his Eyelids, and unusual Light
Wrapped me at once in Glory and Surprise.
My Joyful Heart high leaping in my Breast
With Transport cried, This is the Christ of God;
Then threw my Arms around in sweet Embrace,
And clasped, and bowed Adoring low, till I was lost in him.
While he appears no other Charms can hold
Or draw my Soul ashamed of former things,
Which no Remembrance now deserve or Name
Though with Contempt, best in Oblivion hid.
But the bright Shine and Presence soon withdrew;
I sought him whom I Love, but found him not;
I felt his Absence; and with strongest cries
Proclaimed, Where Jesus is not, all is vain.
Whether I hold him with a full Delight,
Or seek him panting with Extreme Desire,
It Is He alone can please my Wondering Soul;
To hold or seek him is my only Choice.
If he refrain on me to cast his Eye
Down from his Palace, nor my longing Soul
With upward Look can spy my Dearest Lord
Through his Blue Pavement, I Will behold him still
With sweet reflection on the peaceful Cross,
All in his Blood and Anguish, groaning deep,
Gasping and dying there. --
This Sight I never can loose, by it I live:
A Quickening Virtue from his Death inspired
Is Life and Breath to me; His Flesh my Food;
His Vital Blood I drink, and hence my Strength.
I Live, I Am Strong, and now Eternal Life
Beats quick within my Breast; my Vigorous Mind
Spurns the dull Earth, and on her fiery Wings
Reaches the Mount of Purposes Divine,
Counsels of Peace betwixt the Almighty Three
Conceived at once, and Signed without Debate
In perfect Union of the Eternal Mind.
With vast Amaze I see the Unfathomed Thoughts,
Infinite Schemes, and Infinite Designs
Of God's own Heart in which he ever rests.
Eternity lies open to my View;
Here the Beginning and the End of all
I can discover; Christ, the End of all,
And Christ the great Beginning; He my Head,
My God, my Glory, and my All in All.
O that the Day, the joyful Day were come
When the first Adam from his Ancient Dust
Crowned with new Honors shall revive, and see
Jesus his Son and Lord; while shouting Saints
Surround their King, and God's Eternal Son
Shines in the midst but with Superior Beams,
And like himself; Then the Mysterious Word
Long hid behind the Letter shall appear
All Spirit and Life, and in the fullest Light
Stand forth to public View, and there disclose
His Father's Sacred Works and wondrous Ways:
Then Wisdom, Righteousness and Grace Divine
Through all the Infinite Transactions past
Inwrought and shining shall with double blaze
Strike our astonished Eyes, and ever reign
Admired and Glorious in Triumphant Light.
Death and the Tempter, and the Man of Sin
Now at the Bar arraigned, in Judgment cast,
Shall vex the Saints no more, but perfect Love
And loudest Praises perfect Joy create,
While ever-circling Years maintain the blissful State.
LONGING FOR HEAVEN, OR, THE Song of Angels Above.
I.
EARTH has detained me Prisoner long,
And I Am grown weary now;
My Heart, my Hand, my Ear, my Tongue,
There Is nothing here for you.
II.
Tired in my Thoughts I stretch me down,
And upward glance mine Eyes,
Upward (my Father) to thy Throne,
And to my Native Skies.
III.
There the dear Man my Savior sits,
The God, how bright he shines!
And scatters Infinite Delights
On all the happy Minds.
IV.
Seraphs with elevated Strains
Circle the Throne around,
And Move and Charm the Starry Plains
With an Immortal Sound.
V.
Jesus the Lord their Harps employs,
Jesus my Love they sing,
Jesus the Name of both our Joys
Sounds sweet from every String.
VI.
Hark, how beyond the narrow Bounds
Of Time and Space they run,
And speak in most Majestic Sounds
The Godhead of the Son.
VII.
How on the Father's Breast he lay
The darling of his Soul,
Infinite Years before the Day,
Or Heavens began to roll.
VIII.
And now they sink the lofty Tone,
And milder Notes they play,
And bring the Eternal Godhead down
To dwell in humble Clay.
IX.
O the dear Beauties of that Man!
(The God resides within)
His Flesh all pure without a Stain,
His Soul without a Sin.
X.
Then, how he looked, and how he smild,
What wondrous things he said,
Sweet Cherubs, stay, dwell here a while,
And tell what Jesus did.
XI.
At his Command the Blind awake,
And feel the gladsome Rays;
He bids the Dumb attempt to speak,
They try their Tongues in Praise.
XII.
He shed a thousand Blessings round
Where 'ere he turned his Eye;
He spoke, and at the Sovereign Sound
The Hellish Legions fly.
XIII.
Thus while with unambitious Strife
The Ethereal Minstrels rove
Through all the Labors of his Life,
And Wonders of his Love.
XIV.
In the full Quire a broken String
Groans with a strange Surprise;
The rest in silence mourn their King
That Bleeds and Loves and Dies.
XV.
The little Saints with dropping Wings
Cease their harmonious Breath,
No blooming Trees, nor bubbling Springs,
While Jesus sleeps in Death.
XVI.
Then all at once to living Strains
They summon every Chord,
Break up the Tomb, and burst his Chains,
And show their rising Lord.
XVII.
Around the flaming Army throngs
To guard him to the Skies,
With loud Hosannahs on their Tongues,
And Triumph in their Eyes.
XVIII.
In awful State the Conquering God
Ascends his shining Throne,
While tuneful Angels sound abroad
The Vict'ries he has won.
XIX.
Now let me rise, and Join their Song,
And be an Angel too;
My Heart, my Hand, my Ear, my Tongue,
Here Is Joyful Work for you.
XX.
(...) would begin the Music here
And so my Soul should rise,
Oh for some Heavenly Notes to bear
My Spirit to the Skies!
XXI.
There, ye that love my Savior, sit,
There I would fain have place,
Amongst your Thrones, or at your Feet,
So I might see his Face.
XXII.
(...) am confined to Earth no more,
But mount in haste above
To bless the God that I adore,
And sing the Man I Love.
GOD Sovereign and Gracious.
I.
THE Lord! how fearful is his Name?
How wide is his Command?
Nature with all its Mighty Frame
Lies rolling in his Hand.
II.
Immortal Glory forms his Throne,
And Light his Awful Robe;
Whilst with a Smile or with a Frown
He manages the Globe.
III.
A Word of His Almighty Breath
Can swell or sink the Seas;
Build the vast Empires of the Earth,
Or break 'em as he please.
IV.
Adoring Angels round him fall
In all their Shining Forms,
His Sovereign Eye looks through them all,
And pities Mortal Worms.
V.
His Bowels to our Worthless Race
In sweet Compassion move;
He Clothes his Looks with softest Grace,
And takes his Title, Love.
VI.
Now let the Lord for ever Reign,
And Sway us as he will,
Sick or in Health, in Ease or Pain,
We are his Favorites still.
VII.
No more shall peevish Passion rise,
The Tongue no more Complain;
It Is Sovereign Love that lends our Joys,
And Love resumes again.
THE HAZARD OF Loving the Creatures.
I.
WHERE'ere my Flattering Passions rove
I find a lurking Snare;
It Is dangerous to let loose our Love
Beneath the Eternal Fair.
II.
Souls whom the Tie of Friendship binds,
And Things that share our Blood
Seize a large Portion of our Minds,
And leave the less for God.
III.
Nature has soft but powerful Bands,
And Reason She controuls;
While Children with their little Hands
Hang closest to our Souls.
IV.
Thoughtless they act the Old Serpent's Part;
What tempting things they be!
Lord, how they twine about our Heart,
And draw it off from thee!
V.
Our hasty Wills rush blindly on
Where rising Passion rolls,
And thus we make our Fetters strong
To bind our Slavish Souls.
VI.
Dear Sovereign, break these Fetters off,
And set our Spirits free;
God in himself is Bliss enough,
For we have all in thee.
Christ's Amazing Love AND My Amazing Coldness.
I.
COME let me Love: or is my Mind
Hardened to Stone, or froze to Ice?
I see the Blessed Fair One bend
And stoop to embrace me from the Skies!
II.
O it is a Thought would melt a Rock,
And make a Heart of Iron move,
That those sweet Lips, that Heavenly Look
Should seek my Kisses and my Love.
III.
I was a Traitor doomed to Fire,
Bound to sustain Immortal Pains;
He flew on Wings of strong Desire
Assumed my Guilt, and took my Chains.
IV.
Infinite Grace! Almighty Charms!
Stand in Amaze, ye rolling Skies,
Jesus the God with naked Arms
Hangs on a Cross of Love and Dies.
V.
Did Pity ever stoop so low
Dressed in Divinity and Blood?
Was ever Rebel courted so
In Groans of an Expiring God?
VI.
Again He lives; and spreads his Hands,
Hands that were nay l'd to torturing Smart;
"By these dear Wounds, says He, and stands
And prays to clasp me to his Heart.
VII.
Sure I must Love; or are my Ears
Still Deaf, nor feel the Passion move?
Then let me melt my Heart to Tears,
And Die because I cannot Love.
Wishing him ever with me.
I.
NOW be that smiling Moment blessed
When First I saw my Love,
Jesus, the Fairest and the Best
Of all the Forms above.
A thousand Graces ever rise
And bloom upon his Face,
A thousand Arrows from his Eyes
Shoot through my Heart with sweet Surprise,
And stand to guard the Place.
II.
All Natures Art shall never cure
The Heavenly Pains I found,
And it is beyond all Beauties Power
To make another Wound:
Earthly Beauties grow and fade,
Nature may heal the Wounds She made,
But Charms so much Divine
Hold a long Empire of the Heart,
What Heaven has joined shall never part,
And Jesus must be mine.
III.
In vain the envious Shades of Night,
Or Flatteries of the Day
Would vail his Image from my Sight,
Or tempt my Soul away;
Jesus is all my Waking Theme,
His Lovely Form meets every Dream,
And knows not to depart:
The Passion reigns
Through all my Veins,
And floating round the Crimson Stream
Still finds him at my Heart.
IV.
Dwell there, for ever dwell, my Love;
Here I confine my Sense,
Nor dare my Wildest Wishes rove,
Nor stir a Thought from thence.
Let me be lost in thine Embrace
As Rivers in the Sea;
Or live Eternity of Days
To spend them all with thee.
Still I would lie in those dear Arms
Dissolving still among thy Charms,
And as the Moments fly,
I Would Breathe away successive Souls,
So Billow after Billow rolls
To kiss the Shore, and Dye.
THE Absence of the Beloved.
I.
COME, lead me to some lofty Shade
Where Turtles moan their Loves;
Tall Shadows were for Lovers made,
And Grief becomes the Groves.
II.
It Is no mean Beauty of the Ground
That has enslaved mine Eyes,
I faint beneath a Nobler Wound,
Nor love below the Skies.
III.
Jesus the Spring of all that is bright,
The Everlasting Fair,
Heavens Ornament and Heavens Delight
Is my Eternal Care.
IV.
But, ah! how far above this Grove
Does the dear Charmer dwell?
Absence, that keenest Wound to Love,
That sharpest Pain I feel.
V.
Pensive I climb the Sacred Hills,
And near him vent my Woes,
Yet his sweet Face he still conceals,
Yet still my Passion grows.
VI.
I murmur to the hollow Vale,
I tell the Rocks my Flame,
And bless the Echo in her Cell
That best repeats his Name.
VII.
My Passion breaths perpetual Sighs
Till pitying Winds shall hear,
And gently bear them up the Skies,
And gently wound his Ear.
Sick of Love.
Solom. Song, i. 3.
I.
TELL me thou Fairest of thy Kind,
My Love, my All-Divine,
Where may this fainting Head reclined
Relieve such Cares as mine?
Ye Shepherds, Lead me to your Grove:
If burning Noon Infect the Sky,
The Sickening Sheep to Coverts fly,
The Sheep not half so Scorch't as I
Thus Languishing in Love.
II.
Stretched on the Flowery Shades along
There would I tune my Tender Song,
And drop a Melting Tear;
Music has wondrous Charms they say,
Music can raging Heats allay,
And Tame the wildest Care.
Begin my Song the Soothing Strain;
But the dear Flame is Charming Sweet,
I would not cool the Passion yet,
Nor can I bear the pain.
Strangely I Am Racked in wide Extremes,
I burn, I burn, I burn, and yet I Love the Flames.
III.
Oh why should Beauty Heavenly Bright
Stoop down to Charm a Mortals Sight,
And Torture with the Sweet excess of Light?
Our Hearts, alas! how frail their make!
With their own weight of Joy they break,
Oh why is Love so strong, and Natures self so weak?
IV.
Dear Lord, forgive my rash Complaint,
And Love me still,
Against my froward Will,
Unvail thy Beauties though I faint.
Send the great Herald from the Sky,
And at the Trumpets awful roar
This feeble state of things shall fly,
And Pain and Pleasure mix no more.
Then I shall gaze with Strengthened Sight
On Glories Infinitely bright,
My Heart shall all be Love, my Jesus all Delight.
Sitting in an Arbor.
I.
SWEET Muse descend and bless the Shade,
And bless the Evening Grove;
Business and Noise and Day are fled,
And every Care but Love.
II.
But hence, Ye Wanton Young and Fair,
Mine is a purer Flame,
No Phillis shall infect the Air
With her unhallowed Name.
III.
Jesus has all my Powers possessed,
My Hopes, my Fears, my Joys:
He the dear Sovereign of my Breast
Shall still command my Voice.
IV.
Some of the fairest Quires above
Shall flock around my Song,
With Joy to hear the Name they Love
Sound from a Mortal Tongue.
V.
His Charms shall make my Numbers flow,
And hold the falling Floods,
While Silence sits on every Bough
And bends the Listening Woods.
VI.
I Will carve our Passion on the, Bark,
And every wounded Tree
Shall drop and bear some Mystic Mark
That Jesus died for me.
VII.
The Swains shall wonder when they read
Inscribed on all the Grove,
That Heaven it Self came down, and bled
To win a Mortals Love.
BEWAILING My own Inconstancy.
I.
I LOVE the Lord; but ah! how far
My Thoughts from the dear Object are!
This wanton Heart how wide it roves!
And Fancy meets a Thousand Loves.
II.
(...) my Soul burn to see my God
(...) tread the Courts of his abode,
But Troops of Rivals throng the place
And Tempt me off before his Face.
III.
Would I enjoy my Lord alone,
(...) bid my Passions all be gone,
All but my Love; and Charge my Will
To bar the Door and keep it still.
IV.
But Cares or Trifles make or find
Still new Avenues to the Mind,
Till I with Grief and Wonder see
Huge Crowds betwixt my Lord and Me.
V.
Often I am told the Muse will prove
A Friend to Piety and Love;
Strait I begin some Sacred Song,
And take my Savior on my Tongue.
VI.
Strangely I lose his Lovely Face
To hold the Empty Sounds in Chase;
At best the Chymes divide my Heart,
And the Muse shares the larger part.
VII.
False Confident! And falser Breast!
Fickle and fond of every Guest:
Each Airy Image as it flies
Here finds admittance through my Eyes.
VIII.
This Foolish Heart can leave her God,
And Shadows tempt her Thoughts abroad,
How shall I fix this Wandering Mind,
Or throw my Fetters on the Wind?
IX.
Look gently down, Almighty Grace,
Prison me round in thine Embrace:
Pity the Soul that would be thine,
And let thy Power my Love Confine.
X.
Say, when shall that bright Moment be
That I shall live alone for thee,
My Heart no Foreign Lords adore,
And the wild Muse prove false no more?
Forsaken, yet Hoping.
I.
HAPPY the Hours, the Golden Days
When I could call my Jesus mine,
And sit and view his Smiling Face,
And melt in Pleasures all Divine.
II.
Near to my Heart within my Arms
He lay, till Sin defiled my Breast,
Till broken Vows and Earthly Charms
^ir'd and provoked my Heavenly Guest.
III.
And now He Is gone, (O Mighty Woe)
Gone from my Soul and hides his Love!
Curse on you, Sins, that grieved Him so,
Ye Sins, that forced him to remove.
IV.
Break, Break my Heart, Complain my Tongue,
Hither, my Friends, your Sorrows bring,
Angels, assist my Doleful Song,
If you have e're a Mourning String.
V.
But, ah! Your Joys are ever high,
Ever His Lovely Face you see,
While my poor Spirits pant and die,
And Groan for thee, my God, for thee.
VI.
Yet let my Hope look through my Tears
And spy afar his rolling Throne,
His Chariot through the cleaving Spheres
Shall bring the bright Beloved down.
VII.
Swift as a Roe flies over the Hills
My Soul springs out to meet him high,
Then the dear Conqueror turns his Wheels,
And climbs the Mansions of the Sky.
VIII.
There Smiling Joy for ever reigns,
No more the Turtle leaves the Dove;
Farewell to Jealousies, and Pains,
And all the Ills of Absent Love.
The Law and Gospel.
I.
"CURSED be the Man, for ever Cursed
"That does the smallest Sin commit,
"Death and Damnation for the First,
"Without Relief and Infinite.
II.
Thus Sinai roars; and round the Earth
Thunder and Fire and Vengeance flings;
(...) Jesus, thy dear gasping Breath
(...) Calvary says Gentler things.
III.
"Pardon, and Grace and boundless Love
"Streaming along a Savior's Blood,
"And Life and Joys and Crowns above
"Dear purchased by a Bleeding God.
IV.
Hark, how he prays, (the Charming Sound
Dwells on his Dying Lips) Forgive;
And every Groan and gaping Wound
Cries, "Father, Let the Rebels Live.
V.
Go you that rest upon the Law,
And toil and seek Salvation there,
Look to the Flames that Moses saw,
And shrink, and tremble, and despair.
VI.
But I Will retire beneath the Cross,
Savior, at thy dear Feet I lie;
And the keen Sword that Justice draws
Flaming and Red shall pass me by.
THE Death of MOSES,
Deuteronomy. xxxii. 49, 50. and xxxiv. 5, 6.
OR THE Enjoyment of GOD VVorth Dying for.
I.
LORD, it is an Infinite Delight
To see thy Lovely Face,
To dwell whole Ages in thy Sight
And feel thy Kind Embrace.
II.
This Gabriel knows; and Sings thy Name
With his Immortal Tongue;
Moses the Saint Enjoys the same,
And Loud repeats the Song.
III.
All the bright Nation sounds thy Praise
From the Eternal Hills,
While the Sweet Odor of thy Grace
The Heavenly Region fills.
IV.
Thy Charming Looks and Shining Power
Spread Life and Joy abroad:
O it is a Heaven worth dying for
To see a Smiling God.
V.
Show me thy Face, and I Will away
From all Inferior Things;
Speak, Lord, and here I quit my Clay,
And stretch mine Airy Wings.
VI.
'Twas a Sweet Journey to the Sky
The wondrous Prophet tried,
"Climb up the Mount, says God, and Dye,
The Prophet Climbed and Died.
VII.
Softly his fainting Head he lay
Upon his Maker's Breast,
His Maker Kissed his Soul away,
And laid his Flesh to rest.
VIII.
In God's own Arms he left the Breath
That God's own Spirit gave;
His was the Noblest Road to Death,
And his the Sweetest Grave.
AD Dominum nostrum and Servatorem Jesum Christum. ODA.
November. 1694
I.
TE, Grande Numen, Corporis Incola,
Te, magna magni Progenies Patris,
Nomen verendum nostri Jesu
Vox, Citharae, Calami sonabunt.
II.
Aptentur auro grandisonae Fides,
Christi Triumphos incipe Barbite,
Fractosque terrores Averni,
Victum Erebum, domitamque Mortem.
III.
Immensa vastos saecula circulos
Volvere, blando dum Patris in sinu
Toto fruebatur Jehova
Gaudia mill bibens Jesus;
IV.
Donec superno vidit ab Aethere
Adam cadentem, Tartara hiantia,
Unaque mergendos ruina
Heu nimium miseros Nepotes.
V.
Vidit minaces Vindicis Angeli
Ignes and Ensem, Telaque Sanguine
Tingenda nostro, dum rapinae
Spe fremuere Erebaea Monstra.
VI.
Commota Sacras Viscera protinus
Sensere flammas, Omnipotens Furor
Ebullit, Immensique Amoris
Aethereum calet Igne pectus.
VII.
"Non tota prorsus Gens hominum dabit
"Hosti triumphos: Quid Patris and Labor
"Dulcisque Imago? Number peribunt
"Funditus? O prius Astra caecis
VIII.
"Mergantur undis, and redeat Chaos.
"Aut ipse disperdam Satanae dolos,
"Aut ipse disperdar, and isti
"Sceptra dabo moderanda dextrae.
IX.
"Testor paternum Numen, and hoc Caput
"Aequale testor, dixit, and Aetheris
Inclinat ingens culmen, alto
Desiliitque ruens Olympo.
X.
Mortale corpus impiger induit
Artusque nostros, heu tenues nimis
Nimisque viles! Vindicique
Corda dedit fodienda Ferro,
XI.
Vitamque Morti; Proh dolor! O graves
Tonantis Irae! O Lex nimis aspera!
Mercesque peccati severa
Adamici, vetitique fructus,
XII.
Non poena lenis! Quo ruis impotens!
Quo Musa! largas fundere lachrymas,
Bustique Divini triumphos
Sacrilego temerare fletu?
XIII.
Sepone questus. Laeta Deum cane
Majore Chorda. Psalle sonorius
Ut ferreas Mortis cavernas
Et rigidam penetravit Aulam.
XIV.
Sensere Numen Regna feralia,
Mugit Barathrum, contremuit Chaos,
Dirum fremebat Rex Gehennae,
Perque suum tremebundus Orcum
XV.
Late refugit. "Nil agis Impie,
"Mergat vel Imis te Phlegethon vadis,
"Hoc findet undas fulmen, Inquit,
Et patrios Jaculatus Ignes
XVI.
Trajecit hostem. Nigra Silentia
Umbraeque flammas Aethereas pavent
Dudum perosae, ex quo corusco
Praecipites cecidere Coelo.
XVII.
Immane rugit jam Tonitru; fragor
Late ruinam mandat: ab infimis
Lectaeque destinata genti
Tartara disjiciuntur antris.
XVIII.
Heic strata passim vincula, and heic jacent
Unci cruenti, Tormina Mentium
Invisa, ploratuque vasto
Spicula Mors sibi adempta plangit.
XIX.
En, ut resurgit Victor ab ultimo
Ditis Profundo, curribus aureis
Astricta raptans Monstra Noctis
Perdomitumque Erebi Tyrannum.
XX.
Quanta Angelorum gaudia Jubilant
Victor paternum dum repetit Polum?
En qualis ardet, dum beati
Limina scandit Ovans Olympi!
XXI.
Io Triumph plectra Seraphica,
Io Triumph grex hominum sonet,
Dum laeta quaquaversus ambos
Astra repercutiunt Triumphos.
Excitatio cordis Coelum versus.
1694. Ad seipsum.
I.
HEU quot secla teris carcere Corporis
Wattsi, quid refugis Limen and Exitum?
Nec meus Aethereum Culmen, and Atria
Magni Patris anhelitat?
II.
Corpus vile creat mill Molestias,
Circum Corda volant and Dolor, and Metus,
Peccatumque malis durius omnibus
Caecas Insidias struit.
III.
Non hoc grata tibi Gaudia de solo
Surgunt. Christus abest, deliciae tuae,
Long Christus abest, Inter and Angelos
Et picta astra perambulans.
IV.
Vide Horat. Lib. 1. Od. 3.
Coeli summa petas, nec Jaculabitur
Iracunda Tonans fulmina: Te Deus
Hortatur; Vacuum tend per Era
Pennas nunc homini datas.
Breathing toward the Heavenly Country. Casimire. Book I. Od. 19. Imitated.
Urit me Patriae Decor, etc.
THE Beauty of my Native Land
Immortal Love inspires;
I burn, I burn with strong Desires,
And sigh and wait the high Command.
There glides the Moon her shining Way,
And shoots my Heart through with a Silver Ray;
Upward my Heart aspires:
A thousand Lamps of Golden Light
Hung high in vaulted Azure charm my Sight,
And wink and becken with their Amorous Fires.
O Ye dear Glories of my Heavenly Home,
Bright Sentinels of my Fathers Court
Where all the happy Minds resort,
When will my Father's Chariot come?
Must ye for ever walk the Ethereal Round,
For ever see the Mourner lie
An Exile of the Sky,
A Prisoner of the Ground?
Descend some shining Servant from on high,
Build me a hasty Tomb;
A Grassie Turf will raise my Head,
The Neighboring Lillies dress my Bed
And shed a cheap Perfume.
Here I put off the Chains of Death
My Soul too long has worn,
Friends, I forbid one groaning Breath,
Or Tear to wet my Urn;
Raphael, behold me all undrest,
Here gently lay this Flesh to rest;
Then mount and lead the Path unknown,
Swift I pursue thee, Flaming Guide, on Pinions of my own.
THE GLORIES of GOD Exceed all Worship.
I.
ETERNAL Power! whose high Abode
Becomes the Grandeur of a God;
Infinite Lengths beyond the Bounds
Where the Skies roll their little Rounds.
II.
The lowest Step about thy Seat
Rises too high for Gabriel's Feet,
In vain the tall Archangel tries
To reach thine height with wondering Eyes.
III.
Thy dazzling Beauties whilst he Sings
He hides his Face behind his Wings,
And Ranks of Shining Thrones around
Fall Worshipping, and spread the Ground.
IV.
Lord, what shall Earth and Ashes do!
We would adore our Maker too,
From Sin and Dust to thee we cry
The Great, the Holy, and the High.
V.
Earth from afar has heard thy Fame,
And Worms have learnt to lisp thy Name.
But, O, the Glories of thy Mind
Leave all our soaring Thoughts behind.
VI.
God is in Heaven, and Men below,
Short be our Tunes, our Words be few;
A Sacred Reverence checks our Songs,
And Praise sits silent on our Tongues.
The END of the First BOOK.
Tibi silet Laus, O Deus. Psalm. lxv. 1.
BOOK II.
Odes, Elegies and Epistles, etc. SACRED TO VIRTUE, LOYALTY AND FRIENDSHIP.
TO Her MAJESTY.
QUEEN of the Northern World, whose gentle Sway
Invites our Love, and binds our Hearts to Obey:
Forgive the Nation's Groan when William died;
Lo, at thy Feet in all the Loyal Pride
Of rising Joy Three Happy Realms appear,
And William's Urn almost without a Tear
Stands; nor Complains: While from thy Gracious Tongue
Peace flows in Silver Streams amidst the Throng.
Amazing Balm, that on those Lips was found
To heal the Twinges of that Mortal Wound,
The Danger, and the Scar! Far-distant Lands
Whose Lives lay trusted in Nassovian Hands
Transfer their Souls, and live; secure they Play
In thy Mild Rays, and feel a growing Day.
Thy beamy Wing at once defends and warms
Fainting Devotion; whilst in various Forms
Fair Piety shines through the British Isles:
Here at thy Side, and in thy kindest Smiles
Blazing in Ornamental Gold she stands,
To Bless thy Councils, and Assist thy Hands,
And Crowds wait round her to receive Commands.
There at a Humble distance from the Throne
Beauteous She lies; Her Luster all her own,
Ungarnish'd; yet not blushing, nor afraid,
Nor knows Suspicion, nor affects the Shade.
In Words of Solemn Form, or with a freer Cry
Warm as our Zeal for Thee, We Both address the Sky,
Vow for thy Safety Both, and live beneath thine Eye.
PRINCESS, the World already owns thy Name;
Go, mount the Chariot of Immortal Fame,
Nor Die to be Renowned: Fames loudest Breath
Too dear is purchased by an Angels Death.
The Thunder of thy Hand with general Joy
Shall crush Rebellion and the Rival Boy:
Thy Sounding Arms his Gallick Patron hears,
And speeds his Flight; nor overtakes his Fears
Till hard Despair wring from the Tyrant's Soul
The Iron Tears out. Let thy Frown control
Our Angry Jarrs at Home, till Wrath submit
Her Bloody Banners to thine Awful Feet*
Mad Zeal and Frenzy with their Murtherous Train
Flee these Blessed Realms in thine Auspicious Reign,
Envy expire in Rage, and Treason bite the Chain.
Let no black Scenes affright the British Stage,
Thy Thread of Life prolong our Golden Age,
Long bless the Earth: Then rise and shine on high
The fairest Glory of the Western Sky;
There check the Rays of each Malignant Star,
Heal the dire Pestilence, forbid the War,
Warm the chill North, Sooth the two Rugged Bears,
And stretch thy Peaceful Influence to the Southern Spheres.
TO Mr. John Lock Retired from The World of Business.
I.
ANGELS are made of Heavenly Things,
And Light and Love our Souls compose,
Their Bliss within their Bosom springs,
Within their Bosom flows.
But narrow Minds still make pretense
To search the Coasts of Flesh and Sense,
And fetch Diviner Pleasures thence.
Men are akin to Ethereal Forms,
But they belie their Nobler Birth,
Debase their Honor down to Earth,
And claim a share with Worms.
II.
He that has Treasures of his own
May leave the Cottage or the Throne,
May Quit the Globe, and dwell alone
Within his spacious Mind.
LOCK has a Soul wide as the Sea,
Calm as the Night, bright as the Day,
There may his vast Idea's play,
Nor feel a Thought confined.
TO Mr. JOHN SHUTE ON Mr. LOCK's Dangerous Sickness sometime after he had
retired to study the Scriptures.
June 1704.
I.
AND must the Man of wondrous Mind
(Now his rich Thoughts are just refined)
Forsake our Longing Eyes?
Reason at length submits to wear
The Wings of Faith, and Lo they rear
Her Chariot high, and nobly bear
Her Prophet to the Skies.
II.
Go, Friend, and wait the Prophet's Flight,
Watch if his Mantle chance to light
And seize it for thy own;
SHUTE is the Darling of his Years,
Young SHUTE his better Likeness bears,
All but his Wrinkles and his Hairs
Are copied in his Son.
III.
Thus when our Follies or our Fau'ts
Call for the Pity of thy Thoughts,
Thy Pen shall make us wise:
The Sallies of whose Youthful Wit
Could pierce the British Fogs with Light,
Place our true Interest in our Sight,
And open half our Eyes.
FRIENDSHIP.
TO Mr. William Nokes.
1702.
I.
FRIENDSHIP, thou Charmer of the Mind,
Thou sweet deluding III,
The brightest Minute Mortals find,
And sharpest Hour we feel.
II.
Fate has divided all our shares
Of Pleasure and of Pain,
In Love the Comforts and the Cares
Are mixed and joined again.
III.
But whilst in Floods our Sorrow rolls,
And Drops of Joy are few,
This dear Delight of Mingling Souls
Serves but to swell our Woe.
IV.
Oh! why should Bliss depart in haste,
And Friendship stay to moan?
Why the fond Passion cling so fast,
When every Joy is gone?
V.
Yet never let our Hearts divide,
Not Death dissolve the Chain:
For Love and Joy were once allied,
And must be joined again.
TO Nathanael Gould Esquire
Lawful Ambition.
1704.
I.
IT IS not by Splendour, or by State,
Majestic Mien, or lofty Gate
My Muse takes Measure of a King:
If Wealth or Height or Bulk will do,
She calls each Mountain of Peru
A more Exalted thing.
Frown on me, Friend, if e're I boast
Over Fellow Minds, enslaved in Clay,
Or swell when I shall have ingross't
A larger Heap of Shining Dust,
And wear a bigger Load of Earth than they.
Let the vain World Salute me loud,
My Thoughts look inward, and forget
The Sounding Names of High and Great,
The Flatteries of the Crowd.
II.
When GOVLD commands His Ships to run
And Search the Traffic of the Sea,
His Fleet o'retakes the falling Day,
And bears the Western Mines away,
Or Richer Spices from the Rising Sun:
While the glad Tenants of the Shore
Shout and pronounce him Senator,
Yet still the Man's the same:
For well the Happy Merchant knows
The Soul with Treasure never grows,
Nor swells with airy Fame.
III.
But trust me GOULD, it is lawful Pride
To rise above the mean Control
Of Flesh and Sense to which we are tied;
This is Ambition that becomes a Soul.
We steer our Course up through the Skies,
Farewell this Barren Land:
We ken the Heavenly Shore with longing Eyes,
There the dear Wealth of Spirits lies,
And beckoning Angels stand.
TO Dr. Thomas Gibson.
The Life of Souls.
1704.
I.
SWIFT as the Sun rolls round the Day
We hasten to the Dead,
Slaves to the Wind we puff away,
And to the Ground we tread.
It Is Air that lends us Life, when first
The vital Bellows heave;
Our Flesh We borrow of the Dust,
And when a Mothers Care has Nursed
The Babe to Manly size, we must
With Usury pay the Grave.
Juleps still tend the dying Flame,
And Roots and Herbs play well their Game
To save our sinking Breath,
While GIBSON brings his awful Power
To rescue the precarious Hour
From the Demands of Death.
II.
I Would have a Life to call my Own
That shall depend on Heaven alone;
Nor Air, nor Earth, nor Sea
Mix their base Essences with mine,
Nor claim Dominion so Divine
To give me leave to Be.
III.
Sure there is a Mind within, that reigns
Over the dull current of my Veins,
I feel the Inward Pulse bear high
With vigorous Immortality.
Let Earth resume the Flesh it gave,
And Breath dissolve amongst the Winds;
GIBSON, the things that fear a Grave,
That I can loose, or You can save,
Are not akin to Minds.
IV.
We claim acquaintance with the Skies,
Upward our Spirits hourly rise,
And there our Thoughts Employ:
When Heaven shall sign our Grand Release,
We are no Strangers to the Place,
The Business, or the Joy.
TO My Brothers E. and T. W.
False Greatness.
School.
I.
BROTHERS, forbear to call him Blessed
That only has a large Estate,
Should all the Treasures of the West
Meet and Conspire to make him Great.
Let a broad Stream with Golden Sands
Through all his Meadows roll,
He Is but a Wretch with all his Lands
That wears a narrow Soul.
II.
He swells amidst his wealthy Store,
And proudly poizing what he weighs,
In his own Scale he fondly lays
Huge Heaps of Shining Oar,
He spreads the Balance wide to hold
His Manors and his Farms,
And cheats the Beam with Loads of Gold
He hugs between his Arms.
So might the Plough-boy climb a Tree,
When Craesus mounts his Throne,
And both stand up and smile to see
How long their Shadow's grown;
Alas! how vain their Fancies be,
To think that Shape their own.
III.
Thus mingled still with Wealth and State
Craesus himself can never know;
His true Dimensions, and his Weight
Are far inferior to their show;
Were I so tall to reach the Pole,
Or grasp the Ocean with my Span,
I must be measured by my Soul.
The Mind's the Standard of the Man.
TO Mr. A. S. and Mr. T. H.
STRICT RELIGION Exceeding Rare.
1705.
I.
I AM born aloft and leave the Crowd,
I sail upon a Morning-Cloud
Skirted with dawning Gold:
Mine Eyes beneath the opening Day
Command the Globe with wide survey,
Where Ants in busy Millions play
And tug and heave the Mould.
II.
"Are These the things, my Passion cried,
"That we call Men? Are These allied
"To the fair Worlds of Light?
"They have rased out their Maker's Name
"Grav'n on their Minds with pointed Flame
"In Strokes Divinely bright.
III.
"Wretches, they hate their Native Skies:
"If an Ethereal Thought arise
"Or Spark of Virtue shine,
"With cruel Force they damp its Plumes,
"Choke the Young Fire with sensual Fumes,
"And Chain their Souls to Sin.
IV.
"Lo, how they throng with panting Breath
"The broad descending Road
"That leads unerring down to Death,
"Nor miss the Dark Abode.
Thus while I drop a Tear or two
On the wild Herd, a Noble Few
Dare to stray upward, and pursue
The unbeaten Way to God.
V.
I meet their Spirits mounting high,
SHALLET I saw, and HUNT was there,
They break through loads of Pondrous Care,
With Morning Incense up they Fly
Perfuming all the Air.
Charmed with the Pleasure of the Sight
My Soul adores and Sings:
"Blessed be the Power that aids their Flight,
"That streaks their Path with heavenly Light,
"And gives them Zeal for Wings.
ON The Sudden Death OF Mrs. Mary Peacock.
1695.
An Elegiack Song.
I.
HARK! She bids all her Friends Adieu;
Some Angel calls her to the Spheres;
Our Eyes the radiant Saint pursue
Through liquid Telescopes of Tears.
II.
Farewell, bright Soul, a short Farewell
Till We shall meet again above
In the sweet Groves where Pleasures dwell,
And Trees of Life bear Fruits of Love.
III.
There Glory sits on every Face,
There Friendship smiles in every Eye,
There shall our Tongues relate the Grace
That led us homeward to the Sky.
IV.
Over all the Names of Christ our King
Shall our harmonious Voices rove,
Our Harps shall sound from every String
The Wonders of his bleeding Love.
V.
Come Sovereign Lord, Dear Savior come,
Remove these separating Days,
Send thy bright Wheels to fetch us home;
That Golden Hour, how long it stays!
VI.
How long must we lie lingering here,
While Saints around us take their Flight?
Smiling they quit this dusky Syhere,
And mount the Hills of Heavenly Light.
VII.
Sweet Soul, we leave thee to thy Rest,
Enjoy thy Jesus and thy God,
Till we from Bands of Clay released
Spring out and climb the shining Road.
VIII.
While the Dear Dust she leaves behind
Sleeps in thy Bosom, Sacred Tomb;
Soft be her Bed, her Slumbers Kind,
And all her Dreams of Joy to come.
TO THE Reverend Mr. B. Row.
It Is Dangerous to follow the Multitude.
I.
ROW, if we make the Crowd our Guide
Through Life's uncertain Road,
Mean is the Chase; and wandering wide
We miss the Immortal Good.
Men live at random and by Chance,
Bright Reason never leads the Dance;
Whilst in the broad and beaten Way
Over Hills and Dales from Truth we stray,
To Ruin we descend, to Ruin we advance.
II.
Wisdom retires, she hates the Crowd,
And with a decent Scorn
Aloof she climbs her steepy Seat,
Where nor the Grave nor Giddy Feet
Of the Learned Vulgar or the Rude
Have e're a Passage worn.
III.
Mere Hazard first began the Track
Where Custom leads her Thousands blind
In willing Chains and strong;
There Is not one bold, one noble Mind
Dares tread the fatal Error back,
But Hand in Hand our selves we bind
And drag the Age along.
IV.
Mortals, a Savage Herd, and loud
As Billows on a noisy Flood
In rapid order roll:
Example makes the Mischief good:
With jocund Heel we beat the Road
Unheedful of the Goal.
V.
Me let some Friendly Seraph's Wing
Snatch from the Crowd, and bear Sublime
To Wisdom's lofty Tower,
Thence to survey that wretched Thing
Mankind; and in Exalted Rhyme
Bless the delivering Power.
TO My Sisters S. and M. W.
An Epistle.
Dear Sisters, READ the Love of my Heart in the first Line of my Letter, and
believe it. I Am much concerned to bear of my Mother's continued Weakness; we
take our Share of those painful Disorders of Nature which afflict her whom we
Honor and Love: I know also that your Hurries of Business must be more than
doubled thereby; but we are daily leaving Care and Sin behind us: The past
Temptations shall vex us no more, the Months that are gone return not, and the
Sorrows that we hourly feel lessen the decreed Number; every Pulse beats a
Moment of Pain away, and thus by Degrees we arrive nearer to the sweet Period
of Life and Trouble.
Bear up (my dear Ones) through the ruffling Storms
Of a vain vexing World: Tread down the Cares
Those ragged Thorns that lie across the Road,
Nor spend a Tear upon 'em. Trust me, Sisters,
The Dew of Eyes will make the Briars grow.
Nor let the distant Phantom of Delight
Too long allure your Gaze, or swell your Hope
To dangerous size: If it approach your Feet
And court your Hand, forbid the Intruding Joy
To sit too near your Heart: Still may our Souls
Claim Kindred with the Skies, nor mix with Dust
Our betterborn Affections: Leave the Globe
A Nest for Worms, and hasten to our Home.
O there are Gardens of the Immortal Kind
That Crown the Heavenly Edens rising Hills
With Beauty and with Sweets; no Lurking Mischief
Dwells in the Fruit, nor Serpent twines the Boughs:
The Branches bend Laden with Life and Bliss
Ripe for the Taste; but it is a steep Ascent:
Hold fast the The Gospel.
Golden Chain let down from Heaven,
'Twill help your Feet and Wings; I feel its Force
Draw upward: Fastened to the Pearly Gate
It Guides the Way unerring: Happy Clue
Through this dark Wild! 'Twas Wisdom's Noblest Work,
All joined by Power Divine, and every Link is Love.
Sisters, Accept the sudden Rapture kindly. The Muse is not awake every Day, if
she has a Moments Release from the Lethargy, see, it is devoted to serve and
please you -- etc. June 15. 1704.
TO Mr. C. and S. Fleetwood.
The World Vain AND The Soul Immortal.
1701.
I.
FLEETWOODS, Young Generous Pair,
Despise the Joys that Fools pursue;
Bubbles are light and brittle too,
Born of the Water and the Air.
Tried by a Standard Bold and Just
Honor and Gold are Paint and Dust;
How vile the last is, and as vain the first:
Things that the Crowd calls Great and Brave,
With me how low their Value's brought!
Titles, and Names, and Life, and Breath,
Slaves to the Wind and born for Death;
The Soul's the only Thing We have
Worth an Important Thought.
II.
The Soul! it is of the Immortal Kind,
Not formed of Fire, or Earth, or Wind,
Outlives the mouldring Corpse, and leaves the Globe behind.
In Limbs of Clay though She appears,
Dressed up in Ears and Eyes,
The Flesh is but the Souls Disguise,
There Is nothing in her Frame kin to the Rags she Wears.
From all the Laws of Matter free,
From all we feel, and all we see
She stands Eternally distinct, and must for ever Be.
III.
Rise then, my Thoughts, on high,
Soar beyond all that is made to Dye;
Lo! on an Awful Throne
Sits the Creator and the Judge of Souls,
Whirling the Planets round the Poles,
Winds off our Threads of Life, and brings our Periods on.
Swift the Approach, and Solemn is the Day,
When this Immortal Mind
Stripped of the Body's coarse Array
To Endless Pain, or Endless Joy
Must be at once consigned.
IV.
Think of the Sands run down to waste,
We possess none of all the Past,
None but the Present is our own;
Grace is not placed within our Power,
It Is but one short, one shining Hour,
Bright and declining as a Setting Sun.
See the white Minutes winged with have;
The NOW that flies may be the last,
Seize the Salvation e're it is past,
Nor mourn the Blessing gone:
A Thoughts Delay is Ruin here,
A Closing Eye, a Gasping Breath
Shuts up the Golden Scene in Death,
And drowns you in Despair.
TO Mr. William Blackbourn.
Life flies too fast to be Wasted.
1703.
Quae tegit canas modo Bruma valles
Sole vicinos jaculante montes
Deteget rursum -- Casimir. Lib. 2. Od. 2.

I.
MARK, how it Snows! how fast the Valley fills?
And the sweet Groves the hoary Garment wear;
Yet the Warm Sunbeams bounding from the Hills
Shall melt the Vail away, and the young Green appear.
II.
But when Old Age has dropped upon your Head
Her Silver Frost, there is no returning Sun;
Swift rolls our Autumn, swift our Summer's fled,
When Youth, and Love, and Spring, and Golden Joys are gone.
III.
Then Cold, and Winter, and your Aged Snow
Stick fast upon you; not the rich Array,
Nor the Green Garland, nor the Rosy Bough
Shall cancel or conceal the Melancholy Gray.
IV.
The Chase of Pleasure is not worth the Pains,
While the Bright Sands of Health run wasting down*
And Honor calls you from the softer Scenes
To sell the gaudy Hour for Ages of Renown.
V.
It Is but one Youth and short that we can have,
And one Old Age dissolves our feeble Frame;
But there is a Heavenly Art to elude the Grave,
And with the Heroe-Race Immortal Kindred claim.
VI.
The Man that has his Countries Sacred Tears
To drop upon his Hearse, has lived his Day:
Thus, BLACKBOURN, we should leave our Names our Heirs;
Old Time and waning Moons sweep all the rest away.
TO Mr. Robert Atwood.
THE Kingdom of the Wise Man.
PART I.
THE rising Year beheld the Imperious Gaul
Stretch his Dominion, while a hundred Towns
Crouch'd to the Victor: But a steady Soul
Stands firm on its own Base, and reigns as wide,
As Absolute; and sways ten thousand Slaves,
Lusts and wild Fancies with a Sovereign Hand.
We are a little Kingdom: But the Man
That chains his Rebel Will to Reasons Throne
Forms it a large one, ATWOOD, whilst his Mind
Makes Heaven its Council, from the Rolls above
Draws his own Statutes, and with Joy obeys.
It Is not a Troop of Well-appointed Guards
Create a Monarch, not a Purple Robe
Died in the Peoples Blood, not all the Crowns
Or dazzling Tiars that bend about the Head,
Though Gilt with Sunbeams and beset with Stars.
A Monarch He that Conquers all his Fears
And treads upon them; when he stands alone,
Makes his own Camp; four Guardian Virtues wait
His Nightly Slumbers and secure his Dreams.
Now dawns the Light; He ranges all his Thoughts
In square Battalions, bold to meet the Attacks
Of Time and Chance, himself a numerous Host,
All Eye, all Ear, all wakeful as the Day,
Firm as a Rock, and moveless as the Center.
In vain the Harlot Pleasure spreads her Charms
To lull his Thoughts in Luxuries fair Lap
To sensual Ease, (the Bane of little Kings,
Monarchs whose waxen Images of Souls
Are molded into Softness) still his Mind
Wears its own Shape, nor can the Heavenly Form
Stoop to be modeled by the wild Decrees
Of the mad Vulgar, that unthinking Herd.
He lives above the Crowd, nor hears the Noise
Of Wars and Triumphs, nor regards the Shouts
Of Popular Applause, that empty Sound,
Nor feels the flying Arrow of Reproach,
Or Spite, or Envy. In himself secure,
Wisdom his Tower, and Conscience is his Shield,
His Peace all Inward, and his Joys his Own.
Now my Ambition swells, my Wishes soar,
This be my Kingdom; sit above the Globe
My 'Rising Soul, and dress thy self around
And shine in Virtues Armor; Climb the height
Of Wisdoms lofty Castle, there reside
Safe from the Smiling and the Frowning World.
Yet once a Day drop down a gentle Look
On the great Molehill, and with pitying Eye
Survey the Busy Emmets round the Heap
Crowding and Bustling in a Thousand Forms
Of Strife and Toil, to purchase Wealth and Fame,
A Bubble or a Dust: Then call thy Thoughts
Up to thy self to feed on Joys unknown,
Rich without Gold, and Great without Renown.
PART II. OR The Bold Stoic.
Honor demands my Song. Forget the Ground
My Generous Muse, and sit amongst the Stars;
There sing the Soul, that Conscious of her Birth
Lives like a Native of the Vital World
Amongst these dying Clods, and bears her State
Just to her self: How nobly she maintains
Her Character, Superior to the Flesh,
She weilds her Passions like her Limbs, and knows
The Brutal Powers were only born't obey.
This is the Man whom Storms could never make
Meanly complain, nor can a flattering Gale
Make him talk proudly: He has no Desire
To read his Secret Fate; yet unconcerned
And calm could meet his unborn Destiny
In all its Charming or its Frightful Shapes.
He that unshrinking and without a Groan
Bears the first Wound may finish all the War
With mere Courageous Silence, and come off
Conqueror: For the Man that well conceals
The heavy Strokes of Fate he bears 'em well.
He, though the Atlantic and the Midland Seas
With adverse Surges meet, and rise on high
Suspended 'twixt the Winds, then rush amain
Mingled with Flames upon his Single Head
And Clouds and Stars and Thunder, he would stand*
And from the lofty Castle of his Mind
Sublime look down and Joyfully Survey
The Ruins of Creation; he alone
Heir of the Dying World: A piercing Glance
Shoots upwards from between his closing Lids
To reach his Birthplace, then without a Sigh
He bids his battered Flesh lie gently down
Amongst its Native Rubbish; while his Soul
Breaths and flies upward, an undoubted Guest
Of the third Heaven, the unruinable Sky.
Thither when Fate has brought Our willing Souls,
No matter whether 'twas a Sharp Disease,
Or a sharp Sword that helped the Travelers on,
And pushed us to our Home. Bear up my Friend,
My ATWOOD, and break through the Surging Brine
With steady Prow; Know, we shall once arrive
At the fair Haven of Eternal Bliss
To which we ever steer; whether as Kings
Of wide Command we have spread the Spacious Sea
With a broad Painted Fleet, or Rowed along
In a thin Cockboat with a little Oar.
There let my narrow Plank shift me to Land
And I Will be happy, thus I Will leap Ashore
Joyful and fearless on the Immortal Coast,
Since all I leave is Mortal, and it must be lost.
Free Philosophy.
To the much Honored Mr. Thomas Row. THE Director of my Youthful Studies.
I.
CUSTOM, that Tyranness of Fools,
That leads the Learned round the Schools
In Magic Chains of Forms and Rules,
My Genius storms her Throne:
No more ye Slaves with Awe profound
Beat the dull Track, nor dance the Round,
Loose Hands, and quit the Enchanted Ground,
Knowledge invites us each alone.
II.
I hate these Shackles of the Mind
Forged by the haughty Wise;
Souls were not born to be confined,
And led like Sampson Bound and Blind:
I love thy gentle Influence, ROW,
Who only do Advise:
Thy gentle Influence like the Sun
Only dissolves the Frozen Snow,
Then bids our Thoughts like Rivers flow,
And choose the Channels where they run.
III.
Thoughts should be free as Fire or Wind;
The Pinions of a Single Mind
Will through all Nature fly:
But who can drag up to the Poles
Long fettered Ranks of Leaden Souls?
My Genius which no Chain controuls
Roves with Delight, or deep or high:
Swift I survey the Globe around,
Dive to the Center through the Solid Ground,
Or travel over the Sky.
To the Reverend Mr. John How.
THE Vanity of Human Cares.
1704.
I.
GREAT Man, permit the Muse to climb
And seat her at thy Feet,
Bid her attempt a Thought sublime,
And consecrate her Wit.
I feel, I feel the attractive Force
Of thy superior Soul,
My Chariot flies her upward Course,
The Wheels Divinely roll.
Now let me chide the mean Affairs
And mighty Toil of Men:
How they grow gray in trifling Cares,
Or wast the Motions of the Spheres
Upon Delights as vain!
II.
A Puff of Honor fills the Mind,
And Yellow Dust is solid Good;
Thus like the Ass of Savage Kind
We snuff the Breezes of the Wind,
Or steal the Serpents Food.
Could all the Choirs
That charm the Poles
But strike one doleful Sound,
'Twould be employed to mourn our Souls,
Souls that were framed of Sprightly Fires
In Floods of Folly drowned.
Souls made of Glory seek a Brutal Joy,
How they disclaim their Heavenly Birth,
Melt their Bright Substance down with drossy Earth,
And hate to be refined from that impure Alloy.
III.
Often has thy Genius roused us hence
With Elevated Song,
Bid us renounce this World of Sense,
Bid us divide the Immortal Prize
With the Seraphick Throng:
"Knowledge and Love make Spirits blessed,
"Knowledge their Food and Love their Rest;
But Flesh, the unmanageable Beast,
Resists the Pity of thine Eyes
And Music of thy Tongue.
Then let the Worms of grovelling Mind
Round the short Joys of Earthy Kind
In restless Windings Roam;
HOW has an ample Orb of Soul,
Where shining Worlds of Knowledge roll,
Where Love the Center and the Pole
Compleats the Heaven at Home.
TO Mr. Nicholas Clark.
January 1701/2.
Complaining of Vapors, OR, Disorders of the Head.
I.
IT WAS in a Vale where Osyers grow
By murmuring Streams we told our Woe,
And mingled all our Cares:
Friendship sat pleased in both our Eyes,
In both the weeping Dews arise
And drop alternate Tears.
II.
The Vigorous Monarch of the Day
How mounted half his Morning Way
Shone with a fainter Bright,
Still sickning and decaying still
Dimly he wandered up the Hill
With his Expiring Light.
III.
In dark Eclipse his Chariot rolled,
The Queen of Night obscured his Gold
Behind her Sable Wheels:
Nature grew sad to loose the Day,
The Flowery Vales in Mourning lay,
In Mourning stood the Hills.
IV.
Such are our Sorrows, CLARK, I cried,
Clouds of the Brain grow black, and hide
Our darkened Souls behind;
In the young Morning of our Years
Distempering Fogs have climbed the Spheres,
And Choke the Laboring Mind.
V.
Lo the Gay Planet rears his Head
And overlooks the Lofty Shade
New-bright'ning all the Skies*
But say, Dear Part'ner of my Moan,
When will our long Eclipse be gone,
Or when our Suns arise?
VI.
In vain are potent Herbs applied,
Harmonious Sounds in vain have tried
To make the Darkness fly.
But Drugs would raise the Dead as soon,
Or clatt'ring Brass relieve the Moon,
When fainting in the Sky.
VII.
Some friendly Spirit from above,
Born of the Light, and nurs't with Love,
Assist our feebler Fires;
Force these Invading Glooms away;
Souls should be seen quite through their Clay
Bright as your Heavenly Choirs.
VIII.
But if the Fogs must damp the Flame,
Gently, kind Death, dissolve our Frame,
Release the Prisoner-Mind:
Our Souls shall mount at thy Discharge
To their bright Source, and shine at large
Nor clouded, nor confined.
UPON The Dismal Narrative OF THE Afflictions of a Friend.
1702.
I.
NOW let my Cares all buried lie,
My Griefs for ever Dumb:
Your Sorrows swell my Heart so high
They leave my own no Room.
II.
Sickness and Pains are quite forgot,
The Spleen itself is gone,
Plunged in your Woes I feel them not,
Or feel them all in One.
III.
Infinite Grief puts Sense to flight,
And all the Soul invades:
So the broad Gloom of spreading Night
Devours the Evening Shades.
IV.
Thus am I born to be Unblest!
This Sympathy of Woe
Drives my own Tyrants from my Breast
TO admit a Foreign Foe,
V.
Sorrows in long Succession reign;
Their Iron Rod I feel,
Friendship has only changed the Chain,
But I Am the Prisoner still.
VI.
Why was this Life for Misery made?
Or why drawn out so long?
Is there no room amongst the Dead?
Or is a Wretch too Young?
VII.
Move faster on, Great Nature's Wheel,
Be kind, ye rolling Powers,
Hurl my Days headlong down the Hill
With undistinguisht Hours.
VIII.
Be dusky all my rising Suns,
Nor smile upon a Slave:
Darkness and Death, make have at once
To hide me in the Grave.
THE REVERSE; ON THE View of some of my Friends remaining Comforts.
I.
THUS Nature tuned her Mournful Tongue,
Till Grace lift up her Head,
Reversed the Sorrow and the Song,
And smiling thus she said.
II.
Were kindred Spirits born for Cares?
Must every Grief be mine?
Is there a Sympathy in Tears,
And Joys refuse to Join?
III.
Forbid it Heaven, and raise my Love,
And make our Joys the same:
So Bliss and Friendship joined above
Mix an Immortal Flame.
IV.
Sorrows are lost in vast Delight
That Brightens all the Soul,
As Deluges of dawning Light
O'rewhelm the Dusky Pole.
V.
Pleasures in long Succession reign
And all my Powers Employ:
Friendship but shifts the pleasing Scene,
And fresh repeats the Joy.
VI.
Life has a soft and silver Thread,
Nor is it drawn too long,
Yet when my vaster Hopes persuade
I Am willing to be gone.
VII.
Fast as ye please roll down the Hill,
And have away, my Years;
Or I can wait my Father's Will,
And dwell beneath the Spheres.
VIII.
Rise glorious every future Sun,
And bright be all my Days,
Till Death that brightest Moment come
With well-distinguish't Rays.
To the Right Honorable JOHN Lord CUTTS.
[At the Siege of Namure.]
The Hardy Soldier.
I.
"O Why is Man so thoughtless grown?
"Why guilty Souls in have to dye?
"Vent'ring the Leap to Worlds unknown,
"And heedless to the Battle fly?
II.
"Are Lives but worth a Soldiers Pay?
"Why will ye join such wide Extremes?
"And stake Immortal Souls in play
"At desperate Chance and Bloody Games?
III.
"Valor's a nobler Turn of Thought,
"Whose pardoned Guilt forbids her Fears:
"Calmly she meets the deadly Shot
"Secure of Life above the Stars.
IV.
"But Frenzy dares Eternal Fate,
"And spurred with Honor's Airy Dreams
"Flies to Attack the Infernal Gate,
"And force a Passage to the Flames.
V.
Thus hovering over NAMVRIA's Plains
Sung Heavenly Love in Gabriel's form:
Young THRASO felt the moving Strains,
And Vowed to pray before the Storm.
VI.
Anon the Thundering Trumpet calls,
"My Vows be damned, the Hero cries,
Then Swears by Heaven, and Scales the Walls,
Drops in the Ditch, despairs, and dies.
Against Tears. The beginning of Ode 23. Book 4. of Casimire Imitated. Si, quae
flent mala, lugubres
Auferrent Oculi, etc.

TO Mrs. B. Bendish.
MADAM,
I.
COULD you persuade me Tears were Good
To wash our Mortal Cares away,
These Eyes of mine should weep a Flood,
And Stream into a Briny Sea.
II.
Or if these Orbs are hard and dry,
(These Orbs that never use to Rain)
I Would part with all I Am worth to buy
One Sovereign Drop for all my Pain.
III.
Were both the Golden Indies mine,
I Would give both Indies for a Tear;
I Would Barter all but what is Divine,
Nor should I think the Bargain Dear.
IV.
But Tears, alas, are trifling Things,
They rather feed than heal our Woe;
From trickling Eyes new Sorrow springs,
As Weeds in Rainy Seasons grow.
V.
Thus Weeping urges Weeping on;
In vain our Miseries hope Relief,
For one Drop calls another down,
Till we are drowned in Seas of Grief.
VI.
Then let your streaming Tears be staid,
Wear Native Courage on your Face:
These Vulgar Things were never made
For Souls of a Superior Race.
VII.
If it is a Thorny Path you go,
And thousand Foes your Steps surround,
Stamp the Thorns down, Charge through the Foe:
The Hardest Fight is Highest Crowned.
A Word of Warning, OR Few Happy Marriages.
August 1701.
I.
SAY, Mighty Love, and teach my Song
To whom thy Sweetest Joys belong,
And who the Happy Pairs
Whose Yielding Hearts and Joining Hands
Find Blessings twisted with their Bands
To soften all their Cares.
II.
Not the Wild Herd of Nymphs and Swains
That thoughtless fly into the Chains
As Custom leads the way:
If there be Bliss without Design,
Ivys and Oaks may grow and twine,
And be as Blessed as they.
III.
Not Sordid Souls, whose Earthy Mould
Drawn by Congenial Charms of Gold
To dull Embraces move:
So two Rich Mountains of Peru
May rush to Wealthy Marriage too,
And make a World of Love.
IV.
Not the Mad Tribe that Hell inspires
With Wanton Flames; those raging Fires
The Purer Bliss destroy:
On Aetna's top let Furies Wed,
And Sheets of Lightning dress the Bed
TO improve the Burning Joy.
V.
Nor the Dull Pairs whose Marble Forms
None of the melting Passions warms,
Can mingle Hearts and Hands:
Logs of green Wood that quench the Coals
Are Married just like Stoic Souls,
With Osyers for their Bands.
VI.
Not Minds of Melancholy Strain
Still Silent, or that still Complain,
Can the dear Bondage bless:
As well may Heavenly Consorts spring
From two old Lutes with never a String,
Or none besides the Bass.
VII.
Nor can the soft Enchantments hold
Two Jarring Souls of Angry Mould,
The Rugged, and the Keen:
Sampson's young Foxes might as well
In Bonds of Cheerful Wedlock dwell
With Firebrarnds tied between.
VIII.
Nor let the Cruel Fetters bind
A Gentle to a Savage Mind;
For Love abhors the Sight:
Loose the fierce Tiger from the Deer,
For native Rage and native Fear
Stand and forbid Delight.
IX.
Two Kindest Souls alone must meet;
It Is Friendship makes the Bondage sweet,
And feeds their mutual Loves:
Bright Venus on her Rolling Throne
Is drawn by gentlest Birds alone,
And Cupids Yoke the Doves.
TO Mr. Henry Bendish.
August 24. 1705.
Dear SIR, THE following Song was yours when first composed: The Muse then
described the general Fate of Mankind, that is, to be Ill-match'd: And now she
rejoices that you have escaped the common Mischief, and that your Soul has
found its own Mate. Let this Ode then Congratulate you Both: Grow mutually in
more complete Likeness and Love; Persevere and be Happy: Accept from the Press
what the Pen more privately inscribed to you.
The Indian Philosopher, OR Matches made Above, But Broke in coming down.
September 3. 1701.
I.
WHY should our Joys transform to Pain?
Why gentle Hymen's Silken Chain
A Plague of Iron prove?
BENDISH, it is strange the Charm that binds
Millions of Hands should leave their Minds
At such a loose from Love.
II.
In vain I sought the wondrous Cause,
Ranged the wide Fields of Natures Laws,
And urged the Schools in vain;
Then deep in Thought, within my Breast
My Soul retired, and Slumber dressed
A bright Instructive Scene.
III.
Over the broad Lands and 'cross the Tide
On Fancies Airy Horse I ride,
(Sweet Rapture of the Mind)
Till on the Banks of Ganges Flood
In a tall Ancient Grove I stood
For Sacred Use designed.
IV.
Hard by a Venerable Priest
Risen with his God the Sun from Rest
Awoke his Morning-Song;
Thrice he conjured the Murmuring Stream;
The Birth of Souls was all his Theme,
And half Divine his Tongue.
V.
"He Sang the Eternal rolling Flame,
"That Vital Mass, that still the same
"Does all our Minds compose;
"But shaped in twice ten thousand Frames,
"Thence differing Souls of differing Names,
"And Jarring Tempers rose.
VI.
"The mighty Power that formed the Mind
"One Mould for every Two designed,
"And blessed the Newborn Pair:
"This be a Match for This, he said,
"Then down he sent the Souls he made
"To seek them Bodies here:
VII.
"But parting from their warm Abode
"They lost their Fellows on the Road,
"And never joined their Hands:
"Ah cruel Chance, and crossing Fates!
"Our Eastern Souls have dropped their Mates
"On Europes Barbarous Lands.
VIII.
"Happy the Youth that finds the Bride
"Whose Birth is to his own allied,
"The Sweetest Joy of Life:
"But Oh the Crowds of Wretched Souls
"Fettered to Minds of different Moulds,
"And chained to Eternal Strife!
IX.
Thus Sang the wondrous Indian Bard,
My Soul with vast Attention heard,
While Ganges ceased to flow:
"Sure then, I cried, might I but see
"That gentle Nymph that twinn'd with me,
"I may be Happy too.
X.
"Some Courteous Angel tell me where,
"What distant Lands this unknown Fair
"Or distant Seas detain?
"Swift as the Wheel of Nature rolls
"I Would fly to meet and mingle Souls,
"And wear the Joyful Chain.
TO David Polhill Esquire
An Epistle.
December 1702.
I.
LET useless Souls to Woods retreat,
POLHILL should leave a Country Seat
When Virtue bids him dare be Great.
II.
Nor Kent, nor Sussex should have Charms
While Liberty with Loud Alarms
Calls you to Counsels and to Arms.
III.
Lewis by his own Slaves Adored
Bids you receive a Base-born Lord:
Awake your Cares! Awake your Sword!
IV.
Young Tory Votes to Rule the People
By High-Church; Can you Swear and Tipple,
And fetch Commissions from the Steeple?
V.
Thy Grandsire-shades with Jealous Eye
Frown down to see their Offspring lie
Careless, and let their Country die.
VI.
If Trevia fear to let you stand
Against the Gaul with Spear in Hand,
At least Petition for the Land.
TO David Polhill Esquire
AN Answer to an Infamous SATYR, CALLED, Advice to a Painter, Written chiefly
against King WILLIAM III. Of Glorious Memory.
1697.
PART I.
AND must the Hero that redeemed our Land
Here in the Front of Vice and Scandal stand?
The Man of Wondrous Soul, that Scorned his Ease
Tempting the Winters and the faithless Seas,
And paid an Annual Tribute of his Life
To guard his England from the Irish Knife
And crush the French Dragoon? Must WILLIAM's Name
That brightest Star that gilds the Wings of Fame,
WILLIAM the Brave, the Pious, and the Just
Adorn these gloomy Scenes of Tyranny and Lust?
POLHILL, my Blood's a Fire, my Spirits flame;
Vengeance and Darkness on the Poets Name:
Why smoke the Skies not? Why no Thunders roll?
Nor kindling Lightnings blast his guilty Soul?
Audacious Wretch! to stab a Monarch's Fame,
And fire his Subjects with a Rebel-Flame,
To call the Painter to his Black Designs
To draw our Guardian's Face in Hellish Lines:
Painter beware! the Monarch can be shown
Under no Shape but Angels or his own,
GABRIEL or WILLIAM on the British Throne.
Oh! could my Thoughts but grasp the vast Design,
And Words with Infinite Ideas join,
I Would rouse Apelles from his Iron Sleep,
And bid him trace the Warrior over the Deep:
Trace him Apelles, over the Belgian Plain,
Fierce, how he climbs the Mountains of the Slain
Scattering Just Vengeance through the Red Campaign.
Then dash the Canvas with a flying Stroke
Till it be lost in Clouds of Fire and Smoke,
And say, 'Twas thus the Conqueror through the Squadrons broke.
Mark him again emerging from the Cloud
Far from his Troops; there like a Rock he stood
His Countries Single Barrier in a Sea of Blood.
Calmly he leaves the Pleasures of a Throne,
And his MARIA Weeping; whilst alone
He wards the Fate of Nations, and provokes his own:
But Heaven secures its Champion; over the Field
Paint hovering Angels; though they fly concealed,
Each intercepts a Death, and wears it on his Shield.
Now, noble Pencil; lead him to our Isle,
Mark how the Skies with Joyful Luster smile,
Then imitate the Glory; on the Strand
Spread half the Nation longing till he Land.
Wash off the Blood, and take a peaceful Teint,
All Red the Warrior, White the Ruler paint,
Abroad a Hero, and at Home a Saint.
Throne him on high upon a shining Seat,
Lust and Profaneness dying at his Feet,
While round his Head the Laurel and the Olive meet,
The Crowns of War and Peace; and may they blow
With Flowery Blessings ever on his Brow.
At his right Hand pile all the English Laws
In Sacred Volumes; thence the Monarch draws
His Wise and Just Commands --
Rise ye Old Sages of the British Isle,
On the fair Tablet cast a reverend Smile
And bless the Piece; these Statutes are your own,
That sway the Cottage, and direct the Throne;
People and Prince are one in WILLIAM's Name,
Their Joys, their Dangers, and their Laws the same.
Let Liberty and Right with Plumes displayed
Clap their glad Wings around their Guardian's Head,
Religion over the rest her Starry Pinions spread.
Religion guards him; round the Imperial Queen,
Place waiting Virtues, each of Heavenly Mien;
Learn their bright Air, and paint it from his Eyes,
The Just, the Bold, the Temperate, and the Wise
Dwell in his Looks: Majestic, but Serene;
Sweet, with no Fondness; Cheerful, but not Vain:
Bright without Terror; Great, without Disdain.
His Soul inspires us what his Lips command,
And spreads his brave Example through the Land,
Not so the former Reigns; --
Bend down his Ear to each afflicted Cry,
Let Beams of Grace dart gently from his Eye;
But the bright Treasures of his Sacred Breast
Are too Divine, too Vast to be expressed,
Colors must fail where Words and Numbers faint,
And leave the Hero's Heart for Thought alone to paint.
PART II.
NOW Muse, pursue the Satyrist again,
Wipe off the Blotts of his Envenomed Pen;
Hark, how he bids the Servile Painter draw
In monstrous Shapes the Patrons of our Law;
At one slight Dash he cancels every Name
From the white Rolls of Honesty and Fame:
This Scribbling Wretch marks all he meets for Knave,
Shoots sudden Bolts promiscuous at the Base and Brave,
And with unpardonable Malice sheds
Poison and Spite on undistinguished Heads.
Painter, forbear; or if thy bolder Hand
Dares to attempt the Villains of the Land,
Draw first this Poet, like some baleful Star
With silent Influence shedding Civil War;
Or Factious Trumpeter, whose Magic Sound
Calls off the Subjects to the Hostile Ground,
And scatters Hellish Feuds the Nation Round.
These are the Imps of Hell, that cursed Tribe
That first create the Plague, and then the Pain describe.
Draw next above, the Great Ones of our Isle,
Still from the Good distinguishing the Vile;
Seat 'em in Pomp, in Grandeur, and Command,
Feeling the Subjects with a greedy Hand:
Paint forth the Knaves that have the Nation sold,
And tinge their greedy Looks with sordid Gold.
Mark what a selfish Faction undermines
The Pious Monarch's generous Designs,
Spoil their own Native Land as Vipers do,
Vipers that tear their Mothers Bowels through.
Let great NASSAW beneath a careful Crown
Mournful in Majesty, look gently down,
Mingling soft Pity with an Awful Frown:
He grieves to see how long in vain he strove
To make us blessed, how vain his Labors prove
To save the stubborn Land he condescends to Love.
TO THE Discontented and Unquiet.
Virtue alone makes the Mind Easy.
Imitated partly from Casimire: Book 4. Ode 15. Nil est, Munati, nil iterum
canam
Mortale nil est immedicabilis
Immune taedi, etc.

MADAM, There Is nothing here that is free
From wearisome Anxiety:
And the whole Round of Mortal Joys
With short possession tires and cloys:
It Is a dull Circle that we tread
Just from the Window to the Bed,
We rise to see and to be seen,
Gaze on the World a while, and then
We Yawn and Stretch to Sleep again.
But FANCY, that uneasy Guest
Still holds a Lodging in our Beast;
She finds or frames Vexations still,
Her self the greatest Plague we feel.
We take strange Pleasure in our Pain,
And make a Mountain of a Grain,
Assume the Load, and pant and sweat
Beneath the Imaginary Weight.
With our dear selves we live at strife,
While the most constant Scenes of Life
From Peevish Humors are not free;
Still we affect Variety:
Rather than pass an Easy Day,
We Fret and Chide the Hours away,
Grow weary of this Rolling Sun,
And vex that he should ever run
The same old Track; and still, and still
Rise red behind yon Eastern Hill,
And chide the Moon that darts her Light
Through the same Casement every Night.
We shift our Chambers and our Homes
To dwell where Trouble never comes:
Sylvia has left the City Crowd,
Against the Court exclaims aloud,
Flies to the Woods; a Hermit-Saint!
She loathes her Patches, Pins, and Paint,
Dear Diamonds from her Neck are torn:
But HUMOR, that Eternal Thorn
Sticks in her Heart: She Is hurried still
'Twixt her Wild Passions and her Will:
Haunted and hagg'd where're she roves
By purling Streams, and silent Groves,
Or with her Furies, or her Loves.
Then our own Native Land we hate,
Too Cold, too Windy, or too Wet;
Change the thick Climate, and repair
To France or Italy for Air;
In vain we change, in vain we fly;
Go Sylvia, mount the Whirling Sky,
Or ride upon the Feathered Wind;
In vain; If this Diseased Mind
Clings fast and still sits close behind.
Faithful Disease, that never fails
Attendance at her Ladies side
Over the Desert or the Tide
On rolling Wheels or flying Sails.
Happy the Soul that Virtue shows
To fix the place of her Repose,
Needless to move; for she can dwell
In her Old Grandsire's Hall as well.
VIRTUE that never loves to roam,
But sweetly hides her self at Home,
And easy on a Native Throne
Of humble Turf sits gently down.
Yet should Tumultuous Storms arise
And mingle Earth and Seas, and Skies,
Should the Waves swell, and make her roll
Across the Line or near the Pole,
Still She Is at Peace; for well She knows
To lanch the Stream that Duty shows,
And makes her Home wher'ere She goes.
Bear her, ye Seas, upon your Breast,
Or waft her, Winds, from East to West
On the soft Air; She cannot find
A Couch so easy as her Mind,
Nor breathe a Climate half so kind.
TO John Hartopp Esquire
July 1700.
Youth and Pleasure tarry not.
Casimire, Book 1. Ode 4. Imitated. Vive jucundae metuens juventae, etc.
I.
LIVE, my Dear HARTOPP, live to Day,
Nor let the Sun look down and say,
"Inglorious here he lies.
Shake off your Ease, and send your Name
To Immortality and Fame
By every Hour that flies.
II.
Youth's a soft Scene, but trust her not,
Her Airy Minutes swift as Thought
Slide off the Slippery Sphere;
Moons with their Months make hasty Rounds,
The Sun has passed his Vernal Bounds
And whirls about the Year.
III.
Let Folly dress in Green and Red,
And Gird her Wast with flowing Gold,
Knit blushing Roses round her Head,
Alas! the gaudy Colors fade,
The Garment waxes old.
HARTOPP, mark the withering Rose,
And the pale Gold how dim it shows!
IV.
Bright and lasting Bliss below
Is all Romance and Dream,
Only the Joys Celestial flow
In an Eternal Stream.
The Pleasures that the Smiling Day
With large Right hand bestows,
Falsely her Left conveys away
And shuffles in our Woes.
So have I seen a Mother play
And Cheat her Silly Child,
She gave and took a Toy away,
The Infant cried, and smiled.
V.
Airy Chance and Iron Fate
Hurry and Vex our Mortal State,
And all the Race of Ills create;
Now fiery Joy, now sullen Grief
Commands the Reins of Human Life,
The Wheels impetuous roll;
The harnest Hours and Minutes strive,
And Days with stretching Pinions drive
down fiercely on the Goal.
VI.
Not half so fast the Gally flies
Over the Venetian Sea,
When Sails and Oars and laboring Skies
Contend to make her Way.
Swift Wings for all the flying Hours
The God of Time prepares,
They rest lie still yet in their Nest
And grow for future Years.
TO Thomas Gunston Esquire
1700.
Happy Solitude.
Casimire Book 4. Ode 12. Imitated. Quid me latentem, etc.
I.
THE noisy World complains of me
That I should shun their Sight, and flee
Visits, and Crowds and Company.
GUNSTON, the Lark dwells in her Nest
Until she mount the Skies;
And in my Closet I could rest
Till to the Heavens I rise.
II.
Yet they will urge, "This private Life
"Can never make you Blessed,
"And twenty Doors are still at Strife
"TO engage you for a Guest?
Friend, should you see the Louvre, or Whitehall
Open their Royal Gates, and call,
And wait for WATTS to come,
He has no Business there at all
Who finds so much at Home.
III.
When I within my self retreat,
I shut my Doors against the Great;
My busy Eyeballs inward roll,
And there with large survey I see
All the wide Theater of Me,
And view the various Scenes of my retiring Soul;
There I walk over the Mazes I have trod,
While Hope and Fear are in a doubtful Strife
Whether this Opera of Life
Be acted well to gain the Plaudit of my God.
IV.
There Is a Day hastening, ('it is an Awful Day)
When the great Sovereign shall at large review
All that we speak and all we do,
The several Parts we act on this wide Stage of Clay:
These he approves, and those he blames,
And Crowns perhaps a Porter, and a Prince he Damns
O if the Judge from his tremendous Seat
Shall not condemn what I have done,
I shall be Happy though unknown,
Nor need the gazing Rabble, nor the shouting Street.
V.
I hate the Glory, Friend, that springs
From Vulgar Breath and empty Sound;
Fame mounts her upward with a Flattering Gale
Upon her Airy Wings
Till Envy Shoots, and Fame receives the Wound;
Then her flagging Pinions fail,
Down Glory falls and strikes the Ground
And breaks her battered Limbs.
Rather let me be quite concealed from Fame;
How happy I should lie
In Sweet Obscurity,
Nor the Loud World pronounce my little Name!
Here I could live and dye alone;
Or if Society be due
To keep our Taste of Pleasure new,
GVNSTON, I Would live and die with you,
For both our Souls are one.
VI.
Here we could sit and pass the pleasing Hour,
And Pity Kingdoms and their Kings,
And smile at all their shining Things,
Their Toys of State, and Images of Power;
Virtue should dwell within our Seat,
Virtue alone could make it sweet,
Nor is her self secure but in a close Retreat.
While she withdraws from public Praise
Envy perhaps would cease to rail,
Envy it self may innocently gaze
At Beauty in a Vail.
But if she once advance to Light,
Her Charms are lost in Envy's Sight,
And Virtue is the Mark of Universal Spite.
TO John Hartopp Esquire
THE Disdain of Sensual Joys.
1704.
HARTOPP, I love the Soul that dares
Tread the Temptations of his Years
Beneath his Youthful Feet:
FLEETWOOD and all thy Heavenly Line
Look through the Stars, and Smile Divine
Upon an Heir so Great.
Young HARTOPP knows this Noble Theme,
That the wild Scenes of Busy Life,
The Noise, the Amusements, and the Strife
Are but the Visions of the Night,
Gay Phantoms of delusive Light,
Or a Vexatious Dream.
II.
Flesh is the vilest and the least
Ingredient of our Frame,
We Are born to live above the Beast,
Or quit the Manly Name:
Pleasures of Sense we leave for Boys,
Be shining Dust the Miser's Food,
Let Fancy feed on Fame and Noise;
Souls must pursue Diviner Joys,
And seize the Immortal Good.
EPISTOLA. Fratri suo dilecto R. W. J. W. S. P. D.
RUrsum tuas, Amande Frater, Accepi Literas, eodem fortasse momento quo meae ad
te pervenerunt; Idemque qui te scribentem vidit Dies, meum ad Epistolare munus
excitavit Calamum; Non Inane est inter nos Fraternum nomen, unicus enim
Spiritus nos intus animat, agitque, and Concordes in ambobus efficit motus: O
Utinam crescat indies, and vigescat mutua Charitas; faxit Deus, ut amor sui
nostra incendat and defoecet pectora, tunc etenim and alternis purae Amicitiae
flammis erga nos invicem Divinum in modum ardebimus; Contemplemur JESUM
nostrum, Coeleste illud and adorandum Exemplar Charitatis. Ille est
Qui quondam aeterno delapsus ab Aethere Vultus
Induit Humanos, ut posset Corpore nostras
Heu miseras sufferre vices; Sponsoris obivit
Munia, and in sese Tabulae maledicta Minacis
Transtulit, and sceleris poenas hominisque reatu^.
Ecce jacet desertus humi, diffusus in herbam
Integer, innocuas versus sua sidera Palmas
Et placidum attollens Vultum, nec ad oscula Patries
Amplexus solitosve: Artus nudatus amictu
Sidereos, and sponte sinum patefactus ad Iras
Numinis armati. "Pater, hic infige Job 4. 6.
Sagittas,
"Haec, ait, iratum sorbebunt Pectora Ferrum,
"Abluat Aethereus mortalia Crimina Sanguis.
Dixit, and horrendum fremuerunt maenia Coeli
Infensusque Deus; (quem jam posuisse paternum
Musa queri vellet nomen, sed and ipsa fragores
Ad tantos pavefacta silet,) Jam dissilit Ether,
Pandunturque fores, ubi duro Carcere regnat
IRA, and Poenarum Thesauros mill coercet.
Inde ruunt gravidi vesano Sulphur Nimbi,
Centuplicisque volant contorta Volumina Flammae
In Caput immeritum; diro hic sub Pondere pressus
Restat, compressos dumque ardens explicat artus
Luc. 22. 44.
Purpureo Vestes tinctae sudore madescunt.
Nec tamen infando Vindex Regina labori
Segnius incumbit, sed lassos increpat Ignes
Acriter, and somno languentem suscitat Zec. 13. 7.
Ensem:
"Surge, age, Divinum pete Pectus, and imbue sacro
"Flumine mucronem; Vos hinc, mea Spicula, late
"Ferrea per totum dispergite tormina Christum,
"Immensum tolerare valet: Ad pondera Poenae
"Sustentanda hominem suffulciet Incola Numen.
"Et tu sacra Decas Legum, Violata Tabella,
"Ebibe Vindictam; vasta satiabere caede,
"Mortalis Culpae pensabit dedecus ingens
"Permistus Deitate Cruor --
Sic fata, immiti contorquet Vulnera Dextra
Dilaniatque Sinus, Sancti penetralia Cordis
Panduntur, saevis avidus Dolor involat alis,
Atque audax Mentem Scrutatur, and Ilia mordet.
Interea Servator 2 Col. 15.
Ovat, Victorque Doloris
Eminet, Illustri 22 Luc. 44.
perfusus membra Cruore,
Exultatque Miser fieri; nam fortius illum
Urget Patris honos, and non vincenda Voluptas
Servandi miseros Sontes. O Nobilis Ardor
Poenarum! O quid non Mortalia pectora cogis
Durus amor? Quid non Coelestia? --
At subsidat Phantasia, vanescant Imagines, Nescio quo me proripuit amens Musa;
Volui quatuor lineas pedibus astringere, and Ecce! Numeri crescunt in immensum,
dumque concitato Genio laxavi fraena, Vereor ne juvenilis Impetus Theologiam
laeserit, and audax nimis Imaginatio. Heri ad me allata est Epistola indicans
Matrem meliuscule se habere, licet Ignis febrilis non prorsus deseruit mortale
ejus Domicilium. Plura volui, sed turgidi and crescentes versus noluere plura,
and coarctarunt Scriptionis limits. Vale, Amice Frater, and in stadio pietatis
and artis Medicae strenuus decurre. Datum a Musaeo meo Londini, xv. Kalend.
Febr. Anno salutis MDCXCIII.
TO Dr. JOHN SPEED of Southampton.
An EPISTLE, Occasioned by his Ingenious Satyr on the Dissenters, mingled with
his Encomium of Mr. Lloyd's Paraphrase on Solomon's Song, printed in 8 vo. 1682.
TRUE Son of Phoebus, Heir to his Tuneful Quill,
His murdering Arrows, and his healing Skill:
Thy Bills his Medicines are, his Lyre thy Song,
Thine Heart his Quiver, and his Bow thy Tongue:
Neque sempec arcum Tendit Apollo. Horat. lib. 2. Od. 10.
But here is no Python: Sooth thine Arms a while,
And charm thy stately Rigor to a Smile,
For Schism prevails no more; we love to see
Our Words and Lines in Couplings well agree
Nor do we thus abhor Conformity.
Hymns may be soft and smooth and comely Dressed
With humane Art, nor savor of the Beast,
A Lyrick Ode submits to Godly Notes;
Harmonious Words no more offend our Throats.
Nor Rhyme, nor Tune, nor Sacred Sense confines
The Spirit, Freedom flows in tuneful Lines,
And Conscience feels the Pleasure, nor complains
Of Impositions, Prisons, Bonds, and Chains,
Whilst pure Devotion sings and ANNE the Indulgent Reigns.
Then, Sir, Submit with Joy thine Iron Style
To the soft Polish of a gentle File;
The Courteous Muse shines brightest; and it is fit
Apollo's Heir should deal in kinder Wit.
SPEED to his Lute in Artful Numbers sings
Melodious; till his Angry Bow he brings
Across the Chorded Shell, and hurts the gentler Strings.
Ad Reverendum Virum Dom. Johannem Pinhorne, Fidum pueritiae meae Praeceptorem.
Pindarici Carminis Specimen.
1694.
I.
ET te, PINORNI, Musa Trisantica
Salutat, ardens discipulam tuam
Grate fateri: Nunc Athenas,
Nunc Latias per amaenitates
Tuto pererrans te recolit Ducem,
Te quondam teneros and Ebraia per aspera gressus
Duxisse fida manu.
Tuo patescunt lumine Thespii
Campi atque ad arcem Pierid^^ iter.
En altus assurgens Homerus
Arma Deosque Virosque miscens
Occupat Aethereum Parnassi culmen: Homeri
Immensos stupeo Manes --
Te, Maro dulce canens sylvas, te bella sonantem
Ardua, da veniam tenui venerare Camoena;
Tuaeque accipias, Thebane Vates,
Debita Thura Lyrae.
Vobis, magna Trias! clarissima Nomina, semper
Scrinia nostra patent, and Pectora nostra patebunt,
Quum mihi cunque levem concesserit otia and horam
Divina Mosis pagina.
II.
Flaccus ad hanc Triadem ponatur, at ipse pudendas
Deponat Veneres: Venias, sed Horat. Lib. 1. Sat. 6.
purus and Insons
Ut te collaudem, dum sordes and mala lustra
Ablutus, Venusine, canis ridesve. Recisae
Hac lege accedant Satyrae Juvenalis, amari
Terrores vitiorum. At long caecus abesset
Persius, obscurus Vates, nisi lumina circumscidisses.
Fusa forent, Sphingisque aenigmata, Bond,
Grande sonans Senecae Fulmen, grandisque Cothurni
Pompa Sophoclei celso ponantur eodem
Ordine, and ambabus simul hos amplectar in ulnis.
Tuto, Poetae, tuto habitabitis
Pictos abacos: Improba Tinea
Obiit, nec audet saeva castas
Attingere Blatta Camaenas.
At tu renidens foeda Epigrammatum
Farrago inertum, stercoris impii
Sentina soetens, Martialis,
In Barathrum relegandus imum
Aufuge, and hinc tecum rapias Catullum
Insulse mollem, naribus, auribus
Ingrata castis carmina, and improbi
Spurcos Nasonis Amores.
III.
Nobilis extrema gradiens Caledonis ab ora
En Buchananus adest. Divini Psaltis Imago
Jessiadae Salveto; potens seu Numinis Iras
Fulminibus miscere, sacro vel lumine Mentis
Fugare noctes, vel Citharae sono
Sedare fluctus Pectoris.
Tu mihi haerebis comes ambulanti,
Tu domi astabis socius perennis,
Nunc Mensae tenui simul assidere
Dignabere, nunc Lecticae.
Mox recumbentis vigilans ad aurem
Aureos suadebis inire Somnos
Sacra sopitis superinferens oblivia curis.
Stet juxta M. Casimirus Sarbiewski Poeta insign is Polonus.
Casimirus, huic nec parcius Ignem
Natura indulsit, nec Musa armavit Alumnum
M. Casimirus Sarbiewski Poeta insign is Polonus.
Sarbivium rudiore Lyra.
Quanta Polonum levat aura Cygnum!
Od. 5. Lib. 2.
Humana linquens (en sibi devii
Montes recedunt) luxuriantibus
Spatiatur in aere pennis.
Seu tu forte Virum tollis ad aethera,
Cognatosve Thronos and patrium Polum
Visurus consurgis ovans,
Visum fatigas, aciemque fallis,
Dum tuum a long stupeo volatum
O non Imitabilis Ales.
IV.
Sarbivii ad nomen gelida incalet
Musa, simul totus fervescere
Sentio, Stellatas levis induor
Alas and tollor in altum.
Jam juga Zionis radens pede
Elato inter sidera vertice
Long despecto mortalia.
Quam juvat altisonis volitare per aethera pennis,
Et ridere procul fallacia Gaudia secli
Terrellae Grandia inania,
Quae mortale genus (heu male) deperit.
O Curas hominum miseras, Cano,
Et miseras nugas Diademata,
Ventosae sortis Ludibrium!
En mihi subsidunt Terrenae a pectore Faeces,
Gestit and effraenis divinum effundere Carme^
Men's afflata Deo --
-- At vos Heroes and Arma
Et procul este Dii, Ludicra Numina.
Quid mihi cum vestrae pondere Lanceae,
Pallas! aut vestris, Dionyse, Thyrsis?
Et Clava, and Anguis, and Leo, and Hercules,
Et brutum Tonitru fictitii Patris
Abstate a carmine nostro.
V.
Te, Deus Omnipotens! Te nostra sonabit Jesu
Musa, nec assueto coelestes Barbiton ausu
Tentabit numeros. Vasti sine limite Numenet
Immensum sine lege Deum numeri sine lege sonabunt.
Sed Musam magna pollicentem destituit vigor, Divino jubare perstringitur
oculorum acies: En labascit pennis, tremit artubus, ruit deorsum per inane
Aetheris, jacet victa, obstupescit, silet.
Ignoscas Reverende Vir vano conamini, fragmen hoc rude licet and impolitum
aequi boni Consulas, and gratitudinis jam diu debitae in partem reponas.
VOTUM. SEU Vita in terris beata. AD Virum Dignissimum Johannem Hartoppium
Baronettum. 1702.
I.
HARTOPPI, longo stemmate nobilis
Venaque Ingenii divite, si roges
Quem mea Musa beat,
Ille mihi Felix ter and amplius,
Et similes superis annos agit
Qui sibi sufficiens semper adest sibi.
Hunc long a curis mortalibus
Inter agros, sylvasque silentes
Se Musisque suis tranquilla in pace fruentem
Sol oriens videt and recumbens.
II.
Non suae Vulgi favor insolentis
(Plausus insani vacuus popelli)
Mentis ad sacram penetrabit arcem
Feriat licet aethera clamor.
Nec Gaza flammans divitis Indiae,
Nec, Tage, vestrae fulgor Arenulae
Ducent ab obscura quiet
Ad laquear radiantis Aulae.
III.
O si daretur stamina proprii
Tractare fusi pollice proprio,
Atque meum mihi fingere Fatum;
Candidus vitae color innocentis
Fila nativo decoraret Albo
Non Tyria; vitiata concha.
Non aurum, non gemma nitens, nec purpura telae
Intertexta forent invidiosa meae.
Long a Triumphis, and sonitu Tubae
Long remotos transigerem dies,
Abstate Fasces, splendida Vanitas,
Et vos abstate, Coronae.
IV.
Pro meo tecto casa sit, salubres
Captet Auroras, procul Urbis atro
Distet a fumo, fugiatque long
Dura Pthisis mala, dura Tussis.
Displicet Byrsa, and fremitu molesto
Turba Mercantum; gratius alvear
Demulcet aures murmr, gratius
Fons salientis aquae.
V.
Litigiosa Fori me terrent jurgia, lenes
Ad Sylvas properans rixosas execror arts
Eminus in tuto a Linguis --
Blandimenta artis simul aequus odi,
Valete, Cives! and amaena Fraudis
Verba; proh Mores! and inane Sacri
Nomen Amici!
VI.
Tuque, quae nostris inimica Musis
Fell sacratum vitias amorem,
Absis aeternum, Diva libidinis,
Et Pharetrate Puer!
Hinc hinc, Cupido, longius avola,
Nil mihi cum foedis, Puer, ignibus,
Aetherea fervent face pectora,
Sacra mihi Venus est Urania,
Et juvenis Jessaeus Amor mihi.
VII.
Coeleste carmen (nec taceat lyra
Jessaea) laetis auribus insonet,
Nec Watsianis e medullis
Ulla dies rapiet vel hora.
Sacri Libelli deliciae meae,
Et vos, Sodales, semper amabiles,
Nunc simul adsitis, nunc vicissim,
Et fallite taedia vitae.
A Funeral POEM ON Thomas Gunston Esquire
Presented to The Right Honorable The Lady ABNEY Lady Mayoress of London. July
1701.
MADAM,
HAD I been a common Mourner at the Funeral of the Dear Gentleman deceased, I
should have labored after more of Art in the following Composition to supply
the defect of Nature and to feign a Sorrow; but the uncommon Condescension of
his Friendship to Me, the Inward Esteem I pay his Memory, and the vast and
tender Sense I have of our Loss make all the Methods of Art needless, whilst
natural Grief supplies more than all.

I had resolved indeed to lament in Sighs and Silence, and frequently checked
the forward Muse when she brought me Grief in Numbers, and urged me to a
tuneful Mourning; but the Importunity was not to be resisted: Long Lines of
Sorrow flowed in upon my Fancy 'ere I was aware, whilst I took many a Solitary
Walk in the Garden adjoining to his Seat at Newington: Nor could I free my self
from the Melancholy Idea's that crowded themselves upon me, and your Ladyship
will find throughout the Poem that the fair and unfinished Building which he
had just raised for himself gave almost all the turns of Mourning to my
Thoughts, for I pursue no other Topics of Elegy then what my Passion and my
Senses led me to.

The Poem roves as my Eyes and Thoughts did, from one part of the Fabric to
the other: It rises from the Foundation, salutes the Walls, the Doors, and the
Windows, drops a Tear upon the Roof, and climbs the Turret that dear Retreat,
where I promised my self many sweet Hours of his Conversation; there my Song
wanders amongst the delightful Subjects Divine and Moral which used to
Entertain our happy leisure, and thence flings her self down to the Fields and
the Shady Walks where I so often enjoyed his pleasing Discourse, and my Sorrows
diffuse themselves there without a limit: I had quite forgotten what I was
writing, till I correct my self and rise to the Turret again to lament that
Desolate Seat, and how vainly shines the Golden Ball that Crowns it: Thus I
have written without rule and with a negligence becoming Woe unfeigned.

Had I designed a complete Elegy on your Dearest Brother and intended it for
public View, I should have followed the usual Forms of Poetry, spent whole
Pages in the Character and Praises of the Deceased, and thence took occasion to
call Mankind to Complain aloud of the Universal and Unspeakable Loss: But I
wrote merely for my self as a Friend of the Dead and to ease my full Soul by
breathing out my own Complaint: I knew his Character and Virtues so well that
there was no need to mention 'em while I talked only with my self, for the
Image of them was ever present with me, which kept my Sorrow lively and my
Tears flowing with my Numbers.

Perhaps your Ladyship will expect some Divine Thoughts and Sacred Meditations
mingled with a Subject so solemn as this is: Had I formed a Design of offering
it to your Hands I had composed a more Christian Poem: But 'twas Grief purely
natural for a Death so surprising that drew all the Lines of it, and therefore
my highest Reflections are but of a Moral Strain; Such as it is, your Ladyship
requires a Copy of it, but let it not touch your Soul too tenderly, nor renew
your own Mournings. Receive it, Madam, as a Sacrifice of Love and Tears offered
at the Tomb of a Departed Friend, and let it abide with you as a Witness of
that Affectionate Respect and Honor that I bore him, all which as your
Ladyships most rightful Due both by Merit and Succession, is now humbly offered
by

MADAM, Your Ladyships most Hearty and Obedient Servant, I. Watts.

TO THE Dear Memory of my Honored Friend Thomas Gunston Esquire Who Died November
11. 1700. When he had just Finished his Seat at NEWINGTON.
OF blasted Hopes and of short withering Joys
Sing Heavenly Muse. Try thine Ethereal Voice
In Funeral Numbers and a doleful Song;
GUNSTON the Just, the Generous, and the Young,
GUNSTON the Friend is dead. O Empty Name
Of Earthly Bliss! It Is all an Airy Dream,
All a Vain Thought! Our Soaring Fancies rise
On treacherous Wings; and Hopes that touch the Skies
Drag but a longer Ruin through the downward Air,
And plunge the falling Joy but deeper in Despair.
How did our Souls stand flattered and prepared
To shout him welcome to the Seat he reared!
There the Dear Man should see his Hopes Complete,
Smiling and tasting every lawful Sweet
That Peace and Plenty brings, while numerous Years
Rolled happy Circles round the Joyful Spheres:
Revolving Suns should still renew his strength,
And draw the uncommon Thread to an unusual Length.
But hasty Fate thrusts her dread Shears between,
Cuts the Young Life off, and shuts up the Scene*
Thus Airy Pleasure dances in our Sight
And spreads fair Images of Gay Delight
TO allure our Souls, till just within our Arms
The Vision dies, and all the painted Charms
Flee quick away from the pursuing Sight,
Till they are lost in Shades, and mingle with the Night.
Muse, stretch thy Wings and thy sad Journey bend
To the fair The House.
Fabric that thy Dying Friend
Built Nameless: 'Twill suggest a thousand things
Mournful and Soft as my Urania Sings.
How did he lay the deep The Foundations.
Foundations strong,
Marking the Bounds, and rear the The Walls.
Walls along
Solid and Lasting; there a numerous Train
Of Happy GUNSTON's might in Pleasure reign
While Nations perish and long Ages run,
Nations unborn, and Ages unbegun:
Not Time it self should waste the Blessed Estate,
Nor the Tenth Race rebuild the Ancient Seat:
How fond our Fancies are! The Founder Dies
Childless: His Sisters weep, and close his Eyes,
And wait upon his Hearse with never-ceasing Cries.
Lofty and Slow it moves unto the Tomb,
While weighty Sorrow nods on every Plume;
A Thousand Groans his dear Remains convey
To his cold Lodging in a Bed of Clay,
His Countries Sacred Tears well-watering all the Way.
See the dull Wheels roll on the Sable Load,
But no dear Son to tread the Mournful Road,
And fondly kind drop his young Sorrows there,
The Father's Urn bedewing with a Filial Tear.
O had he left us One behind to play
Wanton about the Painted The Hall.
Hall, and say
" This was my Father's, with Impatient Joy
In my fond Arms I Would clasp't the Smiling Boy,
And called him my Young Friend: But Awful Fate
Designed the mighty Stroke as lasting as 'twas great.
And must this Building then, this costly Frame
Stand here for Strangers? Must some unknown Name
Possess these The Rooms.
Rooms, the Labors of my Friend?
Why were these Walls raised for this hapless End?
Why these Apartments all adorned so Gay?
Why his rich Fancy lavish't thus away?
Muse, view the The Paintings.
Paintings, how the hovering Light
Plays over the Colors in a wanton Flight,
And mingled Shades wrought in by soft Degrees
Give a sweet Foyl to all the Charming Piece;
But Night, Eternal Night hangs black around
The dismal Chambers of the hollow Ground,
And Solid Shades unmingled round his Bed
Stand Hideous: Earthy Fogs embrace his Head,
And noysom Vapors glide along his Face
Rising perpetual. Muse, forsake the place,
Flee the raw Damps of the unwholesome Clay,
Look to his Airy spacious Hall, and say
How has he changed it for a loathsome Cave,
Confined and Crowded in a narrow Grave!
The Unhappy House looks desolate and mourns,
And every The Doors.
Door groans doleful as it turns;
The Pillars languish, and each lofty Wall
Stately in Grief, laments the Master's Fall
In drops of Briny Dew; the Fabric bears
His faint Resemblance and renews my Tears.
Solid and square it rises from below;
A Noble Air without a Gaudy Show
Reigns through the Model, and adorns the Whole,
Manly and Plain just like the Builders Soul.
O how I love to view the Stately Frame,
That dear Memorial of the best-lov'd Name!
Then could I wish for some prodigious Cave
Vast as his Seat, and silent as his Grave,
Where the tall Shades stretch to the hideous Roof,
Forbid the Day, and guard the Sunbeams off;
Thither, my willing Feet, should ye be drawn
At the gray Twilight, and the early Dawn;
There sweetly sad should my soft Minutes roll,
Numbering the Sorrows of my drooping Soul.
But these are Airy Thoughts! Substantial Grief
Grows by those Objects that should yield Relief;
Fond of my Woes I heave my Eyes around,
My Grief from every Prospect courts a Wound;
Views the green Gardens, views the Smiling Skies,
Still my Heart sinks, and still my Cares arise;
My wandering Feet round the dear Mansion rove,
And there to sooth my Sorrows I indulge my Love.
Often have I laid the Awful Calvin by,
And the sweet Cowley, with Impatient Eye
To see those Walls, pay the sad Visit there,
And drop the Tribute of an hourly Tear:
Still I behold some Melancholy Scene,
With many a Pensive Thought, and many a Sigh between.
Two Days ago we took the Evening Air,
I, and my Grief, and my Urania there;
Say, my Urania, how the Western Sun
Broke from Black Clouds, and in full Glory shone
Gilding the Roof, then dropped into the Sea,
And sudden Night devoured the sweet remains of Day
Thus the dear Youth just reared his shining Head
From Obscure Shades of Life, and sunk among (...) Dead.
The rising Sun adorned with all his Light
Smiles on these Walls again: But endless Night
Reigns uncontrolled where the dear GUNSTON lies,
He Is set for ever, and must never rise.
Then why these Beams, Unseasonable Star,
These lightsome Smiles descending from afar
To greet a Mourning House? In vain the Day
Breaks through the The Windows.
Windows with a joyful Ray,
And marks a shining Path along the Floors
Bounding the Evening and the Morning Hours;
In vain it bounds 'em: While vast Emptiness
And hollow Silence reigns through all the Place,
Nor heeds the cheerful change of Nature's Face.
Yet Natures Wheels will on without control,
The Sun will rise, the tuneful Spheres will roll,
And the two Nightly Bears walk round and watch the Pole.
See while I speak, high on her Sable Wheel
Old Night comes rolling up the Eastern Hill:
Troops of dark Clouds prepare her way; behold,
How their brown Pinions Edged with Evening Gold
Spread Shaddowing over the House, and glide away
Slowly pursuing the declining Day;
Over the broad The Roof.
Roof they fly their Circuit still,
Thus Days before they did, and Days to come they will;
But the Black Cloud that Shaddows over his Eyes
Hangs there immovable, and never flies:
Fain would I bid the Envious Gloom be gone,
Ah fruitless Wish! how are his Curtains drawn
For a long Evening that despairs the Dawn!
Muse, view the The Turret.
Turret: Just beneath the Skies
Lonesome it stands, and fixes both mine Eyes
As it would ask a Tear. O Sacred Seat,
Sacred to Friendship! O Divine Retreat!
Here did I hope my happy Hours to employ,
And fed beforehand on the promised Joy,
When weary of the noisy Town, my Friend
From Mortal Cares retiring should ascend
And lead me thither. We Our Conversation there.
alone would sit,
Free and secure of all Intruding Feet:
Our Thoughts should stretch their longest Wings and rise,
Nor bound their Soarings by the lower Skies:
Our Tongues should aim at everlasting Themes,
And speak what Mortals dare, of all the Names
Of Boundless Joys and Glories, Thrones, and Seats
Built high in Heaven for Souls: We'd trace the Streets
Of Golden Pavement, walk each happy Field,
And climb and taste the Fruits the spicy Mountains yield:
Then would we swear to keep the Sacred Road,
And walk right upwards to the blessed Abode:
We'd charge our parting Spirits there to meet,
There Hand in Hand approach the Almighty's Seat'
And bend our Heads adoring at our Maker's Feet.
Thus should we mount on bold adventrous Wings,
In high Discourse, and dwell on Heavenly things,
While the pleased Hours in sweet Succession move,
And Minutes measured as they are above
By ever-circling Joys, and ever-shining Love.
Anon our Thoughts should lower their lofty Flight,
Sink by degrees, and take a pleasing Sight
A large round Prospect of the spreading Plain,
The Wealthy River, and his Winding Train,
The Smoaky City, and the Busy Men.
How we should smile to see degenerate Worms
Lavish their Lives, and fight for Airy Forms
Of Painted Honor, Dreams of empty sound,
Till Envy rise, and shoot a secret Wound
At swelling Glory; strait the Bubble breaks,
And the Scenes vanish as the Man awakes:
Then the tall Titles Insolent and Proud
Sink to the Dust, and mingle with the Crowd.
Man is a restless Thing: Still vain and wild,
Lives beyond Sixty, nor outgrows the Child:
His hurrying Lusts still break the Sacred Bound,
To seek new Pleasures on forbidden Ground,
And buy them all too dear. Unthinking Fool,
For a short dying Joy to sell a Deathless Soul!
It Is but a Grain of Sweetness they can Sow,
And reap the long sad Harvest of Immortal Woe.
Another Tribe toil in a different Strife,
And banish all the lawful Sweets of Life
To sweat and dig for Gold, to hoard the Oar,
Hide the dear Dust yet darker than before,
And never dare to use a Grain of all the Store.
Happy the Man that knows the Value just
Of Earthly Things, nor is enslaved to Dust.
It Is a rich Gift the Skies but rarely send
To Favorite Souls. Then happy thou, my Friend,
For thou had learnt to Manage and Command
The Wealth that Heaven bestowed with Liberal Hand:
Hence this fair Structure rose; and hence this Seat
Made to invite my not unwilling Feet;
In vain 'twas made! for We shall never meet,
And Smile, and Love, and Bless each other here,
The Envious Tomb forbids thy Face to appear,
Detains thee GVNSTON from my longing Eyes,
And all my hopes lie buried where my GVNSTON lies.
Come hither all ye tenderest Souls that know
The heights of Fondness and the depths of Woe,
Young Mothers, who your darling Babes have found
Untimely Murd'red with a ghastly Wound;
Ye frighted Nymphs, who on the Bridal Bed,
Claspt in your Arms your Lovers Cold and Dead,
Come; in the Pomp of all your wild Despair
With flowing Eyelids and disordered Hair,
Death in your Looks; come mingle Grief with me,
And drown your little Streams in my unbounded Sea.
You Sacred Mourners of a Nobler Mould
Born for a Friend, whose dear Embraces hold
Beyond all Natures Ties; you that have known
Two happy Souls made intimately One,
And felt a parting Stroke, it is you must tell
The Smart, the Twinges, and the Racks I feel:
This Soul of mine that dreadsul Wound has born,
Off from its Side its dearest Half is torn,
The Rest lies bleeding, and but lives to mourn.
Oh Infinite Distress! Such raging Grief
Should command Pity, and despair Relief.
Passion methinks should rise from all my Groans,
Give Sense to Rocks, and Sympathy to Stones.
Ye dusky The adjacent Country.
Woods and ecchoing Hills around
Repeat my Cries with a perpetual Sound:
Be all ye flowery Vales with Thorns o'regrown,
Assist my Sorrows, and declare your own,
Alas! your Lord is dead. The humble Plain
Must never receive his Courteous Feet again:
Mourn ye gay smiling Meadows, and be seen
In Wintry Robes instead of Youthful Green:
And bid the The Brook.
Brook that still runs warbling by
Move silent on, and weep his useless Channel dry.
Hither methinks the lowing Herds should come,
And moaning Turtles murmur over his Tomb:
The Oak should wither, and the curling The Trees.
Vine
Weep his Young Life out, while his Arms untwine
Their Amorous Folds, and mix his Bleeding Soul with mine.
Ye stately Elms in your long Order mourn,
Strip off your Pride to dress your Master's Urn:
Here gently drop your Leaves instead of Tears;
Ye Elms, the Reverend Growth of Ancient Years,
Stand tall and naked to the Blustering Rage
Of the mad Winds; thus it becomes your Age
To show your Sorrows. Often ye have seen
Our Heads reclined upon the rising Green;
Beneath your Sacred Shade diffused we lay,
Here Friendship reigned with an unbounded sway:
Hither our Souls their constant Offerings brought,
The Burdens of the Breast, and Labors of the Thought;
Our opening Bosoms on the Conscious Ground
Spread all the Sorrows, all the Joys we found,
And mingled every Care; nor was it known
Which of the Pains or Pleasures were our own;
Then with an equal Hand and honest Soul
We share the Heap; yet both possess the Whole,
And all the Passions there through both our Bosoms roll.
By turns We Comfort, and by turns Complain,
And Bear and Ease by turns the Sympathy of Pain.
Friendship! Mysterious Thing, what Magic Powers
Support thy Sway, and charm these Minds of ours?
Bound to thy Foot we boast our Birthright still,
And dream of Freedom when we have lost our Will,
And changed away our Souls: At thy Command
We snatch new Miseries from a Foreign Hand
To call them ours, and thoughtless of our Ease
Plague the dear Self that we were born to please.
Thou Tyranness of Minds, whose Cruel Throne
Heaps on poor Mortals Sorrows not their own;
As though our Mother Nature could no more
Find Woes sufficient for each Son she bore,
Friendship divides the Shares, and lengthens out the Store.
Yet are we fond of thine Imperious Reign,
Proud of the Slavery, wanton in our Pain,
And chide the courteous Hand when Death dissolves the Chain.
Virtue, forgive the Thought! The raving Muse
Wild and despairing knows not what she does,
Grows mad in Grief, and in her Savage Hours
Affronts the Name she Loves and she adores.
She is thy Votaress too; and at thy Shrine
O Sacred Friendship! offered Songs Divine
While GUNSTON lived, and both our Souls were thine.
Here to these Shades at solemn Hours we came
To pay Devotion with a mutual Flame,
And rolled in Pleasures, while the Evening Breeze
Fanned the Leaves gently, sporting through the Trees,
And the declining Sun with sloping Wheels
Rolled down the Golden Day behind the Western Hills.
Mourn ye young The Gardens.
Gardens, ye unfinish't Gates,
Ye Green Enclosures and ye growing Sweets,
Lament, for ye our Midnight Hours have known,
And watched us walking by the silent Moon
In Conference Divine, while Heavenly Fire
Kindling our Breasts did all our Thoughts inspire
With Joys almost Immortal; then our Zeal
Blazed and burnt high to reach the Ethereal Hill,
And Love refined like that above the Poles
Threw both our Arms round one another Souls
In Rapture and Embraces. Oh forbear,
Forbear, my Song! this is too much to hear,
Too dreadful to repeat; such Joys as these
Fled from the Earth for ever!
Oh for a general Grief! let all things share
Our Woes that knew our Loves. The Neighboring The Air.
Air
Let it be laden with Immortal Sighs,
And tell the Gales, that every Breath that flies
Over these Fields should murmur and complain,
And kiss the fading Grass, and propagate the Pain*
Weep all ye Buildings, and ye The Groves.
Groves around
For ever Weep, This is an endless Wound
Vast and Incurable. Ye Buildings knew
His Silver Tongue, ye Groves have heard it too:
At that dear Sound no more shall ye rejoice,
And I no more must hear the Charming Voice,
Woe to my drooping Soul! that Heavenly Breath
That could speak Life lies now congealed in Death;
While on his folded Lips all Cold and Pale
Eternal Chains and heavy silence dwell.
Yet my fond Hope would hear him speak again;
Once more at least, one gentle Word; and then
GUNSTON aloud I call: In vain I cry
GUNSTON aloud; for he must never reply.
In vain I mourn, and drop these Funeral Tears,
Death and the Grave have neither Eyes nor Ears:
Wandering I tune my Sorrows to the Groves,
And vent my swelling Griefs, and tell the Winds our Loves;
While the dear Youth Sleeps fast and hears 'em not;
He has forgot me: In the lonesome Vault
Mindless of WATTS and Friendship there he lies
Deaf and Unthinking Clay.
But whither am I led? This Artless Grief
Hurries the Muse on obstinate and deaf
To all the nicer Rules, and bears her down
From the tall Fabric to the Neighboring Ground:
The pleasing Hours and the dear Moments past
In these sweet Fields reviving on my Taste
Snatch me away resistless with Impetuous have.
Spread thy strong Pinions once again my Song,
And reach the The Turret.
Turret thou have left so long:
Over the wide Roof its lofty Head it rears,
Waiting for our Converse; but only hears
The noisie Tumults of the Realms on high;
The Winds salute it Whistling as they fly,
Or jarring round the Windows; Rattling Showers
Lash the fair Sides, above loud Thunder roars,
But still the Master Sleeps; nor hears the Voice
Of Sacred Friendship, nor the Tempests noise:
An Iron Slumber sits on every Sense,
In vain the Heavenly Thunders strice to rouse it thence.
One Labor more, my Muse, the Golden The Golden Ball.
Sphere
Seems to demand: See through the Dusky Air
Downward it shines upon the rising Moon,
And as she labors up to reach her Noon,
The Ball pursues her Orb with streaming Light,
And shoots a Golden Day on the Pale Queen of Night:
But not one Beam can reach the darksome Grave,
Or pierce the solid Gloom that fills the Cave
Where GUNSTON dwells in Death. My waking Eyes
Saw the last Midnight reigning over the Skies,
And Old Boots drove his shining Carr
Through the Midheaven: Behold the Glittering Sphere
Bright as a Burning Meteor born on high,
Or some new Comet gla^ing through the Sky
It flamed and mingled with the larger Stars;
In vain (said I) the Golden Comet Glares,
In vain it stands; while with a dismal Fall
He sunk beneath the Ground that raised the Lofty Ball.
Now let me call the Joyful Day to mind;
'Twas a fair Morning; and the Blustering Wind
Slept in its peaceful Caverns, while he came
Gazing and pleased to see the Noble Frame
Crowned with that shining Orb. "Stand there, he cries,
"Thou little Emblem of the boundless Skies
"Whither my Soul with fiery Passion tends;
The Emblem stands; and tells surviving Friends
Of the bright Palace and the Golden Throne
Where the Dear GUNSTON's better part is gone:
His eager Thoughts bent on their shining way
Let the Clay drop to mingle with the Clay;
But his great Soul beyond the Stars is fled:
Then why, my Heart, why should we Mourn him Dead?
Strangely, my Thoughts, ye let this cozening Grief
With a false Name impose on your Belief:
It saw the Flesh sink down with closing Eyes
To the cold Earth, and cried, it is GUNSTON Dies:
Mistaken Grief! to call the Flesh the Friend!
The Heavenly Court saw the Bright Youth ascend,
Flew to embrace him with Immortal Love,
And sung his Welcome to the Seats above.
The Building firm, and all the Mansions bright,
The Roof high-Vaulted with Ethereal Light:
Beauty and Strength on the tall Bulwarks Sat
In Heavenly Diamond: And for every Gate
On Golden Hinges a broad Ruby turns,
Guards off the Foe, and as it moves it burns.
Millions of Glories Reign through every part;
Infinite Power and Uncreated Art
Stand here displayed, and to the Stranger show
How it out-shines the Noblest Seats below;
The Stranger just looked down, and Smiled upon 'em too.
Come, my Urania, leave the doleful Strain,
Let Heavenly Notes resume their Joys again;
In Everlasting Numbers sing, and say,
" GUNSTON the Friend lives still, and wipe our Tears away.
AN ELEGY ON THE Reverend Mr. Tho. Gouge.
TO Mr. Arthur Shallett Merchant.
Worthy SIR,
THE Subject of the following Elegy was high in your Esteem and enjoyed a large
share of your Affections. Scarce does his Memory need the Assistance of the
Muse to make it perpetual, But when She can at once pay her Honors to the
Venerable Dead, and by this Address acknowledge the Favors She has received
from the Living, it is a double Pleasure to

SIR, Your obliged humble Servant,

TO THE MEMORY OF THE Reverend Mr. Tho. Gouge, Who Died January 8. 1699/1700.
I.
YE Virgin Souls, whose Sweet Complaint
Could teach Psalm Cxxxvii.
Euphrates not to flow,
Could Lam: 1. 2, 3.
Sion's Ruin so Divinely Paint
Arrayed in Beauty and in Woe;
Awake, ye Virgin Souls, to mourn,
And with your Tuneful Sorrows dress a Prophet's Urn.
O could my Lips, or Flowing Eyes
But imitate such Charming Grief,
I Would teach the Seas, and teach the Skies
Wailings, and Sobs, and Sympathies,
Nor should the Stones, or Rocks be deaf;
Rocks shall have Eyes, and Stones have Ears,
While GOUGE's Death is Mourned in Melody and Tears.
II.
Heaven was impatient of our Crimes,
And sent his Minister of Death
To Scourge the bold Rebellion of the Times,
And to demand our Prophet's Breath;
He came commissioned for the Fates
Of Awful MEAD, and Charming BATES,
There he essayed the Vengeance first,
Then took a dismal Aim and brought great GOUGE to Dust.
III.
Great GOUGE to Dust! How Doleful is the Sound?
How vast the Stroke is? And how wide the Wound?
Yes, it is a vast uncommon Death,
Yes, it is a Wound unmeasurably wide;
No Vulgar Mortal Died
When he resigned his Breath.
The Muse that Mourns a Nations Fall
Should wait at GOVGE's Funeral,
Should mingle Majesty and Groans
Such as she Sings to sinking Thrones,
And in deep-sounding Numbers tell
How Sion trembled when this Pillar fell.
Sion grows Weak, and England Poor,
Nature her self with all her Store
Can furnish such a Pomp for Death no more.
IV.
The Reverend Man let all things mourn;
Sure he was some Ethereal Mind,
Fated in Flesh to be confined,
And ordered to be Born.
His Soul was of the Angelick frame,
The same Ingredients, and the Mould the same,
When the Creator makes a Minister of Flame;
He was all formed of Heavenly Things,
Mortals, believe what my Urania Sings,
For she has seen him rise upon his Flamy Wings.
V.
How would he mount, how would he fly,
Up through the Ocean of the Sky
Towered the Celestial Coast!
With what amazing swiftness soar
Till Earth's dark Ball was seen no more
And all its Mountains lost.
Scarce could the Muse pursue him with her Sight,
But, Angels, you can tell,
For often you met his Wondrous Flight,
And knew the Stranger well;
Say, how he past the radiant Spheres
And visited your happy Seats,
And traced the well known Turnings of the Golden Streets,
And walked among the Stars.
VI.
Tell how he climbed the Everlasting Hills
Surveying all the Realms above,
Born on a Strong-wing'd Faith, and on the Fiery Wheels
Of an Immortal Love.
'Twas there he took a glorious Sight
Of the Inheritance of Saints in Light,
And read their Title in their Savior's Right.
How often the humble Scholar came,
And to your Songs he raised his Ears
To learn the Unutterable Name,
To view the Eternal Base that bears
The New Creations Frame.
The Countenance of God he saw
Full of Mercy, full of Awe,
The Glories of his Power, and Glories of his Grace:
There he beheld the Wondrous Springs
Of those Eternal Sacred Things
The Peaceful Gospel and the Fiery Law
In that Majestic Face.
That Face that all his Gazing Powers employ
With most profound Abasement and exalted Joy.
The Rolls of Fate were half unsealed,
He stood adoring by;
The Volumes opened to his Eye,
And sweet Intelligence he held
With all his shining Kindred of the Sky.
VII.
Ye Seraphs that surround the Throne,
Tell how his Name was through the Palace known,
How warm his Zeal was, and how like your own:
Speak it aloud, let half the Nation hear,
And bold Blasphemers shrink and fear:
Impudent Tongues, to blast a Prophet's Name!
The Poison sure was fetched from Hell
Where the old Blasphemers dwell,
To taint the purest Dust, and blot the whitest Fame.
Impudent Tongues! You should be darted through,
Nailed to your own Black Mouths, and lie
Useless and Dead till Slander die,
Till Slander die with you.
VIII.
"We saw him, say the Ethereal Throng,
"We saw his warm Devotions rise,
"We heard the fervor of his Cries,
"And mixed his Praises with our Song:
"We knew the secret Flights of his retiring Hours,
"Nightly he waked his inward Powers,
"Young Israel rose to Wrestle with his God,
"And with unconquered Force scaled the Celestial Towers
"To reach the Blessing down for those that sought his Blood.
"Often we beheld the Thunderer's Hand
"Raised high to crush the Factious Foe;
"As often we saw the rolling Vengeance stand
"Doubtful to obey the dread Command,
"While his ascending Prayer witheld the falling Blow.
IX.
Draw the past Scenes of thy Delight
My Muse, and bring the Wondrous Man to Sight.
Place him surrounded as he stood
With Pious Crowds, while from his Tongue
A Stream of Harmony ran soft along,
And every Ear drank in the flowing Good:
Softly it ran its Silver Way,
Till warm Devotion raised the Current strong;
Then fervid Zeal on the sweet Deluge rode,
Life, Love, and Glory, Grace, and Joy
Divinely rolled promiscuous on the Torrent-Flood,
And bore our Raptured Sense away, and Thoughts and Souls to God.
O might we dwell for ever there!
No more return to breath this grosser Air,
This Atmosphere of Sin, Calamity, and Care.
X.
But Heavenly Scenes soon leave the Sight
While we belong to Clay,
Passions of Terror and Delight
Demand alternate Sway.
Behold the Man whose awful Voice
Could well proclaim the Fiery Law,
Kindle the Flames that Moses saw,
And swell the Trumpets Warlike noise.
He stands, the Herald of the Threatening Skies,
Lo, on his Reverend Brow the Frowns Divinely rise,
All Sinai's Thunder on his Tongue, and Lightning in his Eyes.
Round the high Roof the Curses flew
Distinguishing each guilty Head,
Far from the unequal War the Atheist fled,
His Kindled Arrows still pursue,
His Arrows strike the Atheist through,
And fix him down to Dread.
The Marble Heart groans with an inward Wound:
Blaspheming Souls of hardened Steel
Shriek out amazed at the new Pangs they feel,
And dread the Eccho's of the Sound.
The Lofty Wretch Armed and Arrayed
In gaudy Pride sinks down his Impious Head,
Plunges in dark Despair, and mingles with the Dead.
XI.
Now Muse assume a softer Strain,
Now sooth the Sinners Raging Smart,
Borrow of GOVGE the wondrous Art
To calm the Surging Conscience, and assuage the Pain.
He from a Bleeding God derives
Life for the Souls that Guilt had slain,
And strait the dying Rebel lives,
The Dead arise again.
The opening Skies almost obey
His powerful Song, a Heavenly Ray
Awakes Despair to Light, and sheds a cheerful Day.
His wondrous Voice rolls back the Spheres,
Recalls the Scenes of Ancient Years
To make the Savior known;
Sweetly the flying Charmer roves
Through all his Labors and his Loves,
The Anguish of his Cross, and Triumphs of his Throne.
XII.
Hark, he invites our Feet to try
The steep ascent of Calvary,
And sets the fatal Tree before our Eye:
See here Celestial Sorrow reigns;
Rude Nails and ragged Thorns lay by
Tinged with the Crimson of Redeeming Veins.
In wondrous Words he sung the Vital Flood
Where all our Sins were drowned,
Words fit to heal and fit to wound,
Sharp as the Spear, and Balmy as the Blood.
In his Discourse Divine
Afresh the Purple Fountain flowed,
Our falling Tears kept Sympathetick Time
And trickled to the Ground,
While every Accent gave a doleful Sound,
Sad as the breaking Heart Strings of the Expiring God.
XIII.
Down to the Mansions of the Dead
With trembling Joy our Souls are lead,
The Captives of his Tongue;
There the dear Prince of Light reclines his Head
Darkness and Shades among.
With pleasing Horror we survey
The Caverns of the Tomb,
Where the Beloved Redeemer lay
And shed a sweet Persume.
Hark, the Old Earthquake roars again
In GOUGE's Voice, and breaks the Chain
Of heavy Death, and tears the Tombs;
The Rising God! he comes, he comes,
With Throngs of waking Saints, a long triumphing Train.
XIV.
See the bright Squadrons of the Sky,
Downward on Wings of Joy and Have they fly,
Meet their returning Sovereign and attend him high.
A shining Carr the Conqueror fills
Formed of a Golden Cloud;
Slowly the Pomp rolls up the Azure Hills,
Old Satan foams and yells aloud,
And gnaws the Eternal Brass that binds him to the Wheels.
The opening Gates of Bliss receive their King,
The Father-God Smiles on his Son,
Pays him the Honors he has won,
The lofty Thrones adore, and little Cherubs Sing.
Behold him on his Native Throne,
Glory sits fast upon his Head;
Dress't in new Light and Beamy Robes
His Hand rolls on the Seasons and the shining Globes,
And sways the living Worlds and Regions of the Dead.
XV.
GOUGE was his Envoy to this Realm below,
Vast was the Trust, and great his Skill,
Bright the Credentials he could show,
And Thousands owned the Seal.
His Hallowed Lips could well impart
The Grace, the Promise, and Command:
He knew the Pity of EMMANUEL's Heart,
And Terrors of JEHOVAH's Hand.
How did our Souls start out to hear
The Embassies of Love he bore,
While every Ear in Rapture hung
Upon the Charming Wonders of his Tongue.
Life's busy Cares a Sacred Silence bound,
Attention stood with all her Powers,
With fixed Eyes and Awe profound,
Chained to the Pleasure of the Sound,
Nor knew the flying Hours.
XVI.
But Oh! my everlasting Grief!
Heaven has recalled his Envoy from our Eyes,
Hence Deluges of Sorrow rise,
Nor hope the Impossible Relief.
Ye Remnants of the Sacred Tribe
Who feel the Loss, come share the Smart,
And mix your Groans with mine:
Where is the Tongue that can describe
Infinite Things with Equal Art,
Or Language so Divine?
Our Passions want the Heavenly Flame,
Almighty Love Breaths faintly in our Songs,
And Awful Threatenings languish on our Tongues;
HOW is a Great, but single Name.
Amidst the Crowd he stands alone;
Stands yet, but with his Starry Pinions on,
Dress't for the Flight and ready to be gone:
Eternal God, command his Stay,
Stretch the dear Months of his Delay;
O we could wish his Age were one Immortal Day!
But when the Flaming Chariot's come
And shining Guards to attend thy Prophet Home,
Amidst a thousand Weeping Eyes
Send an Elisha down, a Soul of Equal Size,
Or burn the Worthless Globe, and take us to the Skies.
AN EPITAPH ON King WILLIAM III. Of Glorious Memory, Who Died March 8th. 1701.
I.
BEneath these Honors of a Tomb
GREATNESS in humble Ruin lies:
(How Earth confines in narrow Room
What Heroes leave below the Skies!)
II.
Preserve, Oh Venerable PILE,
Inviolate thy Sacred Trust;
To thy cold Arms the BRITISH Isle
Weeping commits her Richest Dust.
III.
Ye gentlest Ministers of FATE
Attend the Monarch as he lies,
And bid the Softest SLUMBERS wait
With Silken Cords to bind his Eyes.
IV.
Rest his dear SWORD beneath his Head;
Round him his Faithful ARMS shall stand;
Fix his bright ENSIGNS on his Bed,
The Guards and Honors of our Land.
V.
Ye Sister Arts of PAINT and VERSE,
Place ALBION fainting by his Side,
Her Groans arising 'ore the Hearse,
And BELGIA sinking when he Died.
VI.
High over the Grave RELIGION set
In Solemn Gold: pronounce the Ground
Sacred, to bar unhallowed Feet,
And plant her Guardian VIRTUES round.
VII.
Fair LIBERTY in Sables dressed
Write his loved Name upon his Urn,
WILLIAM, the Scourge of Tyrants past,
And Awe of Princes yet Unborn.
VIII.
Sweet PEACE his Sacred Relics keep
With Olives blooming round her Head,
And stretch her Wings across the Deep
To bless the Nations with the Shade.
IX.
Stand on the Pile, Immortal FAME,
Broad Stars adorn thy brightest Robe,
Thy thousand Voices sound his Name
In Silver Accents round the Globe.
X.
FLATTERY shall faint beneath the Sound,
While Hoary TRUTH inspires the Song;
ENVY grow pale and bite the Ground,
And MALICE gnaw her Forky Tongue.
XI.
NIGHT and the GRAVE remove your Gloom;
Darkness becomes the Vulgar Dead;
But GLORY bids the Royal Tomb
Disdain the Horrors of a Shade,
XII.
GLORY with all her Lamps shall burn,
And watch the Warriors sleeping Clay,
Till the last Trumpet rouse his Urn
To aid the Triumphs of the Day.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
VIndiciae Mentis. An Essay of the Being and Nature of the Mind: Wherein the
Dostinction of Mind and Body, the Substantiality, Personality, and Perfection
of Mind is asserted; and the Original of our Minds, their Present, Separate,
and Future state, is freely inquired into, in order to a more certain
Foundation for the Knowledge of God and our Selves, and the Clearing all Doubts
and Objections that have been, or may be made concerning the LIFE and
IMMORTALITY of our SOULS. In a new Method. By a Gentleman. 8 vo.

New Essays on Trade, wherein the present State of our Trade, its Great Decay
in the Chief Branches of it, and the Fatal Consequence thereof to the Nation
(unless timely remedied) is Considered, under the most Important Heads of Trade
and Navigation. By Francis Brewster Knight. In 8 vo.

Exercitations, Critical, Philosophical, Historical, and Theological. On
several important Pieces in the Writings of the Old and New Testament. By John
Edwards D. D. 8 vo.

Theo-Politica: Or a Body of Divinity, containing the Rules of the Special
Government of GOD, according to which he orders the Immortal and Intellectual
Creatures, Angels, and Man, to their Final and Eternal State. Being a Method of
those Laving Truths, which are contained in the Canon of the Holy Scripture, or
abridg'd in those Words of our Savior Jesus Christ [ Go and teach all Nations,
etc.] which were the Ground and Foundation of those Apostolical Creeds and
Forms of Confessions, related by the Ancients; and in particular by Irenaeus
and Tertullian. By that Learned Divine George Lawson late Rector of More in the
County of Salop. 8 vo.


