AN ESSAY ON THE VIRTUE and EFFICIENT CAUSE OF Magnetical Cures.

To which is added, A new METHOD for curing WOUNDS without PAINS, and without
the Application of REMEDIES.

Hitherto kept as a Secret in private Families.

Written Originally in LATIN, by the Famous Dr. HERMAN BOERHAAVE, Professor at
the University of Leyden in Holland, But never Published till now.

By a Relation of the said Doctor; For the Good of the Public.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCCXLIII.

THE PREFACE OF THE EDITOR.
EVery Body is convinced, that Men are created for Society-sake; and no Body is
ignorant, that without the Assistance of a great many others, he would be more
miserable than a Beast itself. But every Body is not convinced, that it is
naturally impossible, to become happy or rich, without contributing
proportionably toward the Happiness or Riches of others. At least the
Experience we have every Day of a great many People's building their Happiness
and Riches upon the Ruins of others, evidenceth clearly, that either they must
be stark mad, or are not convinced that in so doing, they are acting against
their own Interest. Nevertheless, there is nothing more true and nothing more
deserving our Attention than the Welfare of others, in Case we have a Mind to
be happy ourselves: It is nothing else but a Prevention, to think, that Riches
do consist in the sole Possession of a great Quantity of Goods, and that such a
Quantity of Goods has a sovereign Virtue, to free ourselves from all Troubles
and Accidents. Since Men are not able to live without the personal Ministry of
others, true Riches have no other Virtue than what is given them by the Will,
the Power, and the Number of such, who are to make Use thereof; they have no
Value and no Price in themselves, but what they receive from this Number; and
accordingly as this Will, this Power, and this Number is preserved, accordingly
our pretended Riches have an Estimation. Without it, they are no more than Dust.

An infinite Number of Examples as well ancient as modern do convince us
thereof, and I have in a particular Treatise on the Way and Means to get Rich,
now ready for the Press, purposely endeavored to give a full Demonstration of
this Truth, where I remit the curious Reader. I shall only in this Place draw a
Conclusion from what I have said, which is, that if our Riches have no other
Value and Estimation than what is given them by an infinite Number of others,
and if we cannot be rich without them, it is evident, that instead of ruining
others contrary to our Interest, we ought proportionably to contribute toward
the Preservation of this Will, this Power, and this Number; and in case we
really do intend to get rich and happy, we ought to be in Harmony with such as
are to give a Value and a Price to our Substance; and as we do not know
precisely, who is to give a Value to our Possessions, we ought to regard every
Body as such.

If every Body is to be considered, to be of the Number of such as are to give
a Value to our Riches, and if without the personal Ministry of Men we cannot
live, it is our Interest to have them in a Condition to render the same; if
this Number lives for us, their Condition must be perfect in Consequence, that
their Service may be perfect and entire. Their Bodies must be brought to the
Degree of natural Perfection, that their Organs may be well disposed to receive
the Commandments of Understanding and Will, wherewith they are animated for our
Service and for our Preservation, and that the Inactivity and the Defects of
their Bodies may not hinder the Activity of their Understanding.

This is the total Sum of the Obligations we lie under in Case we love our own
Interest. It is therefore a pernicious Enviousness in some, who, being Master
of some good Invention for shortening and making easy the Labors and Fatigues
of their Fellow Creatures, choose rather to keep it in their Closets as an idle
Object of their Curiosity, than to have the Public reap the Advantage thereof,
which consequently would be beneficial to themselves by reason of the Maxim I
have before, advanced.

If such an Enviousness is to be blamed in respect of Inventions for shortening
and making easy the Labors and Fatigues of Men; it is the more in respect of
Discoveries tending toward the Preservation and Restoring of Health; and I may
boldly say, that such as are backwards therein, are in some Measure answerable
for the Languishings and Sufferings of their Fellow Creatures. The Life and
Health of a single Person is more precious than all what vulgarly we understand
under the Notion of Riches; not so much for reason of the Excellency of the
Structure of a Man, but because Wealth and Riches can never exist without a
Number of People, who are to give it its Value and Estimation. Without it, it
is a Chimaera and no more than Dust; consequently the more this Number
increases, the more Value our pretended Riches are receiving, and consequently
the more richer we actually become.

Few are ignorant of the great Uncertainty we labor under in Physics; and I
should think, it would not be out of the Way, if Physicians would follow the
Example of Painters, who for the more excelling in their Art have divided
themselves in several Branches. Some apply themselves only to Painting of
Faces, some of Landskips, some of Battle Pieces, and even some only to paint
Flowers, etc. By this Way each one comes to a Degree of Perfection. The Object
of Physic being the restoring and preserving of our Health, a Consideration
far surpassing all others of what Nature soever, it is evident, that the Art of
Physic, instead of being founded only upon Probabilities, would attain to a
Degree of Certainty, if each Physician would direct his Attention only to
certain Diseases and publish the Discoveries made in Curing them. Dum singuli
pugnant, omnes vincuntur.

The most ablest Physicians do acknowledge that oftentimes they are at a Loss
in forming a solid Judgment of the Diseases of their Patients; and I am sure,
that not seldom the Remedy prescribed in such a Perplexity is worse than the
Disease itself. Why do we refuse then to make Use of Magnetical Remedies
experienced by our Ancestors and left by them upon Record to Posterity? and why
do we refuse to make a farther Enquiry into the Virtues of such Remedies? The
Use thereof would at least never be detrimental, nor is there to be
apprehended, that the Practice of such Remedies is liable to prove more fatal
than the Disease itself.

A great deal more could be said in Praise of Magnetical Cures, but as
Experientia semel instituta plus valet quam mill rations, I appeal to the
Authors quoted in this Treatise, and content myself to have fulfilled the Duty
every Body lies under, which is, to contribute proportionably to the Happiness
of others in case we pretend to be happy ourselves. And as the Method
discovered for curing Wounds without Pains and without an immediate Application
of Remedies, has been sufficiently experienced, and always found to answer the
Purpose, I hope it will be received with the same Candor as it is discovered.

AN ESSAY ON THE VIRTUE and Efficient CAUSE OF MAGNETICAL CURES.
IT is needless, to give a Definition of what is understood by Magnetical
Cures. Since the Invention of a certain Powder made of Vitriol calcined, or
rather exsiccated by the Reverberation of the Sunbeams, commonly called
Sympathetical Powder, People seem almost to be convinced, that there is another
Way for Curing, chiefly certain Wounds, than by an immediate Application of
certain Remedies to the Part afflicted. Only the Difference lies herein, that
a great many either out of Prevention, or perhaps sometimes out of Ignorance or
Self-interest, stiffly maintain, that the Cause of such Cures is in nothing
else to be looked for, than in the Superstition of certain People. Some go
still farther, and do ascribe the Virtue to certain Ceremonies and even to
Charms. Of the last Opinion are at th^^ Day few, more of the first; and it
seems, as if this opinion was supported by the Experience itself made by many
People, with the said Sympathetical Powder to no Purpose; which has given Room
to them to say, that the Effects of this Powder, if there are any, are only
visible according to the more or lesser Share of Superstition, the Person is
possessed with, who makes Use thereof. Moreover the little Practice made with
this Powder, though nothing at all expensive, and though the Advantage of Novelty
it has, is again an other Argument by which they strive to evidence, that
there is no relying at all on this Remedy.

In my Opinion both Parties are equally to be blamed. The one, for ascribing to
a Thing more than really is in it, or can be produced by its Intervention,
though all imaginable Care is taken in the Preparation of it; and the other,
for deriding every Thing they are not able to comprehend with their Senses. My
Intention is therefore here, to consider on the efficient Cause of Magnetical
Cures, which will be a Means to prove the Possibility thereof; and this being
done, I shall conclude with publishing for the Good of the Public, a Method to
be depended upon, and hitherto kept as a Secret in private Families, for
magnetically curing certain Wounds without Pains and without the Application of
any Remedy.

There is a Kind of Affection between all and every Thing, by Virtue of which,
they alter or affect one another without a visible Touching. The daily
Experience convinces us thereof, and who denies it, Ostendi Solemn postulat
ille sibi.

The Examination and Knowledge of these Qualities and hidden Virtues in Nature,
is called natural Magic, founded upon the Sympathies of Things, and who is
acquainted with the Concord or Discord therein, is called skilful in Magicks,
and able to produce many marvelous Effects, appearing to the Vulgar to be
contrived by the Help of Demons; though this Mystery is nothing else, but a
Science of the Sympathies and Antipathies between superior and inferior
Things.

Sympathy is a mutual Consent between Physical and Natural Things, by which
they friendly embrace one another, called by some a Compassion. Galen uses the
Word of Friendship, Pliny Concord, and Tully a Convenience and natural
Continuation; for though the Bodies of Iron and a Loadstone are distant from
one another, nevertheless Nature is also continued in them, that they agree or
meet in one. The same calls it an Affinity in Nature, and Bapt. Porta a
Consent; by others it is metaphorically named a Symphony or Harmony. Antipathy
is a mutual Affection between Things, by virtue of which they shun, abhor, or
are against one another. Galen and Pliny are calling it a Fighting and Discord;
others a Dissenting, Enmity, Variance and Hatred; others a Resistance, as
hindering or resisting Actives to be applied to Passives.

As from the Sympathy of superior and celestial Virtues arises a Drawing,
(attractio) and conveying (deductio) to the Terrene and inferior Body, also
from Antipathy a Resistance; Plato calls therefore Magic the Attraction or
Drawing of one Thing from another, caused by an Affinity in Nature.

Now all the Parts of this World, or all the Members of one Animal, depending
from one Author and Principle, are joined together by one and the same Nature.
In us, the Brain, Heart, Lungs, Liver and the Rest draw something from one
another, and mutually assist one another; also that if one of them suffers,
the Others are likewise suffering or compatising. The same it is in respect of
all the Bodies in this World joined together; they likewise serve and are
served mutually by one another; and from this common Alliance, or Affinity,
arises a common Love, and from this common Love a common Attraction or
Drawing. This is the Reason, that the Loadstone draws Iron unto it, and the Sun
many Flowers: This is the Reason that Heliotropium turns with the Sun both at
Rising and going down, and Selinetropium with the Moon.

We ought to consider Sun, Moon and the rest according to the terrene Quality;
and Stones, Vegetables and Animals according to the celestial Quality; and so
we will find, that what is above, has Connection with what is below, and what
is below, with what is above. For, by the fatal Law given by our Creator, the
terrene Body is to serve the celestial; and as every individual Part of the
first is endued with a Matrix adapted to bring forth its like, so the last is
appointed to animate it continually with a certain Substance, which is able to
cause its engendering and begetting without Intermission. The Sympathy and
Antipathy, so notable in Animals, Minerals and Vegetables, is therefore to
nothing else to be ascribed, than to the Influence of the celestial Bodies; and
their Impression according to the Constitution of each Species and individual
Being, either in general or sometimes according to the singular Fabric of one
Species in particular. Also a Sapphire, to speak generally, is no where
offensive to the Eyes; but nevertheless there has been found one who did
strike the Sight of the Eye by the first Application.

But by what Means some natural Things join together is very difficult to
demonstrate out of common Philosophy. Because what is joined or coupled to a
Thing, is of the same Being or Essence, or is of the Quality of this Being; or
is in it, as the Form is in the Subject, or appertains to it or touches it
either like a Thing transmuting, in respect to what is transmuted, or like Art
in respect of the Subject Matter. Moses seems to have clearly expounded to us
five Things fastened or knit together; Heaven and Earth, Earth and Voidness, a
bottomless Gulf and Darkness, the Spirit of God and the Waters, Light and
Bodies. The first Way of this Connection is signified by the Earth empty and
void. For an empty and void Earth is its Matter before it is supplied with a
Form from elsewhere.

The second Way of Connection is signified by Darkness all over the Face of the
bottomless Gulf.

The third by Light springing up, rising, or coming upon the Bodies.

The fourth, by Heaven and Earth; the one being joined to the other, as Actives
to Passives, or as a Thing transmuting, to what is to be transmuted.

The fifth, by the Spirit of the Lord.

But let us see, how this is in us. Earth is a terrene Body, empty of Life,
void of Sense; above it are Darkness, Dullness, Death, Stupidity, and no Feeling.

Light is Life, which quickens, moves, stirs, and gives Sense to it.

Heaven is the Soul and the Spring of this Light.

The Spirit of God is the Understanding, the Brightness of the divine
Countenance. The Reason of this Joining, or Connection is this: The Body is void
in itself, has its Darkness; then it is joined to Light, through Light to
Heaven, through Heaven to a spiritual Substance, as appears by the following,
viz.

The bottomless Gulf,
Darkness,
Void of Life. Earth. Void of Sense,
Light, Quickening and giving Life.
Heaven, the Spring of Light,
The Spirit.
Here we see in what Order Things created are knit together. Here we see the
Bond and Knot of the Natural Benevolence. But what Philosophy is this you will
say? Certainly not a vulgar one, which judges of Things by Sense, Matter and
manifest Qualities; but a heavenly, more subtle and an abstrase one.

Body and Soul being Substances very far distant from one another, there was
need of a mean Bond to join these distant Substances together, and to this
Purpose is that thin and spiritual small Body appointed, which Physicians, as
well as Philosophers, call Spirit. This copulating Spirit is more excellent
than the Elements, and even answers to Heaven. Aristoteles speaks of this
Proportion thus: Like as all the Virtue of the Heavens is conveyed to the Earth
by the Vehicle of Light; also all the Faculties of the Soul, viz. Life, Motion
and Senses are, by the Help of this bright Spirit, conveyed and transferred to
the terrene Body. That all what I have said, may be more convincing, I shall
produce some memorable Examples of Antipathys and Sympathys, which Authors of
no little Authority have left to Posterity.

First of all we meet with a notable Antipathy in Poisons; not every Antidote
resists all Sorts of Poison, according to Galen. -- de Antid. Each Kind of
Poison has its particular Antidote.

The Scythians were used to besmear their Arrows, and Sabres, with a certain
Poison composed of human Blood, and a Matter coming out of Putrefaction;
corrupt and filthy Blood of Vipers; a slight Wound with an Instrument also
prepared was deadly, and nothing could help but Cantharides, which, against all
other Poisons is ineffectual, according to Galen and Dioscorides.

According to Pliny, there is no greater Poison for Trees than wild Parsnip,
because, being near them, it takes not only all the Substance away, but it
boreth and pierces Holes, like as with a Sword, through the very Roots of the
Trees.

Galen, I. de Theriaca ad Pison. affirms, that a Herb called Trifoly boiled and
applied to Bitings of Vipers, is to take immediately away all Pains; but if
applied on sound People, that it causes the same Pains People suffer being bit
by Vipers. Scaliger endeavors to give a Reason of this Mystery, but it is more
according to the Subtilty of his Genius than a true one. So much of Poisons.

But what shall we say of the invincible Hardness of a Diamond, which
contemptibly withstands the two greatest; Forces in Nature; and,
notwithstanding, yields to Goat's Blood, being steeped therein when it is fresh
and warm?

Is not this a surprising Example of a natural Variance or Discord? By what
Ingenuity has this been found out? By what Accident, or what Conjecture was
there only to experiment such an immense Secret, chiefly in a Goat, the
filthiest of all Animals?

A Lion, feared by all Animals, and who cares neither Tiger nor Bear, is,
notwithstanding astonished at the Sight of a far weaker Animal, a Cock. Do you
ask the Reason thereof? Perhaps there is a certain Strength in the Eyes of a
Cock, as some think, repugnant to the Eyes of a Lion. Certainly we cannot look
for the Reason of it in the Matter or Senses, otherwise we would fall into
endless Perplexities; but we must look for it in the Contemplation of Things
above us. I remit my Readers to Proclus in his Book of Magicks, where he gives
a Reason, ex professo, of this seeming Prodigy.

Who knows not the Discord between a Spider and a Toad or Serpent? The first,
perceiving one of the last under the Shade of a Tree, after having it artfully
entangled in its Web, pierces its Brains with such a Force, that it is no more
able to disentangle itself from its Prison; nor dothit find an End thereof till
it is dead.

The Antipathy between an Ash-Tree and a Serpent, has been so much
experimented, that we know from thence, that a Serpent will always shun, even
the Morning and Evening Shade of this Tree, and fly from it so far, that a Fire
being made on one Side, and on the other a Semicircle of Leaves and Branches
of an Ash-Tree, it rather will jump, and endeavor to escape through the Fire,
than pass the Ash-Tree.

I proceed to Vegetables, where equally we meet with an evident and notable
Discord. For an Oak-Tree will not prosper in Places where Olives grow; and an
Olive Tree leaves in Groves of Oaks, such offensive Roots, which actually do
kill the Oak-Trees. The same being planted near Wallnut-Trees, either dies
itself or remains always weak, or causes the same Effects in the Wallnut.

The Hatred between Colewort or Cabbage and Vines, is more visible. For a Vine
with its crooked Tendrels does tie and bind itself to every Thing that it does
catch, only it refuses the same to Cabbage, and being near it, it bends to the
opposite Side. Colewort or Cabbage being boiling, if only a few Drops of Wine
are poured upon it, will immediately cease to boil, and the Cabbage will lose
its Color. The same will dry through and through, if Cyclamen, a Kind of
Briony or Origan, or wild Marjorum is near it; and Vines will become worse in
the Neighborhood of Bay-Trees.

There is such an Antipathy between a Crab and Polypody, that this Herb being
applied, will cause its throwing off the Shell wherewith it is covered, or at
least its Claws. Fern and Reeds are so repugnant to one another, that neither
of them will suffer the other near it, which is the Reason that we neither find
Fern in Places where Reeds grow, nor Reeds in Ferny Grounds.

Homer, Pliny and Dioscorides, do report, that Alysson, St. John's Wort and
Rue, or Herbgrace, are of such a natural Repugnancy against malignant Spirits,
that like Heads of Wolves affixed to Gates, so these Herbs hanged up in Houses,
do secure Men and Beasts against all kinds of Sorcery or Poison. Homer, who by
his Travels got a great Skill in Magicks, relates, that Mercurius armed
Ulysses against the Enchantments of Circe by the use of Rue or Herbgrace. And
in the History of Toby, delivered to us by Sacred Writ, we find, that the Angel
taught Toby to take Part of the Heart of a Fish drawn out of the River, and to
cast it upon Coals; the Smoke of which was to rid Men and Women of all kinds of
Demons. We ought therefore not to call in Question the like Amulets, grounded
on natural Reasons, since a certain Substance is issuing out from them, which
according to Experience is capable effectually to repair the Strength of
Bodies, and to resist Poisons or any thing else that is offensive.

THE Root of white Peony, and the Hoof of an Elk, are of an Antipathy against
the Falling Sickness; the Seed of Melanthium, against Rheums or falling down of
raw Humors; Wolf's Dung against Colicks; not by virtue of Charms, as some very
ignorantly think, but because some Vapors like Atoms issue from their
Substance, which sent forth to the Brain, do dry it, and alter the Cause of the
Sickness by their own Virtue. Galen, after many Trials, speaks thereof: That we
are to depend upon the like Amulets, as working by their own Substance, and not
by the virtue of imaginary Charms, l. 6. and 10. de Simplic. Medic.

The Hand of a Fisherman is stupify'd, as soon as he touches a Fish called the
Cramp Fish, though it be with a long Pole. A little Fish, half a Foot in
length, called a Suckstone or Sea Lamprey, cleaving to the Keel of a Ship,
hinders the Course thereof, though Wind and Weather is favorable. This is not
done by virtue of Charms, but by Reasons I have just now mentioned. It is
certainly a stupendous Miracle of Nature, that such a small Fish is capable to
stay a like Bulk, and to hinder the Course of a great Ship, though in full
Sail, by no other means, than by cleaving to it.

Pliny reports, that the imperial Ship, wherein Antony did intend to circuit
and to exhort his People, was stayed by such a Fish; and that he was obliged to
go into another Ship, mean while that his Fleet was driven a great way off.
Caius's Gally bound for Antium, an ancient City in Italy, and rowed by four
hundred Hands, had the same Fate; and it seems this Fish to be ominous, since
this Prince, soon after his coming back, was deadly wounded. There was no
longer Room to dive into the reason of this Staying, as soon as this Fish was
found cleaving to the Stern of the Ship. But being brought into the Ship, it
proceeded; and it is particularly to be admired, why it was able to stay the
Ship by cleaving to it, and could not do the same after being brought into the
Ship. We must acknowledge, that Nature here is intricate, and cannot be
understood by our Senses. For besides what I have said, it seems as if she
knowing of an approaching Danger did intend to remove it. The Ship wherein the
Ambassadors of Periander were sent, for having the noble Boys gelded, was
stayed in its Course; as if Nature did judge it detestable to rob Men of what
is given them to their Preservation. The Ship of Caius Caesar, not long after
assassinated at Rome, was stayed, as if Nature commiserating Caesar's Fate,
would keep him back from this Misfortune, and hinder his unhappy Course. As
much of Sea Lampreys.

It has been found by Experience, that a living Duck applied to the Belly
asswageth the Gripings.

A living Spider enclosed in a Walnut Shell, and tied to the Neck to cure the
Quartan Ague. The Pairings of a Sick Person's Nails of Hand and Feet, tied upon
the Back of a living Crawfish, and also thrown into flowing Water, to expel a
Tertian Ague.

A Tooth of a living Mole to cure the Toothache, only by touching the afflicted
Part therewith.

A little Bone found in the Ham of a Hare's Leg behind the Knee, to resist the
Stone or Gravel in the Reins, and Cramps or Convulsions shrinking, or plucking
of the Sinews; and arising either of too much Fullness, or overmuch Emptiness.

Galgalus (a Galbus) a Bird which being looked upon by one who has the Yellow
Jaundice, cures the Person and dies it self.

The Heart of a Raven carried about to hinder Sleep, and the Heart of a Bat to
provoke it.

The Bones of the Head of a Mare affixed upon a Post in a Garden, to chase
Palmer or Canker-Worms.

A Herb called Dog's-Tooth (having seven Knots) mentioned by Dioscorides under
the name of Coronopus, if tied to one's Head, effectually cures the Headache.

A Man falling sick at the time when Violets, or a Herb called Cicuta The Juice
of this Herb through extreme cold, is Poison; and therefore the Athenians used
it to kill Men in common Executions.
, much like our Hemlock is bearing Flowers, though he is cured, will certainly
relapse as soon as he has a smell thereof. I cannot pass over what Pliny
recites out of Pythagoras, Crateva, Democritus, Appollodorus, Cleemporus, and
many others, of the wonderful virtue and power or some Herbs. An Herb called
Adamantis, growing in Armenia and Cappadocia, An Herb which cannot be brayed,
of the Nature of an Adamant or Diamond, from whence if has received its Name.
being held near Lions, causes them turn upside down, with a yawning an
unpleasant open Sound.

Arianis, an Herb growing with a People in Scythia, called Ariani, from whence
it has its Name, of a Color shining like Fire; when gathered, the Sun being
in Leo, will by touching Wood, set it on fire, the same Wood being before
thoroughly anointed with Oil.

Aeshynomene, an Herb so bashful, that it shrinks in the Leaves, as soon as
one comes near it with the Hand.

Theangelis, an Herb growing in Syria, Babylon, and many other places, makes
People Prophesy, having drunk of a Liquor poured upon this Herb.

Gelotophillus, an Herb growing about Borysthenes, being drunk with Wine and
Myrrh, causes Laughing which never cease, except Kernels of a Pine Apple
with Pepper and Honey are taken in Date-Wine.

Aethiopis, an Herb growing in Aethiopia, like a Lettice, wherewith, according
to Pliny, Enchanters will open any Lock, turn any Stream, and dry any River.

Ophiusa, an Herb in Aethiopia, dangerous to look on; being drunk, it does so
terrify the Mind with a Sight of angry and dreadful Serpents, that condemned
Persons for fear thereof did kill themselves; and therefore it was used to be
given to such as had committed Sacrilege.

A kind of Spider that has in his Legs three Knots or Joints, whose Sting is
perilous and deadly, called Phalangium, immediately dies by touching a certain
Herb we know by the Name of Crocis.

Oenotheris, a kind of Herb strewed on wild Beasts, tameth them.

Achimenis, a kind of Poley, which in time of Battle being cast into an Army
causes them to fear.

Latace, an Herb which the King of Persia did give to the Ambassadors, to the
end they should never lack necessary Food wherever they came.

The ancient History does report of Aemilianus Scipio, otherwise called
Africanus Minor, that he opened the Gates of Carthage with a peculiar Herb, and
dried Moors and fennish Places With Aethiopis, an Herb before mentioned: And
who has ever come near all the hidden Virtues of Nature? Who has ever been
able to give Reasons thereof? or at least what Conjectures could there be to
experience or make Experiments of all these things? Certainly we must
acknowledge it to have been delivered by a particular Blessing of the Supreme
Being.

The Presence of a Diamond hinders the Loadstone to draw Iron unto it, and
the Presence of Oil hinders Amber to draw Straw unto it. And if we consider
the Enmity between things to hurt one another, it is not unlikely, that our
Ancestors did infer from thence, that perhaps some Remedy for their own use
might lie concealed under it; the Success has answered their Conjectures, and
we are obliged to reverence likewise something hidden in Sympathies which is of
a confederate Virtue either to keep at a distance, or to expel something that
is bad.

Every Day we meet with a notable Concord between Herbs and the celestial
Bodies. We are assured of the solar Presence by the Flowers of an Herb called
Cichoreum, Succory, which at the Rising of the Sun opens, and at its Setting
closes itself up again.

Lapinus a Kind of Pulse, is daily turned about with the Sun, also that the Sky
being cloudy, Husbandmen know by it, what of Clock it is. The Herb Mallows
conforms itself likewise to the Motion of the Sun.

Authors of no small Credit unanimously affirm that Thunder and Lightning never
hurts a Bay or Fig Tree, nor an Hide of a Sea-calf, or Hyaena, nor a white
Vine. Octavius Agustus therefore arming himself with the last, and Tiberius
Caesar by wearing a Crown made of Bay Leaves, secured, themselves against
Thunder; because these Things are not only of a Nature to refist the Vehemence
of Lightning, but also to throw back the Blasts of it. There is a wonderful
Sympathy between Metals and the Miners-Rod, or a little Twig with two Branches
cut off a Hasle-tree, by the Help of which Miners search after Gold and Silver
Veins. It would be in vain to seek for the Cause thereof in the manifest
Qualities.

The Sympathy subsisting between Stones and the celestial Bodies is still
greater: Their Power is more extensive than that of Herbs; because they seem
not only to command the celestial Bodies, but also Men. Who is ignorant of the
Pilot's Needle, a Piece of Iron rubbed with the Lodestone, always pointing to
the Arctic Pole? Selenites, a Stone found in Arabia, has a White in it, which
decreaseth and increases as the Moon does.

A Turquois, according to Theophrastus and Proclus, does change and wax very
pale, being worn by a sick or decaying Person; but it is more to be wondered
at, that the precious Color of this Stone is changed into a sooty and smoaky
one, or receives some Spots, or appears to be chink'd, when there is a
considerable Danger approaching the Person it is worn by.

And for Antipathies, the same Authors do report, that the Emerald effectually
does resist Fevers and Poisons; and that it breaks, being overcome by Poison.

Androdamas, a precious Stone, hard and heavy, bright like Silver, and in form
of diverse little Squares, puts away the Fury of Anger, and Rage of Letchery.

Genianes, a precious Stone, procures Punishment to a Man's Enemy.

Dendritis, a precious Stone, which, being put under a Tree, makes that the Ax
in cutting it should hot be dulled.

Siderites, a Stone like Iron, has Power to cause Variance amongst Men. No
doubt, these Stones do actually spout or drive out an invisible hidden Power.
And though they are solid Things, nevertheless the native Heat and Rubbing and
Touching draws out a Virtue, which it communicates to the Heart and Brains.
There are Medicines of a great Use by Reason of their Resemblance, we see them
daily prevail against many Diseases for no other Reason but because the have
one another's Anatomy and Signatura. This is a Way of making Demonstrations by
Resemblance, by which the Creator of all Things oftentimes discovers sublime
and hidden Things to instruct us by the Idea of their Resemblance to what they
have been from the Beginning destinated.

All Herbs, Flowers, Trees, etc. are magical Signs granted by their Author, the
Knowledge Whereof brings us to the true Physic, i. e. Signatum; because the
Signs externally discovered by Nature, are Tokens of certain internally hidden
Virtues; and that Signatum, and the inward Kernel, is always signified by the
outward Physiognomy.

What is the Reason, that many Diseases cannot be cured with every Remedy?
Because they proceed from an astral Impression of the Firmament, there is need
of an astronomical Influence; that is to say, of Things which have an Analogy
between the great and lesser World: Herein does consist the true magnetical
Virtue of the Firmament, and the Means to resist Diseases caused by such
Impressions. This Influence and Signatura we observe in some Plants; the
notablest and most evident do appear in Hypericon and Persicaria; the first is
pierced or bored with small Holes, and the other spotted with red Spots, as if
Blood had dropped upon it.

The same Signaturae, so very useful to the Judgment of Diseases, are likewise
to be met with in other Vegetables; and it is not sufficient for a Botanicus to
search into the external Signaturae of Plants, their Time and Place of growing;
but he ought also to concern himself about the inward Principle, and their
Virtue, which is the Image of God implanted in Things created. This Principle
is known by many Names; some call it the Balsam of Nature, vital Sulphur,
radical Seed, first Matter; some natural Heat, Mercury of Life, universal
Spirit. It never is destroyed in the Corruption of Things; the Elements and all
mixed Bodies being dissolved, it will nevertheless remain. This Balsam does
occupy the whole Anatomy of Bodies in living Creatures and Plants; in some
Animals rather a certain Part, as the Heart, etc. and according to the
Diversity of Impressions, Tincture, Abundance of Humors, Quality, and
Difference, it produces different and diverse Actions. By virtue of this Balsam
some Plants and Parts of Animals are of an Antipathy against Diseases; and by
the Virtue and Power of this Balsam some Parts of Animals are of a Sympathy
with some Parts of the human Body, aiding, strengthening, and preserving it in
its radical Vigor.

Who neglects this Principle, the Signature of Things, without overcoming a
thorough Knowledge thereof, is unworthy of the Name of a Physician. If there
were nothing else, the Knowledge of this Mystery would make a Physician excel
in his Art, according to what Hippocrates says of those, who know beforehand
which can be cured, and which must die.

It cannot be denied, that every Disease has its particular Signs, procuring
the Knowledge thereof to us; and the same Signs are to be found in the Remedies
also marked by Nature. We may therefore say in general, and with a great deal
of Truth, that this Disease is a Disease for this Remedy, and this Remedy is a
Remedy for this Disease. The Herb Tussilago is a Remedy for obstructed Lungs,
because it wears the same Mark. The Herbs Lingua Cervina and Scolopendrium
are a Remedy against a puff'd-up or swollen Milt, because they represent the
Figure of the Milt. The makes appear, that it is possible to overcome a
Knowledge of Nature by the Signs of the Remedies; and that the Mystery of
Sympathies and Antipathies, in respect of Things, as well as their Qualities,
are of a vast Benefit for a Physician.

These who are skilful in this secret Philosophy, and have watched
Opportunities to experience Nature's Strength, are capable of producing many
wonderful Effects: And as the Way of their Proceedings, as in many other
Things, is hidden and concealed, the unskilful not seldom ascribe the Cause of
their Actions to the Delusions of Demons; that is to say, to Magic called
Goetia, from Mourning; because it is an Invocation of evil Spirits near Tombs,
and German-sisters to Necromancy, which, for calling the Souls of the Dead,
requires the Effusion of humane or some other Blood of black Cattle, wherewith
Demons are delighted.

True Magic, grounded upon natural Causes, is nothing else but a thorough
Knowledge of the Concord or Discord between Stones, Herbs, Minerals, Animals,
and the Stars, which, exactly to learn, requires a great deal of Wisdom, and
is in no way contrary to divine Laws.

This natural Magic has always been honored and approved of by diligent
Searchers in the celestial and sublunar Beings, as tending to the Admiration of
the Works of God. Who is diving therein, cannot but overcome a Knowledge of an
infinite Number of Things, impossible to be understood by any other Means.

It will add a great deal of Light to the further Unfolding of our Mystery, to
make mention in this Place of some Experiments made with Rings of Gold, Silver,
Latten, or any other Metal dedicated to ce^e^^ial Bodies, whose Virtue one
intends to procure to himself. I say of Rings, in whose Cavity is fastened a
Stone, and under it an Herb of a Sympathy with the same Star. Trallianus,
Gordonius, Mesue, and many others, do report, that the Virtue thereof is to
rejoice the Heart, and to expel Diseases.

Gyges, a King of Lydia, got a Stone, taken out of the Head of a Dragon,
enclosed in his Ring, which when he turned to the Palm of his Hand, he could be
seen of none; but he himself could see every one; whence the Proverb, Gygis
annulus: By the Help of this Ring, it is said, he flew Candaules, and committed
Adultery with his Wife. Alexander Trallianus tells us, that the Image of
Hercules strangling a Lion, set in a Ring, cures the Cholick. The Philosopher
Eudaemus is said to have prepared Rings against Stingings of Serpents, Charms,
and Diseases. Josephus, in his Antiquities, reports to have seen, in the
Presence of the Emperor Vespasianus, one Eleazar, a Jew, apply to the Nose of
one possessed with a Demon a Ring, under the Seal of which was laid a Root
found by Solomon; and that this Eleazar did draw out of the Nose the Demon,
who immediately falling on the Ground, was banished by him, upon reciting
Solomon's conjuring Hymn against Demons. The same does tell us, that Solomon
has been very skilful in Magicks: And that Moses, the Lawgiver of the Jews,
did begin to learn Magicks in Egypt, where he made Rings of Love and
Forgetfulness: The Ring of Forgetfulness he gave to the Egyptian Women to
forget him, which caused his free returning from Egypt. This was not performed
by the Help of prohibited Magic, as Apollonius and Lysimachus have taxed Moses
with, and therefore been refuted by the said Josephus; but by the Help of a
thorough Knowledge of the celestial and sublunar Beings, their Destination and
Virtues. And it is known, that Empedocles, Pythagoras, Democritus, and Plato
himself, learned Magicks from the Egyptian Priests.

It is therefore not generous, to call entirely in question all Cures performed
by Characters, graven Images tied to the Neck, etc. because their Operation is
natural, and performed by the wonderful Influence of the celestial Bodies
agreeing with our Bodies. It is not reasonable entirely to deny Credit to what
our Ancestors, diligent Searchers in Nature's Closet, have left to Posterity,
in respect of Characters and Seals, wrought at certain times, according to the
Virtue and Influence of the Bodies above us, without any Superstition, (which
is framed only by the Ignorance of this Mystery) without any Profanation, or
Offense to the Name of God, and without any Violation of Faith or Religion.
That this useful Knowledge has in Aftertimes been so very much hidden, and
seems at this Day almost entirely lost, can be ascribed to no other Reason but
to the Misuse of these characters. Men falling to Superstition, and not
understanding the Reason of their Working, did attribute more to them than our
Creator had granted, and intended to discover thereby. I am very far off to
attribute to these Images a Virtue in themselves; nor do I affirm, that
Characters or Names, graven under Constellations, have a Virtue by reason of
the Figure; because the Figure, Number, Bigness, Situation, and the Solution of
what is continual, are no Principles of Actions. I would entirely deny their
Virtue, in case there were nothing else acting or moving, by whose Authority
Characters are powerful. I have been obliged to enlarge upon this Subject for
Reason to make appear what is true, it being the Perfection of our
Understanding; and to show what Difference there is between true and physical
Signaturae, and superstitious and unlawful ones, which, for Contemplation-sake,
we may know, but nowhere but in Practice. There is no Virtue in Heaven and
Earth, which has not its Offspring from God: Also Medicines are visible to the
Body, Words invisible to the Body; now if Herbs or Words are curing, the Cause
is notwithstanding in God; therefore the Herb itself is not the Medicine, but
it is hidden in it invisibly by God. It shows a great deal of Ignorance to
condemn, or to deride things remote or distant from our Senses, and not fit to
be comprehended by them. Who is not astonished at the wonderful Effects of
precious Stones? Nevertheless we cannot deny, that there is a great natural
Power in them, chiefly when under certain Constellations certain Figures and
Signatures are graved therein. It is false what some report, that the Effects
of precious Stones are produced by a magical Virtue, and not by a natural one:
It proceeds from the School of Magicians, who used precious Stones, graven
under certain Constellations, for a Pretext of their Enchantments. It is
sufficiently known, that an Emerald gets loose from the Finger at the Death of
the Person it is worn by; and that a Stone, which comes from New Spain, known
by the Name of Lapis Nephriticus, is of great Efficacy against the Stone in the
Kidneys, if but bound to one's Arm. Who does not admire the Virtues of a
Turquois? and an infinite Number of Experiments made with precious Stones, as
well as Herbs, could be quoted; which if they do not everywhere, and not
always answer, nevertheless do not deserve to be called in question; because
not every thing does everywhere and always concur, and the Rarity or
Singularity of Effects does never take away the Cause in Nature; for wonderful
Things in Nature are performed by a due Application of Actives to Passives
hereunto disposed so closely and so secretly, that the Cause thereof seems
exceedingly remote or distant. It is outrageous to ascribe every thing
immediately to the Works of Beelzebub, which are remote from our Senses, as if
a hidden Virtue in Nature, the Instrument of the Divine Power, was not able to
produce many wonderful Things without the Assistance of this Prince of evil
Spirits. It is likewise outrageous in such, who entirely given to Superstition,
either out of Ignorance, or out of a foolish Doubtfulness, maintain the most
evident Things to proceed from hidden Causes, who, besides the Color and
Taste, ascribe no other Virtues to Plants; as if a particular Concord or
Agreement between them and something above us, was not capable to produce,
besides their first sensual Virtues, some hidden ones; witness the daily
Experience. I take it, therefore, to be very indiscreet to assign, in singular
Facts, no other Cause than what seems to us to be; for who can deny, that
either by some Inspiration, or by Chance and mere Accidents, Effects are
produced semblable to natural ones? And it is sufficient for one, who
understands or sets out the Causes of Things natural, to have showed such
a semblable Effect to be the Effect of natural Causes, either always or for the
most part, And though the Event does not always answer, nevertheless the Power
and Motion in Nature is not to be denied; because all Causes for producing one
Effect do seldom concur, which is to be seen in Things, which, for reason of
their Fewness, Variety, and Singularity, are considered as Miracles and
Prodigies; for these Things have natural Causes, but they are seldom disposed
or ready for the like Effects. If therefore the Effect is natural, the Cause
must be the same, and also contrariwise. Now the Effects of Images, graven
under the Constellation of certain celestial Bodies, are natural; consequently
the Cause thereof must likewise be natural. And though this Cause is hidden, and
hard to be understood, and very remote from our outward Senses, nevertheless
there is no Occasion to have recourse to a diabolical Power; but we ought
attentively to consider by what Help, and by what Concurrence of Causes, such
an Effect is produced or not produced; and we ought rather to take an
Opportunity from these mavelous Causes, and the natural Effects produced by
them, to acknowledge and to proclaim the wonderful Power of God; who having
evidently implanted such mavelous Virtues in Nature, how wonderful must He
appear in Things entirely hidden from us?

Having sent this before, I proceed to the Seals themselves. The Image of
Jupiter is graved in a white or clear Stone, or pure Silver or Pewter, for
procuring a healthful Life, Honor and Riches.

The Image of Mars against Timorousness and Pusillanimity.

The Image of Sol in pure Gold, for procuring the Favor of Kings and Princes,
and for curing Diseases afflicting the Heart.

The Image of Venus holding in her Hand Flowers and Apples, for procuring
Mirth, Beauty and Strength to the Body.

The Image of Mercury, to sharpen Memory.

The Image of Luna, to procure Honor and Wealth, and to cure Diseases
afflicting the Brains. These Seals are to be made under certain Constellations,
diligently and exactly to be observed by one skillful in Astrology; and as
there is a great Nicety required for making them, I think proper to send my
Readers to the Authors themselves, who have treated of these I have related, as
well as of a great many more, in an ample manner, satisfactory to each one's
Desires. I proceed now to other Images and Monuments, to whom the ancient Sophi
and Doctors ascribe a mavelous Virtue, if they are ingraved in convenient
Stones and worn and kept with Honor and Reverence (without all manner of
Superstition.) The first of all are the Arcana's of the ancient and great
Rhagael, who is said to have experienced the following, viz.

The Image of a comely Dragon, graved in a Ruby or any other Stone of the like
nature, to have a Virtue to increase Wealth, and to keep him who wears it in
Health and Cheerfulness.

The Image of a Falcon, graved in a Topaz, to help to acquire the Benevolence
of Kings, Princes and great People.

The Image of an Astrolabium, an Instrument wherewith the Motions of the Stars
are gathered and the Distance, to keep him who wears it, healthful and free
from all Diseases and unfortunate Accidents in traveling.

The Figure of a Frog, graved in a precious Stone called Beryl, found in India,
in Fashion fix-square, in Color like Oil or Water in the Sea, to have the
Virtue to reconcile Enemies, and make Friendship amongst Men, by touching only
Persons being at Variane.

The Image of a Bat, graved in a precious Stone called Heliotropium, in color
green like a Leek Blade, to make him who wears it able to resist Demons.

The Image of a well-dress'd Man having something in his Hand which is
handsome, being graven in a Cornelian, to have the Virtue to stop Blood, and to
help to Honor.

The Image of Leo or Sagittarius, graven in a Stone, to resist Poison, and to
free from Agues.

The Image of a Man with a Sword in his Hand, graven in a Cornelian, to
preserve the Place wherein it is, against Lightning and Thunder.

The Image of a Man with his right Hand erected, graven in a Chalcedony, to
enable him who wears it to accomodate Quarrels, to make him healthy, and
overcome all Accidents in traveling.

The Name of God being graven in a precious Stone called Cerauni, of a high
Color with a Star in the midst of it, to preserve every Place where this
graven Image is, against Tempests, and to give him who wears it Strength and
Victory against his Enemies.

The Image of an armed Man graven in a Loadstone, to render him who wears it
victorious in War. So far Rhagel.

The Seals and Images of Chael.
Chael, one of the Sons of the Children of Israel, a very ancient Doctor,
during the time he was in the Wilderness, made many Observations, and caused
Figures to be graved according to the Course of the Planets. Perceiving the
Effects thereof, he compiled a Book of the Virtue of such Images, amongst which
the following are the most notablest. Hallowed be God, who has given such
Virtues to the Earth for the Welfare of the human Generation. These Words are
to be found in the very Beginning of the Book written by the said Chael.

The Figure of a Man sitting behind a Plow, with a long Beard, a long Face and
bent Eyebrows, four Men leaning upon his Neck, he himself having in his Hands
a Fox and a Vulture; if such a Stone in which these things are graven, is tied
to one's Neck, he will be able to discover hidden Treasures; he will dream of
Treasures, and of the manner to overcome them. There is still another Virtue to
free Beasts from Sickness, if they drink the Water wherein this Stone has been
washed. This Stone must be graved in the day and hour of Venus. But what Stone
is must be, is not signified.

The Image of a Man, having on his Neck a Shield, on his Head a Helmet, and in
his Hand a Sword, treading under Foot a Serpent, being graven in a red Jasper,
and tied to the Neck, is to make him who wears it to overcome his Enemies in
a Battle, chiefly if such a Battle is fought on a Tuesday.

The Image of a Horse, having above a Crocodile, graven in a Jacinct, to have
the Virtue to help him who wears it to his just Demands, to make him beloved
or lovely. It must be set in Gold, because Gold causes its Virtue to increase.

The Figure of a Man sitting and a Woman standing before him with her Hairs
spread abroad, the Man looking upwards; this Figure also graven in a Cornelian,
will procure the Benevolence of every Body touched therewith. Under the Stone
must be put a little Ambergrise and Turpentine.

A Man sitting with a lighted Candle in his Hand, being graved in a Chrysolite,
has the Virtue to cause him who wears it, to become rich. It must be set in
the finest Gold that can be had.

A Stag, or a Hunter, or a Dog, or a Hare, graven in a Stone, has the Virtue
to tame lunatic and frantic People.

The Image of a woman, having in one Hand a Bird, and in the other a Fish,
graven in a Stone, to have a Virtue in fishing and fowling. It must be set in
Silver.

An Image, whose Forepart is a Horse, and the Backpart a She Goat, being graved
in a Stone, is of a Virtue to give Luck in bringing up and feeding all kinds of
Animals. It must be set in Lead.

The Image of a Vulture, with an Olive Branch in his Bill, being engraved in a
Stone called Pyrites A precious Stone which, if one holds it hard, burns
the Fingers.
and worn in a Silver Ring, is to cause him who wears it to be looked at with
Admiration and Amazement.

The Figure of a Ram and a Lion, graven in a precious Stone, has a Virtue to
reconcile discordant People, being touched therewith. It is to be set in Silver.

The Figure of a Basilisk fighting with a Dragon, and above it the Head of a
Man graven in a Cornelian and tied to the Neck, causes him who wears it to
vanquish all kind of Beasts, as well on Earth as in the Sea.

The Figure of a naked Man puffed up, and the Figure of another Man well
dressed, having in one Hand a Cup, and in the other a Bough of an herb or
Plant, being graved in an Agath, has a Virtue to free from all kind of Fevers
and Agues, if it is worn only for three Days.

The Figure of Scorpio and Sagittarius fighting together, graven in a Stone,
and set in an Iron Ring and printed into Wax, is to make Discord instantly
amongst such who are touched therewith.

The Figure of half a Woman and half a Fish; the Woman having in one Hand a
Looking-glass, and in the other a Bough, being graved in a Jacinct and set in
Gold, is to make invisible him who wears it as often as he pleases. The Seal
is to be covered with Wax, and to be worn toward the Palm of the Hand. This
Figure is mentioned twice by the same Author with almost the same Words.

The Figure of a Serpent, above it a Man, and on the Man sitting a Raven, being
graved in a Stone, to make him who wears it witty and prudent.

The Figure of a Man standing, and being clothed with a Coat of Mail, and
having a naked Sword in his Hand, being found graved in a Stone, and set in an
Iron Ring of the same Weight, to cause him who wears it to be irresistible in
War.

The Figure of a Man with a Beard, and a long Face; and bent Eyebrows; sitting
upon a Plow between two Bulls, being graved in a Stone, to cause him, who
wears it, to be prosperous in Husbandry; to discover Treasures; to be valiant
in Fighting; to convert Enemies into Friends; to resist many Diseases; and to
make Serpents fly from his Face: To be likewise powerful against the
Falling Sickness; and being Worn by a sick Person, to recover Health
immediately. To cause the Virtue to be still stronger, it must be set in Iron,
double the Weight in respect of the Stone.

The Figure of an Eagle graven in a precious Stone called Aetites; and set in a
Ring of Lead, to cause him, who wears it, to be beloved by every body, and be
obeyed by all Kind of Animals. According to Pliny this Stone is found in an
Eagle's Nest, and is like an Eagle with a white Tail, without which, it is
thought, that the Eagle cannot lay her Eggs. Of this Stone is reported, that
being laid to a Woman's Thigh, it causes quick Deliverance.

The Sign of Capricorn, graved in a Cornelian or in any other Stone, and set in
Silver, to cause him who wears it to abound in Honor, to acquire every
Body's Friendship, and to be able to resist every Body in Fighting, how stout
and valiant soever they may be. Thus far Chael.

Images and Figures of Hermes.
Hermes, a Philosopher sufficiently known, mentions the following Images and
Figures graved in Stones, to be of singular Virtues.

The Image of a Man of a great Stature, standing, graved in a Stone called
Diadochus, (a Stone like a Beryl) having in the right Hand an Obolus, or an
Halfpenny, and in the other a Serpent, above him the Figure of the Sun, and
under his Feet keeping a Lion prostrate; if such a Stone is set in a Ring of
Lead with a little of Mugwort or Motherwort, and the Root of Fenugreek, it will
empower him who wears it, to call on the Shore of a River the Spirits
belonging to the Waters, and to receive answer to what he is asking of them.

The Figure of Aquarius, (one of the Signs of the Zodiac) being graved in a
green Jasper, and worn, causes Profit in buying and selling. A Bird carrying
in his Bill a Leaf, and the Head of a Man being in his Sight looking at the
Bird, if this is graved in a precious Stone, called Pangonius, having many
Angles, and set in Gold, is to cause him who wears it to become rich and
respected by every Body.

The Figure of Jupiter, which is a Man sitting on a Bench or Chair with four
Feet, four Men standing before Jupiter, and Jupiter having his Hands erected
toward Heaven, and on his Head a Diadem; if such a Figure is graved in a
Jacinct, and set in Gold, and this Ring worn, or an Impression thereof made in
Wax, and tied to the Neck of a Person, it will cause him to have granted of
Kings and wise People, every thing he desires.

The Figure of a Man on Horseback, holding in one Hand the Bridle, and in the
other a Bow bent, and girded with a Sword; if such a Figure is graved in a
precious Stone called Pyrites, before mentioned, and set in Gold, it is to
render him who wears it victorious in a Battle, and no body can resist him.

The Figure of a Woman, having her Hairs spread over her Breast, and in her
Sight a Man as coming unto her and making some Signs of Love, being graved in a
Jacinct or Crystal and set in Gold, and under the Stone a little Ambergrise.
Aloe and Mugwort or Motherwort, will cause him who wears such a Stone in a
Ring to be obeyed by every body, and if he touches a Woman therewith she will
love him; and if he lays it under his Head at going to Bed, he will see any
thing he desires.

The Image of a Man sitting over a Fish, and over the Head of the Man a
Peacock, being graved in a red Stone, and laid under the Table at a Feast, no
Body, eating with the right Hand, will be satiated.

The Image of a naked Man standing, and at his right Hand a Girl likewise
standing, whose Hairs are tied round the Head, and the Man is holding his left
Hand over her Breast, and the Right round her Neck, looking in her Face, and
the Girl looking downwards; if such a Figure is graved in a Stone and set in an
Iron Ring, and under the Stone laid a little Bit of a Sparrow's Tongue, and of
that of a Bird called Upupa, Myrrh, Alum, and human Blood; the Person who
wears such a Ring will be invincible, no body can resist, and no Beast can
hurt him. It will cure the Falling Sickness, if red Wax is sealed therewith and
tied to the Neck; and if it is held to the Neck of a Dog, it will stop his
barking.

The Image of a Man holding Flowers in his Hand, being graved in a Cornelian,
and set in a Pewter Ring, the Ring being made on a Monday or Friday in the 4th,
8th or 12th Hour, every Body will obey who is touched with this Ring.

The Figure of a Man bearded, with a long Face and bended Eyebrows, sitting
upon a Plow, between two Bulls, and having a Vulture in his Hand, being graved
in a Stone, is of Virtue to cause good Success in planting of Trees,
discovering of Treasures, and to be victorious in Battles. It cures the
Falling Sickness, and must be set and worn in an Iron Ring.

The Figure of a Man holding a Scythe in his Hand over his Head, and under his
Feet a Crocodile, being graved in a Stone, and set in a leaden Ring, and under
the Stone laid a little of the Root of an Herb called Sea-Onyon, is to cause
him who wears it to be secure against all his Enemies, and on Journies
against Robbers and Highwaymen.

The Figure of a Man holding a Sword in his Hand, and sitting on a Dragon,
being graved in an Amethyst, and set in a leaden or Iron Ring, is to procure to
him who wears such a Ring, the Obedience of all Spirits and Discovery of all
Treasures.

The Figure of an Eagle standing, graved in a precious Stone called Aetites,
before mentioned, and set in a leaden Ring, causes him who wears it to be
successful in fishing; no Beast can hurt him, and he is beloved by every Body.

The Figure of a Man, having in his Hand a Bough of a Palm or Date Tree, being
graved in a Stone, is to render him who wears it acceptable and beloved by
Princes and great People. As much out of Hermes.

Images or Seals of Thetel.
Thetel, a very ancient Doctor, writing of Gravings in Stones, relates the
following Seals to be of a great Virtue.

The Image of a Man graved in a Jasper, having a Shield in the left and some
Weapons in the right Hand; instead of the Feet, Vipers, and instead of a Man's
Head, a Head of a Cock or Lion, to be of Virtue against Enemies, and to cause
him who wears it, to be victorious; and that such a Stone is prevailing
against Poison, and stays Blood from what Place soever it proceeds.

The Figure of a Man having a Bundle of Flowers on his Neck, graved in a
Jasper, to give Virtue to understand Diseases, and to stop Blood from what
place soever it proceeds. And it is said that Galen had such a Stone.

A Woman having in one Hand a Bird, and in the other a Fish, graved in a
Chrysolite, to profit much in negotiating.

The Figure of a Stag, graved in a Jasper, to have the Virtue to cure lunatic
and frantic People.

The Figure of a Virgin with a long Garment, holding a Laurel in her Hand,
being graved in a Jasper, to secure him who wears it from being drowned, and
to procure every thing to be granted to him. So far Thetel.

Seals of Solomon.
An ancient Book being found in the Wilderness by the Children of Israel, which
comprehends many Works of Solomon, has therefore been ascribed to Solomon. The
Title of this Book is, Of the Seals of Stones, according to thy Name, O Lord,
and according to the Course of the Stars.

The Figure of a Man sitting on a Plough, having a short Neck and a long Beard,
four Men lying upon his Neck, holding in one Hand a Fox, and in the other a
Vulture; such a Seal being tied to the Neck, is profitable to Husbandry and
discovering of Treasures. The Trial thereof is to be made following, viz. Take
pure black Wool without being dyed, wrap your Stone therein, and after having
laid it between Wheat Straw, lay your Head upon it, and you will see in your
Sleep all the Treasures of the Country you are in. It has likewise the Virtue
to cure all Languishings of Beasts, if they drink of the Water wherein this
Stone has been washed.

A Man graved in a green Jasper, having a Shield bending on his Neck, and a
Helmet upon his Head, with a Sword erected, treading upon a Serpent; such a
Stone if you wear on your Neck, you will fear no Enemy; you will be victorious
in every thing, but chiefly in martial Things. It must be set in Brass.

A Horse carrying on its Back a Crocodile, graved in a white Jacinct, to render
one beloved by Men and Beasts.

The Figure of a Man sitting, and a Woman standing before him with her Hairs
hanging down to the Thighs, lifting her Eyes upwards, being graved in a
Cornelian, has the Virtue to cause every Body to be obedient. It must be set
in double the Weight of Gold, and under it laid Betony and Ambergrise.

A Horse foaming, and a Man upon its Back having a Scepter in his Hand, graved
in an Amethyst, is to procure the Favor of Princes and great People to him who
wears it. It must be set in Gold or Silver of double the Weight in respect to
the Stone.

The Head of a Man, with a long Beard and a little Blood about his Neck, being
graved in a Diamond, procures Victory and Audacity, preserves the Body from
being hurt, and causes Favor from Princes.

The Image of a Cock, or of three Girls, being grave in an Agath, makes him
who wears it beloved by Men.

The Figure of a Lion graved in a Gernet, is to procure Riches, to rejoice the
Heart and to expel Sadness.

The Figure of a Man, like a Merchant carrying Goods to sell, graved in an
Emerald, is to procure Riches, to make victorious, and to ease from Troubles
and Grief of Mind.

The Figure of a Bull or a Calf, graved in a Loadstone, to procure a prosperous
Journey through every Place one travelleth, and to secure against Enchantments.

The Figure of a Horse or a Wolf, graved in a Jasper, to cure Fevers and to
stop Blood.

The Figure of a Man armed with a Sword in his Hand, graved in Stone called
Sardius Found in Sardinia, from whence it has its Name; it is a kind of Onyx
of a black Color.
, or in an Amethyst, to procure to him who wears it a good Memory, and to
make him witty.

The Figure of a Stag or a Buck Goat, graved in a Chalcedony, has the Virtue
to increase Riches if it is worn in a Purse where is Money in.

The Figure of a Lobster (Locusta Marina) graved in a Beryl, to make up
Quarrels and to cause Love between married People.

The Figure of a Night-Crow or Raven (Nocticorax or Nycticorax, a Bird
dedicated to Pallas) graved in a Stone, to cause a Man to be skillful and
eloquent.

The Image of a Peacock graved in a convenient Stone, to make him who wears
it rich.

The Figure of a Man, killing with a Sword a Lion or any other Beast, to make
him who wears it victorious and beloved.

The Figure of a naked Man, puffed up and crowned, holding in one Hand a great
Cup, and in the other a Bough of an Herb, being graved in an Agath Stone, and
set in a Ring of any Metal, has the Virtue to free him who wears it
immediately from a Fever.

The Figure of a Man sitting on Fishes, graved in a red Jasper, and laid near
one, is to hinder him to be satiated, in case he eats with his right Hand.

The Figure of a Woman, having her Hairs spread abroad, her Breasts naked, in
her Sight being a Man looking in her Face; if this Figure is graved in a
Jacinct, Garnet or Crystal, and set in a Ring of Gold of the same Weight as the
Stone is, and under the Stone Ambergrise, Aloe and Polypody, it will procure to
him who wears it the Love and Regard of every body, and if he lays it under
his Head he will see in his sleep every thing he desires to see.

The Figure of a Man being on Horseback, holding in one Hand the Bridle, and in
the other a Bow, and being girded with a Sword; if such a Figure is graved in a
Stone called Pyrites, before mentioned, and set in a golden Ring, it has the
Virtue to make him who wears it victorious in Battles, and no body can resist
him; if he dippeth the Ring in Oil of Nutmegs, every Body will fear him, and if
he anointeth his Face with this Oil, no body will oppose him.

The Figure of a naked Man, and at his right Hand standing a Girl naked, and
having her Hairs tied about her Head, the Man laying his right Hand round the
Neck of the Girl, and the left upon her Breast, the Man looking in the Face of
the Girl, and she toward the Ground; if such a Figure is graved in a
Loadstone, and set in a Ring of Iron of as much Weight as the Stone is, and
under the Stone laid the Tongue of an Houp (Upupa) Myrrh, Alum, and as much
human Blood as the Weight of the Tongue, no body can resist him who wears
such a Ring either in War or elsewhere, no Robber nor savage Beast can come in
the House where such a Stone is kept; and one afflicted with the falling
Sickness, is cured by drinking the Water wherein this Ring is washed. If a
Piece of red Wax is sealed with this Image and tied to the Neck of a Dog, it
will hinder him to bark.

The Figure of a Woman, holding in one Hand a Bird, and in the other a Fish,
graved in Crystal, is profitable in Catching of Birds. It must be set in Silver.

The Figure of a Man with the Head of a Buck-Goat instead of his own, to be
powerful in acquiring of Riches.

The Figure of an Eagle graved in a Crystal, to make him who wears it rich,
victorious and eloquent.

The Figure of a Turtle graved in a Stone called Pangonius (a precious Stone
with many Angles) and set in a leaden Ring, is to cause him who wears it to
be never wounded nor hurted, and to be honored by every body, chiefly by old
People.

The Figure of a Bird holding a Leaf in his Bill, and in his Sight being the
Head of a Man or of a Vulture, graved in Gold, is to procure to him who wears
it Profit in every thing he buyeth and sells, and to draw Customers to him.

The Figure of a winged Horse, called Pegasus, being graved in a Stone, to be
profitable to Warriors, and to give Audacity and Alacrity.

Mars armed, or a Virgin with a Garment bended or turned round about her, being
graved in Jasper, is to be useful in Warfare, to secure him who wears it
against a violent Death and other unlucky Accidents.

The Figure of an armed Man on Horseback, with a Javelin in his Hand, graved in
an Amethyst, is to cause him who wears it to be victorious in War.

The Figure of Hercules, holding in his right Hand a Club, and killing a Lion
or any other Monster, being graved in a Stone, has the Virtue to him who
wears it, Victory in all Battles.

The Figure of a Virgin holding a Lamp, being graved in a Crystal, has the
Virtue to preserve the Eye Sight.

The Figure of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, graved in a precious Stone, to
prevail against cold Diseases, and to resist phlegmatic Fevers, and by reason
of the Planets which are ruling in these Signs, to procure Dignities, to make
beloved by God and Men, eloquent and ingenious; but it must be graved
triangular-wise, in the upper Part Leo, and below at the right Hand Aries, and
at the left Sagittarius.

The Figure of Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus, graved in a Stone, is to prevail
against hot and moist Diseases. It causes him who wears it to incline to
rural Business, as plowing, planting, sowing, cultivating of Vineyards and the
like. Capricornus must be graved in the Cone, at the right Hand Taurus, and at
the left Virgo.

The Image of Gemini, Libra and Aquarius, graved in a Stone, is powerful
against cold and dry Diseases arising from melancholic Humors; chiefly it
prevails against Quartans. Libra must be graved at the Point of the Triangle,
and at the right of the Basis Aquarius, and at the left Gemini.

The Figure of Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, graved in a Stone, has the Virtue
to prevail against hot and dry Diseases, and such as do proceed from Choler;
but it causes him who wears it to be inconstant, unjust, and an Enemy to
Truth. Cancer must be graved at the Point of the Triangle, below, at the right
Hand Pisces, and at the left Scorpio.

Seals of Planets.
The Figure of Saturn is graved on Stones as follows. An old Man holding a
Sickle in his Hand, having a Beard not very hairy; if such a Figure is graved
in a Stone of the Nature of Saturn, it will make him who wears it powerful,
with a continual Increase of Power.

The Image of Jupiter, is a Man sitting on a Throne or Chair with four Feet,
having in one Hand a Rod, and in the other a Globe, and at his Feet an Eagle;
but the Doctors of Magicks form it otherwise, viz. The Figure of a Man with a
Ram's Head, withered Heels and a little Breast, which being graved in a Stone,
chiefly in one called Krabatus, is to make him who wears it fortunate,
beloved, and respected by religious People, and to raise him to Honor and
Dignity.

The Image of Mars is diversely figured, sometimes with a Banner or Flag in his
Hand, sometimes with a Lance or any other warlike Instrument, but always armed,
and sometimes on Horseback. The Virtue of a Stone wherein such a Figure is
graved, is to make him who wears it victorious, bold and valiant, chiefly if
a Stone is used for this Purpose of the same Nature.

The Figure of Sol is differently found; sometimes like with Beams round about,
sometimes like a Man sitting on a Throne with Hairs spread abroad and a very
sumptuous Garment, sometimes in a Chariot, as if drawn by four Horses, and
round about the Chariot the twelve Signs of the Zodiac. The Virtue of their
Figure graved in a Stone, is to cause him who wears it, to command and to be
intimate with great People.

The Image of Venus is likewise manifold, but the following is more frequently
graved in Stones. A Woman with a long Robe, and in her Hand a Bay Leaf. The
Virtue thereof is to give an Agility in performing Business, to bring every
thing to a good Success, to free from Fear of being drowned, and to procure
Honors from Women.

The Figure of Mercury is a Man, having a slender or small Breast, an handsome
Beard, Shoes with Wings, holding a Rod or white Wand and a Cock before his Feet
or a Serpent under his Feet. The Virtue thereof is to procure Wisdom and
Eloquence, and to be profitable for Trade.

The Images of Luna are various. Sometimes it is represented in the Figure of
the Moon, with Horns; sometimes in a Chariot as a Girl with a Quiver of Arrows,
with Dogs persecuting a Stag. The Virtue of this Image is to cause Success in
Expeditions, Honor and Wealth, a Celerity and Facility in all Undertakings and
the Bringing of every Thing to the desired End. But it ought to be observed,
that the Planet whose Image you intend to have graved and set in a convenient
Ring, is to be well disposed, that is to say, not burnt, retrograde, oppressed
or touched by malignant Beams; but he ought to be in a good Place, either
toward the East or the Middle of the Firmament agreeing with Jupiter or Venus,
otherwise your Image or Seal will be of no Signification.

For procuring Love you make Use of favorable Aspects, and for provoking
Hatred of averse or unfavourable ones. The Image of Saturn is therefore to be
graved when it exists in Capricorn or Aquarius; of Jupiter in Sagittarius or
Pisces, of Mars in Aries and Scorpio, of Sol in Leo, of Venus in Taurus and
Libra, of Mercury in Gemini and Virgo, Luna in Cancer. Also the Image of Leo or
Cancer is to be graved or set in a Ring, when Sol is going through Leo, and
Luna through Cancer, but also that both of them be free from all Impediments,
chiefly from the Beams of Saturn or Mars. It is to be observed, that each Sign,
as long as Sol is in it, is strong and rules over the others; consequently is
of a more prevailing Virtue and more to be perceived than the Others; you ought
therefore always to direct the Planet to the Place, that is to say, the Sign,
Face and Degree, which Sol does illustrate.

So much of magical Images of the ancient Sophi, which I have inserted chiefly
for Reason to demonstrate thereby, that these as well as many more, which could
be mentioned, were founded upon nothing else than Magical Philosophy; that is
to say, upon the Principles of a true and natural Magic, though I do not deny
that Superstition has creep'd into a good many of them.

Usus habet laudem, crimen abusus habet. The same is to be said of thin Plates
of Gold and Silver, round, square or triangular, wherein Characters and
Signatures are ingrav'd under certain Constellations according to the Desire
one has to procure to himself the Favor and the Influence of some Planets.
And it is sufficiently known, that such Plates being duly wrought and prepared
and hanged about the Neck, or born about, have a Virtue and Power against some
Evil. But it is exactly to be observed, that the Planet, whose Influence is
desired, be at the Time of the Graving strong and fortunate, that is to say, in
a proper House, Exaltation Eastward, or in the Middle of the Firmament, free
from the malignant Beams of Saturn or Mars, supported by Venus or Jupiter or
joined by them, direct, swift in his Course, not burnt, etc.

But why and wherefore Rings, Images and Figures graved in certain Metals and
Stones have the Virtues I have recited, is a Question not to be decided by the
Temperament or manifest Qualities, nor is it to be assigned to the Substance
itself, but to a Heavenly and magical One, that is to say, to a Superior and
mo re sublime Cause, which some not unfitly have called a spiritual Vehicle and
Bond. By the Help of it Body and Soul, Substance very distant and remote from
one another, are joined, and by the Intervention or Intercession of this
Vehicle, the Loadstone draws Iron unto it, and Cichoreum follows the Motion
of the Sun.

Not every Philosophical Demonstration is to be taken from the Senses and
Qualities. A manifest Proof thereof is in the Color of a white Rose; from
whence does its Color proceed? if you ascribe the Cause thereof to a colder
Temperament, what will you say of the Red one? A Kind of Intybus gives a milky
Juice, which you ascribe to a cold Quality: but what will you say of
Tithymalus, a Herb called Sealettice, Wolfes-milk or Milk-thistle, which gives
likewise a milky Juice and is hot enough? The Bitterness of Aloe, you say, does
proceed because it is of a hot Nature; but Opium, which kills by its
pernicious Coldness, has likewise a great Bitterness. It is in vain to ascribe
every Thing to the manifest Qualities: Scalciger calls it a great Impudence,
and shows the Insufficiency of such Reasons only in the several Kinds of
Poisons.

Thus far we have considered the Principles and Causes of marvelous and hidden
Actions in Nature; it remains now to make an Application of these Principles to
the Method of Curing Wounds, I am going to publish.

I believe every Body is convinced by what I have said, that Plants, Roots,
Stones, Metals, the Spirit and celestial Signs, are by a divine Law as it were
partaking and conspiring together, seemingly for no other Reason, than as Plato
says, because to each Species is a peculiar celestial Sign, like the Pole to
the Loadstone, by our Creator consecrated and dedicated; also that each Plant,
each Metal, and each precious Stone is of a Sympathy with a certain Star or
celestial Sign. But the more sublime this Position is, the farther we are to go
back to the Beginning, and the more diligent Search we are to make therein. We
do all agree that Heaven and every Thing has been immediately created by God,
and that every Thing has received and does keep its Virtue as well for
preserving itself, as for bringing forth its like. Because God, who ever works
by the most compendious Way, has, after having given every Things its
particular Virtue, appointed the Heavens for the farther continual Working
thereby. Now as the Seed is endued with a vital Power, which prepares,
disposes and makes fit the Matter for bringing forth its like, also, that at
all Times it may receive and draw unto itself that animating and spiritual
Power from Heaven, which is the very Cause of the Support of all what is
created, we may say, that the Seed furnishes the Matter, and Heaven puts on
the Form. Also a Man does beget a Man, the Man by Virtue of the Seed procures
and brings together the Apparel, and is causa proxima. The Spirit and the
Warmth which is in the Seed, prepares the Matter of the Seed: first it causes
a Mingling and Tempering together consonant to each signal Part which is to be
made thereof; and then it gives the Structure, Conformity and Posture; lastly
it diffuseth itself through all the Parts and abides therein as a Ruler, and
refuses to forsake what it has tempered, formed, and composed, the other
efficient Cause of a Man's Being, and indeed the First and Principal one is,
which gives a Species Form or Shape to this single prepared Matter, which is
Heaven; for the Species of Things are cast in by Heaven, and not by the Matter
itself.

The Sayings of the Ancients: Deum per naturas esse divisum, and Deorum plena
esse omnia, are to be understood, that the Virtue received and infused by God
remains in every thing; that a godly Virtue is in every thing, by whose Power
every thing comes forth; but otherwise in Heaven and otherwise in Things which
are not able to bear up themselves; in such it is more obscure, but in Heaven
more evident and more excellent to the Generation of Things. What therefore God
has created in Heaven and Earth, is entirely maintained and ruled by him; the
celestial Ones immediately by himself, and the terrestrial Ones by the
Subordination of the Heavens appointed for the Procreation and Conservation of
all sublunary Beings. The Species, Forms or Shapes of all living Creatures,
Roots, Stones and Metals, which ever have been or can be, are compassed by the
Power Heaven is endued with, which being big, as it were, with an innumerable
Number of Species or Forms, ingenders every thing; and by this way one Power
and Faculty has in itself the Virtues of all the Bodies below. Heaven
therefore produces without Seed many things, but no Seed is able to bring
forth any thing without Heaven; but it being duly prepared and set in Order,
Heaven casts into it its Species and Perfection, it raises up Life in every
thing by the Interceding of the Bright universal Spirit: For this is the
Carrier between Heaven and Earth, diffused throughout the whole Universe, who
communicates to all and every thing at one and the same Time its Species, and
native vital Heat accommodated to its Ingendring. It is he, who does contain
every thing, and does cherish it with Heat and Life; through his Power and Help
Things without Life do subsist, and animate Things have a Soul according to
each Kind, a nourishing one, some have a sensual one, and some a Soul endued
with or partaking of Reason. But this Power descending from Heaven, does
accommodate itself to every thing; it serves each one with as much as its
Nature desires, and never gives more than the Condition of each Subject can
bear. Neither is this Virtue always like unto itself, nor does it always and in
the same Manner exhibit itself to every thing, but variousty according to the
Station of the Stars and their different casting forth of Beams, who for the
most Part do vary very much, though this Carrier, I say, this universal Spirit,
is always the same and of a not changing Substance.

It is therefore not likely, as some think, that this Spirit of the World can
impart to every thing Life and Form, without being in Want of the Assistance of
the celestial Bodies, or the Stars; for if this was possible, he would engender
always the like in one and the same Way, that is to say, in the same Measure
and perpetually. For he carries with him a vital Soul and Nature itself, and
makes lively all what he enters, but all this according to the Nature,
Condition, Disposition and Preparation of each Subject.

It being evident by what I have said, that the celestial Bodies do concur to
the Procreation and Preservation of all Things; and that all Parts of the World
do cleave or are joined together, or embrace one another, by this common
Carrier the universal Spirit, being of a middling Substance between Heaven and
the sublunar Beings; and that there is no one Thing in the World so abject,
upon which this Spirit does not bestow some Virtue and Quality, with which it
is infused by Heaven and the celestial Bodies; that, as this Spirit meddleth
with the bringing forth of all Things, every Thing must be comprehended in it;
I say, as all this is evident by what I have advanced, who can doubt of the
Possibility of curing Wounds without applying any Remedy, only by anointing the
Instrument wherewith such a Wound is made? Or, who can deny that such Cures are
natural? Certainly they can be demonstrated out of the very Principles of
Nature itself, and who denies it, is either ignorant thereof, or thinks proper
to measure every Thing with his Senses. For these Cures are performed merely by
Nature and a magnetical Power, Drawing (Attractio) and Conveying (Deductio) the
Influence of celestial Bodies working by the Elements; and this so often
mentioned Carrier the universal Spirit, who, as the mean Bond, induces from
proper Constellations a Sympathy, knitting together, or Convenience, as Tully
says, out of which next a healing Virtue is derived to the Instrument, from
whence afterward it goes out, and is continued and conveyed to the wounded
Part; lastly, by the Action of this spiritual Virtue, the Effect ensues. For
between the Wound and the Instrument is a magnetical Drawing and Conveying
Power (Attractrix and Deductrix); the first tends to the Part afflicted or the
Wound, that is to say, the Drawing (Attractio) goes to the wounded Part, and
the conveying of the Virtue (Deductio) to the Instrument anointed.

But there is objected, that the Space coming between the Time and Place does
hinder this conveying or healing, and that nothing can act beyond its limited
Space; moreover that it is necessary the Body to be healed, should be touched
by that which is to heal; and properly touching cannot be said but of Things
whose Extremities or Ends meet together. Now such a Touching does not happen
between the Wound and the Instrument anointed; consequently no Cure can be
performed.

Nobody will argue in this Manner but sensual Philosophers: But it is very easy
to confute their Arguments. Who knows not that many Things act at a Distance,
whose Outsides, or Superficies, can never be joined, and notwithstanding they
meet together, viz. the Sun and a Man's Body; though their Superficies can
never be joined together, nevertheless the Beams, being between, actually do
join them; for no natural Actives can act in extremum before acting in medium,
because every physical or natural Action is performed by Touching. The Sun
warmeth the inferior World by the Orb of the Moon, though it never touches it,
nor warmeth the Sphere of the Moon. Also all Bodies, between which is a
Sympathy or Antipathy, mutually affect one another, and work upon one another
without any visible Touching, that is to say, the Virtue of one is carried to
the other by the Intervention or Intercession of the universal Spirit; also,
that though the Space is very great, this Virtue is nevertheless not altered
nor dispersed by Winds, nor dissolved by a cold and moist Air, but by Reason of
its natural Communion, Accord and Bond, preserved and continued.

Also in Contagions, Bodies do not touch one another; and, in pestilential
Fevers, many are infected who never come near sick People, that is to say,
their extreme Parts do not meet: For the malignant and corrupt Quality of these
Fevers defiles the Bodies by propagating and diffusing itself and continuing.
Therefore who communicates to another a Disease, needs not to touch him, but
the corrupt Breath or Vapors may be sent and hidden in Garments and other
Things, (witness the daily Experience,) and infect another many Days after; and
though we cannot properly say, that such an infected one has been touched by
another, nevertheless we can without Doubt affirm, that no Disease can be
communicated from one to another without a Body, that is to say, they cannot be
carried or conveyed without the Intervention of a spiritual Substance or
Humor. It is therefore undeniable, that there are many Actions performed
without a visible Touching, and that many Bodies act upon one another mutually,
without meeting together by the Touching of their Bodies, but of their Virtues;
and this Virtue which Bodies make use of and put forth at a Distance, is a
Quality without a Body, wherein the whole Power lies. Also the Power issuing
from this Ointment does not spread itself out in the Stone, in Iron or Wood,
with which it has no Affinity, but propagateth itself to the Wound by Virtue
of its Mover.

The first Thing which moves in this Ointment, is the Balsamic Power hidden in
the Blood and in the Moss, which, by the Intervention of the spiritual Bond, is
continued to the Wound, and except the Distance is too great, becomes one and
the same with it by joining both Forms. I say, they join, because their Forms
do extend themselves, and mutually meeting they unite together. Both what
moves and what is moved, becomes one, either by an immediate Application and
Joining of both Superficies, or the Virtue of one is conveyed to the
Superficies, consequently to the Body of the other; let it be done by Light,
Beams or any other hidden Quality and spiritual Touching. Therefore this
Ointment reaches the Wound, or is joined to the Wound as an efficient Power,
or as Actives to Passives; or as a Thing transmuting or altering to a Body to
be transmuted: In the same manner Heaven is joined to Earth, which nevertheless
according to its Superficies is not contiguous with it, that is to say, the
Extremities of Heaven and Earth do not touch one another.

The vulgar physical Canons are therefore not to be understood without
Exceptions, viz. that the Extremities of Actives and Passives do always touch
one another; and that Actives have no Power upon Passives, except their
superficial Outsides or Extremities touch together. For the Quality, or the
celestial and magnetical Virtue by the Help of this conveying Spirit, is in the
Ointment, the Cause, and as it were the Vehicle, which being moved, the Thing
to be carried is likewise moved. In the Vehicle is required, that it may be apt
for carrying, and for carrying is nothing more apt than the celestial
magnetical Virtue; which, as it were, intercedeth between the Instrument and
the wounded Place, moving and directing every Thing for obtaining the desired
Effect. For between this Virtue and Vehicle is first of all a Sympathy, which
afterward is conveyed to the Instrument; from thence to the Wound by Reason of
the Familiarity and Similitude; for this is the efficient Cause, why Things are
wrapped and tied together. Therefore nobody can deny, that there is a Touching
between the Instrument and the Wound, though it is not performed immediately by
joining the Extremities together, because there is no Necessity for it in this
Mystery. The Principles which are acting in this Case not being corporeal,
there is likewise no corporeal Touching required. The Virtue is brought to the
Wound mediately by interceding (as I have often repeated) of a more sublime and
incorporeal Power, which the Doctors of natural Magicks have called a
magnetical one.

It remains nothing but to give a Description of the Ointment wherewith
magnetical Cures of Wounds without Pains, and without an immediate Application
of any Remedy, are performed. Baptista Porta gives a Description of some such
Composition, and introduces Paracelsus for its Author: But this Composition is
very defective, as every body may see by comparing it to the following.
Besides, it has been contradicted by many, that Paracelsus could be the Author
thereof, which joined to the Credulity wherewith the said Porta has collected
and published a great many Compositions, nothing at all to be depended upon,
gives Room to believe, that he was unable to assure the Veracity of his
Description by any other means than by introducing Paracelsus for its Author. I
believe therefore the following Description will be the more acceptable, as by
long Experience of different Persons it has been found to answer the End for
which it is designed.

The Description is as follows, viz.

Of Sanicle (Lat. Sanicula) which is spotted, and has the Signature of the
Lungs.

Of Bugle (Lat. Consolida media, Buglum, Bugla, Bugula) both being gathered
fresh, and dried in the Shade, and afterward made to Powder; you take of each
one Ounce.

Oil of Linseed.

Turpentine.

Armeniac Bolus, of each two Drachms.

Human Fat, four Ounces.

Genuine Mummy.

Human Blood, being yet warm.

Of the Moss which grows upon the Skull of a Man, being hanged and left
hanging; of each one Ounce.

All being well mixed in a Mortar, must be kept close in a Glass or earthen
Vessel with a narrow Neck, being glazed within.

The whole is to be made when the Sun does exist in Libra; but the Moss is to
be gathered when the Moon increases and does exist in the House of Venus if
possible, not in Saturn or Mars. If you cannot expect the Moon's existing in
the House of Venus, you are diligently to observe when Luna is in the Sign of
Pisces, to gather the Moss at that time, because this Sign is the most
convenientest by reason of Jupiter's Dwelling Place, and Venus's Exaltation;
the next after it is Taurus and Libra.

By this Ointment also prepared, all manner of Wounds given by Instruments,
either pierced, or stricken, or blown, are cured, if only the Instrument can be
had; but such Wounds are excepted where the Arteries or some of the principal
Members, as the Heart, Brains, etc. are hurted.

The Instrument with which the Wound is made, or in want thereof, a piece of
Wood or a little Bough of Willow, steeped in the bloody Opening, is to be
plunged in the Ointment and therein to be left: The wounded Person, meanwhile,
has only to wash the Wound daily once with his Urine or fresh Water, and to
cover it with a piece of clean Linen, always wiping away the Filth, and the
Wound will heal and consolidate without any Pains. If the Instrument wherewith
the Wound is made cannot be had, another Instrument is to be steeped in the
Wound, and after it is anointed on both Sides with this Instrument, it is to be
kept in a clean and temperate Place, because if it is exposed to the Air or too
much Cold, the Wound will begin to smart. It is likewise to be observed, if the
Wound is made edgling or pointingly. In the last Case the Instrument is to be
anointed from the Point toward the Handle; in the first, from the Edge toward
the Back; and in all Cases the Instrument is diligently to be covered. If it
does not appear how deep the Instrument has been in the Wound, all is to be
anointed, but if it appears, only the Part which was plunged in the Wound.

As for the Moss growing upon the Skull of a Man being hanged, it may seem to
many to be a useless Nicety, and that perhaps any other, though not grown upon
the Skull of a Man hanged, may do the same. But the following Reason, with
which I conclude, may be given for why the last has a Preference in the
Composition of this Magnetical Remedy. The vital Spirits of a Man to be
strangled, by reason of the Presence of his unhappy Chance, do retire to the
Head and Brains, and the violent Constriction hinders their going back to
their Principles; they remain also there and mingle, and are confounded with
the Spirits and the Balsam of the Head and Brains; and though all animal
Functions do cease, nevertheless there remains a certain Heat or Warmness in
the Bones, Nerves, and the other similar Parts, which is in Stones and in
Pepper, that is to say, an elemental one. Now after this Mixture, and through
the help of this Heat and the joint working of a heavenly Influence, Moss, like
a Vegetable growing upon the Skull of a Man being hanged, must needs be of a
greater Force than such as grows upon the Head of another who died of some
Disease.

FINIS.

