A COLLECTION FROM Dyer's Letters, Concerning the ELECTIONS OF THE Present
Parliament: WITH AN APPENDIX, relating to some other Public Matters.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by B. Bragg, in Ave-Mary-Lane. 1706.

Advertisement.
WHereas Her Majesty has been Graciously Pleased, on all Occasions, to express
Her truly Royal and Religious Concern, for promoting the Welfare of Her
Subjects; and particularly for uniting them in their Common Interest against
the Common Enemy. On the contrary, Our Domestic and most Dangerous Enemies
have been Indefatigable in their Industry to obstruct these glorious Designs of
Her Majesty and Her Ministers, by fomenting our Animosities, and perpetuating
our unhappy Divisions.

And whether those Weekly Papers from whence this Collection is taken, may not
be reckoned amongst these mischievous Engines that have been set at Work for
some Years past, is humbly submitted to the Consideration of the Persons in
Authority, as a necessary Duty and Service to he Public.

A COLLECTION OF Several Paragraphs Out of Mr. Dyer's LETTERS.
London, May 3d, 1705.
YEsterday my Lord Keeper sent out Writs for a New Parliament, and the first
Election will be on Monday next at Malden in Essex, where two honest Loyal
Gentlemen, called by the Whigs Tackers, will be chosen: The rest of the
Elections will come on very quick, and be soon over.

May 5th.
OUR Port Letters have nothing in them considerable, nor have we any public
News but what relates to the approaching Elections; and more particularly from
Exon, we have an Account of the honorable Reception there of John Snell, Esquire
one of the Representatives in the late Parliament, an honest, loyal, and brave
Tacker, who arrived from London on the 1st instant, having been met some Miles
out of Town by above 500 Horse, and some 1000 Foot, composed of the
Neighboring Gentry, with the Clergy, Aldermen, and principal Citizens; who
conducted him to his own House, with the City Music playing before him, the
Streets ecchoing with these Acclamations; God bless the Loyal Tackers, and send
the Sneakers more Honesty and Courage.

At Dartmouth they have that Veneration for the Service of their worthy
Representatives, Fred. and Not. Hern, Esquires, that they have Christened a
Ship by the Name of Tacker.

We hear that 17 Strangers are like to be chosen in Wiltshire, not one of them
having a Foot of Land in that County, to the Reproach of the Electors, for not
having a greater Value for the honest, loyal, neighboring Gentry.

May 8th.
WE have an Account that these Elections were made Yesterday; viz. Malden in
Essex, Will. Fytche and Joh. Comyns, Esquires, Tackers: Town of Hertford,
Charles Caesar and Rich. Gulston, Esquires, Tackers: Agmondesham, Lord Cheyne,
and Sir Sam. Garrard, Bar', the last a Tacker, the other a Well-Wisher to them;
so that here is five out of six, which is a good Beginning, and it is believed
very few of the 134 will miss of their Elections, notwithstanding the senseless
Clamours of Whiggish Libellers. Sir Will. Drake has brought an Action against
an Attorney of Exon for calling him Tacker, and saying he is a Friend to France.

The B. of S. labors Tooth and Nail to oppose these sort of Gentlemen,
declaring from the Pulpit, that it was the Orders of the Q^n, and the D^ of M^
to excite the People against the Tackers, and sent the ensuing Circular Letters
to the inferior Clergy of his Diocese; viz.

Gentlemen,
I have been B^ here 16 Years, and never meddled with any Elections till now;
but now the Q^n seeing which way things are going, gave us particular Commands
to take Care, and send such Persons as will support her and her Government. I
therefore recommend to you Sir Ed. E^y, and Mr. A^h, as fit Members. I shall
take further Inspection than you imagine, therefore remember, etc.


What sort of Churchmen these are the B^ recommends is well known.

We have an Account from Cheshire, that Sir George Warburton and Mr. Offley,
who stand Candidates for that County, have had a Rencounter, and are both
wounded.

May 10th.
WE have an Account of a pretty many Elections since my last, but Fortune has
favored the wrong side, for Mr. Nevile has carried it at Abingdon against Sir
Simon Harcourt by 30 odd Voices. At Ailsbury, Simon Main, Esquire against Simon
Harcourt, Clerk of the Crown. At Wallingford, Mr. Kent against Mr. Renda. At
Colchester, Mr. Bullock against Sir Tho. Cook. At Wendover, Sir Roger Hill
against Sir Richard Crawley. At Rochester, Mr. Knatchbull has lost it, as has
Mr. Randyl at Guilford. On the other Hand, Mr. Gape has carried it at St.
Albans, notwithstanding a great Lady went down thither to oppose him, whose
Endeavors, it is hoped, will no better succeed at Woodstock, in Favor of
Brigadier Cadoggan an Irishman. The County, City, and University of Oxford have
elected their old Tacking Members.

May 12th.
SInce my Last we have an Account of a great many Elections, some of which have
gone well, but more ill. Five honest Tackers have lost it in Kent, and two at
Haslemere in Surry, and one in Westminster. On the other Hand, the Honorable
Charles North, Esquire has carried it at Banbury; the Greviles at Warwick; and for
the County of Suffolk, the Earl of Dysert and Sir Rob. Davers; where there has
been such a Trial of the Strength of Parties, that the like has hardly been
known. The Poll ended on Wednesday Night, when 'twas found that Sir Rob. Davers
had 2883, the Earl of Dysert 2877, Sir Dudley Cullum 2318, Sir Sam.
Bernardiston 2286 Voices; so that the Election was carried by a great Majority,
if you consider the terrible Opposition that was made by the Low-Church men,
and their Friends, the Phanaticks of all sorts, supported by the D^ of G^n, the
Lords Cor^llis and H^y. But this Victory is owing in a great Measure to the
Diligence of the Clergy, of which 80 went and polled in one Body, and as many
singly, being not advertised of the Design; and to pin the Basket, Sir Tho.
Hanmer brought in a Body of 300 Horse, at the Sight of which the D^ withdrew
from the Window, and all was given up; and though the great Cry of the Whigs
was, and is, no Tackers, yet that is known to be only the Word that is given
out to the Party; the true Meaning is, No Church of England Man: For we find
that they have opposed Sir Simon Harcourt and others (that had not the Honor
to be of that Number) with the same Violence; and Sir Will. Ash^t, in a Letter
to his Friend at Warrington, tells him plainly, that it is past 12 a Clock with
the Church, so that she must come down. At these Proceedings the inferior
Clergy are so alarmed in Cheshire, that they design to appear in a Body for Sir
R. Motyn and Sir G. Warburton, the late Representatives for that County; and in
Essex for Sir Charles Barrington and Sir R. Child. Dr. Oats is gone to Poll at
Woodstock for Brigadier Cadoggan, of which Place he is a Burgess.

May 15th.
SInce my last a great many more Elections are made, which are too long for my
Purpose to enumerate. Brigadier Cadoggan has carried it at Woodstock against
Sir John Waters, a very worthy Gentleman; but Dr. Oats did not go to give his
Vote as was said he would, nor did the Solicitor General, though he had also a
Right so to do. The Lord Woodstock, Son of the Earl of Portland, has carried it
at Southampton against Frid. Tilney, Esquire a loyal and worthy Gentleman, which
was done by this Trick; That Gentleman happening to pay his Reckoning in that
Town with about 70 Loudores which he had received there, the Whig Party
immediately gave out, he was a French Pensioner, which Calumny answered their
Purpose.

A great Sum of Money has been spent at Newcastle under Line, by Mr. Offley and
Mr. Lawton, (the latter Brother-in-Law to my Lord Hallifax) to get in Burgesses
there; but Sir Tho. Bellot and Mr. Cotton have carried it, and the chief Reason
for their succeeding was, the Assurances they gave their Electors of their firm
Adhesion to the Church, in this Day of Danger.

The Report we had of a Rencounter which happened in Cheshire between Sir G.
Warburton and Mr. Offley, proves not true. Yesterday commenced the Election for
the City of London, and the four Whig Candidates were declared to have the
Majority upon View, and are like to carry it upon the Poll.

May 17th.
WE have an Account of a great many more Elections made since my last; and upon
the whole, a sort of an Equilibrium seems to be between the Parties: near 70 of
the Tackers are already chosen. In Essex Sir Chapter Barrington and Sir R. Child
have lost it by a great Majority, though they poll'd more Freeholders than in
former Elections; but the Whigs have found a way of granting quit Rents of 40
Shillings per Annum, resignable upon the Tender of Six Pence: Besides, the
Quakers in general throughout the Kingdom in this Election, Vote against the
Church.

The Poll in London runs still in Favor of the four Whigs, and their Election
will be declared this Evening.

May 19th.
YEsterday our Letters from the several Parts of the Kingdom brought an Account
of a great many more Elections that are made, and particularly for the County
of Gloucester, Col. Colchester and Sir John Guise have carried it against the
Honorable John How and Sir Ralph Dutton Bar'. For Warwickshire the old
Representatives Sir Chapter Shuckburgh and Sir John Mordaunt (the last a Tacker)
have carried it, being set up by the general Consent of the Gentry of that
County. One Captain Lucy, supported by the Assistance of three or four
Gentlemen, and the Assistance of all the Dissenters, attempted to have come in,
but was very much distanced, as you will see by their Numbers on the Poll. Sir
Chapter Shuckburgh 1984. Sir John Mordaunt 1884. Cap. Lucy 1116. The Bishop of
Worcester refused the latter his Interest upon Application to his Lordship, by
Reason a Fanatic Preacher is kept in his Family.

The Welsh Elections are not yet made, but we may guess how they will be by the
Loyal Health that is amongst them. viz.

He that owns with his Heart, and helps with his Hand,
The Church that is established by the Law of the Land,
Conforming for Conscience, and not on Occasion,
Not eluding the Law by a knavish Evasion,
Not melted through Favor, nor frozen through Fear
By the Smiles of the Court, or the Frowns of a Peer,
But boldly maintains his Religion and Right,
Dares die for the one, for the other dares fight;
This is the Man, and this alone,
Whose Health now I drink, whose Friendship I own.
Nor are the Cornish Elections yet made by Reason by a Trick or Manage the Writ
has been delayed. Sir R. Vivian has had the Misfortune to break his Leg,
however the Gentlemen of the County labor to support his Interest against Mr.
Boscawen.

On Thursday last came on the much contested Election for the University of
Cambridge. The Candidates were the Honorable Arthur Annesly, Esquire late Fellow
of Magdalen College, who had 185 Voices, and the Honorable Dixey Windsor, Esquire
Fellow of Trinity College, who had 170; opposed by Fr. Godolphin, Esquire my Lord
Treasurer's Son, who had 162 Voices, and Sir Isaac Newton (a late made Knight)
who had 117. Notwithstanding there was all the Management and Delay possible,
and the Heads of the Houses against the two first, yet 'twas carried for them,
to the unspeakable Joy of the hopeful and promising Part of the University; by
which we may see, that the Sense of both Universities was for the Occasional
Bill, and that they approved of the tacking it, by choosing the same Members
that joined in it.

I hear the Poll at Woodstock will be printed, that it may be seen who they
were that Poll'd for the Brigadier, whose Grandfather was Governor of Trim in
Ireland for the Parliament, and his Grandmother was Daughter to the famous Sir
Hardress Waller. On his Father's Side his Pedigree was proved by an Epitaph
that was made last Summer by one at the Herald Office, and was never yet upon a
Tomb.

May 22d.
YEsterday we had an Account of a great many more Elections that have been made
since my last, which for the most part have been in Favor of the Church
Interest; and particularly Sir R. Middleton, Bar', is elected for the County of
Denbigh, and Will. Robinson, Esquire for the Borough of that Name, they having
rejected Mr. Brereton, One of the Commissioners of Prizes, by Reason he was not
a Tacker.

Mr. Sacheverel met with terrible Opposition from the Whig Party at Nottingham,
which were supported by the D^ of N^, the Lords K^ton and H^w; however he
carried it by a considerable Majority, and they got him into the Chair before
eleven, at which the Whigs looked so simply as though 'twas past Twelve with
them. The Management of this Victory was due in a great measure to the
Neighboring Gentry, and in a more particular manner to that honorable
Gentleman Sir Tho. Willoughby, who has carried diverse other Elections which he
has been at with equal Success, as Newark, Retford, and Leicester; and on
Wednesday the 23d. is to be the Election for the County of Nottingham, where
Sir Thomas and Mr. Thornihagh are like to carry it without Opposition.

Sir Justinian Isham and Mr. Cartwright are rechosen for the County of
Northampton by a Majority of 400 Freeholders, though they were strenuously
opposed by my Lord Mordaunt (who it is said spent 2000 l.) and Sir Andrew St.
John. Sir Will. Drake, a brave Tacker, is chosen at Honiton, with Sir Walter
Young (whom the Electors made promise to be one upon Occasion) Sir John Elwill
was vastly distanced: The two first were met and ushered into Town by above
1000 Gentlemen on Horseback, all wearing a Golden Tacker in their Hats: The
same Day Mr. Reynell and Mr. Yard, two loyal Gentlemen carried it at Ashburton,
against Sir John Elvil and his Son.

The two loyal Sons of the Church and Tackers, Nath. and Fred. Hern, Esquires,
were unanimously rechosen at Dartmouth, and Sir Hump. Mackworth with Mr.
Coulson at Totnes; so that the Word Tacker, which the Phanaticks thought to
have made a Bugbear amongst the Freeholders and other Electors, proves in most
Places a Badge of Honor, that recommends those Gentlemen to them, and we see
some great Men that trimmed or sneaked in the last Parliament, upon that
Account, are not like to have the Honor to sit in the next.

May 24th.
YEsterday we had an Account of a great many more Elections made since my last,
and on Saturday last ended that for Lancashire. The Candidates were the
Honorable Mr. Stanly, Brother to the Lord Derby, Sir Roger Bradshaigh, Bar',
and Mr. Shuttleworth. The two first were set up by the Papists and
Presbyterians, the third by the Church of England, and a Majority was declared
for Mr. Stanley and Mr. Shuttleworth, to the great Mortification of the Whigs,
who have endeavored by all means to eject the latter. The Church had so much
the better at this Election, that Mr. Shuttleworth left 200 unpoll'd, and Sir
R. Bradshaigh had only 1100. Sir Richard How and Mr. Hyde have carried it for
the County of Wilts by a great Majority.

May 26th.
SInce my last we have received an Account of a great many Elections, and
particularly from Cornwall, where by the Interest and Endeavors of the new
Lord Lieutenant of that County, and of the B^ of E^, a great many Alterations
are made, in Favor of the Party that oppose the Occasional Bill, or for Low
Church: But in Wiltshire it fared better with those two Loyal Churchmen that
the B... opposed, for they carried it by a Majority of 300 against the
Occasionalmen, or Was, and the inferior Clergy, notwithstanding the menacing
Letter sent them, voted for the best Churchmen.

In Kent the Lord Villars and Sir Cholmely Deering have carried it for that
County, in Opposition to Sir R. Austin, and Mr. Colepeper, by a considerable
Majority. Sir John Packington has carried it for Worcestershire; and the two
old Tackers for Coventry. Upon the whole, the best Judgment that can be given,
is, we may have a Court Parliament, but 'twill not be a Whig One.

May 29th.
SInce my last we have had an Account of several Elections, which I leave to
the Gazette to enumerate; only the Management of some of them is worth Notice;
particularly for the County of Worcester, where Sir John Packington and Mr.
Bromley carried it gloriously against Mr. Walsh, who was set up by the
Dissenters. Sir John Packington had a Banner carried before him, whereon was
painted a Church falling, with this Inscription; For the Queen and Church,
Packington. 'Twas observable, that as they were marching through the Fore-gate
Street they met the Bishop's Coach, in which was a Non-Con-Teacher, going to
Poll for Cap. Walsh, but the Horses (at the Sight of the Church as 'twas
believed) turned Tail, overturned, and broke the same, and very much bruised
the Holder-forth's OutwardMan; and this raised no small Admiration that the
Bishop's Horses should be afraid of a Church.

For the County of Chester, the Honorable Mr. Booth and Crew Offley, Esquire set
up by the Whig Interest, have carried it by a vast Majority against Sir Roger
Mostyn and Sir George Warburton, the two late Representatives for that County,
although the two latter poll'd 300 more than at the former Election, and had
all the Clergy and the Body of the Gentry on their Side, but this Conquest was
wholly owing to above a thousand defeasable Freeholders that Party had made
against the Election, which is a new and scandalous Practice; and if the next
Parliament do not enquire into it, and put a Stop to it, the whole Constitution
will be subverted. The Cry of the Whig Rabble, during this Election, was Down
with the Church and the Bishops, and when about 60 of the Clergy, headed by the
Dean, came to Poll, they said, Hell was broke loose, and these were the Devil's
black Guard: They abused the Bishop, though according to his peaceable Temper he
did not intermeddle in the Election; and to complete their Outrage, broke the
Windows of the Cathedral, and another Church.

Yesterday was the Election for Middlesex, the Candidates were the two old
Members, opposed by Sir John Wolstenham and Mr. Barker, supported by the Whig
Interest, and the latter carried it by a Majority of 300, the highest of them
polling about 1600, which is some Hundreds more than ever were polled at any
Election in this small County, and this Multiplication of Freeholders is wholly
owing to the new method.

May 31st.
SInce my last we have an Account of some more Elections, but nothing so very
material has happened at them, as at that for Sussex. The High Sheriff Turner
Esquire refused to take the Poll, unless the D^ of S^ removed out of the Court,
which he obliged him to do, after some high Words had passed, the High Sheriff
producing a Vote of the House of Commons against Peers intermedling in
Elections, which however they have done more in the Electing this Parliament
than ever. The Quakers in Buckinghamshire have Voted all of them against my
Lord Cheney, though he was the Person that brought in and procured the Bill in
their Favor about the signing a Declaration instead of an Oath; at Brentford
several Hundreds of them Poll'd against Smithson and Lake, as they have done
against the Church Interest all England over, which no doubt will be remembered,
and placed to their Accounts in Bar of future Favor.

June 2d.
WE have an Account of several Tackers more that are chosen since my last, of
which Number are Sir Edward Seymor and Mr. Snell, who carried it without
Opposition at Exeter, though Endeavors were used to have brought in a Gentleman
that lately lost it at Cambridge; but that loyal City would not be put upon
with the University's Refuse. [In some Copies Leavings was first written, but
that not being thought severe enough was erased, (yet not so but still to
remain legible) and the Word Refuse written above it.]

June 5th.
THE Election for Knights of the Shire for Somerset runs thus: Nath. Palmer,
Esquire 2566 Voices. John Piggot, Esquire 2469, George Worner, Esquire 1327. Francis Lord
Hawley, 829.

[The Letter of June 7th, mentions nothing of Elections.]

June 9th.
YEsterday we had an Account of the Election for Devonshire, which was made on
Tuesday last, where the Honorable Sir Will. Courtenay, Bar', and Robert Roll,
Esquire both loyal and stanch Churchmen, were unanimously re-elected to serve for
that County; so that as the first Borough, viz. Malden, begun with the
Election of two brave Tackers, so the last County ended with the like Choice.

The Election for Knights of the Shire for Northumberland, was commenced on
Thursday the last of May. The Candidates were Sir John Delavall, Bar'. Sir
Fran. Blake, Knight. and Tho. Foster, Esquire Jun'; and though the two first were
supported with the Interest of the D^ of S^t, the E^ of C^le, and the Lord G^y
in Person, and all the Whigs in the County, by Promises and Threats; and the
last only by the Clergy and true Churchmen: yet he carried it for one by a
great Majority, as you will see by the Poll, viz. Foster 823, Sir John Delaval
775, Sir Francis Blake 646. Besides the first had 300 Freeholders more, that
were ready to have Poll'd, but the Knights threw up.

No doubt but this House of Commons (the Major Part of them being Churchmen)
will remember and gratify the Quakers for the Service they have done them in
this Election, by supporting their Marriages by a Law, and easing them from the
Payment of small Tithes, which is that they aim at; as appears by the circular
Letters sent by the Heads of them to their Friends in the Country, directing
them how to Vote.

June 12th.
THE Election for Members of Parliament is now over; and it is found that there
are 150 new Members chosen, that were not in the last House of Commons; and 90
of the Tackers, and 44 left out; near a Moiety of which did not now stand. Upon
the whole both Parties seem pretty well pleased, each fancying the Majority is
on their Side.

The Bristol Election, of which we had an Account but Yesterday, is gone for
the old Members. Mr. Colestone, (Nephew to a Gentleman of that Name, who had
given a Charity to that City of 20000 l.) lost it by 214 Voices; those Ingrates
crying out, No Alms-house-man, no High-Church man, no Jacobite, etc.

AN APPENDIX: CONTAINING A Few of Mr. Dyer's scandalous Observations and
Reflections, in some of his late Letters, upon Matters of a Public Concern.
London, June 23d.
MOnday next being theDay for the annual Election of Sheriffs for London and
Middlesex; the Sheriff making Party Design to put up Sir Charles Thorold, and
Sam. Stannier, Esquire. They are always for securing that Point, not knowing what
Occasion they may have for Ignoramus's,

June 26th.
SIR Chapter Thorold, and Sam. Stannier, Esquire were elected Sheriffs for London and
Middlesex, for the Year ensuing. There was scarce any Body appeared at the
Common Hall, but the Party that put them up; the Churchmen finding which way
the Stream must go, are passively obedient.

July 7th.
A New Book is come out of 12 d. Price, entitled, A Memorial of the Church of
England, humbly offered to the Consideration of all true Lovers of our Church
and Constitution; the same is an exeraordinary Piece, and shows the Drift and
Intrigues of Primier M^r, and others, and the languishing State the C^ is now
in.

July 10th.
THE Messenger of the Press is ordered to make a Discovery, if possible, of the
Author, Printer, and Publisher of the Book entitled, A Memorial of the Church
of England, which gives great Offense at C^ but the swarm of Libels, on the
other hand, pass with a sort of Privilege, as the History of the Court of
Poland, and others.

July 21st.
THE Manifesto of the Church of England, that was endeavored to be suppressed,
is now again sold publicly about the Streets, the Bookseller being resolved to
take the Benefit of his Copy, and stand the Test of the Law; and the pretended
Remarks that are printed with it, strengthen and not confute the Assertions of
the Author.

July 31st.
WE have an Account from the Assizes at Maidstone, that the Soldier belonging
to Shereness Fort, that bastinadoed to Death one Machleman a Whig and trusty
Pedlar, was condemned to die for the same; but the Major, who, it is pretended,
hired him for half a Crown, was cleared by the Jury, contrary to the Directions
of my Lord Chief Justice: The Same was a mighty Party-Cause.

Aug. 2d.
WE have an Account from the late Assizes at Horsham in Sussex, that the Clergy
of that County in a full Body, making upwards of 150, waited on Arthur Turner,
Esquire the High Sheriff, and in a solemn Manner gave him their Thanks for standing
up for the Interest of the Church, in the late Election, and for vindicating
the Rights of the Commons, in not permitting a great Lord to be present at
taking the Poll for Knights of the Shire: The Grand Jury for the County
returned the High Sheriff the like Thanks; and were both magnificently treated
by him.

Sept. 1st.
THE two Sheriffs have waited on Dr. Willis, with the Thanks of the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen, for the Sermon he preached before the Queen, at St.
Paul's, on the late Thanksgiving Day, though at the same time I hear that
Sermon is variously reflected upon, and will hardly escape without an Answer,
it containing very hard Reflections on the main Body of the Church of England.

A Vindication is come out of the Memorial of the Church of England, when at
the same time the Grand Juries of London and Middlesex, this present Sessions,
have presented the same as a dangerous Libel, but that is no wonder if we
consider the Juries, and who return them.

Sept. 6th.
THE G^ J^ of London that presented the Memorial were ten of them Dissenters,
and only two of the Panel Churchmen, who refused to sign the said Presentment.

Sept. 13th.
AN Elegy is come out upon the famous Achievement of burning the Church of
England's Memorial, last Sessions at the Old Baily.

Sept. 22d.
THIS Morning came on the Election of a President for Bridewell-Hospital; and
the two Aldermen which had the Majority of Voices (the whole Court having been
put up seriatim) were Sir Thomas Rawlinson and Sir John Hublon, and though the
first had 38, the latter but 25; yet my Lord Mayor who presided, would not
declare the first Elected, but raised a Scruple, that all the Electors (which
he called Governors) were not Freemen, and therefore he would refer it to the
Court of Aldermen; at which Innovation they very much complained, as well as of
some other Tricks that were shown them.

FINIS.

