ERRATA.
Page 5 Line 39. Read Chap. i. x. p. 7. l. 15, 28. r. Romans xi. 36 l. 17. r. 18.
xi. p. 18. l. 38 r. Isa. lix. lxv. p. 19. l, 17. r. effectually restraix. p.
26. l. 43. r. the souls. p. 41. l. 37. r. x^xi. 22. cxvi. p. 50. l. ^7. r. good
refutations. p. 60. l. 9. r. cut off. p. 61. l. 10 r. or revelation is. p. 63
l. 13. r. virtuous lives. p. 75. l. 22. r. these draw. p. 88. l. 17. r. Prove.
xxix. p. 101. l. 2 r. xliv. 17. l. 9. r. cxi. p. 98. l. 28. r. particular
circumstances. p. 123. l. 31. r. power to bind them.

The ABSURDITY and PERFIDY of all authoritative TOLERATION OF Gross Heresy,
Blasphemy, Idolatry, Popery, in BRITAIN.

IN TWO LETTERS TO A FRIEND.

IN WHICH The Doctrine of the Westminster Confession of Faith relative to
Toleration of a False Religion, and the power of the Civil Magistrate about
Sacred Matters; and the Nature, Origin, Ends and Obligation of the National
Covenant and Solemn League are heartily represented and defended.

BY JOHN BROWN, Minister of the Gospel in HADDINGTON.

GLASGOW: Printed by JOHN BRYCE; And Sold by the Booksellers in Town and
Country. M,DCC,LXXX.

LETTER I. On the absurdity of Authoritative TOLERATION of gross Heresy,
Blasphemy or Idolatry.
SIR,
HOW God himself connected religion, and the civil welfare of nations, in his
ancient laws, almost the whole of the Old Testament does bear witness. That
religion is the great basis of civil happiness, was the common, the avowed
belief of every sensible Heathen: It was, for ought I know, the infamous
monster Tiberius, who first pretended, That the Gods alone ought to regard or
resent the injuries done them. Before the happy Reformation, the Popish clergy
had reduced civil rulers into mere tools for executing their pleasure in
religious matters; and pretended that they had no power of judging in them. To
free these rulers from such Antichristian claims, the Protestant reformers,
every where, as their Confessions of faith and other writings make evident,
loudly maintained, That to magistrates themselves independent of clergymen,
belongs a distinguished power in the reformation and preservation of religion.
Not long after, Erastus, a German physician and his followers, to curry favor
with their respective princes, pretended, That magistrates are the proper lords
of the Christian church, from whom her ministers and other rulers derive their
whole power, and to whom they must be accountable. This notion, exceedingly
flattering their ambition, was too greedily embraced by most of the Protestant
princes; nor do I know of one Protestant church, which has not suffered by
means of it. Meanwhile, the German Anabaptists, having experienced the frowns,
and sometimes the improper severities of magistrates, copied after the ancient
Donatists in the like circumstances, and warmly contended, That magistrates
have no more power about religious matters than any private person, and ought
to punish none for different sentiments in doctrine or forms of worship. The
Socinians and remonstrant Arminians, except when magistrates favored
themselves, and promoted their cause, zealously contended for the same notion,
at least in the case of ministers and worship, which were not maintained at the
public expense. Many, if not most of the English Independents in the last
century were much of the same mind; and hence, by their influence, some
passages in the Westminster Confession of Faith could never obtain a
ratification by the English Parliament, or a place in their own Savoy
Confession. Part of these passages, relative to the magistrate's power, are
also dropped from the Confession of Faith agreed to by the Independents of New
England in 1682. Most of the English Dissenters of this century seem to be much
of the same mind; especially such as might otherwise have been exposed to
danger on account of their open maintenance of Arian, Socinian, and Quakerish
blasphemies -- Lock and bishop Hoadly, and some others of the Episcopalian
party, warmly espoused the same cause.

This notion never received much countenance in Scotland, till Mr Glass of
Tealing commenced a furious new-fashioned Independent. He mightily contended,
That the Jewish nation was an ecclesiastical one, and their kings
ecclesiastical rulers; that Christian magistrates have no more power in
religious matters than private Christians, and ought not to employ their power
in advancing the true religion, or in making laws with penalties in favor of
it; or in restraining or punishing heretics or false teachers, nor ought they
to give more encouragement to good Christians, than to other peaceable
subjects; -- that the example of the reforming kings of Judah in punishing
idolatry and false worship, and in promoting the true religion, is not now to
be imitated; and that our fathers national covenanting against Popery and other
wickedness, in favor of the true religion was unwarrantable, and is not
binding upon us. -- Dr. Wisheart, Principal of the college of Edinburgh, in his
sermons contended, That magistrates have only a right to punish such crimes as
strike immediately against the persons or property of men; but not to punish
any thing which strikes immediately against the honor of God, as blasphemy or
heresy; that all men ought to have civil liberty to think and speak as they
please, providing they make no attack upon the welfare of civil society; that
none ought to be hampered in their search after truth by any requirement of
their subscriptions to Formulas or Confessions of Faith; that children in their
education, ought never to be biassed to a side by learning catechisms which
maintain the peculiar principles of a party. These or the like notions have
been adopted by not a few of the pretenders to modern illumination.

In her public Standards, the Church of Scotland has renounced, and in her
solemn covenants has abjured both these extremes. In her Old Confession of
Faitb, which is expressly sworn to in the national covenant of 1581, etc. as in
all points the undoubted truth of God, Art. xxiv, she asserts, that "the power
and authority of magistrates is God's holy ordinance, ordained for
manifestation of his own glory, and for the singular profit of mankind -- they
are the lieutenants of God, in whose sessions God himself does fit and judge --
to whom by God is given the sword to the praise and defense of good men, and to
punish all open malefactors. To kings, princes, rulers and magistrates chiefly,
and most principally, the conservation and purgation of religion appertains; so
that not only are they appointed for civil policy, but also for maintenance of
the true religion, and for suppression of all idolatry and superstition
whatsoever." This doctrine is further asserted and explained in her second book
of discipline, chap. ix; The doctrine of her Westminster Confession of Faith,
the WHOLE of which is solemnly espoused and engaged to, by every Presbyterian
minister and elder in Scotland in his ordination vows, is that "for their
publishing opinions or maintaining practices contrary to the light of nature
and the known principles of Christianity, whether concerning faith, worship or
conversation, or to the power of godliness, or such erroneous opinions or
practices, as either, in their own nature, or in the manner of publishing and
maintaining them, are destructive to the external peace, and order, which
Christ has established in the church, they may be lawfully called to account,
and proceeded against by -- the power of the civil magist^ate," Chap. xx. 4. --
that "God, the supreme Lord and King of all the world, has ordained civil
magistrates to be under him, over the people, for his own glory and the public
good -- they ought especially, (in managing their office) to maintain PIETY,
justice and peace, according to the wholesome laws of each commonwealth -- That
the civil magistrate -- HAS authority, and it IS his duty to take order that
unity and peace be preserved in the church, and that the truth of God be kept
pure and entire; that all blasphemies and heresies be suppressed, all
corruptions and abuses in worship and discipline prevented and reformed, and
all the ordinances of God duly settled, administered and observed. For the
better effecting of which, he has power to call Synods, to be present at them,
and to provide that whatsoever is transacted in them be according to the mind
of God," Chap. xxiii. 1, 2, 3. -- "The duties required in the second
commandment are -- the disapproving, detesting, opposing all false worship, and
according to each one's place and calling, removing it, and all monuments of
idolatry; -- The sins forbidden in the second commandment are, all devising,
counselling, commanding, using, and any ways approving any religious worship
not instituted by God himself, tolerating a false religion." Lar. Cat. Q 108,
109. These declarations are an authentic explication of the power of the
magistrate in maintaining and preserving the true religion, the defense of
which is expressly sworn in their solemn covenants with God. If therefore, Sir,
you discredit this doctrine, and plead the toleration of idolatry, blasphemy,
heresy, and that magistrates ought to meddle with nothing in religion, be so
honest, as openly to renounce your ordination vows and the Confession of Faith
and Catechisms, as well as the national Covenant and Solemn League.

To illustrate the above doctrine of our excellent standards, it is proper to
observe, (1.) God alone is the necessarily existent, and absolutely independent
Creator and preserver, and therefore original and supreme proprietor and
governor of all things in heaven or earth, Exodus iii. 4. Genesis i. Psalm. civ. and
xxiv. 1, 2. xxxiii. 6. lxxxiii. 18. xlvii. 2, 7, 9. Ezekiel. i. 11. Col. i. 16, --
18. Dan. iv. 34, 35. (2.) All right, civil, natural, or spiritual, whether of
conscience, or of persons, or of husbands, parents, masters, magistrates,
ministers, or even of Christ as mediator, must therefore wholly originate from
God alone, Psalm cxv. 16. Romans ii. 36. Heb. ii. 10 Acts x. 25, 28. 2 Cor. v.
18. Psalm. lxxv. 7. Dan. ii. 21. iv. 32, 35. Mat. xxviii. 18. ii. 27. John v.
35. To suppose any real^right or being whatsoever, unoriginating from him, is
to give up with the necessary existence of God, and to plunge into the very
depths of Atheism. (3.) All right and authority of conscience, persons,
husbands, parents, magistrates, ministers, or even of Christ as mediator, being
wholly derived from God, ought, necessarily ought, wholly to be improved, or
exercised in his name, in conformity and subordination to his law, as the
supreme rule, and in order to promote his declarative glory as the chief end of
it. Prove. xvi. 4 Rom ii. 30. 1 Pet. iv. 11. 1 Cor x. 31. John v. 30. viii. 29
vii. 18. Ephesians iii. 21 (4.) No right or authority derived from God can therefore
be lawfully improven or exercised, in protecting, encouraging, allowing or
commanding any thing which God himself, on account of his infinite perfection
in holiness, justice, goodness and truth, cannot command; -- or in
discouraging, disallowing, or prohibiting any thing which God in his law
requires. It is absurd to suppose it, that God can give men a power which he
has not himself; and shocking blasphemy to suppose him capable of giving men a
right and authority to contemn or counteract his own law as their rule, or his
own glory as their chief end, in every thing they do, 2 Timothy ii. 13. Hab. i.
12, 13. Exodus, xv. 11. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4. Zeph. iii. 5. James i. 13. (5.) All the
diversified forms of right and authority in conscience, husbands, parents,
masters, magistrates, ministers, and even in Christ as mediator, being derived
from the same God of infinite wisdom and order, each of them may, and ought to
be wholly exercised within its proper department, and in a manner answerable to
its nature, and never in the way of invading the place or interrupting the
exercise of any other right or authority. No right of conscience can be
exercised to the interruption of the due exercise of marital, parental,
magisterial, magistratical, ministerial, or Christ's mediatorial authority;
nor, can any regular exercise of these powers interrupt the due exercise of the
power of conscience, or of one another, 1 Cor. xiv. 33, 40. vii. 20, 24. (6.)
All these different forms of power and authority being derived from the same
God, may have the same things for their object, but viewed in different
respects. The same man may be subject to the power of his conscience as he is a
rational creature, -- subject to the power of parents as a child, -- subject to
the power of masters as a servant, -- subject to the power of magistrates as a
member of the commonwealth, -- subject to the power of church-rulers as a
member of an organized visible church, -- subject to the mediatorial power of
Christ, as a member of his mystical body, or an agent for promoting the welfare
of it. -- The same good work of piety or virtue may, or ought to be required by
conscience, by parents, masters, magistrates, ministers, and even by Christ as
mediator, in different respects, as calculated to promote the welfare of the
persons, families, nations, and churches concerned, -- in subordination to the
glory of God as their respective proprietor and superior. The performance of
the same good work may be encouraged by rewards from all these different
powers, answerable to their respective forms. -- The same vices of idolatry,
blasphemy, calumny, treason, theft, murder, etc. as in different respects
hurtful to persons, families, civil societies, and churches, may, and ought to
be prohibited by all these different powers, and resented by each, as hurtful
to itself, as subordinated to God, -- in a manner answerable to its particular
nature and department, -- by conscience with stinging rebukes, -- by parents
with correction, disinheriting, or the like, -- by masters with frowns,
stripes, abridgment of wages, or the like, -- by magistrates with public
dishonor, fining, imprisonment, or death, -- by church rulers with
ecclesiastical rebuke, excommunication, -- by Christ with temporal, spiritual
or eternal judgment, Acts xxiv. 16. Josh xxiv. 15. Psalm. ci. Mat. v, vi, vii,
etc. (7.) All these powers of conscience, husbands, parents, masters,
magistrates, church-rulers, and of Christ as mediator, proceeding from an
infinitely wise, powerful and good God, are each of them, in its own place,
altogether sufficient to gain its own end. -- Nevertheless, it mightily tends
to the advantage of each, that all of them be rightly exercised at once, and to
the hurt os all the rest, if any of them be not. If conscience act faithfully,
this promotes the regular and comfortable exercise of the power of husbands,
parents, masters, magistrates or ministers. etc. And it is to the advantage of
conscience, if they regularly exercise their power, and especially if Christ
exercise his, in a remarkable manner. It is much to the advantage of Church and
State, if husbands, parents, and masters, faithfully exercise their power in
their respective departments; and much to their hurt, if they do not. If the
rulers in Church and State, faithfully discharge their trust, it will tend much
to promote the welfare of families. The more faithfully ministers labor in
winning souls to Christ, and teaching men to live soberly, righteously and
godly in view of Christ's second coming, the more easy will the work of
magistrates, and the greater the happiness of the commonwealth be. -- The more
faithfully magistrates act in curbing of crimes, and promoting obedience to God
the King of nations, as a mean of securing his felicitating blessing to the
commonwealth, the more delightfully will church power be exercised, and the
more abundantly it will tend to the welfare of the church. Nay, though the
mediatorial power of Christ be infinitely sufficient in its own place, to
answer its own ends, yet the delightful exercise and success of it is not a
little promoted by the faithful exercise of the powers of conscience, husbands,
parents, masters, magistrates and church-rulers, Acts xxiv. 16. 1 Timothy i. 5.
Ephesians. iv, -- vi. Col. iii. iv. 1 and 2 Timothy Titus i. -- iii. 1 Pet. ii. -- v.
Psalm ii. 10, 12. Rev. ii. 15. xvii. 14, 16. xxi. 24. Isa. xlix. 23. lx, 3, 4,
10, 16. (8.) Though the marital, parental, magisterial, magistratical, and
ministerial powers be altogether distinct from, and independent of one another,
and each of them have its own particular exercises pertaining to it alone; --
yet the same person, in respect of different relations, may be at once superior
or inferior to another person, -- and so may be required to fulfill the
particular duties of his station, by one who has not any lawful right to
perform them himself. Thus magistrates and ministers as such, may require
husbands to perform their duties to their wives, parents to perform theirs to
their children, or masters theirs to their servants, as a mean of promoting the
welfare of the commonwealth and of the church, in obedience to God, and aiming
at his glory. An uncrowned husband of a queen may command her, faithfully to
exercise her magistratical power, as a means of honor and happiness to his
family; and she as queen may command him in every thing relating to the welfare
of the state, as her officer or subject. A parent may require his son, as such,
faithfully to exercise his ministerial, magistratical, or magisterial power as
a mean of honor and happiness to his family. A son may command his father, who
is his servant, in every thing pertaining to the service due from him, and even
to order his family aright, in so far as it tends to promote that service.
Ministers, as the ambassadors of Christ, have power to require magistrates, as
church members, faithfully to exercise their magistratical power, so as may
best promote the honor of Christ, and the welfare of his church. And on the
other hand, magistrates have power to require ministers as their subjects,
faithfully to exercise their ministerial power, as a mean of rendering the
nation pious and virtuous, in order to promote its happiness, -- and all this
in subordination to the law, and to promote the glory of God as the supreme
governor of families, churches, or nations. (9.) Though the marital, parental,
magisterial, magistratical and ministerial powers, have, each of them,
something for its peculiar and distinguishing object, in which no other power
can interfere with it; -- Thus it is always unlawful for husbands, parents,
masters or ministers, as such, to assume the power of civil magistrates in
levying taxes, adjudging criminals to death, -- always unlawful for parents,
masters, or magistrates, as such, to preach the gospel, dispense sacraments; or
church censures; -- yet if the exercise of some of these powers be fearfully
neglected or abused, the other powers may be exercised, in order to rectify the
disorders occasioned, further than would be proper if there were no such
neglect, abuse, or disorder. Thus if husbands, parents, or masters, fearfully
abuse their power, relative to wives, children, or servants, the rulers of
church or state, for the benefit of these societies, may interfere more with
their family-concerns, than would be proper in other circumstances. If
church-rulers be notoriously negligent or wicked, magistrates as
church members, and to promote the welfare of the state, may do more in the
reformation of the church, than would be proper for them, if church rulers were
diligent and faithful. And, if through the indolence or wickedness of
magistrates, the affairs of the nation be thrown into terrible confusion,
ministers as members of the commonwealth, and to promote the welfare of the
church, may do more in the rectification of affairs, than would be proper, if
the magistrates were faithful, 2 Kings xi. 2 Chronicles. xxiii (10.) All governing
authority empowers the possessors of it, to issue forth laws or commandments,
binding on the subject of it. But these laws or commandments can extend their
binding force no further, than the particular department belonging to that
power, as by that, every particular form of authority, derived from God, is
limited. The laws or commandments of parents, masters, magistrates, and
church-rulers, extend only to external things in the family, commonwealth, or
church. These of conscience and of Christ extend also to that which is inward
in the heart. -- And as all human superiors are imperfect in knowledge
themselves, and cannot enable their subjects perfectly to understand their
whole duty, it is necessary that laws of families or nations, or constitutions
of churches require nothing but what is plainly agreeable to the law of God,
and nothing in religion but what is plainly required by the word of God, that
so nothing may be contrary to these laws but what is not only really, but
plainly contrary to the word of God. And, the weaker the subjects are, the more
condescension ought to be exercised toward them in this matter, Romans xv, 1, 2.
(11.) As men cannot bow the hearts of their inferiors unto subjection, they
ought always to issue forth their commandments in the most prudent, mild and
gaining manner. It is very improper to issue forth any law doubtful or obscure,
or which most of the subjects are not likely to be got peaceably to comply
with. This ought especially to be attended to, in the framing and imposing of
laws and constitutions relative to religion, which ought to be a reasonable and
voluntary service. (12) As nothing, particularly in religion, ought to be
contrary to any law of church or state but what is plainly contrary to the law
of God; and nothing ought to be held censurable by the laws of the church, or
punishable by the laws of the state, but what is plainly contrary to these
laws, and has become duly public, in the providence of God, without requiring
the party concerned to be his own accuser. -- So, on account of the weakness or
number of the offenders, or the disordered state of the society, many real
scandals in the church must be forborne without centure, and many real crimes
against the state forborne without punishment; notwithstanding, it would be
extremely wicked, authoritatively to license or tolerate them in either. If
your children be very young, raving in a fever, delirious, or apt to fall into
convulsive fits, it might be very prudent and dutiful for you to forbear severe
chastisement of them for playing on the Lord's day; repeating some wicked
expressions, they had heard from their fellow children, or the like. But would
it be lawful in you to give them a parental license to profane the Sabbath or
name of God, and promise them protection in so doing? You dare not pretend it.
God himself wisely forbears the punishment of many things, which his law
forbids. (13.) As it is never errors or corruptions of the heart, but wicked
words and deeds, sufficiently and regularly manifested, which are to be
corrected in families, punished in commonwealths, or censured in churches,
Deuteronomy. xiii. 1, -- 14. xvii. 46. Heb. x. 28. 1 Timothy v. 1 -- So even in punishing
manifest crimes, especially in matters of religion, all proper mildness ought
to be exercised, never proceeding to extremities, where there is any hope of
reformation, or where, as in the case of heresy or blasphemy, confession and
repentance can make any kind of restitution, Mat. xviii. 15, -- 18. Among the
Hebrews, not one appears to have been punished for idolatry, if he professed
repentance and reformation. The princes of Israel first attempted to bring the
Reubenites and Gadites, whom they supposed guilty of it, to repentance, Josh.
xxii. Never in the reformation by Asa, Hezekiah, or Jofiah, have we one
instance of a penitent idolater slain. The idolaters condemned to death, Deuteronomy.
xiii. xvii. are represented as men of Belial, presumptuous, and obstinate in
their wickedness. The prophets of Baal whom Elijah caused be put to death, 1
Kings xviii. 40. and Mattan the priest, who was slain by Jehoiada's orders, 2
Kings xi. 18. were no doubt of this sort; and probably also guilty of promoting
the murder of the Lord's prophets and people. The man put to death for
profanation of the Sabbath, appears to have acted presumptuously, Number. xv. 30,
-- 36. Asa and his subjects covenanted to put to death such as obstinately
adhered to idolatry, 2 Chronicles. xv. 12, 13. (14.) Magistrates ought never to
attempt forcing men to believe with their hearts, even the most fundamental
truths of religion, or to practice any religious duty, -- that being no means
appointed by God for convincing them of the truth, or inducing them to a
cordial performance of religious duties, 2 Cor. x. 4, 5. But it would be highly
absurd, hence to infer, That magistrates may not restrain men from robbing
nations or churches of those divine truths, which God has graciously entrusted
to them, and which are inexpressibly profitable to them, -- or restrain them
from propagating gross heresies, blasphemies, idolatries, which undermine and
exclude the true religion, provoke God o destroy nations, and are the fruitful
seeds of contention, confusion, and every evil work. No magistrate can compel
me to love my neighbor as my self, or can justly compel me to divide mine
inheritance with him; but he may lawfully punish me for calumniating or robbing
him.

It is, therefore, extremely uncandid in the advocates for magistratical
tolerations of heresy, blasphemy, and idolatry, always to attempt blending or
placing on an equal level, true and false religion, -- mere neglect of some
positive duties of religion, and shocking insults upon, and opposition to the
duties of religion, -- lesser and secret mistakes in religion, and the most
damnable heresies, blasphemies, and idolatries, openly and obstinately
professed and practiced, as if these were equally objects of toleration,
restraint, or punishment, -- or, to confound a mere forbearance to punish, with
an authoritative license, openly to prosess and practice what is criminal
respecting religion. The true religion ought never to need a toleration. It
ought always to have an establishment. Whereas a false one ought never to be
established, magistrates having no power against the truth but for the truth.
There are many mere neglects or lesser mistakes in religion, against which it
would not be proper for magistrates to enact civil laws, in this present state
of imperfection. And, if there be no civil law against them, they cannot be
punishable as crimes. "Where no law is, there can be no transgression." -- Mere
forbearance to punish, what is plainly contrary to law, is, in some cases,
necessary, and in imitation of God himself; and gives no positive encouragement
to wickedness. Whereas a positive or authoritative toleration, proclaims to
men, a liberty to sin, and promises them protection in so doing. If the
provider for an army deliver to them fine flour mixed with some particles of
bran, and a large quantity of arsenic, Is his delivery of the sine flour, or
even of the mixture of bran, as criminal and punishable, as that of the mixture
of arsenic? No man that is not mad will pretend it. For the fine flour he
deserves the highest encouragement: for the bran he may be justiy forborne; but
for the arsenic he deserves to be hanged.

The toleration, which I mean to oppose, if plainly and heartily expressed,
would run thus: "We, the King and Parliament of --, as powers ordained of God,
-- ministers of God for good to men, -- as the ordinance of God for the terror
and punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, -- as
nursing fathers to the church of Christ, -- in order that all our subjects may
come to the knowledge of the truth, and lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty -- Do hereby, in the name and authority of The Most High
GOD, from whom we have derived all that governing power, which we possess, that
we, ruling in his fear, may exercise it wholly in obedience to his law, and to
promote his declarative glory in the world -- Grant to all and every one of
you, our said subjects, an authoritative toleration or legal license, -- openly
and obstinately to pervert, contradict, and revile the declarations of God
contained in his word, -- and in the most in solent and abusive manner to
blaspheme his nature, perfections, purposes and works, particularly of the
redemption of mankind, -- and to corrupt his worship, represent him in it, in
the most absurd and abominable forms, -- or rob him of it, giving it to devils,
monsters of wickedness, brutes, stocks, or stones, in his stead, -- and with
all your might to exert yourselves, in making your fellow subjects do the like.
-- And, we hereby do, In the same name and authority of God, the King of
nations, promise you every kind and degree of civil protection in all such
behavior, as you can profess, or pretend, your consciences do dictate or
allow, -- providing always, that you commit your outrage only against God,
your, and our Maker and Sovereign, -- but do not disturb the external peace of
the nation, in reviling the civil character, seizing or hurting the civil
property, or any way abusing the body of any of your fellow sinners of
mankind." -- The correspondent warrant of conscience which we mean to impugn,
if honestly expressed, would run thus: "I Conscience, as the great deputy of
The Most High GOD, Lord, and Lawgiver of the world, implanted in every man's
breast, for his temporal, spiritual, and eternal advantage, Do hereby, In God's
name and authority, and in the exercise of my power which is wholly derived
from him, and to be exercised for his glory, in trying all things by his law,
and approving and holding fast that which is good, -- Warrant and authorize all
and every one of you, sons and daughters of men, to devise, believe, openly and
obstinately profess, and zealously propagate every damnable heresy, and
blasphemous opinion, and to practice and propagate every absurd and abominable
form of idolatry, which Satan, who deceives the world, and a heart deceitful
above all things and desperately wicked, and given up of God to strong
delusion, belief of lies, vile affections, and a reprobate sense, can make you
think innocent or proper. -- And, I do hereby, In the same name and authority,
-- Grant you my sacred claim of right to all manner of liberty and protection
from the civil magistrate in so doing, -- providing always, that you commit
such injury and outrage only against God, your infinitely excellent, high, and
gracious Proprietor and Superior, and do no civil injury to the body,
character, or property of your fellow creatures." Such is indeed the toleration
which many praise or plead for; and this I proceed to impugn, by the following
arguments.

I. Men's pleadings for it do, all of them, necessarily proceed on their
adopting such atheistical principles as the following, (1.) Men's natural or
civil rights to their property, liberty, profits and honors, are not
originally derived from God, -- and ought to protect them in their most
outrageous sinning against him (2,) Men's consciences have a right and
authority, underived from, and independent of God, by which it can warrant them
to think and speak of, or act toward God, as insolently and blasphemously as
they please. (3.) That, if the law of God, be any rule to men; it is not so, in
respect of any intrinsic meaning affixed to it by him, but merely as it is
understood by every man, particularly in that which relates to their behavior
toward God. (4.) All men being ready to mistake, we ought always to believe
that our opponents may have as just a view of the scriptures as ourselves, and
never to condemn them for that which they do not own to be blasphemy, idolatry,
or heresy. (5.) Magistrates right and authority to govern others, does not
originate in God as the Creator, Preserver, and King of nations, but in
magistrates themselves, or in their subjects; and so may be exercised as they
please, particularly in requiring or allowing their subjects to belie,
blaspheme, or rob God. (6) Magistrates may be moral governors deputies or
lieutenants, under God, without having any power or authority relating to
religion, or his honor. (7.) Not the law of God natural or revealed, but the
laws of nations ought to be the supreme standard of all civil government. (8.)
Not the declarative glory of God, as the Most High over all the earth, but the
civil peace and prosperity of nations, ought to be the chief end of magistrates
in all their acts of government. (9) Men's natural rights of conscience, or
their civil rights, or the authority of magistrates, may or ought to empower,
warrant, or protect them in gross heresy, blasphemy, idolatry, or other
outrageous abuse and injury of God; but can by no means warrant or protect them
in calumny, theft, murder, or any other injuries against men. (10.) There is no
real difference between moral good and evil, at least in things pertaining to
God; and so true and false religion are equally calculated to promote the
welfare of civil society, and the virtues which render men good, peaceable,
useful, and honorable rulers or subjects, -- and hence heretics, blasphemers,
and idolaters may be good subjects. (11.) The favor or indignation of God is
of no importance to civil society; and therefore magistrates ought to use no
means to procure his favor by the encouragement of true religion, or to avert
his indignation by the restraint of gross heresy, blasphemy, or idolatry, --
but only labor to procure the friendship of men, and prevent their injuring
the character, property, or bodies of their subjects -- That all these
propositions are really atheistical, is manifest. They all give up with the
necessary existence, infinite excellency, and absolute supremacy of God,
without any of which, he cannot be God at all. -- That Lock, Hoadly,
Blackburn, Voltaire, and others, advocates for authoritative toleration of
false religion, found their pleadings on the above propositions, is no less
evident to every judicious and unbiassed observer. -- Nay, did not modesty
forbid, I might defy all the world to plead for such toleration, without taking
all, or some of the above or like atheistical propositions for granted.

II. The scriptures plainly represent magistrates granting of men an
unrestrained freedom to profess and practice a false religion as extremely
sinful and hurtful. (1.) It is in the name of God to give a liberty to the
flesh, of which heresics and idolatry are the manifest and damning works, Gal.
v. 13, 19, -- 21. with Romans viii, 7, 8. (2.) It is not merely to pity and
spare, but to encourage such as seek to draw away their subjects from God,
contrary to Deuteronomy. xiii. 9, 10. Ephesians. xiv. 14. 2 Timothy iii. 4, 5, 13. 2 Pet. ii.
1, 2, 3. (3.) In so doing, magistrates, as political shepherds, not only suffer
the flock of God, the King of nations, under their charge, to wander or be
driven from their fold and pasture, but encourage them in it, -- contrary to
Ezekiel. xxxiv. 5, -- 8. Acts xx 30. (4.) It marks a heavy judgment of God upon,
and an anarchy in a commonwealth, when every man is left without restraint, and
does that which is right in his own eyes, in matters of religion, Judges xvii.
6. Zech. xi. 9, 16. 2 Chronicles. xx. 33. Amos iv. 4, 5. (5.) In granting such
liberty, magistrates are not for Christ, by whom they rule, Prove. viii. 15, 16.
but against him, in encouraging and protecting the doctrines and works of the
devil, which he came to destroy, John viii. 44. 1 Timothy iv. 2. Rev. xvi. 13, 14
with 1 John iii. 8. Zech. xiii. 2. (6) False religion eats out the true
doctrine of Christ, and the true piety and virtue which proceed from the faith
of it, -- which are like joints and bands to connect and establish a nation,
Isa. liii. 5. 2 Timothy ii. 16, 17. Gal. v. 10, 11, 12. (7.) Heresies produce
divisions, 1 Cor. xi. 18, 19. make men wanton, filthy dreamers, despisers and
revilers of magistrates, Jude, ver. 4, 8. 2 Pet. ii. 10, -- 17. they render
times perilous, and make men traitors, heady, high minded, truce breakers,
false accusers, fierce, without natural affection, despisers of those that are
good, 2 Timothy iii. 1, -- 13. They produce envy, strifes, evil surmisings, and
perverse disputings, 1 Timothy vi. 3, 4. Gal. v. 19, 20. they spoil Christ's
vines, Song ii. 15. (8.) False religion deprives a nation of God's protecting
hedge of favorable providence, and opens an inlet or the floods of destructive
judgments, Exodus xxxii. 25. Ezekiel. xiii. 4, 5. and xxii. 30, 31. (9.)
Magistrates indulgence of a false religion is represented as a kicking at the
true religion, and an honoring of the corrupters above God, and brings a
charge of the wickedness upon the tolerators of it. Hence Eli the judge of
Israel is represented as kicking at God's sacrifice, honoring his profane sons
^bove God, and making himself fat with God's portion of the sacrifices, because
he did not effectually re^orm his sons, 1 Samuel ii. 12, -- 16, 23, -- 25. 29.
Ephesians. v. 7, 11. and Nehemiah contended with the rulers of Judah for suffering
the worship of God to be neglected, and the Sabbath profaned, Neh. xiii. 10, --
18. (10) Such indulgence of false or corrupt religion is represented as tending
to make men abhor the true religion, and speak evil of it, 1 Samuel ii. 17. 2
Pet. ii. 1, -- 3.

III. The scriptures represent magistrates as having power to make civil laws
relative to the external concerns of religion subordinated to the law of God,
and answerable to their own department. (1.) They have in charge the keeping of
the whole law of God, Deuteronomy. xvii. 19 1 Kings ii. 3. Josh. i. 7, 8. 2 Chronicles
xxiii. 11. Job xxix. 25. Romans xiii. 1, -- 4. It is never hinted, that they have
no charge with respect to religion, but the contrary. God chose Moses the
magistrate, not Aaron the High Priest to publish his laws relative to religion.
-- Abijah avers, that in maintaining the true worship of God, he had kept the
charge of the Lord, which Jeroboam the introducer of a false religion had not,
2 Chronicles xiii. 10, 11. (2.) God promised to the Jews good magistrates, in order
to root out abusive practices and monuments of false religion, Isa i. 25, 26.
Now, if they had power to root these out, they had certainly power to make laws
for that effect. (3.) They ought to repeal wicked and persecuting laws, and
free their subjects from being bound over to punishment by them for their
faithful service of God, Psalm xciv. 20. Isa. x. 11. Mic. vi. 16. Hos. v. 11.
If they can repeal wicked laws, they must have power to establish what is
contrary to them, Dan. iii. and vi. (4) If magistrates can make laws
encouraging the true religion and church of Christ, by annexation of civil
favors to the profession or practice of gospel truth; they can also by law
annex civil punishment to the contempt of, or rebellion against these laws;
they being for the terror and punishment of evil doers, as well as for the
praise of them that do well, Romans xiii. 3, 4. 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14 Dan. vi. 16.
iii. 29. Ezra i. 1, -- 5. vi. 3, -- 12. vii. 23, -- 27. (5) By enacting such
laws they neither invade the office of ecclesiastical rulers, who have no power
to connect civil rewards or punishments, with any thing religious, -- nor do
they transgress any law of God. -- What then can hinder their having power to
make them? (6.) If all sorts of men, church members and officers, as well as
others, be subject to civil magistrates, they must have power, and ought to
make civil laws calculated to promote their advantage, in all these stations,
Romans xiii. 1, -- 4. 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14. 1 Timothy ii 1, 2. (7.) Unless magistrates
have a power to make good laws relative to the external profession and practice
of religion, clergymen, if generally corrupt, will have it in their power, by
Synodical constitutions, or otherwise, to devour and poison their subjects,
with the seeds of confusion, profaneness, and every evil work, without any
possibility of any legal restraint. For to allow magistrates to act without
law, is to introduce tyranny and arbitrary government.

But, in magistrates making laws respecting religion, it is necessary, that
[1.] They, first in order, carefully acquaint themselves with the law of God,
that they may form all their laws in agreeableness and subordination to it, --
they having no power against the truth, but for it, Deuteronomy. xvii. 18, -- 20.
Josh. i. 7, 8. Psalm cxix. 97, -- 104. 2 Cor. xiii. 8. [2.] They ought to
consult with faithful ministers of the church, either as met in Synods or
otherwise; as it may be expected, they know the laws of God relative to
religion, Deuteronomy. xvii. 9, -- 12. Mal. ii. 7. 2 Chronicles. xv. 1, -- 15. Thus, in
making these laws, church-rulers help magistrates with their direction, while
magistrates help them with their civil encouragements, 2 Chronicles. xix. 10, 11.
Ezekiel. xliv. 23, 24 [3.] They ought to require the ministers, who are in their
dominions, faithfully to instruct their subjects in the whole counsel of God,
contained in his word, relative to those points of religion, about which they
intend to make laws, that they may be thus prepared, willingly to receive and
obey them. -- Thus Jehoshaphat first sent teachers, and then judges throughout
his dominions, 2 Chronicles. xvii. xix [4.] In all matters of religion, great care
ought to be taken to establish the laws, with and by, the consent of the
subjects, or their representatives, -- thus strengthening these laws, through
their binding men who are willing to obey them; -- and the rather as the
principal end of such laws is lost, unless men willingly obey them, 2 Chronicles.
xv. 9, 13. xx. 21. Jonah iii. 4, 7. [5.] In these laws a special regard ought
to be shown to persons of a weak and tender conscience. Political shepherds
ought never to over drive their flock, but to carry the lambs in their bosom.
And, that the very weakest of their subjects may be qualified to obey their
laws, they ought never to establish any thing in religion, but what is plainly
as well as really established by God in his law; -- that so nothing may be
contrary to their law, but what is plainly contrary to God's law, Ezekiel. xxxiv.
4.

IV. Though the law of God allows not of magistrates attempting to force men
into the faith, profession or practice of the true religion, or of their
punishing any thing relative to it, which is not an open and manifest violation
of the law of God, and plainly destructive of the welfare of the commonwealth;
-- yet it requires them to restrain, and even seasonably and suitably to punish
blasphemy, idolatry, and like grosser corruptions, and insults upon the true
religion, when they become openly notorious, and especially if obstinately
continued in to the just offense and hurt of others. (1.) Such restraint and
punishment are represented in scripture as an eminent service done to God,
Exodus xxxii. 4, 26, 29. 1 Samuel xv. 2, 3. xviii. 22. Rev. xvii. 14, 16. xix. 17,
-- 19 Song ii. 15 in which last text, the word rendered TAKE ordinarily
signifies an external and forcible taking, compare 2 Samuel i. 10. Judges xii. 6.
xvi. 3; 21. Psalm. cxxxix. 9. Exodus iv. 4. Genesis xxv. 26. xxii. 13. (2.) The end
of God's appointment of magistrates, is the GOOD of the subjects, Romans xiv. 4.
Now such corruptions in religion impair that good, in preventing the spread and
success of the gospel, which are so exceedingly calculated to render men
virtuous and happy, even in this life, 1 Timothy iv. 8. 1 Pet. iii. 11, 12, 13.
Tit. ii. 12. and in promoting the hurt of men's morals, safety; estate, peace or
liberty, Romans i. 21, -- 32. xvi. 18. 2 Pet. ii. 1, 2, 3, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18,
19, Jude, ver 4, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19. 2 Timothy iv. 3, 4. iii. 1, -- 9,
13. ii. 16, 17. 1 Timothy iv. 2, -- 5. vi. 3, 4. (3) Such restraint and punishment
are represented in scripture as a blessing to be prayed for, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2,
4. and as a blessing for which God ought to be thanked, Ezra vii. 25. -- 28.
Rev. xi. 15, 17. (4.) It is promised, that such restraint and punishment should
be produced by the effusion of the holy Ghost upon the Christian church, Zech.
xii. 10, 12, 14. with xiii. 1-6. and that they should tend to the advantage,
even of some seducers, who should be brought to account the inflicters their
real FRIENDS, Zech. xiii. 4, 5, 6. (5) The scripture represents EVIL as
removed, and GOOD both moral and civil as obtained, by such restraints and
punishments, Deuteronomy xvii 2, 5, 7, 10 1 Kings xviii. 40, 41 2 Chronicles. xiv. 3, 4, 5.
and wickedness and misery as overflowing a nation, when neglected, Eccl. viii.
11. Judge xvii. 4, 5, 6, 12 1 Samuel ii. 12, -- 29 and iv. Ezekiel. xxii 25, 26, 30,
31. (6.) When the proper judges neglected such restraint and punishment, God
raised up some in an extraordinary way, to execu^e it. Thus Elijah caused slay
the prophets of Baal, 1 Kings xviii. 40. Jehu caused slay others of them, 2
Kings x. 5, -- 25. The Jews, under the direction of Jehoiada, slew Mattan the
priest of Baal, and Christ himself once and again drove the buyers and sellers
out of the temple, John ii. 13, -- 19. Mat. xxi. 12. Why ought not magistrates,
who are his vicegerents, as God, to imitate his conduct, Psalm. lxxxii. 1, 6. 2 Chronicles. xix. 6. Romans xiii. 1, -- 4. (7.) The scripture affords many approven
instances of such restraint or punishment of gross corruptions in religion, as
by Jacob, Genesis xxxv 24 by the judges in the time and country of Job, Job xxxi.
26, -- 28. by Moses, Exodus xxxii. 4, 20, 22, 29. by the rulers of the ten
tribes, Josh. xxii, 10, -- 34. by Asa, 2 Chronicles. xv. 12, 13, 15. by Jehoshaphat,
2 Chronicles. xix. 3, -- 8. by Josiah, 2 Chronicles. xxxiv. 4, 33, 2 Kings xxiii. 5, 20.
by Nehemiah, Neh. x. 20. by Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. iii. 29. by Artaxerxes, Ezra
vii. 26. and by the Protestant destroyers of Antichrist, Rev. xvii. 16.

V. Beside their power, as men, to try all things by the law of God manifested
to them, and their power of Christian discretion (if they are Christians) to
judge by the word of God what is for their own spiritual and eternal advantage,
magistrates, as such, have a power of POLITICALLY judging and determining, what
and how, principles and practices of the true religion are to be connected with
political rewards or encouragements; or, what ought to be professed and
practiced by persons, as members of their political society, in order to
promote the real welfare of it, in subordination to the glory of God, as King
of nations. (1) If they may enact laws in the matters of God, as has been
proven; and may judge in what is fundamental in religion, -- or in that which
is contained in express words of scripture, -- or in matters of the second
table of the moral law, -- then they must have power to judge of that which is
plainly deducible from the express words of scripture, by necessary
consequence, -- and in those matters of the first table of the moral law, which
as much belong to the law of nature, as any in the second; -- have power
politically to judge why, and how, such a religious profession and practice is
to be encouraged by the civil authority; and how, and why, that which is
notoriously opposite to the true religion, is to be discouraged. (3.) Without
this political judging of them, magistrates could never determine, Whether the
decisions of ecclesiastical courts ought to be ratisied by their civil
authority or not; 1 Thessalonians. v. 21. Acts xvii. 11. If in judging of those things,
magistrates improve the Word, the Spirit, and the faithful ministers of God,
for their counselors, they bid fair to have a divine sentence in their lips,
and not to err in judgment, Deuteronomy. xvii. 18, -- 20. Psalm. cxix. 97, -- 105.
Prove. xvi. 10. Isa, xxxii. 1. If, neglecting to consult these, magistrates give
a corrupt sentence, they ly open to the judgment of God, -- to the restraint
and correction of the collective body of the subjects, or their
representatives, -- and also to ecclesiastical censure, if they be
church members. (3.) If magistrates be nursing fathers to the Christian church,
Isa. xlix. 23. they ought to prevent her being poisoned with corrupt food; and
hence must have a power politically to judge what is corrupt, and what is not.
(4.) If the magistrate be the keeper of the peace of the kingdom, then, if a
party in the church, complaining of the gross errors of the other, should form
a furious schism, he must have power politically to judge, who is in the right,
or in the wrong -- who adhere to the truths established by law, and who do not;
-- and to show favor accordingly, 1 Thessalonians. v. 21. (5.) If magistrates may
restrain and punish evil doers, they may exercise this power over church
officers, if, in their Synods, they make blasphemous or idolatrous decrees,
which tend to disturb the commonwealth, and dishonor God, the King of nations,
-- and hence must politically judge of their conduct by the laws of God and the
land. -- No covenanted subjection to church judicatures, as a member of the
church, can deprive them of this political judgment, any more than of their
right of cognition and discretion as men and Christians. Magistrates political
judgment, how principles or practices are to be connected with civil
encouragements or discouragements, is no infallible rule of church courts
judging, how principles and practices ought to be connected with ecclesiastical
encouragements or censures: nor are the decisions of ecclesiastical courts any
infallible rule to direct magistrates. But the law of God is the only
infallible and supreme rule to both. Nor is the decision of the one subordinate
to that of the other; but both, as well as every man's right to judge for
himself according to the law of God, what he is to believe and practice in
order to his own peace and comfort, and his joyful answering in the final
judgment of God, are supreme in their respective departments, subordinated only
to the judgment of God himself. -- But, to argue the matter still more
particularly,

1. If magistracy, conscience, and human rights, natural and civil, be all
derived from God, as all but Atheists must allow, magistrates can have no more
power, authoritatively to tolerate sin, than God himself can command it. If
God, by virtue of the infinite perfection of his nature, have no will, no
power, authoritatively to proclaim liberty to commit sin, he cannot communicate
any such power to the magistrate. Nor can the magistrate account to God for
exceeding his power in licensing that which is infinitely injurious to him,
more than the British king's Lion-keeper has power, or could be accountable
for loosing and hunting out the lions in the Tower upon His Majesty. If
conscience derive all its power from God, it can have no more power to enjoin
any thing sinful, than Lord North has to hire ruffians to assassinate his
Sovereign. If all human rights be derived from God, the primary and supreme
proprietor of all things, it is impossible they can authorize men to contrive
or commit any thing sinful, or can protect them in it.

2. Men's state in this world is neither separated nor separable from, but
closely connected with their eternal state. And magistracy is an ordinance of
God, appointed by him for his own glory, and to promote the chief end of
mankind in glorifying him, Romans xiii. 2. Prove. xvi. 4. 1 Cor. x. 31. 1 Pet. iv.
11. Romans xii. 36. But, how, Sir, do magistrates promote this end, if they give
the same degree of protection, though perhaps, not of encouragement, to the
soul-ruining and practice-corrupting delusions and abominations of Satan, as
they do the eternally saving religion of God and his Christ? -- if they give
the same countenance to them, who to the corruption of men's moral behavior,
and their eternal damnation, -- defame Jehovah to them as mere matter, a mere
man, a mere creature, a worker of contradiction and nonsense, -- as they do to
those, who faithfully proclaim his infinite excellencies, and glorious works of
redemption, publish his truths, and promote the present and future holiness and
happiness of mankind? -- If God chiefly aim at the glorifying of himself, in
the advancement of the kingdom of Christ; how can magistrates, who are
appointed by him, as his vicegerents, for promoting his glory on earth, be
allowed, far less obliged by him, to exert their power, as much for protecting
or promoting the kingdom of the devil, as for the advancement of the kingdom of
Christ? Indeed magistrates are not the deputies of Christ as mediator, but they
are of God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and all their administrations are, by
him, subjected to Christ, as "Head over all things to his church," Prove. viii.
15, 16. Mat. xxviii. 18. Ephesians. i. 22. Why then ought they not to concur with
God, in advancing the kingdom of Christ, especially as this mightily promotes
the temporal as well as the eternal welfare of their subjects, Prove. xiv. 34.
Isa. i. 19. iii. 10. Psalm. cxii, cxxvii, cxxviii.

3. Magistrates are expressly represented in scripture, as ministers of God for
good to men, -- rulers deputed by, and under him, Romans xiii. 4. But, how can
they be ministers, deputies, or vicegerents of God, without having power to
restrain, and if proper and seasonable, to punish, that which openly affronts
and horridly insults him, -- blasphemously gives him the lie, basely
misrepresents him, or devotes the worship due to him, to his adversary the
devil, -- or any other crimes, which immediately strike against him? -- If they
be God's ministers, they must transact all their magistratical managements in
his name, -- and how can God empower his own ministers as such, and acting in
his name, to promote his highest dishonor, licensing, encouraging, and
protecting gross heresy, blasphemy, and idolatry; -- giving as much
encouragement to the vilest delusions of Satan, as to the new Testament in
Jesus blood? -- How can they be ministers of God for good to men, without
having power to restrain such as, like wolves and murderers, go about
corrupting the principles and practices, and destroying the sons of his and
their subjects? How can they be ministers of God, the father of spirits, for
good, universal good, to men, who are not brutes but endowed with precious and
immortal souls, which are more, beneficial in commonwealths, than their bodies,
without having power to promote the cultivation and welfare of souls as a means
of promoting the happiness of that state? How can they be ministers of God for
good to men, if they have power, only to punish these crimes which strike
immediately against their bodies or external property, but no power to punish
crimes, as they provoke God's wrath against the nation; -- if they have power
to restrain the petty thief, robber, or other less hurtful things, -- but none
to prevent the kindling of God's wrath against the nation, and the debauching
of men's consciences and morals, by blasphemy, heresy, idolatry, etc. which may
quickly do more real mischief to a nation, than ten thousand thieves or robbers
could do? -- After God has expressly commanded to punish murderers as
destroyers of his image, Genesis ix. 6 -- have his ministers no power to punish
murder, as a destruction of his rational creatures, or a sacrificing them to
devils, Psalm. cvi. 37? If murder ought to be punished as an injury and
dishonor to God, why not also public blasphemy, idolatry, and heresy,
obstinately continued in?

4. Magistrates are appointed of God for the terror and punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well, Romans xiii. 3, 4. 1 Pet. ii. 14.
And are not, Sir, idolaters, blasphemers, profaners of the Sabbath, by teaching
of damnable errors or practicing of abominable idolatries on it, evil doers in
God's account, as well as revilers of men, thieves, traitors, murderers, etc.?
Are not heresies and idolatries expressly declared by him, damning works of the
flesh, -- evil deeds, Gal. v. 14, -- 21. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 9, -- 12. Rev. xiv. 9, --
11? Are not heretical teachers declared evil workers, Phil. iii. 2. Tit: i. 10,
11. -- It must therefore necessarily follow, that magistrates are appointed by
God, not to be licensers, protectors, and encouragers, but to be terrors to,
and punishers of them, as is suitable and seasonable.

5. The power, which magistrates have, as ministers of God for good to men,
ought to be so exercised as most effectually conduces to make all their
subjects live a quiet and peaceable life in all GODLINESS and honesty, and make
all men come to the saving knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2, 4, But how,
Sir, can their authoritative allowing or protecting of men in ungodliness,
blasphemy, and idolatry, promote such an end? Has not God himself testified,
that heresies, as well as blasphemy and idolatry, as a canker, eat out the
doctrine, which is according to godliness, and increase unto more and more
ungodliness, and make men worse and worse, till they be monstrously wicked, 2 Timothy ii. 16, 17. iv. 3, 4. iii. 1, -- 9, 13. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3, -- 12. 1 Timothy iv.
1, -- 3. vi. 3, 4 2 Pet. ii. 1, -- 3, 10, -- 20. Romans i. 21, -- 32. If
magistrates protect and encourage obstinate seducers in blaspheming God,
reproaching his Son as a mere creature, or as an impostor, or in furiously
rending his well compacted body the church, or in corrupting the principles and
morals, and ruining the souls of neighbors, children, or servants, how can
such as are truly serious and ardently zealous for God, fail to have their
righteous souls vexed from day to day, with the damnable doctrines and filthy
conversation of these wicked? Psalm. cxix. 136, 139, 158. lxix. 9. 2 Pet. ii. 8.
-- To truly zealous saints, a den of thieves, is not a more grievous neighbor
than a Synagogue of Satan.

6. All magistrates ruling over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of the
Lord, 2 Samuel xxiii. 3. But how can they be just, if they dispose of that
protection or encouragement, to that which dishonours and provokes God to the
highest, saps the foundation of all true virtue, and natively produces the most
ruinous practices, -- which is due to that doctrine, worship, and practice,
which is according to godliness, and promotes glory, honor, immortality,
eternal life? How can they rule in the fear of God, if, in their magistratical
administrations, they show no regard to that religion, by which his declarative
glory is advanced, but instead thereof, license, protect, and encourage, that
which infinitely dishonours and offends him?

7. The fourth commandment, the obligation of which is certainly moral, and
perpetually binding on magistrates, as well as on heads of families, commands
them to cause the weekly Sabbath to be sanctified by all within their gates, i.
e. all their subjects, Exodus xx. 10. Jer. xvii. 20, -- 25. And to this the
approven example of Nehemiah corresponds, Neh. xiii. 15, -- 22. Now, if
magistrates cannot answer to God, for encouraging or protecting their subjects
in their civil business, which is of itself lawful and useful, -- on the the
Sabbath, -- how will they account to him, for protecting and encouraging men,
in teaching blasphemous errors, or practicing abominable idolatries, on that
day? How can this commandment bind them to restrain what is in itself lawful
and useful, -- and yet bind them not to restrain, but allow, encourage, and
protect, that which is in itself infinitely dishonorable to God, their
superior, and ruinous to his and their subjects, in both temporal and eternal
interests? -- Or, dare you pretend, that the observance of the weekly Sabbath
depends one whit less on Revelation, than the doctrine of the Trinity of
persons in the Godhead does.

8. If magistrates have power, on proper occasions, to appoint religious fasts,
as means of turning away God's wrath, and of procuring or obtaining his
blessings to their commonwealth, as it is certain yourself, and perhaps every
advocate for authoritative toleration, acknowledge, Jonah iii. 6, -- 10. 1 Samuel
vii. 9, 6. 2 Chronicles. xx. 3, -- 15. Ezra viii. 21, -- 33. Neh. ix. 1. Jer. xxxvi.
6, 22. they cannot but have power to establish that religion, and only that
religion which answers to those ends, and to restrain that damnable heresy,
blasphemy, and idolatry, which provoke God's wrath against his subjects. To
command their subjects to mourn over the grounds of his anger and supplicate
his favor, while at the same time they encouraged and protected them in gross
heresy, public blasphemy and idolatry, than which nothing can more provoke his
indignation, would be fearful dissimulation with the Most High. Psalm lxvi. 18.
Ezekiel. xiv. 3, -- 8, If magistrates have power to appoint a Christian fast, and
to punish the public contemners of it, or of their authority, in appointing it,
-- How can they but have power to establish the true Christian religion, and to
punish, if seasonable, the public and insolent contemners and corrupters of it,
and despisers of their authority in establishing it? -- Dare you pretend, that
the upright profession and practice of the Christian religion is less
calculated to promote the happiness of a nation in subordination to the honor
of God, than an occasional fast? Or, that a Christian fast can be observed
without entering into the very marrow of the doctrines of Revelation? -- or
that magistrates ought merely to require the day to be observed in fasting,
leaving the manner and object of the worship, wholly to the choice of their
subjects, -- recommending the worship of devils, as much as that of Jehovah;
and supposing the one as able and ready to avert calamities, and bestow
necessary blessings, as the other. If you pretend, that God rewarded Ahab or
the Ninevites for worshipping their idols, you must prove that God is so far
from being highly displeased with idolatry, as himself often declares, Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 16, 17, 21, -- 26. Judges ii. 14. 2 Kings xvii. 10, -- 18. Psalm cvi.
19, -- 40 Jer. xlviii. 7, 35, l. 38, etc. -- that he is ready to accept and
reward the worship of idols, devils, bulls, dogs, cats, saints, leeks, onions,
consecrated wafers, etc. if men be sincere in it. Rare doctrine this, for a
Presbyterian clergyman, of this enlightened age!

9. If every parent or master ought for the welfare of his family, in
subordination to the honor of the God of all families, to establish the true
religion in it, Genesis xviii. 19. Josh. xxiv. 15 to remove idols out of it, G^n.
xxxv. 2, -- 4. and to refuse seducing hereties a lodging in it, 2 John x. 11.
-- And if according to this injunction, and those approved examples, he ought
to extrude a seducer, who had entered: or even a member of the family, who
obstinately endeavored to corrupt the rest, with damnable error, blasphemy, or
idolatry, -- in order to prevent the infection of the family, and hinder the
destructive wrath of God from falling on them; -- Why must not magistrates, who
are God's ministers for good, be allowed power and authority to establish and
promote the true Christian religion, in their large political families, and to
repress or exclude notorious murderers of souls, and kindlers of the wrath of
God? The relation of a parent or master is no more spiritual, than that of a
magistrate, makes no man either member or officer of Christ's mystical body,
any more than magistracy does. -- And I dare defy all the Tolerants on earth,
to point out one thing relative to religion, competent to masters and parents,
as such, but magistrates may do what is similar; or to prove that the true
knowledge, faith, profession and practice of revealed religion, is one whit
less necessary and useful in commonwealths, than in families.

10. If the power of ecclesiastical rulers extends to all the civil
transactions of church members, -- all the magistratical and military
managements of kings or emperors not excepted, in so far as they are regulated
by the law of Christ, and are immediately connected with his honor and the
good of his church, -- there is equal reason, that the power of magistrates
should extend to religious matters, in so far as they are connected with the
welfare of the state, in subordination to the honor of God, as King of
nations. No reason can be assigned, why the vicegerents of God should, as such,
act as atheists, regardless of religion, any more than the messengers of
Christ. Nor, till it be proven, that God, the King of nations, is more inclined
to damnable heresy, blasphemy, and idolalatry, than Christ the Head of the
church, can it be possible to prove, that magistrates have one whit more power,
authoritatively to license, encourage, or promise them protection, than
church-rulers have; -- though as the church is a select holy society, called
out of the world which lies in wickedness, founded on, and having all her
adult members instructed by the revelation of Christ, the same degree of
forbearance to censure, in the church, as to punish in the state, is by no
means proper.

11. Unless true and false religion be equally calculated to render men good
subjects, or magistrates, and to promote the peace and prosperity of
commonwealths, in subordination to the honor of God, as King of nations, they
can never deserve or lawfully enjoy equal encouragement, protection or liberty
-- But the true religion exalts a nation, Prove. xiv. 34. renders it quiet and
prosperous, 2 Chronicles. xiv. 1, -- 7. it teaches men to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soherly, righteously and godly, Tit. ii. 11, 12. The
fruits produced by it, are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against which there is no law, Gal. v.
22, 23. -- whereas, gross heresy, blasphemy and idolatry, debauch men's
conscience, make it seared with a hot iron, 1 Timothy iv. 2. make their affections
vile, and their mind and sense reprobate, Romans i. 26, 28. they render men,
filled with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, -- believers and speakers of
lies in hypocrisy, giving heed to the damnable doctrines of devils, -- proud,
doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railing, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10, -- 12. 1 Timothy iv. 1, 2, 3. vi. 3, 4.
They render times perilous, and men covetous, boasters, proud, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce despisers, and extirpaters of those that are
good, traitors, heady, high-minded, hypocritical, dissemblers, villainous,
corrupters of families, haters and resisters of sound doctrine, reprobate
concerning the faith, and waxing worse and worse; -- who will not endure sound
doctrine, but after their own lusts, heap up to themselves teachers, having
itching ears, and turn away their ears from the truth to fables, 2 Timothy iii. 1,
-- 8, 13. iv. 3, 4. They, as a canker, eat out the principles, profession and
practice of piety and virtue, and increase unto more ungodliness, 2 Timothy ii.
16, 17. -- They make men self destroyers, -- their pernicious ways much
followed, -- the way of truth reproached, and dispose them through covetousness
with feigned words to make damnable merchandise of souls; they render men
horridly unchaste, presumptuous, selfwilled, despisers and revilers of
magistrates and church rulers, beguilers of unstable souls, exercised in
covetous practices, cursed children, -- speakers of great swelling words of
vanity, pretenders to liberty, but real slaves of corruption, 2 Pet. ii. 1, --
3, 10, -- 19. -- They render men ungodly turners of the grace of God into
lasciviousness, -- filthy dreamers, who defile the flesh, despise dominions,
and speak evil of dignities, -- blasphemers and calumniators of those things
which they know not, who go in the unnatural and maliciously murderous way of
Cain, run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perish in the
rebellious gainsaying of Kore, -- and are luxurious, unprofitable, -- raging
waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, -- wandering stars, to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever: -- men of ungodly deeds and hard
speeches, -- murmurers, complainers, walkers after their own lusts, whose mouth
speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration, because of
advantage, -- sensual and separating mockers, who walk after their ungodly
lusts, Jude iv. 8, 10, -- 13, 15, 16, 10, 19. -- They render persons and
societies full of abominations and filthiness of fornication -- a mystery of
iniquity, and mother of harlots and abominations in the earth, -- drunk with
the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus, -- fighters against Him, who is
LORD of Lords, and pretendedly conscientious murderers of his ministers and
people, Rev. xvii. 3, -- 6, 14. John xvi. 2. In fine, they introduce unnatural
lusts of the flesh, and tend to fill men with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, malicioutness, envy, murder, debates, deceit,
malignity, and make them whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful,
proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to parents, without
understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, implacable
unmerciful, -- who, contrary to their own inward convictions, commit the most
abominable crimes, and have pleasure in them that do the like, Romans i, 21, --
23. -- These, Sir, if God do know and speak truth, are the native fruits of
heresy, blasphemy and idolatry, -- these the GOOD SUBJECTS, who are infected
with them, -- if Providence permit them to reduce their principles to practice.
How then is it for the safety of nations, or the honor of God, as King of
nations, to have them authoritatively tolerated in his name?

12. Though God never, in scripture, commands that any lesser mistakes in
religion, or a simple neglect of religious duties should be punished; yet he
commands magistrates, suitably and seasonably, to punish, even unto death,
idolaters, particularly seducers to it, Deuteronomy. xiii. 2, -- 15. xvii. 2, -- 7.
Exodus xxii. 20. blasphemers, Lev. xxiv. 15, 16. insolent profarers of the
Sabbath, Number. xv. 30, -- 36. -- Where in all the New Testament, is there a
single hint of the repeal of such laws, any more than of those concerning
murder, Genesis ix. 6 Numb. xxxv. 30, 31.? -- Where is a single hint, that
Christ's incarnation, -- his death for sin, and to save men, abolished these
laws and procured for magistrates a right and power, in the name of God, to
license, encourage and protect heretics, blasphemers, and idolaters, who openly
and obstinately labor to offend God, and destroy and damn men?

13. God, in scripture, frequently approves of magistrates requiring their
subjects to worship the true God, in a right manner, -- and of their
suppressing and punishing idolatry; as Abraham, Genesis xviii. 19. Jacob, Genesis
xxxv. 2, 3, 4^ the Judges in the land of Uz, Job xxxi. 26, -- 28. Moses, Exodus
xxxii. 20, 27. Joshua, Josh, xxiv. 14, 15. Asa, 2 Chronicles. xiv. 2, -- 5, xv. 13,
16. Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. xvii, xix Jehoiada, 2 Chronicles. xxiii, 16, -- 19.
Hezekiah, 2 Kings xviii. 4, 5. 2. Chron. xxix, -- xxxi. Manasseh, 2 Chronicles.
xxxiii. 15, 16. Josiah, 2. Chron, xxxiv. xxxv. 2 Kings xxii, xxiii. Nehemiah,
chap. xiii. Jehu, 2 Kings x. 24, -- 30. and marks with infamy magistrates
allowing of their subjects to worship the true God in the high places, 1 Kings
xv. 14 xxii. 43. 2 Kings xii. 3 xiv. 4. xv. 4, 35. 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. 17. The
scripture never hints, that those magistrates acted as church officers or
merely typical persons, in their reformation work. Nay,

14. Even Heathen magistrates, whom you cannot pretend to have been
ecclesiastical rulers, have, with his approbation, made laws to promote the
honor of the true God, and against the contemners of him; as Artaxerxes king
of Persia, Ezra vii. 13, -- 26. which God in mercy put into his heart, v. 27.
Cyrus and Darius Persians, Ezra i. 1, -- 5 vi. 1, -- 14, Nebuchadnezzar the
Chaldean, Dan. iii. 28, 29. and Darius the Mede, Dan. vi. 26.

15. God promised it, as a blessing to the gospel church, that magistrates
should exercise their power in favors of her revealed religion, and in
opposition to false teachers, and their abominable delusions, Isa xlix. 23.
"Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and queens thy nursing mothers." Isa. lx.
3, 10, 16. "Kings shall come to the brightness of thy rising, -- Kings shall
minister unto thee, -- Thou shall suck the breast of kings." Psalm lxxii, 10,
11. "Kings shall bring presents -- shall offer gifts; -- all kings shall fall
down before him; all nations shall serve him." Psalm ii. 8, 10, -- 12. "I will
give thee, O Christ, the heathen for thine inheritance. -- Be wise now
therefore, ye kings, be instructed ye judges of the earth; serve the Lord with
fear. -- Kiss ye the Son," manifesting your cordial subjection to him. Zech.
xiii. 2, 3. "I will cut off the names of idols out of the land, and I will
cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to go out of the land. -- When any
shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother shall say unto him, thou
shall not live, for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord, and -- shall
thrust him through when he prophesies." Rev. xvii. 16. "The ten horns shall
hate the Whore, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire." Rev. xxi. 24. "The
kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto the gospel church."
Rev, xi. 15. "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ."

16. Even the law of nature plainly requires, That magistrates maintain and
promote the honor of that God, who gave them all their power and authority, --
that God, who is the original and supreme proprietor and Sovereign of nations
and societies, and the all-sufficient source of all their happiness; -- that
they govern their subjects, not as if they were dogs or swine, having nothing
but their bodies to care for, but as men endowed with rational and immortal
souls; -- that as righteousness exalts a nation, and sin is the reproach of
any people, they should exercise their whole power and authority, as is best
calculated to make all their subjects behave most agreeably to the law, and
declarative glory of God, and most usefully to each other. -- It plainly
teaches, That if God graciously grant us a supernatural revelation, directive
of our faith, profession and practice, we ought thankfully to receive, believe,
profess and obey it; -- that, if magistrates ought to restrain and punish gross
immoralities, they ought to restrain that error or worship, which, being a
manifestly damning work of the flesh, natively leads men into such
immoralities; -- and that, if heresy, blasphemy and idolatry hinder the
progress of virtue, or the increase of good men, who are the principal support
and blessings of a society, Isa. vi. 13. lxv. 8. Genesis xviii. 26, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32. they ought to be restrained. -- If heresy, blasphemy and idolatry
established or authoritatively tolerated, eminently and notoriously provoke God
to punish nations with sword, famine, pestilence, poverty, decay of trade,
desolation, captivity, or the like, as they have often done even among
Heathens, Common sense requires, That every magistrate, from regard to the
welfare of his subjects, ought to restrain them, as far as his circumstances
can prudently permit, -- instead of giving them as much liberty, encouragement
or protection as he gives to the religion of Jesus Christ, which has the
promises of this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy iv. 8, Titus iii.
8, 14. Proverbs xiv. 34.

17. If, Sir, as you pretend, magistrates ought to tolerate heresy, idolatry
and blasphemy, -- then, a power and office derived from God ought to be
employed and executed in encouraging the most shocking dishonours and outrage
against him; -- the authority of God, placed in, and exercised by, magistrates,
ought to be set in opposition to his own immediate authority, manifested in his
word; -- they as ministers of God for good to men, ought to license and
encourage his enemies to deny, pervert, and revile his truths contained in his
oracles, and confirmed by the blood of his Son, and to introduce the most
accursed and damnable errors into their place, in his church, -- ought to give
the devil and his agents as much countenance and assistance in driving men to
hell, as they give to Jesus Christ and his faithful servants in leading them to
heaven, -- ought to give a company of wizards as much countenance and
protection in worshipping the devil and his angels, as a society of precious
saints worshipping the Lord and his Christ, in the beauty of holiness. -- In
short, authoritative tolerations of heresy, blasphemy or idolatry are solemn
proclamations issued forth by the deputies of God, in his name, bearing that
Satan and his emissaries have full liberty granted them to cast forth their
floods of error, and every abomination that proceeds from it, for the dishonor
of God, and the temporal and eternal destruction of men. Nor, for ought I know,
have they ever neglected to improve their opportunity; as the issues of the
tolerations granted by Cromwell, K. James VII. and Q. Anne, in part manifest.

How absurd then, after all the amazing deliverances from it, which God hath^
mercifully bestowed upon us. -- after all that our fathers have suffered from
it, -- after all our public and solemn engagements to God, or to men, against
it, and when the very accession of our Sovereign K. George and his family to
the British throne, and their establishment depends on the nation's detestation
of Popery, and when the tremenduous destruction of its votaries draws nigh,
Rev. xiv. xvi. and xviii 4, -- 8. -- for our rulers to grant any authoritative
toleration of a pretended religion, that tramples on our Bibles, which God has
inspired, and requires us to search as the mean of our eternal salvation, 2 Timothy iii. 15, -- 17. 2 Pet. i. 19, -- 21. Isa. viii. 20. John v. 39. Acts xvii.
11 Col. iii. 16. and blasphemes these oracles of God as imperfect, obscure,
destitute of any fixed meaning or con^idence-binding authority till they
receive it from the Pope or his councils, and as infinitely dangerous to the
temporal, spiritual and eternal interests of men, if perused without a
pontifical license, Dan. vii. 25. xi. 36. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 4. 2 Timothy iv. 4. -- a
religion, which overthrows the whole mediation of our Redeemer, confining his
mediatorial work to his manhood, -- and making saints, angels, crosses, images,
etc. mediators of satisfaction, intercession, or saving influence, along with
Him, -- and the Pope and his clergy infallible prophets, sinexpiating priests,
and kingly dispensers of spiritual privileges, and formers of laws and offices
in the church, Dan. ii. 36, -- 39. vii. 25. Rev. xvii. 14. -- a blasphemous
religion, which in the most daring manner, reproacheth and misrepresents God
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and what belongs to him, and ascribes his
excellencies and prerogatives to creatures, Dan. vii, 25. xi. 36, -- 38. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 4. Rev. xiii. 1, 5, 6. xvii. 3. -- a religion wholly given to
superstition, mingling multitudes of heathenish or other human or devilish
ceremonies, with every part of its worship, Dan. vii. 25. 2 Timothy iv. 4 with
Mat. xxviii. 20. Deuteronomy. xii. 32. -- a religion full of abominable idolatries,
giving to multitudes of saints and angels, images, relics and consecrated
wafers, that worship and glory which is due to God alone, Dan. xi. 38, 39. 2 Thessalonians. iv. 4. Rev. ix. 20, 21. xiii. 3, 4 xiv. 9, -- 11. -- a religion pregnant
with the most shocking villainies, pretended miracles, dispensing with, or
commuting the most solemn engagements, -- indulgence of equivocation and mental
reservation in oaths, -- and inculcating breach of faith with heretics, if for
the advantage of the Romish church, -- and which, by holding multitudes of sins
to be venial, -- by the sale of pardons and indulgences, -- by prohibiting
clergymen and devotees to marry, -- and by licensing of stews, promotes the
most horrible debauchery, Dan. xi. 36, -- 39. 2 Thessalonians ii. 3, 7, 9, -- 12. 1 Timothy iv. 1, -- 3. 2 Timothy iii. 1, -- 6, 8, 13. Rev. ix. 21. xi. 8. xiii. 13, 14.
xvi. 13, 14. xvii. 2, 3, 5. xviii. 2. -- a bloody religion, in the propagation
and maintenance of which, about sixty millions of mankind, many of them saints,
have been murdered, in the most cruel and inhuman forms, Dan. vii. 25. Rev.
viii. 13. ix. 11, 21. xi, 2, 7. xiii. 2, 7. xvii. 6. xviii. 24. xvi. 2. -- a
religion, the cordial and persevering profession and practice of which, God
has declared inevitably damning, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 3, 9, -- 12. Rev. ix. 11. xvii.
11. xiv. 9, -- 11. xix. 20. xx 10.

OBJECT. I. "God alone is the Lawgiver and Lord of men's conscience." ANSW. 1.
God is the only absolute, supreme and infallible Lawgiver; He alone has power
to constitute any thing a part of religion. But that no more hinders his
magistratical vicegerents to make political laws in favors of what he has
declared and instituted in religion, than Christ being Head of the church can
hinder her subordinate rulers to make ecclesiastical constitutions in favors
of the truth, in his name, Psalm lxxxii. 1, 6. Romans xiii. 1, -- 6. 1 Fet. ii.
13, 14. 2. Neither magistrates nor ministers can make any law which of
themselves, and as their deeds, bind men's conscience. Their authority is not
infallibly exercised; it does not reach to the inward actings of conscience.
They cannot oblige conscience to these actings, or take any cognizance of them.
They cannot free it from any guilt contracted by them, or reward it if it does
well, or punish or censure it if it does amiss. Nor are their constitutions,
but God's law, the standard by which it shall be judged at the last day. -- But
they may make laws or constitutions, which, as originating from, subordinated
to, and adopted and ratisied by the law of God. bind men to obey for conscience
sake, Romans xiii. 1, -- 4. Mat. xviii. 19. 3. God's being the only Lawgiver of
men under the Old Testament as much as now, did not hinder Moses, David, Asa,
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehemiah, Nebuchadnezzar the Chaldean, Darius
the Mede, Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, Persians, or the king of Nineveh to
make civil laws in favors of the true religion. 4. If God alone be the
Lawgiver and Lord of the conscience, it necessarily follows, that magistrates
and conscience, who are his deputies, can have no power to warrant, license or
protect, any thing forbidden by his law, 2 Cor. xiii 8, 10.

OBJECT. II. "Every man has a natural right to judge for himself, what he
ought to do or forbear, especially in religion. He is to be fully persuaded in
his own mind, and to follow the dictates of his own conscience. Even the law of
God is a rule to him, as he understands it in his own conscience. To force any
man to do any thing contrary to his conscience, is to force him to sin, for
whatsoever is not of says is sin; and to punish him for following the dictates
of his conscience is to punish him for doing his duty." ANSW. [1.] Already you
have made men's conscience the supreme governor of their actions, exalting it
above The Most High GOD. [2.] Every man has a natural right derived from God,
to judge all things by the law of God, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. v. 21. He has a right to judge by the law of God what is necessary to
be professed and practiced, in order to the peace of his conscience, and his
fellowship with, and receiving of favors from God. But that no more hinders
magistrates politically to judge what profession and practice are proper for
men, as members of such a particular commonwealth, -- or what relative to
religion is to be connected with civil encouragements or discouragements, --
than it hinders church-rulers, ecclesiastically to judge and define what
profession or practice is necessary, in order to comfortable fellowship with
such a particular church. [3.] Men's conscience is no Lawgiver at all, but a
witness of their conduct, and a judge, which enquires into the meaning of God's
law, and directs accordingly, -- and which compares their qualities,
profession, and practice with the law of God, and if faithful, approves or
disapproves accordingly. [4.] The law of God, not men's conscience, is their
supreme and only insallible rule, which binds even conscience itself, Mark xii.
30. 1 John v. 3. and whatever men do contrary to it, is sinful, let their
conscience approve it as much as they will, 1 John iii. 4. Lev. v. 17, 18. Acts
xxvi. 9. 10. 1 Timothy i. 13, -- 16. Whatever proceeds not from the persuasion of a
good conscience, founded on the word of God, is sin. It is a sin for men's
conscience to err in dictating any thing not perfectly agreeable to the law of
God. -- How absurd to pretend, that this fin can render another sin duty, or a
duty sinful in itself! [5] If men's conscience, in itself, or in its directing,
persuading or instigating influence be sustained, as the immediate rule of
their conduct, without respect to the word of God, then either their conscience
must be insallible in its dictates, which it certainly is not, in either saints
or sinners, in this world, Romans vii. 14, 23. Prove. xxviii. 26. Jer. xvii 9.
Romans viii. 7, 8. Tit. i. 15. or, if it be fallible, God must have established
for men a fallible and deceitful rule of truth and holiness, -- and so be the
author of confusion in religion, since different consciences dictate different
things in it. -- To make men's conscience their rule in religion, would make God
the author and commander of wickedness, -- by conscience, requiring the
transgression of his own law. -- It would make him not only acquit from
criminality, but approve as duty, the most damnable errors, horrid blasphemies,
detestable abominations, and cruel barbarities, if but dictated by the
consciences of Heathens, Mahotans, Papists, etc. in their religion. -- It would
make him the author of men's ruin, if it were procured by a way which seemed
right in their own eyes, Prove. xvi. 25. -- It would render it absolutely
impossible to convince men of the sinfulness of any thing they had done
according to the dictates of their conscience, be it ever so contrary to the
law of God. It would render it improper for men to repent of or mourn over any
blasphemy, murder of saints, or the like, which their deluded conscience had
dictated to them, or to ask, receive, or praise God for the pardoning of it,
contrary to 1 Timothy i. 13, -- 16. with Acts xxvi. 9, -- 11. Gal. i. 13, 14.
Phil. iii. 6. It would open a wide gap for men's doing whatever they pleased,
without being chargeable by, at least any man, for it -- If men should be
executed for the most horrid blasphemy, or abominable idolatry, high treason,
or any other deed dictated by their conscience, they would die martyrs for
righteousness sake. -- And men ought to believe whatever their conscience
dictated to them concerning their state, experience or duty, however contrary
to the testimony of God, contained in his word, -- contrary to Psalm iii. 22.
and xvi 11. xlii. 5, 11. Rev. iii. 17. [6.] To pretend that the law of God, not
in itself, but as understood by men's conscience, is their rule, is absurd. It,
in the Popish manner, represents the law of God as destitute of sense and
authority in itself, and as deriving it from a creature. It, in the Quakerish
manner, makes the light within the rule of men's conduct. It exalts every man to
an equality with, or rather superiority above God, having power to give
regulating sense and authority to his word, according as an erroneous and
defiled conscience pleases. It abolisheth every real standard of religion,
every man's particular apprehensions of the meaning of God's word being his
binding rule. The same word of God becomes the standard of Calvinism, Popery,
Socinianism, etc. as different men understand it. It saps the foundation of all
mutual trust and confidence among men; and opens a wide inlet for all manner of
villainy and dissimulation. According to it, men's promises, oaths, vows, and
covenants, -- their sworn and subscribed Creeds, Articles, Confessions,
Formulas, etc. bind them, not according to the common meaning of the words, --
but according to the meaning which their conscience, however seared, biassed,
or deluded, puts upon them. In fine, it plunges men into the depths of Atheism,
according to which every man believes and acts what is right in his own eyes.
[7] If men's private judgment of their own acts hindered the magistrates supreme
political judgment, no laws could be made in matters of religion or any thing
else; as some would be readily of a different mind, even in the fundamentals of
religion and virtue. -- While some believed that Christ was not true God or
true man, or that idols might be worshipped, others would believe that oaths
might be lawfully violated, heretical princes assassinated, or women and goods
used in common. [8.] If other men's private judgment be allowed to be their
supreme rule and reason of conduct, it will necessarily follow, that
magistrates private judgment must be the rule of their conduct; and that they
ought to make and execute such laws as they believe in their own heart to be
proper, be they as arbitrary and tyrannical as they will. [9.] It is not with
men's conscience, and its judgment in religion, any more than in matters of
common honesty, that magistratical authority intermeddles, but with their
external words and deeds. It only restrains and punishes such of those as are
manifestly contrary to the laws of God and the land, and as they are hurtful to
the commonwealth, and the public honor of God as King of nations. [10.] If all
proper means of conviction be used with men who obstinately persist in gross
heresy, blasphemy, and idolatry without effect; their mistake does not arise
from a conscience regulating duty, but from one stiffened against duty. And it
is perhaps sometimes as difficult to convince a hardened thief, robber, or
adulterer of his mistake, as it is to convince a hardened heretic. Men are
punishable, not for what their conscience, as the deputy of God, dictates, but
for what they would not have done, if they had any proper conscience of duty.
[11.] If men slothfully and especially wilfully refuse to use the means of
ealightening their conscience by the word of God, they but add to their crimes
both before God and men, by pretending conscience. [12.] Men's conscience being
as much a director in their conduct toward men, as in their conduct toward
God, its influence must have as much force to keep them from accountableness
(...) men, for their theft, murder, calumny, as for their gross heresy,
blasphemy and idolatry.

OBJECT. III. "To allow magistrates such power of judging, and of making and
executing laws about religious matters, is to render Christians the servants of
men, contrary to 1 Cor. vii. 23." ANSW. (1,) If so, Christ himself rendered his
redeemed favorites servants of men under the Old Testament. (2) If so, church
rulers being men, as well as magistrates, their restraints and censures,
appointed by Christ himself, must as much render Christians servants of men, --
Nay to comply with the religious orders of families, would make them servants
of men. (3.) Servilely to comply with the vain fancies, humors, sinful lusts
or laws of men, particularly in religion, is to be the servants of men in the
sense of this text: but to comply with scriptural restraints, censures, or
punishments of wickedness, is to act as servants of Christ, and his Father and
Spirit.

OBJECT. IV. "To restrain men from what they think right in religion, and
especially to punish them for it, is contrary to that Christian charity, which
suffers long, and is kind, -- envieth not, -- thinks no evil, bears all
things, believes all things, and hops all things, 1 Cor. xlii. 4, -- 7.
contrary to that meekness, mercy and peaceableness exemplified in Christ, and
required in Christians, Romans xv. 1. Gal. vi. 1, 2. Ephesians. iv 32. 2 Timothy ii. 15.
James iii. 15." ANSW. Christian charity rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth. It requires that nothing should be done out of malice
or envy, or rashly on bare surmises, or without due examination of facts and
circumstances, but not that rulers, either of church or state, should overlook
every scandal or crime contrary to the law of God. Even the undue delay of
censure or punishment encourages men in wickedness, much more would the total
overlooking of it, Eccl. viii. 11. (2.) The texts quoted in the objection, are
directed to Christians and church-rulers. Is therefore all their holy zeal and
activity in restraining and censuring the corrupters of the church, according
to Christ's command, Rev. ii Romans xvi. 17. Gal. v. 10. Tit. iii. 10. 1 Timothy i.
20 -- contrary to Christian charity, meekness, or mercifulness? Had Moses quite
abandoned his unparalelled meekness, when he so zealously punished the Hebrew
idolaters, Number. xxxii. 3. with Exodus xxxii. 26, -- 29? Was Jesus Christ
destitute of all meekness and mercy, when he appointed the restraints and
penalties under the old Testament; and at least the tremenduous censure of
excommunication under the new? Was he destitute of all charity, meekness and
mercy, in never giving us a hint that these laws are now repealed, as having
been cruel and tyrannical? Was he destitute of all charity, meekness and mercy,
when the zeal of his Father's house did eat him up, -- when he repeatedly drove
the buyers and sellers from the temple, John ii. 13, -- 19. Mat. xxi. 12.

OBJECT. V. "Even under the law, Moses tolerated men's divorcing of their wives
for slight causes: Much more does the gospel dispensation call for liberty to
men." ANSW. It is blasphemous to pretend, that the gospel dispensation allows
any more liberty to fin, than the legal did. Must the grace of God be turned
into lasciviousness? Jude, ver. 4. Gal. v. 13. (2.) To prevent worse
consequences, Moses directed a deliberate and solemn manner of divorce, which
tended to render divorces less frequent or irregular, but never warranted
divorce for slight causes. (3.) Perhaps you cannot prove, that the perpetual
continuance of marriage relation flows as necessarily from the nature of God,
as gross heresy, blasphemy, and idolatry are contrary to it; God therefore
might sovereignly dispense with the one, though not with the other. (4.) This
objection is rather calculated to prove that magistrates should license or
tolerate murder, adultery, theft, and other sins against the second table of
the moral law, than that they should tolerate heresy, blasphemy, and idolatry,
which pertain to the first table.

OBJECT. VI. "Gamaliel's counsel, "Refrain from these men, and let them alone;
for if this work be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye
cannot overthrow it," was certainly prudent; and Gallio's conduct, who cared
for no disputes relative to religion, Acts v. 38, 39. and xviii. 15, 17." ANSW.
(1.) Prove that Gamaliel's speech was inspired as a rule to us, in all
religious disputes, or that magistrates or others ought to be mere skeptics in
religion. (2.) That which Gamaliel pled to be let alone, was evidently good,
calculated to promote the welfare of both church and state; and so ought to
have had the utmost encouragement from him and his fellow rulers. (3) Prove, if
you can, that the Holy Ghost approves Gallio's carelessness; or that
magistrates like him ought to allow parties at the bar to beat one another.

OBJECT. VII "Under the gospel it is promised, That men should beat their
swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks; and that there
should be none to hurt or destroy in God's holy mountain, Isa. ii. 4. Micah iv.
3." ANSW. (1.) These texts import, that quarrelsome dispositions, and injurious
slaughter of men should be remarkably restrained, by the gospel; but not that
magistrates should no more bear the sword, or be terrors to, and punishers of
evil doers, Romans xiii. 1, -- 6. 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14; -- they no more import, that
magistrates should not restrain or seasonably or suitably punish blasphemy and
idolatry, than that they should not restrain theft or murder. (2) The restraint
or punishment we plead for, being God's institution, cannot hurt, but profit
men, making many fear, and avoid such horrible wickedness. Deuteronomy. xvii. 10; nay,
sometimes do much good to the restrained and punished persons, Zech. xiii. 6.
(3.) If heretics, blasphemers and idolaters be as mischievous persons, as above
described from the oracles of God, the restraint of them is a necessary mean to
secure the peace of nations and churches. If such scorners be cast out,
contention, strife and reproach are repressed, Prove. xxii. 10.

OBJECT. VIII. "Our Savior commands his servants to let the tares grow with
the wheat, Mat. xiii. 29, 30." ANSW. He rather represents, that till the last
judgment the righteous should never be fully separated from the wicked. (2.) If
it were a command, it is given to church rulers rather than to magistrates, and
so might, with more apparent propriety, be pled in favors of ecclesiastical
toleration of heretics, idolaters, blasphemers. (3) If these tares mean only
hypocrites, who have a visible appearance of holiness or innocence, we plead,
that neither magistrates nor ministers ought to attempt plucking them up. If
they mean all the children of the devil, as ver. 38. your objection ought
honestly to plead, that no crimes of theft, murder, etc. manifesting them to be
such, ought to be restrained or punished.

OBJECT. IX. "By rebuking his disciples, who would have commanded fire from
heaven to consume those Samaritans who refused him lodging in his way to
Jerusalem; and by his declaring, That he came not to destroy men's lives, but to
save them, Luke ix. 51, -- 56. our benevolent Savior plainly intimated, That
under the gospel, magistrates ought to lay no restraint on heresy, blasphemy or
idolatry." ANSW. (1.) As these Samaritans did not live under magistrates or
laws, which established the true religion, it is not pled, that even their
gross heresy, blasphemy, or idolatry, however notorious and obstinate, could
have been regularly punishable by men. (2) They were in this matter guilty of
no heresy, blasphemy or idolatry, -- or of attempting to seduce or disturb
Christ or his disciples, -- but merely of not giving lodging to a meanlike Jew,
of whose Messiahship they had but little, if any information or proof. (3.)
Though the Samaritans had been guilty of gross heresy, blasphemy and idolatry,
publicly and obstinately professed and practiced, contrary to the civil laws of
the country, and been regularly punishable, -- Christ's disciples being no
magistrates in that place, had no right to call them to account. (4.) The
disciples never sought to have the contempt shown to themselves and their
Master punished by the civil law, but by the miraculous vengeance of God.
Without any warrant from God, and to gratify their own proud, passionate, and
revengeful temper, they would have required him to work a miracle for the
destruction of these poor ignorant Samaritans. -- So, if you will drag in this
text, it ought to be to prove, That neither God nor ministers ought to restrain
heretics, blasphemers, or idolaters. (5.) While Christ was in his debased
state, obeying and suffering for the salvation of mankind, it would have been
extremely improper for God, visibly to punish every slight put upon him. But
his coming to save men with an everlasting salvation, can no more infer, that
he came to protect criminals from just punishment by men, than that he came to
save obstinate unbelievers from hell. He came to save men's lives, by saving
them from their sins, not by protecting and warranting them in a public and
obstinate commission of them. There is no hint in scripture, that he, who was
manifested to destroy the works of the devil, came to procure men a liberty of
conscience, or a magistratical license or protection in public and gross
heresy, blasphemy, and idolatry, more than in theft, murder, adultery. It would
be highly blasphemous to suppose it.

OBJECT. X. "Christ requires us not to judge others, -- to judge nothing before
the time. Mat. vii. 1. 1 Cor. iv. 5. We ought to believe our own opinions in
religion to be as probably erroneous, as those of our opponents; and if they do
not acknowledge themselves heretics, blasphemers, or idolaters, we ought never
to hold them such, or plead for their being restrained as such." ANSW. (1.) We
must never rashly or uncharitably judge others, or judge their hearts and
intentions, which God alone knows. But that will no more infer, that
magistrates ought to give no judgment about religious matters, than that
magistrates and ministers should judge of nothing at all respecting either God
or men, but encourage every person to live as his inclinations direct him. (2.)
Is there indeed no certainty in religion? If men ought to be complete Skeptics
in it; why not as well downright atheists? (3) If men's own acknowlegments be
sustained as the standard of our judgment concerning them, what rare work must
ensue! None ought to be held blasphemers, heretics, or idolaters, till they
have become penitent convicts. None ought to be held thieves murderers,
calumniators, etc. till they acknowledge themselves such. All impenitent
criminals must thus escape every degree of infamy, restraint or punishment.

OBJECT. XI. "Men ought to be persuaded, not forced into faith and holiness. It
is in vain to attempt rooting out corruptions, especially in religion, out of
men's outward behavior unless they be first rooted out of their hearts." ANSW.
(1.) It requires no small share of ignorance, impudence and fraud, to insinuate
that the many thousands of Protestant advocates for the magistrates power to
restrain gross heresy, blasphemy or idolatry, plead for the FORCING of men to
faith and holiness, when they so harmoniously plead for the contrary. (2) None
ought to be forced into the faith and profession of the true religion, as has
been repeatedly declared, but all proper methods taken to render their
compliance judicious and voluntary. Yet that will not infer, that no man ought
to be restrained from, or even suitably and seasonably punished for, open and
gross heresy, blasphemy or idolatry, which, while they publicly oppose, insult,
and undermine the true religion, -- produce terrible immoralities and disorders
in churches and nations, and draw upon them the ruinous vengeance of God; --
and far less will it infer, that magistrates, as vicegerents of God, ought, in
his name and authority, to license a false religion, and promise men protection
and encouragement in it No magistrate has power to force me to esteem, love,
delight in, sympathize with, maintain, or even commend my neighbor. But he
has power to refuse me a warrant to calumniate, rob or murder him, and even to
restrain or punish me for so doing. It would be absurd to attempt forcing of
the British Jacobites, to believe and solemnly profess, that K. George, not the
Pretender is rightful Sovereign of this kingdom. But would it therefore be
absurd, to restrain and punish them for publicly and insolently reviling him as
an usurper, -- or seducing their fellow subjects to dethrone him, -- or for
taking arms against him, or paying his just revenues to the Pretender? (3) It
is certain, that Christ, who has power over the hearts of all men, curbed the
external corruptions of the Jewish buyers and sellers in the temple, without
first casting the corruptions out of their heart. And pray would you have all
thieves, robbers, murderers, etc. to have full liberty in their courses, till
their wickedness can be got rooted out of their heart?

OBJECT. XII. "Such is the reasonableness and the glory of divine truths, that
if they be but freely, clearly and distinctly preached, their native lusire
will render them victorious over every error and corruption in religion,
however boldly published, or craftily varnished. What a singular advantage has
it been to Britain, that Deists have had full freedom to make their attacks
upon the Christian religion, and so to occasion so many glorious defenses of
it?" ANSW. (1.) Did not God under the Old Testament, know the conquering power
of his truth as well as you do? Did not Christ know it when he drove the buyers
and sellers from the temple. (2) Did the inexpressibly amiable and edifying
conduct of Jesus Christ, the way, the truth and the life, render him the
universal, the fixed DARLING of the Jewish nation, among whom he went about
doing good? You dare not pretend it. And yet it is certain that examples do
more affect than instructions. (3) You must not only, with Pelagians, deny
original sin, but effectually disprove it, before your objection can have any
sense in it. -- While men are so blinded by Satan and their own lusts, and so
full of enmity against God, they cannot but be much more disposed to receive
and practice error, than to discern, embrace, and practice gospel truths,
however clearly and faithfully preached, 1 Cor. ii. 14. Romans viii. 7, 8. 2 Cor.
iv. 3, 4. Isa. liii. 1. vi. 9, 10. (4.) The common experience of every one, who
attempt^ to instruct children and servants in the truths of God, even when they
are young, and their minds most unbiassed, irrefragably demonstrates, that
almost any thing is more readily embraced than the plain truths of the gospel;
and that earnest prayers, serious admonitions, external encouragements, and
Christian nurture, have all enough, and too often more than enough of work, to
make men learn them. (5.) If professed Christians, by encouraging others in
gross error and wickedness, provoke God to give up themselves to strong
delusions, that they may believe lies, will the native luster of divine truths
then enlighten and captivate them? Far, -- very far from it, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10,
-- 12. 2 Timothy iii. 13. iv. 3, 4. (6) If we do evil in licensing, encouraging,
or protecting the free propagation of gross errors, that good reputation may be
thereby occasioned, our damnation is just, Romans iii. 8. (7.) Few of those
boasted glorious desenders of Christianity are real and thorough friends to the
gospel of Christ, but often proceed upon the Arminian, and sometimes the
Socinian scheme, the last of which is as bad, if not worse, than Heathenism
itself. -- And, it is certain, that TENS, if not HUNDREDS, have been seduced by
deistical publications, for every ONE, that has been been converted from Deism
by almost all these defenses of the Christian religion.

OBJECT. XIII. "Christ has appointed for his church, rulers of her own, who
govern her in every duty of religion." ANSW. (1.) This can no more prove, that
magistrates ought to make and execute no laws respecting the duties required by
the first table of the moral law, than it will prove that they ought to make no
laws respecting duties of the second table, -- since church-rulers are as much
authorized by God to govern, in the one as in the other. Let magistrates and
church-rulers be allowed to govern their distinct departments in their
different manner, in the very same things, and nothing but harmony, order and
advantage will ensue. (2.) Magistrates as well as church rulers, are divinely
denominated, Rulers, Watchmen, Shepherds, -- and therefore ought politically to
direct, govern and feed their subjects as members of the commonwealth, by
making and executing wholesome laws relative to both tables of God's law; --
while ministers ecclesiastically feed them, as members of the visible church,
by preaching the gospel, administering the sacraments, and exercising church
government and discipline, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2, 4. Romans xiii. 1, -- 6. 2 Chronicles.
xiii. 10, 11. and xvii. xix. Neh. xiii. 10, -- 17, Ezekiel. xxxiv. 9, 10.

OBJECT. XIV. "The church has sufficient power in herself to obtain every end
necessary to her own welfare. That cannot be an ordinance of Jesus Christ,
which needs any foreign assistance to gain its proper end." ANSW. (1.) The
church has as sufficient power to gain her ends, with respect to the duties of
the second table, as to gain her ends in what respects the first table. Will it
therefore follow, that magistrates ought to make no laws respecting murder,
unchastity, theft, calumny, etc? (2.) Public transgressions of the first table
of the moral law injure the state, as well as they do the church. The state,
which also has a power in itself sufficient to gain all its ends, necessary to
promote its own welfare, ought therefore to restrain or punish such
transgressions as crimes injurious to itself, while the church restrains and
censures them as scandals defiling and hurtful to herself. (3.) If soundness in
the faith, purity in worship, holiness in practice, and beautiful order in the
church, be an excellent mean of promoting the happiness of that nation, where
the church has her residence, magistrates ought to promote those things, out
of a regard to the prosperity of their state, in subordination to the honor of
God. (4.) However complete the intrinsic power of the church be, it is
manifest, that it can be exercised to more advantage, if parents, masters, and
magistrates regularly exert their power in promoting the true religion, in
their different departments. -- It is no less certain, that after the church
has done her utmost, by conference, injunction and censure, some turbulent
heretics or blasphemers may do as much, if not more, hurt to her than before,
unless magistrates restrain or punish them.

OBJECT. XV. "For almost three hundred years after Christ, the truths of the
gospel gloriously prevailed against errors and corruptions, without any care of
magistrates to restrain or punish the erroneous." ANSW. (1.) It was proper,
that the Christian religion should be spread in the world, not only without the
countenance of the civil magistrate, but also in opposition to his severe laws
and bloody persecutions, that it might the more abundantly appear to be of God.
(2.) In that period, it prevailed notwithstanding the most furious opposition,
and the cruel persecution and murder of millions of its adherents, as well as
without magistratical assistance. Will you therefore plead, that peace and
freedom in preaching the gospel ought to be hated and avoided, and furious
persecution coveted and prayed for? (3) In that period, the miraculous powers,
which attested the doctrines of Christ did more than balance the want of
magistratical helpfulness to the truth, Heb. ii 4. -- (4.) In that period, the
hardships to which Christians were exposed, deterred such naughty persons from
entering the church, as might have plagued her with their blasphemies and
heresies. (5) And nevertheless, even then blasphemers and heretics did no small
hurt to the church. (6) If God had not reckoned the magistratical countenance a
real blessing to his church, he had never promised it, as in the texts above
quoted.

OBJECT. XVI. "It is horrid cruelty and unchristian persecution to restrain or
punish men for believing, teaching, and worshipping, according to the dictates
of their own conscience, as charity obliges us to believe is the case with
heretics, blasphemers and idolaters. -- It is altogether diabolical, the very
worst part of Popery, and that which peculiarly supports the whole
Antichristian scheme. -- Men ought to follow the dictates even of an erring
conscience." ANSW. (1.) Where is your proof, from either scripture or reason,
that an erring conscience binds men to believe, teach or practice, gross
heresy, blasphemy or idolatry, any more than their promises or vows to do evil,
bind to performance? -- or than it can bind them to theft, murder, adultery,
calumny, or the like? -- If we have an erring conscience, our immediate duty is
to get rid of that error, by the illumination of God's word, as being sinful in
itself, especially if procured through sloth or wickedness; it will hinder our
right performance of duty, but can never make fin lawful. If, Sir, you can
believe, that an erring conscience, can outdo the almighty power of God, in
making heresy, blasphemy, or idolatry innocent things, you may quickly believe,
that a Romist priest can outdo his Maker, in making a God, and then eating him,
in the mystery of transubstantiation. (2.) Even when conscience is perfectly
clear, pure and unbiassed, it is wholly subordinated and subjected to the
authority of God's law. -- How can the entrance of sinful error into it, exalt
it above his law, and make such a God of it, as can stamp its wicked dictates
into incontroulable laws, in opposition to the mandates of Jehovah himself. --
This will not only prove, that Adam and Eve became Gods by the entrance of fin,
but go far to justify Popes and devils in the whole of their conduct. (3.) If
the devil, who deceives the world, get into men's conscience by his strong
delusions, has God allotted him that as a quiet city of refuge, from which no
means ought to be used to dislodge him, and from which he may use the whole man
unrestrained in his service, -- in sacrificing children to Moloch, murdering
saints, blaspheming God, etc.? (4.) Where is your proof, that I ought to
believe, that the man, who has access to the Bible, acts according to the
dictates of his conscience in gross heresy, blasphemy or idolatry, any more
than that he acts according to them, in murder, treason, theft, unchastity,
etc.? Men have labored and suffered as much, in courses of the latter kind, as
in those of the former, and died as impenitently at last. (5.) If pretense of
conscience, and more than pretense in favors of sin we can never be certain
of, be a sufficient ground for magistrates licensing, encouraging and
protecting men in contradicting and blaspheming God, or robbing him of his
worship, to bestow it on devils, -- or in robbing his church of his oracles or
ordinances, -- in murdering the souls of men, and sowing the seeds of confusion
and every evil work, -- Why ought it not to warrant their licensing,
encouraging and protecting them in high treason, calumny, theft, robbery,
murder? -- It is hoped, you, who are so generous in allowing men, if they can
but pretend conscience for it, to abused and rob Jehovah, will be as ready to
allow them equal freedom, if they can but pretend conscience, in abusing and
injuring yourself. If God's giving up men to strong delusions, that they may
believe lies warrant magistrates to encourage or protect them, in spreading
gross heresy, or in open blasphemy and idolatry, Why ought not his giving them
up to vile affections, -- to their own hearts lusts, equally to warrant their
encouraging and protecting of them in open whoredom, bestiality, incest,
robbery, etc.? Men can as little conquer their lusts and cleanse their hearts,
as they can rectify the errors of their conscience. (6.) It is infallibly
certain, that God himself, under the Old Testament appointed magistrates to
restrain and punish men for blasphemy and idolatry, let their conscience
dictate them as strongly as it pleased. -- Had men in these early ages no
conscience to govern them? Or did God then, like the old fashioned Protestants,
not understand human liberty and the rights of men's conscience? -- Did he
indeed then so far mistake his way, as to appoint what is so cruel and
diabolical; what is the very worst part of Popery, and the principal support of
that abominable system? Or has God, or the nature of sin, cruelty and tyranny,
been changed? How shocking the thought!

OBJECT. XVII. "As men's natural and civil rights nowise depend upon their being
orthodox Christians, magistrates ought to protect them in these privileges, be
their opinions and worship what they will; nay, to give them legal security for
their protection of them, in these opinions and worship, that they may not be
exposed to the caprices of particular magistrates." ANSW. [1.] The Christian
liberty, which Christ purchased, is not a liberty to commit sin, but a
spiritual freedom from it, Gal. v. 1, 13 Luke i. 74, 75. Heb. xii. 28, 29.
Christ came not to save men's lives from restraint or punishment required by his
own law, in order that they, by spreading gross heresy, blasphemy, and
idolatry, might ruin nations and damn men's souls. [2.] You might have forborne
to demand legal or authoritative licenses for men to blaspheme God, worship
devils in his stead, etc. till you had proven Satan to be the absolute
proprietor and governor of this world, and the primary granter of all civil and
natural rights to men; -- or proven, that God, who is infinitely holy, just and
good, has, or can, give men natural or civil rights protecting them in public
blasphemy, idolatry, or the like, any more than rights protecting them in
incest, robbery, murder; or that magistrates, as his ministers, ought, in his
name and authority, to grant men such rights. [3.] If God has so frequently
turned men out of their civil property and life for their idolatry and
blasphemy, Isa. x, xiv, xxxvii, xlvi, xlvii. Jer. xlviii, li. Ezekiel. xxxv -- how
absurd to require magistrates, who are his ministers for good to men, to
execute their office, which is his ordinance, Rom, xiii. 1, -- 6. in
encouraging and protecting men, in openly and insolently contradicting,
blaspheming, rebelling against, and robbing him? -- Ought the Sheriff and
Justices of peace in Britain, as the king's ministers for good to the nation,
to have executed their office in protecting the arch-rebels in 1715, and 1745,
in the undisturbed enjoyment of all their civil rights, or to have given them
new legal securities, in order to enable them, more boldly and successfully to
carry on their treacherous and murderous rebellion against his Majesty? Or
ought they, by proclamation, to warrant all the subjects in their respective
counties to revile, rob, and take arms against our king and parliament, and
promise them protection in so doing, but always prohibiting them to injure
their fellow subjects?

OBJECT. XVIII. "Magistrates ought not to rule their subjects by the Bible, but
by the civil laws of the nation, according to which they are admitted to their
power, by their subjects, from whom all their power originates" ANSW. [1.] That
magistrates power originates from their subjects is a notion plainly
atheistical. It originates in God himself, Romans xiii. 1, 2. Romans xi. 36. Psalm
lxxv. 7. Dan. ii. 21. [2.] If magistrates must regulate their government by no
other law than that which they or their subjects have established for
themselves or one another; they must act as atheists independent of God, in the
execution of an office wholly derived from him, and for every act of which they
must be accountable to him. If the useful laws of one nation, may be adopted
into the civil law of another, Why may not the will of God, the supreme
governor of nations, declared in his laws of nature and revelation, be also
adopted into it? Are God's laws more dishonorable or dangerous, -- more unfit
to be adopted into our civil law, than those of our sinful neighbors? Is the
Scotch law the worse, that many of God's statutes, prescribed in his word, have
been adopted into it, -- nay, that all the leading doctrines of Christianity
contained in our two Confessions of Faith and Catechisms have been adopted into
it, and the Confessions themselves expressly engrossed into acts of Parliament?
-- Indeed, if nations adopt nothing of the manifested will of God, into their
civil law, it will contain nothing but useless trifles. Will these be fit for
directing the administrations of ministers of God for good to men, or for
securing, and promoting the important welfare of any nation under heaven? (3.)
If all civil authority to make laws, resident, either in subjects or
magistrates, be necessarily derived from God, as Former and King of nations; --
If magistrates be ordained of God, to be ministers of God for good to men, to
be for terror and punishment, and revengers of evil doers, and a praise of them
that (...) well, and to be obeyed for conscience sake, -- for the Lord's sake,
Romans xiii. 1, -- 6. 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14. Common sense loudly demands, That
neither their will nor that of their subjects, but the manifested will of God,
their independent and infinitely high superior, should be the supreme rule and
standard of all their administrations; and that no civil law should or can bind
either magistrates or their subjects, but in so far as it is agreeable and
subordinated to the laws of God.

OBJECT. XIX "Magistracy being an office, not founded in revelation, but in the
law of nature, the whole execution of it ought to be regulated by that law of
nature, not by the will of God revealed in scripture." ANSW. (1.) I thank you
for so quickly overturning your preceding objection, and adopting the divine
law of nature, instead of your civil law, as the supreme standard of
magistratical administration. (2.) According to your objection, parents,
masters, children and servants, must regulate their performance of relative
duties, merely by the law of nature, without taking the smallest assistance
from the directions of the Holy Ghost in scripture. No parents or masters must
instruct their children or servants in the knowledge of the doctrines,
promises, laws, worship, or virtue required in the Bible, as these relations
depend no more on Revelation than magistracy does. I defy you to prove they do.
In performing the duty of our natural or civil relations, we must act as mere
deists, ignorant of, or pouring contempt on the inspired oracles of the Great
GOD, our Savior. -- What hurt have the laws of revelation done to such
relative duties, that they must be thus infamously excluded from being any part
of a rule of them? (3) No man can truly obey the law of nature, without
heartily embracing and cheerfully improving whatever revelations God is pleased
to bestow on him, -- as such revelations proceed from the same divine authority
as the law of nature; and must be a noted means of promoting true and proper
obedience to it. -- To exclude divine revelation, when granted, from regulating
our performance of relative duties, must therefore not only amount to an
heathenish contempt of the scriptures, but to an atheistical contempt of the
law of nature, which necessarily requires us to adopt divine Revelation for our
supreme rule, whenever it is graciously granted to us.

OBJECT. XX. "Many of the abovementioned instances of magistrates care about
religion, and their restraint and punishment of idolaters, blasphemers, and
false prophets, related merely to the Jewish Theocracy which was typical, and
therefore not now to be copied." ANSW. [1.] Many of the abovementioned
instances, particularly those respecting Heathens, or contained in the promises
to the gospel church, have not the least appearance of being typical. Nay, I
defy you to prove that the instances of Jewish rulers were merely typical. [2.]
These typical magistrates of the Jewish nation also exercised laws relative to
murder, theft, unchastity, treason, and other matters of the second table of
the moral law. Ought therefore no magistrates now to do so? The laws respecting
duties of the second table pertained as much to the Jewish Theocracy, as those
relating to the first. Must therefore the Christian magistrate, for fear of
copying the Jewish Theocracy, meddle with no morality at all? [3.] Must every
thing that was once typical, be now, under the gospel, excluded from regulating
authority? Must all the excellent patterns of Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job. Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David, and other Hebrew saints
be rejected as typical and useless? -- Must all the laws directing to elect
men, fearing God, and hating covetousness, to be magistrates, or directing them
to judge justly, impartially and prudently, and to punish murderers,
adulterers, thieves, robbers, etc. be discarded as typical? Must the weekly
Sabbath, public fasts and thanksgivings be laid aside as typical, -- a mere
sign between God and the Israelites? Must the ten commandments, and all the
explications of them in the Old Testament be discarded, as published in a
typical manner, and to a typical people, and used as the principal part of
their rule of government in the Jewish Theocracy? [4] As the Jewish church was
a REAL church, and not MERELY TYPICAL, so their State was a REAL commonwealth
or kingdom, and not MERELY TYPICAL. Whatever therefore pertained to it, as a
real commonwealth, is imitable in any other. [5.] The Jewish Church and State
were as REALLY DISTINCT, as the Church and State are now; though I do not say
precisely in the same manner. (1.) They differed in respect of REGULATING LAWS.
The ceremonial law directed the Jewish church. The judicial directed the
affairs of their state. (2.) They differed in their respective ACTS. The Jews
worshipped God, offered sacrifices, and received sacraments, not as members of
that state, but as members of that church. They punished evil doers by fines,
imprisonment, banishment, burning, stoning, and hanging; and fought with
enemies, etc. not as a church, but as a state. (3.) They differed in respect of
CONTROVERSIES. To the church pertained the matters of the Lord, and a judging
of leprosies, and between statutes and judgments. To the state belonged the
matters of the king, and to judge between blood and blood, 2 Chronicles. xix. 10,
11. Deuteronomy. xvii. 8. (4) They differed in respect of OFFICERS. The priests were
the only stated officers in the church, and prophets a kind of occasional ones.
Elders, Judges and Kings were governors in the State. The priests might not
take the civil sword out of the hand of the magistrates; nor the magistrates
offer sacrifices, burn incense, or otherwise execute the priest's office. (5.)
They differed in respect of CONTINUANCE. When the Jewish civil power was taken
away by the Romans, the constitution of their church remained, in the days of
our Savior's debasement. And even now the Jews pretend to be a church, but not
to be a state. (6.) They differed in respect of VARIATION. The constitution of
their church remained much the same under Moses, Joshua, the Judges, the Kings,
and after the captivity. But the form of the state underwent great alterations.
(7.) They differed in respect of MEMBERS. Proselytes of the covenant were
complete members of the Jewish church; but had not the same dignities or
marriages allowed them in the State, as the natural Israelites. Nor had the
proselytes of the gate any church privileges, though they had some civil ones.
(8.) They were governed by different COURTS. The church had her courts of the
Synagogue, and her ecclesiastical Sanhedrin. -- The state had her courts of the
gate, etc. and her civil Sanhedrin; -- though often some Levites were judges in
both, as our ruling elders in the church, may, at the same time, be civil
judges, Exodus xxiv. 1. Deuteronomy. xvii 8, -- 12. 1 Chronicles. xxxiii. 4, and xxvi. 30,
32. 2 Chronicles. xix 8, 10, 11. Jer. xxvi. 8, -- 11, 16. xviii. 18. with Deuteronomy xvii.
10, 11, 12. Ezekiel vii. 26 2 Kings vi. 32. Zech. vii. 1, -- 3. Psalm. cvii. 32.
Ezekiel. xiii. 9. Mat. ii 4. xvi. 21. xxi. 23. xxvi. 57, 59. xxvii. 1, 12. Luke
xxii. 66. Acts iv. 5. Some Jewish Rabbis expressly distinguish between their
judges and their church elders in the same places. (9) They differed in their
CENSURE of offenders. In the church, offenders were suspended from sacred
fellowship, by a casting out of the Synagogue, or a cutting off from God's
people or congregation. John ix. 22. and xii. 42. Exodus xii. 15, 19 Number. xix.
13, 20. Lev. xxii. 3. with Genesis iv. 14. -- Lev. vii. 20, 21. with v. 2, -- 1
Cor. v. 6, 7, 8, 13. with Exodus xii. 15, 19. Genesis xvii. 14. with Acts iii. 23.
Psalm. i. 5. Genesis xxv. 17. In the state, they were cast off by death or
ontlawry. (10) Profane and scandalous persons were excluded from the Jewish
temple-service and passover, while they retained their civil rights in the
state, Ezekiel xliv. 7, 9 Deuteronomy. xxiii. 18. Jer. vii. 9, -- 11. Ezekiel. xxiii. 38,
39. 2 Chronicles. xxiii. 19. with 1 Cor. v. 11. Psalm. cxviii. 19, 20. and xv, 1, --
5. and xxiv. 3, 4. and l. 16, -- 20. Ezekiel. xxvi. 22, 26. Ezra x. 8, 16, 17. and
vi. 21. See Gillespy's Aaron's Rod blossoming, Part I. Leusden's Philologus
Hebraeo mixtus, P. 338, 339.
. -- [6.] There was no such difference between the Jewish magistracy,
especially after their rejection of the Theocracy, under Samuel, 1 Samuel viii.
5, 7, 19. and xii. 12, 17, 19. and the magistracy in Christian countries, as it
is often pretended. (1.) The Jewish magistracy was an ordinance of God, Exodus
xviii. Number. xi. Deuteronomy. i. xvii. and xvi. 18, 19. Magistracy is still an
ordinance of God, to be submitted to for the Lord's sake, Romans xiii. 1, -- 6 1
Pet. ii. 14. (2.) Notwithstanding God's appointment of particular persons to be
their kings, the Hebrew nation had the power of electing and admitting them to
their office, 1 Samuel x, xi, xvi. 2 Samuel ii. 4. and v. 3. 1 Chronicles. xii. Our
magistrates are powers ordained of God, Romans xiii. 1, -- 6. and yet an
ordinance of men, 1 Pet. ii. 13. (3.) God himself was the supreme governor of
the Hebrew nation, Deuteronomy. xii 32. Hos. xiii. 10. God is still King of nations,
Most High, King of the whole earth, Jer. x. 7. Psalm lxxxiii. 18. xlvii. 7.
(4.) The Israelites were God's peculiar kingdom, 1 Samuel xii. 12. Hos xiii, 10.
Nations which generally profess the Christian religion, are the kingdoms of our
Lord and of his Christ, Rev. xi. 15. (5) The Jewish magistrates were deputies
and vicegerents of God the sovereign King, 1 Chronicles xxix. 23. 2 Chronicles. ix.
6, 7. Psalm. lxxxii. 1, 6. Magistrates are still powers ordained of God,
ministers of God for good, to whom we must be subject for conscience sake, --
for the Lord's sake, Romans xiii. 1, -- 6. 1 Pet. ii. 13. By Christ kings still
reign, and princes decree justice, even all the judges of the earth, Prove.
viii. 15, 16. with Ephesians. i. 22. (6.) The manifested will of God was the proper
statute book of the Jewish civil law, Deuteronomy. xvii. The will of God manifested in
the laws of nature and revelation, are the supreme standard of all civil laws
in the world, in which every human constitution ought to be founded, and by
which the whole binding force of it is circumscribed, Acts iv. 19. and v. 29.
Psalm, ii. 10, -- 12. and hence human laws become an ordinance of God, Romans
xiii. 2. (7.) The judicial laws of the Hebrew nation, regulated that which
pertained to their kings, judges, warriors, fields, houses, injuries, crimes,
punishments, mortgages, marriages, etc. Exodus xxi, -- xxiii. Deuteronomy. xviii, xx,
Lev. xviii, xx. Number. xxxvi, -- xxxviii, etc. Our civil laws regulate the same
things. (8.) Among the Jews, notorious disobedience to the declared will of God
was held rebellion against him, the King of the nation, and to be condignly
punished, as it tended to the good of the state, Heb. ii. 2. and x. 28.
Notorious disobedience to the manifested will of God ought to be still held as
rebellion against Him, as king of nations, and to be condignly punished, as
tends to the welfare of the state, -- magistrates being still set up by God to
be terrors, revengers, and punishers of evil doers, and bound not to bear the
sword in vain, Romans xiii. 1, -- 5. 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14. Nor has it been yet
proven, That our magistrates, who have the scriptures, ought to pay less real
regard to them in the stating of crimes, than the Jewish rulers did. (9.) The
Jewish magistrates were appointed to promote the welfare of the church, in
order to promote the welfare of the state, in subordination to the honor of
God, the King of the nation. Magistrates are still bound to do the same, as
they have opportunity, Isa. xlix. 23. and lx. 3, 10, 16 Rev. xvii. 16. and xxi.
24, 26. Romans xiii. 1, -- 6. 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14. 1 Timothy ii. 1, -- 4. (10.) The
Jewish church and state, as has been just now proven, were really distinct
from, and independent of each other, having different laws, officers, courts,
privileges, penalties, etc. The christian church and the civil state of
Christians are no less distinct and independent of each other. (11.)
Nevertheless, the purity of the Jewish church, contributed much to the welfare
of their state, and the right management of their state to the prosperity of
their church; and bad management in the one always tended to the hurt of the
other, Deuteronomy. xxviii, -- xxxii Lev. xxvi. Judges i, -- xiii. 1 Samuel ii. -- to 2 Chronicles. xxxvi Isa. i -- to Mal. iv. Isa i. 19, 20. and iii. 10, 11. And still
righteousness exalts a nation, and sin is the reproach and ruin of any
people, Prove. xiv. 34. (12.) God never commanded the Jewish magistrates to
force their true religion upon their Heathen neighbors, Philistines, Moabites,
Ammonites, or Syrians, whom they conquered, or to put them to death for their
idolatry. Nor has He ever commanded magistrates, who have embraced the true
Christian religion to FORCE men by fire or sword, or any like punishments, to
embrace and profess it, -- or to inslict the same punishments upon blasphemers
or idolaters in unenlightened countries, which they may do upon such as
obstinately rebel against and apostatize from the truth, amidst plentiful means
of conviction and establishment in it. (13) Never did God, that I know of,
require the Jewish magistrates to punish any of their subjects for lesser
faults, however open or manifest, or to punish them for the simple neglect of
duties strictly religious, -- or to annex sentences of outlawry and of death to
ecclesiastical cutting off by excommunication from the church. Nor can I find,
that he has enjoined any such thing upon the Christian magistrate. (14) Among
the Jews, some things partaking of both a civil and religious nature, did, in
these different respects, fall under the government of both Church and State.
Even circumcision itself was a national badge as well as a religious seal of
God's covenant. -- Among Christians, public fasts and thanksgivings, calling of
Synods, etc. do, in different respects, fall under the power of both church and
state. -- Pretend therefore no more, that there is a total difference between
the case of our magistrates, and that of the Jewish, recorded in scripture.

OBJECT. XXI. "To allow magistrates a power of judging, making and executing
laws, about religion, and of punishing men for erroneous opinions, or for
disturbing the peace and order of the church, as in cur Confession of Faith and
Second Book of Discipline, altogether confounds the kingdoms of Christ with the
kingdoms of this world, contrary to John xviii. 36." ANSW. Sir, Have you in an
honest and orderly manner, renounced these Confessions of Faith, as plainly and
publicly as you solemnly avowed, if not also, subscribed a steadfast adherence
to the Westminster one, at your ordination? Dare you, one day, call God, angels
and men to witness, that you sincerely avow that Confession of Faith to be the
Confession of your Faith, and that you sincerely believe the WHOLE DOCTRINE
contained in it, to be founded on the word of God, and will constantly adhere
to and maintain the same all the days of your life; -- and the next, slight,
reproach, revile and attempt to confute an important article of it See the
wickedness of such conduct excellently exposed in Walker's Vindication of the
Discipline and Constitutions of the Church of Scotland.
? (2.) Have you suffered as much for a zealous maintenance of the intrinsic
powerof the church, and of Christ's sole headship over her as his spiritual
kingdom, as the compilers and cordial adherers to that Confession have done? If
not, modesty, as well as equity, might have restrained your revilings. (3.)
Suppose that, contrary to my judgment, I should allow, that magistrates as such
have not that power relative to religious matters mentioned in our Confessions,
and solemnly avowed in our Covenants, yet, being Christians, they are bound as
such to execute their civil offices in that manner which most effectually
promotes the honor and kingdom of Christ, -- even as parents or masters, who
are Christians, are bound to exercise their power in their families, as may
best maintain and propagate the knowledge, faith, and obedience of the gospel.
Every other character or office, which a Christian has, must be subordinated
to his character as a Christian. 1 Pet. iv. 11. Col. iii. 17. Ephesians. v. 21, --
33. vi. 1, -- 9. Col. iii. 18, -- 25. iv. 1. 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2, 3. Tit. ii. 1, --
10. iii. 2. 1 Pet. ii. 11, -- 20. and iii. 1, -- 7. Romans xiii. (4.) If to
prevent confounding of the kingdom of Christ with the kingdoms of this world,
magistrates who are heads of large political families, must be excluded from
all that care about religion, which is allotted them in our Confession of
Faith, Heads of families, must, for the same reason, be excluded from
establishing the gospel worship of God in their houses, and from instructing
their children or servants in the truths of divine revelation, at least from
requiring them to attend such instructions and worship. You pretend, there is a
difference; But, Sir, I insist on your stating it precisely, and proving from
scripture and reason, that headship over families is a more spiritual relation
than headship over multitudes of families; or, that magistrates cannot without
sin, do what is similar to every thing which parents and masters, as such, are
commanded to do. (5.) If, to prevent confounding of the church with the state,
magistrates must exercise no care about religion, -- must punish no publicly
obstinate heretic, blasphemer, idolater, profaner of the Sabbath, or reviler of
the oracles and ordinances of Christ, as a criminal against the welfare of the
state, -- Church-courts must censure, as scandals against the welfare of the
church, no theft, murder, robbery, treason, unlawful war, perversion of civil
judgment, or the like; as these pertain to the kingdoms of this world. (6)
Though the powers of civil and ecclesiastical government be COORDINATE, each
standing on its proper basis, and the right exercise of church power
contributing mightily to the welfare of the state, -- and of civil power to the
advancement of the church, -- yet they are not COLLATERAL, inseparable from, or
dependent upon each other, but are altogether distinct from, and different, in
many respects See this point excellently handled in the Hundred and Eleven
Propositions of the Assembly, 1645. republished by Alston, Edinburgh.
.

1. Civil and ecclesiastical power differ in their FOUNDATION. Magistracy is
founded on God's universal dominion over all nations; and hence the law of
nature is the immediate supreme rule of its administrations, and the scriptures
become the rule of them only as introduced by the law of nature, requiring
magistrates as well as others to believe and obey whatever revelation, duly
attested, God is pleased to grant them. -- or, by magistrates subjecting their
consciences, as followers of Christ, to the scriptures as their only rule to
direct them how to glorify God and enjoy him for ever. But ecclesiastical power
is founded in the oeconomical or mediatorial headship of Jesus Christ over his
church, as his spiritual kingdom; and hence the immediate standard for
regulating the exercise of it, is that Revelation, which God has given to, and
by him, in his word; -- and the laws of nature have a regulating force in the
church by virtue of the general precepts of scripture, as 1 Cor. xiv. 26, 40.
vi. 12. xvi. 14. Phil. iv. 8. Mat. vii. 12.

2. Civil and ecclesiastical power differ in their IMMEDIATE OBJECT.
Magistratical power immediately relates only to things external, pertaining to
the outward man. Even, when exercised about sacred things, it has that which
is external for its immediate object. It removes external hindrances of
spiritual exercises, and provides external opportunities and accommodations for
the performance of them. If magistrates call a Synod, they do not properly call
it as a court of Christ, or as ministers of Christ, but as a meeting of
subjects, whose joint deliberations are calculated to promote the honor of God
the King of nations, and the happiness of their country, by the right
government of the church. If a magistrate command persons to compear before a
church-court to be judged, or to bear witness, be commands them not as
spiritual members of Christ's mystical body, but as his own and Jehovah's
subjects, to take their trial or attest the truth before proper arbitrators of
their cause, that God may be honored, and through keeping of order in the
church, the welfare of the city or nation may be advanced and consirmed. If he
punish insolent contemners of the authority and censures of the church, he
punishes them not as scandalous persons, but as criminals, insulters of that
true religion which the civil law has established, and contemners of these
judicatories which it has authorized, and to which themselves have solemnly
engaged all due subjection, -- and thus, as treacherous disturbers of the good
order and peace of his kingdom, and tramplers on the laws of the Most High
Sovereign of the nation. -- But church power has that which is spiritual for
its only proper object. It properly deals with men's consciences and heart, and
with their outward man, only in order to affect those, in the way of
conviction, reformation, comfort, etc. It considers the persons with whom it
deals, not as mere men, or as members of a civil society, but as members of the
spiritual and mystical body of Christ, in the visible form of it.

3. Civil and ecclesiastical power differ in their TORM. Though magistrates be
the ministers of God for good to men, their power over their subjects is of a
LORDLY nature. They are lordly fathers, who, by making and enforcing civil
laws, can compel the disobedient. -- In this view, if they establish any thing
pertaining to the church, they establish it as a mean of honoring God their
Superior, in the advancement of the welfare of the common wealth. If they
punish faults, they consider them as crimes, injurious to the happiness of the
state, dishonouring God its supreme Governor, and provoking his wrath against
it, and they punish those crimes only on the outward man, by fining,
imprisonment, death, etc. -- But church power is altogether MINISTERIAL,
distributing to men, reproofs, admonitions, and other ordinances, according to
the inspired prescriptions of Christ, Mat. xvi. 19. and xviii. 18. 1 Cor. iv.
1, 2. Christ being her alone Lord, Church-rulers have no power to make any laws
properly so called, Isa. xxxiii. 22 James iv. 12. In dealing with offenders,
they consider faults, even oppression, tyranny, sinful wars and leagues,
perversion of judgment, bribery or the like in magistrates, who are members,
not as crimes, but merely as scandals, desiling and ruining men's souls,
plaguing the church, and dishonouring and provoking Christ and his Father in
him, against it. They have no compulsory power, -- can punish no man either in
his person or his external property, can use no weapons but such as are
spiritual, mighty through God; administering church censures, not as
punishments, but as spiritual privileges, and divinely instituted means of
bringing offenders to a thorough repentance of their sins, to the eternal
salvation of their souls. -- And this whole power must be used, only in the
name of Jesus Christ, as Head of his church, 2 Cor. i. 24. x 4, 5, 8. xiii. 8,
10. ii. 6, -- 10 1 Cor, v. 4.

4. Civil and ecclesiastical power differ in their PROPER END. The formal end
of magistratical power is to advance the glory of God, the King of nations, in
promoting the welfare of the commonwealth; -- and the establishment of the true
religion, and care to promote the prosperity and propagation of the church, are
used as eminent means of gaining that end. Or, the good of the church may also
be considered as an accessory end of civil administration, as the better civil
justice be executed, open (...) breakings restrained, and virtue encouraged by
the magistrate, the fewer will probably be the scandals, and the greater the
purity and prosperity of the church. Nay, though the advancement of the
church's welfare be not the formal end of magistracy, yet as Christ is made
Head over all things to his church, every magistrate, who professes the
Christian religion, ought to pursue the formal end of his office, as
subordinated to his Christian end of promoting the glory of God in the welfare
of the church and eternal salvation of men -- But the formal end of all church
power is the glorifying of God in Christ, by promoting the spiritual
conviction, conversion and edification of men's souls; and the welfare of
nations is but an accessory or subordinate end, at which church-rulers, as
subjects in the state, ought always to aim; -- as the better they prosecute and
obtain the end of their office, the fewer will be the crimes, the better both
subjects and magistrates, and the more numerous and valuable the blessings of
God on the nation.

5. Civil and ecclesiastical power differ in their PROPER EFFECTS. The proper
effects of magistratical power, rightly exercised, is the good of the
commonwealth, in their commodious enjoyment of civil privileges, in a manner
mightily calculated to promote the honor of God, as the Most High over all the
earth; -- and the purity, peace and prosperity of the church, arising from the
right administration of justice, discouragement of evil doers, and praise of
them that do well, is but an accessory effect. But the proper effect of church
power rightly exercised, is the conversion of men to Jesus Christ, fellowship
with him, and growth in grace and good works, to the praise of his glory; and
the advantage accruing to cities or nations, by the virtuous laws and fervent
prayers of church members, is but an accessory effect of it.

6. Civil and ecclesiastical power differ in their SUBJECTS of residence. No
ecclesiastical power can reside in a heathen, a woman, or a child; and no power
of jurisdiction in a single person; -- as civil power often may, or does. Nor
can one ecclesiastic officer delegate his power to another.

7. They differ in their FORMAL CONSIDERATION OF THE PERSONS UPON WHOM THEY ARE
EXERCISED. A magistrate's power extends over all persons resident in his
territory, be their moral character what it will, Jews, Heathens, etc. Romans
xiii 1. But church power extends only to the professed members of Christ's
mystical body, the Church, 1 Corinthians. v. 12, 13.

8. Civil and ecclesiastical power differ in respect of their DIVIDED EXERCISE.
The one may, and ought to be exercised, whether the other be so or not. -- The
end of church-censure being to gain sinners to repentance and salvation,
scandalous persons appearing penitent, ought to be seasonably absolved from it,
and restored to communion with the church in sealing ordinances. But the end of
civil punishment being the satisfaction of the law, and the deterring of others
from the like faults, criminals, however penitent and fully restored to
church fellowship, may, as the nature of their crime demands, be punished, even
unto death. And suppose a churchmember should have satisfied the demands of
the civil law for a crime, he ought to be prosecuted and censured for it as a
scandal, by the ecclesiastical courts, till he appear duly penitent. Not only
ought church-rulers to censure scandalous persons, when magistrates take no
notice of their faults, but even to censure magistrates, who are
church members, for what wickedness they commit under color of countenance
from the civil law. And where magistrates punish, and church-rulers censure the
same persons for the same faults, the processes ought to be kept entirely
distinct from, and independent of each other; -- though, to prevent unnecessary
swearing, the proof taken in one court may sometimes be produced and judged of,
also in the other.

OBJECT. XXII. "Magistrates not being proper judges of the doctrines of
Revelation, cannot be capable to judge concerning religious matters, and
particularly to determine who are heretics, blasphemers, or idolaters" ANSW.
(1.) That they have a right to judge in these matters has been already
established. (2) God, who knows all things, admits private Christians to be
capable of judging what is heresy, blasphemy and idolatry, and who are
heretics, blasphemers and idolaters, and hence commands them to keep themselves
from these sins, and to avoid such seducers, and debar them from their houses,
Romans xvi. 17. 2 Timothy iii. 5. 1 Cor. v. 11. 1 John iv. 1, -- 3. and v. 21. 2
John 9, -- 11. Now what hinders Christian magistrates to have as much good
sense and ^s much capacity of judging in these matters, as common Christians
(2.) The gross errors, blasphemies and idolatries which magistrates ought to
restrain, and suitably and seasonably punish, are so plainly condemned by the
word of God, which magistrates ought carefully to search, under the direction
of the Holy Spirit, that any unbiassed person of common capacity may easily
discern them. (3.) The advice of faithful ministers, and the common consent of
Christian churches, may assist magistrates in discerning from the word of God,
what is gross or damnable heresy, blasphemy, idolatry.

OBJECT. XXIII. "If magistrates, as such, have a power of judging in religious
matters, then Heathen magistrates must also be allowed to make laws concerning
religion and the church, while in the mean time they cannot be censured by the
church, if they do amiss." ANSW. (1.) What could you gain, if I should plead,
that it is magistrates Christianity requiring them to execute their office in
subordination to it, that is the immediate origin of their power about the
matters of religion, even as it is parents Christianity that warrants them to
receive baptism for their infants? But (2.) Heathen magistrates, with God's
direction and approbation, have made laws respecting religion, Ezra vii. 13, --
28. vi. 1, -- 14. i. 1, -- 3. Dan. iii. 29. vi. 26. Jonah iii. Dare you condemn
the Almighty? (3) Heathen magistrates have the same power as Christian
magistrates, but are less capable to use it aright; even as heathen parents and
masters have the same power over their children and servants as Christians, but
are less qualified to discern and perform their duty. (4.) Neither heathen nor
Christian magistrates have any power at all against the truth, but for the
truth, -- any power for the destruction of the church, but for her edification,
2 Cor. xiii. 8, 10. (5) Heathen magistrates therefore, ought carefully to
improve what assistance they have by the light of nature and works of creation
and providence, or by any Revelation from God, to which they have access, --
always taking heed to make no laws, but such as they certainly know to be
agreeable to the law of God. -- It is not to be expected, that civil laws can
forbid every fault and require every thing good in externals; but they ought
never to encourage sin, or discourage duty.

OBJECT. XXIV. "To allow magistrates a power of judging about the matters of
religion will make them church-rulers." ANSW. (1) No more than it made
Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, and the king of Nineveh
church-rulers. (2.) No more than church-rulers taking cognizance of murder,
adultery, incest, theft, robbery, or even of the conduct of Christian
magistrates relative to administration of justice, wars, alliances, etc. will
make them magistrates. (3.) How often must you be told, that church-rulers
judge, how such profession or practice ought to stand connected with
ecclesiastical enconcouragements, discouragements or censure; but magistrates
judge, how such profession or practice ought to be connected with civil
encouragements or discouragements. Church-rulers warn against, and censure men's
public faults, only as scandals, disgraceful and hurtful to the church
Magistrates judge of, and punish them only as crimes, hurtful to the prosperity
of the State. In church courts, matters are considered as the matters of the
Lord. In civil courts, they are considered as the matters os the king, 2 Chronicles.
xix. 8, -- 11. Ministers as the deputies of Christ, require magistrates to
execute their office for the honor of Christ, and welfare of his church, and
censure them, if church members, if they do not. Magistrates as vicegerents of
God, the King of nations, require ministers faithfully to execute their office,
particularly as stated by the laws of the land, in order to promote virtue and
happiness among the subjects, and draw the blessing of God upon them; and they
punish them as undutiful subjects, if they notoriously transgress, 1 Kings ii.
26. Magistrates have NO ECCLESIASTICAL POWER at all. They have no power to
restrain or hinder the free and full exercise of church power. But, by giving
full opportunity, encouragement and excitement to church officers, they have
power to provide that church power be freely and faithfully exercised in their
dominions. They have no power to transact any thing ecclesiastical, as in
admission of members into the church, or to the seals of God's covenant; -- no
power to choose or ordain church officers; -- no power to preach the gospel,
dispense the sacrament, inflict censures, or absolve from them. -- They have no
power to prescribe or enact any ecclesiastical laws; but they have power to
adopt such lawful and expedient constitutions, as have been made by the
church-courts, into their civil code, by a legal ratification, -- and power to
enact such political laws as are necessary for the more advantageous execution
of these ecclesiastical constitutions. They have no power to frame a religion
for their subjects, or ratify a false religion already received or framed, or
to establish any thing in religion, which is not founded in the word of God;
but they have a power to adopt the law of God, and the religion prescribed by
it, as a part of their civil law, in order to promote the glory of God in the
welfare of the nation. -- The more public church courts be, and the more
extensive his influence upon his subjects, and the welfare of the nation, --
the more right has the civil magistrate to exercise his political power about
them. The church having an intrinsic right and power from Christ to call Synods
for government, whenever her circumstances require it, the magistrate has no
power to deprive her of this right. But while the church calls them as courts
of Christ, constituted of church rulers appointed by him to act in his name,
the magistrate may call them as courts established by the civil law, and
necessary to to promote the peace, order and piety, and so the prosperity of
his subjects, -- as courts, which consist of his principal subjects, and to
which place and protection must be given in his dominions. The magistrate has
no power of deputing to Synods such members as he pleases, Acts xv. 2 Chronicles.
viii. 18. or, to hinder or recall those whom the church has deputed, unless the
safety of the state plainly require it. But he may compel members, and parties
who have causes before the court, to attend, if the case of the church require
it, as a mean of repressing a malicious and turbulent faction, who have, or may
hurt the State. It is not necessary, that either the magistrate, or his
Commissioner, attend ecclesiastical Synods; -- though to secure their
protection, curb unruly troublers of the court, and to witness the propriety of
their procedure, he may attend. -- If he attend, He has a power to judge for
himself, how matters are ecclesiastically transacted, -- a power politically to
provide, That the members meddle with no political affairs, which do not belong
to them as a court of Christ: -- and to take care, that members, and others
present, observe that due decency, in reasoning, voting, submitting, or
hearing, which the nature of the court requires. If any cause be partly civil
and partly ecclesiastical, he is to judge the civil part himself, and leave the
ecclesiastical to the church court. -- Even in ecclesiastical causes, he may
give his advice, nay, he may propose and require Synods to examine and decide
concerning points of doctrine or practice, if necessary for the satisfaction of
his own conscience, or the instruction and edification of his subjects, in
order to promote the welfare of the state, in subordination to the glory of
God. But he has no power to hinder others to propose their difficulties or
grievances before the Synod for satisfaction or redress, unless the cause be
partly of a political nature, a Synodical decision of which, at that time,
endangers the state. -- He has no power to preside in the Synod, or give his
decisive vote in any of their transactions. But, as a man and Christian, he
has right to a judgment of discretion, Whether their decisions be according to
the law of God or not, -- and as a magistrate, he has a power of political
judgment, by which he does not properly judge, Whether these decisions be true
or false, good or bad in themselves, but Whether, and How far, they ought to be
ratified, and as it were adopted into the laws of the State, and connected with
civil rewards, forbearance, or punishments. Thus, the power of the magistrate,
in nothing interferes with the power of the Synod. Nothing is done by the one,
as a magistrate, that the other can do, as a court of Christ. And as the
decisions of Synods are supreme in the ecclesiastic order, from which there is
no appeal but to Jesus Christ; -- By remonstrating as a churchmember, and
commanding them as their King, the magistrate may cause the Synod re-consider
its own deeds, but he cannot reverse them himself; -- so the magistrate's deed
concerning the civil ratification of church-deeds is supreme in its kind, from
which there is no appeal but to God himself. The Synod may require him as a
Churchmember; and, as subjects, they may remonstrate, and supplicate his
re-consideration of his own deed, but they cannot reverse it themselves.

OBJECT. XXV. "To allow magistrates to judge in matters of religion for others,
and to restrain and punish corruptions in it, is to render them Lords of men's
faith and conscience, -- a power which even the inspired apostles disclaimed.
For if magistrates impose any religion at all upon their subjects, it must be
what their own conscience dictates; and then what shall become of the private
rights of conscience, among their subjects?" ANSW. (1.) Did then God, who of
old commanded magistrates to judge about matters of religion, and to restrain
and punish blasphemers, idolaters, seducers, profaners of the Sabbath, Deuteronomy.
xiii. 9, 10. and xvii. 5, -- 7. Lev. xxiv. 11, -- 14. Song ii. 15. Number. xv. 32,
-- 36. command them to lord it over men's conscience? If it was not so then, it
cannot be so now, as conscience, tyranny and murder, are the same in every age.
(2) The objection strikes with equal force, against all ecclesiastical
establishment of the true religion, and against all creeds and Confessions of
Faith, and against all ecclesiastical judging and censuring of men for heresy,
blasphemy, or idolatry, contrary to Rev. ii. 20. Titus iii 10. Gal. v. 10, 11.
as against magistrates judging about establishing religion or punishing the
public insulters of it. (3.) Magistrates act in this matter as his ministers
and vicegerents, by virtue of his commandment, who is the alone Lord of
conscience, and restrain or punish nothing, but what men, under any proper
influence of faith and conscience, would abstain from, as forbidden by the Lord
of conscience, who is to be their future judge, and has appointed magistrates,
as his substitutes to avenge the open injuries done to him in this world, Romans
xiii. 4. And, if men persist in sins plainly forbidden in his law, he holds
them as sinners against, and condemned by their conscience, Tit. iii. 10, 11.
(4) The absurdity of men's consciences being sustained as a standard, as well as
the proper method of magistrates making laws relative to religion, have been
already manifested. Magistrates consciences have no more just claim to God bead
than those of their meanest subjects. Not, therefore, magistrates pretenses to
conscience, but plain and evident marks of the authority of God manifested in,
and from the scriptures, must determine their subjects to receive a religion in
obedience to their authority, as subordinated to the authority of God, the Most
High, superior of both.

OBJECT. XXVI. "In Romans xiii. where the power of magistrates is more fully
described than any where else in the New Testament, only the commands of the
second table of the moral law are subjoined, to mark that it only extends to
the concerns of men one with another." ANSW. (1.) Who authorized the objector
to put asunder the two Testaments and the two tables which God has joined? Or,
to separate the first part of that chapter from the last, which certainly
relates to religion, any more than from verse 9th. (2.) The magistrate's
character, minister of God for good, terror to, and revenger of evil doers, and
his duty to love his neighbors as himself there hinted, cannot admit of his
having no care about religion and the first table of the moral law. (3) To
oblige men carefully to search the whole scriptures, God has seldom, if ever,
manifested his whole will, relative to any thing, in one passage.

OBJECT. XXVII. "If we allow magistrates any power at all about religious
matters, we must plunge ourselves into inextricable difficulties, as the
precise limits of civil and ecclesiastical power can never be fixed, -- and
every small mistake in religious opinions, or neglect of religious duties, must
bring men to the gibbet, as theft draws down the wrath of God on nations, as
well as blasphemy and idolatry do" ANSW. There is no more difficulty in
limiting the power of magistrates about either religion or virtue, than in
fixing precise limits to the power of church-rulers relative to those matters.
Do you fix precise limits to church power according to the word of God, and I
shall next moment fix as precise limits for the power of the magistrate. If you
limit the exercise of church power to duties required, and sins forbidden in
the first table of the moral law, -- you naturally leave the care of the duties
required in the second table to the magistrate. But then, whether a church of
Christ, having no care or power about morality toward men, -- or a deputed
kingdom of God without any care or power about any thing relating to the honor
of God, be most absurd and devilish, I know not. If you aver, That the power of
church-rulers extends to the external obedience or disobedience of
church members to both tables of God's law, not as civil, but as spiritual
conduct, tending to the spiritual advantage or hurt of the church, and
therefore connected with the spiritual encouragements or frowns of Christ's
visible church; and that they meddle not with sins against the second table as
crimes against men's person or property, but as scandals against the spiritual
edification of the church, and the glory of Jesus Christ therein concerned; --
I immediately reply, That precisely, in like manner, the power of magistrates
extends to the external obedience or disobedience of civil subjects as such, to
both tables of God's law, not as it is of a spiritual nature, but as it affects
the civil welfare or hurt of the nation, or honor of God as the King of it,
and so ought to stand connected with civil encouragements or discouragements.
If you pretend, that it will be still hard to show, how far magistrates may, in
that view, proceed in matters of the first table, particularly with respect to
offending clergymen I answer, that it is not one whit harder, than to show how
far church courts may proceed in matters of the second table, particularly with
respect to offensive magistratical administrations. (2.) Your pretense, that if
magistrates punish any faults in religion, they must punish all known faults in
the same form and degree, is but a deceitful insult on the Most High, who, in
his word, appointed the capital punishment of idolaters and blasphemers, and
yet never warranted the punishment of many faults relative to religion, in like
manner; nay, for ought I see, has not required magistrates at all to punish
any thing but the most atrocious faults in it. If you insult Christ, who has
not commanded any faults, but atrocious ones obstinately continued in, to be
censured with excommunication, and has never commanded many lesser neglects
and infirmities of church members to be censured at all, -- It is an insult on
common sense. Would you, or any man in his wits, either censure or punish men
as severely for a simple neglect of a religious duty, as for an open and
blasphemous insulting of religion? Would you censure or punish the stealing of
a single straw as severely as the stealing of a man or woman? Would you censure
or punish a prick with a pin, as severely as the cutting of a man's throat, or
the ripping up of a woman with child.

OBJECT. XXVIII. "Either every error in doctrine, and mistake in worship must
be punished by the magistrate, or only that which is more glaring and
notorious. If it is only the latter, How are the limits of what is punishable,
and what is not, and the degree of punishment proper for each, to be precisely
fixed." ANSW. If every species of duty must be neglected, and the contrary sin
allowed, where it is difficult to fix the precise boundaries of sin or duty, --
or where it is difficult to fix the precise degrees of encouragement to be
given to such obedience, or of censure or punishment due to such sin, men must
be left to live like absolute atheists, in both church and state, every man
doing that which is right in his own eyes. (2) Unless you prove that every
insult of, and outrage against God and his religion ought to pass unpunished,
and even be licensed and authorized, yourself must be equally embarrassed in
fixing what is punishable and what is not, and what must be the form and degree
of punishment annexed to each punishable fault. (3.) Nay, unless you prove,
that all deeds, however horrid, ought to be tolerated in both church and state,
How are you to fix precisely, what deeds are censurable or punishable, and what
not; -- and what form and degree of censure or punishment is proper for each,
in every particular form and circumstance. A man may as really, and for ought
men can prove against him, as justly pretend conscience for his wicked deeds of
treason, murder, robbery, etc. as for his damnable heresies, blasphemies, and
idolatrous worship. Wicked deeds, if God be true, are the native fruits of
gross errors and idolatrous worship. A conscience, which under the clear light
of scripture revelation, approves the whole system of Popery or Socinianism,
may as reasonably dictate the murder of saints, dethronement of lawful
Sovereigns, community of women and goods, etc. Let once the plea of conscience
be admitted in the case of treason, theft, robbery, murder, and the like, and I
will undertake, it shall be as commonly pled, as in the case of gross heresy,
blasphemy and idolatry; and it will be as impossible for judges to disprove it
in the one case, as in the other. Nothing therefore, will truly answer your
tolerant scheme, but that every man be allowed to profess, worship, and act as
he pleases. (4) Let therefore magistrates, as well as church-rulers, in their
punishing and censuring work, make God's word their rule; and if they do not
perceive from it clearly the proper degrees of punishment and censure, let them
rather err on the charitable side, than in approaches to severity.

OBJECT. XXIX. "But, how are heretics, blasphemers, and idolaters to be got
judged in order to punishment? They must be judged only by their Peers, by
persons of the same station as themselves, quite impartial, and no wise
attached to the contrary sentiments or practices." ANSW. (1.) But, how can you
prove from scripture or reason, that such criminals must be judged only by
their Peers; -- or that there is a nation under heaven, in which criminals are
judged by such Peers, as you mention? (2) Allowing that our juries consist of
the proper Peers of the criminals, yet they judge not concerning the relevancy
of the crime, or the form or degree of punishments, but of the proof of the
fact, -- which, in the case of heresy, blasphemy, or idolatry, is ordinarily no
more difficult, than in the case of adultery, incest, theft, murder, etc. (3.)
Nothing can be more absurd, than to pretend, that men's detestation of heresy,
blasphemy, and idolatry, disqualifies them from judging heretics, blasphemers,
and idolaters. What! Does men's abhorrence of theft, murder, adultery,
disqualify them to judge of, and punish those crimes? Do God's infinite
holiness and equity, disqualify him from judging of sinners?

OBJECT. XXX. "If heretics, blasphemers and idolaters be punishable, orthodox
magistrates, who happen to become governors of heretical, blasphemous and
idolatrous nations, must kill the most of their subjects." ANSW. We hold none
punishable, especially in any severe manner, till they appear openly obstinate
in it, notwithstanding sufficient means of conviction, which these subjects are
not supposed to have had; and so are not punishable at all by magistrates. (2,)
Nothing, and particularly the infliction of punishment, ought to be done,
merely because it is lawful, till it also become expedient, 1 Cor. vi. 12. and
x 23. Eccl. iii. 1, 11. Now it would be highly inexpedient to proceed to
extremities against the greater part of a society. Nay, in the case supposed,
they would prove a barbarously sinful mean of prejudicing men against the
gospel of Christ. (3.) Great difference ought to be made between such as were
never reformed from a false religion, and those who obstinately apostatize from
the true religion to a false one; -- between such as live in a nation generally
corrupted with a false religion, and those who live in a nation generally
enlightened and reformed by the gospel of Christ; -- and between such as are
only seduced, and those who exert themselves to seduce others. Much more
forbearance is due to the former than to the latter; for (4) However
peremptorily the Jews were commanded by God to punish even unto death, the
obstinate false prophets, idolaters and blasphemers of their own church or
nation, they were never required to punish their idolatrous tributaries in
their conquered countries of Syria, Philistia, Edom, Ammon, or Moab. And
meanwhile, were never allowed, and never did grant them any legal establishment
or authoritative toleration of their idolatry. (5.) Even God himself, for the
ends of his glory, exercises much forbearance toward heretics, blasphemers
and idolaters, but never grants them any legal establishment or authoritative
toleration, securing them of protection in their wickedness. Let magistrates,
who are his ministers for good to men, go and do so like wise.

OBJECT. XXXI. "The Christian law of doing to others that which we would have
them do to us, demands, That we should allow every man to think, profess, and
act in religion as he pleases. If we think men heretics, blasphemers or
idolaters, our proper method is to manifest the utmost kindness and familiarity
to them, that we may gain them to the truth. Every other method is no less
dangerous than uncharitable. If orthodox Christian magistrates restrain and
punish the spreading of Heathen, Mohammedan, and Popish errors or worship, --
Heathen, Mohammedan and Popish princes will be thereby tempted to restrain and
punish the spread of gospel truth in their dominions, and can plead the very
same right for their conduct." ANSW. (1.) Strange! Did not God know the meaning
of his own law of equity and kindness between man and man, and the true method
of securing or propagating his own religion, when he made or encouraged the
laws against seducers, idolaters, and blasphemers above mentioned; -- when he
commanded his people to avoid false teachers, and not so much as to lodge them
in their houses. (2) With all your pretended benevolence, Would you familiarly
lodge in your family a notorious pick pocket or an harlot, along with your own
children, in order to gain them to the ways of piety and virtue? You would not.
Why then, in direct contradiction to the command of God, do you plead for
familiarity with robbers of God, defilers, or murderers of souls! (3) The
Christian law of kindness and equity requires me to do all that for the real
welfare of my neighbor, in subordination to the glory of God, which I could
lawfully wish him, in like circumstances, to do for me? But, must I do evil
that good may come, rendering my damnation just? Must I procure my just liberty
to believe and serve God according to his own appointment, by granting my
neighbor an unjust, an authoritative license to insult and blaspheme God, and
worship the devil in his stead? Because I wish my neighbor to be helpful to
me, in honoring God, and in laboring to render myself and others happy in
time and eternity, Must I assist and encourage them in horribly dishonouring
God, and destroying themselves and others. None but an atheist, who believes no
real difference between moral good and evil, can pretend it. (4.) When and
Where have Faithful adherents to gospel truth, got much liberty and safety by
means of their friends encouraging and protecting gross herely, blasphemy and
idolatry? Since Protestants became so kind to Papists in their dominions, Have
not the Popish powers, in return, cruelly murdered, banished, or oppressed
their Protestant subjects, in Hungary, Poland, Germany, France. etc. till they
have left few of them remaining? While Britons were lavishly expending their
blood and treasure in support of the Popish house of Austria about 1709 and
1741, She returned our kindness in the most villainous destruction of about 230
Congregations of our Protestant brethren in Silesia and Hungary. (5.) Ought
Elijah to have spared, nay protected and encouraged the prophets of Baal, as a
mean of securing for himself the protection of Ahab and Jezebel, or, because
she was disposed to avenge their death? Must thieves and robbers be
benevolently used, protected and suffered to pass unpunished, for fear of
provoking their associaus to revenge the just severities used toward them? Let
magistrates do their duty, and leave events to God. (6.) Till you honestly
profess yourself an atheist, who believes no intrinsical difference between
moral good and evil, never pretend that magistrates, who have their whole power
from God, have any power against the truth, or have a right to exercise that
power derived from God for the good of mankind, to his dishonor and to the
hurt of mankind. Astonishing I Because a power originating from God may be
rightfully exercised in promoting his declarative glory, the spread or
protection of his gospel, and the happiness of mankind, -- May it, must it,
therefore, in the hand of other magistrates, be rightfully exercised in
promoting blasphemy and robbery of God, and worshipping of devils? -- Because
it may be rightfully exercised in punishing obstinate and notorious heretics,
blasphemers and idolaters, -- May it, must it, therefore be rightfully
exercised in persecuting and murdering the faithful preachers and professors of
Gospel Truths, and worshippers of the true God? -- Because magistrates in
Britain have a right to punish thieves and murderers, must these in France have
as good a right to use Alms givers and skilful and diligent Physicians in the
same manner? -- Because that which tends to the highest honor of God, and
temporal and eternal happiness of mankind ought to be authoritatively
tolerated, nay established, every where, -- may, -- must, that which tends to
his highest dishonor, and the most dreadful temporal and eternal ruin of
mankind, be every where, in like manner, tolerated or established? -- Because
in a dearth, benevolent persons may be tolerated, nay highly encouraged in
freely distributing wholesome provisions to the poor and needy, may, or must,
malicious murderers be therefore tolerated and encouraged in distributing their
poisoned morsels, especially if abundantly sweetened among the unwary infants
or others? (7.) The restraint or suitable and seasonable punishment of that
which is contrary to God's law, being commanded by himself, can never have any
tendency to introduce corruptions in religion, or persecution for an adherence
to gospel truth. And if some will abuse their power, that must not hinder
others, either in church or state, to use theirs aright.

OBJECT. XXXII. "If infidelity and difference in religion do not make void
magistrates right to govern nations, much less can heresy, idolatry, or
blasphemy, invalidate subjects right to protection, or of admission to all the
privileges of other subjects." ANSW. (1.) In almost every case, the restraint
or punishment of superiors is more difficult than that of inferiors. (2.) If
the professors of the true religion be the minority in number and power, both
scripture and reason demand their subjection to their common rulers, in all
their lawful commands, till they become manifest tyrants, and Providence afford
a proper opportunity of shaking off their yoke. But, if the professors of the
true religion be the majority in a nation or society, both scripture and reason
forbid their setting up a magistrate of a false religion, or a wicked practice,
-- and allow that, if after his advancement, he apostatize, and obstinately
attempt to promote a false religion, or notoriously wicked practice, he may be
deposed and even punished, as far as the general welfare of the society, in
subordination to the glory of God, can admit, Psalm. xv. 4. (3) Do you pretend
to be wiser than God himself? Without any apprehended inconsistency, he
commanded the Jews, not authoritatively to tolerate, protect, and encourage,
but to punish blasphemers, profaners of the Sabbath, idolaters, and false
prophets, Lev. xxiv. 15, 16 Number. xv. 35, 36. Deuteronomy. xiv, xvii. Zech. xiii. 2, --
6. and yet commanded them when they were the small minority in the Chaldean
empire, to serve the Heathen king of Babylon, Jer. xxvii. 17. and xxix. 7.

OBJECT. XXXIII. "Unlimited tolerations in the state ought not to be granted.
In Protestant countries, Papists ought not to be tolerated, as they are subject
to the foreign power of the Pope, as their Head, and cannot be supposed
faithful subjects to, or to keep faith with such as they pretend to be
heretics. Atheists ought not to be tolerated, as they cannot be bound by any
oath. Such as are against tolerating others ought not to be tolerated, as they
will kindle strife. And in churches, there ought to be no toleration at at
all." ANSW. (1.) Then it seems, Christ and his Father must be excluded from all
share in the toleration you plead for, on account of their intolerant
disposition, unless they be infinitely altered from what they were in ancient
times. (2) You have already given up all your care for procuring the favor of
the Popish powers to your Protestant brethren abroad, by means of tolerating
Papists. (3.) Never pretend zeal against atheism, till you be able to maintain
your tolerant scheme, upon other than the atheistical principles mentioned near
the beginning of this missive; and to which you have had repeated recourse in
your objections. -- and till you allow men's rights or pretenses of conscience
to warrant them to defame, abuse, rob, and murder yourself, as you allow with
respect to God. (4.) Your present objection is partly foundin atheism. Papists
are excluded from toleration, not at all as notorious blasphemers and
idolaters, but merely as not very like to prove faithful subjects to Protestant
magistrates. Atheists are excluded, not as daring blasphemers or intentionally
malicious murderers of Jehovah, but merely because they cannot give proper
security for their good behavior to magistrates and fellow subjects. Thus no
more regard is showed to God the King of nations, than might be expected among
a nation of Atheists, and the interests of men are altogether, I might say,
infinitely, preferred to his. (5.) How are you to fix the precise limits, Who
are to be accounted under foreign heads; -- who are to be accounted Papists and
Atheists; -- or who are to be held to give sufficient security by oath, --
Whether profane swearers, Quakers, Socinians, notorious violaters of baptisinal
engagements, solemn subscribers of, and engagers to Creeds and Confessions of
Faith which they believe not, etc. -- If, contrary to the light of nature and
revelation, men zealously propagate the doctrines of devils and do worship them
in idols, and follow the pernicious practices abovementioned, as the native
consequences of error and idolatry, Are not they plainly subject to another
Head, even the God of this world, who is not much more friendly to magistrates
and nations, than the Romish Pope? If men have conscience, villainously to
wrest the scripture to prove that Christ was originally a mere mar, a mere
creature, and is now a made God, What more security can we have by their oath,
than if they were professed Atheists? (6.) None who plead tor the authoritative
toleration of heretics, blasphemers and idolators by the State, can with any
self-consistent candor, disallow of all toleration in the church -- God the
King of nations, hates these abominations as much as Christ, the Head of the
church. Church-rulers have no other infallible rule to direct them in their
decisions, than magistrates have. They are as unfit to judge of more refined
errors, as magistrates are to judge of gross errors, blasphemies, idolatries.
They have as little allowance from Christ to lord over men's consciences, or to
impose their own opinions for articles of faith or rules of duty, as
magistrates have from God. It is as difficult to fix precisely, What is
censurable, and what not, and the proper degree of censure answerable to every
seandal, in every circumstance, as to six precisely, what and how crimes ought
to be punished by the magistrate. Unrighteous censures for an adherence to
truth and duty, are as real and more severe perfecution than unrighteous
punishments. Articles and Confessions of Faith imposed by ecclesiastical
anthority, as much cramp Christian liberty, as if they were established by the
state. Clergymen h^e as often abused their power about religion, as e^
Statesmen did. Their constitutions and councils have done as much hurt to it,
as these of magistrates ever did: If it be difficult to get gross heretics,
blasphemers and idolaters judged, restrained or punished by the State, it will
be found as hard to get ALL errors and ALL practical mistakes censured by the
church. Nay, for once that magistrates have erred in punishing heretics,
blasphemers and idolaters. I believe clergymen have erred ten, if not an
hundred times, in their censures. And, seldom have ever magistrates persecuted
men for righteousness sake, but when they were instigated to it by some
clergymen

OBJECT. XXXIV. "No carnal influence of magistrates relative to religion is
consistent with the spiritual nature of the kingdom of Christ, which is not of
this world, John xviii. 36. The apostles used no carnal weapons of warfare in
promoting it, 2 Cor. x. 4, 5." ANSW. Why do not you state precisely, what you
mean by the spiritual nature of Christ's kingdom, and its not being of this
world? Is it so spiritual, that the members and subordinate rulers in it, are
not at the same time members in a civil state, and interested in the welfare or
hurt of it? Is it so spiritual, that it has no manner of connection or
fellowship with the kingdom of God over the nation, in which it resides, and
neither gives nor receives from it, any more helpfulness, than from the kingdom
of Belial? Is it so spiritual, that the power of it cannot touch any part of
men's conduct toward one another, or even the magistratical administrations of
its members? Is it so spiritual, as to exclude the Most High, King of nations,
and his deputed vicegerents, from all regard to the honor of God and his
religion, and the welfare of the State as connected therewith, leaving them no
more concern therewith, than if nations were herds of swine? The question under
consideration is not concerning the nature of Christ's kingdom, of which the
civil magistrate is not a ruler of any kind, as has been already manifested,
but, Whether all care about the church and her religion, as tending to promote
the welfare of nations ought to be excluded from God's kingdom, as the
Sovereign of nations, and he and his vicegerents obliged to manage that
department, as if there were no God in the earth? (2.) Had Christ no spiritual
kingdom in the days of Moses, and the prophets, when God required magistrates
to take care about religion, and to restrain and punish the public atrocious
insulters of it? Had he no spiritual kingdom, not of this world, when he
repeatedly drove the buyers and sellers out of the temple? (3.) That the
spiritual nature of Christ's kingdom rendered it perfectly consistent with the
full exercife of the magistratical power in the Roman empire, or any other
state, which is what he meant in his answer to Pilate, we readily grant; but
the inspired promises, which have been repeatedly quoted, Isa. xlix. 23. and
lx. 3, 10, 16 Psalm. ii. 8, 10, 11, 12. and lxxii. 10, 11. Rev. xi. 15. and
xvii. 16. and xxi. 24. sufficiently prove, that the spiritual nature of
Christ's kingdom does not exclude magistrates helpfulness to the truth, in
authorizing the profession and practice of it by their civil laws, and in
restraining the open and insolent blasphemers of it? (4.) Though the weapons of
ministers warfare, in propagating the gospel be not carnal, What is that to the
case of magistrates? And as the spiritual weapons of church officers reach as
much to sins against the second table of the moral law as to those against the
sirst, they no more exclude the use of the magistrates carnal weapons against
the atrocious sins against the first table, than with respect to those against
the second, 2 Cor. x. 6. 1 Cor. v. 2, -- 5, (4.) Magistratical influence cannot
set up Christ's kingdom in men's heart, or oblige men's conscience to obey his
laws in an acceptable manner; but it can remove many external hindrances, and
afford many external opportunities, of his own setting up, by means of his word
and Spirit. It can restrain burning of Bibles or abusing and murdering of
preachers and hearers of the gospel. It can spread the scriptures, and protect
preachers of the truths contained in them; and by command, example, and
otherwise, encourage the subjects to search the scriptures, and to hear, learn,
profess, and practice the plain doctrines of the gospel. In thus endeavoring
to make their subjects attend on, receive, and observe the doctrines of the
gospel, all appearance of force should be carefully avoided, as that is apt to
provoke a dislike, rather than to promote a cheerful embracement of them. But
force may be used to restrain, or duly and seasonably punish the insolent
opposers and revilers of the true religion, which is established. And, on no
account, ought such plagues of nations, as well as of churches, to receive any
authoritative license to commit such wickedness.

OBJECT. XXXV. "The annexing of temporal encouragements to the profession and
practice of the Christian religion or external discouragements to the
profession or practice of such opinions and worship as are contrary to it, --
tends to render men hypocrites, and their religion merely carnal, in obedience
to civil authority, and influenced by mere carnal motives. It makes men trample
on and debauch their conscience, and so sap the foundation of all true piety
and virtue." ANSW. (1) God, who well knows the true nature of religious worship
and obedience, and highly regards the candor and purity of conscience, excited
the Israelites to it, partly by external encouragements, restraints and
terrors, Deuteronomy. iv, -- viii, xxvii, -- xxxii, Lev. xviii, -- xx, xxvi. and by
each of his prophets. Isa. i. -- to Mal. iv. And even under the gospel,
godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of that which is to come,
1 Timothy iv. 8. 1 Pet. iii. 13. -- Did you mean to blaspheme his conduct as
absolutely devilish? (2.) With God's approbation, David, Nehemiah and others,
by familiar intimacy, and by preferring them to posts of honor, encouraged
such as appeared eminent in the profession and practice of revealed religion;
and they excluded such as appeared notoriously wicked, Psalm. cxix. 63. and ci.
6, 7. Neh. vii 2. and xiii, 28. Nay, David before hand publicly intimated his
resolution to prefer only pious and faithful men. -- And why not, when such bid
fairest to be eminently useful officers in the state? (3.) Why may not men,
even by external advantages be encouraged to an external attendance upon
gospel ordinances, which, by the blessing of God and the working of his Spirit,
may issue in rendering them eminently useful subjects, and in their eternal
salvation, even as children may be hired to that reading of their Bible and
learning of their Catechism, which may issue in their conversion and
everlasting life? (4) Regard to the command of parents, masters, magistrates,
and ministers, all at once, in our religious profession and practice, is no way
inconsistent with, but may be delightfully subordinated to a supreme regard to
the authority of God in them. (5.) Do you really think, that those, who believe
neither a God, nor a heaven, nor a hell, ought under pretense of civil right,
to be as readily admitted to places of power and trust, in civil governments as
the most pious? -- Nay, are not even a profession and practice of the Christian
religion much more profitable in a nation, than open blasphemy, impiety and
idolatry, which we have heard from God's own word, exceedingly corrupt men's
morals, and pull down the wrath of God on the society. (6.) If such things only
be restrained and punished, as are plainly contrary to the law of God, and a
right conscience, and never punished, till after sufficient means of conviction
have been afforded and trampled on, how can that make men dissemble with or sin
against their conscience, any more than the punishment of theft, murder,
incest, or the like, can do it?

OBJECT. XXXVI. "The abolishment of all civil establishments of revealed
religion, would have a remarkable tendency to render men truly pious, truly
sincere, in their faith, profession and worship: and to render them excellent
subjects, candid, peaceable, and affectionate lovers of one another. It would
effectually root out Popery and every thing similar." ANSW. (1.) Just as
remarkable a tendency, as the leaving of children to themselves has to render
them truly virtuous, and a distinguished honor to their parents, Prove. xxv.
15. 1 Samuel iii. 13. -- as remarkable a tendency as the abolishment of all
ecclesiastical establishments of it would have to render men perfect saints.
(2.) It is plain, that God, when he fixed a civil establishment of revealed
religion, and when he represented, as above, heresy, blasphemy, and idolatry,
as reudering men monsters of all manner of wickedness, instead of good
subjects, neighbors, or Christians, thought otherwise. Are you wiser than He?
(3.) Never, that I know of, was there a nation or numerous society on earth in
which there was less of a religious establishment, good or bad, than among the
Ismaelians of Irak and Syria, and the Giagas of Africa. What were the noted
virtues which flourished among them? Murders, assassinations, which cannot be
read or heard, without horror. Under the protection of an extensive toleration,
how did England, about an hundred and thirty years ago, swarm with Sectarian
errors, blasphemies, confusions? And, what has either the peace of the State,
or the orthodoxy and holiness of our church gained by our last Scotch
toleration? Repeated attempts in 1715 and 1745, to unhinge our civil
establishment and dethrone our lawful Sovereigns in favors of Popish
pretenders, are the noted advantages, which have accrued to our State, and an
alarming increase of infidelity, profaneness, and Popery, to our church.
Instead of scarce six hundred Papists, which was once all that could be
reckoned in Scotland, their number now, may amount to about thirty thousand. In
about a dozen of parishes in the North, they have above twenty congregations,
several of them pretty large, and a College and an Academy for training up
priests. How quickly these, with the Scotch colleges abroad, may furnish
converters for the whole nation, God only knows. In the parish of South Uist,
there are 2300 Papists and 300 Protestants; in Barra 1250 Papists, and 50
Protestants; in Ardnamurchan 1950 Papists, and 17 Protestants; in Kinkmichael
and its neighboring parish 1520 Papists; in Kilmanivaig 1600; and in Glenelg
1340.

OBJECT. XXXVII. "All civil laws establishing revealed religion must
necessarily land magistrates in persecuting their subjects; for, if these civil
laws be contemned and violated, the breakers must be punished" ANSW. For this
reason no superior, parent, master, minister, or magistrate, must make any
appointment relative to religious matters, because, if it be disregarded,
punishment or censure must be inflicted, and that will amount to persecution in
the sense of the objection. -- No duty must ever be attempted, lest some
perplexing consequence should attend it. (2.) Though evil doers ordinarily reckon
restraints of iniquity persecution, the scripture allows nothing to be
persecution but unjust severities exercised against the profession or practice
of gospel truth, -- at least against innocence or virtue. Punishment of men for
what is plainly contrary to the word of God is no persecution for conscience
sake, but a proper correction of them for trampling on and murdering their
conscience. (3.) If, by the blessing of God, parents can do much to advance
religion in their families, without any furious or hurtful beating of their
children, -- and ministers do much to promote it in their congregations,
without proceeding, perhaps once in their life, to the higher excommunication;
and if both may do much to render their children and people useful members of
the commonwealth, without having power to fine, imprison or kill them, why may
not magistrates by their appointments, encouragements, and example, much
promote the profession and practice of revealed religion, without proceeding,
unless very rarely, to any disagreeable severities? -- The point we attempted
directly to establish is, that magistrates ought never to grant an
authoritative toleration to gross heresy, blasphemy, idolatry; you therefore
act uncandidly in perpetually haling in the affair of punishments; even capital
ones, just as your tolerant friends the ancient Remonstrants perpetually haled
in the doctrine of reprobation, in order to render the sovereignty of God's
grace odious to the people. (4) If magistrates take heed never to punish on the
head of religious matters, but when the CRIME is plainly relevant and manisest,
plainly contrary to the laws of God, as well as to those of the land; and that
the punishment be SUITABLE and SEASONABLE, circumstantially calculated to
promote the real welfare of the commonwealth, why should they be charged with
persecution, for prudently supporting their most important laws, and yet held
innocent, if not virtuous, in supporting their comparatively insignificant
laws, relative to fishing, fowling, hunting, or the like?

OBJECT. XXXVIII "Let things be reduced to practice. What could be done, just
now, in Britain, without an authoritative toleration of the different parties
in religion." ANSW. No difficulty of the performance of duties can be a
sufficient reason for the neglect of them. No difficulty of rectifying what is
in disorder, can be a proof that it is not duty to attempt it. Because I sind
it so hard work to keep my heart with all diligence, and often know not how to
get its sinful disorders rectified, it will not follow, that to obtain inward
quietness, I should, in God's name, give an authoritative toleration to my
several lusts, except perhaps the grosser ones of malice, whoredom,
drunkenness. (2.) The rules of rectifying what pertains to religion in Britain,
is plain. Let magistrates and subjects impartially and earnestly search the
oracles of God, depending on the illuminating influence of his Spirit -- Let
every thing not contained in the scripture be thrown out of both civil and
ecclesiastical establishments of religion, and every thing plainly appointed
therein for the gospel church, be authorized. Let the whole administration of
government in church and state, and subjection to it, be regulated by the law
of God. -- Let every prudent and winning method be taken to promote an
universally cheerful compliance. -- If any continue to dissent, let every
degree and form of tender forbearance be exercised toward them, which the
express laws of God will permit, especially, if by a circumspect life, they
manifest themselves persons of a truly tender conscience, with respect to what
they apprehend. -- If all will not concur in these measures, let particular
persons, in their several stations, act as becomes the gospel of Christ,
obeying God rather than man, and doing all that he has commanded, without
turning aside to the right hand or to the left. And if need be, let them take
up their cross, and patiently follow Christ counting nothing too dear unto
them, if they may uprightly finish their course with joy -- Upon trial, it
would be found as easy for magistrates to rectify the disorders in their
department, relative to religion, as it would be for church-rulers in Britain,
to rectify what pertains to rheirs, in which, you just now pled, that there
never should be any toleration at all.

OBJECT. XXXIX. "The great Dr. OWEN zealously pled for authoritative
toleration, and that magistrates ought not to interfere with religious
matters." ANSW. We call no man master. One is our master even Christ. Dr.
Owen's authority would be 100 light to balance that of many thousands of
Protestant divines. But let us hear his judgment, for ought I know his FINAL
JUDGMENT, in his Sermon before the English Parliament, OCTOBER 13th, 1652 --
"The civil powers -- shall be disposed of, into an useful subserviency to the
interest, power, and kingdom of Jesus Christ; hence they are said to be his
kingdoms, Rev. xi. 15 Page 15.
. Judges and Rulers AS SUCH must kiss the Son and own his scepter and advance
his ways. Some think, if you were well settled, you ought not, as rulers of the
nations, to put forth your power for the interest of Christ. The good Lord keep
your hearts from that apprehension P. 16.
. It is the duty of magistrates to seek the good, peace, and prosperity of the
people committed to their charge, and to prevent and remove EVERY THING, that
will bring confusion, destruction and desolation upon them, Esther x. 3. Psalm.
ci Magistrates are the ministers of God for good -- UNIVERSAL GOOD of them, to
whom they are given, Romans xiii. 4. and are to watch and apply themselves to
this very thing, ver. 6. -- It is incumbent on them to act, even as kings and
men in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty, -- and all may come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy ii. 1,
-- 4 -- They are to feed the people committed to their charge, with all their
might, unto universal peace and welfare -- The things opposite to the good of
any nation and people, are of two sorts; (1.) Such as are really, directly, and
immediately opposed to that state wherein they close together, and find
prosperity, -- seditions, tumults, disorders, -- violent or fraudulent breaking
in upon the privileges and enjoyments of singular persons, without any
consideration of him who ruletb all things. -- Such evils as these, nations and
rulers, supposed to be atheists, would with all their strength, labor to
prevent. -- (2.) Such as are morally and meritoriovsly opposed to their good
and welfare, in that they will certainly pluck down the judgments and wrath of
God upon that nation, where they are practiced and allowed, Romans i. Shall he be
thought a magistrate to bear out the name, authority, and presence of God to
men, that, so he and his people have present peace like a herd of fwine, cares
not though such things as will certainly devour their strength, and then
utterly consume them, do pass current. -- Seeing they that rule over men must
be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord, the sole reason why they sheathe the
sword of justice in the bowels of thieves, murderers, adulterers, is not,
because their outward peace is actually disturbed by them -- but principally
because he, in whose stead they sland and minister, is provoked by such
wickedness to destroy both the one and the other. And, if there be the same
reason concerning other things, they also call for the same procedure. -- To
gather up now what has been spoken; Considering the gospel's right to be
propagated with all its concernments in every nation under heaven, and the
blessings, peace, prosperity, and protection, wherewith it is attended, when
and where received, and the certain destruction which accompanies the rejection
and contempt of it. -- Considering the duty, that by God's appointment is
incumbent on them that rule over men, That in the fear of the Lord they ought
to seek the good, peace, and prosperity of them that are committed to their
charge, and to prevent, obviate, remove, and revenge that which tends to their
hurt, perturbation, destruction, immediate from heaven, or from the hand of
men; and in their whole administration to take care, that the worshippers of
God in Christ may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
Let any one, who has the least sense of the account, which he must -- make to
the the great King and Judge of the world, -- of the authority and power
wherewith he was entrusted, determine, Whether it be not incumbent on him, by
all the protection he can afford; by all the privileges be can indulge; by all
the support he can grant; by all that encouragement he is required or allowed
to give to any person whatsoever, -- to further the propagation of the gospel,
which upon the matter, is the only thing of concernment, as well unto this
life, as unto that which is to come. -- And, if any thing be allowed in a
nation, which, in God's esteem, may amount to a contempt and despising thereof,
men may be taught by sad experience, what will be the issue of such ALLOWANCE
P. 49, 50.
Although the institutions and examples of the Old Testament, of the duty of
magistrates in the things about the worship of God, are not, in their whole
latitude and extent, to be drawn into rules -- obligatory to all magistrates,
now under -- the gospel, -- yet doubtless, there is something moral in these
institutions. -- Subduct from these administrations, what was proper to the
church and nation of the Jews, and what remains upon the general account of a
church and nation, must be everlastingly binding; and this amounts thus far at
least, That Judges, Rulers and Magistrates, which are promised under the New
Testament, to be given in mercy, and to be of singular usefulness, as the
Judges were under the Old, are to take care, That the gospel church, may, in
its concernments as such, be supported and promoted, and the truth propagated,
wherewith they are entrusted -- Know, that ERROR and FALSEHOOD have no right or
title, either from God or men, unto any privilege, protection, advantage,
liberty, or any good thing, you are entrusted withal. To dispose that unto a
LIE, which is the right of, and due to TRUTH, is to deal treacherously with
Him, by whom you are employed P. 52, 53.
. Know, that in things of practice, so OF PERSUASION, that are impious and
wicked, either in themselves or natural consequences, the plea of conscience is
an aggravation of the crime. If men's conscience be feared, and themselves given
up to a reprobate mind, to do those things, that are not convenient, there is
no doubt but they ought to suffer such things as are assigned and appointed by
God to such practices P. 54.
" A truly golden speech, and which nothing, but the deepest conviction of its
truth, could have drawn from an Independent, in his then circumstances.

Upon the whole, Sir, I readily grant, that a multitude of cavils may be
started against the magistrates power about religious matters mentioned in our
excellent Standards, as may be against every divine truth, the most fundamental
not excepted; and that the proper application of it to practice may be, in some
circumstances, not a little difficult. But not cavils however specious; nor
difficulty of upright performance of duty, but demonstrative arguments of its
sinfulness will warrant my renouncing a principle which I have so solemnly
espoused in ordination vows and covenants with God; and far less to admit, That
men's conscience and magistrates ought, in the name of God, to warrant,
encourage, and protect men in gross heresy, blasphemy and idolatry, though they
cannot warrant, encourage, or protect them in doing any civil injury to men.
Perhaps, Tindal alone has raised as many shrewd objections against the divine
authority of our Bible, as have, or can be, raised against that power of
magistrates mentioned in our Standards; and yet Woe, woe, woe for ever, to my
soul, if, on that account, I renounce it, as an imposture of Satan.

LETTER II. On the PERFIDY of all AUTHORITATIVE TOLERATION of gross Heresy,
Blasphemy or Idolatry, in BRITAIN.
SIR,
TO exhibit the contrariety of an authoritative toleration of gross heresy,
blasphemy, and idolatry, to many, if not all the Burgess Oaths, in our country,
and to the established oaths of allegiance to His Majesty, or even to his own
Coronation Oath, to maintain the true Protestant religion, as by law
established in his dominions, and to our Solemn vows in Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, I leave to some fitter hand, and shall only represent it as a violation
of these public covenants with God, which our fathers framed, as their
strongest human securities against gross heresy, blasphemy, idolatry, Popery,
and every thing fimilar.

Being treacherously and cruelly opposed in their reformation of religion, by
their two Popish Queens, the Protestant Lords and others in Scotland, entered
into five several bonds, A. D. 1557, 1559, 1560, 1563, in which they solemnly
engaged to assist and protect each other, in promoting the free exercise of the
Protestant religion. It was only the smaller part of the Protestants in our
land, which entered into these bonds, -- nor does it appear, they were intended
as general obligations. -- But, when the Papists abroad were laboring, with
all their might, to extirpate the Protestant religion; and the Pope was found
to have granted dispensations for qualifying his votaries, to undermine it in
our land, -- the National Covenant was formed and sworn in 1581 -- in order to
frustrate their attempts, and secure the reformation attained. In it the
abominations of Popery were expressly and particularly abjured; and it was
understood as adhered to and renewed in every religious bond that sollowed.
After God had marvellously frustrated the attempts of the Spaniards and other
Papists against Britain, our fathers, in thankfulness to Him, -- and to secure
themselves against the Popish confederates abroad, and their friends at home,
-- with much unanimity and joy renewed their National Covenant, A. D 1590,
along with the subscription of a General Bond for preservation of the
Protestant religion, and the King's Majesty. In 1596, apprehensions of danger
from the Popish Lords, and the treacherous regard showed them by K. James, and
especially a very extraordinary effusion of the Holy Ghost on the General
Assembly, issued in much solemn mourning for sin, and renovation of their
covenant with God. After forty years of fearful perfidious apostasy, and much
sinful veering toward the abjured abominations of Popery, they, awakened by K.
Charles and Archbishop Laud's imposition of an almost Popish Liturgy and Book
of Canons, -- Searched out, and lamented, their perfidy to God, as the cause of
their manifold miseries; and solemnly renewed their covenant with Him, as a
mean of obtaining his gracious assistance, and securing their Protestant
religion and liberties. Affrighted by the Papists massacring of about two
hundred thousand Protestants in Ireland, instigated by their distresses in
England, and encouraged by the remarkable countenance of God's Spirit and
Providence to the Scotch covenanters. Most of the English and Irish Protestants
in 1643 and 1644. along with them, entered into a Solemn League and Covenant
with God, and with one another, in which they expressly abjured Popery, and
Prelacy as a branch of it. -- K. Charles had scarce granted a peace, a kind of
establishment of their religion to the murderous Papists in Ireland; and Duke
Hamilton's attempts to restore him to his throne without giving any security
for religion or liberty miscarried in England, when the Scots, and not a few of
the Irish renewed their Covenant, with a solemn acknowledgment of sins and
engagement to duties. -- To manifest the fearful perfidy of all authoritative
toleration of gross heresy, blasphemy, idolatry, Popery, and every other form
of encouragement to, or reception of them, the solemn, the religious nature of
these covenants, and their extensive and perpetual obligation must be
considered.

God alone bath a supreme and unlimited authority and right to regulate his
own, and the conduct of all his creatures, Psalm. lxxxiii. 18. Dan. iv. 35.
James iv. 12. But the very constitution of a rational creature, implies a power
derived from him to govern itself, even as men's standing in the relation of
parents, masters, magistrates, or church-rulers, necessarily implies their
power to govern others, -- in subordination to him. By virtue of their divinely
originated authority over others, parents, masters, and other rulers make laws,
or binding rules, for directing the external behavior of those who are
committed to their charge. And by their authority derived from God to rule
their own Spirit, and to govern and keep in subjection their whole body, Prove.
xvi. 32. James iii. 2. 1 Cor. ix. 27. all men are empowered to make for
themselves laws of self engagement, in promises, oaths, vows and covenants,
which extend to their purposes and inclinations as well as to their external
acts. And, as all the authority, which men have over themselves or others, is
derived srom that supreme and independent authority, which is in God himself,
and is communicated to them, by an act of his will, and is implied in his
giving them such a nature and station, it is plain, that no human laws of
authority, or self-engagement, can have any obligation or binding force, but
what are regulated by and subordinated to the divine laws of nature or
revelation, 2 Cor. xiii. 8. and that, if such laws and engagements be lawful,
God, not only does, but must necessarily ratify them, his law requiring the
fulsilment of them, under pain of his highest displeasure, Romans xiii. 1, -- 6.
Mat. v. 33.

As no deputed authority derived from God, can increase that supreme, that
infinite authority, which he has in himself; so no human command or engagement
can increase that infinite obligation to duty, which his law has in itself.
But, if lawful, they have in them a real obligation, distinct, though neither
separated nor separable, from the obligation of God's law. To pretend with
Bellarmine and other Papists, that our promises or vows do not bind us in moral
duties commanded by the law of God, is manifestly absurd. It necessarily
infers, that all human commands of superiors as well as human promises, oaths,
vows, and covenants, are in themselves destitute of all binding force, except
in so far as they relate to such trifling things, as the law of God does not
require of men in such particular truths; and thus saps the foundation of all
relative order and mutual trust and confidence among mankind. Commands of
superiors must be mere declarations of the will of God in his law, and
promises, oaths, vows and covenants must be nothing but mere acknowledgments,
that God's law requires such things from us, -- in so far as relating to moral
duties. It represents the authority which God has in himself, and with which
he has invested men, as his deputies, as so inconsistent and mutually
destructive of each other, that men cannot be bound to the same thing by both.
It represents the law of God as necessarily destructive of the being of an
ordinance appointed by itself, to promote the more exact observance of itself,
-- in so far as that ordinance binds to a conscientious and diligent obedience
to it. It is contrary to the common sense of mankind in every age, who have all
along considered men's promises, oaths and covenants, as binding them to pay
their just debts, perform their just duties of allegiance or the like, and to
declare the truth and nothing but the truth in witness bearing, etc. It is
contrary to scripture, which represents promises, promissory oaths, vows, and
covenants, as things which are to be performed, paid, or fufilled, and which
may possibly be transgressed and broken, Mat. v. 33. Deuteronomy. xxviii. 21, 22, 23.
Eccl. v. 4. Psalm. xxii. 25. and l. 14. and lxi. 8. and lxvi. 13. and lxxvi. 11.
and cxvi. 13, -- 18. and cxix. 106. Isa. xix. 21. Judges xi. 35. Isa. xxiv. 5.
Jer. xxxiv. 18. -- which represents an oath as a strong and decisive
confirmation, putting an end to all doubt or strife, Heb. vi. 16, -- 18. -- and
which in one of the plainest and least figurative chapters of it, repeatedly
represents a vow, as constituted by our binding ourselves, binding our own
souls with a bond, and represents a vow as a bond or obligation, Heb. ISSAR, a
very fast and strait binding bond or obligation, -- as our own bond, that
stands upon or against us, Number. xxx. 2, -- 12. -- Self-binding, self
engagements, is so much the essential form of vows, and of all covenants,
promises, or promissory oaths, whether of God or man, that they cannot exist at
all, or even be conceived of without it, any more than a man without a soul, or
an angel without an understanding and will. To represent vowing as a placing of
ourselves more directly under the law of God, or any command of it; or, as a
placing of ourselves in some new relation to the law, is but an attempt to
render unintelligible that which the Holy Ghost has, in the abovementioned
chapter, labored to make plain, if it does not also import, that we can place
ourselves more directly under the moral law than God has or can place us, or,
more directly than Christ was placed. -- To pretend, that men's commands or
engagements derive their whole obligation from the law of God's requiring us to
obey the one, -- and pay, or fulfill or perform the other, is no less absurd. --
These divine commands, requiring us to obey, pay, perform or fulfill human laws
and engagements, plainly suppose an intrinfic obligation, in these laws and
engagements, and powerfully enforce it. But no law of God can require me to
OBEY a human law, or fulfill an engagement which has no obligation in itself,
any more than the laws of Britain can oblige me to PAY a Bill, or FULFILL a Bond
consisting of nothing but mere ciphers.

The intrinsic obligation of promises, oaths, vows, and covenants which
constitutes their very essence or essential form, is totally and manifestly
distinct from the obligation of the law of God in many respects. (1.) In his
law, God, by the declaration of his will, as our supreme Ruler, binds us, Deuteronomy.
xii. 32. In promises, vows, covenants, and promissory oaths, we, as his
deputy-governors over ourselves, by a declaration of our will, bind ourselves
with a bond, bind our ^uls with our own bond, our own vow, Number, xxx. Psalm
lxvi. 13, 15 and cxix. 106, etc. (2.) The obligation of our promises, oaths and
covenants is always subject to examination by the standard of God's law, as to
both its matter and manner, 1 Thessalonians. v. 21. But it would be presumption,
blasphemous presumption, to examine, Whether, what we know to be the law of God
be right and obligatory, or not, James iv. 11, 12. Isa. viii. 20. Deuteronomy. v. 32.
(3.) The law of God necessarily binds all men to the most absolute perfection
in holiness, be they as incapable of it as they will, Matthew. v. 48. 1 Pet. i.
15, 16. No man can, without mocking and tempting of God, bind himself by vow or
oath to any thing, but what he is able to perform. No man may vow to do any
thing which is not in his own power, and for the performance of which he has
no promise of ability from God. But, no mere man since the fall is able, in
this life either in himself or by any grace received from God, perfectly to
keep the commandments of God, Eccl. vii. 20 James iii. 2. While God remains
God, his law can demand no less than absolute perfection in holiness. While his
word remains true, no mere man since the fall, in this life, can possibly
attain to it; and therefore ought never to promise or vow it. The least
imperfection in holiness, however involuntary, breaks the law of God, and is
even contrary to the duty of our relative stations of hushands, parents,
masters, magistrates, ministers, wives, children, servants or people, 1 John
iii. 4. Romans vii. 14, 23, 24. But it is only by that which is, in some respect,
voluntary sinfulness, that we break our lawful vows, Psalm. xliv. 47. Nothing
can more clearly mark the distinction of the two obligations, than this
particular. There is no evading the force of it, but either by adopting the
Arminian new law of sincere obedience, or by adopting the Popish perfection of
saints in this life. (4.) The law of God binds all men for ever, whether in
heaven or hell, Psalm. iii. 7, 8. No human law or self-engagement binds men, but
only in this life, in which they remain imperfect, and are encompassed with
temptations to seduce them from their duty. In heaven they have no need of such
helps to duty, and in hell they cannot be profited by them.

The obligation of lawful promises, oaths, vows and covenants, as well as of
human laws, respecting moral duties, however distinct, is no more separable
from the obligation of God's law, than Christ's two distinct natures are
separable, the one from the other, but closely connected in manifold respects.
In binding ourselves to necessary duties, and to other things so long and so
far as is conducive thereto, God's law as the only rule to direct us how to
glorify and enjoy him, is made the rule of our engagement. Our vow is no new
rule of duty, but a new bond to make the law of God our rule. Even Adam's
engagement to perfect obedience in the covenant of works was nothing else. His
sallibility in his estate of innocence, made it proper, that he should be bound
by his own consent or engagement, as well as by the authority of God. Our
imperfection in this life, and the temptations which surround us, make it
needful, that we, in like manner, should be bound to the same rule, both by the
authority of God, and our own engagements. It is in the law of God, that all
our deputed authority to command others, or to bind ourselves is allotted to
us. The requirement of moral duties by the law of God obliges us to use all
lawful means to promote the performance of them; and hence requires human laws
and self-engagements, and the observance of them as conducive to it. Nay they
are also expressly required in his law, as his ordinances for helping and
hedging us in to our duty. In making lawful vows, as well as in making human
laws, we exert the deputed authority of God, the supreme Lawgiver, granted to
us in his law, in the manner which his law prescribes, and in obedience to its
prescription. In forming our vows as an instituted ordinance of God's worship,
which he has required us to receive, observe, and keep pure and entire, Psalm.
lxxvi. 11. and cxix. 106. and lvi. 12. Isa. xix. 18, 21. and xlv. 23, 24. and
xliv. 5. Jer. l. 5. 2 Cor. viii. 5. -- we act precisely according to the
direction of his law, and in obedience to his authority in it, -- binding
ourselves with a bond, binding our soul with a bond, Number. xxx. 2, -- 11. --
binding ourselves by that which we utter with our lips, ver. 2, 6, 12. --
binding ourselves with a binding oath, -- binding ourselves -- binding our soul
by our own vow -- our own bond, ver. 4, 7, 14. In forming our vow, we,
according to the prescription of his own law, solemnly constitute God, who is
the supreme Lawgiver and Lord of the conscience, -- the witness of our
self-engagement, and the Guarantee, graciously to reward our evangelical
fulfillment of it, and justly to punish our perfidious violation of it. The more
punctual and faithful observation of God's law, notwithstanding our manifold
infirmities and temptations, and the more effectual promoting of his glory
therein, is the END of our self-engagements, as well as of human laws of
authority. And by a due regard to their binding force, as above stated, is this
end promoted, -- as hereby the obligation of God's law is the more deeply
impressed on our minds, and we are shut up to obedience to it, and deterred
from transgressing it -- In consequence of our formation of our vow, with
respect to its matter, manner, and end, as prescribed by God, He does, and
necessarily must ratify it in all its awful solemnities, requiring us by his
law, to pay it as a bond of debt, -- to perform and fulfill it as an engagement
to duties, and an obligation which stands upon or against us, Number. xxx. 5, 7,
9, 11. with Deuteronomy. xxiii. 21, -- 23. Psalm lxxvi. 11. and l. 14. Eccl. v. 4, 5.
Mat. v. 33. In obedience to this divine requirement, and considering our vow,
in that precise form, in which God in his law, adopts and ratifies it, and
requires it to be fulfilled, We pay, perform, and fulfill it as a bond,
wherewith we, in obedience to Him, have bound ourselves, to endeavor universal
obedience to his law, as our only rule of faith and manners. Whoever does not,
in his attempts to obey human laws or to fulfill self-enagements, consider them
as having that binding force which the law of God allows them, he pours
contempt on them, as ordinances of God, and on the law of God for allowing them
a binding force. Thus, through maintaining the superadded but subordinate
obligation of human laws, and of self-engagements to moral duties, we do not
make void, but establish the obligation of God's law.

The obligation of a vow, by which we engage ourselves to necessary duties
commanded by the law of God, must therefore be INEXPRESSIBLY SOLEMN. Not only
are we required by the law of God before our vow was made; but we are bound, in
that performance, to fulfill our vow, as an engagement or obligation founded in
the supreme authority of his law warranting us to make it. We are bound to
fulfill it as a mean of further impressing his authority manifested in his law,
upon our own consciences, -- as a bond securing and promoting a faithful
obedience to all his commandments We are bound to fulfill it, in obedience to
that divine authority, by derived power from which, we as governors of
ourselves made it to promote his honor. In those or like respects, our
fulfillment of our vows is a direct obedience to his whole law. -- We are
moreover bound to fulfill it, as a solemn ordinance of God's worship, the
essential form of which lies in self-obligation, and must be received,
observed, kept pure and entire, and holily and reverently used, and so in
obedience to Command I. II. III. We are bound to fulfill it, as an ordinance of
God, in which we have pledged our own truth, sincerity and faithfulness; and so
in obedience to Command IX. I. II. III. We are bound to fulfill it, as a solemn
deed or grant, in which we have made over our persons, property, and service to
the Lord and his church; and so in obedience to Command I. II. VIII. nay, in
obedience to the whole law of love and equity, Mat. xxii. 37, 39. and vii. 12.
We are bound to fulfill it from regard to the declarative glory of God, as the
witness of our making of it, that he may appear to have been called to attest
nothing, but sincerity and truth; and so in obedience to Command I. III. IX. We
are bound to fulfill it from a regard to truth, honesty, and reverence of God,
as things not only commanded by his law, but good in themselves, agreeable to
his very nature, and therefore necessarily commanded by him, -- and from a
detestation of falsehood, injustice, and contempt of God, as things
intrinsically evil, contrary to his nature, and therefore necessarily forbidden
in his law; and thus in regard to his authority in his whole law, as
necessarily holy, just and good We are bound to fulfill it, from a regard to the
holiness, justice, faithfulness, majesty, and other perfections of God, as the
Guarantee of it, into whose hand we have committed the determination and
execution of its awful sanction, -- as the gracious rewarder of our fidelity,
or just revenger of our perfidy, -- and hence in regard to our own happiness,
as concerned in that sanction -- In fine, We are bound to fulfill it in
obedience to that command of God, which adopts and ratifies it, requiring us to
pay, fulfill, or perform our vow, oath or covenant, Psalm. l. 14. and lxxvi. 11.
Eccl. v. 4. Deuteronomy. xxiii. 21, -- 23 Mat. v. 33.

In VIOLATING such a vow, We do not merely transgress the law of God, as
requiring the duties engaged, before the vow was made. But we also rebel
against, and profane that divine warrant which we had to make our vow. We
profane that authority over ourselves in the exercise of which we made the vow,
and consequentially that supreme authority in God, from which ours was derived;
and so strike against the foundation of the whole law. We manifest a contempt
of that law, which regulated the matter and manner of our vow. We profane the
vow, as an ordinance of God's worship, appointed in his law. By trampling on a
noted mean of promoting obedience to all the commands of God, We mark our
hatred of them, and prepare ourselves to transgress them, and endeavor to
remove the awe of God's authority and terror of his judgments from our
consciences. We blasphemously represent the Most High as a willing Witness to
our treachery and fraud. We pour contempt on him, as the Guarantee of our
engagements, as if he inclined not, or durst not avenge our villainy. Contrary
to the truth and faithfulness required in his law, and pledged in our vow, we
plunge ourselves into the most criminal deceit and falsehood. Contrary to
equity, we rob God and his church of that which we had solemnly devoted to
their service. Contrary to devotion, we banish the serious impression of God's
adorable perfections. Contrary to good neighborhood, we render ourselves a
plague and curse, and encourage others to the most enormous wickedness.
Contrary to the design of our creation and preservation, we reject the glory of
God, and obedience to his law from being our end. Meanwhile, we trample on the
ratification of our vow, by the divine law in all its awful solemnities, and
manifold connections with itself, -- and requirement to pay it.

It is manifest, that our covenanting ancestors understood their vows in the
manner above represented. They never represent them as mere acknowledgments of
the obligation of God's law, or as placing themselves in some new relation to
God's law, or more directly under any command of it. But declare that a man
binds himself by a promissory oath to what is good and just -- It cannot oblige
to sin: but in any thing not sinful, being taken, it binds to performance. --
By a vow we more strictly bind ourselves to necessary duties Confess. XXII. 3
4, 6.
. And, in expressions almost innumerable, they represent the obligation of
their vows as distinct and different, though not separable from the law of God
Stevenson's hist. P. 345, 346, 347, 348, 354, 384, 433. etc. Sir James Stewart,
afterward advocate to K. William, in Naphtali, P. 360. and Jus populi divinum,
p. 118. Brown in Apologetical Relation, p. 341, 363, 364. Covenanters Plea, p
9. 10, 68. Durham on commands, p. 14, 121, 122, 129, 120, 131, 132. 135. 137.
138 See also R. Erskine's works, Vol. I. p. 62, 170, 303, 419, 489. Vol. II. p.
109, 142, 224, 227. Discourse at renewing of the Covenants at (...), p. 11.
Synod's Catechism on the third command, Q. 40, 50.
. They no less plainly declared, that no man may bind himself by oath to any
thing, but what he is ABLE and resolved to perform; -- no man may vow any thing
which is not in his own power, and for the performance of which he has no
promise of ability from God Hall on Gospel worship, Vol. II. p. 378, 385.
. And in their several forms of covenant, they never once pretend to engage
performing of duties in that absolute persection which is required by the law
of God, -- but sincerely, really, and constantly to ENDEAVOR the performance
of them.

II. These public covenants of our ancestors, in which they abjured the Popish
and other abominations, may be called NATIONAL, because the representatives, or
the greater or better part of the nation, jointly entered into them, as
covenants of duty grafted upon the covenant of grace. But they ought never to
be called national or civil, in order to exclude them from being
church-covenants, and thus diminish the solemnity or continuance of their
obligation. Both church and state jointly promoted them, and in different
respects they related to both, being at once covenants of men with God, and
with one another. In so far as therein they covenanted with one another, with
an immediate view to promote or preserve what belonged to the state, they
served instead of a civil bond. But at the same time, they covenanted with one
another as church members, in subordination to their covenanting with God
himself as their principal party. -- The ratifications given to these covenants
by the State were really civil ratifications, which adopted them as a part of
the laws of the State. -- But that no more rendered them merely civil
covenants, than the civil ratifications given to, and embodying our Confessions
of Faith, made them merely civil confessions, and mere acts of Parliament, --
or than the repeated legal establishment of our Protestant religion in
doctrine, worship, discipline and government, made it a mere civil religion.
These covenants were sometimes used as means of promoting civil purposes. But
that will no more prove them merely civil, than the use of fasting and prayer
for advancing or securing the welfare of the State, will prove them a mere
civil worshipping of God. -- These covenants were formed for promoting the
happiness of both church and state, and were calculated to answer that end. But
so is the christian religion and all the ordinances of it, if duly observed, 1 Timothy i. 8. Prove. xiv. 34. I admit, that there was sometimes too mixed an
interference of civil and ecclesiastical power in enjoining these covenants.
But abuse of things does not alter their nature. God's ordinances are too often
used in a carnal, sensual and devilish manner, without ever being rendered such
themselves. It is only, as really religious covenants, and not as civil or
state covenants, they can be adopted into ordination vows or baptismal
engagements. And that they were such, the following arguments evince.

1. The Covenanters themselves, who best knew their own intentions do, times
without number, represent them as Vows, which their Confession declares to be a
religious ordinance, as covenants with God, which must be religious, if any
dealings with him be so Chap. XXII. 6. Lar. Cat. Q. 108. Calderwood's Hist. P.
307, 318. Dickson, Henderson and Cant's answers to doctors of Aberdeen, p. 8,
9, 61, 50. Act of Assembly, 1638, p. 21. Supplication of Ass. 1639, to K.
Charles. Letter of Ass. 1645, to Dutch.
. The Assembly in 1649, in their last session, represent them as consirmations
of that right which the Father had given Christ to the ends of the earth. --
They, times without number, call them religious covenants, -- a religious
covenant with God, -- among themselves, -- a voluntary covenanting with God, --
a more free service to God, than that which is commanded by civil authority;
and hence distinguish their covenant, as having a religious and perpetual
obligation, -- from acts of parliament establishing religion, which are
changeable, and of the nature of a civil ratification Stevenson's history of
church of Scotland, P. 343, 347, 349, 350, 348.
. Concerning the Solemn League, Principal Baillie says, The English were for a
civil league, we for a religious. They were brought to us in this Baillie's
Letters, Vol. I. P. 381.
. The Assembly 1645, in their Letter to the Dutch, say of it, "Having made a
religious covenant, even as bound to God by the firmest bond, that God might
avert his wrath already smoking and hanging over our heads, -- a covenant
renewed with God, (which shows that the Scots considered it as a real
renovation of their national covenant) a religious covenant with God and among
ourselves. -- If it should seem meet to your prudence to think of joining in
the religious fellowship of such a covenant." How absurd, for persons of weaker
capacities and less instructed by the Spirit of God, to pretend, at this
distance of time, to know better the nature of their covenants, than themselves
did!

2. Except perhaps in 1581, the church, in her General Assemblies, or
Commissions, took the lead in promoting the covenanting work. And the state,
when it did any thing, did little more than ratify the deeds of the church
appointing these covenants to be sworn Calderwood, P. 220, 248, 254. Act of
Ass. 1639. Aug. 30th, with act of convention that day. Act of Commission, Oct.
11th. with act of Commissioners of Estates, Oct. 12th, 1643. and act of Parl.
July 15th, 1644. Act of Commission, Oct. 6th, 1648, with act of Committee of
Estates, Oct. 14th, and act of Parl. Jan. 5th, 1649.
. Nay to me it appears evident, that even from 1581 to 1595, the national
covenant was subscribed more in obedience to the church, than in obedience to
the state.

3. In A. D. 1596 and 1638, in which the covenanting work was most delightfully
carried on, in Scotland, the state had no influence at all in promoting it. Nay
in 1638, the court did all it could, to oppose the covenanters procedure.
Indeed our zealous ancestors in the preamble to their bond of that year quote
many acts of Parliament in favors of that religion to which they engaged, and
of the steadfast maintenance of it. But they never condsiered these acts as a
part of their bond, or as a command to covenant in their manner; but as an
evidence that they were doing nothing rebellious or treasonable, as their
adversaries pretended. Nay, till 1640, no act of Parliament enjoined
covenanting work.

4. All along in Scotland, England and Ireland, ministers not statesmen, were
the ordinary administrators of these covenants. And upon religious occasions on
the Lord's day, before administration of his Supper, or solemn fasting, were
they appointed to be taken Calderwood, P. 248. Stevenson, p. 291, 294.
Baillie's Let. Vol. I. p. 45. Livingston's life, p. 22. Wilson's defense, p.
237, -- 243. Letter of Ass 1640, to Helvetians. Act of Ass. Oct. 1581. Acts of
Ass. Aug. 8th, 17th, and Commission, Oct. 11th, 1643, and of June 3d, 1644. and
Aug. 7th, 1648, and of Commission and Committee of Estates, Oct. 6th, 14th,
1648, and of Parl. Jan. 5th, 1649, and of Eng. Parl, Feb. 2d, 9 h, 1644.
. If, without law, laymen sometimes administered them, that will no more prove
them merely state covenants, than mid-wives baptizing of children, will
constitute baptism a midwife ordinance. To protect them from the insults of
Popish and other profane opposers, the ministers in A. D. 1590, had a royal
commission, and a number of attendants appointed them, when they administered
the covenant. But that will no more prove, that they acted as civil judges,
than that ministers, receiving an order from King or Parliament to observe a
public fast, or hold a Synod, they must, in their fasting and judging work,
renounce Christ's sole headship over his church, and adopt the magistrate into
his place. -- If it is pretended, that ministers marrying of persons is not a
religious but civil work, I insist, that the marriage of Christians, which is
to be only in the Lord, -- to bring up an holy seed for Him and his church, and
the family to be a church in the house, and the parties mutual duty copied
from, and influenced by the example of Christ, -- and as it is a covenant of
God which is not like civil contracts, dissolvable by the will of parties, be
plainly proven to be a merely civil and nowise religious bond. If bishops, as
spiritual lords, administer the king's coronation oath, I leave it to others to
explain and defend their conduct. -- It is certain, the defense of religion is
a leading article in that oath.

5. There appears nothing in the origination of these covenants, which can
prove them merely civil. Nothing appears in the five bonds of our Reformers, in
1557, 1559, 1560, 1563, but may well accord to the nature of a religious
engagement. As Christians, and not merely as civil lords, they bound
themselves, -- chiefly to promote the true religion according to God's word. --
Had K. James been not only the original adviser, but even the framer of the
National Covenant, it might nevertheless have been a religious bond. The psalms
which K. David penned and James versified, are not thereby rendered merely
civil. The fast which K. Jehoshaphat appointed, and at which he publicly
prayed, was really religious, not merely civil. Our Confessions of Faith and
Protestant religion were not rendered merely civil, though in 1560 and 1690,
the State took the lead in the ratification and establishment before any
General Assembly of these periods. It is not improbable, that the ministers of
the church had a principal hand in the origination of our national covenant. In
1580, James was about fourteen years of age, and by no transcendent genius,
qualified for the work. Just before, and quickly after, we find him marking his
hatred of true reformation. His ruling favorites were not a little suspected
and complained of, by the zealous clergy, as addicted to Popery. -- Through the
tearing out of the minutes of four sessions of the Assembly, October 1580, by
some parasite of the court, Calderwood's history, at least his printed
abridgment, is imperfect on this period. He only says, that "the second
Confession of Faith, i. e. national covenant, commonly called the King's
Confession, was subscribed by the King and his household, i. e. privy council,
January 28th, 158^, which is but an appendix to the First, i e. Scotch
Confession, and comprehends it; and so both are one, -- that a charge was
subscribed by the King, March 2d, whereby subjects of all ranks were charged to
subscribe the Confession, (national covenant) and requiring ministers to demand
said subscription, and to censure such as refused. -- The General Assembly in
April approved the said Confession, and enjoined the subscription of it. -- The
Assembly in October peremptorily enjoined ministers, to see that this
Confession of Faith be subscribed, by all under their charge. -- The Assembly
in February 1588, enjoined all ministers to deal with noblemen and gentry to
subscribe this Confession of Faith. -- In March 1590, the privy council, at the
earnest desire of the Assembly, appointed about ninety-six ministers to conveen
before them, persons of all ranks to subscribe the Confession and general Bond.
-- The Assembly appointed the Confession and Bond to be subscribed anew on
copies printed by Robert Waldgrave," (in 4to, and fronted with these
scriptures, Josh. xxiv. 15. 2 Kings xi. 17. Isa. xliv. 5. which certainly
respect religious covenants) Hist. P. 94, 95, 102, 121, 220, 248, 254.
. Petry affirms, "That Romish dispensations for Papists to swear the oaths, or
do other things required of them, providing they continued true to the Pope in
their heart, -- being showed to K. James (but whether by ministers appointed to
watch over the dangers of the church, he says not) occasioned the formation and
swearing of the national covenant, in order to defeat the intention of them.
Mr. Craig, a celebrated minister, formed the draught of it at the desire of
King James," (and perhaps instigated James to desire it) Hist. part 3d, P. 406
. -- With respect to James' conduct in the drawing, and first subscription of
this covenant, Spotswood, who had the best access to original vouchers, had he
been inclined to a faithful use of them, says, "So careful was the King to have
the church satisfied and the rumors of the Court's defection from the
(Protestant) religion repressed Hist. p. 308.
" -- Remarks in Williamson's Sermon, 1703, says, "The Presbyterian party, A. D
1580, got an act of Assembly at Dundee against Episcopacy. That did not content
them. They raised mighty jealousies against the King and his court, as if they
intended to re-introduce Popery. To convince his subjects of his sincere
adherence to the Protestant religion, His Majesty caused his minister John
Craig to compile the negative Confession, (national covenant) in the form of an
oath P. 25.
." Collier says, "This covenant was signed, either by the king or the lords of
the council, at the request of the General Assembly Hist. Vol. II. P. 788.
." Rapin says, "It was drawn up by order of the General Assembly Hist. Fol.
Vol. II. P. 303.
."

The origination of the Solemn League and Covenant was equally consistent with
a religious vow. Not a few of the most pious clergymen in England had all
along, from Elizabeth's establishment of the Protestant religion, hated part of
the ceremonies, and the lordly power of the bishops. Many of these, driven from
their charge, by the Prelatical persecution, under Elizabeth and James, and
Charles I had been compassionately taken into the families of great men, for
the education of their children. Their instruction and example were remarkably
blessed, for rendering their pupils and others intelligent and pious. They
perceived the encroachments made upon their religion and liberties by Abp. Laud
and his assistants, and not a few of them conceived a strong relish for what
was then called Puritanism. The success of the Scotch covenanters, in their
struggles with the tyrannical court, made many of the English wish and hope for
a similar deliverance. In their treaty with Charles 1641, the Scots requested,
that the English should be brought to a reformed uniformity with themselves in
religion. The Scotch ministers, who attended their Commissioners at London, in
forming that treaty of peace, by their instructions and example, recommended
their Presbyterian reformation not a little to many of the most learned and
pious of the English. A correspondence for promoting a religious uniformity
between the two churches was carried on by a number of the English clergymen
with the Scotch Assemblies, 1641, 1642, 1643; and by the English parliament
with the Assemblies, 1642, 1643. At their request, the Assembly appointed
Messrs Henderson, Rutherford, Gillespy and others, to assist the Westminster
Assembly in compiling ecclesiastical Standards, of doctrine, worship,
discipline and government. Alarmed by the terrible massacre of the Protestants
in Ireland, and reduced to stra^ts in their war with K. Charles, the English
Parliament requested, that for promoting and establishing uniformity in
religion, and preserving their respective liberties, the two nations might be
more closely connected by a mutual League. The Letter from a multitude of
English ministers, -- the papers from the English parliament and their
Commissioners, and the Scotch Assembly's answers, manifest that an uniformity
of religion was the principal thing proposed by this League. Henry Vane and
perhaps some other English Commissioners, nevertheless, from a dislike of the
Scotch Presbyterianism, thought to have gone no further than a civil league,
but the Scots being positive for a religious one, he yielded It appeared from
that readiness and avidity, with which the Solemn League was received in
England, that it answered to the wishes of his constituents. After the
Westminster Assembly had examined and approved it, the English Parliament
appointed it to be sworn by persons of all ranks, and issued forth instructions
and an exhortation for promoting that work Neal's history of Puritans, Vol. I,
II, III. Naphtali, p. 142. Stevenson, Vol. III. Baillie's Let. Vol. I. Acts of
Ass 1642, 1643. Paton's collection of Confessions, p. 58. -- 107, 558, -- 546.
Rapin, Vol. II. 481, -- 484.
.

6. There is nothing in the matter of these covenants, which does not enter
into the faith and practice of true religion. They principally engaged to the
belief, profession and practice of the true Protestant religion, in doctrine,
worship, discipline and government; and renounced, and promised the regular
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, and whatever else should, by the word of God,
be found contrary to said doctrine, worship, discipline, and government, and
holy practice. The preservation of the King's person and authority, and of the
rights and privileges of the parliament and nation was promised as a thing
subordinated to the interests of religion, in which view, it is a very
necessary and important branch of practical Christianity, Romans xiii. 1, -- 8. 1
Pet. ii. 13, 17. Tit iii. 1.

7. The manner of covenanting represented in these covenants, corresponds not
to merely civil but to religious Bonds. In their Bond 1581, 1590. etc. Our
ancestors covenanted as thoroughly resolved in the truth by the word and Spirit
of God, -- as believing it with their heart, -- and joining themselves to the
reformed kirk in doctrine, faith, religion, and use of the holy sacraments, as
lively members of the same, in Christ their Head. If these expressions be but
understood, as relating to the visible church, her concerns as such, are of a
spiritual and religious nature, John xviii. 36. Their covenanting in 1596, was
so much detached from the State, and so religiously conducted, that you dare
not pretend it to have been state-covenanting; yet they viewed it as a mere
renovation of their national covenant, in a manner suited to their
circumstances. Shield in Hind let loose, De Foe, Crook-shanks, and Stevenson,
and Petry in their church-histories, and Gillespy in his English Popish
ceremonies, call it a renovation of their national covenant Hist. on A. D.
1576, English Ceremonies, Part 4. p. 35.
. Epistola Philadelphi subjoined to Altar Damascenum, says, "Their sacred and
solemn covenant was renewed, in which men of all ranks covenanted with God,
that they would adhere to the religion and discipline P. 7.
." Calderwood, who was perhaps present, says, "The end of the convention March
1596, was to enter into a new league with God, -- holding up their hands, --
entering into a new league and covenant with God, -- that the covenant might be
renewed in Synods, after the same manner. -- The covenant was renewed in
Synods. -- The covenant was renewed in Presbytries. -- The covenant was renewed
in Parishes Hist. P. 317, 318, 323, 324, 325.
. -- In 1604, the whole brethren of the Presbytry of St. Andrews and Synod of
Lothian, subscribed the confession of faith and national covenant anew, like as
they subscribed the same -- in the year 1596, -- which confession, i. e.
national covenant is solemnly renewed in the covenant celebrated in the general
and provincial Assemblies, Presbytries, and Kirk-sessions, in the year 1596;
and how shall any be heard against that which he has solemnly sworn or
subscribed Hist. P. 484, 485, 752.
? The Assembly 1638, Ses. 17th, say, "The covenant was renewed in 1596." The
preamble of the covenant, 1648, affirms, that "the Assembly 1596, and all the
kirk judicatures, with the concurrence of the nobility, gentry and burgesses,
did with many tears acknowledge before God the breach of the national covenant,
and engaged themselves to reformation." -- In 1638, they covenanted in
obedience to the command of God, conform to the practice of the godly in sormer
times, and according to the laudable example of their worthy and religious
progenitors, and of many yet living among them, ( i. e. who had covenanted in
1596.) -- They covenanted as agreeing with their heart to the true religion, --
and from the knowledge and conscience of their duty to God, their king and
their country, without worldly respect or inducement, so far as human infirmity
will suffer; -- as Christians renewing their covenant with God; -- as resolved
to be good examples of all goodness, soberness and righteousness. -- In 1643,
they covenanted as unseignedly desirous to be humbled for their sins, in not
duly receiving Jesus Christ, and walking worthy of him. -- In 1648, they
covenanted in imitation of their penitent predecessors in 1596, -- as deeply
affected with their sins, especially the undervaluing of the gospel, that they
had not labored in the power thereof, and received Christ into their hearts;
-- and as really and sincerely penitent; denying themselves, and resolving not
to lean on carnal confidences, but to lean to the Lord. Dare you pretend, that
all these expressions, in their several bonds, represent men, merely as members
of a commonwealth, employed in mere state-covenanting?

8. The ends of their covenanting expressed in their several bonds are
religious not merely civil. In 1581-1596 and 1604 they covenanted in order to
promote and preserve the profession and practice of the true Protestant
religion; -- in order to advance the kingdom of Christ, as the principal, and
the welfare of their country as their subordinate end -- In 1638, they
covenanted as a means of obtaining the Lord's special savor, and of recovering
the purity of religion Stevenson's history, P. 284, 351.
. In 1643, they covenanted that they and their posterity might as brethren,
live together in says and love, and the Lord delight to dwell among them; and
that the Lord might be one, and his name one, in all the three kingdoms, that
the Lord might turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and establish these
churches and kingdoms in truth and peace. -- In 1648 they covenanted, for
advancing the knowledge of God, and holiness and righteousness in the land.

9. There is nothing in these covenants, or in the seasons of taking them,
which does not perfectly harmonize with a taking hold of God's covenant of
grace. Men's beli^ profession and practice of the true Protestant religion, and
laboring to promote the welfare of their king and country, agree well to it,
Tit. ii. 11, 12, 14. and iii. 1, 8, 14. Prove xxiii. 23. 1 Pet. ii. 13, 17. Romans
xiii. 1, -- 8, 11, -- 14. -- Their voluntary joining themselves to the church
of God as lively members in Christ, -- and agreeing with their whole heart to
his true religion and ordinances, agree exactly to it, Psalm. xxii. 27, -- 31.
and cx. 3. 2 Cor. viii. 5. Having before their eyes the glory of God, and
advancement of the kingdom of Christ, and their earnest and constant
endeavors, in their stations, that they and their posterity might live in
faith and love, delightfully agree with it, Mat. vi. 9, 10. 1 Cor. x 31. Ephesians.
iii. 14, -- 19. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 1. Psalm. lxxviii. 4, -- 9. Isa. xxxviii. 19. An
unfeigned desire to be humbled for their sin in not duly receiving Christ, and
walking worthy of him, and for their unworthy use of the sacraments; -- a real
and sincere repentance, self-denial, and resolution to lean upon the Lord
alone, accord excellently with it, Ezekiel. xvi. 62, 63 and xxxvi. 25, -- 32.
Phil. iii. 3, 8, -- 14. The covenanting seasons being remarkable for trouble or
danger, -- the out pouring of the Holy Ghost, -- and deep convictions of sin,
are precisely those marked out for that work in scripture, Joel ii 12, 13.
Psalm. l. 14, 15. and lxvi. 13, 14. Ezekiel. xx. 36, 37. Hos. ii, 7, 14. and v. 15.
and iii. 4, 5, Isa. xliv. 3, -- 5. Acts ii. 2 Cor. viii 5. Jer. l. 4, 5.

These covenants indeed connect fulfillment with gracious rewards, and violation
with fearful judgments See Covenant-Bonds of 1581, 1638, 1643, 1648.
. But this annexed sanction no more renders them covenants of works, than so
help me God, in the conclusion of oaths, renders every oath a covenant of
works. Notwithstanding this sanction annexed to the Israelites covenants of
duty with God, they might well stand steadfast in the covenant of grace, Lev.
xxvi. Deuteronomy. xxvii, -- xxx. 1 Kings ix. In this world, the Law, as a rule of
life, has an annexed sanction of gracious rewards and fearful chastisements,
as well as it has as a covenant, one of legal rewards and punishments, Psalm.
i. Isa iii. 10, 11. Exodus xx 6, 12. Romans ii. 7, -- 10. and viii. 13. Heb. xi.
6. Gal. vi. 7, -- 10. 1 Cor. xv. 58. Without Neonomianism, the Holy Ghost calls
that which is annexed to believers obedience, a reward, and that which is
connected with their disobedience, a punishment, Psalm. xix 11. and lviii. 11.
Prove. xi. 18. and xxiii. 18. Mat. v. 12. and x. 41. Genesis xv. 1. Ezra ix. 13.
Amos iii. 2. 2 Cor. ii. 6 Lam. iii. 39 Psalm xcix. 8. "The threatenings of
God's law show believers what even their sins deserve, and what afflictions in
this world they may expect for them, although freed from the curse thereof,
threatened by the law. The promises of it show them God's approbation of
obedience, and what blessings they may expect upon the performance thereof,
although not as due to them by the law as a covenant of works; so as a man's
doing good, and refraining from evil, because the law encourages the one and
deterreth from the other, is no evidence of his being under the law, and not
under grace Confess. XIX. 6, 7. Marrow, Part 2d P. 14, 144, -- 147.
"

10 The remarkable effusion of the Spirit of God, which attended the swearing
of these covenants, for the conviction, conversion, and confirmation of
multitudes, fixing in their hearts such a deep sense of religion, as all the
profaneness and persecution of twenty eight years could not eradicate, -- is no
contemptible evidence that He looked upon them as religious, not merely state
covenants. It is at our infinite hazard, if we call that common and unclean,
which God has so singularly honored.

OBJECT. I. "Our Covenanters characterizing themselves Noblemen, Barons,
Burgesses and Commons, proves their covenants to be mere civil covenants."
ANSW. Will then others characterizing themselves ministers render them, at the
same time, church-covenants? Has Solomon's denominating himself King of
Israel, in his Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, rendered these two books merely
civil, not religious? If, in a Bond or Bill, I denominate myself minister of
the gospel, Will that render the Bond or Bill religious and ecclesiastical?
(2.) As they never used such characters in their bonds, but when they
covenanted contrary to their King's will, they probably intended no more by
them, than merely to mark the great harmony of all ranks, for the encouragement
of their friends, and the terror of their malicious enemies. (3.) There was no
irreligion, in subjecting themselves and all their honors to the service of
Jesus Christ, as made of God Head over all things to his Church, Revel. xxi. 24.

OBJECT. II. "In 1638, and 1643, they framed their covenants to admit
Episcopalians and Independents, whom they would not have admitted to the
sacraments." ANSW. As in taking these covenants, men bound themselves to the
regular reformation of every thing found sinful, when tried by the word of God,
our ancestors agreeable to Romans xiv. 1. Isaiah xxxv. 3, 4. were willing to help
forward the weak, and admit to their covenant and church fellowship, every
person, who appeared willing to receive more light. even though they were not
in every respect, equally enlightened and reformed as themselves. But, I defy
you to prove, that they excluded one upright covenanter from their religious
communion. (2.) The covenants of 1638 and 1643, were not framed to admit any
who resolved obstinately to adhere to Episcopacy or Independency. In the bond
of 1638, men bound themselves to forbear the practice of Episcopalian
government, and of the articles of Perth, till they should be TRIED and ALLOWED
in a free General Assembly. The covenanters declare, that their intention in
that bond, was against all innovations and corruptions Stevenson's hist. P. 351.
. In the covenant of 1643, that paragraph, which peculiarly respected the
Protestants in England and Ireland was prudently suited to the weakness of many
of them. But there is nothing in it, which favors either Episcopacy or
Independency. The preservation of the reformation attained in Scotland sworn
to, excluded them both. If then Erastians or Independents, and others
dissembled with God, and their brethren, in taking it, they, not the covenant,
are blameable. Men's hypocritical reception of the sacraments will not render
them civil ordinances. (3.) You can never prove, that the covenant of 1538 was
tendered to the Doctors of Aberdeen, after they had shown their obstinate
attachment to Prelacy. Or that Philip Nigh, or any others, after manifesting
their obstinate attachment to Independency, had the covenant of 1643, tendered
to them by any truly zealous covenanter. Baillie affirms, that the Scots were
peremptory against keeping open a door to Independency in England Committee of
Westminster Ass. answers to Independen's, p. 106, -- 112. Wilsons defense, p.
304. Bail. let. Vol. I. p. 301.
.

OBJECT. III. "The imposition of these covenants under civil penalties, proves
them to have been merely state covenants." ANSW. No more than the requirement
of men under civil penalties, to partake, at least once a year, of the Lord's
Supper, rendered it a merely civil ordinance. An ordinance may remain
religious, though a civil sanction should be sinfully annexed to it. (2.) If,
which I do not, you believe, that Asa and Josiah, by penal laws, compelled men
to take their covenants, you can scarce condemn our covenanters annexing civil
penalties to the refusal of their bonds, especially as they knew, it would
scarce come from any, but such as were malignant enemies to the civil as well
as religious liberties of the nation. (3.) In 1596, 1638, 1648, and 1649, these
covenants had no penalty either civil or ecclesiastical annexed to the not
swearing of them, without any hint from the covenanters, that this altered the
nature of the engagement.

OBJECT. IV. "Our ancestors gave up with their covenanting work, whenever they
got the state of the nation settled by means of it; and having got their civil
liberties otherwise secured at the Revolution, they never covenanted at all."
ANSW. (1.) Did ten years of murderous invasion and outrageous contention, and
twenty-eight years of horrible profaneness and persecution make our nation so
happy, that covenanting with God our deliverer was no more necessary? Or, Have
the fearful profanation of the name of God by unnecessary and wicked oaths, or
the shocking bribery and perjury, too common in the election of our
Representatives in Parliament, and our other outrageous abominations, rendered
Britain so holy, that these covenants need no more be regarded? (2.) Not the
alteration of the national affairs to the better, but the alteration of men's
hearts to the worse, made covenanting with God to be so contemned at the
Restoration and Revolution.

III. That these solemn and religious covenants with God, in which all gross
heresy, blasphemy, idolatry, Popery, and other abominations have been
repeatedly abjured, bind not only the immediate swearers or subscribers, but
all their posterity and other representees, in all generations following, to a
saithful performance of every thing engaged, must now be demonstrated.

1. That which is engaged in these covenants, being moral duty, commanded by
the law of God, is of perpetual obligation. The whole faith and practice to
which we therein engage are stated from the oracles of God, in our excellent
Standards. If the matter in itself, were contrary to God's law, no human
covenant could bind us, or any represented by us, to it for a moment. We can
have no power from God to bind ourselves or others to any thing sinful, 2 Cor.
xiii. 8. Nor can any human deed be valid in opposition to his supreme
authority. -- If the matter were indifferent, no vow or promissory oath could
lawfully constitute a perpetual obligation, as the alteration of circumstances
might render it very unexpedient and unedifying, 1 Cor. vi. 12. and x. 23. and
xvi. 14 Romans xiv. 19. But if that which is engaged, be precisely, what every
person, in every age or circumstance, is bound to, by the antecedent tie of the
law of God, no man can be, in the least, abridged of any lawful liberty, by
being brought under the most solemn obligation of an oath or vow. -- The
strictest fulfillment of it cannot but tend to the real profit of every one
concerned, both in his personal and his social capacity, Psalm. xix. 11. 1 Cor.
xv. 58. Isa iii. 10. Proverbs xiv. 34. Romans ii. 1, -- 10. It is therefore for
the advantage of us and our posterity, to be hedged in, and bound up to the
most exact conformity to God's law, by every mean which he requires or allows,
in his word, -- even as it is for our advantage to have our liberty bounded by
the ledges of bridges. -- The law of God requires us to do every thing which is
calculated to promote or secure our own or our children's walking in the truth,
Genesis xvii. 7. Psalm. xlv. 17. and lxxviii 1, -- 9 Isa. xxxviii. 19 3 John, ver.
4. -- It represents solemn vows as a mean most effectual to answer this
purpose, Psalm. cxix. 106. and lxxvi. 11. and l. 14. and lvi. 12. and lxvi. 13,
14. and lxi. 8. and cxvi. 12, -- 19. and cxxxii. 1, -- 5. Genesis xxviii. 20.
Deuteronomy. v. 2. and xxix. Josh. xxiv. 15, 24. 25. 2 Chronicles. xv. 12. and xxiii. 16,
17. and xxiv. 10. and xxxiv. 30, -- 32. Ezra x 3. Neh. ix. x. Isa. xix. 18, 21.
and xliv. 3, -- 5. and xlv. 23, 24. Jer. l. 4. 5. 2 Cor. vii. 5.

2. By the repeated judicial acts of both church and state, approving and
imposing these covenants, they were constituted the adopted laws of both,
proper to be acknowledged and submitted to, by all their members, in the most
solemn manner, which their circumstances permitted. -- Several of these acts,
as well as the best duties of Christians, had their sinful infirmities
particularly on the head of penalties, which I mean not to defend. But in so
far as these acts approved and authorized these covenants, which bound men to
receive and hold fast such temporal and spiritual privileges, as God had given
them, and thankfully improve them to his glory, -- and required a Christian,
regular, and seasonable taking of them, -- they were certainly good and valid.
Being good in themselves, and the exact performance of them calculated to
promote the glory of God, and eminent welfare of both church and state, these
covenants, if once regularly adopted as laws, must remain obligatory upon the
adopting societies, while they exist. Civil rulers being ordained ministers of
God for good to men, Romans xiii. 1, -- 4. and church officers appointed by
Christ for the edifying of his body, Ephesians. iv. 11, -- 14. have no power against
the truth, but for the truth, 2 Corinthians. xiii. 8, 10. and so can no more repeal
a law, which promotes only that which is morally good, any more than they can
give validity to a sinful one. -- These covenants must therefore, in the view
of God and conscience, continue binding, as laws divinely ratified, upon us, as
subjects, and as Christians. But it is their much more solemn obligation as
public Vows and Covenants with God, which I mean to establish, particularly
with reference to Scotland.

3. The matter of these vows being morally good, calculated to promote the
holiness and happiness of every person in every age, the immediate covenanters
were such as laid every possible foundation of transmitting the obligation of
their vow to the whole church and nation, to all generations. The
REPRESENTATIVES of both church and state, -- the MAJORITY of the Society, and
our own PARENTS, in their respective stations, took these covenants. What could
transmit and extend an obligation to posterity, if all this did not? You cannot
but allow, that even in private civil deeds, the obligation is extended far
beyond the immediate engagers. In bonds, respecting money or service, men bind
not only themselves, but their successors, and assigns, especially, if they
have the continued right to, or possession of that fund or property from which
that money or service natively arises. The obligations contained in a call to
a minister, fix on the whole congregation, if subscribed by the majority,
without any regular dissent, -- and on such as afterward accede to it. The
treaties of peace, traffic, etc. contracted by Kings, Parliaments,
Magistrates, are held binding on their subjects, and even on their posterity.
They, who accede to any society, fall under the binding force of its social
engagements for debt, duty, etc. If bonds and covenants did only bind immediate
contractors, nothing but the wildest disorder would ensue. If the immediate
engagers, quickly after died, they who trusted to their engagement, might be
totally ruined. -- A minority, who had been silent during the transaction,
might, in a few days, overturn a bond or contract of the majority. Subjects
might, at their pleasure, render void the contracts and treaties of their
rulers. To pretend, that men may not use the same freedom, in binding their
representees and posterity to God, as in binding them to men, is highly absurd
and shocking, as it represents God as more dangerous, and less honorable and
useful to be dealt with, than the very worst of men. Why may not a parent, in
offering his child to God in baptism, take hold of God to be his God, and the
God of his seed after him to all generations, -- and dedicate not only that
child, but all his posterity to God, as his honored vassals and servants, Genesis
xvii. 7. Acts ii. 39.? -- Is this less dutiful, safe, or honorable, than to
infeft himself and them in some earthly property, and bind them as possessors
of it, to be the vassals of some sinful superior? -- If the majority of a
society, especially in distress, may put the whole under the authority and
protection of a man who is a great sinner, why must they act either wickedly or
foolishly, if, by a solemn dedication, they put it under the especial care and
protection of the Great GOD our Savior? Rev. xi. 15. Psalm. ii. 12. and xxii.
27. If the representatives of a people, may bind them to live peaceably and
trade honestly with earthly neighbors; or may, in some cases, subject them to
the power, laws, or exactions of other earthly superiors, -- why allow them no
power to study peace with God, and to follow peace with all men and holiness?
-- No power to surrender them to God, to be ruled by his law, -- and to render
him his due revenues of honor? -- Has not God an original and supreme right
to all men as his creatures, subjects, and children? Are they not all bound by
his law to the whole of that duty, to which, we contend, any man ought to be
bound by a vow of perpetual obligation? Is it not inexpressibly honorable,
safe and profitable to stand under the special care of, and in relation to God
in Christ, Deuteronomy. iv. 7. and xxxiii. 29,? Why then more shy of devoting
posterity, or other representees to him, than to a sinful man and his service?

In covenants with men, a proper and timely dissent may frequently be well
founded; and may effectually divert this obligation from the dissenters. But
how there could be a lawful dissent from an engagement carefully to keep all
the commandments of God and nothing else, I know not. Had the whole, or even
the body of the Hebrew nation, timely and regularly dissented from the treaty
made by their princes with the Gibeonites, it might have diverted its
obligation from them. -- Inslead of this, they appear to have agreed to the
final stating of it, without a single murmur, Josh. ix. But, if these princes
had, by covenant, devoted themselves and their tribes to a careful keeping of
God's commandments; I know not how the people's dissent could have diverted the
obligation from themselves. -- In covenants with men, the non-fulfilment of
some condition or some dispensation or remission may weaken, if not perfectly
annul, the obligation. But none can dispense with, or grant remissions, in the
matters of God. Covenants made with God are more absolute, and less clogged
with conditions, and so more obliging The covenants of which we now treat,
being about indispensible duties of morality, upon which depends the glory of
God, the advancement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of magistrates, and the public liberty, safety and peace of the nation, and the
good of posterity in all time coming, ought to have their obligation allowed to
fix, wherever any ground can be found, while Christ has a kingdom, and the
covenanters a posterity, particularly in Scotland; for,

(1.) Our civil Representatives by these covenants devoted themselves in their
station, and their subjects, in so far as under their power, to the service of
God. In 1581 and 1590, King James and his privy council took the National
Covenant, and required their subjects to follow their example. In 1638, the
privy council again took it, as it stood in 1581. In 1640, the members of
Parliament took it, as explained by the Assembly 1638, to abjure Prelacy and
the five articles of Perth, and appointed it to be sworn by all the members of
every future Parliament. It was sworn by the members of Parliament 1644. In
1649, the national covenant, and the Solemn League which was materially the
same, were renewed by the members of Parliament, with solemn fasting and
humiliation. The oath framed in 1641, to be sworn by members of Parliament, at
taking their seats, expressly approved the national covenant. King Charles I.
gave a solemn approbation of it. King Charles II. and other magistrates took
the covenants in 1650 and 1651. Now, if a covenant made by the princes of
Israel with the representatives of the Gibeonites, in a matter which concerned
the Lord's land and the remote service os his altar, extended its obligation to
the whole nation of Israel, who consented to it, no otherwise, than by silence
at the final stating of it, -- and to their posterity, for many generations, --
that four hundred years after, they were punished with a famine on account of
Readiness breach of it, Josh. ix. with 2 Samuel xxi. and to the Gibeonites and their
posterity; -- Why not allow the covenanting deed of our Princes to extend its
obligation in like manner? If magistrates be the ministers of God for good to
men, Why should they not be capable to surrender themselves and their subjects
to the special care and service of God, their common and beneficent Superior?
If they possess the powers assigned them in our excellent Standards, Why may
they not, as nursing sathers of the church, devote themselves and their
subjects of the same true religion, to the enjoyment of God himself in his
oracles and ordinances, and to serve Him regularly in Christ? If Joshua could
bind himself and his family to serve the Lord, why may not magistrates bind
themselves and their subjects of the same true religion, to receive and hold
fast the like honor and happiness? If for the benefit of their subjects,
magistrates may, in a time of need, subject themselves and their people to some
powerful Monarch, whose fury is terrible, but his favor extremely profitable,
or may approve and ratify some former grant of that kind, -- Why may they not
for the same end, devote themselves and subjects to the Great GOD our Savior,
and Prince of the kings of the earth? Why may they not bring their glory into
the church? and as judges kiss the Son of God, solemnly approving and in their
station ratifying that grant which his Father made to him, of the outermost
ends of the earth? Rev. xxi. 24. and xi. 15. Prove. viii. 15, 16, Psalm. ii. 8,
-- 12.

(2.) In these covenants our Representatives in the church, in their station,
devoted themselves and their people to the faith, profession and obedience of
Christ. In April 1581, the General Assembly unanimously approved the national
covenant, and then in October ensuing, in the name of Christ, appointed it to
be subscribed by all Protestants. In 1588 and 1590, they made further acts for
promoting this subscription. The general Assemblies of 1596, 1638, 1639, and
the Commissions or Assemblies of 1643, 1644, 1648, 1649, enjoined the swearing
of the covenant by all adult church members. I do not know of one Presbyterian
minister or ruling elder in Scotland, who, in any of the covenanting periods of
1581, 1590, 1596, 1638, 1643, 1648, declined taking it. Now, if civil
representatives may bind their subjects and their posterity by civil contracts,
Why ought not the harmonious dedication of themselves and people to God, by
church-rulers to have a like binding force? If, in public prayers, ministers
may devote themselves and congregations to Christ, why may not they and ruling
elders conjunctly do it, by public covenant? But we do not chiefly rest the
matter on these grounds; for,

(3.) It is beyond all contradiction, that the lawful and public covenants
civil or religious, which are made by parents, do bind their posterity. The
oath of Esau, in which he resigned his birthright to Jacob, bound his posterity
never to attempt recovering the privileges of it, from Jacob or his
descendents. Hence Esau and his family, after the death of Isaac, removed
entirely from Canaan, Genesis xxv. 33. and xxxvi. 6. Even the public curse, which
the Jews took upon themselves and their children, has been manifestly binding
on them these seventeen hundred years past, Mat. xxvii 25. The vow of parents
in the ancient circumcision, or the Christian baptism of their infants, extends
to these children, -- nay according to the extent of God's covenant and promise
to all their future seed, Genesis xvii. 7. Acts ii. 38, 39. Hence, whatever any of
them do contrary to that vow, must at once be perfidy and rebellion against
God. Nor will their wilful or slothful ignorance of that obligation, or their
non-consent to it, when grown up, free them from that guilt, any more than
ignorance of Adam's covenant, or of the breach of it, can free his posterity
from the guilt of his first sin, or from perfidy in their personal violations
of that covenant of works. In Deuteronomy. v. 2, 3. God, by Moses declares, that the
covenant made with the Israelites at Sinai, was not made with them only, but
with all that new generation of their children and grand children, who survived
them, Number. xxvi. 64. -- In Deuteronomy. xxix. 14, 15. he declares, that the covenant
taken by that new generation in the plains of Moab, did not only bind them who
were alive and present at the entrance into it, but also others, even their
posterity. -- Their covenant with the Gibeonites did not only bind the
immediate engagers and consenters, but also their posterity, many ages
afterward, Josh. ix. 15, 19. with 2 Samuel xxi. 1. -- Now, these covenants of
allegiance to God and duty to men, of which we are treating, were sworn and
subscribed by our own natural, though now mediate parents, and when it is
considered, how FREQUENTLY that covenant, the same in substance in the several
Bonds, was sworn or subscribed, and how GENERALLY; -- and how readily some
covenanted on one occasion, whose ancestors had not on a preceding; -- and how
families have been since intermixed, it will scarce remain probable, that there
is a Scotchman, at least on the continent of Britain or Ireland, who is not
descended from some covenanter. If any, to his own disgrace, will contend that
in all these and different periods of covenanting 1581, 1590, 1596, 1638, 1639,
1643, 1648, etc. all his progenitors were such mere neutrals, or malignant
opposers of the true religion and liberties of the country, that none of them
took the covenant, let him take heed, lest, after all, God his Creditor find
him a perjured transgressor of the covenant of his fathers, -- or at least, of
the covenant made by his church and nation, and their respective
Representatives.

(4.) That lawful covenants, made by the greater part of a society bind the
whole, and every future acceder to it, -- at least, unless the minority or
acceders have, by a proper dissent, diverted the obligation from themselves; --
and that, if remarkably calculated to promote the common advantage, they bind
the members of it, while it continues a society, -- Common sense will not allow
us to doubt. That the exact fulfillment of our covenants with God, is remarkably
calculated to promote the honor of Christ and his Father, and the welfare of
both church and state, has been formerly hinted. No person therefore could, or
can, by any lawful dissent, divert their binding force from himself. Nor do I
remember of any, who regularly attempted it in Scotland.

Without doubt, the majority, nay body of the Scotch nation nation entered into
their Solemn Covenant with God. In 1581, both the privy council and the General
Assembly, in their respective acts enjoined the taking of the National
Covenant. "In this year, in the month of March, was the National Covenant
solemnly taken by the king, his council and court, and afterward by the
inhabitants of the kingdom Brown's Apologetical Relation, P. 17.
." "The National Covenant (was) subscribed by the King, his court, and council,
and afterward by all ranks of people in the land Crookshank's hist. P. 10.
Comp. Calderwood, p. 96, 102, 121. Spotswood, p. 309. Petry, part 3d, p. 407.
Collier, Vol. II. p. 572.
." "That good order of the church was three years ago approved, sealed, and
confirmed with profession of month, subscription of hand, and religion of oath,
by the King, and every subject of every estate And^ Malvin, in Petry, p. 445.
Comp. Vindiciae epistolae Philadelphi, P. 55.
." -- "In 1590, the National Covenant was again subscribed by all sorts of
persons Crookshanks, P. 11.
" "In March 1590, the bond for religion was again ratified in council and about
ninety-six ministers, in different parts of the kingdom, were appointed to
conveen before them the godly of all ranks, and minister unto them the National
Covenant, and to take their subscriptions; and an hundred and thirty of the
nobility and gentry to assist them, as should be necessary -- In consequence
hereof, copies of the covenant and general Bond were dispersed through the
whole kingdom, and the covenant subscribed Calderwood, P. 248, -- 254.
." "Their Confession of Faith and Solemn League and Covenant (was) subscribed
by the whole Scotch nation Neal's history of Puritans, Vol. II. P. 259.
." "It was subscribed by all sorts of persons, the whole land rejoicing at the
oath of God. It was attended by many choice blessings from the Lord Testimony
by Rutherford, Guthrie, and 15 other Protestors, p. 14. Comp. Epist
Philadelphi, p. 6. Stevenson's Introduction, p. 164. Willison's Testim. p. 5.
Seced. Testimony, p. 17.
." About this time the General Assembly appointed this covenant to be renewed
in Universities every year. -- In 1596, the covenant was renewed in the General
Assembly by about four hundred ministers, besides elders and others, with great
solemnity, and attended by a remarkable effusion of the Holy Ghost, and bitter
mourning for sin, and earnest reformation from it. It was afterward renewed in
Synods, Presbytries, and Parishes; but in many parishes, particularly in
Edinburgh, where the court had much influence, it was delayed and neglected. In
1604, the covenant was subscribed by all the members in the Presbytery of St.
Andrews and Synod of Lothian Calderwood. P. 311, 312, 317, 318, 323, 324, 325,
484, 485, 712. De Foe, p. 132. Crookshanks, p. 13. Brown's Apol. Rela^. p. 24,
403. Pe^y, p. 511, 570. Spotswood, p. 416. Stevenson, p. 169, -- 172. Epist.
Ph^ad. p. 7 Acts of Ass. 1638. p. 38. Preamble to Covenant 1638 and 1648.
.

The renovation of the covenant in 1638, was still more universal and
harmonious. "This covenant like an alarm bell brought together all the Scots,
who were dissatisfied with the government, that is almost the whole nation. It
was subscribed by the great men and the people, except the privy counselors,
the judges, and the bishops, and such ministers as were dignitaries in the
church. -- By the publication of this covenant, the Royalists were not above
one to a thousand. The covenant was the sole law the people would follow, with
respect to religion Rapin, Vol. II. P. 303.
." "All ranks and conditions, all ages and sexes flocked to the subscription of
this covenant. Few in their judgment disapproved it, and still fewer dared
openly to condemn it. The King's ministers and counselors were, most of them,
seized by the general contagion. -- The covenanters found themselves seconded
by the zeal of the whole nation D. Hume's hist. on 1638.
." "In the several counties and shires, it was received by the common people as
a sacred oracle, and subscribed by all such, as were thought to have any zeal
for the Protestant religion, and the liberties of their country. The privy
counselors, the judges, the bishops and the friends of arbitrary power were
the principal who refused it Neal's history of Pu. Vol. II. p. 260.
." "These rightly judging that the procuring cause of all the calamities of the
nation was the violation of their National Covenant, unanimously resolved to
renew the same. The town of Aberdeen was the only place of any note in the
kingdom, that declined joining in the covenant, -- (yet even there) severals of
special note cheerfully put their hands to the covenant, which was sworn by the
generality of all ranks through the nation, before the end of April
Crookshanks, Vol. I. p. 28.
." "They resolved upon renewing the national covenant, which had been almost
buried for forty years before. -- Being read in churches, it was heartily
embraced, sworn, and subscribed by all ranks, with many tears and great joy; so
that the whole land great and small, a very few excepted, without any
compulsion from church or state, did, in a few months cheerfully return to
their ancient principles, and subject themselves to the oath of God for
reformation. Both the court and prelates were enraged against them for it; but
the Lord remarkably countenanced them with the extraordinary manifestation of
his presence and down-pouring of his Spirit Willison's Testimony, P. 7.
." "The whole body of the people of Scotland were engaged to God, by solemn
covenants and vows frequently renewed, to own and endeavor the preservation of
the reformed religion, etc. -- Not only did the body of the commonalty, swear
these covenants, but the magistrates themselves did take on the same vows and
engagements, -- solemnly promised to prosecute the ends of this covenant. All
the lovers of God and friends to the liberties of the nation did solemnly renew
the national covenant, wherein they were signally countenanted of the Lord Sir
James Stewart in Jus Populi, P. 3, 4. He and Stirling in Naphtali, p. 140.
Wilson's defense, p. 236, -- 243. Stevenson, p. 291, etc. Esquire Guthrie's hist.
of Scotland, Vol. IX. p. 238. Burnet's memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton, on
1638.
." So much for the testimony of foes and friends, who lived at some distance of
time.

Let us now hear eye and ear witnesses of that work. "Upon the first of March
1638, the covenant was publicly read and subscribed by them all, with much joy
and shouting -- Afterward the covenant was subscribed every where in parishes,
with joy, except in the North Bishop Guthrie's memoirs, p. 30.
." "Within not many months, almost the whole land did subject themselves to the
oath of God, which was attended with more than ordinary influences of the
Spirit Test. by Rutherford, etc. p. 16.
." "The Lord did let forth much of his Spirit on his people in 1638, when this
nation did solemnly enter into covenant. -- Then did the nation visibly own the
Lord, and was visibly owned by him. A remarkable gale of Providence did attend
the actings of his people, which did astonish their adversaries, and force many
of them to own subjection. Fleming's fulfilling of the scriptures, p. 401.
" "Except one day at the kirk of Shots, I never saw such motions from the
Spirit of God, -- all the people generally and most willingly concurring (in
swearing the covenant) through the whole land, except the professed Papists, and
some few who for base ends, adhered to the prelates, the people universally
entered into the covenant of God Livingston's life, p. 22.
." When the covenanting work of that year was still unfinished, Dickson,
Henderson, and Cant affirm, that almost the whole kirk and kingdom had joined
in the late covenant, and that they had been sent to Aberdeen from almost the
whole kirk and kingdom. And this the Prelatic Doctors there, grant to be true
Answers to doctors of Aberdeen. p. 440.
. "The covenant being drawn up, was subscribed by all present (at Edinburgh)
and copies thereof sent to such as were absent, and being read in the churches,
it was heartily embraced, sworn and subscribed, with tears and joy. Great was
that day of the Lord's power; for much willingness and cheerfulness was among
the people, so as in a short time, few, in all the land did refuse, except some
Papists, some aspiring courtiers, some who were addicted to the English
ceremonies, and some few, who had sworn the oath (of supremacy and canonical
obedience) at their entry Brown's Apol. Relat, p. 48,
." "This covenant was subscribed by almost every assertor of liberty, who was
present (at Edinburgh). Copies of it were sent to such as were absent, to be
communicated to all the inhabitants of the kingdom, that every one who had
religion at heart, might swear this covenant. -- The non-covenanters were first
all the Papists, the number of whom scarce exceeded six hundred, -- some court
parasites, who had lately been advanced to dignities, or eagerly grasped at
them, or who were more addicted to the English rites and canons, -- as the
doctors and magistrates of Aberdeen. -- Some others for a time declined
subscribing from a regard to the oath (of Supremacy and Canonical obedience)
which they had taken, and because the king had not enjoined this covenant, and
because it bound them to assist one another in this cause Spang and Baillie in
Historia Motuum, p. 60.
." "The national covenant having been agreed to, with so great harmony, amidst
a world of difficulties, -- upon the first of March was subscribed by several
thousands, consisting of all the nobles, who were then in Scotland, (except the
Lords of privy council, and four or five more) -- and of commissioners from all
the Shires within Scotland, and from every Burgh, except Aberdeen, St. Andrews,
and Crail, -- and of other gentlemen and ministers -- Before the end of April;
every parish through Scotland, where the minister was friendly to the
reformation then sought, having observed a fast, to humble themselves for the
former defection and breach of covenant, did renew the same with great
solemnity, scarce a person opposing himself, but every one, women as well as
men, concurring, and publicly avouching the Lord to be THEIR God, with their
right hand lifted up, except, (1.) Papists, to whom it was not offered, -- the
number of whom in all Scotland, was not reckoned above 600 persons. (2.)
Courtiers, who had no will to displease the king. (3.) Some of the clergy, who
had sworn the oath for conformity, (to Prelacy) or were dignitaries in the
church, the chief of whom were the doctors of Aberdeen. -- The most of the
Hamiltons, Douglasses, all the Gordons who were under the influence of
Sutherland and Kenmure, -- all the Campbells, Forbeses, Frasers, Grants,
M'Kenzies, M'Kenzies, M'Kays, M'Intoshes, M'Leans, M'Donalds, Irvines, and
Innesses, subscribed the covenant. Many in Aberdeen and Glasgow, who for a time
refused, subscribed. Not a burgess in St. Andrews refused. -- In Edinburgh Dr.
Elliot a minister, and Robert Rankin, and John Brown, Regents of the college,
were the only persons of note, who declined subscription Stevenson's hist. P.
291, 294, 311. from Baillie's MSS Letters, p. 196, -- 223. Bail. printed let.
Vol. I. p. 45, -- 49, 66, 73. Acts of the Ass. 1638. p. 24, -- 41. Stevenion,
p. 416, -- 418, etc. Large Declaration. Burnet's memoirs of D. Hamilton.
." Add to all these, the 28,000, who, at King Charles' command, subscribed the
covenant as it stood in 1581, declared to be the same in substance with the
other Bond, -- and it will appear that few, very few, then neglected to swear
or subscribe the covenant. What numbers took the covenant from 1639 to 1643, in
obedience to the peremptory acts of church and state enjoining it, I know not.

In 1643 and 1644, the swearing of the Solemn League and Covenant by all adult
persons, was very peremptorily required by both church and state. From a copy
of it before me, I have reason to think, that the subscription of it was pretty
universal. The takers of it in Scotland are affirmed to have been seven to one
of their opposers Stevens, Vol. III.
. "It was solemnly sworn and subscribed almost in all parts of the nation
Crook. p. 33. Hind let loose p. 80
." "With a mavelous unanimity was this every where received. In God's great
mercy all that I have yet heard of, have taken this oath. Our land now, I hope,
in a happy time, has entered into a league with England Bail. Let. Vol. I. p.
239, 393.
." In their speech to the council of London, after their return, Henry Vane and
Stephen Marshal affirm, That they believed the Solemn League had been
universally taken by the whole Scotch nation. The exhortation of the English
Assembly and Parliament affirms, that the "whole body of Scotland had willingly
sworn it, with rejoicing." Rutherford, and his sixteen faithful brethren,
affirm, that "the Solemn league was actually sworn and taken by the whole body
of Scotland, from the highest to the lowest -- by the whole body of the land
Test. p. 20, etc.
." Sir James Stewart and Mr. Stirling who, perhaps, both covenanted that year,
affirm, that "in 1648, in the month of December, (the Solemn League) was, for
the second time, sworn in all the congregations of Scotland, upon the same day,
except where a vacancy, or the minister's being under scandal, did occasion a
delay till another day, -- with great solemnity and such mixture of joy and
sorrow, as became people entering into covenant with the Lord. -- There was at
that time a great zeal for God, from clear knowledge and sad experience,
generally and solemnly professed before God and all men, in our public
acknowledgments 1648, -- in consequence whereof, the League and Covenant was
also, by the whole kingdom, renewed that same year, and in answer thereto, the
Lord did mightily save us. -- He did highly advance his blessed work Naphtali,
p. 91, 156.
."

That the body of the English nation also swore the Solemn League and Covenant,
is manifest. The Westminster Assembly and English Parliament, affirm, "The
honorable houses of Parliament, the Assembly of Divines, the renowned city of
London, and multitudes of other persons of all ranks and quality in this
nation, and the whole body of Scotland, have all sworn it, rejoicing at the
oath so graciously seconded from heaven. God will, doubtless, stand by all
those, who with singleness of heart shall now enter into an everlasting
covenant with the Lord Exhortation to take the Covenant, FEBRUARY 1644.
." Rutherford and his sixteen faithful brethren, affirm, that "this Solemn
League was actually sworn and taken by the whole body of Scotland, -- also by
the honorable houses of the parliament of England, the Assembly of Divines,
the renowned city of London, and multitudes not only of the people, but of
persons of eminent rank and quality throughout that nation, and the nation of
Ireland, and all this by the authority of the powers, civil and ecclesiastic.
Who can have forgot, how deliberately it was resolved, and how unanimously it
was concluded? The respective authorities of both church and state in Scotland,
did all with one voice approve and embrace the same, as the most powerful mean
by the blessing of God for settling and preserving the true Protestant
religion, with perfect peace in these nations, and propagating the same to
other nations, did ordain it to be, with humiliation and all religious
solemnities, received, sworn and subscribed by all ministers and professors
within this kirk, and subjects within this kingdom, -- which was accordingly
done by the whole body of the land, and in many congregations attended with the
feelings of that joy, and comfortable influence of the Spirit of God, -- which
they did find in so great a measure upon the renovation of the national
covenant in 1638. -- And this solemn oath of God being taken by the honorable
houses of the Parliament of England, by the renowned city of London, by the
reverend Assembly of Divines, -- the Lords and Commons, upon the account of its
being thought a fit and excellent means to acquire the favor of God toward
the three kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to establish and
propagate the true reformed religion, peace and prosperity of these kingdoms,
did -- ordain, that the same covenant be solemnly taken throughout the kingdom
of England. And upon these grounds, and according to these instructions and
exhortations of the Assembly and Parliament, was that solemn covenant taken by
multitudes of all ranks and sorts, many of which did rejoice at the oath of
God. A little thereafter, it was ordered by the House of Commons, that the
Solemn League and Covenant be, on every day of humiliation, ( i. e. once every
month) publicly read in every church and congregation, within the kingdom; and
that every congregation have one of the said covenants fairly printed on a fair
letter, in a table to hang up in some place of the church, to be read, (where
many copies continued hanging till the restoration). -- No power on earth can
absolve either themselves or others from the bond and tie of this sacred oath
of the Most High Testimony. P. 20, 21, 22, 24.
." An apologetical declaration of the conscientious Presbyterians of the
province of London, and of many thousands of other faithful and
covenant-keeping citizens and inhabitants, which was subscribed by these many
thousands in January, 1649, at the hazard of every thing dear to them, has
these words, "calling to mind our Solemn League and Covenant, which was so
religiously and unanimously sworn P. 2.
." "The sacred oath was first taken by the Lords and Commons legally assembled
in Parliament, then by the generality of the people in England. -- They (the
parliament) no sooner met in 1649, but they ordered it to be hung up before
their eyes, as a constant monitor to them Covenanters Piea, P. 3^ 70.
." "If all tables were as legible as those of the Lords and Commons, I believe
their ( i e subscribers of the covenant) number would be found more than a 4th
part of the nation (in 1660, notwithstanding the death of perhaps more than one
half of them from 1644 to 1660). Can any considerate observer, take notice,
that the covenant (in England) was imposed on, and submitted to, by all sorts
and degrees of men in all counties, cities, and towns, tendered, and fince
testified, by their public subscriptions, by the most of ministers in their
several counties, and to their individual congregations, and yet without the
supposal of a very great mortality, imagine not a fourth part of the nation
(now living in 1660) to have taken it? -- Nor shall I insist on the universal
alacrity, joy and content of the most serious in England and Scotland, that
accompanied the first making of the covenant, and the solemnities and order, in
which it was taken in the city of London, and the several counties and
congregations of England, -- than which -- no act ever passed among the people
of England, more solemnly or more religiously. -- The Solemn League and
Covenant is really public and national (in England). (1.) Its matter is public
and national, relating to the kingdom under its civil, religious and reformed
capacity, being the reformation and defense of religion, under a national
profession, and the honor and happiness of the king, privileges of the
Parliament, and liberties of the subjects. (2.) These matters were consulted,
debated and agreed to, by two distinct nations in their most public capacities.
(4) The end of it was public and national, -- the true liberty, peace, and
safety of the kingdom, wherein every one's private condition is included; --
and that the Lord may be one and his name one in the three kingdoms; and the
kingdoms of England and Scotland may remain conjoined in a firm peace to all
posterity, -- in a case that concerned the good of these kingdoms (5.) The
covenant was sworn by the nation. [1.] Collectively, in the most full and
complete body, that could, or ever did represent the same, the Parliament
consisting of Lords and Commons, and that in their public capacity, and with
the greatest solemnity imaginable, did as the representative body of the
kingdom, swear the covenant, which as a further testimony that it was a
national covenant, they caused to be printed with their names subscribed, and
to be hung up in all churches, and in their own (Parliament) House, as a
compass, whereby to steer their debates, and to dictate unto all that should
succeed them into that place and capacity, what obligations before God ly upon
the body of this nation. [2.] It was universally sworn by the people of this
kingdom, (England) solemnly testified in their particular places of convention,
all over the kingdom, and by all manner of persons, from eighteen years and
upwards, and that at the command of, and by the authority of the Parliament,
who, in their place, and in behalf of this nation, did order it to be
universally sworn. -- Certainly, whoever will but weigh the directions given
and duly executed, in the tendering of the covenant in all counties and
parishes, and taken by all persons, religious, military or civil. -- If the
several rolls within the several parishes and precincts of this kingdom, in
which the several names of such, as did swear the Solemn League and Covenant,
were engrossed, be viewed, it will be found that it was sworn by the
universality of the nation; -- and I hope we, who are a free people, tied by no
bonds but such as we lay upon ourselves, may be allowed to bind ourselves by an
oath. [3.] His Majesty (Charles II) did swear the Solemn League and Covenant,
in behalf of himself and his successors, and that as King of Great Britain and
Ireland. -- More than six hundred ministers of England in thirteen different
counties, in their testimonies, (1648) to the truths of Christ and to the
Solemn League and Covenant, attest it as national. -- The Yorkshire ministers
say, "It cannot but be known to the churches abroad, that all the three
kingdoms stand engaged by virtue of the Solemn League and Covenant Crofton's
Peter's bonds abide, P 26. and Fastening of St. Peter's setters, p. 108, 138,
-- 146.
." The London ministers say, "We shall never forget, how solemnly and
cheerfully the sacred league was sworn, -- wherein the three kingdoms stand
engaged jointly and severally. The Parliament have not only enjoined it to be
taken by all men above eighteen years of age, throughout the kingdom of England
and dominion of Wales; but the Commons have also required it to be published on
every monthly fast day, for the better remembrance and observation of it, and
that every congregation have one of the said Covenants fairly printed in a fair
letter, in a table, fitted to hang up in some public place of the Church, to be
read. Testim. P. 46. Paton's collect. of Confess. p. 97.
"

In IRELAND, Rutherford and his sixteen faithful brethren, who had full access
to know the truth, affirm, That multitudes swore the solemn league. In Cox'
history of Ireland, Ormond, then Lord lieutenant there, says, "The covenant
has been imposed by ordinance of (English) Parliament, (which has the supreme
power over Ireland as a dependent kingdom Act 6. Geo. I.) -- The covenant was
imposed on all that were under the power of the Parliament." In a subsequent
page it is affirmed, That all the province of Ulster (in which the Protestants
chiefly reside), and a considerable part of Munster were under the power of
Parliament; and that in 1649. The Puritans and Presbyterians prosessed, that
their regard to their covenant made them side with Charles II, against the
Sectarians headed by Cromwell Cox' hist. Vol. II. P. 177, 180, etc.
." In the Christian loyalty of the Presbyterians, particularly in Ulster, since
their Settlement there by K James, -- the most of which is verified by original
papers inserted, we have the following and like hints, -- "The petition of many
thousand Protessant inhabitants of Ulster presented to the English Parliament
1640, avows their approbation of the Scotch national covenant; and complain,
that the Irish Prelates had exclaimed against it, and concurred with Lord
lieutenant Strafford in imposing an oath, renouncing it; -- The Scots, who were
generally dissenters, i. e. Presbyterians took arms against the Popish
massacrers, and were the first that appeared in Ulster against the common
enemy, who were then exercising unheard of cruelty; -- With the Scotch army of
six thousand, under Gener. Alexander Lesly, which were sent to check the ravage
of the murderous Papists, ministers were sent to attend the several regiments,
who, associating themselves with some formerly in Ireland, formed themselves
into a Presbytery, in which Lesly and several other officers of the army, sat
as ruling elders. -- They preached both in camp and country. -- At this time,
those who had fled from Ireland, on account of the oath imposed by Strafford,
before the massacre begun, returned in great numbers, and joined with the
Scotch army, and Sir John Clotworthy, a zealous puritan; so that he with his
party scoured the whole county of Antrim from massacring Papists. -- When the
established ( i. e. Episcopalian) clergy were generally destroyed by the
massacre, or had fled, the work of the ministry was mostly in the hands of
Presbyterians, who, with indefatigable industry, attended both camp and
country, not without comfortable success. -- In 1642, the Irish Protestants
petitioned the Scotch General Assembly, that some ministers of the gospel might
be sent to comfort them in their great calamity, when, by the massacre, left as
without shepherds; and particularly that their own ministers, who had been
formerly banished by Abp. Laud's partisans, might be restored to them. -- Six
ministers were sent to concur with those of the Scotch army sent thither by
authority of king and Parliament; and as they came very seasonably to encourage
the army and their friends, God mightily blessed their endeavors with success
Christian Loyalty, etc. P. 137, 140, 175, 176, 87, 88.
." Upon a request of very great numbers, the Assembly 1643, sent them further
supply of ministers. -- A petition of the distressed Christians in the North of
Ireland, subscribed by very many hands to the Assembly 1644, says, -- "Your
reward is with your God, for your zeal and care to have your reformation
spread, in sending hither that blessed League and Covenant, which we much
desired and longed for, -- which has had a wished and gracious success, by the
blessing of God accompanying the pains of those, to whom the tendering of it
was entrusted by you. -- When the said -- covenant was presented to the
regiments (of your army) we made bold to lay hold on the opportunity, and
cheerfully and unanimously joined ourselves thereto, that, if we die (by the
hand of the Popish murderers) we may die a covenanted people;" and they beg
supply of ministers for twenty-four desolate congregations Acts of Ass. p. 151,
190, 191, 214, -- 217.
Much about the same time, "the English Parliament by an ordinance enjoined
that covenant to be taken in Ireland; and accordingly it was sworn by almost
all the Protestants in Ulster, who acknowledged the authority of the
Parliament, -- the greatest part of the Protestants in Ireland all concurred in
it, -- and their posterity enjoy large estates from that English Parliament
which enjoined the taking of the covenant. -- It known, that the Irish army
under the Lord of Ards, were all Presbyterian covenanters. -- Many of the Irish
Protestants renewed the Solemn League about 1649; and hence the Presbytery of
Bangor in their declaration that year affirm, "That they and others had renewed
their covenant, -- and warn, that none who had renewed covenant, should join
the army of Ards, who, after he and they had lately renewed the covenant, had
turned over to assist the malignants; and foretell that the quarrel of the
covenant should pursue them, -- as it soon did, in their ruin and of Ormond's
army which they assisted. -- The Irish Presbyterians, in their representation
against the procedure of the Sectarians with K. Charles I, publicly read in
their several congregations, avow the Solemn League, as their covenant; and
warn the well affected to that covenant, to avoid all compliance with the
Sectaries. Christian loyalty, P. 176, 177, 39, 143, 197, -- 200, 203
The Presbyterian ministers in their Narrative to government of their steadfast
loyalty, and of their sufferings under Cromwell, say, "We could not own them, i.
e. Cromwell and his substitutes, as lawful magistrates, and could not pray for
their success, etc. -- considering the strong obligation of the oath of God,
that lay still upon us, to maintain His Majesty's power and greatness according
to our covenant Ibid. p. 214, -- 217.
." -- Notwithstanding all the cruel banishment, imprisonment, etc. which they
had suffered under Cromwell, for their attachment to K. Charles, there remained
so many staunch covenanters in Ireland, that in one Synod of Bellimenoch,
fifty-nine ministers, in 1662, refused to conform to Prelacy, which is more
than were in some six Synods in Scotland. Nor, in any Synod here, except in
that of Glasgow, which consists of above 130 ministers, and in which the
Protestors chiefly resided, was that number of Non-conformists exceeded
Wodrow's hist. Vol, I. p. 155. Appendix, p. 78,
. From these hints it appears, that the body of Protestants in Ireland took the
Solemn League and Covenant; and that the number of Covenanters there, could not
be less than 50 or 60,000, if it was not double or triple that reckoning.

If then, Sir, the public engagements of representatives of Church and State
can bind those represented by them and their posterity; -- if the public
engagements of parents can bind their descendents; -- if the public engagements
of the greater part of a society can bind the whole and their successors; --
Our public covenants with God must bind the Protestants in Ireland, the whole
nation of England, and in a peculiar manner the Scots, who are so manifestly
affected by all the four sources of obligation, that no not our perjured
Prelatists, for their own vindication, ever dared, that I know of, to contest
it. And answerable to this source, these fourfold vows must fix upon us a kind
of foursold solemn obligation to God, frequently repeated, renewed, or
confirmed: How fearful then must be our guilt, if we cast all the cords of God
behind our back, in favors of gross heresy, blasphemy, idolatry, Popery!

4. Our ancestors did not covenant with God as mere individuals, but as a BODY.
Covenanting at the same time with each other, they made a joint surrender of
themselves to God. In their Bond of 1636, they call it a blessed and loyal
conjunction. In their Reasons against giving it up, they call it a Bond of
union and conjunction. -- a mutual union and conjunction amongst themselves;
and in reasons of protestation they call it a bond of inviolable union amongst
themselves Stevenson, p. 345, 354.
The Assembly August 6th, 1649, say, -- "Our engagement therein is not only
national, but personal." -- The subject bound by the covenant being thus, not
merely particular persons, but a church and nation, the obligation of it must
be as permanent as the society bound by it.

5. Our ancestors did what they could to make their covenant as binding as
possible. The express terms in which the different forms of it are conceived,
manifest it a promise, an oath, a vow, a covenant. If then there be any binding
force in a promise from the truth of men which is therein pledged; if there be
any religion in an oath because of the reverence we owe to the sacred name of
God interposed in it; if any obligation results from a vow, because of the
fealty we thereby owe to God; if a man be obliged to keep his covenant from
regard to truth or justice due to others, who are parties in it; -- all these,
transacted with the utmost solemnity, must concur in constituting the binding
sorce of this public engagement. -- Hence the Commission 1651, in their
Warning, say, "The bonds and obligations that lie upon us to this duty, by the
law of God, the law of nature and the National Covenant and Solemn League, and
the pains therein contained, whereunto we have devoted ourselves, if we shall
desert or fail Stevenson, P. 10.
."

6. Our ancestors plainly intended, that their public covenants should bind all
future generations. In 1638, they lamented their own sins as breaches of the
covenant made or renewed in 1581, 1590, 1596 Hist. Mot. p. 43. Short Relat. on
1638. Ass. Letter to Helvetians. Steven. p. 285. Bail. Let. p. 35. Apol. Relat.
p. 47. Wilson's defense, p. 237, 238, 242, etc.
. In their Reasons against giving up their sworn covenant, they asfirm, "Our
religious ancestors, by the like oath, have obliged us to the substance and
tenor of this. -- This our oath being a religious and perpetual obligation,
should stand in vigor, for the more firm establishment of religion in our own
time, and in the generations following. -- Although the innovations of religion
were the occasion of the making of this covenant, yet our intention was against
these and all other innovations and corruptions, to establish religion by an
everlasting covenant, never to be forgotten Stevenson, p, 347, 348, 351.
." In their preamble to the covenant that year, they say, "Being convinced in
our own minds, and professing with our months, that the present and succeeding
generations are bound to keep the foresaid national oath and subscription (of
1581, 1590, 1596) inviolable." In the Solemn League, they swear, "We shall
endeavor that these kingdoms may remain conjoined in a firm peace and union to
all posterity."

7. The ends of these covenants declared in their express words are perpetual
till the end of time, viz. "To maintain the true worship of God, the majesty of
our king, and the peace of the kingdom, for the common happiness of ourselves
and our posterity, -- that religion and righteousness may flourish in the land
to the glory of God, etc Covenant of 1638.
." "To promote the glory of God, and the advancement of the kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, -- the honor and happiness of the King's Majesty, and his
posterity, and the public liberty, safety, and peace of the kingdoms; that we
and our posterity may, as brethren, live in faith and love, and the Lord
delight to dwell in the midst of us; -- that the Lord may be one and his name
one in the three kingdoms, -- may turn away his wrath, and establish these
churches and kingdoms in peace Covenant of 1643.
."

If then, the matter being moral duty, was proper for a covenant of perpetual
obligation; if the covenanters had full power to bind the whole society and
their posterity; if the subject upon which the obligation was laid be
permanent; if the end of the covenanters and their covenant was to fix the
obligation upon posterity, as well as upon the immediate engagers; and if they
did every thing in their power to render that obligation solemn and permanent,
What surther evidence of the perpetuity of that obligation can any man demand,
who singly regards the honor of God, or the welfare of this church and nation?
May I therefore adopt the words of a truly great man, "It was the glory of
Scotland, that we were solemnly in covenant with God, -- wherein our
forefathers, for themselves engaged and swore against Popery, Prelacy,
superstition, and every thing contrary to the word of God; -- and to the
doctrine, worship, discipline and government of the reformed church of
Scotland, and that as we should answer to Jesus Christ at the great day, and
under the pain of his everlasting wrath; -- May not our hearts bleed to think
on our defection from old covenanted principles, and our violation of our
engagements, yea of the burning and burial of our covenants, -- and the
prevalence of abjured Popery in this land. -- Covenant obligation to duty is
what we still stand under, -- though many be ashamed and refuse to own these
obligations, -- the glory of our land. -- Let us go forward -- lamenting our
sinful defection from a covenanted reformation, and acknowledging our solemn
covenant-obligation R. Erskine's works fol. Vol. I. p. 62.
. -- Never was a nation more solemnly bound to the Lord by national covenants.
Religious covenants in scripture comprehend absent as well as present, and
posterity to come as well as the covenanting forefathers, Deuteronomy. xxix. 14, 15,
22, 24, 25. Now, our solemn covenants, which our forefathers entered into,
being nothing but a super-added and accumulative obligation, to what we were
previously bound to by the word of God, they cannot but stand binding upon us
their posterity Ibid, p. 170, 304.
. -- As Israel avouched the Lord to be their God by solemn covenants, that were
binding upon them and their posterity after them; so in this moral duty, We, in
our forefathers, followed the example, -- entering into a solemn covenant with
him, which he many signal ways countenanced, -- attended with internal displays
of (his) power and glory. -- To disparage these covenants is to cast dung upon
our glory. I think it worse than the breaking, burning, and burying of them. To
bespatter their reputation, and deny their obligation, is to render them odious
to all generations Ibid. p. 489,
. -- There is -- a superadded obligation lying on us by our covenants of
gratitude and duty, which, though it bind us to nothing, but what we were
authoritatively bound to before, yet it strengthens the obligation Ibid. Vol.
II, p. 224.
. -- When God has manifested his covenant of grace to a people, receiving them
to be his people, and they thereupon have entered into a covenant of duty with
him, avouching him to be their God, and promising through grace, subjection to
him, though it were four hundred, yea four thousand years, it stands; and they
who succeed are bound by the covenant. -- A number of honest covenanters, when
they avouched the Lord to be their God, and promised obedience to him, did it
in the faith of his avouching them to be his people, and trusting to his
covenant of grace and promise, and not to their covenant or engagement. We, in
these lands, have devoted ourselves to the Lord, in which we were warranted by
many scripture precedents. -- Never was an action done more sedately and
advisedly. -- The binding obligation of it upon us is plain. If we have the
benefit of that religion to which our forefathers swore, we must be heirs of
that oath they came under to the Most High (as Levi paid tithes in his father's
loins, so we, in our forefathers, swore to this covenant). We are obliged to
stand to it, though it were never so many years after. -- Being partakers of
the benefit, we are bound to do that which they promised to do for it. If a
parent bind his children, are not their seed and heirs bound by his promise as
well as they were? What continual changes and confusions would there be in the
world, if persons themselves were only to be tied by their own personal bonds?
-- How much more impiety is it for men, to deny that obligation by covenant to
God, made by their forefathers in their name. -- Our solemn covenants, are one
of the grounds of our claim to him, -- and of his continuing his claim to us,
who own these covenants. -- How will God avenge the violation of a lawful oath,
made with himself in this land? -- Unless these professed Preshyterians can now
prove, that Presbytry is sinful, they must acknowledge that our national
covenants are binding on us in this matter. -- If a covenant in things lawful
be not binding, then no covenant ever was R. Erskine's works, Vol. II. p. 142,
224, 104. Comp. Hind let loose, p. 514. -- 521. Apol. Relat. p. 227, -- 4,^6.
Discourse at the renewing of the covenants, 1688. M'W^rd's earnest contendings.
p. 229, -- 230, 266. Examinat. of 13. Bp. Leighton's Accommodation. English
ministers testimonies to Solemn League. Covenanters plea, Crofton's tracts on
covenant. etc. etc.
.

OBJECT. I. "Many things were wrong in the imposing and taking of these
covenants; and their words are ill chosen, as to extirpate Popery, Prelacy, i.
e. to kill Papists and Prelatists." ANSW. (1) Let us allow no malignant enemy
or perjured violator of these covenants to be held a sufficient witness against
them. Nor let us have the long ago refuted calumnies of such men revived upon
their mere authority. (2) Though the covenant had had insirmities, even
infirmities sufficient to have hindered the swearing of it, as the Doctors of
Aberdeen and Oxford pretended, was the case, -- it may nevertheless bind when
once it is sworn. Though its matter had been in part sinful and
self-contradictory, it would bind to the part which was lawful. -- Though the
authority which imposed it, had been insufficient, and the manner of imposing
it improper, it would bind when once sworn. Zedekiah was in some respect
compelled to swear allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar, whose sovereignty over Judah
was very disputable, yet his oath bound him, Ezekiel. xvii. 12, -- 19. 2 Chronicles.
xxxvi. 13. -- Though our covenanters ends had been carnal, or even sinful, the
oath, as far as lawful in its matter, is binding, when once it is sworn. --
Without allowing these things as fixed principles, no oaths or covenants could
be any securities among mankind. (3) If Popery and Prelacy be plants which God
has not planted, why may we not, as lawfully, in our stations, endeavor to
extirpate or root them out, as we may mortify the deeds of our body, that we
may live? The one includes no more violence against men's persons than the
other, Romans viii. 13. Do you imagine, that the covenanters swore to cut their
own throats, or tear out their own hearts, when they engaged to endeavor, in
their station, to extirpate every thing contrary to the power of godliness, as
indwelling sin, vain thoughts, etc. which adhere to believers in this life,
certainly are.

OBJECT. II. "Many in England and Ireland never took the Solemn League, or took
it in a sense consistent with Prelacy or Independency." ANSW. I do not expect
that any hater of that covenant will ever be able to invalidate the proof which
has been given of the number of the covenanters in both these kingdoms. (2.)
The covenanters declared "that an oath is to be taken in the plain sense of the
words, without equivocation or mental reservation. -- It cannot bind to sin;
but in any thing not sinful, being taken, it binds to performance, although to
a man's own hurt Confession of Faith, chap. XXII. 4.
." All but Jesuits profess the same principle. And indeed if oaths, vows, or
covenants bind not men, according to the plain meaning of their words, they
become quite useless. Men's prevarication therefore, in favors of Prelacy or
Independency, cannot free them from the obligation of an oath, which strikes
against both. (3) As the Scots stood bound by their National Covenant to every
duty contained in the Solemn League, long before the English had a thought of
covenanting along with them, and did also swear the solemn league, no neglect
or prevarication of either English or Irish can free us from our obligation. It
was neither to the English nor to the Irish, but chiefly to the faithful and
unchangeable God of all grace, that our fathers bound themselves and their
seed. The Assembly in their Letter to the council of London, justly observe,
"It is not in the power of any human authority to absolve you from adhering to
this so solemnly sworn League and Covenant." And in another letter, "The
covenant has been broken by many in both kingdoms. -- We do not doubt, but
there are many seven thousands in England, who have retained their integrity in
that business." And in their Warning 1648, "The violation of the covenant by
some in England does not set us free from the obligation of it. No laws, nor
authority on earth can absolve us from so solemn an obligation to the Most
High. -- We are not acquitted from the obligation of our solemn covenants
because of the troubles. -- In the worst of times, all those duties whereunto
by covenant, we oblige ourselves, do still ly upon us. -- We have sworn, and we
must perform it." And in their Warning 1649, "Albeit the League and Covenant be
despised by that prevailing party in England, yet the obligation of that
covenant is perpetual; and all the duties contained therein are constantly to
be minded and prosecuted, by every one of us and our posterity, according to
their place and station." And in their Letter to brethren in England, "Although
there were none in the one kingdom, who did adhere to the covenant, yet were
not the other kingdom, nor any person in either of them, absolved from the bond
thereof; since in it, we have not only sworn by the Lord, but also covenanted
with him. It is not the failing of one or more that can absolve others from
their duty or TIE to him. Besides, the duties therein contained being in
themselves lawful, and the grounds of our TIE thereto moral, though others
forget their duty, yet does not their defection free us from that obligation
which lies upon us by the covenants, in our places and stations. The covenant
being intended as one of the best means of stedfastness, it were strange to
say, that the backslidings of any should absolve others from the TIE thereof,
especially seeing our engagement therein is not only national, but personal. --
All these kingdoms joining together to abolish that oath by law, could not
dispense therewith, much less can any one of them, or any party in either do
the same. -- (They are) testimonies which the Lord Christ has entered as
protestations, to preserve his right in these ends of the earth, long ago given
unto him for his possession, and of late confirmed by solemn covenant."

OBJECT. III. "The influence of the Highland thiefs, and the gross ignorance of
the Scotch islands, together with the general dislike of the covenant at the
Restoration and Revolution, are internal evidences, that but a part, perhaps a
small part, of the Scots took the covenant." ANSW. I boldly defy you to
invalidate the proofs I have brought to the contrary. Nay, for ought I know,
you cannot produce one of these perjured Prelatists, that pretended that only
the smaller part of the Scotch nation took the covenant, especially in 1590,
1638, and 1643. (2.) Were the Highland chiefs, and the gross ignorance of the
islanders, occasioned by the negligence of the curates, a whit more able to
withstand the enlightening and heart-bowing power of God, so remarkably
manifested on these occasions, than K. Charles and many others on the
continent? Have we not produced evidence that multitudes of the Highlanders
entered into the reformers covenant, 1638, and were not Argyle, Mar, and many
other Highland chiefs zealous covenanters? Did not such as were otherwise
minded take the covenant of 1581, as imposed by the Privy council according to
its original meaning? Did not even the Doctors and Prelatic inhabitants of
Aberdeen take that bond, without approving the council's limitation of it to
its original meaning? (3) You can produce no evidence that the covenanting work
was not carried on in the Scotch islands, but such as we have, that never a
Hebrew child was circumcised on the 8th day, from Isaac to John Baptist; -- or
that never a weekly Sabbath was observed from the creation till the manna fell
around the Hebrew camp, i. e. want of positive evidence to the contrary, -- and
that too in places, of which, to this moment, we have little account, except
what relates to their situation, soil, product, or the like. (4.) It is highly
absurd to pretend, that the so general disregard of the covenants, twelve or
forty years after the last taking of them, is internal evidence that few had
taken them. Will it irrefragably prove, that Adam was never made after the
image of God, or taken into covenant with him, because within a few days or
hours he had become a sinner, hating both God and his covenant. -- or that
devils were never created holy and happy, because within a few days they had
left their first estate? Will the general concurrence of the Hebrews in
worshipping the golden calf, prove that they had not entered into solemn
covenant with God, about forty days before? Will their subsequent apostasies,
prove that but few of them had covenanted with God, under Joshua, Asa, Joash,
Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra and Nehemiah? Will Peter's fearfully heinous and
repeated denial of Christ, prove that he had not, a few hours before, solemnly
engaged against it?

OBJECT. IV. "Force or fear caused many to covenant." ANSW. Though force or
sear should have rendered the manner of covenanting unacceptable to God, they
cannot render void an oath which is sworn. (2.) I will never contend, that the
penalty annexed by law to the refusal of the covenant in 1643, or even on some
other occasions, was proper. But, after a laborious search, I find no proper
evidence, that any force was ever used in Scotland to make any take the
covenant, except in 1639, by Montrose and Monro, two military men, without any
warrant from either church or state, -- the former, if not both of whom
afterward turned out a malignant murderer of his covenanting brethren. Never,
Sir, pick up or retail the mere inventions of perjured violators of these
covenants, who were glad to say any thing to conceal or excuse their own
wickedness. (3.) In 1638, when the covenanting was most universal, the bishops
and some other anticovenanters, afraid of prosecution for their enormous debts,
or for their oppressive and other wicked deeds, -- and perhaps chiefly to
calumniate the covenanters at court, did flee their country. But none were
obliged to do so for refusing the covenant. Fear of danger probably restrained
some from reviling a Bond which the nation so highly esteemed But none, that I
know of, were thereby constrained to swear it. Some mobs happened, occasioned
by the king's suspension of the common exercise of the civil law, and the
sitting of its courts. But these were detested by the zealous covenanters, and
not one of them appears either to have been intended, or to have issued in
favors of the covenant. If the influences of God's Spirit, and the affecting
appearances of his Providence -- as at Sinai or in the apostolic age, awed or
allured numbers to take the covenant whose hearts were not sincere before him,
-- should we quarrel with the Almighty on that account? -- But, Sir, Henderson,
Dickson, and Cant, who being the principal leaders of the covenanting work that
year, affirm to the doctors of Aberdeen, who were eager to have detected them
of falsehood, if it had been possible, "No pastors in our knowledge have been
either forced to flee or have been threatened with the want of their stipends
for refusing their subscription; but some have of their own accord, gone to
court for procuring protection against their creditors, -- and have made lies
between the king and his people. Others have wilfully refused to abide with
their flocks, for no reason, but because the people have subscribed. --
Arguments have been taken from (promised) augmentation of stipends to hinder
subscription. Fear of worldly loss rather hinders men to subscribe, than
scruples of conscience. -- The prelates flight seems rather to have proceeded
from inward furies of accusing consciences, etc. -- In this day of the Lord's
power, his people have most willingly offered themselves in multitudes like the
dew of the morning. Others, of no small note, have offered their subscriptions,
and have been refused till time should try their fincerity, from love to the
cause, and not from the fear of man. No threatenings have been used, except of
the deserved judgments of God, nor force, except the force of reason from the
high respects which we owe to religion, to our king, to our native country, to
ourselves, and to our posterity Answers to doctors of Aberdeen, P. 42, 44.

The General Assembly 1649, in their act, Ses. 19th, appear so far from forcing
men into their covenant, that they earnestly enjoin and appoint the utmost
caution to be used for preventing such persons taking of it as did not
sincerely approve it, and resolve to prosecute the ends of it.


." (4.) Since the covenanting work was so remarkably countenanced by the Holy
Ghost, -- attended with perhaps more sincere mourning for sin, -- more serious
repentance and solid conversion to God, than has within an equal space of time
and place, happened any where in the world, since the apostolic age, -- and
since the covenanters in their vow deponed, that they covenanted without any
worldly respect or inducement, as far as human in firmity would allow, -- Take
heed, Sir, lest after your objection has manifested the carnality,
selfishness, and dissimulation of your own religious appearances. -- God, at
last, should publicly expose you as a blasphemer of his great work, and a
malicious slanderer of his people, as wilfully perjured.

OBJECT. V. "It is impossible our covenanters could understand their bonds,
particularly in that which relates to Popery in the notional covenant, or to
prelacy in the solemn league." ANSW. Ignorance indeed hinders a right and
acceptable swearing of oaths or covenants, but cannot invalidate their binding
force if once they be sworn; otherwise millions in Britain would, through
ignorance; be freed from all their solemn engagements in Baptism and the Lord's
supper; and thousands freed from all obligation of their oaths of allegiance or
fidelity to magistrates; or even their oaths to declare the truth and nothing
else, in witness bearing. Candidates for the ministry needed but keep
themselves in a great measure ignorant of the doctrines of the Confession of
Faith and duties of the ministerial office, in order to render their ordination
vows or subscriptions altogether unobligatory. (2.) Being trained up in the
abominations of popery or prelacy, or having frequent access to witness them,
our covenanting ancestors, who had common sense, might have more knowledge of
them, than most clergymen in Scotland now have; even as a common sailor, who
has served 20 years in a man of war, may have more knowledge of her tackling
and other pertinents, than all the learned doctors of fix British universities.

OBJECT. VI "If nothing be engaged to in these covenants, but what God has
declared or required in his word, they never could lay any obligation upon the
covenanters, much less a perpetual obligation upon their posterity: It is
absolutely inconsistent with sound philosophy, Christianity or common sense to
imagine that any human deed can bind to any thing declared in the word, or
required by the law of God" ANSW. 1. Then it seems the common Protestant
doctrine of our Confession of Faith, which in your ordination vows you solemnly
declared to be founded on the word of God, viz. That a man BINDS HIMSELF by
oath to what is GOOD and JUST, that in ANY THING not sinful, it BINDS to
performance; That by a vow we more strictly BIND OURSELVES TO NECESSARY DUTIES,
etc. must be grossly erroneous. (2) Instructed by some Papist or some
ringleader in the perjurious violation of these covenants in the last century,
you have indeed now hit upon a sentiment, which if proven, would effectually
undermine the obligation of our covenants, and for ought I know, all religion,
-- all morality, -- all mutual trust and order among mankind along with it. If
our promises, oaths, vows or covenants can have no binding force except in
things to which the revelation and law of God cannot reach; neither Adam, nor
Christ as Mediator, could bind themselves to fulfill God's law; and so there
must be no proper, no real covenant of works or of grace; and so no religion
among mankind. And, for the same reason, the promises of God, in so far as
their matter corresponds to his natural excellencies can have no binding force;
and thus the foundation of our faith and hope is quite overturned. All
engagements in Baptism or the Lord's Supper to believe what God reveals,
receive what he offers, and do what he commands, must be absolutely null and
void, destitute of all binding force. -- Jesuitical equivocation and mental
reservation are no more necessary in the making of promises, covenants or vows,
or in swearing promissory oaths of allegiance, fidelity or witness bearing; or
in subscribing Articles, Creeds or Confessions of Faith, Calls to ministers,
Bonds or Bills of service or debt. -- If the law of God, which is exceeding
broad can but reach to the matter of them, and require the believing,
maintaining or practicing of what is therein engaged, that alone renders them
null and void, and not binding to all intents, and purposes. And so there can
be no such a thing as perjury, perfidy, or breach of promise, except it be with
respect to such things as the law of God could not directly or indirectly
reach, -- which if it be as perfect and exceeding broad as the Bible affirms,
must certainly be very few and very trisling; -- for where there is no law, --
no binding of a law, -- there can be no transgression. -- Men's promises,
covenants, oaths and vows, in word or writ, in so far as they respect things to
which the law of God can reach, must be mere villainous impositions, seeming to
bind, while they do not, in the smallest degree; and therefore ought to be
detested, instead of being required, made, or trusted. -- For the same reason,
no commands of parents, masters, magistrates, or any other superiors being
human deeds, can have any binding force in any thing relative to religion,
equity, kindness, etc. to which the law of God can reach its requirements, and
hence cannot be lawfully OBEYED, or their authority regarded, except when they
commend what is absolutely indifferent and trisling. -- If human engagements
and commands can only bind men to that which is absolutely indifferent, it is
plain, that we can only be answerable to men for such parts of our conduct as
the law of God did not reach; -- but, let men once firmly believe, that their
promises, covenants, oaths or vows, and the commands of superiors, have no
binding force, but in that which is left absolutely indifferent by the law of
God; and that they are answerable to men only for such parts of their conduct
as the law of God could not reach, -- how naturally they will rush headlong
into all manner of profligacy, every man doing that which is right in his own
eyes, in every thing important. (3) How absurd to pretend honoring of
religion, or of the law of God by making it the murderer of that deputed
authority which God has, by it, granted to men; or of these covenants, oaths
or vows, which He has therein appointed as means of his worship -- Not only
scripture, but even common sense dictates, that the authority of God in his law
cannot be rightlyregarded, unless in a way of also regardingthat authority
which he has deputed to men, and all the commands or self engagements which
proceed from it, in due subordination to it. If I read my Bible daily, in
obedience to the command of God as my God in Christ, -- in obedience to Christ
as appointed by God to be my mediatorial, prophet and king, -- and at the same
time in due subordination hereto, -- in obedience to my civil ruler, as the
minister of God for good to men, -- in obedience to my pastor or church
judicature as the messenger of Christ to me, -- in obedience to my parents or
masters as God's deputy-governors over me, -- and in fulfillment of the vow,
which I as God's deputy governor over myself, have laid myself under, according
to his appointment, Where is the inconsistency? Must I wickedly put asunder the
immediate and deputed authority of God, which he has so closely and
delightfully joined together? God forbid.

OBJECT. VII. "What have we to do with our father's engagements in religion, to
which we never gave any personal consent, especially after we have become
capable to judge and choose for ourselves, -- nay to do with engagements, which
I cannot prove my ancestors ever took." ANSW. (1.) To rest obligation to pay
debt or perform duty on the debtor's proving the contraction of it, or
engagement to it, is highly absurd in itself, and opens a wide door for
breaking through almost every engagement. According to this scheme you may hold
your ancestors, who lived 130 years ago unbaptized Heathens and perhaps
yourself too, and so renounce your baptism, because you cannot prove that ever
you received it. If God, who is our creditor in these covenants, can prove our
ancestors taking of them, he will hold us bound by their deed; and even though
they did not take them, he will hold us bound by the deed of the society and
its representatives. (2.) You know, that Lord --, about four hundred years ago,
granted your ancestor, the valuable estate of --, to be held under him and his
heirs, for a very small honorary service, as an acknowledgment of vassalage;
and that the celebrated farmer A. B. about six years ago took a ninety-nine
years lease of one of your farms at a very high rent. Have you certified the
present heirs of that Lord and Farmer, That they are no-wise bound by their
progenitors deeds, unless they have given their own personal consent, -- and
that the one may recall your estate, and the other may keep your farm, and
refuse to pay you any rent? -- You have not, nor ever will You allow such
freedoms only to be used with God, -- not with yourself; -- too strong a
presumption, That you more value your estate and rent, than all that you hold
of God in religion, and all the honor you owe to him. (3.) If our fathers
bound us to any thing in religion which is not warranted by the word of God, we
have nothing to do with it, but to bewail their sin in such engagement. But, if
they bound us to what is commanded by the law of God, we must stand bound, --
till we prove from scripture, that vows binding to duty are not lawful; or that
fathers have no right to devote their children to God's service. No slothful or
wilful ignorance or withholding of personal consent, can so much as excuse the
nonperformance of such engagements. Nothing can free from their binding force,
which would not annual our baptismal vows. (4) Once more, Sir, be pleased to
review these public covenants of our fathers, in their principal contents and
meaning. They were a solemn acquiescence in and confirmation of God's grant of
the utmost ends of the earth to his Son Jesus Christ for hs possession. They
implied a solemn acceptance of God himself in Christ as the God, Savior and
portion of the covenanters and their posterity freely granted to them in the
gospel, -- and of his oracles and ordinances as the means of familiar
fellowship with Him, -- a resolution through his grace to retain him and them,
as their inestimable privileges, -- and a solemn engagement, thankfully to
improve these privileges in an holy obedience to all his commandments, to
promote his glory, and the temporal, spiritual and eternal advantage of these
covenanters and their seed. Now, Sir, do you so heartily envy our Redeemer his
Father's grant of the ends of the earth for his possession, Psalm. ii. 8. that
you would gladly renounce our ancestors solemn acquiescence in it? Do do you so
heartily dislike the having of a reconciled God in Christ for your and your
posterity's God, Savior and portion, and his pure oracles and ordinances for
your privileges, that you would fondly renounce a solemn acceptance of God's
gracious grant of them sealed and consirmed by the remarkable influences of his
Spirit? Do you so undervalue these enjoyments, and hate a grateful and
self-profiting obedience to all the commandments of God, that you would gladly
renounce a solemn obligation to it? Or, are you offended with the declared ends
of these covenants, viz. the glorifying of God, the preservation and
reformation of religion and promoting the welfare of the nation, -- and that
God may delight to dwell among us to the latest posterity? -- You will perhaps
pretend, that you love our reformed doctrine. worship, Presbyterian government
and discipline; but hate to be bound to them, especially by others than
yourself. But, Sir, for the same reason you must renounce your baptismal
engagements, and state your quarrel with God himself, who has appointed vows.
as his ordinance for hedging up men to their duty, and who has entered into
covenants with parents for their posterity as well as for themselves. Moreover,
it is scarce credible, that you can love every thing engaged to in a vow, and
yet hate to be bound by it, after God has signally countenanced it. It is
scarce possible, that my wife can dearly love her husband, and the order and
enjoyments of my family, if she hate and wish to renounce her marriage Vow.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by JOHN BRYCE, at his Shop opposite to Gibson's-Wynd, Salt-market,
either in Wholesale or Retail.
BOOKS IN FOLIO.
I. HENRY's Commentary, on the old and new testament 6 vols, large print. Price
L 3-10-0. II. A body of divinity, wherein the doctrines of the Christian
Religion are explained and desended; being the substance of several lectures on
the Assembly's larger Catechism. In one volume. By Thomas Ridgley, D. D. late
dissenting minister in London. Price 11s and 6d. III. The Christian in complete
armor, or a treatise of the saints war with the devil, by Wiliiam Gurnal, M.
A. Price 10s. IV. Josephus' whole works Price 12s. V. Clark's martyrology.
Price 9s and 6d. VI. Henry's practical works, half bound. Price 4s
BOOKS IN QUARTO.
VII. An exposition of the epistle to the Romans, with large practical
observations by the reverend Mr John Brown, sometime minister of the Gospel at
Rotterdam in Holland. Price 7s. VIII. Willison's whole works Price 7s.
BOOKS IN OCTAVO.
IX. Mr Ralph Erskine's practical works, 10 vols. Price L 1-8-0. X. The works
of the late reverend Mr Robert Trail, minister of the Gospel at London, 3 vols,
price 6s. XI. Religious cases of conscience answered in an evangelical manner,
by S. Pike and S. Hayward, to which is now added, not in any former edition,
the Spiritual Companion, or the professed Christian tried at the bar of
God'sword; being some pious thoughts inanswer to thirty practical questions, of
equal importance with the above cases -- Together with some free thoughts on
the character of the happy man. Price 2s and 6d XII. Familiar Letters on a
variety of religious subjects, by Jonathan Dickinson, A. M President of the
College of New Jersey. Price 2s. XIII. Christ crucified; or the marrow of the
Gospel evidently held forth in seventy-two Sermons on the whole fifty-third
chapter of the prophecy of Isaiah, by Mr James Du^ham, sometime minister of the
gospel in Glasgow. Price 2s and 6d. XIV. The unsearchable riches of Christ, and
of grace and glory in and through him in fourteen communion Sermons by Mr James
Durham, sometime minister of the Gospel in Glasgow. Price 1s and 3d. XV. A
practical exposition of the 130th Psalm, by John Owen, D. D. Price 2s and 6d.
XVI Christ the righteousness of his people; or the doctrine of justification by
says in him represented in several sermons preached at Pinner's-hall, London,
by Mr. Richard Rawprice 1s 6d

