REMARKS ON Dr. BOERHAAVE'S THEORY OF THE ATTRITION of the BLOOD In the LUNGS.

BY SAMUEL MUSGRAVE, M. A. Of Corpus-Christi College, OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCCLIX.

THE celebrated Dr. BOERHAAVE in his Institutiones Medicae, lays it down as a
fundamental Principle, that the Blood, in passing through the Lungs, undergoes
a Degree of Attrition considerably greater than in any other Part of the Body.
This Attrition, according to his System, eminently increases the Heat of the
Blood, at the same Time that it unites the elementary Parts of it more
intimately, and makes the whole Mass more dense and compact.

I am so far from assenting to this Theory, that I cannot but apprehend it is
abundantly confuted by the Texture and Appearance of the Parts themselves. Is
it to be supposed, for Instance, that the right Ventricle of the Heart, which
is thinner and apparently weaker than the left, can communicate a greater
Impulse to the Blood? This however is one of the first Requisites in producing
a greater Degree of Attrition. There is still a more remarkable Difference
between the Pulmonary Artery, and the Aorta; the one, being loose and flaccid;
the other, of so dense and compact a Nature, as to resemble, in some Measure, a
Cartilage. If we go on to examine the Texture of the Parts, through which these
Circulations are respectively performed, and observe how tender and spungy the
Lungs are, in Comparison of the Muscular Parts of the Body, we cannot avoid
coming to the same Conclusion; unless we would suppose that Nature made the
stronger Substance to resist the weaker Impression: which surely would be
interpreting its Meaning very perversely.

Neither is it material to say that the Blood may suffer considerable Attrition
by the alternate Motion of the Lungs in Respiration; either when expanded by
the Air, or compressed by the Thorax. For, Action and Reaction being equal, it
makes no Difference in the Effect, whether the Lungs be every Moment pressed
upon the Blood, or the Stream of Blood forced against the Lungs. Should we
therefore admit the Sum of the Attritions produced by these two Causes in the
Lungs, to be greater than that which subsists in the corresponding Arteries of
the Body, the same Objection would still remain, in regard to the Structure of
the Parts. It would still be impossible to comprehend how the Author of Nature
could proportion his Work so ill, as to make the Power of Resistance greatest,
where the Impression was least: to give an unnecessary Degree of Strength to
one System of Arteries, or an insufficient one to the other.

The Difficulties that attend this Theory are not more extraordinary, than the
Proofs, by which it is supported, are defective. In regard to the Velocity of
the two Circulations, Dr. HALLER expresses himself thus: Cum sanguinis tantum
per pulmones transeat in dato tempore, quantum per universum corpus humanum,
sequitur, ut sanguis per pulmonem in eadem ratione fluat celerius, qua ipse
pulmo minor est. ( In Boerhaav. Praelection. Acad. Vol. II. p. 169.) It is hard
to say whether the Doctor is more unfortunate here in his Premises, or his
Conclusion. In the first Place, that equal Quantities of Blood pass in equal
Times through the Lungs, and through the larger Circuit of the Body, is
asserted, as far as I can inform myself, without any manner of Foundation
either in Reason or Experiment. And secondly, admitting it to be true, the
Consequence would be just the contrary of what the Doctor supposes; namely,
that the Motion of the Blood through the Lungs must be slower, and in the very
same Proportion too, that he assigns for its being quicker. In a late Edition
of the Commentary on Boerhaave's Institutions, I find the following Note, by
which it appears that the Doctor begins to suspect at least, the Justness and
Force of his Reasoning: Haec omnia expedita sunt. Unum superest an velocius
trajicitur per pulmones Sanguis? Videtur etiam lentius trajici, quia sanguis
per corpus trajectus viam multo majorem eodem tempore absolvit, -- and video
hanc rationem fuse and ornate proponi a Cl. Krugero in Physiologia Germanice
scripta. Vol. II. p. 230. Ed. Gotting. 1745.

It has indeed been observed by Dr. Hales ( Haemastat. p. 67.) that in the
Lungs of a Frog, the Blood moves with greater Velocity than in any other Part
of the Body. We are not however to make any general Inferences from this
Phenomenon, which seems to depend upon the peculiar Structure of the Frog and
some other small Animals, the Heart of which, having only one Ventricle, must
of Necessity give the same Impulse to all the circulating Blood. We cannot, I
say, conclude from Instances of this Kind, that the relative Velocity of the
two Circulations is exactly the same in larger Animals, where the Heart, having
two Ventricles, may possibly impel the Blood with different Degrees of Force.

But to consider this Experiment in another Light. It appears that the Power
exerted at the Origin of the pulmonary Artery and the Aorta being equal, the
Blood moves with greater Velocity through the Lungs, than through any other
Part of the Body: what are we to conclude from this, but that the Blood Vessels
of the Lungs are larger, allowing the Blood to pass through them with greater
Freedom? Which being once admitted, Dr. Boerhaave's Theory is directly
overthrown, in the very Instance that Dr. Haller refers to in Support of it
(Vol. II. p. 230.) and still more clearly with respect to larger Animals, where
the Force impelling the Blood into the Lungs is with good Reason supposed to be
less than that which throws it into the Aorta.

FINIS.

