AN ADDRESS TO THE WHIG CLUB, etc.

AN ADDRESS TO THE WHIG CLUB: WITH AN ESSAY ON THE JUDICIAL DISCRETION OF
JUDGES, ON FIATS AND ON BAIL.

"And they do claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the premises, as
their undoubted rights and liberties, and that no declarations, judgments,
doings, or proceedings, to the prejudice of the people in any of the said
premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into consequence or example."
BILL OF RIGHTS. DUBLIN: PRINTED FOR J. MOORE, NO. 45, COLLEGE-GREEN.

MDCCXC.

AN ADDRESS TO THE WHIG CLUB.
IN your integrity and abilities the people confide for protection, justice,
and redress. Upon the principles on which you have associated, they rest their
hopes. They expect from your virtue, spirit, and perseverance, not only the
preservation of their rights, lately rescued from an usurped and foreign
control, but the perfection of their further claims, by removing that
corruption which has contaminated every department of the State; which has
tainted even the most subordinate offices, which has increased and is
increasing under the dictates of the British Minister, for the evident purpose
of repelling the generous energies of liberty.

Next to the law of religion, the law of the land should be the principal study
with a free people. A knowledge of the one being as essential to their temporal
interests as a knowledge of the other is to their eternal happiness. Wilful
ignorance will neither excuse the soul before the tribunal of the creator, nor
the person before the judgment seat of the constitution. To diffuse legal
information is the purpose of this essay: it is not written to acquire fame --
It is written to meet the approbation of the understanding, not to amuse the
fancy, and you will attend to it, from respect; to the subject on which it
treats.

It is not in ornaments that the merit of an argument consists. In viewing a
portrait, the figure and features are the principal objects of contemplation;
nor can the most elegant drapery, or beautiful coloring please the minds eye,
where the artist deviates from nature and truth. The intent will excuse in your
minds, the blemishes of the performance. The opinions, if not expressed, are
conceived in the ardor of patriotism; in disinterested love for a community,
where the writer received that life, which he thinks can only be well spent in
its service.

The writer should consider himself pusillanimous, and contemptible indeed, if
in the present contest between the friends of his country, and the purchased
dependants of the British minister, he withheld the little contribution of
knowledge, that his studies have afforded him. This is an era, where every
honest hand, every honest heart, and every honest head, should unite their
exertions, and with "a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all together,"
level to the earth that rotten fabric, where despotism holds private counsel
with corruption, for the treacherous purpose of sapping, and overturning the
noblest constitution that wisdom ever framed, or freedom ever defended.

The authority delegated by the people to their representatives in parliament,
has now reverted to its original possessors. This then is the time, they should
be informed how that trust has been executed, that they may know who has
deserved their approbation, who has merited their censure and resentment.

Measures militating with the liberty of the subject, have been carried into
effect by venal majorities. Every proposition brought forward to diminish undue
influence, to establish oecomy, to secure the revenue, to vindicate the law,
and to ease the people, have been negatived by the same correct power.
Oppression has experienced impunity, the injured have been denied redress, and
the authority of law and sound reason, has been trampled upon by the aggregate
force of numbers. This then is the time when constitutional knowledge should be
deseminated through the land, when the principles of legislation and law should
be made known to the people at large.

This is the time when men, who regard the interests of their country, who are
not equally insensible to the value of their own honor, and the good of
posterity, following the glorious example of your association, should with all
their powers, promote the spirit of liberty, till every heart pervaded by that
divine essence, which expands the understanding, and elates the mind, even of
the meanest peasant, vibrates with ardour and pants to spring forth the
guardian of those principles, which emanate from the bosom of God! -- The
protector of those laws, which are derived from the immutable decrees of the
eternal code, laid down by providence, and delivered to man at the creation!

The moment has scarcely passed since the people of Ireland demanded and
acquired the restitution of their rights, with arms in their hands. -- They
have laid down their arms, and their rights are again invaded. Where then are
they to find protection? They can only insure it by a strict and firm adherence
to those resolutions, which you have formed for their political creed. Let the
people zealously support the doctrines you have promulged; let them not tamely
sit down satisfied with the melancholy privilege of complaint; let them prove
by their spirit in the face of heaven and of the world, that by whatever right
Englishmen possess freedom, by the same right, Irishmen, and all mankind may
claim it.

The greatest and most distinguishing property of mankind is the immortality of
his soul; and we find the strongest evidence of that immortality in the freedom
of his mind, which includes the right of declaring all our thoughts! In this
free will, derived from God, originated the liberty of the press, that sacred
medium through which every freeman, who possesses the blessing, has a right to
declare his opinions on public men, and on public measures. Every unnecessary
restraint of the press, being then a restraint of the free will of man, is an
act of tyranny. By suppressing the exercise of intellectual liberty, slavery
has been established -- by giving it fair scope freedom has been restored. The
histories of nations are illustrations of this position, and recent proofs are
to be found in the fears of Spain and Portugal -- in the spirit of America and
France -- in the revolutions of Great Baitain and Ireland.

Then let the press exert her powers. Notwithstanding the restraints lately
laid on her natural vigor, she still retains sufficient strength to drag
before the people those pusillanimous, corrupt, and abdicating culprits, who,
deserting from the standard of freedom, have enlisted with prostituted
mercenaries, and war against common sense, and the law of the land.

The press still retains sufficient ability to hunt from their lurking places,
and scourge into shame and repentance, those adulating and degenerate monsters,
who point out to every alien plunderer, the secret springs, the honey, and the
treasures of the land; who have entered into conspiracies with strangers,
against its legal owners, and who have stripped the laborious peasant, and the
industrious manufacturer, of their fruits and earnings.

This is the moment to bring about political reformation, for extirpating
venality -- and the press is the most effectual means: Was the constitution
subverted, and tyranny seated on her throne, surrounded by her sycophants, her
parasites, her informers, her guards, her assassins, and her executioners, a
free press would restore the one and overturn the other.

THE ESSAY.
IT may be objected, that this essay is ill-timed; as tending to influence the
determination of suits now pending; but the objection is erroneous: The
questions are not of law but of fact. The determinations lie with juries not
with judges. The inquiries on the trials will be merely, whether the defendant
be guilty or not guilty of the injury laid in the declaration, and if guilty,
what damages the plaintiffs have sustained. The arguing points of law is at all
times legal, and the points herein discussed, are in every respect irrelevant
to the merits of the issues which the juries are to try. Any man as amicus
curiae may inform a judge on a point of law, but no man shall give information
to a jury on a fact, unless he be a witness previously sworn. Earl Mansfield
some years ago prohibited the publication of evidence given against prisoners
on examinations before jusstices of the peace, because the evidence being
exparte, the publishing of it tended to create an influence against the
prisoner, which might be injurious to him on trial; but no judge ever yet
asserted that animadverting on matters of law was illegal, and yet in the case
of general warrants, the press teemed with legal disquisitions.

The causes for promulging the law of the land, on the discretion of judges in
granting fiats, and on bail, having originated in the suits carried on against
Magee, the printer, it will be frequently necessary to advert to them. In doing
this, however, it is not intended to stigmatize with invective, or severe
imputations, the prosecutors or plaintiffs. The law gives a remedy for every
injury, and if they suffered, or imagined they suffered wrong, they had an
unquestionable right to seek redress from the laws of their country.

Magee, considered as a private individual, is equally an object of
indifference. This essay neither takes into consideration his guilt, nor his
innocence, that is the province of a jury; but the proceedings against him, are
of the most serious concern to the people; every individual, of whom are
entitled to inquire, whether his own rights and liberties have been attacked in
the person of his fellow citizen, under the sanction of a process, issuing from
a court of law, which, by its institution, is the guardian and protector of
those rights and liberties.

The honor of the laws of Ireland, its judges, and its professors, is also
materially involved in the ultimate decision upon these proceedings. The
English bar have treated them with contempt and reprobation. It is at this day
a common observation in Westminster Hall, that "Ireland will soon repent the
loss of writs of error and appeal to the courts of England." Must not the pride
and sensibility of Irishmen, suffer to the quick from the fallacious slander,
thus indiscriminately thrown upon all the judges, and all the barristers of
this kingdom? And must not these sufferings be aggravated in the minds of those
who know, that unsullied purity, extensive knowledge and great ability, have
ever been found at the Irish bar? That the bench is radiated by sacred worth,
spirit, and independence? That the law is promulged by judges of inflexible
integrity, united with intelligent minds, fortified by invincible virtue, and
dispising with equal contempt those accommodating fears, which sometimes give
temporary popularity, and those mean pliabilities, which bow and cringe with
implicit obedience, to the influence of every administration?

Under the torture of those sufferings, the writer of this essay with sedulous
attention, searched the records and repositories of the law, for precedent or
principle, upon which he could justify, excuse, or even palliate those
proceedings, thus reprobated in England.

What was the consequence?

He found that the opinions of the English lawyers, so far as they respected
arrests by fiat, in cases of libels, were well grounded; and, to his great
satisfaction, he is now convinced that the Irish bar, and every independent
member of the Irish house of commons, maintain the same doctrine, and have
thereby vindicated the jurisprudence of their country, and the ancient practice
of their courts from wanton and rash aspersions.

These extraordinary proceedings, thus universally condemned, of course
appeared to him as rash and alarming innovations on the indubitable rights of
the people. They appeared to him as grievances, springing from latent motives,
and tending either to oppress private individuals, or to establish precedents
for the purpose of coercing the liberty of the press, an object that has been
repeatedly attempted, and too often with success, since Mr. Pit has been
placed at the head of the British administration, though no minister was ever
supported by a more licentious abuse of his opponents.

The Case of MAGEE, is this,

He has been arrested on fiats, or judges warrants, and held to special bail in
several actions, brought against him for publishing libels on private
individuals; and he has been held to bail in the following sums -- four
thousand pounds -- eight hundred pounds -- one thousand pounds -- and two
thousand pounds, making in the whole, the sum of seven thousand eight hundred
pounds.

Now as each bondsman must swear himself, when justifying his bail, worth
double the sum for which he becomes bound, the bail demanded amounts to
thirty-one thousand two hundred pounds! and this unfortunate defendant is a
private subject -- the printer of a newspaper!

Two questions result from this case:

FIRST -- Were the arrests legal?

SECOND -- If the arrests were legal -- was the special bail demanded of the
defendant legal?

In answer to these questions it has been asserted --

That the right of granting a fiat is within the discretionary power of the
judge: And,

That the quantum of bail demanded is within the same discretionary power.

It is therefore the purport of this essay to show, that the charges exhibited
against the defendant being for libels, and the objects of the imputed
calumnies private individuals, the interference of a judge, by fiat, in such
cases, is unprecedented, the special bail demanded of the defendant excessive;
that neither of those acts of the judge are within the rules of legal
discretion, and that they are both contrary to the LAW OF THE LAND.

The granting of fiats, in any case, being discretionary, the first point to be
discussed, is the nature, and legal extent of that power.

LORD COKE defines discretion thus -- It is, says that learned jurist, to
discern between right and wrong, shadows and substance, equity and colorable
glosses, and not to do according to our will and private affections; and such
discretion is to be limited and bounded.

2 Inst. 56.
Therefore, whoever has power to act at discretion is bound by the rule of
reason and law. 2 Inst. 298.
For justices must remember that it is legal discretion, in which, in favor of
liberty, great tenderness is to be used, -- And though there be a latitude of
discretion given to one, Hob. 158.
yet he is circumscribed that what he does be necessary and convenient, without
which no liberty, no claim to jurisdiction can defend it.

For these reasons when the law leaves any thing, to any person, to be done
according to his discretion, 1 Lit. ab. 477.
the law intends it must be done with sound discretion and according to law.
And the COURT OF KING'S BENCH has a power to redress things that are otherwise
done, notwithstanding that they are left to the discretion of those who do them.

The superintending power which the constitution thus reposes in the court of
king's bench, does not, however, authorize the judges of that court to exercise
an uncontrolled discretion over the personal liberty of the subject. The
restrictive rules of legal discretion, are as binding on the chief justice and
his brethren, whether acting collectively, or individually as on any
subordinate magistrate; they are as strictly binding on judges in courts of
law, as principles and precedents are binding on the chancellor, or the barons
of the exchequer in the courts of equity.

If discretion was not thus circumscribed the subject, says Lord Coke, 1 Inst.
would feel it a crooked line, ruinous to the personal liberties of the people;
1 Black. 134.
whose liberties or rights have never been abridged, by the laws of England,
Mont. S.
without sufficient cause, L. b. 11. c. 5.
and can not ever be abridged, at the mere discretion of the magistrate,
without explicit permission from the laws.

1 Black. 6.
The reason of this doctrine is obvious. Civil liberty which is the very end
and scope of the English constitution, rightly understood, consists in the
power of doing whatever the laws permit; which is only to be effected by a
general conformity of all orders and degrees, to those equitable rules of
action, Inst. 1. 3. 1.
by which the meanest individual, is protected from the insults and oppression
of the greatest. If this was not the case there would be no liberty. For as
Smith in his Commonwealth of England observes, speaking of a court of equity,
there is as much difference between the consciences of men, or their
discretion, as between the measure of their feet; and as one man may have a
longer or shorter foot than another man, so may his conscience or discretion be
more contracted or extensive.

If the personal liberty of the subject was not thus protected by the law; if
the highest magistrate, the KING himself, was not thus restricted in the
exercise of discretion, weak, or corrupt judges, influenced by caprice, by
resentment, by party prejudice, or by obstinate ignorance might, under pretense
of legal authority, exercise an arbitrary power. The fiat or warrant would
attack the person of the destined victim -- The demand of enormous bail would
send him to prison, where his sufferings being unknown to the public, or if
known, being soon forgotten, inevitable ruin, to himself and family, would be
the consequence. Imprisonment is the least public, the least striking species
of punishment. Arbitrary power of inflicting it, is the most dangerous engine
that could be put into the hands of a man inclined to injure the rights of the
people. Therefore, the common law has wisely provided against it, by the writ
of habeas corpus, which by a declaratory enacting and penal statute, has been
made one of the great bulwarks of the peoples' liberties.

Happy is it for the subjects of the British and Irish crowns, that judicial
discretion is thus circumscribed within the bounds of reason, and controled by
the rules of law. Men of the most consummate knowledge and unbiassed probity,
are still men. Be their judgments ever so acute, their hearts ever so
incorrupt, yet even too exquisite a sensibility of nature may in some cases
misguide the one and pervert the other. Affection and prejudice operate
strongly in persons of lively sensations and urge them often to be unjust in
those very instances wherein they flatter themselves they are only generous.
Rare are those talents which constitute a great judicial character. It requires
a ready and clear apprehension; a found, distinguishing and exact act judgment;
a comprehensive understanding; freedom and liberality of thought; sagacity to
investigate the great principles of justice; and discernment to see where those
principles lead. -- BACON was the wisest chancellor ever sat in a court of
equity: JEFFERIES was a most excellent lawyer; but the one was corrupt, and the
other was cruel. Had these men been ignorant, would their oppressions have been
less?

Having shown the nature and legal extent of discretionary power in judges the
next point is,

Were the arrests, in the several suits against Magee for publishing libels,
legal?

The granting of a fiat, or judges warrant to hold a defendant to bail, is a
trust reposed in the judges, to be exercised only on extraordinary cases of
necessity; and in what ever case they are granted, the greatest delicacy,
circumspection and precaution should be attended to.

A fiat should never be granted in any case, but on positive affidavit, stating
special circumstances of actual loss, of mayhem, of battery, or that the
defendant is going to quit the kingdom. 2 Inst. 186.
If a person has dangerously wounded another, the justice ought to be very
cautious how he takes bail, till the year and day be past; because the
defendant is liable to an indictment for murder, if the wounded party die
within a year and day; and the same reason shows the necessity of granting a
warrant to apprehend the delinquent; besides in cases of actions for mayhem, or
violent battery, the wounds and the blows are possitive proofs of actual
injury, and a breach of the peace. The aggressor is therefore held to bail not
only to answer the damages, but to prevent his flight from justice.

When a fiat is applied for on a positive affidavit that the defendant is going
to leave the kingdom, and the proof of such fact is accompanied with the
further proof of specific damages, a fiat is necessary to render such defendant
ameanable to justice, and the consequences of the suit. It is more
expeditiously procured than the writ ne exeat regno, which may be granted, in
any case, 2 Chanc. Cas 245.
where there is danger of subterfuge from the justice of the nation though of
private concernment.

The law, or rather the discretionary power which should rule, the conduct of
the judge, in granting a ne exeat regno, applies strictly to the exercise of
legal discretion in granting a fiat.

LORD CHIEF JUSTICE HOLT says, a ne exeat regno ought not to be granted, 2
Chanc. Cas. 245.
but upon great reason and examination, otherwise a homine replegiando may lie.
Far. 9.


In the application for the writ ne exeat regno, which is a prerogative or
state writ, no general averment, though upon oath will be held sufficient.

The plaintiff applying for a ne exeat regno, Skinn. 136.
is to make positive oath of his debt, and the writ is always marked for the
sum sworn in the affidavit, Chanc. C. 115.
in words at length and not in figures, and the plaintiff swears the defendant
is going out of the kingdom, 7 Mod. 9.
which if he should do the debt may be lost. The order is till answer, or
further order, Ld. Ray. 696.
and the party is obliged to give security before the court will discharge the
writ, which security is taken by recognizance before a master, and is in the
penalty of what is sworn to be actually due and the sheriff takes bail
accordingly, Cas. in B. R. 562.
when he arrests the party thereon, S tiles 441. -- 442.
the sum swom to be due being constantly endorsed on the ne exeat regno as a
guide for the sheriff to take bail by.

From a comparative view of the writ of ne exeat regno with a judges fiat, it
appears then, that in granting the latter, the judge should consider and
strictly adhere to the legal rules of discretion which are strictly followed in
granting the former.

The reasons for granting a fiat should be equally strong. The facts stated in
the affidavit should be equally specific, and the situation of the plaintiff,
his credibility, and his cause of action, should equally entitle him to this
extraordinary interference and favor of the judge.

Thus in Hilary 1787, in the common pleas of England, an application was made
to Mr. Justice Gould to hold a defendant to bail, on a breach of promise of
marriage. The affidavit stated the cause of action, that defendant (a lady) was
going to quit the kingdom, and that plaintiff bad suffered five hundred pounds
damages. The judge held this affidavit insufficient, because plaintiff did not
specifically state the cause or causes by which the damages accrued, but gave
him leave to amend. He then swore, that at the particular request of the
defendant, he sold his commission for five hundred pounds, and spent the money
on her, she having positively promised him marriage, and to purchase him a
commission of higher rank, and on this affidavit she was held to bail.

No man will be so weak or so rash as to assert that the same caution and
precission is not necessary in granting a warrant at the discretion of a judge,
that the law requires in issuing a prerogative writ. The latter is a royal
trust reposed in the king, F. N. B. 95.
which the law does not presume that he will abuse, Lane 29.
or make use of to the prejudice of his subjects. 2 Co. 17. C. 76.
The former is a delegated trust from the king to his representative, 10 Co. 92.
the judge, who is sworn to execute it according to law, and who is responsible
to parliament for his conduct.

Having examined the nature and legal extent of discretionary power, the next
object is,

Whether a defendant can be held to bail for publishing a libel? against a
private individual.

Magna Charta enacts, that no man shall be imprisoned but by judgment of his
peers, or by the law of the land. The imprisonment of Magee has not been by the
judgment of his peers. Has it been by the law of the land? The answer is, there
is neither law nor practice to support such a proceeding; for the discretion
exercised, is not within the rules of " sound reason, law, necessity, and
convenience."

The definition of a libel shows, that it is not an offense, for which a
defendant should be held to bail, even on a criminal action.

A libel is a misdemeanor. and is esteemed as such, not for being a breach of
the peace, but for its direct tendency to a breach of the peace by provoking to
fight. Now, the law of England never intended, that the subject should be held
to bail for any misdemeanor, that did not amount to an actual breach of the
peace; 6 Mod. 178.
and formerly none could be taken up for a misdemeanor till indictment found.
Regina v. Tracy. 1 Haw. 130.
Therefore, mere words of passion, as liar, knave, or rascal, do not create a
forfeiture of recognizance to keep the peace, for they do not challenge a man
to break the peace, though they tend to it; from which the reasonable
conclusion is, that as slander does not incur a forfeiture of recognizance for
keeping the peace, neither is it an offense that can justify a judge, in
holding a defendant to bail.

It may be answered, that, though bail is not demandable in a criminal
prosecution for a libel, against a private individual, yet the plaintiff may
demand it in a civil suit.

Those who thus argue, are called upon to show a precedent, for holding a
defendant to bail on any action for a libel, except in cases of scandalum
magnatum, or slander of title. To make a plaintiff assessor of his owm damages,
conceived perhaps in a moment of heat or resentment would be, to establish the
grossest mischief. Damages cannot be ascertained but by verdict of a jury on
hearing evidence, and in many cases verdicts have been set aside for excess of
damages. Perjury and oppression would be among the consequences. It would be
deciding by anticipation on the quantum of damages, which the jury should give,
and on the oath of the plaintiff himself. It would be contrary to natural
justice, and the liberty of the subject, by enabling an inhuman plaintiff to
imprison a poor friendless defendant, upon an averment, for the space of three
terms, when upon trial it might appear that he was not guilty of the fact, or
that what he published was not actionable. It would be useless as well as
cruel, for thus punishing before conviction by fiat, when accompanied by
excessive bail, would be only a severity known in those countries, where
private informers are encouraged to prosecute men obnoxious to the state, and
where torture precedes trial.

The following causes lately tried at Westminster, are so many proofs, that it
is not the practice of the courts there, to grant warrants either in criminal
or civil sults brought upon libel.

These causes were --

An information ex officio, by the Attorney General, against Lord George
Gordon, for a libel against the Queen of France.

The King, on the prosecution of the Prince of Wales, against Walter.
Indictment.

The King, on the prosecution of the Duke of York, against Walter. Indictment.

The King, on the prosecution of the Duke of Clarence, against Walter.
Indictment.

Doctor Walcot, against Walter. An action.

Lord Loughborough, against Walter. Two actions.

Right Hon. William Pit, against Perryman. An action.

The Attorney General, against Perryman. Information ex officio.

The King on the prosecution of Mrs. Fitzherbert, against Doctor Withers.
Indictment.

The Attorney General, against Almon. Information ex officio.

The Attorney General, against Stockdale. Information by order of the King on
address of the house of commons.

The libels in all the above causes, (except the last), were of the most
atrocious nature. Among the prosecutors and plaintiffs are seen the most
illustrious characters. A queen, three princes, a lord chief justice and a
doctor of laws. Walter and Withers were convicted and severely punished. Lord
Loughborough and Mr. Pit recovered damages. Perryman and Almon fled and were
proceeded against by outlawry; yet, in none of these prosecutions and suits,
which all originated within the last two years, was a defendant held to bail,
or a fiat even demanded.

The above cases are proofs sufficient to show that on prosecution and actions
for libels, it is not the practice of the court of King's Bench of England to
issue such process: and it follows that such practice can not be legal here;
for practice must be consistent with law, and the common law of England, is by
the assent and adoption of the people of Ireland, the common law of Ireland.

Can it be shown that EARL MANSFIELD, a prerogative judge, who extended the law
of libels to its utmost stretch, ever granted a fiat in the case of a libel?
Certainly not; his lordship well knew it was not within his judicial
discretion; he well knew there was neither law nor practice to justify the
issuing of such a process, in such a case. To all those therefore who argue in
support of the legal authority to hold defendants to bail for publishing
libels, may be applied Earl Cambden's requisition to the noble lord above
mentioned, who in arguing the writ of error brought on the judgment in the
King's Bench on literary property said -- "Show me a case."

But supposing a few cases should be shown in support of practice, does it
follow that the fiats recently issued against Magee are legal? Practice, like
custom, if contrary to law cannot be sanctified by repetition or continuance.
General warrants were in practice from the revolution down to the 6th of the
present king, when after being solemnly argued in the court of Common Pleas and
King's Bench, they were declared illegal.

"The practice of a particular magistrate cannot control the law. Communis
error is not in this case sufficient to make law. This is the duty and
therefore doubtless the inclination of the court to stop the mischief as soon
as it is complained of." -- Case of General Warrants


These were the words of Dunning a great constitutional lawyer, 3 Burr. 1762.
and they made a proper impression upon the court: for in the same case Lord
Mansfield said, "a usage to grow into law ought to be a general usage, Money et
al versus Leach.
communiter usitata et approbata; and which after a long continuance it would
be mischievous to overturn: 3 Burr. 1762.
and, Mr. Justice Aston added, " No degree of antiquity can give sanction to a
usage bad in itself."

It may also be advanced, that if the judges had not authority to hold
libellers to bail, justice would be evaded and delinquents escape with
impunity. But is that the case? If the defendant flies, process of outlawry
issues against him, and the voluntary transportation of his person by flight is
a severer punishment in the eye of the law, than any the judicial discretion of
the court can inflict; restricted as it now is, by the benign prohibition of
the bill of rights, which declares that by the common law of the land, which
protects the ancient rights and liberties of the people, Stat. 1. W. and M.
excessive bail ought not to be required, c. 2. Bollingb. abridgm. tit. Liberty.
nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

The refusing of bail where it ought to be granted, that is in the language of
the old law, "to withold prisoners repleviable after they have offered
sufficient bail," 1 New ab. 228.
is an offense at common law and by statute punishable by grievous amercement;
2 Inst. 191. Hal. p. c. 97. Stat. West. 1.
and demanding bail, where it is not demandable, must of course appear an
offense of equal magnitude, 3 Edw. 3. c. 15.
as in each case the liberty of the subject is invaded. On this legal doctrine
much might be said -- but delicacy forbids the argument; -- the opinion of
Dunning before stated, pa. 36
will probably be followed -- 3 Burr. 17^2.
"It is the duty and therefore doubtless the inclination of the court to stop
the mischief ( of fiats) as soon as it is complained of."

Magna Charta has been mentioned and many other old statutes are equally
applicable. By the 25. of Edward 3. Stat. 5. c. 4. it is enacted that none
shall be taken by petition or suggestion to the king or his counsel unless it
be by indictment of lawful people of the neighborhood, or by process made by
original writ at the common law. 28 Ed. 3. c. 3.
Clear it is that a fiat is not an original writ, and it is equally clear, 48
Ed. 3. c. 3.
that an averment on oath, or general affidavit is merely a suggestion to the
king or to his judge and representative, and of course, that to take or
imprison a man on such affidavit is illegal. These are old statutes, but they
are living ones: the law, though it sleeps, never dies; and acquires respect
and reverence from antiquity.

BISHOP'S CASE, though not strictly in point, is not irrelevant to this
argument.

Bishop was held to bail in the sum of two thousand pounds, and two sureties of
two thousand pounds each. But mark the difference between the cases of Bishop
and Magee. Magee has been held to bail before trial in large sums, for
publishing libels against obscure individuals. 1 Strange 9.
Bishop was not held to bail till after conviction, on an information, for
publishing a seditious libel against the state. Bishop was not held to bail, on
an averment or suggestion to a judge. Magee has been held to bail on loose
affidavits, to answer damages estimated by the plaintiffs themselves. Bishop
was held to bail, to suffer the judgment of the court; he was committed after
conviction of course, and being afterward brought up, it was moved, he should
receive the judgment of the court, and be admitted to bail, being in a very ill
state of health. The chief justice said, the offense is so great, that an
adequate punishment may endanger his life, and to lessen the punishment will be
an ill precedent; therefore bail him for the present, ^ Strange ^.
and we will give judgment when he is better.

This was administering justice in mercy.

In England it is enacted, Stat. 12 Geo. 1. c. 29.
by a statute to prevent frivolous and vexatious suits, "that in all cases,
where the cause of action shall amount to the sum of ten pounds, affidavit
shall be made, and filed of the cause of action, and the sum or sums specified
in such affidavit, shall be endorsed on the back of such writ or process, for
which sum or sums so endorsed, the sheriff or other officer to whom such writ
or process shall be directed, shall take bail, and for no more."

This statute, though not of legal authority in this country yet being founded
upon reasons and principles of the common law, may be fairly cited in argument,
as may the cases resulting from it.

By these cases, and several of anterior date, Barnes 100, 105, 109.
it is now an established rule, of the courts at Westminster, Strange 1157,
1209, 1219, 1226.
that where the affidavit of the debt does not positively show the cause of
action, and specify the sum due, 1 Wills. 121, 231.
the defendant shall be discharged on common bail, 2. Burr. 625. where a great
number of cases are cited.
which is no more than filing as sureties the names of those well-known
non-entities, Messrs John Do and Richard Roe. Indeed so tenacious was the old
law of the personal liberty of the subject, 3 Burr. 1447.
and so cautious was it to discourage litigation, that formerly, before a
plaintiff could obtain a writ to hold a defendant to bail, he was obliged to
put in two sureties, that if he was nonsuit, or a verdict given against him, he
would pay the defendant's costs and damages* but this precaution has become
obsolete, and John Do and Richard Roe, who represent common bail in all cases,
are now also become the nominal and fictitious pledges to prosecute.

Where damages are uncertain, common bail is always taken, and there are many
cases to this point.

In Reynoldson v. Blades, Barnes 108.
[for covenant broken, (in the treasury) the court said, where damages can be
reduced to a certainty, as in covenant for payment of money, or where a tenant
covenants with his landlord to pay a certain sum for every acre of land he
plows up, or the like, plaintiff is entitled to bail, otherwise not, for it is
not reasonable that defendant should be held to bail for such damages as
plaintiff fancies he has sustained, and is pleased to swear to!

In the above case it was also held, Barnes 67.
that the old cases, Fleetwood, v. Poictier, etc. are not to be followed.

Shaw brought an action of debt against Hawkins on a bond, Shaw against
Hawkins, Barnes notes 72.
wherein defendant was held to bail on plaintiff's affidavit. Defendant moved
for a common appearance, and that plaintiff might produce the bond to the court
upon an affidavit, that, defendant had great reason to believe, that the whole
sum due was paid by one of his co-obligers, which would appear by endorsement
made on the said bond when produced. Plaintiff in answer made affidavit, that a
hundred pounds and upwards remained due to him on the bond after all just
allowances; that he had seen the bond which was uncancelled, and in full force
some few months before, but had mislaid it, and being severely afflicted with
the gout, could not search among his papers himself, so that it could not be
procured. It was urged by the plaintiff, that no declaration being yet
delivered, defendant is not entitled to oyer of the bond, but, after a
declaration, with a profert in cur, he was entitled to oyer. The court held,
that as the matter of bail is discretionary, and as the measure of the sum, for
which bail ought to be given, is with certainty only to be had from the bond
itself, the bond ought to be produced, and for want of producing it, a common
appearance was ordered.

Where the question was, whether the condition of a bond not appearing upon
record, bail ought to be required in a court of error. Spinks v. Bird. Barnes
72. 95.
The court held that matter of bail, is properly examinable by affidavit, and
the bonds being conditioned for performance of covenants, bail ought not to be
required on a writ of error.

Plaintiff made an affidavit, Le W^^^ v. Tolcher.
that defendant had seized, and detained his ship to his damage, Barnes 79.
and a capias ad respondendum was thereupon endorsed for all without a judge's
order. 1 Com. Dig. 507.
Rule for common appearance and supersedeas was made absolute; 1 Siderfin 183.
the damages in this case are uncertain, Compto^ 29, (...) Bail.
and plaintiff was not entitled to bail without a judge's order. In debt,
assumpsit, trover, covenant by aliam, bail is of course in trespass, detinue,
in special action on the case, or in covenant at discretion; for WORDS no bail,
unless slander of title.

The foregoing cases, will all apply as strongly in elucidation of the
subsequent part of this essay, as they have in supporting the anterior
argument. -- But if there was not a case or statute in point, the question on
fiats could be decided upon principles.

It is a principle that no man shall be imprisoned but by the judgment of his
peers or the law of the land -- Now the law of the land will not hold a man to
bail for slanderous words -- Magna Charta.
and where the law holds a man to bail, it must be for a sum specifically sworn
to, and the law of the land forbids that bail to be excessive. But if the
proceedings in the suits against Magee, were net prohibited by any positive
law, nor adjudged illegal by any precedents, yet they might be decided to be so
upon principles, and the law of England would be a strange science indeed if it
were decided upon precedent only. Precedents serve to illustrate principles and
to give them a fixed certainty; but the common law, which is every man's
birthright, is exclusive of possitive law enacted by statute, and depends upon
principles. Cowper. 39.

Having shown, that in actions for slander, neither the law of the land, nor
the practice of the courts justify judges, in holding defendants to bail.

The next question is:

Suppsiong a judge, or a court of justice, to possess discretionary power to
hold a defendant to bail on prosecutions, or suits for libels, was the bail in
which Magee was held, within the rules of that discretion and authorized by the
law of the land; or was it what the law terms excessive?

DALTON and BACON define bail, Dalt. 166. 1 New ab. 205.
to be an undertaking of a man's friends, before certain persons, for that
purpose authorized, that he shall appear at a certain day, and place certain,
and answer any legal charges exhibited against him.

This definition is grounded on that given by Bracton. Lib 3. Tract. 2. ca 8.
mu. 8. 9.
Bail, ballium (from the French bailler, which comes from the Greek, (...), and
signifies to deliver into hands) is used in our common law, for freeing, or
setting at liberty, one arrested, or imprisoned, upon any action, either civil
or criminal, on surety taken for his appearance, at a day and place certain.

The reason why it is called bail is, Impey's Practice in B. R. High-more on
Bail.
because by this means in the case of civil actions, the party restrained, is
delivered into the hands of those, who bind themselves for his forth coming, in
order to a safe keeping, or protection from prison, and the end of bail in a
civil action, is to satisfy the condemnation and costs, or to render the
defendant to prison.

In all civil actions, whereon bail may be taken, See the cases already cited.
there shall be a positive affidavit of the cause of action, and no averment of
damages is sufficient, though on oath, to hold a defendant to bail. If a judge,
will however take upon him to exceed his judicial discretion, and hold a
defendant to bail, upon an averment of damages, whereby he allows the plaintiff
to assess his own satisfaction, which is clearly the exclusive right of a jury,
he should take care, that the estimate of the plaintiff be not so high as to
imprison the defendant, but so low as not to prohibit what the law allows him,
"protection from prison;" for this would be tant amount to withholding of bail.

In criminal cases, bail is not only the means of giving liberty to the
prisoner, but at the same time, secures the extent of the law to punish an
offender, and as it is the undertaking of a man's friends, for the purpose of
his appearing to take his trial, or be dealt with according to law.; therefore,
bail demanded at the discretion of the judge, should always bear a relation to
the defendant's situation in life, as well as to the offense charged upon him;
for should the bail be excessive, the defendant is precluded from that
"undertaking of his friends," which the law allows, "to protect him from
prison, and the judge does not act according to the rules of law and sound
reason, which are the guides to judicial discretion.

The law, by which bail is regulated in criminal and civil actions, appears
clearly to be founded on the same principles, and to have the same great object
in view, "the liberty of the subject." It never was intended that a man should
be imprisoned for damages, till those damages were assessed by a jury, or for
an offense till convicted by his country, unless that offense was of such
enormity and notoriety, that the four walls of a prison only could be
considered certain security, for his person.

What is excessive bail, 1 New Ab. 226. Dalt. 14. 2. Hawk. p.c. 88. 89. Hal. p.
c. 97.
may easily be collected from the established law of the land. It is said, not
to be usual for the King's Bench to bail a man on a habeas corpus, on a
commitment for treason or felony, without four sureties, and the sum in which
the sureties are to be bound, ought never be less than forty pounds for a
capital crime; and in all felonies there should be two sureties; but it may be
higher in discretion, on consideration of the ability and quality of the
prisoner, and the nature of the offense.

Now it appears from the above authorities, that if bail is to be taken at all
for a libel, which considered as an offense, is not a breach of the peace, but
only a misdemeanor, tending to a breach of it, that the least bail, which the
law allows in cases of treason and felony, is the greatest that the discretion
of the court can legally demand for such a species of misdemeanor, particularly
where the libel is against a private individual, not against a peer, or against
the state.

The bail demanded from Magee in the different actions for slander has been
stated at the enormous sums of four thousand pounds, one thousand pounds, eight
hundred pounds, and two thousand pounds.

Let us see if such demands be consistent with the COMMON LAW.

Let us see if it be prohited by the STATUTE LAW.

These two points may be examined together.

The COMMON LAW lays it down, that justices must take care, 2 Hawk p. c. 89.
that under pretense of demanding sufficient surety, they do not make so
excessive a demand, as in effect to amount to a denial of bail. And in support
of this doctrine, a long string of cases might be produed, a few however will
be sufficient, as the great principles of bail are to be found in the petition
of rights, and the habeas corpus act. But it is to be observed, that in those
cases, even where the offenses charged upon the defendant have been enormous,
as actions for Mayhem, for violent and cruel batteries, Barnes Notes 76. 191.
for malicious prosecutions, etc. no bail has been demanded, that bears the
least proportion to the smallest sum demanded from Magee.

See the old acts cited in p. 36, 37. Stat. 1. Wm. and Mary c. 2.
The STATUTE LAW, after recognizing the oppressions of a tyrannical government,
prohibits the demand of excessive bail as a grievance; and it was one of those
complained of by the people, and provided against by the legislature at the
revolution, in the ever memorable bill of rights.

If it be said the bill of rights only respects criminal prosecutions; the
answer is, it is a statute declaratory of the common law, but if it was not,
acts of parliament shall be taken with latitude, and extended to cases within
the same reason, Barnes 89.
and calling for the same remedy. The nature of the case, Raymer v. Borough.
and the intent of the legislature, are to be considered, so in the
construction of the English statutes, the 11 and 12 of W. 3. Plowed. 366. Lord
Zouch's case.
and 12 Geo. 2. c. 40. the court of common pleas held both that as statutes
were made in favor of the liberty of the subject, Co. Litt. 24. b. 10 Co. 101.
b. Beausages case.
they may stand together. Now whatever reason can be shown against demanding
excessive bail on criminal prosecutions, Plowd. 147.
acquires strength when applied against such a demand, Iston v. Studd.
by the fiat of a judge, in a civil suit, wherein the damages Plowd. 36.
are undetermined, Platt v. the Sheriffs of London.
wherein the cause of action may be justified, or wherein no damages whatever
may be given, Brook tit. Parliament 20.
but on the contrary a verdict may be found for the plaintiff. To prevent
excessive bail is the reason on which the prohibitory statutes were founded;
Wentworth's Office of executors 67.
civil suits were not specified merely because the grievance now complained of
was not then known, Sir Thomas Jones 62.
but they are within the principle of the statutes, and of course within their
prohibition and relief. Plomer v. Witchcot.


In England, the principles of these statutes have been constantly kept alive.
LORD MANSFIELD, well knew, that the spirited people of that country, were more
tenacious of the sacred privileges of person, than of any other right or
liberty the constitution gives them, and therefore his lordship always set his
face against excessive bail, and against excessive damages.

When MR. LAURENS, the American, was brought before the court of King's Bench,
on a charge of high treason, his friends made a voluntary tender of one hundred
thousand pounds bail. Lord Mansfield refused to receive such bail, which he
termed enormous, and considered unconstitutional, and ordered the recognizance
to be made out for such a sum, as was proportioned to the offense charged upon
the prisoner, his rank, and situation in life.

The opinion of Mr Attorney General of Ireland (Wolf) delivered in the house
of commons, on Mr. Ponsonby's motion, co-incides with that of Lord Mansfield,
in the case of Mr. Laurens; That learned gentleman, News paper report of the
debate.
then declared, "that he did not think a man's ability to give large bail was a
justification for demanding it." --

In SIR THOMAS RUMBOLD'S case, Parl. Reg. of Eng. 1782. by Debrett.
a bill was brought into the house of commons, by Mr. Henry Dundass, then lord
advocate of Scotland, to restrain Sir Thomas from disposing of his property, by
holding him to bail, in the sum of one hundred and fifty thousand pounds.

The English lawyers, were rouzed at this unconstitutional requisition of the
Scotch advocate. --

The ATTORNEY GENERAL said, it was a hard case to impound a man's whole estate
merely that he should not fly from justice. See definition of bail ante.
The demanding of enormous bail he reprobated in the most pointed terms, as
amounting in reality to absolute imprisonment; because no man under such a rule
of bail, could indemnify others to become security for him.

The SOLICITOR GENERAL argued on the same points. He insisted that the demand
was contrary to the practice of the courts below; and that to exact excessive
bail was a breach of the constitution. The law condemned such bail as being
cruel, by inflicting punishment on the innocent -- by imprisoning before
conviction, men who could procure reasonable bail to enlarge them till the day
of trial.

MR. HASTINGS, impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors, by the house of
commons in the name of the people of Great Britain, was only held to ten
thousand pounds bail, though there could be no doubt of his capability to
procure bail to any amount.

From what has been advanced then it is clear,

That the judicial discretion of judges, is circumscribed and bound by the
rules of law and sound reason,

That bail can not be demanded on actions for slander, except in cases of
scandalum magnatum or slander of title,

That in all cases where fiats are grantable there must be a positive affidavit
of the cause of action and of the specific damages suffered by the defendant,

That the bail demanded in the case of Magee was excessive, and,

That in civil as well as in criminal actions, a demand of EXCESSIVE BAIL is
ILLEGAL.

N. B. The writer of this essay was not present, at the arguments in the court
of King's Bench, in any of the causes against Magee; nor was he in the house of
commons, when the question of fiats and bail came before the representatives of
the nation. Of the proceedings in the King's Bench he has seen no report. Of
the arguments in the house of commons, he has seen only a newspaper account,
which however, though probably taken down with inaccuracy, and printed in haste,
displays great constitutional and legal abilities. To avail himself of other
gentlemen's genius and learning, the writer would have considered mean and
unfair; he has therefore, with every possible caution, avoided the introduction
of any particular observation or expression used in the report he has seen by
the advocates of the people, though in principles it will be found he thinks
with them, and the study of these principles of course led him to the cases by
which they are illustrated.

FINIS.

