THE POETICAL WORKS OF MARK AKENSIDE.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

WITH THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

Genius of ancient Greece! whose faithful steps
Have led us to these awful solitudes
Of Nature and of Science; Nurse revered
Of generous counsels and heroic deeds!
O let some portion of thy matchless praise
Dwell in my breast, and teach me to adorn
This unattempted theme! -- Let me
With blameless hand from thy unenvious fields
Transplant some living blossoms to adorn
My native clime -- while to my compatriot youth
I point the great example of thy sons.
And tune to Attick themes the British lyre.
PLEAS. OF IMAG. ENLARCED Come, AKENSIDE! come with thine Attick urn,
Filled from Ilissus by the Naiad's hand:
Thy harp was tuned to Freedom -- Strains like thine,
When Asia's lord bored the huge mountain's side
And bridg'd the sea, to battle roused the tribes
Of ancient Creece. --
ANONYM. VOL. II.

EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1781.

THE POETICAL WORKS OF MARK AKENSIDE.

VOL. II.

CONTAINING HIS ODES, MISCELLANIES, HYMNS, INSCRIPTIONS, etc. etc. etc.

With what enchantment Nature's goodly scene
Attracts the sense of mortals; how the mind
For its own eye does objects nobler still
Prepare; how men by various lessons learn
To judge of Beauty's praise; what raptures fill
The breast with Fancy's native arts endowed,
And what true culture guides it to renown,
My Verse unfolds. Ye Gods or godlike Powers!
Ye Guardians of the sacred task! attend
Propitious: hand in hand around your Bard
Move in majestic measures. -- Be great in him,
And let your favor make him wise to speak
Of all your wondrous empire, with a voice
So tempered to his theme that those who hear
May yield perpetual homage to yourselves. --
O! attend, whoever thou art whom th^se delights can touch,
Whom Nature's aspect, Nature's simple garb,
Can thus command: O! listen to my Song,
And I will guide thee to her blissful walks,
And teach thy solitude her voice to hea,
And point her gracious features to thy view.
PLEAS. OF IMAG. ENLARGED. EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno
1781.

ODES ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS. IN TWO BOOKS.
BOOK I. ODE I. PREFACE.
I.
ON yonder verdant hillock laid
Where oaks and elms, a friendly shade!
O'erlook the falling stream,
O master of the Latin lyre!
A while with thee will I retire
From summer's noontide beam.
II.
And lo! within my lonely bower
The industrious be from many a flower
Collects her balmy dews;
"For me," she sings, "the gems are born,
"For me their silken robe adorn,
"Their fragrant breath diffuse."
III.
Sweet Murmurer! may no rude storm
This hospitable scene deform.
Nor check thy gladsome toils;
Still may the buds unsullied spring,
Still showers and sunshine court thy wing
To these ambrosial spoils.
IV.
Nor shall my Muse hereafter fail
Her sellow-lab'rer thee to hail,
And lucky be the strains!
For long ago did Nature frame
Your seasons and your arts the same,
Your pleasures and your pains.
V.
Like thee in lowly sylvan scenes,
On river-banks and flowery greens,
My Muse delighted plays,
Nor through the desert of the air
Though swans or eagles triumph there
With fond ambition strays;
VI.
Nor where the boding raven chants,
Nor near the owl's unhallowed haunts,
Will she her cares employ,
But flies from ruins and from tombs,
From Superstition's horrid glooms,
To daylight and to joy.
VII.
Nor will she tempt the barren waste,
Nor deigns the lurking strength to taste
Of any noxious thing,
But leaves with scorn to Envy's use
The insipid nightshade's baneful juice,
The nettle's sordid sting.
VIII.
From all which Nature fairest knows,
The vernal blooms the summer rose,
She draws her blameless wealth,
And when the generous task is done
She consecrates a double boon
To pleasure and to health.
ODE II. ON THE WINTER SOLSTICE, MDCCXL.
I.
THE radiant ruler of the year
At length his wintry goal attains,
Soon to reverse the long career,
And northward bend his steady reins.
Now piercing half Potosi's height
Prone rush the siery floods of light,
Ripening the mountain's silver stores,
While in some cavern's horrid shade
The panting Indian hides his head,
And often the approach of eve implores.
II.
But lo! on this deserted coast
How pale the sun, how thick the air!
Must'ring his storms, a sordid host!
Lo! Winter desolates the year.
The fields resign their latest bloom,
No more the breezes waft perfume,
No more the streams in music roll,
But snows fall dark or rains resound,
And while great Nature mourns around
Her griefs infect the human soul.
III.
Hence the loud city's busy throngs
Urge the warm bowl and splendid sire;
Harmonious dances, festive songs,
Against the spiteful heaven conspire.
Mean-time perhaps with tender fears
Some village-dame the curfew hears
While round the hearth her children play:
At morn their father went abroad,
The moon is sunk and deep the road;
She sighs, and wonders at his stay.
IV.
But thou my Lyre! awake, arise,
And hail the sun's returning force;
Even now he climbs the northern skies,
And health and hope attend his course.
Then louder howl the aerial waste,
Be earth with keener cold embraced,
Yet gentle hours advance their wing,
And Fancy, mocking Winter's might,
With flowers, and dews, and streaming light,
Already decks the newborn spring.
V.
O Fountain of the golden day!
Could mortal vows promote thy speed,
How soon before thy vernal ray
Should each unkindly damp recede!
How soon each hovering tempest fly
Whose stores for mischief arm the sky
Prompt on our heads to burst amain,
To rend the forest from the steep,
Or thundering over the Baltic deep
To whelm the merchant's hopes of gain!
VI.
But let not man's unequal views
Presume over Nature and her laws;
It Is his with grateful joy to use
The indulgence of the Sovran Cause;
Secure that health and beauty springs
Through this majestic frame of things
Beyond what he can reach to know,
And that Heaven's allsubduing will
With good the progeny of ill
Attemp'reth every state below.
VII.
How pleasing wears the wintry night
Spent with the old illustrious dead!
While by the taper's trembling light
I seem those awful scenes to tread
Where chiefs or legislators lie
Whose triumphs move before my eye
In arms and antic pomp arrayed,
While now I taste the Ionian song,
Now bend to Plato's godlike tongue
Resounding through the olive shade.
VIII.
But should some cheerful equal friend
Bid leave the studious page a while,
Let Mirth on Wisdom then attend,
And social Ease on learned Toil;
Then while at Love's uncareful shrine
Each dictates to the god of Wine
Her name whom all his hopes obey,
What flattering dreams each bosom warm,
While absence height'ning every charm
Invokes the slow-returning May!
IX.
May, thou delight of heaven and earth!
When will thy genial star arise?
The auspicious morn which gives thee birth
Shall bring Eudora to my eyes.
Within her sylvan haunt behold,
As in the happy garden old,
She moves like that primeval fair:
Thither ye silver-sounding Lyres!
Ye tender Smiles, ye chaste Desires!
Fond Hope and mutual Faith! repair.
X.
And if believing Love can read
His better omens in her eye,
Then shall my fears, O charming Maid!
And every pain of absence die;
Then shall my jocund harp, attun'd
To thy true ear, with sweeter sound
Pursue the free Horatian song;
Old Tyne shall listen to my tale,
And Echo down the bord'ring vale
The liquid melody prolong.
ODE II. FOR THE WINTER SOLSTICE, December 11, 1740 This Ode was afterward
entirely altered, as may be seen p. 7. -- The reader will not be displeased to
see it as it was originally written.
.
I.
Now to the utmost southern goal
The sun has traced his annual way,
And backward now prepares to roll,
And bless the North with earlier day.
Prone on Potosi's lofty brow
Floods of sublimer splendor flow,
Ripening the latent seeds of gold,
Whilst panting in the lonely shade
The afflicted Indian hides his head,
Nor dares the blaze of noon behold.
II.
But lo' on this deserted coast
How faint the light, how chill the air!
Lo! armed with whirlwind, hail, and frost,
Fierce Winter desolates the year.
The fields resign their cheerful bloom,
No more the breezes breathe perfume,
No more the warbling waters roll;
Deserts of snow fatigue the eye,
Successive tempests bloat the sky,
And gloomy damps oppress the soul.
III.
But let my drooping genius rise
And hail the sun's remotest ray,
Now now he climbs the northern skies,
Tomorrow nearer than today.
Then louder howl the stormy waste
By sand and ocean worse defaced,
Yet brighter hours are on the wing,
And Fancy through the wintry gloom,
Radiant with dews and flowers in bloom,
Already hails the emerging spring.
IV.
O Fountain of the golden day!
Could mortal vows but urge thy speed,
How soon before the vernal ray
Should each unkindly damp recede!
How soon each tempest hovering fly
That now fermenting loads the sky,
Prompt on our heads to burst amain,
To rend the forest from the steep,
And thundering over the Baltic deep
To whelm the merchant's hopes of gain!
V.
But let not man's imperfect views
Presume to tax wise Nature's laws;
It Is his with silent joy to use
The indulgence of the Sovereign Cause;
Secure that from the whole of things
Beauty and good consummate springs
Beyond what he can reach to know,
And that the providence of Heaven
Has some peculiar blessing given
To each allotted state below.
VI.
Even now how sweet the wintry night
Spent with the old illustrious dead!
While by the taper's trembling light
I seem the awful course to tread
Where chiefs and legislators lie
Whose triumphs move before my eye
With every laurel fresh displayed,
While charmed I rove in classick song,
Or bend to Freedom's fearless tongue,
Or walk the academick shade.
ODE III. TO A FRIEND UNSUCCESSFUL IN LOVE.
I.
INDEED my Phaedria! if to find
That wealth can female wishes gain
Had ever disturbed your thoughtful mind
Or cost one serious moment's pain,
I should have said that all the rules
You learned of moralists and schools
Were very useless, very vain.
II.
Yet I perhaps mistake the case. --
Say, though with this heroic air,
Like one that holds a nobler chase,
Y^u try the tender loss to bear,
Does not your heart renounce your tongue?
Seems not my censure strangely wrong
To count it such a slight affair?
III.
When Hesper gilds the shaded sky
Often as you seek the wellknown grove,
Methinks I see you cast your eye
Back to the morning scenes of love:
Each pleasing word you heard her say,
Her gentle look her graceful way,
Again your struggling fan^y move.
IV.
Then tell me, is your soul entire?
Does Wisdom calmly hold her throne?
Then can you question each desire,
Bid this remain and that be gone?
No tear half starting from your eye?
No kindling blush you know not why?
No stealing sigh nor stifled groan?
V.
Away with this unmanly mood!
See where the hoary churl appears
Whose hand has seized the favorite good
Which you reserved for happier years,
While side by side the blushing maid
Shrinks from his visage half afraid
Spite of the sickly joy she wears.
VI.
Ye guardian Powers of Love and Fame!
This chaste harmonious pair behold,
And thus reward the generous flame
Of all who barter vows for gold.
O bloom of youth! O tender charms!
Well buried in a dotard's arms!
O equal price of beauty sold!
VII.
Cease then to gaze with looks of love;
Bid her adieu the venal fair;
Unworthy she your bless to prove,
Then wherefore should she prove your care?
No: lay your myrtle garland down,
And let a while the willow's crown
With luckier omens bind your hair.
VIII.
O just ecaped the faithless main,
Though driven unwilling on the land,
To guide your favored steps again
Behold your better genius stand!
Where Truth revolves her page divine,
Where Virtue leads to Honor's shrine,
Behold he lifts his awful hand!
IX.
Fix but on these your ruling aim
And Time, the sire of manly care,
Will Fancy's dazzling colors tame,
A sob'rer dress will Beauty wear;
Then shall Esteem by Knowledge led
Inthrone within your heart and head
Some happier love, some truer fair.
ODE IV. AFFECTED INDIFFERENCE. TO THE SAME.
I.
YES, you contemn the perjured maid
Who all your favorite hopes betrayed,
Nor though her heart should home return,
Her tuneful tongue its falsehood mourn,
Her winning eyes your faith implore,
Would you her hand receive again,
Or once dissemble your disdain,
Or listen to the Siren's theme,
Or stoop to love, since now esteem,
And confidence, and friendship, is no more.
II.
Yet tell me Phaedria! tell me why,
When summoning your pride, you try
To meet her looks with cool neglect,
Or cross her walk with slight respect,
(For so is falsehood best repaid)
Whence do your cheeks indignant glow?
Why is your struggling tongue so slow?
What means that darkness on your brow?
As if with all her broken vow
You meant the fair apostate to upbraid?
ODE V. AGAINST SUSPICION.
I.
On fly! it is dire Suspicion's mien,
And meditating plagues unseen
The sorc'ress hither bends;
Behold her torch in gall imbrued,
Behold -- her garment drops with blood
Of lovers and of friends.
II.
Fly far! already in your eyes
I see a pale suffusion rise;
And soon through every vein,
Soon will her secret venom spread,
And all your heart and all your head
Imbibe the potent stain.
III.
Then many a demon will she raise
To vex your sleep, to haunt your ways,
While gleams of lost delight
Raise the dark tempest of the brain,
As lightning shines across the main
Through whirlwinds and through night.
IV.
No more can Faith or Candor move,
But each ingenuous deed of love
Which Reason would applaud
Now smiling over her dark distress
Fancy malignant strives to dress
Like Injury and Fraud.
V.
Farewell to Virtue's peaceful times;
Soon will you stoop to act the crimes
Which thus you stoop to fear.
Guilt follows guilt; and where the train
Begins with wrongs of such a stain
What horrors form the rear!
VI.
It Is thus to work her baleful power
Suspicion waits the sullen hour
Of fretfulness and strife,
When care the infirmer bosom wrings,
Or Eurus waves his murky wings
To damp the seats of life.
VII.
But come, forsake the scene unblest
Which first beheld your faithful breast
To groundless fears a prey;
Come where with my prevailing lyre
The skies, the streams, the groves, conspire
To charm your doubts away.
VIII.
Throned in the Sun's descending car
What power unseen diffuseth far
This tenderness of mind?
What genius smiles on yonder flood?
What god in whispers from the wood
Bids every thought be kind?
IX.
O thou! whatever thy awful name,
Whose wisdom our untoward frame
With social love restrains;
Thou! who by fair affection's ties
Giv'st us to double all our joys
And half disarm our pains;
X.
Let universal candor still,
Clear as yon' heav'n-reflecting rill,
Preserve my open mind,
Nor this nor that man's crooked ways
One sordid doubt within me raise
To injure humankind.
ODE VI. HYMN TO CHEERFULNESS.
How thick the shades of evening close!
How pale the sky with weight of snows!
Haste, light the tapers, urge the fire,
And bid the joyless day retire.
-- Alas! in vain I try within
To brighten the dejected scene;
While roused by grief these fiery pains
Tear the frail texture of my veins,
While Winter's voice that storms around,
And yon' deep death-bell's groaning sound,
Renew my mind's oppressive gloom
Till starting Horror shakes the room.
Is there in Nature no kind power
To sooth Affliction's lonely hour?
To blunt the edge of dire disease,
And teach these wintry shades to please?
Come, Cheerfulness! triumphant Fair!
Shine through the hovering cloud of care:
O sweet of language, mild of mien!
O Virtue's friend, and Pleasure's queen!
Assuage the flames that burn my breast,
Compose my jarring thoughts to rest,
And while thy gracious gifts I feel
My song shall all thy praise reveal.
As once (it was in Astrea's reign)
The vernal powers renewed their train,
It happened that immortal Love
Was ranging through the spheres above,
And downward hither cast his eye
The year's returning pomp to spy.
He saw the radiant god of Day
Waft in his car the rosy May;
The fragrant Airs and genial Hours
Were shedding round him dews and flowers;
Before his wheels Aurora past,
And Hesper's golden lamp was last:
But fairest of the blooming throng
When Health majestic moved along,
Delighted to survey below
The joys which from her presence flow,
While earth enlivened hears her voice,
And swains, and flocks, and fields, rejoice,
Then mighty Love her charms confessed,
And soon his vows inclined her breast,
And known from that auspicious morn
The pleasing Cheerfulness was born.
Thou, Cheerfulness! by Heaven designed
To sway the movements of the mind,
Whatever fretful passion springs,
Whatever wayward fortune brings
To disarrange the power within
And strain the musical machine,
Thou, Coddess! thy attemp'ring hand
Does each discordant string command,
Refines the soft and swells the strong,
And joining Nature's general song
Through many a varying tone unfolds
The harmony of human souls.
Fair Guardian of domestic life!
Kind Banisher of homebred strife!
Nor sullen lip nor taunting eye
Deforms the scene where thou art by;
No sickening husband damns the hour
Which bound his joys to female power;
No pining mother weeps the cares
Which parents waste on thankless heirs;
The officious daughters pleased attend,
The brother adds the name of friend:
By thee with flowers their board is crowned,
With songs from thee their walks resound,
And morn with welcome luster shines,
And evening unperceived declines.
Is there a youth whose anxious heart
Labors with love's unpitied smart?
Though now he stray by rills and bowers,
And weeping waste the lonely hours,
Or if the nymph her audience deign
Debase the story of his pain
With slavish looks, discolored eyes,
And accents falt'ring into sighs,
Yet thou, auspicious Power! with ease
Can yield him happier arts to please,
Inform his mien with manlier charms,
Instruct his tongue with nobler arms,
With more commanding passion move,
And teach the dignity of love.
Friend to the Muse and all her train!
For thee I court the Muse again;
The Muse for thee may well exert
Her pomp, her charms, her fondest art,
Who owes to thee that pleasing sway
Which earth and peopled heaven obey.
Let Melancholy's plaintive tongue
Repeat what later bards have sung,
But thine was Homer's ancient might,
And thine victorious Pindar's flight;
Thy hand each Lesbian wreath attired,
Thy lips Sicilian reeds inspired;
Thy spirit lent the glad perfume
Whence yet the stow'rs of Teos bloom,
Whence yet from Tibur's Sabine vale
Delicious blows the enlivening gale,
While Horace calls thy sportive choir,
Heroes and nymphs, around his lyre.
But see where yonder pensive sage
(A prey perhaps to Fortune's rage,
Perhaps by tender griefs oppressed,
Or glooms congenial to his breast)
Retires in desert scenes to dwell,
And bids the joyless world farewell:
Alone he treads the autumnal shade,
Alone beneath the mountain laid
He sees the nightly damps ascend
And gathering storms aloft impend,
He hears the neighboring surges roll,
And raging thunders shake the pole,
Then struck by every object round,
And stunned by every horrid sound,
He asks a clue for Nature's ways,
But evil haunts him through the maze;
He sees ten thousand demons rise
To wield the empire of the skies,
And Chance and Fate assume the rod,
And Malice blot the throne of God.
-- O thou! whose pleasing power I sing,
Thy lenient influence hither bring,
Compose the storm, dispel the gloom,
Till Nature wear her wonted bloom
Till fields and shades their sweets exhale,
And music swell each opening gale;
Then over his breast thy sostness pour,
And let him learn the timely hour
To trace the world's benignant laws,
And judge of that Presiding Cause
Who founds on discord Beauty's reign,
Converts to pleasure every pain,
Subdues each hostile form to rest,
And bids the universe be blessed.
O thou! whose pleasing power I sing,
If right I touch the votive string,
If equal praise I yield thy name,
Still govern thou thy poet's flame,
Still with the Muse my bosom share,
And sooth to peace intruding care;
But most exert thy pleasing power
On friendship's consecrated hour,
And while my Sophron points the road
To godlike Wisdom's calm abode,
Or warm in freedom's ancient cause
Traceth the source of Albion's laws,
Add thou over all the generous toil
The light of thy unclouded smile.
But if by Fortune's stubborn sway
From him and friendship torn away,
I court the Muse's healing spell
For griefs that still with absence dwell,
Do thou conduct my fancy's dreams
To such indulgent placid themes
As just the struggling breast may cheer,
And just suspend the starting tear,
Yet leave that sacred sense of woe
Which none but friends and lovers know.
ODE VII. ON THE USE OF POETRY.
I.
NOT for themselves did humankind
Contrive the parts by Heaven assigned
On life's wide scene to play:
Not Scipio's force nor Caesar's skill
Can conquer glory's arduous hill
If Fortune close the way.
II.
Yet still the self-depending soul,
Though last and least in Fortune's roll,
His proper sphere commands,
And knows what Nature's seal bestowed,
And sees before the throne of God
The rank in which he stands.
III.
Who trained by laws the future age,
Who rescued nations from the rage
Of partial factious power,
My heart with distant homage views,
Content if thou, celestial Muse!
Did rule my natal hour.
IV.
Not far beneath the hero's feet
Nor from the legislator's seat
Stands far remote the bard:
Though not with public terrors crowned
Yet wider shall his rule be found,
More lasting his award.
V.
Lycurgus fashioned Sparta's fame,
And Pompey to the Roman name
Gave universal sway.
Where are they? -- Homer's reverend page
Holds empire to the thirtieth age,
And tongues and climes obey.
VI.
And thus when William's acts divine
No longer shall from Bourbon's line
Draw one vindictive vow,
When Sidney shall with Cato rest,
And Russel move the patriot's breast
No more than Brutus now;
VII.
Yet then shall Shakespeare's powerful art
Over every passion every heart
Confirm his awful throne;
Tyrants shall bow before his laws,
And freedom's, glory's, virtue's, cause
Their dread assertor own.
ODE VIII. ON LEAVING HOLLAND.
I. 1.
FAREWELL to Leyden's lonely bound,
The Belgian Muse's sober seat,
Where dealing frugal gifts around
To all the favorites at her feet
She trains the body's bulky frame
For passive persevering toils;
And lest from any prouder aim
The daring mind should scorn her homely spoils,
She breathes maternal fogs to damp its restless flame.
I. 2.
Farewell the grave pacifick air
Where never mountain zephir blew,
The marshy levels lank and bare
Which Pan which Ceres never knew,
The Naiads with obscene attire
Urging in vain their urns to flow,
While round them chant the croking choir,
And happily sooth some lover's prudent woe,
Or prompt some restive bard and modulate his lyre,
I. 3.
Farewell ye Nymphs! whom sober care of gain
Snatched in your cradles from the god of Love;
She rendered all his boasted arrows vain,
And all his gifts did he in spite remove:
Ye too, the slow-ey'd Fathers of the land!
With whom dominion steals from hand to hand,
Unown'd, undignify'd by public choice,
I go where Liberty to all is known,
And tells a monarch on his throne
He reigns not but by her preserving voice.
II. 1.
O my loved England! when with thee
Shall I sit down to part no more?
Far from this pale discolored sea
That sleeps upon the reedy shore,
When shall I plough thy azure tide?
When on thy hills the flocks admire,
Like mountain snows, till down their side
I trace the village and the sacred spire,
While bowers and copses green the golden slope divide?
II. 2.
Ye Nymphs who guard the pathless grove,
Ye Blueey'd Sisters of the streams!
With whom I wont at morn to rove,
With whom at noon I talked in dreams,
O take me to your haunts again,
The rocky spring the greenwood glade,
To guide my lonely footsteps deign,
To prompt my slumbers in the murmuring shade,
And sooth my vacant ear with many an airy strain!
II. 3.
And thou, my faithful Harp! no longer mourn
Thy drooping master's inauspicious hand;
Now brighter skies and fresher gales return,
Now fairer maids thy melody demand.
Daughters of Albion! listen to my lyre:
O Phoebus! guardian of th'Aonian choir,
Why sounds not mine harmonious as thy own,
When all the virgin deities above
With Venus and with Juno move
In concert round the Olympian Father's throne?
III. 1.
Thee too, Protectress of my lays,
Elate with whose majestic call
Above degenerate Latium's praise,
Above the slavish boast of Gaul,
I dare from impious thrones reclaim
And wanton Sloth's ignoble charms
The honors of a poet's name,
To Somers' counsels or to Hamden's arms
Thee, Freedom! I rejoin, and bless thy genuine flame.
III. 2.
Great Citizen of Albion! thee
Heroic Valor still attends,
And useful Science, pleased to see
How Art her studious toil extends,
While Truth diffusing from on high
A luster unconfined as day
Fills and commands the public eye,
Till pierced and sinking by her powerful ray
Tame Faith and monkish Awe like nightly demons fly.
III. 3.
Hence the whole land the patriot's ardour shares,
Hence dread Religion dwells with social Joy,
And holy passions and unsullied cares
In youth, in age, domestic life employ.
O fair Britannia! hail! -- With partial love
The tribes of men their native seats approve,
Unjust and hostile to each foreign fame;
But when for generous minds and manly laws
A nation holds her prime applause
There public zeal shall all reproof disclaim.
ODE IX. TO CURIO See The Epistle to Curio in this volume.
, MDCCXLIV.
I.
THRICE has the spring beheld thy faded fame
Since I exulting grasped the tuneful shell,
Eager through endless years to sound thy name,
Proud that my memory with thine should dwell,
How have thou stained the splendor of my choice!
Those godlike forms which hovered round thy voice,
Laws, Freedom, Glory, whither are they flown?
What can I now of thee to time report
Save thy fond Country made thy impious sport,
Her fortune and her hope the victims of thy own?
II.
There are with eyes unmoved and reckless heart
Who saw thee from thy summit fall thus low,
Who deemed thy arm extended but to dart
The public vengeance on thy private foe:
But spite of every gloss of envious minds,
The owl-ey'd race whom virtue's luster blinds,
Who sagely prove that each man has his price,
I still believed thy aim from blemish free,
I yet, even yet, believe it spite of thee
And all thy painted pleas to greatness and to vice.
III.
"Thou did not dream of Liberty decayed,
"Nor wish to make her guardian laws more strong,
"But the rash many first by thee misled
"Bore thee at length unwillingly along."
Rise from your sad abodes ye cursed of old
For faith deserted or for cities sold!
Own here one untried unexampled deed,
One mystery of shame from Curio learn,
To beg the infamy he did not earn,
And 'scape in Guilt's disguise from Virtue's offered meed.
IV.
For saw we not that dangerous power avowed
Whom Freedom often has found her mortal bane,
Whom Public Wisdom ever strove to exclude,
And but with blushes suff'reth in her train?
Corruption vaunted her bewitching spoils,
Over court over senate spread in pomp her toils,
And called herself the states directing soul,
Till Curio like a good magician tried,
With Eloquence and Reason at his side,
By strength of holier spells the enchantress to control.
V.
Soon with thy country's hope thy fame extends;
The rescued merchant often thy words resounds:
Thee and thy cause the rural hearth defends;
His bowl to thee the grateful sailor crowns:
The learned recluse with awful zeal who read
Of Grecian heroes Roman patriots dead,
Now with like awe does living merit scan,
While he whom virtue in his blessed retreat
Bad social ease and public passions meet
Ascends the civil scene, and knows to be a man.
VI.
At length in view the glorious end appeared,
We saw thy spirit through the senate reign,
And Freedom's friends thy instant omen heard
Of laws for which their fathers bled in vain.
Waked in the strise the public Genius rose
More keen, more ardent, from his long repose;
Deep through her bounds the City felt his call;
Each crowded haunt was stirred beneath his power,
And murmuring challenged the deciding hour
Of that too vast event the hope and dread of all.
VII.
O ye good Powers who look on humankind!
Instruct the mighty moments as they roll,
And watch the fleeting shapes in Curio's mind,
And steer his passions steady to the goal.
O Alfred! father of the English name,
O valiant Edward! first in civil fame,
O William! height of public virtue pure,
Bend from your radiant seats a joyful eye,
Behold the sum of all your labors nigh,
Your plans of law complete, your ends of rule secure.
VIII.
'Twas then -- O shame! O soul from faith estranged!
O Albion! often to flattering vows a prey,
'Twas then -- thy thought what sudden frenzy changed?
What rushing palsy took thy strength away?
Is this the man in freedom's cause approved,
The man so great, so honored, so beloved,
Whom the dead envied and the living blessed,
This patient slave by tinsel bonds allured,
This wretched suitor for a boon abjured,
Whom those that feared him scorn, that trusted him detest?
IX.
O lost alike to action and repose!
With all that habit of familiar fame
Sold to the mock'ry of relentless foes,
And doomed to exhaust the dregs of life in shame,
To act with burning brow and throbbing heart
A poor deserter's dull exploded part,
To slight the favor thou can hope no more,
Renounce the giddy crowd, the vulgar wind,
Charge thy own lightness on thy Country's mind,
And from her voice appeal to each tame foreign shore.
X.
But England's sons to purchase thence applause
Shall never the loyalty of slaves pretend,
By courtly passions try the public cause,
Nor to the forms of rule betray the end.
O Race erect! by manliest passions moved,
The labors which to Virtue stand approved
Prompt with a lover's fondness to survey,
Yet where Injustice works her wilful claim
Fierce as the flight of Jove's destroying flame,
Impatient to confront and dreadful to repay.
XI.
These thy heart owns no longer. In their room
See the grave queen of pageants, Honor, dwell
Couched in thy bosom's deep tempestuous gloom
Like some grim idol in a sorc'rer's cell:
Before her rites thy sickening reason flew,
Divine Persuasion from thy tongue withdrew,
While Laughter mocked or Pity stole a sigh.
Can Wit her tender movements rightly frame
Where the prime function of the foul is lame?
Can Fancy's feeble springs the force of truth supply?
XII.
But come; it is time; strong destiny impends
To shut thee from the joys thou have betrayed:
With princes filled the solemn fane ascends
By Infamy the mindful demon swayed;
There vengeful vows for guardian laws essac'd,
From nations fettered and from towns laid waste,
For ever through the spacious courts resound;
There long Posterity's united groan,
And the sad charge of horrors not their own,
Assail the giant chiefs and press them to the ground.
XIII.
In sight old Time, imperious judge! awaits:
Above revenge, or fear, or pity, just
He urges onward to those guilty gates
The Great, the Sage, the Happy, and August,
And still he asks them of the hidden plan
Whence every treaty every war began,
Evolves their secrets and their guilt proclaims,
And still his hands despoil them on the road
Of each vain wreath by lying bards bestowed,
And crush their trophies huge and raze their sculptured names.
XIV.
Ye mighty Shades! arise, give place, attend;
Here his eternal mansion Curio seeks;
-- Low does proud Wentworth to the stranger bend,
And his dire welcome hardy Clifford speaks:
"He comes whom Fate with surer arts prepared
"TO accomplish all which we but vainly dared,
"Whom over the stubborn herd she taught to reign,
"Who soothed with gaudy dreams their raging power
"Even to its last irrevocable hour,
"Then baffled their rude strength and broke them to the chain."
XV.
But ye whom yet wise Liberty inspires,
Whom for her champions over the world she claims,
(That household godhead whom of old your sires
Sought in the woods of Elbe and bore to Thames)
Drive ye this hostile omen far away;
Their own fell efforts on her foes repay;
Your wealth, your arts, your fame, be here is alone:
Still gird your swords to combat on her side,
Still frame your laws her generous test to abide,
And win to her defense the altar and the throne.
XVI.
Protect her from yourselves ere yet the flood
Of golden luxury which commerce pours
Has spread that selfish fierceness through your blood
Which not her lightest discipline endures:
Snatch from fantastic demagogues her cause;
Dream not of Numa's manners Plato's laws:
A wiser founder and a nobler plan
O Sons of Alfred! were for you assigned:
Bring to that birthright but an equal mind
And no sublimer lot will Fate reserve for man.
ODE X. TO THE MUSE.
I.
QUEEN of my songs, harmonious Maid!
Ah! why have thou withdrawn thy aid?
Ah! why forsaken thus my breast,
With inauspicious damps oppressed?
Where is the dread prophetic heat
With which my bosom wont to beat?
Where all the bright mysterious dreams
Of haunted groves and tuneful streams
That wooed my genius to divinest themes?
II.
Say, Goddess! can the festal board,
Or young Olympia's form adored,
Say, can the pomp of promised fame
Relume thy faint thy dying flame?
Or have melodious airs the power
To give one free poetic hour?
Or from amid the Elysian train
The soul of Milton shall I gain
To win thee back with some celestial strain?
III.
O powerful strain! O sacred soul!
His numbers every sense control:
And now again my bosom burns;
The Muse, the Muse herself, returns!
Such on the banks of Tyne confessed
I hailed the fair immortal guest
When first she sealed me for her own,
Made all her blissful treasures known,
And bad me swear to follow her alone.
ODE XI. ON LOVE. TO A FRIEND.
I.
NO, foolish Youth! -- To virtuous fame
If now thy early hopes be vowed,
If true ambition's nobler flame
Command thy footsteps from the crowd,
Lean not to Love's enchanting snare;
His songs, his words, his looks, beware,
Nor join his votaries the young and fair.
II.
By thought, by dangers, and by toils,
The wreath of just renown is worn;
Nor will Ambition's awful spoils
The flowery pomp of Ease adorn;
But love unbends the force of thought,
By love unmanly fears are taught,
And love's reward with gaudy sloth is bought.
III.
Yet thou have read in tuneful lays,
And heard from many a zealous breast,
The pleasing tale of Beauty's praise
In Wisdom's lofty language dressed;
Of Beauty powerful to impart
Each finer sense each comelier art,
And sooth and polish man's ungentle heart.
IV.
If then from Love's deceit secure
Thus far alone thy wishes tend,
Go see the white-wing'd evening hour
On Delia's vernal walk descend;
Go while the golden light serene,
The grove, the lawn, the softened scene,
Becomes the presence of the rural queen.
V.
Attend while that harmonious tongue
Each bosom each desire commands:
Apollo's lute by Hermes strung,
And touched by chaste Minerva's hands,
Attend. I feel a force divine,
O Delia! win my thoughts to thine;
That half the color of thy life is mine.
VI.
Yet conscious of the dangerous charm
Soon would I turn my steps away,
Nor often provoke the lovely harm,
Nor lull my reason's watchful sway:
But thou, my Friend! -- I hear thy sighs;
Alas! I read thy downcast eyes,
And thy tongue salters and thy color flies.
VII.
So soon again to meet the fair?
So pensive all this absent hour?
-- O yet, unlucky Youth! beware
While yet to think is in thy power.
In vain with friendship's flattering name
Thy passion veils its inward shame,
Friendship, the treacherous fuel of thy flame!
VIII.
Once I remember, new to Love,
And dreading his tyrannick chain,
I sought a gentle maid, to prove
What peaceful joys in friendship reign,
Whence we forsooth might safely stand,
And pitying view the lovesick band,
And mock the winged boy's malicious hand.
IX.
Thus frequent past the cloudless day,
To smiles and sweet discourse resigned,
While I exulted to survey
One generous woman's real mind,
Till friendship soon my languid breast
Each night with unknown cares possessed,
Dashed my coy slumbers or my dreams distressed.
X.
Fool that I was! -- And now, even now,
While thus I preach the Stoic strain,
Unless I shun Olympia's view
An hour unsays it all again.
O Friend! -- when Love directs her eyes
To pierce where every passion lies
Where is the firm, the cautious, or the wise?
ODE XII. TO SIR FRANCIS HENRY DRAKE, BARONET.
I.
BEHOLD! the Balance in the sky
Swift on the wintry scale inclines,
To earthy caves the Dryads fly,
And the bare pastures Pan resigns.
Late did the farmer's fork overspread
With recent soil the twice-mown mead,
Tainting the bloom which autumn knows;
He whets the rusty coulter now,
He binds his oxen to the plough,
And wide his future harvest throws.
II.
Now London's busy confines round,
By Kensington's imperial towers,
From Highgate's rough descent profound,
Essexian heaths or Kentish bowers,
Wherever I pass I see approach
Some rural statesman's eager coach,
Hurried by senatorial cares,
While rural nymphs (alike within
Aspiring courtly praise to win)
Debate their dress, reform their airs.
III.
Say, what can now the country boast
O Drake! thy footsteps to detain,
When peevish winds and gloomy frost
The sunshine of the temper stain?
Say, are the priests of Devon grown
Friends to this tolerating throne,
Champions for George's legal right?
Have general freedom, equal law,
Won to the glory of Nassau
Each bold Wessexian squire and knight?
IV.
I doubt it much, and guess at least
That when the day which made us free
Shall next return, that sacred feast
Thou better may observe with me:
With me the sulfurous treason old
A far inferior part shall hold
In that glad day's triumphal strain,
And generous William be revered,
Nor one untimely accent heard
Of James or his ignoble reign.
V.
Then while the Gascon's fragrant wine
With modest cups our joy supplies
We 'll truly thank the power divine
Who bad the chief the patriot rise;
Rise from heroic case, (the spoil
Due for his youth's Herculean toil,
From Belgium to her savior son)
Rise with the same unconquered zeal
For our Britannia's injured weal,
Her laws defaced her shrines overthrown.
VI.
He came: the tyrant from our shore
Like a forbidden demon fled,
And to eternal exile bore
Pontifick rage and vassal dread:
There sunk the mouldering Gothic reign;
New years came forth, a liberal train!
Called by the people's great decree.
That day, my Friend! let blessings crown:
-- Fill to the demigod's renown
From whom thou have that thou art free.
VII.
Then, Drake! (for wherefore should we part
The public and the private weal?)
In vows to her who sways thy heart
Fair health, glad fortune, will we deal;
Whether Aglaia's blooming cheek,
Or the soft ornaments that speak
So eloquent in Daphne's smile,
Whether the piercing lights that fly
From the dark heaven of Myrto's eye
Happily thy fancy then beguile.
VIII.
For so it is; thy stubborn breast,
Though touched by many a slighter wound,
Has no full conquest yet confessed,
Nor the one fatal charmer found;
While I, a true and loyal swain,
My fair Olympia's gentle reign
Through all the varying seasons own:
Her genius still my bosom warms,
No other maid for me has charms,
Or I have eyes for her alone.
ODE XIII. ON LYRICK POETRY.
I. 1.
ONCE more I join the Thespian choir
And taste the inspiring fount again;
O parent of the Grecian lyre
Admit me to thy powerful strain! --
And lo! with ease my step invades
The pathless vale and opening shades,
Till now I spy her verdant seat;
And now at large I drink the sound
While these her offspring listening round
By turns her melody repeat.
I. 2.
I see Anacreon smile and sing,
His silver tresses breathe perfume,
His cheek displays a second spring
Of roses taught by wine to bloom.
Away, deceitful Cares! away,
And let me listen to his lay;
Let me the wanton pomp enjoy
While in smooth dance the light-wing'd Hours
Lead round his lyre its patron powers,
Kind Laughter and convivial Joy.
I. 3.
Broke from the fetters of his native land,
Devoting shame and vengeance to her lords,
With louder impulse and a threatening hand
The Lesbian patriot Alcaeus.
smites the sounding chords.
Ye wretches! ye perfidious train!
Ye ours'd of gods and freeborn men!
Ye murderers of the laws!
Though now ye glory in your lust,
Though now ye tread the feeble neck in dust,
Yet Time and righteous Jove will judge your dreadful cause.
II. 1.
But lo! to Sappho's melting airs
Descends the radiant queen of Love:
She smiles, and asks what fonder cares
Her suppliant's plaintive measures move?
Why is my faithful maid distressed?
Who, Sappho, wounds thy tender breast?
Say, flies he? -- Soon he shall pursue:
Shuns he thy gifts? -- He soon shall give:
Slights he thy sorrows? -- He shall grieve,
And soon to all thy wishes bow.
II. 2.
But, O Melpomene! for whom
Awakes thy golden shell again?
What mortal breath shall ever presume
To echo that unbounded strain?
Majestic in the frown of years
Behold the man of Thebes Pindar.
appears:
For some there are whose mighty frame
The hand of Jove at birth endowed
With hopes that mock the gazing crowd,
As eagles drink the noontide flame,
II. 3.
While the dim raven beats her weary wings,
And clamours far below. -- Propitious Muse!
While I so late unlock thy purer springs,
And breathe whatever thy ancient airs infuse,
Will thou for Albion's sons around
(Never had thou audience more renowned)
Thy charming arts employ,
As when the winds from shore to shore
Through Greece thy lyre's persuasive language bore
Till towns, and isles, and seas, returned the vocal joy?
III. 1.
Yet then did Pleasure's lawless throng,
Often rushing forth in loose attire,
Thy virgin dance thy graceful song
Pollute with impious revels dire.
O fair, O chaste! thy echoing shade
May no foul discord here invade;
Nor let thy strings one accent move
Except what earth's untroubled ear
'Mid all her social tribes may hear
And Heaven's unerring throne approve.
III. 2.
Queen of the Lyre! in thy retreat
The fairest flowers of Pindus glow,
The vine aspires to crown thy seat,
And myrtles round thy laurel grow:
Thy strings adapt their varied strain
To every pleasure every pain
Which mortal tribes were born to prove,
And straight our passions rise or fall,
As at the wind's imperious call
The ocean swells the billows move.
III. 3.
When Midnight listens over the slumbering earth
Let me, O Muse! thy solemn whispers hear,
When Morning sends her fragrant breezes forth
With airy murmurs touch my opening ear;
And ever watchful at thy side
Let Wisdom's awful suff'rage guide
The tenor of thy lay:
To her of old by Jove was given
To judge the various deeds of earth and heaven:
'Twas thine by gentle arts to win us to her sway.
IV. 1.
Often as to wellearn'd ease resigned
I quit the maze where Science toils,
Do thou retresh my yielding mind
With all thy gay delusive spoils;
But O! indulgent, come not nigh
The busy steps the jealous eye
Of wealthy Care or gainful Age,
Whose barren souls thy joys disdain,
And hold as foes to Reason's reign
Whome'er thy lovely works engage.
IV. 2.
When ^iendship and when lettered Mirth
Happily partake my simple board,
Then let thy blameless hand call forth
The music of the Teian chord;
Or if invoked at softer hours,
O^ seek with me the happy bowers
That hear Olympia's gentle tongue:
To Beauty linked with Virtue's train,
To Love devoid of jealous pain,
There let the Sapphick lute be strung.
IV. 3.
But when from envy and from death to claim
A hero bleeding for his native land,
When to throw incense on the Vestal flame
Of Liberty my genius gives command,
Nor Theban voice nor Lesbian lyre
From thee O Muse! do I require,
While my presaging mind,
Conscious of powers she never knew,
Astonished grasps at things beyond her view,
Nor by another's fate submits to be confined.
ODE XIV. TO THE HON. CHARLES TOWNSHLND, FROM THE COUNTRY
I.
SAY, Townshend! what can London boast
(...) pay thee for the pleasures lost,
The health today resigned,
When Spring from this her favorite seat
Bad Winter hasten his retreat,
And met the western wind?
II.
Oh! knew'st thou how the balmy air,
The sun, the azure heavens, prepare
To heal thy languid frame,
No more would noisy courts engage,
In vain would lying Faction's rage
Thy sacred leisure claim.
III.
Often I looked forth and often admired,
Till with the studious volume tired
I sought the open day;
"And sure," I cried, "the rural gods
"Expect me in their green abodes,
"And chide my tardy lay."
IV.
But ah! in vain my restless feet
Traced every silent shady seat
Which knew their forms of old;
Nor Naiad by her fountain laid
Nor Woodnymph tripping through her glade
Did now their rites unfold:
V.
Whether to nurse some infant oak
They turn the slowly-tinkling brook
And catch the pearly showers,
Or brush the mildew from the woods,
Or paint with noontide beams the buds,
Or breathe on opening flowers.
VI.
Such rites which they with spring renew
The eyes of Care can never view,
And care has long been mine;
And hence offended with their guest
Since grief of love my soul oppressed
They hide their toils divine.
VII.
But soon shall thy enlivening tongue
This heart by dear affliction wrung
With noble hope inspire;
Then will the sylvan powers again
Receive me in their genial train
And listen to my lyre.
VIII.
Beneath yon' Dryad's lonely shade
A rustic altar shall be paid
Of turf with laurel framed.
And thou the inscription wilt approve,
"This for the peace which lost by love
"By friendship was reclaimed."
ODE XV. TO THE EVENING STAR.
I.
TONIGHT retired the queen of Heaven
With young Endymion stays;
And now to Hesper is it given
A while to rule the vacant sky,
Till she shall to her lamp supply
A stream of brighter rays.
II.
O Hesper! while the starry throng
With awe thy path surrounds,
Oh! listen to my suppliant song,
If happily now the vocal sphere
Can suffer thy delighted ear
To stoop to mortal sounds.
III.
So may the bridegroom's genial strain
Thee still invoke to shine,
So may the bride's unmarry'd train
To Hymen chant their flattering vow,
Still that his lucky torch may glow
With luster pure as thine.
IV.
Far other vows must I prefer
To thy indulgent power:
Alas! but now I paid my tear
On fair Olympia's virgin tomb,
And lo! from thence in quest I roam
Of Philomela's bower.
V.
Propitious send thy golden ray
Thou purest light above;
Let no false flame seduce to stray
Where gulf or steep lie hid for harm.
But lead where musick's healing charm
May sooth afflicted love.
VI.
To them by many a grateful song
In happier season, vowed
These lawns, Olympia's haunt, belong;
Often by yon' silver stream we walked,
Or fixed while Philomela talked
Beneath yon' copses stood.
VII.
Nor seldom where the beechen boughs
That roofless tower invade
We came while her enchanting Muse
The radiant moon above us held,
Till by a clamorous owl compelled
She fled the solemn shade.
VIII.
But hark! I hear her liquid tone.
Now, Hesper! guide my feet
Down the red marl with moss o'ergrown
Through yon' wild thicket next the plain
Whose hawthorns choke the winding lane
Which leads to her retreat.
IX.
See the green space! on either hand
Enlarged it spreads around:
See! in the midst she takes her stand
Where one old oak his awful shade
Extends over half the level mead
Enclosed in woods profound.
X.
Hark! how through many a melting note
She now prolongs her lays;
How sweetly down the void they float!
The breeze their magic path attends,
The stars shine out the forest bends,
The wakeful heifers gaze!
XI.
Whoever thou art whom Chance may bring
To this sequestered spot,
If then the plaintive Siren sing,
Oh! softly tread beneath her bower,
And think of Heaven's disposing power,
Of man's uncertain lot.
XII.
Oh! think over all this mortal stage
What mournful scenes arise,
What ruin waits on kingly rage,
How often Virtue dwells with Woe,
How many griefs from knowledge flow,
How swiftly pleasure flies!
XIII.
O sacred Bird! let me at eve
Thus wandering all alone
Thy tender counsel often receive,
Bear witness to thy pensive airs,
And pity Nature's common cares
Till I forget my own.
ODE XVI. TO CALEB HARDINGE, M. D.
I.
WITH sordid floods the wintry urn Aquarius.

Has stained fair Richmond's level green,
Her naked hill the Dryads mourn,
No longer a poetic scene;
No longer there thy raptured eye
The beauteous forms of earth or sky
Surveys as in their Author's mind,
And London shelters from the year
Those whom thy social hours to share
The Attick Muse designed.
II.
From Hampstead's airy summit me
Her guest the City shall behold
What day the people's stern decree
To unbelieving kings is told,
When common men (the dread of Fame)
Adjudg'd as one of evil name
Before the sun the anointed head:
Then seek thou too the pious Town,
With no unworthy cares to crown
That ev'ning's awful shade.
III.
Deem not I call thee to deplore
The sacred martyr of the day,
By fast and penitential lore
To purge our ancient guilt away:
For this on humble faith I rest
That still our advocate the priest
From heavenly wrath will save the land,
Nor ask what rites our pardon gain,
Nor how his potent sounds restrain
The Thund'rer's lifted hand.
IV.
No, Hardinge! peace to church and state!
That evening let the Muse give law,
While I anew the theme relate
Which my first youth enamored saw.
Then will I often explore thy thought
What to reject which Lock has taught,
What to pursue in Virgil's lay,
Till hope ascends to lostiest things,
Nor envies demagogues or kings
Their frail and vulgar sway.
V.
O versed in all the human frame!
Lead thou wherever my labor lies,
And English Fancy's eager flame
To Grecian purity chastize,
While hand in hand at Wisdom's shrine
Beauty with Truth I strive to join,
And grave Assent with glad Applause,
To paint the story of the soul
And Plato's visions to control
By Verulamian Verulam gave one of his titles to Francis Bacon author of the
Novum Organum.
laws.
ODE XVII. ON A SERMON AGAINST GLORY, MDCCXLVII.
I.
COME then, tell me, Sage Divine!
Is it an offense to own
That our bosoms ever incline
Toward immortal glory's throne?
For with me nor Pomp nor Pleasure,
Bourbon's might, Braganza's treasure,
So can Fancy's dream rejoice,
So conciliate Reason's choice,
As one approving word of her impartial voice.
II.
If to spurn at noble praise
Be the passport to thy heaven
Follow thou these gloomy ways;
No such law to me was given,
Nor I trust shall I deplore me
Faring like my friends before me,
Nor an holier place desire
Than Timoleon's arms acquire
And Tully's curule chair and Milton's golden lyre.
ODE XVIII. TO THE RIGHT HON. FRANCIS EARL OF HUNTINGDON, MDCCXLVII.
I. 1.
THE wise and great of every clime
Through all the spacious walks of Time
Wherever the Muse her power displayed
With joy have listened and obeyed;
For taught of Heaven the sacred Nine
Persuasive numbers forms divine
To mortal sense impart:
They best the soul with glory fire,
They noblest counsels boldest deeds inspire,
And high over Fortune's rage inthrone the fixed heart.
I. 2.
Nor less prevailing is their charm
The vengeful bosom to disarm,
To melt the proud with human woe,
And prompt unwilling tears to flow.
Can wealth a power like this afford?
Can Cromwell's arts or Marlb'rough's sword
An equal empire claim?
No, Hastings! thou my words wilt own;
Thy breast the gifts of every Muse has known,
Nor shall the giver's love disgrace thy noble name.
I. 3.
The Muse's awful art,
And the blessed function of the poet's tongue,
Never shall thou blush to honor, to assert
From all that scorned Vice or slavish Fear has sung,
Nor shall the blandishment of Tuscan strings,
Warbling at will in Pleasure's myrtle bower,
Nor shall the servile notes to Celtick kings,
By flattering minstrels paid in evil hour,
Move thee to spurn the heavenly Muse's reign:
A different strain
And other themes
From her prophetic shades and hallowed streams
(Thou well can witness) meet the purged ear,
Such as when Greece to her immortal shell
Rejoicing listened godlike sounds to hear,
To hear the sweet instructress tell
(While men and heroes throug'd around)
How life its noblest use may find,
How well for freedom be resigned,
And how by Glory Virtue shall be crowned.
II. 1.
Such was the Chian father's strain
To many a kind domestic train,
Whose pious hearth and genial bowl
Had cheered the reverend pilgrim's soul,
When every hospitable rite
With equal bounty to requite
He struck his magic strings,
And poured spontaneous numbers forth,
And seized their ears with tales of ancient worth,
And filled their musing hearts with vast heroic things.
II 2. Stanza II. 2.] Lycurgus, the Lacedaemonian lawgiver, brought into Greece
from Asia Minor the first complete copy of Homer's Works. -- At Plataea was
fought the decifive battle between the Persian army and the united militia of
Greece under Pausanias and Aristides. -- Cimon the Athenian erected a trophy in
Cyprus for two great victories gained on the same day over the Persians by sea
and land. Diodorus Siculus has preserved the inscription which the Athenians
affixed to the consecrated spoils after this great success, in which it is very
remarkable that the greatness of the occasion has raised the manner of
expression above the usual simplicity and modesty of all other ancient
inscriptions. It is this; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The following translation is almost literal; Since first the sea from Asia's
hostile coast
Divided Europe, and the god of War
Assailed imperious cities, never yet
At once among the waves and on the shore
Has such a labor been achiev'd by men
Who earth inhabit. They whose arms the M^es
In Cyprus felt pernicious, they the same
Have won from skilful Tire an hundred ships
Crowded with warriors. Asia groans, in both
Her hands (...) smitten by the might of war.


Now often where happy spirits dwell,
Where yet he tunes his charming shell,
Often near him with applauding hands
The Genius of his country stands;
To listening gods he makes him known,
That man divine by whom were sown
The seeds of Grecian fame,
Who first the race with freedom fired
From whom Lycurgus Sparta's sons inspired,
From whom Placaean palms and Cyprian trophies came.
II. 3. Stanza II. 3.] Pindar was contemporary with Aristides and Cimon, in
whom the glory of ancient Greece was at its height. When Xerxes invaded Greece
Pindar was true to the common interest of his country, though his
fellow-citizens the Thebans had sold themselves to the Persian king. In one of
his odes he expresses the great distress and anxiety of his mind occasioned by
the vast preparations of Xerxes against Greece, ( Isthm. viii.) in another he
celebrates the victories of Salamis, Plataea, and Himera, ( Pyth. i.) It will
be necessary to add two or three other particulars of his life, real or
fabulous, in order to explain what follows in the text concerning him. First,
then, he was thought to be so great a favorite of Apollo that the priests of
that deity allotted him a constant share of their offerings. It was said of him
as of some other illustrious men, that at his birth a swarm of bees lighted on
his lips and fed him with their honey: it was also a tradition concerning him
that Pan was heard to recite his poetry, and seen dancing to one of his hymns
on the mountains near Thebes. But a real historical fact in his life is, that
the Thebans imposed a large fine upon him on account of the veneration which he
expressed in his poems for that heroic spirit shown by the people of Athens in
defense of the common liberty which his own fellow-citizens had shamefully
betrayed; and as the argument of this ode implies that great poetical talents
and high sentiments of liberty do reciprocaily produce and assist each other,
so Pindar is perhaps the most exemplary proof of this connection which occurs in
history. The Thebans were remarkable in general for a slavish disposition
through all the fortunes of their commonwealth at the time of its ruin by
Philip, and even in its best state under the administration of Pelopidas and
Epaminondas; and every one knows they were no less remarkable for great dullness
and want of all genius. That Pindar should have equally distinguished himself
from the rest of his fellow-citizens in both these respects seems somewhat
extraordinary, and is scarce to be accounted for but by the preceding
observation.

O noblest happiest age
When Aristides ruled and Cimon sought,
When all the generous fruits of Homer's page
Exulting Pindar saw to full perfection brought!
O Pindar! ost' shall thou be hailed of me;
Not that Apollo fed thee from his shrine,
Not that thy lips drank sweetness from the be,
Nor yet that studious of thy notes divine
Pan danced their measure with the sylvan throng,
But that thy song
Was proud to unfold
What thy base rulers trembled to behold,
Amid corrupted Thebes was proud to tell
The deeds of Athens and the Persian shame,
Hence on thy head their impious vengeance fell.
But thou, O faithful to thy fame!
The Muse's law did rightly know,
That who would animate his lays,
And other minds to virtue raise,
Must feel his own with all her spirit glow.
III. 1.
Are there approved of later times
Whose verse adorned a tyrant's Octavianus Caesar.
crimes,
Who saw majestic Rome betrayed
And lent the imperial ruffian aid?
Alas! not one polluted bard,
No, not the strains that Mincius heard
Or Tibur's hills replied,
Dare to the Muse's ear aspire,
Save that instructed by the Grecian lyre
With freedom's ancient notes their shameful task they hide.
III. 2.
Mark how the dread Pantheon stands
Amid the domes of modern hands,
Amid the toys of idle state,
How simply, how severely great!
Then turn, and while each western clime
Presents her tuneful sons to Time
So mark thou Milton's name,
And add, "Thus dissers from the throng
"The spirit which informed thy awsul song,
"Which bad thy potent voice protect thy country's same."
III. 3. Stanza III. 3.] Alluding to his Defense of the People of England
against Salmasius. See particularly the manner in which he himself speaks of
that undertaking in the Introduction to his Reply to ^us.

Yet hence barbarick Zeal
His memory with unholy rage pursues,
While from these arduous cares of public weal
She bids each bard begone, and rest him with his Muse.
O Fool! to think the man whose ample mind
Must grasp at all that yonder stars survey,
Must join the noblest forms of every kind
The world's most perfect image to display,
Can ^'er his country's majesty behold
Unmoved or cold;
O fool! to deem
That he whose thought must visit every theme,
Whose heart must every strong emotion know,
Inspired by Nature or by Fortune taught,
That he, if happily some presumptuous foe
With false ignoble science fraught
Shall spurn at Freedom's faithful band,
That he their dear desence will shun,
Or hide their glories from the sun,
Or deal their vengeance with a woman's hand.
IV. 1.
I care not that in Arno's plain
Or on the sportive banks of Seine
From public themes the Muses' quire
Content with polished Ease retire.
Where priests studious head command,
Where tyrants bow the warlike hand
To vile Ambition's aim,
Say, what can public themes assord
Save venal honors to an hateful lord,
Reserved for angry Heaven and scorned of honest Fame?
IV. 2.
But here, where Freedom's equal throne
To all her valiant sons is known,
Where all are conscious of her carcs,
And each the power that rules him shares,
Here let the bard whose dastard tongue
Leaves public arguments unsung
Bid public praise farewell,
Let him to fitter climes remove,
Far from the hero's and the patriot's love,
And lull mysterious monks to slumber in their cell.
IV. 3. Stanza. IV. 3.] Edward III. from whom descended Henry Hastings, third
Earl of Huntingdon, by the daughter of the Duke of Clarence, brother to Edward
IV.

O Hastings! not to all
Can ruling Heaven the same endowments lend;
Yet still does Nature to her offspring call,
That to one general weal their different powers they bend
Unenvious. Thus alone though strains divine
Inform the bosom of the Muse's son,
Though with new honors the Patrician's line
Advance from age to age, yet thus alone
They win the suffrage of impartial Fame.
The poet's name
He best shall prove
Whose lays the soul with noblest passions move:
But thee, O Progeny of heroes old!
Thee to severer toils thy fate requires;
The fate which formed thee in a chosen mould,
The grateful country of thy sires,
Thee to sublimer paths demand,
Sublimer than thy sires could trace
Or thy own Edward teach his race
Though Gaul's proud Genius sank beneath his hand.
V. 1.
From rich domains and subject farms
They led the rustic youth to arms,
And kings their stern achievements feared
While private strife their banners reared:
But loftier scenes to thee are shown,
Where empire's wide established throne
No private master fills,
Where long foretold the people reigns,
Where each a vassal's humble heart disdains,
And judges what he sees, and as he judges wills.
V. 2.
Here be it thine to calm and guide
The swelling Democratick tide,
To watch the state's uncertain frame,
And baffle Faction's partial aim,
But chiefly with determined zeal
To quell that servile band who kneel
To Freedom's banished soes,
That monster which is daily found
Expert and bold thy country's peace to wound,
Yet dreads to handle arms nor manly counsel knows.
V. 3. Stanza V. 3.] At Whittington, a village on the edge of Scarsdale in
Derbyshire, the Earls of Devonshire and Danby, with the Lord Delamere,
privately concerted the plan of the Revolution. The house in which they met is
at present a farmhouse, and the country people distinguish the room where they
sat by the name of The Plotting Parlour.

It Is highest Heavens command
That guilty aims should sordid paths pursue,
That what ensnares the heart should maim the hand,
And Virtue's worthless foes be false to glory too.
But look on Freedom: see through every age
What labors, perils, griefs, has she disdained!
What arms, what regal pride, what priestly rage,
Have her dread offspring conquered or sustained!
For Albion well have conquered. Let the strains
Of happy swains
Which now resound
Where Scarsdale's cliffs the swelling pastures bound
Bear witness: there often let the farmer hail
The sacred orchard which imbow'rs his gate,
And show to strangers passing down the vale
Where Cav'ndish, Booth, and Osborne, sat
When bursting from their country's chain
Even in the midst of deadly harms,
Of papal snares and lawless arms,
They planned for Freedom this her noblest reign.
VI. 1.
This reign, these laws, this public care,
Which Nassau gave us all to share,
Had never adorned the English name
Could Fear have silenced Freedom's claim:
But Fear in vain attempts to bind
Those lofty efforts of the mind
Which social good inspires;
Where men for this assault a throne
Each adds the common welfare to his own
And each unconquered heart the strength of all acquires.
VI. 2.
Say, was it thus when late we viewed
Our fields in civil blood imbrued?
When Fortune crowned the barbarous host,
And half the astonished isle was lost?
Did one of all that vaunting train
Who dare affront a peaceful reign,
Durst one in arms appear?
Durst one in counsels pledge his life,
Stake his luxurious fortunes in the strife,
Or lend his boasted name his vagrant friends to cheer?
VI. 3.
Yet, Hastings! these are they
Who challenge to themselves thy country's love;
The true, the constant, who alone can weigh
What glory should demand or liberty approve.
But let their works declare them. Thy free powers,
The generous power of thy prevailing mind,
Not for the tasks of their confed'rate hours,
Lewd brawls and lurking slander, were designed.
Be thou thy own approver. Honest praise
Often nobly sways
Ingenuous youth;
But sought from cowards and the lying mouth
Praise is reproach. Eternal God alone
For mortals fixes that sublime award:
He from the faithful records of his throne
Bids the historian and the bard
Dispose of honor and of scorn,
Discern the patriot from the slave,
And write the good, the wise, the brave
For lessons to the multitude unborn.
END OF BOOK FIRST.
ODES ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS. IN TWO BOOKS.
BOOK II. ODE I. THE REMONSTRANCE OF SHAKESPEARE,
Supposed to have been spoken at the Theater Royal while the French Comedians
were acting by Subscription, 1749.
IF yet regardful of your native land
Old Shakespeare's tongue you deign to understand,
Lo! from the blissful bowers where Heaven rewards
Instructive sages and unblemished bards
I come, the ancient ^ounder of the stage,
Intent to learn in this discerning age
What form of wit your fancies have embraced,
And whither tends your elegance of taste,
That thus at length our homely toils you spurn,
That thus to foreign scenes you proudly turn,
That from my brow the laurel wreath you claim
To crown the rivals of your country's fame.
What though the footsteps of my devious Muse
The measured walks of Grecian art refuse?
Or though the frankness of my hardy style
Mock the nice touches of the critick's file?
Yet what my age and climate held to view
Impartial I surveyed and fearless drew.
And say, ye skilful in the human heart!
Who know to prize a poet's noblest part,
What age, what clime, could ever an ampler field
For lofty thought for daring fancy yield?
I saw this England break the shameful bands
Forged for the souls of men by sacred hands,
I saw each groaning realm her aid implore,
Her sons the heroes of each warlike shore,
Her naval standard (the dire Spaniard's bane)
Obeyed through all the circuit of the main;
Then too great Commerce for a late-found world
Around your coast her eager sails unfurled;
New hopes new passions thence the bosom ^ir'd,
New plans new arts the genius thence inspired,
Thence every scence which private fortune knows
In stronger life with bolder spirit rose.
Disgraced I this full prospect which I drew,
My colors languid or my strokes untrue?
Have not your sages, warriors, swains, and kings,
Confessed the living draught of men and things?
What other bard in any clime appears
Alike the master of your smiles and tears?
Yet have I deigned your audience to entice
With wretched bribes to luxury and vice?
Or have my various scenes a purpose known
Which Freedom, Virtue, Glory, might not own?
Such from the first was my dramatick plan;
It should be yours to crown what I began:
And now that England spurns her Gothic chain,
And equal laws and social science reign,
I thought now surely shall my zealous eyes
View nobler bards and juster critics rise,
Intent with learned labor to refine
The copious ore of Albion's native mine,
Our stately Muse more graceful airs to teach,
And form her tongue to more attractive speech,
Till rival nations listen at her feet,
And own her polished as they owned her great.
But do you thus my favorite hopes fulfill?
Is France at last the standard of your skill?
Alas for you that so betray a mind
Of art unconscious and to beauty blind!
Say, does her language your ambition raise,
Her barren, trivial, unharmonious, phrase,
Which fetters eloquence to scantiest bounds,
And maims the cadence of poetic sounds?
Say, does your humble admiration choose
The gentle prattle of her Comic Muse,
While wits, plaindealers, fops, and fools, appear,
Charged to say naught but what the king may hear?
Or rather melt your sympathizing hearts
Won by her Tragic scenes' romantic arts,
Where old and young declaim on soft desire,
And heroes never but for love expire?
No: though the charms of novelty a while
Perhaps too fondly win your thoughtless smile,
Yet not for you designed indulgent Fate
The modes or manners of the Bourbon state;
And ill your minds my partial judgment reads,
And many an augury my hope misleads,
If the fair maids of yonder blooming train
To their light courtship would an audience deign,
Or those chaste matrons a Parisian wife
Choose for the model of domestic life,
Or if one youth of all that generous band,
The strength and splendor of their native land,
Would yield his portion of his country's same,
And quit old Freedom's patrimonial claim,
With lying smiles Oppression's pomp to see,
And judge of glory by a king's decree.
O blessed at home with justly envied laws!
O long the chiefs of Europe's general cause!
Whom Heaven has chosen at each dangerous hour
To check the inroads of barbarick Power,
The rights of trampled nations to reclaim,
And guard the social world from bonds and shame,
Oh! let not Luxury's fantastic charms
Thus give the lie to your heroic arms,
Nor for the ornaments of life embrace
Dishonest lessons from that vaunting race
Whom Fate's dread laws, (for in eternal Fate
Despotick Rule was heir to Freedom's hate)
Whom in each warlike each commercial part,
In civil counsel and in pleasing art,
The Judge of earth predestined for your foes,
And made it same and virtue to oppose.
ODE II. TO SLEEP.
I.
THOU silent Power! whose welcome sway
Charms every anxious thought away,
In whose divine oblivion drowned
Sore pain and weary toil grow mild,
Love is with kinder looks beguiled,
And Grief forgets her fondly-cherish'd wound,
Oh whither have thou flown, indulgent God!
God of kind shadows and of healing dews,
Whom do thou touch with thy Lethaean rod?
Around whose temples now thy opiate airs diffuse?
II.
Lo! Midnight from her starry reign
Looks awful down on earth and main,
The tuneful birds lie hushed in sleep,
With all that crop the verdant food,
With all that skim the crystal flood
Or haunt the caverns of the rocky steep;
No rushing winds disturb the tufted bowers,
No wakeful sound the moonlight valley knows
Save where the brook its liquid murmur pours,
And lulls the waving scene to more profound repose.
III.
Oh let not me alone complain,
Alone invoke thy power in vain!
Descend propitious on my eyes,
Not from the couch that bears a crown,
Not from the courtly statesman's down,
Nor where the miser and his treasure lies;
Bring not the shapes that break the murd'rer's rest,
Nor those the hireling soldier loves to see,
Nor those which haunt the bigot's gloomy breast;
Far be their guilty nights and far their dreams from me!
IV.
Nor yet those awful forms present
For chiefs and heroes only meant.
The figured brass, the choral song,
The rescued people's glad applause,
The listening senate, and the laws
Fixed by the counsels of Timoleon's After Timoleon had delivered Syracuse from
the tyranny of Dionysius the people on every important deliberation sent for
him into the public assembly, asked his advice, and voted according to it. P^.
tongue,
Are scenes too grand for Fortune's private ways,
And though they shine in youth's ingenuous view
The sober gainful arts of modern days
To such romantic thoughts have bid a long adieu.
V.
I ask not, god of Dreams! thy care
To banish Love's presentiments fair:
Nor rosy cheek nor radiant eye
Can arm him with such strong command
That the young sorc'rer's fatal hand
Should round my soul his pleasing fetters tie:
Nor yet the courtier's hope, the giving smile,
(A lighter phantom and a baser chain)
Did ever in slumber my proud lyre beguile
To lend the pomp of thrones her ill-according strain.
VI.
But, Morpheus! on thy balmy wing
Such honorable visions bring
As soothed great Milton's injured age
When in prophetic dreams he saw
The race unborn with pious awe
Imbibe each virtue from his heavenly page;
Or such as Mead's benignant fancy knows
When health's deep treasures by his art explored
Have saved the infant from an orphan's woes
Or to the trembling sire his age's hope restored.
ODE III. TO THE CUCKOO.
I.
O Rustic herald of the spring!
At length in yonder woody vale
Fast by the brook I hear thee sing,
And studious of thy homely tale
Amid the vespers of the grove,
Amid the chanting choir of love,
Thy sage responses hail.
II.
The time has been when I have frowned
To hear thy voice the woods invade,
And while thy solemn accent drowned
Some sweeter poet of the shade
Thus thought I, thus the sons of Care
Some constant youth or generous fair
With dull advice upbraid.
III.
I said "While Philomela's song
"Proclaims the passion of the grove
"It ill beseems a Cuckoo's tongue
"Her charming language to reprove." --
Alas! how much a lover's ear
Hates all the sober truth to hear,
The sober truth of love!
IV.
When hearts are in each other blessed,
When naught but lofty faith can rule
The nymph's and swain's consenting breast,
How Cuckoolike in Cupid's school
With store of grave prudential saws
On Fortune's power and Custom's laws
Appears each friendly fool!
V.
Yet think betimes, ye gentle Train!
Whom love, and hope, and fancy, sway,
Who every harsher care disdain,
Who by the morning judge the day,
Think that in April's fairest hours
To warbling shades and painted flowers
The Cuckoo joins his lay.
ODE IV. TO THE HON. CHARLES TOWNSHEND, In the Country, 1750.
I. 1.
How often shall I survey
This humble roof, the lawn, the greenwood shade,
The vale with sheaves overspread,
The glassy brook, the flocks which round thee stray?
When will thy cheerful mind
Of these have uttered all her dear esteem?
Or tell me do thou deem
No more to join in glory's toilsome race,
But here content embrace
That happy leisure which thou had resigned?
I. 2.
Alas! ye happy hours
When books and youthful sport the soul could share
Ere one ambitious care
Of civil life had awed her simpler powers,
Often as your winged train
Revisit here my friend in white array
Oh! fail not to display
Each fairer scene where I perchance had part
That so his generous heart
The abode of even Friendship may remain.
I. 3.
For not imprudent of my loss to come
I saw from Contemplation's quiet cell
His feet ascending to another home
Where public Praise and envied Greatness dwell.
But shall we therefore, O my Lyre!
Reprove Ambition's best desire,
Extinguish Glory's flame?
Far other was the task enjoined
When to my hand thy strings were first assigned,
Far other faith belongs to Friendship's honored name.
II. 1.
Thee Townshend! not the arms
Of slumbering Ease nor Pleasure's rosy chain
Were destined to detain;
No, nor bright Science, nor the Muse's charms.
For them high Heaven prepares
Their proper votaries, an humbler band:
And never world Spenser's hand
Have deigned to strike the warbling Tuscan shell,
Nor Harrington to tell
What habit an immortal city wears,
II. 2
Had this been born to shield
The cause which Cromwell's impious hand betrayed,
Or that like Vere diiplay'd
His Redcross banner over the Belgian field;
Yet where the will divine
Hsth shut those loftiest paths, it next remains
With reason clad in strains
Of harmony selected minds to inspire,
And Virtue's living fire
To feed and eternize in hearts like thine.
II. 3.
For never shall the herd whom Envy sways
So quell my purpose or my tongue control
That I should fear illustrious worth to praise
Because its master's friendship moved my soul.
Yet if this undissembling strain
Should now perhaps thine ear detain
With any pleasing sound,
Remember thou that righteous Fame
From hoary Age a strict account will claim
Of each auspicious palm with which thy youth was crowned.
III. 1.
Nor obvious is the way
Where Heaven expects thee, nor the traveller leads
Through flowers or fragrant meads
Or groves that hark to Philomela's lay.
The impartial laws of Fate
To nobler virtues wed severer cares.
Is there a man who shares
The summit next where heavenly natures dwell?
Ask him (for he can tell)
What storms beat round that rough laborious height.
III. 2.
Ye Heroes! who of old
Did generous England Freedom's throne ordain
From Alfred's parent reign
To Nassau, great deliv'rer wise and bold!
I know your perils hard,
Your wounds, your painful marches, wintry seas,
The night estranged from ease,
The day by cowardice and falsehood vexed,
The head with doubt perplexed,
The indignant heart disdaining the reward
III. 3.
Which Envy hardly grants. But, O renown!
O praise from judging Heaven and virtuous men
If thus they purchased thy divinest crown
Say, who shall hesitate or who complain?
And now they sit on thrones above,
And when among the gods they move
Before the Sovran Mind,
"Lo! these," he says, "Lo! these are they
"Who to the laws of mine eternal sway
"From violence and fear asserted humankind."
IV. 1.
Thus honored while the train
Of legislators in his presence dwell,
If I may aught foretell
The statesman shall the second palm obtain.
For dreadful deeds of arms
Let vulgar bards with undiscerning praise
More glittering trophies raise,
But wisest Heaven what deeds may chiefly move
To favor and to love;
What save wide blessings or averted harms?
IV. 2.
Nor to the embattled field
Shall these achievments of the peaceful gown
The green immortal crown
Of valor or the songs of conquest yield.
Not Fairfax wildly bold,
While bare of crest he hewed his fatal way
Through Naseby's firm array
To heavier dangers did his breast oppose
Than Pym's free virtue chose
When the proud force of Strafford he controlled.
IV. 3.
But what is man at enmity with truth?
What were the fruits of Wentworth's copious mind
When (blighted all the promise of his youth)
The patriot in a tyrant's league had joined?
Let Ireland's loud lamenting plains,
Let Tyne's and Humber's trampled swains,
Let menaced London, tell
How impious Guile made Wisdom base,
How generous Zeal to cruel Rage gave place,
And how unblessed he lived and how dishonored fell.
V. 1.
Thence never has the Muse
Around his tomb Pierian roses flung,
Nor shall one poet's tongue
His name for musick's pleasing labor choose.
And sure when Nature kind
Has decked some favored breast above the throng,
That man with grievous wrong
Affronts and wounds his genius if he bends
To Guilt's ignoble ends
The functions of his ill-submitting mind.
V. 2.
For worthy of the wise
Nothing can seem but virtue, nor earth yield
Their fame an equal field
Save where impartial Freedom gives the prize:
There Summers fixed his name,
Enrolled the next to William; there shall Time
To every wondering clime
Point out that Summers who from Faction's crowd,
The sland'rous and the loud,
Could fair assent and modest reverence claim.
V. 3.
Nor aught did laws or social arts acquire,
Nor this majestic weal of Albion's land
Did aught accomplish or to aught aspire
Without his guidance, his superior hand.
And rightly shall the Muse's care
Wreaths like her own for him prepare,
Whose mind's enamored aim
Could forms of civil beauty draw
Sublime as ever sage or poet saw,
Yet still to life's rude scene the proud ideas tame.
VI. 1.
Let none profane be near!
The Muse was never foreign to his breast;
On Pow'r's grave seat confessed
Still to her voice he bent a lover's ear:
And if the blessed know
Their ancient cares, even now the unfading groves
Where happily Milton roves
With Spenser, hear the enchanted echoes round
Through farthest heaven resound
Wise Summers! guardian of their fame below.
VI. 2.
He knew, the patriot knew,
That letters and the Muses' powerful art
Exalt the ingenuous heart
And brighten every form of just and true:
They lend a nobler sway
To civil Wisdom than Corruption's lure
Could ever yet procure;
They too from Envy's pale malignant light
Conduct her forth to sight
Clothed in the fairest colors of the day.
VI. 3.
O Townshend! thus may Time, the judge severe,
Instruct my happy tongue of thee to tell,
And when I speak of one to freedom dear
For planning wisely and for acting well,
Of one whom glory loves to own,
Who still by liberal means alone
Has liberal ends pursued,
Then for the guerdon of my lay
"This man with faithful friendship," will I say,
"From youth to honored age my arts and me has viewed."
ODE V. ON LOVE OF PRAISE.
I.
OF all the springs within the mind
Which prompt her steps in Fortune's maze
From none more pleasing aid we find
Than from the genuine love of praise.
II.
Nor any partial private end
Such reverence to the public bears,
Nor any passion, Virtue's friend,
So like to Virtue's self appears.
III.
For who in glory can delight
Without delight in glorious deeds?
What man a charming voice can slight
Who courts the echo that succeeds?
IV.
But not the echo on the voice
More than on virtue praise depends,
To which of course its real price
The judgment of the praiser lends.
V.
If praise then with religious awe
From the sole perfect Judge be sought,
A nobler aim, a purer law,
Nor priest, nor bard, nor sage, has taught;
VI.
With which in character the same,
Though in an humbler sphere it lies,
I count that soul of human fame
The suffrage of the good and wise.
ODE VI. TO W. HALL, ESQUIRE. WITH THE WORKS OF CHAULIEU.
I.
ATTEND to Chaulieu's wanton lyre
While fluent as the skylark sings
When first the morn allures its wings
The epicure his theme pursues,
And tell me if among the choir
Whose music charms the banks of Seine
So full, so free, so rich, a strain
Ever dictated the warbling Muse.
II.
Yet, Hall! while thy judicious ear
Admires the welldissembled art
That can such harmony impart
To the lame pace of Gallick rhymes,
While wit from affectation clear
Bright images and passions true
Recall to thy assenting view
The envied bards of nobler times;
III.
Say, is not often his doctrine wrong?
This priest of Pleasure, who aspires
To lead us to her sacred fires,
Knows he the ritual of her shrine?
Say, (her sweet influence to thy song
So may the goddess still afford)
Does she consent to be adored
With shameless love and frantic wine?
IV.
Nor Cato nor Chrysippus here
Need we in high indignant phrase
From their Elysian quiet raise,
But Pleasure's oracle alone
Consult attentive, not severe.
O Pleasure! we blaspheme not thee,
Nor emulate the rigid knee
Which bends but at the Stoic throne.
V.
We own had Fate to man assigned
Nor sense nor wish but what obey
Or Venus soft or Bacchus gay,
Then might our bard's voluptuous creed
Most aptly govern humankind,
Unless perchance what he has sung
Of tortured joints and nerves unstrung
Some wrangling heretic should plead.
VI.
But now with all these proud desires
For dauntless truth and honest fame,
With that strong master of our frame
The inexorable judge within,
What can be done? Alas! ye fires
Of love! alas! ye rosy smiles!
Ye nectar'd cups from happier soils!
-- Ye have no bribe his grace to win.
ODE VII. TO THOMAS EDWARDS, ESQUIRE. On the late Edition of Mr. Pope's Works, 1751.
I.
BELIEVE me, Edwards! to restrain
The license of a railer's tongue
Is what but seldom men obtain
By sense or wit, by prose or song;
A task for more Herculean powers,
Nor suited to the sacred hours
Of leisure in the Muses' bowers.
II.
In bowers where laurel weds with palm
The Muse, the blameless queen, resides,
Fair Fame attends, and Wisdom calm
Her eloquence harmonious guides,
While shut for ever from her gate
Often trying still repining wait
Fierce Envy and calumnious Hate.
III.
Who then from her delightful bounds
Would step one moment forth to heed
What impotent and savage sounds
From their unhappy mouths proceed?
No; rather Spenser's lyre again
Prepare, and let thy pious strain
For Pope's dishonored shade complain.
IV.
Tell how displeased was every bard
When lately in the Elysian grove
They of his Muse's guardian heard,
His delegate to fame above,
And what with one accord they said
Of Wit in drooping age misled,
And Warburton's officious aid:
V. Stanza V.] During Mr. Pope's war with Theobald, Concanen, and the rest of
their tribe, Mr. Warburton, the present Lord Bishop of Gloucester, did with
great zeal cultivate their friendship, having been introduced forsooth at the
meetings of that respectable confederacy, a favor which he afterward spoke of
in very high terms of complacency and thankfulness: at the same time in his
intercourse with them he treated Mr. Pope in a most contemptuous manner, and as
a writer without genius. Of the truth of these assertions his Lordship can have
no doubt if he recollects his own correspondence with Concanen, a part of which
is still in being, and will probably be remembered as long as any of this
prelate's writings.

How Virgil mourned the sordid fate
To that melodious lyre assigned,
Beneath a tutor who so late
With Midas and his rout combined
By spiteful Clamor to confound
That very lyre's enchanting sound,
Though listening realms admired around:
VI.
How Horace owned he thought the fire
Of his friend Pope's satirick line
Did farther fuel scarce require
From such a militant divine:
How Milton scorned the sophist vain
Who durst approach his hallowed strain
With unwash'd hands and lips profane.
VII.
Then Shakespeare debonnair and mild
Brought that strange Comment forth to view;
"Conceits more deep," he said and smiled,
"Than his own fools or madmen knew;"
But thanked a generous friend above
Who did with free adventurous love
Such pageants from his tomb remove.
VIII.
And if to Pope in equal need
The same kind office thou would pay,
Then, Edwards! all the band decreed
That future bards with frequent lay
Should call on thy auspicious name
From each absurd intruder's claim
To keep inviolate their fame.
ODE VIII. TO THE AUTHOR OF MEMOIRS OF THE HOUSE OF BRANDENBURGH, 1751 In the
year 1751 appeared a very splendid edition in 4to of Memoires pour servir a
l'Histoire de la Maison de Brandebourg, a Berlin et la Hay, with a privilege
signed Frederick, the same being engraved in imitation of handwriting. In this
edition among other extraordinary passages are the two following, to which the
third stanza of this ode more particularly refers:

Page 163.] "Il se fit une migration [the author is speaking of what happened
of the revocation of the Edict of Nantz] don't on n'avoit guere vu d'exemples
dans l'histoire: un peuple entier sortit du royaume par l'esprit de parti en
haine du pape, et pour recevoir sous un autre ciel la communion sous les deux
especes: quatre cens mill ames s'expatrierent ainsi et abandonnerent tous leur
biens pour detonne^ dans d'autres temples les vieuxpseaumesde Clement Marot."

Page 242.] "La crainte donna le jour a la credulite, et l'amour propre
interessa bientot le ciel au destin des hommes."


.
I.
THE men renow'd as chiefs of human race,
And born to lead in counsels or in arms,
Have seldom turned their feet from Glory's chase
To dwell with books or court the Muse's charms:
Yet to our eyes if happily time has brought
Some genuine transcript of their calmer thought,
There still we own the wise, the great, or good,
And Caesar there and Xenophon are seen
As clear in spirit and sublime of mien
As on Pharsalian plains or by th'Assyrian slood.
II.
Say thou too, Fred'rick! was not this thy aim?
Thy vigils could the student's lamp engage
Except for this? except that future fame
Might read thy genius in the faithful page?
That if hereafter Envy shall presume
With words irrev'rent to inscribe thy tomb,
And baser weeds upon thy palms to fling,
That hence posterity may try thy reign,
Assert thy treaties, and thy wars explain,
And view in native lights the hero and the king.
III.
O evil foresight and pernicious care!
Will thou indeed abide by this appeal?
Shall we the lessons of thy pen compare
With private honor or with public zeal?
Whence then at things divine those darts of scorn?
Why are the woes which virtuous men have borne
For sacred Truth a prey to Laughter given
What fiend, what foe of Nature, urged thy arm
The Almighty of his scepter to disarm,
To push this earth adrist and leave it loose from heaven?
IV.
Ye godlike Shades of legislators old!
Ye who made Rome victorious Athens wise!
Ye first of mortals, with the blessed enrolled!
Say, did not horror in your bosoms rise
When thus by impious Vanity impelled
A magistrate, a monarch, ye beheld
Affronting civil Order's holiest bands,
Those bands which ye so labored to improve.
Those hopes and fears of justice from above
Which tamed the savage world to your divine commands?
ODE IX. TO THE RIGHT REV. BENJAMIN LORD BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, 1754.
I. 1.
FOR toils which patriots have endured,
For treason quelled and laws secured,
In every nation Time displays
The palm of honorable praise.
Envy may rail and Faction fierce
May strive; but what, alas! can those
(Though bold yet blind and sordid foes)
To gratitude and love oppose,
To faithful story and persuasive verse?
I. 2.
O Nurse of freedom, Albion! say,
Thou tamer of despotick sway,
What man among thy sons around
Thus heir to glory have thou found?
What page in all thy annals bright
Have thou with purer joy surveyed
Than that where truth by Hoadley's aid
Shines through imposture's solemn shade,
Through kingly and through sacerdotal night?
I. 3.
To him the Teacher blessed
Who sent religion from the palmy field
By Jordan like the morn to cheer the west,
And lifted up the veil which Heaven from earth concealed,
To Hoadley thus his mandate he addressed;
"Go thou and rescue my dishonored law
"From hands rapacious and from tongues impure;
"Let not my peaceful name be made a lure
"Fell Persecution's mortal snares to aid,
"Let not my words be impious chains to draw
"The freeborn soul in more than brutal awe,
"To faith without assent, allegiance unrepaid."
II. 1. Stanza II. 1.] Mr. Lock died in 1704, when Mr. Hoadley was beginning
to distinguish himself in the cause of civil and religious liberty, Lord
Godolphin in 1712, when the doctrines of the Jacobite faction were chiefly
favored by those in power, Lord Summers in 1716, amid the practices of the
Nonjuring clergy against the Protestant establishment, and Lord Stanhope in
1721, during the controversy with the lower ^ouse of Convocation.

No cold or unperforming hand
Was armed by Heaven with this command:
The world soon felt it; and on high
To William's ear with welcome joy
Did Lock among the blessed unfold
The rising hope of Hoadley's name,
Godolphin then confirmed the fame,
And Summers when from earth he came,
And generous Stanhope, the fair sequel told.
II. 2.
Then drew the lawgivers around,
(Sires of the Grecian name renowned)
And listening asked and wondering knew
What private force could thus subdue
The vulgar and the great combined,
Could war with sacred folly wage,
Could a whole nation disengage
From the dread bonds of many an age
And to new habits mould the public mind.
II. 3.
For not a conqueror's sword
Nor the strong powers to civil founders known
Were his, but truth by faithful search explored
And social sense like seed in genial plenty sown.
Wherever it took root the soul (restored
To freedom) freedom too for others sought.
Not monkish craft, the tyrant's claim divine,
Not regal zeal, the bigot's cruel shrine,
Could longer guard from Reason's warfare sage;
Not the wild rabble to sedition wrought,
Nor synods by the papal Genius taught,
Nor St. John's spirit loose nor Atterbury's rage.
III. 1.
But where shall recompense be found,
Or how such arduous merit crowned?
For look on life's laborious scene
What rugged spaces he between
Adventurous Virtue's early toils
And her triumphal throne! the shade
Of death mean-time does often invade
Her progress, nor to us displayed
Wears the bright heroine her expected spoils.
III. 2.
Yet born to conquer is her power:
-- O Hoadley! if that favorite hour
On earth arrive, with thankful awe
We own just Heaven's indulgent law,
And proudly thy success behold;
We attend thy reverend length of days
With benediction and with praise,
And hail thee in our public ways
Like some great spirit famed in ages old.
III. 3.
While thus our vows prolong
Thy steps on earth, and when by us resigned
Thou join'st thy seniors, that heroic throng
Who rescued or preserved the rights of humankind,
O! not unworthy may thy Albion's tongue
Thee still her friend and benefactor name;
O! never, Hoadley! in thy country's eyes
May impious gold or pleasure's gaudy prize
Make public ^tue, public freedom vile,
Nor our own manners tempt us to disclaim
That heritage, our noblest wealth and same,
Which thou have kept entire from force and factious guile.
ODE X.
I.
IF rightly tuneful bards decide,
If it be fixed in Love's decrees
That beauty ought not to be tried
But by its native power to please,
Then tell me, Youths and Lovers! tell
What fair can Amoret excel?
II.
Behold that bright unfully'd smile,
And Wisdom speaking in her mien,
Yet (she so artless all the while,
So little studious to be seen)
We naught but instant gladness know,
Nor think to whom the gift we owe.
III.
But neither music nor the powers
Of youth, and mirth, and frolic cheer,
Add half that sunshine to the hours,
Or make life's prospect half so clear,
As memory brings it to the eye
From scenes where Amoret was by.
IV.
Yet not a satirist could there
Or fault or indiscretion find,
Nor any prouder sage declare
One virtue pictured in his mind
Whose form with lovelier colors glows
Than Amoret's demeanor shows.
V.
This sure is beauty's happiest part,
This gives the most unbounded sway,
This shall enchant the subject heart
When rose and lily fade away,
And she be still in spite of time
Sweet Amoret in all her prime.
ODE XI. AT STUDY.
I.
WHITHER did my fancy stray?
By what magic drawn away
Have I left my studious theme,
From this philosophic page,
From the problems of the sage,
Wandering through a pleasing dream?
II.
It Is in vain, alas! I find,
Much in vain, my zealous mind
Would to learned Wisdom's throne
Dedicate each thoughtful hour;
Nature bids a softer power
Claim some minutes for his own.
III.
Let the busy or the wise
View him with contemptuous eyes,
Love is native to the heart:
Guide its wishes as you will,
Without love you 'll find it still
Void in one essential part.
IV.
Me though no peculiar fair
Touches with a lover's care,
Though the pride of my desire
Asks immortal Friendship's name,
Asks the palm of honest fame,
And the old heroic lyre;
V.
Though the day have smoothly gone,
Or to lettered leisure known
Or in social duty spent,
Yet at eve my lonely breast
Seeks in vain for perfect rest,
Languishes for true content.
ODE XII. TO THE COUNTRY GENTLEMEN OF ENGLAND, 1758.
I.
WHITHER is Europe's ancient spirit fled?
Where are those valiant tenants of her shore
Who from the warriour-bow the strong dart sped,
Or with firm hand the rapid poleaxe bore?
Freeman and Soldier was their common name
Who late with reapers to the furrow came,
Now in the front of battle charged the foe,
Who taught the steer the wintry plough to endure,
Now in full councils checked encroaching power,
And gave the guardian laws their majesty to know.
II.
But who are ye? from Ebro's loit'ring sons
To Tiber's pageants, to the sports of Seine,
From Rhine's frail palaces to Danube's thrones,
And cities looking on the Cimbrick main,
Ye lost, ye self-deserted! whose proud lords
Have baffled your tame hands, and given you swords
To slavish ruffians hired for their command:
These at some greedy monk's or harlot's nod
See rifled nations crouch beneath their rod;
These are the public will, the reason of the land.
III.
Thou, heedless Albion! what, alas! the while
Do thou presume? O inexpert in arms,
Yet vain of freedom, how do thou beguile
With dreams of hope these near and loud alarms?
Thy splendid home, thy plan of laws renowned,
The praise and envy of the nations round,
What care have thou to guard from Fortune's sway?
Amid the storms of war how soon may all
The lofty pile from its foundations fall,
Of ages the proud toil, the ruin of a day!
IV.
No; thou art rich, thy streams and fertile vales
Add industry's wise gifts to Nature's store,
And every port is crowded with thy fails,
And every wave throws treasure on thy shore.
What boots it? if luxurious plenty charm
Thy selfish heart from glory, if thy arm
Shrink at the frowns of danger and of pain,
Those gifts, that treasure, is no longer thine.
Oh! rather far be poor. Thy gold will shine
Tempting the eye of Force, and deck thee to thy bane.
V.
But what has force or war to do with thee?
Girt by the azure tide, and throned sublime
Amid thy floating bulwarks, thou can see
With scorn the fury of each hostile clime
Dashed ere it reach thee. Sacred from the foe
Are thy fair fields. Athwart thy guardian prow
No bold invader's foot shall tempt the strand. --
Yet say, my Country! will the waves and wind
Obey thee? have thou all thy hopes resigned
To the sky's fickle faith the pilot's wavering hand?
VI.
For oh! may neither fear nor stronger love
(Love by thy virtuous princes nobly won)
Thee last of many wretched nations move
With mighty armies station'd round the throne
To trust thy safety. Then farewell the claims
Of Freedom! her proud records to the flames
Then bear, an offering at Ambition's shrine,
Whatever thy ancient patriots dared demand
From furious John's or faithless Charles's hand,
Or what great William sealed for his adopted line.
VII.
But if thy sons be worthy of their name,
If liberal laws with liberal hearts they prize,
Let them from conquest and from servile shame
In war's glad school their own protectors rise.
Ye chiefly, heirs of Albion's cultured plains!
Ye leaders of her bold and faithful swains!
Now not unequal to your birth be found;
The public voice bids arm your rural state,
Paternal hamlets for your ensigns wait,
And grange and fold prepare to pour their youth around.
VIII.
Why are ye tardy? what inglorious care
Detains you from their head, your native post?
Who most their country's fame and fortune share
It Is theirs to share her toils her perils most.
Each man his task in social life sustains:
With partial labors with domestic gains
Let others dwell: to you indulgent Heaven
By counsel and by arms the public cause
To serve for public love and love's applause,
The first employment far, the noblest hire, has given.
IX.
Have ye not heard of Lacedaemon's fame?
Of Attick chiefs in Freedom's war divine?
Of Rome's dread generals? the Valerian name?
The Fabian sons? the Scipios? matchless line!
Your lot was theirs. The farmer and the swain
Met his loved patron's summons from the plain;
The legions gathered; the bright Eagles flew;
Barbarian monarchs in the triumph mourned,
The conq'rors to their household gods returned,
And fed Calabrian flocks, and steered the Sabine plough.
X.
Shall then this glory of the antic age,
This pride of men, be lost among mankind?
Shall war's heroic arts no more engage
The unbought hand the unsubjected mind?
Does valor to the race no more belong?
No more with scorn of violence and wrong
Does forming Nature now her sons inspire,
That like some mystery to few revealed
The skill of arms abashed and awed they yield,
And from their own defense with hopeless hearts retire?
XI.
O shame to human life to human laws!
The loose advent'rer, hireling of a day,
Who his fell sword without affection draws,
Whose god whose country is a tyrant's pay,
This man the lessons of the field can learn,
Can every palm which decks a warrior earn,
And every pledge of conquest, while in vain
To guard your altars, your paternal lands,
Are social arms held out to your free hands!
Too arduous is the lore, too irksome were the pain.
XII.
Mean-time by Pleasure's lying tales allured
From the bright sun and living breeze ye stray,
And deep in London's gloomy haunts immured
Brood over your fortune's, freedom's, health's decay.
O blind of choice, and to yourselves untrue!
The young grove shoots, their bloom the fields renew,
The mansion asks its lord, the swains their friend,
While he does Riot's orgies happily share,
Or tempt the gamester's dark destroying snare,
Or at some courtly shrine with slavish incense bend.
XIII.
And yet full often your anxious tongues complain
That lawless tumult prompts the rustic throng,
That the rude village inmates now disdain
Those homely ties which ruled their fathers long.
Alas! your fathers did by other arts
Draw those kind ties around their simple hearts,
And led in other parts their ductile will,
By succor, faithful counsel, courteous cheer,
Won them the ancient manners to revere,
To prize their country's peace, and Heaven's duerites fulfill.
XIV.
But mark the judgment of experienced Time,
Tutor of nations. Does light discord tear
A state, and impotent sedition's crime?
The powers of warlike prudence dwell not there,
The powers who to command and to obey
Instruct the valiant. There would civil sway
The rising race to manly concord tame,
Often let the marshalled field their steps unite,
And in glad splendor bring before their sight
One common cause and one hereditary fame.
XV.
Nor yet be awed nor yet your task disown
Though war's proud votaries look on severe,
Though secrets taught erewhile to them alone
They deem profaned by your intruding ear;
Let them in vain your martial hope to quell
Of new refinements fiercer weapons tell,
And mock the old simplicity in vain:
To the time's warfare simple or refined
The time itself adapts the warriour's mind,
And equal prowess still shall equal palms obtain.
XVI.
Say then, if England's youth in earlier days
On Glory's field with well trained armies vy'd,
Why shall they now renounce that generous praise?
Why dread the foreign mercenary's pride?
Though Valois braved young Edward's gentle hand,
And Albert rushed on Henry's way-worn band,
With Europe's chosen sons in arms renowned,
Yet not on Vere's bold archers long they looked,
Nor Audley's squires nor Mowbray'sycomen brook'd;
They saw their standard fall, and left their monarch bound.
XVII.
Such were the laurels which your fathers won,
Such Glory's dictates in their dauntless breast.
-- Is there no voice that speaks to every son,
No nobler holier call to you addressed?
O! by majestic Freedom, righteous Laws,
By heavenly Truth's by manly Reason's cause,
Awake! attend! be indolent no more:
By Friendship, social Peace, domestic Love,
Rise! arm! your Country's living safety prove,
And train her valiant youth, and watch around her shore.
ODE XIII. ON RECOVERING FROM A FIT OF SICKNESS, In the Country, 1758.
I.
THY verdant scenes, O Goulder's Hill!
Once more I seek, a languid guest;
With throbbing temples and with burdened breast
Once more I climb thy steep aerial way.
O faithful cure of oft'-returning ill!
Now call thy sprightly breezes round,
Dissolve this rigid cough profound,
And bid the springs of life with gentler movement play.
II.
How gladly 'mid the dews of dawn
My weary lungs thy healing gale,
The balmy west or the fresh north, inhale!
How gladly while my musing footsteps rove
Round the cool orchard or the sunny lawn
Awaked I stop, and look to find
What shrub perfumes the pleasant wind,
Or what wild songster charms the Dryads of the grove!
III.
Now ere the morning walk is done
The distant voice of Health I hear
Welcome as Beauty's to the lover's ear:
"Droop not, nor doubt of my return," she cries;
"Here will I 'mid the radiant calm of noon
"Meet thee beneath yon' chestnut bower,
"And lenient on thy bosom pour
"That indolence divine which lulls the earth and skies."
IV.
The goddess promised not in vain;
I found her at my favorite time,
Nor wished to breathe in any softer clime,
While (half-reclin'd half-slumb'ring as I lay)
She hovered over me: then among her train
Of Nymphs and Zephirs to my view
Thy gracious form appeared anew,
Then first, O heavenly Muse! unseen for many a day.
V.
In that soft pomp the tuneful maid
Shone like the golden star of Love:
I saw her hand in careless measures move,
I heard sweet preludes dancing on her lyre,
While my whole frame the sacred sound obeyed.
New sunshine over my fancy springs,
New colors clothe external things,
And the last glooms of pain and sickly plaint retire.
VI.
O Goulder's Hill! by thee restored
Once more to this enlivened hand
My harp, which late resounded over the land
The voice of Glory solemn and severe,
My Dorian harp, shall now with mild accord
To thee her joyful tribute pay,
And send a less ambitious lay
Of friendship and of love to greet thy master's ear:
VII.
For when within thy shady seat
First from the sultry Town he chose,
And the tired senate's cares, his wished repose,
Then wast thou mine; to me a happier home
For social leisure, where my welcome feet,
Estranged from all the intangling ways
In which the restless vulgar strays
Through Nature's simple paths with ancient Faith might roam.
VIII.
And while around his sylvan scene
My Dyson led the white winged Hours
Often from the Athenian Academick bowers
Their sages came, often heard our lingering walk,
The Mantuan music warbling over the green,
And often did Tully's reverend shade,
Though much for liberty afraid,
With us of lettered ease or virtuous glory talk.
IX.
But other guests were on their way,
And reached ere long this favored grove,
Even the celestial progeny of Jove,
Bright Venus! with her allsubduing son,
Whose golden shaft most willingly obey
The best and wisest. As they came
Glad Hymen waved his genial flame,
And sang their happy gifts and praised their spotless throne.
X.
I saw when through yon' festive gate
He led along his chosen maid,
And to my friend with smiles presenting said;
"Receive that fairest wealth which Heaven assigned
"To human fortune. Did thy lonely state
"One wish, one utmost hope, confess?
"Behold! she comes to adorn and bless;
"Comes worthy of thy heart and equal to thy mind."
ODE XIV. THE COMPLAINT.
I.
AWAY! away!
Tempt me no more insidious Love!
Thy soothing sway
Long did my youthful bosom prove:
At length thy treason is discerned,
At length some dearbought caution earned:
Away! nor hope my riper age to move.
II.
I know, I see
Her merit. Needs it now be shown,
Alas! to me?
How often to myself unknown
The graceful, gentle, virtuous, maid
Have I admired! how often said
What joy to call a heart like here is one's own!
III.
But, flattering God!
O squand'rer of content and ease!
In thy abode
Will Care's rude lesson learn to please?
O say, Deceiver! have thou won
Proud Fortune to attend thy throne,
Or placed thy friends above her stern decrees?
ODE XV. ON DOMESTIC MANNERS. [UNFINISHED.]
I.
MEEK Honor, female shame,
O! whither, sweetest offspring of the sky!
From Albion do thou fly,
Of Albion's daughters once the favorite fame?
O Beauty's only friend!
Who giv'st her pleasing reverence to inspire,
Who selfish bold desire
Do to esteem and dear affection turn,
Alas! of thee forlorn
What joy, what praise, what hope, can life pretend?
II.
Behold! our youths in vain
Concerning nuptial happiness inquire;
Our maids no more aspire
The arts of bashful Hymen to attain,
But with triumphant eyes
And cheeks impassive as they move along
Ask homage of the throng;
The lover swears that in a harlot's arms
Are found the selfsame charms,
And worthless and deserted lives and dies.
III.
Behold! unblessed at home
The father of the cheerless household mourns;
The night in vain returns,
For Love and glad Content at distance roam,
While she in whom his mind
Seeks refuge from the day's dull task of cares,
To meet him she prepares
Through noise, and spleen, and all the gamester's art,
A listless harrass'd heart,
Where not one tender thought can welcome find.
IV.
'Twas thus along the shore
Of Thames Britannia's guardian Genius heard
From many a tongue preferred
Of strife and grief the fond invective lore,
At which the queen divine
Indignant, with her adamantine spear
Like thunder sounding near
Smote the Redcross upon her silver shield,
And thus her wrath revealed,
(I watched her awful words and made them mine.)
* * * * * * * * * *
END OF BOOK SECOND.
MISCELLANIES.
AN EPISTLE TO CURIO Curio was a young Roman Senator of distinguished rank and
parts. Being profusely extravagant he soon dissipated a splendid fortune, to
supply the want of which he entered into the designs of Caesar against the
liberties of his country, although he had formerly been a professed enemy to him.
Cicero, to whose care he had been committed upon his first entrance into the
Forum, exerted himself to prevent his ruin, but without effect, and he became
one of the first victims in the Civil war. This Epistle was first published in
the 1744, when a celebrated patriot was supposed to have deserted the cause of
his country. The Author afterward transformed it into the Ode to Curio, "a
performance disgraceful only to its Author," says a celebrated writer. The
Epistle, which is too curious to be omitted, we here give in its original form.
The Ode is printed p. 31. of this volume.
.
THRICE has the spring beheld thy faded fame
And the fourth winter rises on thy shame
Since I exulting grasped the votive shell
In sounds of triumph all thy praise to tell,
Blessed could my skill through ages make thee shine,
And proud to mix my memory with thine.
But now the cause that waked my song before
With praise with triumph crowns the toil no more.
If to the glorious man whose faithful cares,
Nor quelled by malice nor relaxed by years,
Had awed Ambition's wild audacious hate,
And dragged at length Corruption to her fate,
If every tongue its large applauses owed,
And wellearn'd laurels every Muse bestowed,
If public justice urged the high reward,
And Freedom smiled on the devoted bard,
Say then, to him whose levity or lust
Laid all a people's generous hopes in dust,
Who taught Ambition firmer heights of power,
And saved Corruption at her hopeless hour,
Does not each tongue its execrations owe?
Shall not each Muse a wreath of shame bestow?
And public justice fanctify the award,
And Freedom's hand protect the impartial bard?
Yet, long reluctant, I forbore thy name,
Long watched thy virtue like a dying flame,
Hung over each glimmering spark with anxious eyes,
And wished and hoped the light again would rise;
Put since thy guilt still more entire appears,
Since no art hides, no supposition clears,
Since vengeful Slander now too sinks her blast,
And the first rage of party-hate is past,
Calm as the judge of Truth at length I come
To weigh thy merits and pronounce thy doom;
So may my trust from all reproach be free,
And Earth and Time confirm the fair decree!
There are who say they viewed without amaze
Thy sad reverse of all thy former praise,
That through the pageants of a patriot's name
They pierced the foulness of thy secret aim,
Or deemed thy arm exalted but to throw
The public thunder on a private foe;
But I, whose soul consented to thy cause,
Who felt thy genius stamp its own applause,
Who saw the spirits of each glorious age
Move in thy bosom and direct thy rage,
I scorned the ungen'rous gloss of slavish minds,
The owley'd race whom Virtue's luster blinds:
Spite of the learned in the ways of vice,
And all who prove that each man has his price,
I still believed thy end was just and free,
And yet, even yet believe it -- spite of thee;
Even though thy mouth impure has dared disclaim,
Urged by the wretched impotence of shame,
Whatever filial cares thy zeal had paid
To laws infirm and liberty decayed,
Has begged Ambition to forgive the show,
Has told Corruption thou were never her foe,
Has boasted in thy country's awful ear
Her gross delusion when she held thee dear,
How tame she followed thy tempestuous call,
And heard thy pompous tales, and trusted all. --
Rise from your sad abodes ye cursed of old
For laws subverted and for cities sold!
Paint all the noblest trophies of your guilt,
The oaths you perjured and the blood you spilt;
Yet must you one untempted vileness own,
One dreadful palm reserved for him alone;
With studied arts his country's praise to spurn,
To beg the infamy he did not earn,
To challenge hate when honor was his due,
And plead his crimes where all his virtue knew!
Do robes of state the guarded heart enclose
From each fair feeling human nature knows?
Can pompous titles stun the enchanted ear
To all that reason all that sense would hear?
Else could thou ever desert thy sacred post,
In such unthankful baseness to be lost?
Else could thou wed the emptiness of vice,
And yield thy glories at an idiot's price?
When they who loud for liberty and laws
In doubtful times had fought their country's cause,
When now of conquest and dominion sure
They ^ought alone to hold their fruits secure,
When taught by these Oppression hid the face
To leave Corruption stronger in her place,
By silent spells to work the public fate,
And taint the vitals of the passive state,
Till healing Wisdom should avail no more,
And Freedom loath to tread the poisoned shore,
Then like some guardian god that slies to save
The weary pilgrim from an instant grave,
Whom sleeping and secure the guileful snake
Steals near and nearer through the peaceful brake,
Then Curio rose, toward the public woe
To wake the heedless and incite the slow,
Against Corruption Liberty to arm,
And quell the enchantress by a mightier charm.
Swift over the land the fair contagion ^lew,
And with thy country's hopes thy honors grew:
Thee patriot the Patrician roof confessed;
Thy powerful voice the rescued merchant blessed;
Of thee with awe the rural hearth resounds;
The bowl to thee the grateful sailor crowns:
Touched in the sighing shade with manlier sires
To trace thy steps the lovesick youth aspires;
The learned recluse who often amazed had read
Of Grecian heroes Roman patriots dead,
With new amazement hears a living name
Pretend to share in such forgotten fame;
And he who scorning courts and courtly ways
Left the tame track of these dejected days
The life of nobler ages to renew
In virtues sacred from a monarch's view,
Roused by thy labors from the blessed retreat
Where social ease and public passions meet,
Again ascending treads the civil scene,
To act and be a man as thou had been.
Thus by degrees thy cause superior grew,
And the great end appeared at last in view;
We heard the people in thy hopes rejoice,
We saw the senate bending to thy voice;
The friends of freedom hailed the approaching reign
Of laws for which our fathers bled in vain,
While venal Faction struck with new dismay
Shrunk at their frown, and self-abandon'd lay.
Waked in the shock the Public Genius rose
Abashed and keener from his long repose;
Sublime in ancient pride he raised the spear
Which slaves and tyrants long were wont to fear:
The City felt his call; from man to man,
From street to street, the glorious horror ran;
Each crowded haunt was stirred beneath his power,
And murmuring challenged the deciding hour.
Lo! the deciding hour at last appears,
The hour of every freeman's hopes and fears!
Thou, Genius! guardian of the Roman name,
O ever prompt tyrannick rage to tame!
Instruct the mighty moments as they roll,
And guide each movement steady to the goal.
Ye Spirits! by whose providential art
Succeeding motives turn the changeful heart,
Keep, keep the best in view to Curio's mind,
And watch his fancy and his passions bind!
Ye Shades immortal! who by Freedom led
Or in the field or on the scaffold bled,
Bend from your radiant seats a joyful eye,
And view the crown of all your labors nigh;
See Freedom mounting her eternal throne!
The sword submitted and the laws her own;
See public Power chastis'd beneath her stands,
With eyes intent and uncorrupted hands!
See private life by wisest arts reclaimed!
See ardent youth to noblest manners framed!
See us acquire whatever was sought by you
If Curio, only Curio, will be true.
'Twas then -- O shame! O trust how ill repaid!
O Latium! often by faithless sons betrayed! --
'Twas then -- What frenzy on thy reason stole?
What spells unsinew'd thy determined soul?
-- Is this the man in Freedom's cause approved,
The man so great, so honored, so beloved,
This patient slave by tinsel chains allured,
This wretched suitor for a boon abjured,
This Curio, hated and despised by all,
Who fell himself to work his country's fall?
O lost alike to action and repose!
Unknown, unpitied, in the worst of woes!
With all that conscious undissembled pride
Sold to the insults of a foe defied!
With all that habit of familiar same
Doomed to exhaust the dregs of life in shame!
The sole sad refuge of thy baffled art,
To act a statesman's dull exploded part,
Renounce the praise no longer in thy power,
Display thy virtue though without a dower,
Contemn the giddy crowd, the vulgar wind,
And shut thy eyes that others may be blind.
-- Forgive me, Romans! that I bear to smile
When shameless mouths your majesty defile,
Paint you a thoughless, frantic, headlong, crew,
And cast their own impieties on you:
For witness Freedom! to whose sacred power
My soul was vowed from reason's earliest hour,
How have I stood exulting to survey
My country's virtues opening in thy ray!
How with the sons of every foreign shore
The more I matched them honored here is the more!
O Race erect! whose native strength of soul
Which kings, nor priests, nor sordid laws, control,
Bursts the tame round of animal affairs,
And seeks a nobler center for its cares,
Intent the laws of life to comprehend,
And fix dominion's limits by its end,
Who bold and equal in their love or hate,
By conscious reason judging every state,
The man forget not though in rags he lies,
And know the mortal through a crown's disguise,
Thence prompt alike with witty scorn to view
Fastidious Grandeur lift his solemn brow,
Or all awake at Pity's soft command
Bend the mild ear and stretch the gracious hand,
Thence large of heart from envy far removed,
When public toils to virtue stand approved,
Not the young lover fonder to admire,
Nor more indulgent the delighted sire,
Yet high and jealous of their freeborn name
Fierce as the flight of Jove's destroying flame,
Wherever Oppression works her wanton sway
Proud to confront and dreadful to repay;
But if to purchase Curio's sage applause
My country must with him renounce her cause,
Quit with a slave the path a patriot trod,
Bow the meek knee and kiss the regal rod,
Then still, ye Powers! instruct his tongue to rail,
Nor let his zeal nor let his subject fail,
Else ere he change the style bear me away
To where the Gracchi where the Bruti The two brothers, Tiberius and Caius
Gracchus, lost their lives in attempting to introduce the only regulation that
could give stability and good order to the Roman republic. ^ Junius Brutus
founded the commonwealth, and died in its defense.
stay!
O long revered and late resigned to shame!
If this uncourtly page thy notice claim,
When the loud cares of business are withdrawn,
Nor welldrest beggars round thy footsteps fawn,
In that still thoughtful solitary hour
When Truth exerts her unresisted power,
Breaks the false optics tinged with Fortune's glare,
Unlocks the breast and lays the passions bare,
Then turn thy eyes on that important scene,
And ask thyself -- if all be well within?
Where is the heartfelt worth and weight of soul
Which labor could not stop nor fear control?
Where the known dignity, the stamp of awe,
Which half-abash'd the proud and venal saw?
Where the calm triumphs of an honest cause?
Where the delightful taste of just applause?
Where the strong reason, the commanding tongue,
On which the Senate fired or trembling hung?
All vanished, all are sold! -- and in their room,
Couched in thy bosom's deep distracted gloom,
See the pale form of barbarous Grandeur dwell,
Like some grim idol in a sorc'rer's cell!
To her in chains thy dignity was led,
At her polluted shrine thy honor bled;
With blasted weeds thy awful brow she crowned,
Thy powerful tongue with poisoned philters bound,
That baffled Reason straight indignant flew,
And fair Persuasion from her seat withdrew:
For now no longer Truth supports thy cause,
No longer Glory prompts thee to applause;
No longer Virtue breathing in thy breast,
With all her conscious majesty confessed,
Still bright and brighter wakes the almighty flame
To rouse the feeble and the wilful tame,
And where she sees the catching glimpses roll
Spreads the strong blaze and all involves the soul;
But cold restraints thy conscious fancy chill,
And formal passions mock thy struggling will;
Or if thy Genius ever forget his chain,
And reach impatient at a nobler strain,
Soon the sad bodings of contemptuous mirth
Shoot through thy breast and stab the generous birth,
Till blind with smart from truth to frenzy tossed,
And all the tenor of thy reason lost,
Perhaps thy anguish drains a real tear,
While some with pity some with laughter hear.
-- Can art, alas! or genius, guide the head
Where truth and freedom from the heart are fled?
Can lesser wheels repeat their native stroke
When the prime function of the soul is broke?
But come, unhappy Man! thy sates impend;
Come, quit thy friends, if yet thou have a friend;
Turn from the poor rewards of guilt like thine,
Renounce thy titles and thy robes resign;
For see the hand of Destiny displayed
To shut thee from the joys thou have betrayed!
See the dire fane of Infamy arise
Dark as the grave and spacious as the skies,
Where from the first of time thy kindred train,
The chiefs and princes of the unjust, remain!
Eternal barriers guard the pathless road
To warn the wanderer of the cursed abode,
But prone as whirlwinds scour the passive sky
The heights surmounted down the steep they fly.
There black with frowns relentless Time awaits,
And goads their footsteps to the guilty gates,
And still he asks them of their unknown aims,
Evolves their secrets and their guilt proclaims,
And still his hands despoil them on the road
Of each vain wreath by lying bards bestowed,
Break their proud marbles, crush their festal cars,
And rend the lawless trophies of their wars.
At last the gates his potent voice obey,
Fierce to their dark abode he drives his prey,
Where ever armed with adamantine chains
The watchful demon over her vassals reigns,
Over mighty names and giant powers of lust,
The Great, the Sage, the Happy, and August Titles which have been generally
ascribed to the most pernicious of men.
;
No gleam of hope their baleful mansion cheers,
No sound of honor hails their unblessed cars,
But dire reproaches from the friend betrayed,
The childless fire and violated maid,
But vengeful vows for guardian laws essac'd,
From towns enslaved and continents laid waste,
But long Posterity's united groan,
And the sad charge of horrors not their own,
For ever through the trembling space resound,
And sink eaxh impious forehead to the ground.
Ye mighty foes of Liberty and Rest
Give way; do homage to a mightier guest!
Ye daring Spirits of the Roman race,
See Curio's toil your proudest claims efface!
-- Awed at the name fierce Appius Appius Claudius the Decemvir, and L.
Cornelius Cinna, both attempted toestablish a tyrannical dominion in Rome, and
both perished by the treason.
rising bends,
And hardy Cinna from his throne attends:
"He comes," they cry, "to whom the Fates assigned
"With surer arts to work what we designed,
"From year to year the stubborn herd to sway,
"Month all their wrongs and all their rage obey,
"Till owned their guide and trusted with their power
"He mocked their hopes in one decisive hour,
"Then tired and yielding led them to the chain,
"And quenched the spirit we provoked in vain."
But thou, Supreme! by whose eternal hands
Fair Liberty's heroic empire stands,
Whose thunders the rebellious deep control,
And quell the triumphs of the traitor's soul,
O turn this dreadful omen far away!
On Freedom's foes their own attempts repay,
Relume her sacred fire so near suppressed,
And six her shrine in every Roman breast.
Though bold Corruption boast around the land
"Let Virtue if she can my baits withstand!"
Though bolder now she urge the accursed claim,
Gay with her trophies raised on Curio's shame,
Yet some there are who scorn her impious mirth,
Who know what conscience and a heart are worth.
-- O Friend and Father of the human mind,
Whose art for noblest ends our frame designed!
If I, though fated to the studious shade,
Which party-strife nor anxious power invade,
If I aspire in public virtue's cause
To guide the Muses by sublimer laws,
Do thou her own authority impart,
And give my numbers entrance to the heart:
Perhaps the verse might rouse her smothered flame,
And snatch the fainting patriot back to fame;
Perhaps by worthy thoughts of humankind
To worthy deeds exalt the conscious mind,
Or dash Corruption in her proud career,
And teach her slaves that Vice was born to fear.
LOVE. AN ELEGY.
Too much my heart of Beauty's power has known,
Too long to Love has Reason left her throne,
Too long my Genius mourned his myrtle chain,
And three rich years of youth consumed in vain.
My wishes lulled with soft inglorious dreams
Forgot the patriot's and the sage's themes;
Through each Elysian vale and Fairy grove,
Through all the enchanted paradise of Love,
Misled by sickly Hope's deceitful flame,
Averse to action, and renouncing fame.
At last the visionary scenes decay,
My eyes exulting bless the newborn day
Whose faithful beams detect the dangerous road
In which my heedless feet securely trod,
And strip the phantoms of their lying charms
That lured my soul from Wisdom's peaceful arms.
For silver streams and banks bespread with flowers,
For mossy couches and harmonious bowers,
Lo! barren heaths appear and pathless woods,
And rocks hung dreadful over unfathomed floods:
For openness of heart, for tender smiles,
Looks fraught with love, and wrath-disarming wiles,
Lo! sullen Spite and perjured Lust of Gain,
And cruel Pride and crueller Disdain;
Lo! cordial Faith to idiot airs re^in'd,
Now coolly civil now transporting kind;
For graceful Ease, lo! Affectation walks,
And dull Half-sense for Wit and Wisdom talks:
New to each hour what low delight succeeds,
What precious furniture of hearts and heads!
By naught their prudence but by getting known,
And all their courage in deceiving shown.
See next what plagues attend the lover's state,
What frightful forms of Terror, Scorn, and Hate!
See burning Fury heaven and earth defy!
See dumb Despair in icy fetters lie!
See black Suspicion bend his gloomy brow,
The hideous image of himself to view!
And fond Belief with all a lover's flame
Sinks in those arms that points his head with shame!
There wan Dejection falt'ring as he goes,
In shades and silence vainly seeks repose,
Musing through pathless wilds consumes the day,
Then lost in darkness weeps the hours away.
Here the gay crowd of Luxury advance,
Some touch the lyre and others urge the dance;
On every head the rosy garland glows,
In every hand the golden goblet flows,
The Siren views them with exulting eyes,
And laughs at bashful Virtue as she flies.
But see behind where Scorn and Want appear,
The grave remonstrance and the witty sneer;
See fell Remorse in action prompt to dart
Her shaky poison through the conscious heart!
And Sloth to cancel with oblivious shame
The fair memorial of recording Fame!
Are these delights that one would wish to gain?
Is this the Elysium of a sober brain?
To wait for happiness in female smiles,
Bear all her scorn, be caught with all her wiles,
With prayers, with bribes, with lies, her pity crave,
Bless her hard bonds, and boast to be her slave,
To feel for trifles a distracting train
Of hopes and terrors equally in vain,
This hour to tremble and the next to glow?
Can Pride, can Sense, can Reason, stoop so low,
When Virtue at an easier price displays
The sacred wreaths of honorable praise,
When Wisdom utters her divine decree
To laugh at pompous Folly and be free?
I bid adieu then to these woeful scenes,
I bid adieu to all the sex of queens;
Adieu to every suffering simple soul
That lets a woman's will his ease control.
There laugh ye Witty! and rebuke ye Grave!
For me I scorn to boast that I Am a slave;
I bid the whining brotherhood be gone:
Joy to my heart! my wishes are my own.
Farewell the female heaven the female hell,
To the great god of Love a glad farewell.
Is this the triumph of thy awful name?
Are these the splendid hopes that urged thy aim
When first my bosom owned thy haughty sway,
When thus Minerva heard thee boasting say,
"Go, martial Maid! elsewhere thy arts employ,
"Nor hope to shelter that devoted boy;
"Go teach the solemn sons of Care and Age,
"The pensive statesmen and the midnight sage;
"The young with me must other lessons prove,
"Youth calls for Pleasure, Pleasure calls for Love;
"Behold his heart thy grave advice disdains,
"Behold I bind him in eternal chains?"
Alas! great Love, how idle was the boast!
Thy chains are broken and thy lessons lost;
Thy wilful rage has tired my suffering heart,
And passion, reason, forced thee to depart.
But wherefore do thou linger on thy way,
Why vainly search for some pretense to stay
When crowds of vassals court thy pleasing yoke
And countless victims bow them to the stroke?
Lo! round thy shrine a thousand youths advance,
Warm with the gentle ardours of romance
Each longs to assert th cause with feats of arms,
And make the world consess Dulcinea's charms.
Ten thousand girls with flowery chaplets crowned
To groves and streams thy tender triumph ^ound,
Each bids the stream in murmurs speak her flame,
Each calls the grove to sigh her shepherd's name:
But if thy pride such easy honors scorn,
If nobler trophies must thy toil adorn,
Behold yon' flowery antiquated maid
Bright in the bloom of threescore years displayed,
Her shall thou bind in thy delightful chains,
And thrill with gentle pangs her withered veins,
Her frosty cheek with crimson blushes dye,
With dreams of rapture melt her maudlin eye.
Turn then thy labors to the servile crowd,
Entice the wary and control the proud,
Make the sad miser his best gains forego,
The solemn statesman sigh to be a beau,
The bold coquette with fondest passion burn,
The Bacchanalian over his bottle mourn,
And that chief glory of thy power maintain
"To poise ambition in a female brain."
Be these thy triumphs, but no more presume
That my rebellious heart will yield thee room:
I know thy puny force thy simple wiles,
I break triumphant through thy slimsy toils:
I see thy dying lamp's last languid glow,
Thy arrows blunted and unbrac'd thy bow;
I feel diviner fires my breast inflame
To active science and ingenuous fame,
Resume the paths my earliest choice began,
And lose with pride the lover in the man.
A BRITISH PHILIPPICK, OCCASIONED BY THE INSULTS OF THE SPANIARDS, AND THE
PRESENT PREPARATIONS FOR WAR, 1738.
WHENCE this unwonted transport in my breast?
Why glow my thoughts? and whither would the Muse
Aspire with rapid wing? Her country's cause
Demands her efforts: at that sacred call
She summons all her ardour, throws aside
The trembling lyre, and with the warriour's trump
She means to thunder in each British ear;
And if one spark of honor or of fame,
Disdain of insult, dread of infamy,
One thought of public virtue, yet survive,
She means to wake it, rouse the generous flame,
With patriot zeal inspirit every breast,
And ^ire each British heart with British wrongs.
Alas, the vain attempt! What influence now
Can the Muse boast? or what attention now
Is paid to fame or virtue? Where is now
The British spirit, generous, warm, and brave,
So frequent wont from tyranny and woe
To free the suppliant nations? Where indeed
If that protection once to strangers given
Be now withheld from sons! each nobler thought
That wa^'d our ^ires is lost and buried now
In luxury and avarice. Baneful vice!
H^w it unmans a nation! Yet I Will try;
(...) aim to shake this vile degenerate sloth,
I Will dare to rouse Britannia's dreaming sons
To fame, to virtue, and impart around
A generous feeling of compatriot woes.
Come then the various powers of forceful Speech,
All that can move, awaken, fire, transport!
Come the bold ardour of the Theban bard,
The arousing thunder of the patriot Greek,
The soft persuasion of the Roman sage!
Come all! and raise me to an equal height,
A r^pture worthy of my glorious cause,
Lest my best efforts failing should debase
The sacred them, for with no common wing
The Muse attempts to soar. Yet what need these?
My country's fame, my freeborn British heart,
Shall be my best inspirers, raise my flight
High as the Theban's pinion, and with more
Than Greek or Roman flame exalt my soul.
Oh! could I give the vast ideas birth
Expressive of the thoughts that flame within,
No more should lazy Luxury detain
Our ardent youth, no more should Britain's sons
Sit tamely passive by, and careless hear
The prayers, sighs, groans, (immortal insamy!)
Of fellow Britons with oppression sunk
In bitterness of soul demanding aid,
Calling on Britain their dear native land,
The land of Liberty, so greatly sam'd
For just redress, the land so often died
With her best blood, for that arousing cause
The freedom of her sons; those sons that now
Far from the manly blessings of her sway
Drag the vile fetters of a Spanish lord.
And dare they, dare the vanquished sons of Spain,
Enslave a Briton? Have they then forgot,
So soon forgot, the great the immortal day
When rescued Sicily with joy beheld
The swift-wing'd thunder of the British arm
Disperse their navies, when their coward bands
Fled like the raven from the bird of Jove,
From swift impending vengeance fled in vain?
Are these our lords? and can Britannia see
Her soes often vanquished thus defy her power,
Insult her standard and enslave her sons,
And not arise to justice? Did our sires,
Unawed by chains, by exile, or by death,
Preserve inviolate her guardian rights,
To Britons ever sacred, that their sons
Might give them up to Spaniards? -- Turn your eyes,
Turn ye degenerate! who with haughty boast
Call yourselves Britons, to that dismal gloom,
That dungeon dark and deep, where never thought
Of joy or peace can enter; see the gates
Harsh-creaking open; what an hideous void,
Dark as the yawning grave! while still as death
A frightful silence reigns: there on the ground
Behold your brethren chained like beasts of prey,
There mark your numerous glories, there behold
The look that speaks unutterable woe,
The mangled limb, the faint the deathful eye,
With famine sunk, the deep-heart bursting groan
Suppressed in silence; view the loathsome food
Refused by dogs; and oh the stinging thought!
View the dark Spaniard glorying in their wrongs,
The deadly priest triumphant in their woes,
And thundering worse damnation on their souls,
While that pale form in all the pangs of death
Too faint to speak, yet eloquent of all
His native British spirit yet untamed,
Raises his head, and with indignant srowns
Of great defiance and superior scorn
Looks up and dies. -- Oh! I Am all on fire!
But let me spare the theme, lest future times
Should blush to hear that either conquered Spain
Durst offer Britain such outrageous wrong
Or Britain tamely bore it. --
Descend ye guardian Heroes of the land!
Scourges of Spain descend! behold your sons,
See how they run the same heroic race,
How prompt how ardent in their country's cause,
How greatly proud t'assert their British blood,
And in their deeds reflect their fathers' fame!
Ah! would to Heaven ye did not rather see
How dead to virtue in the public cause,
How cold, how careless, how to glory deaf,
They shame your laurels and belie their birth!
Come ye great Spirits, Cav'ndish, Rawleigh, Blake!
And ye of later name, your country's pride,
Oh come! disperse these lazy fumes of sloth,
Teach British hearts with British fires to glow;
In wak'ning whispers rouse our ardent youth,
Blazon the triumphs of your better days,
Paint all the glorious scenes of rightful war
In all its splendours; to their swelling souls
Say how ye bowed the insulting Spaniards' pride,
Say how ye thundered over their prostrate heads,
Say how ye broke their lines and fired their ports,
Say how not death in all its srightful shapes
Could damp your souls or shake the great resolve
For right and Britain; then display the joys
The patriot's soul exalting while he views
Transported millions hail with loud acclaim
The guardian of their civil sacred rights;
(How greatly welcome to the virtuous man
Is death for others' good!) the radiant thoughts
That beam celestial on his passing soul,
The unfading crowns awaiting him above,
The exalting plaudit of the Great Supreme,
Who in his actions with complacence views
His own reflected splendor; then descend
Though to a lower yet a nobler scene;
Paint the just honors to his relics paid,
Show grateful millions weeping over his grave,
While his fair fame in each progressive age
For ever brightens, and the wise and good
Of every land in universal choir
With richest incense of undying praise
His urn encircle, to the wond ring world
His numerous triumphs blazon, while with awe,
With filial reverence, in his steps they tread,
And copying every virtue every fame
Transplant his glories into second life,
And with unsparing hand make nations blessed
By his example. Vast immense rewards
For all the turmoils which the virtuous mind
Encounters here! Yet, Britons! are ye cold?
Yet deaf to glory, virtue, and the call
Of your poor injured countrymen? Ah! no:
I see ye are not; every bosom glows
With native greatness, and in all its state
The British spirit rises. Glorious change!
Fame, Virtue, Freedom, welcome! Oh! forgive
The Muse, that ardent in her sacred cause
Your glory questioned; she beholds with joy,
She owns, she triumphs, in her wished mistake.
See from her seabeat throne in awful march
Britannia towers! upon her laurel crest
The plumes majestic nod; behold she heaves
Her guardian shields, and terrible in arms
For battle shakes her adamantine spear;
Loud at her foot the British Lion roars,
Frighting the nations: haughty Spain full soon
Shall hear and tremble. Go then, Britons! forth
Your country's daring champions; tell your foes,
Tell them in thunders over their prostrate land,
You were not born for slaves: let all your deeds
Show that the sons of those immortal men,
The stars of shining story, are not slow
In virtue's path to emulate their sires,
TO assert their country's rights, avenge her sons,
And hurl the bolts of Justice on her soes.
HYMNS.
HYMN TO THE NAIADS. MDCCXLVI.
The Argument.
The Nymphs who preside over springs and rivulets are addressed at daybreak in
honor of their several fun^ons, and of the relations which they bear to the
natural and to the moral world. Their origin is deduced from the first
allegorical deities or powers of Nature, according to the doctrine of the old
mythological poets concerning the generation of the gods and the rise of
things. They are then successively considered as giving motion to the air and
exciting summer breezes; as nourishing and beautifying the vegetable creation;
as contributing to the fullness of navigable rivers, and consequently to the
maintenance of commerce, and by that means to the maritime part of military
p^er. Next is represented their favorable influence upon health when assisted
by rural exercise, which introduces their connection with the art of physic,
and the happy effects of mineral medicinal springs. Lastly, they are celebrated
for the friendship which the Muses (...) them and for the true inspiration
which temperance only can receive, in opposition to the enthusiasm of the more
licentious poets.

OVER yonder eastern hill the Twilight pale
Walks forth from darkness, and the god of Day
With bright Astraea seated by his side
Waits yet to leave the ocean. Tarry, Nymphs!
Ye Nymphs! ye blueey'd progeny of Thames!
Who now the mazes of this rugged heath
Trace with your fleeting steps, who all night long
Repeat amid the cool and tranquil air
Your lonely murmurs, tarry, and receive
My offered lay. To pay you homage due
I leave the gates of Sleep; nor shall my lyre
Too far into the splendid hours of Morn
Engage your audience; my observant hand
Shall close the strain ere any sultry beam
Approach you: to your subterranean haunts
Ye then may timely steal, to pace with care
The humid sands, to loosen from the soil
The bubbling sources, to direct the rills
To meet in wider channels, or beneath
Some grotto's dripping arch at height of noon
To slumber, sheltered from the burning heaven.
Where shall my song begin ye Nymphs! or end?
Wide is your praise and copious. -- First of things,
First of the lonely powers, ere Time arose,
Were Love and Chaos; Love the fire of Fate,. 25. -- Love -- Elder than Chaos.]
Hesiod in his Theogony gives a different account, and makes Chaos the eldest of
beings, though he assigns to Love neither father nor superior, which
circumstance is particularly mentioned by Phaedrus in Plato's Banquet as being
observable not only in Hesiod but in all other writers both of verse and prose,
and on the same occasion he cites a line from Parmenides, in which Love is
expressly styled the eldest of all the gods. Yet Aristophanes, in The Birds,
affirms that "Chaos and Night, and Erebus and Tartarus, were first, and that
Love was produced from an egg which the sable-winged Night deposited in the
immense bosom of Erebus." But it must be observed that the Love designed by
this comic poet was always distinguished from the other, from that original
and selfexistent being the TO ON or AGATHON of Plato, and meant only the
DIOYPGOS or second person of the old Grecian trinity, to whom is inscribed an
hymn among those which pass under the name of Orpheus, where he is called
Protogonos, or the First-begotten, is said to have been born of an egg, and is
represented as the principal or origin of all these external appearances of
Nature. In the Fragments of Orpheus collected by Henry Stephens he is named
Phanes, the Discoverer or Discloser, who unfolded the ideas of the Supreme
Intelligence, and exposed them to the perception of inferior beings in this
visible frame of the world, as Mocrobius, and Proclus, and Athenagoras, all
agree to interpret the several passages of Orpheus which they have preserved.

But the Love designed in our text is the one selfexistent and Infinite Mind,
whom if the generality of ancient mythologists have not introduced or truly
described in accounting for the production of the world and its appearances,
yet to a modern poet it can be no objection that he has ventured to differ
from them in this particular, though in other respects he professes to imitate
their manner and conform to their opinions; for in these great points of
natural theology they differ no less remarkably among themselves, and are
perpetually confounding the philosophical relations of things with the
traditionary circumstances of mythick history; upon which very account
Callimachus in his Hymn to Jupiter declares his dissent from them concerning
even an article of the national creed, adding that the ancient bards were by no
means to be depended on. And yet in the exordium of the old Argonautick poem
ascribed to Orpheus it is said that "Love, whom mortals in later times call
Phanes, was the father of the eternally begotten Night," who is generally
represented by these mytholOgical poets as being herself the parent of all
things and who in The Indigitamenta, or Orphick Hymns, is said to be the same
with Cypris, or Love itself. Moreover, in the body of this Argonautick poem,
where the personated Orpheus introduces himself singing to his lyre in reply
to Chiron, he celebrateth "the obscure memory of Chaos, and the natures which
it contained within itself in a state of perpetual vicissitude; how the heaven
had its boundary determined, the generation of the earth, the depth of the
ocean, and also the sapient Love, the most ancient, the self-sufficient, with
all the beings which he produced when he separated one thing from another:"
which noble passage is more directly to Aristotle's purpose in the first book
of his Metaphysics than any of those which he has there quoted to show that
the ancient poets and mythologists agreed with Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and the
other more sober philosophers, in that natural anticipation and common notion
of mankind concerning the necessity of mind and reason to account for the
connection, motion, and good order of the world. For though neither this poem
nor the hymns which pass under the same name are, it should seem, the work of
the real Orpheus, yet beyond all question they are very ancient. The hymns more
particularly are allowed to be older than the invasion of Greece by Xerxes, and
were probably a set of public and solemn forms of devotion, as appears by a
passage in one of them, which Demosthenes has almost literally cited in his
first oration against Aristogiton, as the saying of Orpheus, the founder of
their most holy mysteries. On this account they are of higher authority than
any other mythological work now extant, the Theogony of Hesiod himself not
excepted. The poetry of them is often extremely noble, and the mysterious air
which prevails in them, together with its delightful impression upon the mind,
cannot be better expressed than in that remarkable description with which they
inspired the German editor Eschenbach when he accidentally met with them at
Leipsick: "Thesaurum me reperisse credidi," says he, "et prosecto thesaurum
reperi. Incredibile dictu quo me sacro horrore afflaverint indigitamenta ista
deorum: nam et tempus ad illorum lectionem eligere cogebar, quod vel solum
horrorem incutere animo potest, nocturnum; cum enim totam diem consumserim in
contemplando urbis splendore, et in adeundis, quibus scatet urbs illa, viris
doctis; sola nox restabat, quam Orpheo consecrare potui. In abyssum quendam
mysteriorum venerandae antiquitatis descendere videbar, quotiescunque silente
mundo, solis vigilantibus astris et luna, (...) istos hymnos ad manus sumsi."


. 25. Chaos.] The unformed undigested mass of Moses and Plato, which Milton
calls "The womb of Nature."

Ibid. Love the sire of Fate.] Fate is the universal system of natural causes,
the work of the Omnipotent Mind or of Love; so Minucius Felix: "Quid enim aliud
eft fatum, quam quod de unoquoque nostrum deus fatus est." So also Cicero, in
the first Book on Divination; "Fatum autem id appello, quod Graeci EIPAPENN; id
est, ordinem seriemque causarum, cum causa causae nexa rem ex se gignat -- ex
quo intelligitur, ut fatum sit non id quod superstitiose, sed id quod physice
dicitur causa aeterna rerum." To the same purpose is the doctrine of Hierocles
in that excellent fragment concerning Providence and Destiny. As to the three
Fates or Destinies of the poets, they represented that part of the general
system of natural causes which relate to man and to other mortal beings, for so
we are told in the hymn addressed to them among the Orphick Indigitamenta,
where they are called the daughters of Night (or Love) and contrary to the
vulgar notion are distinguished by the epithets of Gentle and Tenderhearted.
According to Hesiod, Theog. ver. 904, they were the daughters of Jupiter and
Themis, but in the Orphick Hymn to Venus or Love that goddess is directly
styled the mother of Necessity, and is represented immediately after as
governing the three Destinies, and conducting the whole system of Natural
causes.

Elder than Chaos. Born of Fate was Time,. 26. Born of Fate was Time.] Cronos,
Saturn, or Time, was, according to Apollodorus, the son of Coelum and Tellus;
but the author of the Hymns gives it quite undisguised by mythological
language, and calls him plainly the offspring of the Earth and the starry
Heaven, that is of Fate, as explained in the preceding note.

Who many sons and many comely births
Devoured, relentless Father! till the child. 28. Who many sons devoured.] The
known fable of Saturn devouring his children was certainly meant to imply the
dissolution of natural bodies, which are produced and destroyed by Time.
. 28. The child -- Of Rhea.] Jupiter so called by Pindar.

Of Rhea drove him from the upper sky,. 29. Drove him from the upper sky.] That
Jupiter dethroned his father Saturn is recorded by all the mythologists.
Phurnutus or Cornutus, the author of a little Greek treatise on the nature of
the gods, informs us that by Jupiter was meant the vegetable soul of the world,
which restrained and prevented those uncertain alterations which Saturn or Time
used formerly to cause in the mundane system.

And quelled his deadly might. Then social reigned. 30. Then social reigned,
etc.] Our mythology here supposes that before the establishment of the vital,
vegetative, plastic nature, (represented by Jupiter) the four elements were in
a variable and unsettled condition, but afterward welldisposed, and at peace
among themselves. Tethys was the wife of the Ocean, Ops or Rhea the earth,
Vesta the eldest daughter of Saturn fire, and the Cloudcompeller, or (...), the
air, though he also represented the plastic principle of nature, as may be
seen in the Orphick hymn inscribed to him.

The kindred powers Tethys and reverend Ops,
And spotless Vesta, while supreme of sway
Remained the Cloudcompeller. From the couch
Of Tethys sprang the sedgy-crowned race. 34. The sedgy-crowned race.] The
river-gods, who according to Hesiod's Theogony were the sons of Oceanus and
Tethys.

Who from a thousand urns over every clime
Send tribute to their parent; and from them. 36. From them -- Are ye O
Naiads!] The descent of the Naiads is less certain than most points of the
Greek mythology, Homer, Odyss. xiii. (...). Virgil in the eighth book of the
Aeneid speaks as if the Nymphs or Naiads were the parents of the rivers, but in
this he contradicts the testimony of Hesiod, and evidently departs from the
orthodox system which represents several nymphs as retaining to every single
river. On the other hand Callimachus, who was very learned in all the
school divinity of those times, in his Hymn to Delos makes Peneus the great
Thessalian river-godthe father of his nymphs; and Ovid, in the fourteenth book
of his Metamorphoses, mentions the Naiads of Latium as the immediate daughters
of the neighboring river-gods. Accordingly the Naiads of particular rivers are
occasionally both by Ovid and Statius called by a patronymick, from the name of
the river to which they belong.

Are ye O Naiads! Arethusa fair,
And tuneful Aganippe, that sweet name
Bandusia, that soft family which dwelt
With Syrian Daphne, and the honored tribes. 40. Syrian Daphne.] The grove of
Daphne in Syria, near Antioch, was famous for its delightful fountains.
Ibid. The tribes -- Beloved of Paeon.] Mineral and medicinal springs. Paeon
was the physician of the gods.

Beloved of Paeon. Listen to my strain
Daughters of Tethys! listen to your praise.
You Nymphs! the winged offspring which of old. 43. The winged offspring.] The
Winds, who according to Hesiod and Apollodorus were the sons of Astraeus and
Aurora.

Aurora to divine Astraeus bore
Owns, and your aid beseeches. When the might
Of Hyperion from his noontide throne. 46. Hyperion.] A son of Coelum and
Tellus, and father of the Sun, who is thence called by Pindar Hyperionides. But
Hyperion is put by Homer in the same manner as here, for the Sun himself.

Unbends their languid pinions aid from you
They ask; Favonius and the mild Southwest
From you relief implore: your sallying streams. 49. Your sallying streams.]
The state of the atmosphere with respect to rest and motion is in several ways
affected by rivers and running streams, and that more especially in hot
seasons; first, they destroy its equilibrium, by cooling those parts of it with
which they are in contact; and, secondly, they communicate their own motion;
and the air which is thus moved by them being left heated is of consequence
more elastick than other parts of the atmosphere, and therefore fitter to
preserve and to propagate that motion.

Fresh vigor to their weary wings impart;
Again they fly disporting from the mead
Half ripened and the tender blades of corn
To sweep the noxious mildew, or dispel
Contagious steams, which often the parched earth
Breathes on her fainting sons. From noon to eve
Along the river and the paved brook
Ascend the cheerful breezes, hailed of bards
Who fast by learned Came the Aeolian lyre
Solicit, nor unwelcome to the youth
Who on the heights of Tibur all inclined
Or rushing Anio, with a pious hand
The reverend scene delineates, broken fanes
Or tombs, or pillar'd aqueducts, the pomp
Of ancient Time, and happily while he scans
The ruins with a silent tear revolves
The fame and fortune of imperious Rome.
You too O Nymphs! and your unenvious aid,
The rural powers confess, and still prepare
For you their choicest treasures. Pan commands
Often as the Delian king with Sirius holds. 70. Delian king.] One of the
epithets of Apollo or the Sun, in the Orphick hymn inscribed to him.

The central heavens, the Father of the Grove
Commands, his Dryads over your abodes
To spread their deepest umbrage. Well the god
Rememb'reth how indulgent ye supplied
Your genial dews to nurse them in their prime.
Pales, the Pasture's queen, wherever ye stray
Pursues your steps delighted, and the path
With living verdure clothes. Around your haunts
The laughing Chloris with profusest hand. 79. Chloris.] The ancient Greek name
for Flora.

Throws wide her blooms, her odours. Still with you
Pomona seeks to dwell; and over the lawns
And over the vale of Richmond, where with Thames
Ye love to wander, Amalthea pours. 83. Amalthea.] The mother of the first
Bacchus, whose birth and education was written, as Diodorus Siculus informs us,
in the old Pelasgick character by Thymoetes, grandson to Laomedon and
contemporary with Orpheus. Thymoetes had traveled over Libya to the country
which borders on the western ocean, there he saw the island of Nysa, and
learned from the inhabitants that "Ammon king of Libya was married in former
ages to Rhea sister of Saturn and the Titans; that he afterward fell in love
with a beautiful virgin whose name was Amalthea, had by her a son, and gave her
possession of a neighboring track of land wonderfully fertile, which in shape
nearly resembling the horn of an ox was thence called the Hesperian horn, and
afterward the horn of Amalthea; that fearing the jealousy of Rhea he concealed
the young Bacchus with his mother in the island of Nysa;" the beauty of which
Diodorus describes with great dignity and pomp of style. This fable is one of
the noblest in all the ancient mythology, and seems to have made a particular
impression on the imagination of Milton, the only modern poet (unless perhaps
it be necessary to except Spenser) who in these mysterious traditions of the
poetic story had a heart to feel and words to express the simple and solitary
genius of Antiquity. To raise the idea of his Paradise he prefers it even to --
"that Nysean isle
"Girt by the river Triton, where old Cham
"(Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Libyan Jove)
"Hid Amalthea and her florid son
"Young Bacchus from his stepdame Rhea's eye."


Wellpleas'd the wealth of that Ammonian horn,
Her dower, unmindful of the fragrant isles
Nysaean or Atlantic. Nor can thou,
(Albeit often ungrateful thou do mock
The bev'rage of the sober Naiad's urn,
O Bromius! O Lenaean!) nor can thou
Disown the powers whose bounty ill repaid
With nectar feeds thy tendrils. Yet from me,
Yet, blameless Nymphs! from my delighted lyre,
Accept the rites your bounty well may claim,
Nor heed the scoffings of the Edonian band.. 94. Edonian band.] The
priestesses and other ministers of Bacchus, so called from Edonus a mountain of
Thrace, where his rites were celebrated.

For better praise awaits you. Thames your sire,
As down the verdant slope your duteous rills
Descend, the tribute stately Thames receives
Delighted, and your piety applauds,
And bids his copious tide roll on secure,
For faithful are his daughters, and with words
Auspicious gratulates the bark which now
His banks forsaking her adventurous wings
Yields to the breeze, with Albion's happy gifts
Extremest isles to bless. And often at morn,
When Hermes from Olympus bent over earth. 105. When Hermes.] Hermes or Mercury
was the patrron of commerce, in which benevolent character he is addressed by
the author of The Indigitamenta in these beautiful lines; (...)
(...)


To bear the words of Jove on yonder hill
Stoops lightly sailing, often intent your springs
He views, and waving over some newborn stream
His blessed pacifick wand, "And yet," he cries,
"Yet," cries the son of Maia, "though recluse
"And silent be your stores from you, fair Nymphs!
"Flows wealth and kind society to men;
"By you my function and my honored name
"Do I possess while over the Boetick vale,
"Or through the towers of Memphis or the palms
"By sacred Ganges watered, I conduct
"The English merchant, with the buxom fleece
"Of fertile Ariconium while I clothe
"Sarmatian kings, or to the household gods
"Of Syria from the bleak Cornubian shore
"Dispense the min'ral treasure which of old. 121. Dispense the min'ral
treasure.] The merchants of Sidon and Tire made frequent voyages to the coast
of Cornwall, from whence they carried home great quantities of tin.

"Sidonian pilots sought, when this fair land
"Was yet unconscious of those generous arts
"Which wise Phoenicia from their native clime
"Transplanted to a more indulgent heaven."
Such are the words of Hermes, such the praise
O Naiads! which from tongues celestial waits
Your bounteous deeds. From bounty iffueth power,
And those who sedulous in prudent works
Relieve the wants of Nature Jove repays
With noble wealth; and his own seat on earth,
Fit judgments to pronounce and curb the might
Of wicked men. Your kind unfailing urns
Not vainly to the hospitable arts
Of Hermes yield their store; for O ye Nymphs!
Has he not won the unconquerable queen. 136. Has he not won.] Mercury, the
patron of commerce, being so greatly dependent on the good offices of the
Naiads, in return obtains for them the friendship of Minerva, the goddess of
War; for military power, at least the naval part of it, has constantly
followed the establishment of trade; which exemplifies the preceding
observation, that "from bounty issues power."

Of Arms to court your friendship? You she owns
The fair associates who extend her sway
Wide over the mighty deep, and grateful things
Of you she utters often as from the shore
Of Thames, or Medway's vale, or the green banks
Of Vecta, she her thundering navy leads
To Calpe's foaming channel or the rough. 143. Calpe -- Cantabrian surge.]
Gibraltar and the bay of Biscay.

Cantabrian surge, her auspices divine
Imparting to the senate and the prince
Of Albion to dismay barbarick kings,
The Iberian or the Celt. The pride of kings
Was ever scorned by Pallas, and of old
Rejoiced the virgin from the brazen prow
Of Athens over Aegina's gloomy surge. 150. Aegina's gloomy surge Near this
island the Athenia^ obtained the victory of Salamis ever the Persian navy.

To drive her clouds and storms, o'erwhelming all
The Persian's promised glory, when the realms
Of Indus and the soft Ionian clime,
When Libya's torrid champain, and the rocks
Of cold Imaus, joined their servile bands
To sweep the sons of Liberty from earth.
In vain! Minerva on the bounding prow
Of Athens stood, and with the thunder's voice
Denounced her terrors on their impious heads,
And shook her burning egis. Xerxes saw;. 160. Xerxes saw.] This circumstance
is recorded in that passage perhaps the most splendid among all the remains
(...) ancient history, where Plutarch in his Life of Themistocles describe^ the
seafights of Artemisium and Salamis.

From Heracleum on the mountain's height
Throned in his golden car he knew the sign
Celestial, felt unrighteous hope forsake
His falt'ring heart, and turned his face with shame.
Hail! ye who share the stern Minerva's power,
Who arm the hand of Liberty for war,
And give to the renowned Britannick name
To awe contending monarchs, yet benign,
Yet mild of nature, to the works of peace
More prone, and lenient of the many ills
Which wait on human life. Your gentle aid
Hygeia well can witness, she who saves
From poisonous cates and cups of pleasing bane
The wretch devoted to the entangling snares
Of Bacchus and of Comus. Him she leads
To Cynthia's lonely haunts. To spread the toils,
To beat the coverts, with the jovial horn
At dawn of day to summon the loud hounds,
She calls the lingering sluggard from his dreams,
And where his breast may drink the mountain breeze,
And where the fervor of the sunny vale
May beat upon his brow, through devious paths
Beckons his rapid courser. Nor when ease,
Cool ease and welcome slumbers, have becalmed
His eager bosom, does the queen of Health
Her pleasing care withhold. His decent board
She guards presiding, and the frugal powers
With joy sedate leads in, and while the brown
Ennaean dame with Pan presents her stores,
While changing still and comely in the change
Vertumnus and the Hours before him spread
The garden's banquet, you to crown his feast,
To crown his feast O Naiads! you the fair
Hygeia calls; and from your shelving seats
And groves of poplar plenteous cups ye bring
To slake his veins, till soon a purer tide
Flows down those loaded channels, washes off
The dregs of luxury, the lurking seeds
Of crude disease, and through the abodes of life
Sends vigor, sends repose. Hail, Naiads! hail,
Who give to Labor health, to stooping Age
The joys which Youth had squandered: often your urns
Will I invoke, and frequent in your praise
Abash the frantic thyrsus with my song.. 204. Thyrsus.] A staff or spear
wreathed round with ivy, of constant use in the Bacchanalian mysteries.

For not estranged from your benignant arts
Is he the god to whose mysterious shrine
My youth was sacred and my votive cares
Belong, the learned Paeon. Often when all
His cordial treasures he has searched in vain,
When herbs and potent trees, and drops of balm
Rich with the genial influence of the sun
(To rouse dark Fancy from her plaintive dreams,
To brace the nerveless arm, with food to win
Sick appetite, or hush the unquiet breast
Which pines with silent passion) he in vain
Has proved, to your deep mansions he descends;
Your gares of humid rock, your dim arcades,
He ent'reth, where impurpled veins of ore
Gleam on the roof, where through the rigid mine
Your trickling rills insinuate: there the god
From your indulgent hands the streaming bowl
Wafts to his paleey'd suppliants, wafts the seeds
Metallic, and the elemental salts
Washed from the pregnant glebe. Theydrink, and soon
Flies pain, flies inauspicious care, and soon
The social haunt or unfrequented shade
Hears Io, Io Paean! as of old. 227. Io Paean.] An exclamation of victory and
triumph derived from Apollo's encounter with Python.

When Python fell. And O propitious Nymphs!
Often as for hapless mortals I implore
Your salutary springs, through every urn
Oh shed your healing treasures! with the first
And finest breath which from the genial strife
Of min'ral fermentation springs, like light
Over the fresh morning's vapors, lustrate then
The fountain, and inform the rising wave!
My lyre shall pay your bounty: scorn not ye
That humble tribute. Though a mortal hand
Excite the strings to utt'rance, yet for themes
Not unregarded of celestial powers
I frame their language, and the Muses deign
To guide the pious tenor of my lay.
The Muses (sacred by their gifts divine)
In early days did to my wondering sense
Their secrets often reveal; often my raised ear
In slumber selt their music; often at noon
Or hour of sunset by some lonely stream,
In field or shady grove, they taught me words
Of power from death and envy to preserve
The good man's name; whence yet with gratefulmind
And offerings unprofan'd by ruder eye
My vows I send, my homage, to the seats
Of rocky Cirrha where with you they dwell,. 252. Cirrha.] One of the summits
of Parnassus, and sacred to Apollo. Near it were several fountains said to be
frequented by the Muses. Nysa, the other eminence of the same mountain, was
dedicated to Bacchus.

Where you their chaste campanious they admit
Through all the hallowed scene, where often intent
And leaning over Castalia's mossy verge
They mark the cadence of your confluent urns
How tuneful, yielding gratefullest repose
To their consorted measure, till again
With emulation all the sounding choir,
And bright Apollo leader of the song,
Their voices through the liquid air exalt,
And sweep their lofty strings; those powerful strings
That charm the mind of gods, that fill the courts. 263. -- charm the mind of
gods.] This whole passage concerning the effects of sacred music among the
gods is taken from Pindar's first Pythian ode.

Of wide Olympus with oblivion sweet
Of evils, with immortal rest from cares,
Assuage the terrors of the throne of Jove,
And quench the formidable thunderbolt
Of unrelenting fire. With slackened wings
While now the solemn concert breathes around
Incumbent over the scepter of his lord
Sleeps the stern eagle, by the numbered notes
Possessed, and satiate with the melting tone,
Sovereign of birds! The furious god of War
His darts forgetting and the winged wheels
That bear him vengeful over the embattled plain,
Relents and sooths his own fierce heart to ease,
Most welcome ease. The fire of gods and men
In that great moment of divine delight
Looks down on all that live, and whatsoever
He loves not over the peopled earth and over
The interminated ocean he beholds
Cursed with abhorrence by his doom severe,
And troubled at the sound. Ye Naiads! ye
With ravished ears the melody attend
Worthy of sacred silence, but the slaves
Of Bacchus with tempest'ous clamours strive
To drown the heavenly strains, of highest Jove
Irrev'rent, and by mad presumption fired
Their own discordant raptures to advance
With hostile emulation. Down they rush
From Nysa's vine-impurpled cliff the dames
Of Thrace, the Satyrs, and the unruly Fauns,
With old Silenus reeling through the crowd
Which gambols round him, in convulsions wild
Tossing their limbs, and brandishing in air
The ivy-mantled thyrsus, or the torch
Through black smoke flaming, to the Phrygian pipe's. 297. Phrygian pipe's.] The
Phrygian music was fantastic and turbulent, and fit to excite disorderly
passions.

Shrill voice, and to the clashing cymbals, mixed
With shrieks and frantic uproar. May the gods
From every unpolluted ear avert
Their orgies! If within the seats of men,
Within the walls, the gates, where Pallas holds. 302. The gates, where Pallas
holds -- The guardian key.] It was the office of Minerva to be the guardian of
walled cities, whence she was named POAIAS and PODIOYOS, and had her statues
placed in their gates, being supposed to keep the keys, and on that account
styled KADOYOS.

The guardian key, if happily there be found
Who loves to mingle with the revel band
And hearken to their accents, who aspires
From such instructers to inform his breast
With verse, let him, fit votarist! implore
Their inspiration. He perchance the gifts
Of young Lyaeus and the dread exploits
May sing in aptest numbers; he the fate. 310. Fate -- Of sober Pentheus.]
Pentheus was torn in pieces by the Bacchanalian priests and women for despising
their mysteries.

Of sober Pentheus, he the Paphian rites,
And naked Mars with Cytherea chained,
And strong Alcides in the spinster's robes,
May celebrate applauded; but with you
O Naiads! far from that unhallowed rout
Must dwell the man whoever to praised themes
Invokes the immortal Muse. The immortal Muse
To your calm habitations, to the cave. 318. The cave -- Corycian.] Of this
cave Pausanias in his tenth book gives the following description: "Between
Delphi and the eminences of Parnassus is a road to the grotto of Corycium,
which has its name from the nymph Corycia, and is by far the most remarkable
which I have seen. One may walk a great way into it without a torch. It is of a
considerable height, and has several springs within it; and yet a much greater
quantity of water distills from the shell and roof so as to be continually
dropping on the ground. The people round Parnassus hold it sacred to the
Corycian nymphs and to Pan."

Corycian or the Delphick mount, will guide. 319. Delphick mount.] Delphi, the
seat and oracle of Apollo, had a mountainous and rocky situation on the skirts
of Parnassus.

His footsteps, and with your unsullied streams
His lips will bathe, whether the eternal lore
Of Themis or the majesty of Jove
To mortals he reveal, or teach his lyre
The unenvied guerdon of the patriot's toils,
In those unfading islands of the blessed
Where sacred bards abide. Hail! honored Nymphs!
Thrice hail! for you the Cyrenaick shell. 327. Cyrenaick.] Cyrene was the
native country of Callimachus, whose Hymns are the most remarkable example of
that mythological passion which is assumed in the preceding poem, and have
always afforded particular pleasure to the author of it by reason of the
mysterious solemnity with which they affect the mind. On this account he was
induced to attempt somewhat in the same manner, solely by way of exercise, the
manner itself being now almost entirely abandoned in poetry: and as the mere
genealogy or the personal adventures of Heathen gods could have been but little
interesting to a modern reader, it was therefore thought proper to select some
convenient part of the history of Nature, and to employ these ancient
divinities as it is probable they were first employed, to wit, in personifying
natural causes, and in representing the mutual agreement or opposition of the
corporeal and moral powers of the world, which has been accounted the very
highest office of poetry.

Behold I touch revering: to my songs
Be present ye with favorable feet,
And all profaner audience far remove.
HYMN TO SCIENCE.
"O vitae philosophia dux! O virtutis indagatrix, expultrixque vitiorum. -- Tu
urbes peperisti: tu inventrix legum, tu magistra morum et disciplinae fuisti:
ad te confugimus, a te opem petimus." CIC. Tusc. Quaest.
I.
SCIENCE! thou fair effusive ray,
From the great source of mental day
Free, generous, and refined,
Descend with all thy treasures fraught,
Illumine each bewildered thought,
And bless my laboring mind!
II.
But first with thy resistless light
Disperse those phantoms from my sight,
Those mimick shades of thee,
The scholiast's learning, sophist's cant,
The visionary bigot's rant,
The monk's philosophy.
III.
O let thy powerful charms impart
The patient head the candid heart
Devoted to thy sway,
Which no weak passions ever mislead,
Which still with dauntless steps proceed
Where Reason points the way!
IV.
Give me to learn each secret cause;
Let Number's, Figure's, Motion's, laws
Revealed before me stand;
These to great Nature's scenes apply,
And round the globe and through the sky
Disclose her working hand.
V.
Next to thy nobler search resigned
The busy, restless, human mind
Through every maze pursue;
Detect perception where it lies,
Catch the ideas as they rise,
And all their changes view.
VI.
Say from what simple springs began
The vast ambitious thoughts of man
Which range beyond control,
Which seek eternity to trace,
Dive through the infinity of space,
And strain to grasp the whole?
VII.
Her secret stores let Memory tell,
Bid Fancy quit her Fairy cell
In all her colors dressed,
While prompt her sallies to control
Reason the judge recalls the soul
To truth's severest test.
VIII.
Then lanch through Being's wide extent;
Let the fair scale with just ascent
And cautious steps be trod,
And from the dead corporeal mass
Through each progressive order pass
To Instinct, Reason, God.
IX.
There, Science! veil thy daring eye,
Nor dive too deep nor soar too high
In that divine abyss,
To Faith content thy beams to lend,
Her hopes to assure her steps befriend,
And light her way to bless.
X.
Then downwards take thy flight again,
Mix with the policies of men
And social Nature's ties;
The plan the genius of each state,
Its interest and its powers, relate,
Its fortunes and its rise.
XI.
Through private life pursue thy course,
Trace every action to its source,
And means and motives weigh;
Put tempters, passions, in the scale,
Mark what degrees in each prevail,
And fix the doubtful sway.
XII.
That last best effort of thy skill,
To form the life and rule the will,
Propitious Power! impart;
Teach me to cool my passions' fires,
Make me the judge of my desires,
The master of my heart.
XIII.
Raise me above the vulgar's breath,
Pursuit of fortune, fear of death,
And all in life that is mean:
Still true to reason be my plan,
Still let my actions speak the man
Through every various scene.
XIV.
Hail! queen of Manners, light of truth;
Hail! charm of age and guide of youth,
Sweet refuge of distress;
In business thou exact, polite;
Thou giv'st retirement its delight,
Prosperity its grace.
XV.
Of wealth, power, freedom, thou the cause;
Foundress of order, cities, laws,
Of arts inventress, thou!
Without thee what were humankind?
How vast their wants, their thoughts how blind,
Their joys how mean, how few!
XVI.
Sun of the soul! thy beams unveil;
Let others spread the daring sail
On Fortune's faithless sea,
While undeluded happier I
From the vain tumult timely fly
And sit in peace with thee.
INSCRIPTIONS.
I. FOR A GROTTO.
To me, whom in their lays the shepherds call
Actaea, daughter of the neighboring stream,
This cave belongs. The figtree and the vine
Which over the rocky entrance downward shoot
Were placed by Glycon: he with cowslips pale,
Primrose and purple lychnis, decked the green
Before my threshold, and my shelving walls
With honeysuckle covered. Here at noon
Lall'd by the murmur of my rising fount
I slumber: here my clust'ring fruits I tend,
Or from the humid flowers at break of day
Fresh garlands weave, and chase from all my bounds
Each thing impure or noxious. Enter in
O Stranger! undismayed; nor bat nor toad
Here lurks; and if thy breast of blameless thoughts
Approve thee, not unwelcome shall thou tread
My quiet mansion, chiefly if thy name
Wise Pallas and the immortal Muses own.
II. FOR A STATUE OF CHAUCER AT WOODSTOCK.
SUCH was old Chaucer, such the placid mien
Of him who first with harmony informed
The language of our fathers. Here he dwelt
For many a cheerful day. These ancient walls
Have often heard him while his legends blithe
He sang of love or knighthood, or the wiles
Of homely life, through each estate and age
The fashions and the follies of the world
With cunning hand portraying. Though perchance
From Blenheim's towers O Stranger! thou art come
Glowing with Churchill's trophies, yet in vain
Do thou applaud them if thy breast be cold
To him this other hero, who in times
Dark and untaught began with charming verse
To tame the rudeness of his native land.
III.
WHOEVER thou art whose path in summer lies
Through yonder village, turn thee where the grove
Of branching oaks a rural palace old
Imbosoms; there dwells Albert, generous lord
Of all the harvest round! and onward thence
A low plain chapel fronts the morning light
Fast by a silent rivulet. Humbly walk
O Stranger! over the consecrated ground,
And on that verdant hillock which thou see
Beset with osiers let thy pious hand
Sprinkle fresh water from the brook, and strew
Sweet Smelling flowers, for there does Edmund rest,
The learned shepherd, for each rural art
Famed, and for sons harmonious, and the woes
Of ill-requited love. The faithless pride
Of fair Matilda sank him to the grave
In manhood's prime; but soon did righteous Heaven
With tears, with sharp remorse and pining care,
Avenge her falsehood; nor could all the gold
And nuptial pomp which lured her plighted faith
From Edmund to a lostier husband's home
Relieve her breaking heart, or turn aside
The strokes of Death. Go, Traveller! relate
The mournful story; happily some fair maid
May hold it in remembrance, and be taught
That riches cannot pay for truth or love.
IV.
O Youths and Virgins! O declining Eld!
O pale Misfortune's slaves! O ye who dwell
Unknown with humble Quiet! ye who wait
In courts, or fill the golden seat of kings,
O sons of Sport and Pleasure! O thou Wretch
That weepst for jealous love, or the sore wounds
Of conscious guilt or Death's rapacious hand,
Which left thee void of hope! O ye who roam
In exile! ye who through the embattled field
Seek bright renown, or who for nobler palms
Contend, the leaders of a public cause!
Approach; behold this Marble! know ye not
The features? has not often his faithful tongue
Told you the fashion of your own estate,
The secrets of your bosom? Here then round
His monument with reverence while ye stand
Say to each other "This was Shakespeare's form,
"Who walked in every path of human life,
"Felt every passion, and to all mankind
"Does now, will ever, that experience yield
"Which his own genius only could acquire."
V.
GVLIELMVS III. FORTIS, PIUS, LIBERATOR, CVM INEVNTE AETATE PATRIAE LABENTI
ADFVISSET SALVS IPSE VNICA; CVM MOX ITIDEM REIPVBLICAE BRITANNICAE VINDEX
RENVNCIATVS ESSET ATQVE STATOR; TVM DENIQVE AD ID SE NATVM RECOGNOVIT ET REGEM
FACTVM, VT CVRARET NE DOMINO IMPOTENTI CEDERENT PAX, FIDES, FORTVNA, GENERIS
HVMANI. AVCTORI PVBLICAE FELICITATIS P G. A. M. A.

VI. FOR A COLUMN AT RUNNYMEDE.
THOU who the verdant plain do traverse here
While Thames among his willows from thy view
Retires, O Stranger! stay thee, and the scene
Around contemplate well. This is the place
Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms,
And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
The Charter of thy freedom. Pass not on
Till thou have blessed their memory, and paid
Those thanks which God appointed the reward
Of public virtue. And if chance thy home
Salute thee with a father's honored name
Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
They owe their ancestors, and make them swear
To pay it, by transmitting down entire
Those sacred rights to which themselves were born.
VII. THE WOODNYMPH.
APPROACH in silence; it is no vulgar tale
Which I the Dryad of this hoary oak
Pronounce to mortal ears. The second age
Now hasteneth to its period since I rose
On this fair lawn. The groves of yonder vale
Are all my offspring; and each Nymph who guards
The copses and the surrow'd fields beyond
Obeys me. Many changes have I seen
In human things, and many awful deeds
Of justice, when the ruling hand of Jove
Against the tyrants of the land, against
The unhallowed sons of Luxury and Guile,
Was armed for retribution. Thus at length
Expert in laws divine I know the paths
Of Wisdom, and erroneous Tolly's end
Have often presaged; and now wellpleas'd I wait
Each evening till a noble youth who loves
My shade a while released from public cares
Yon' peaceful gate shall enter, and sit down
Beneath my branches: then his musing mind
I p^ompt unseen, and place before his view
Sincerest forms of good, and move his heart
With the dread bounties of the Sire Supreme
Of gods and men, with Freedom's generous deeds,
The losty voice of Glory, and the faith
Of sacred Friendship. Stranger! I have told
My function: if within thy bosom dwell
Aught which may challenge praise, thou will not leave
Unhonour'd my abode, nor shall I hear
A sparing benediction from thy tongue.
VIII.
YE Powers unseen! to whom the bards of Greece
Erected altars, ye who to the mind
More lofty views unfold, and prompt the heart
With more divine emotions, if erewhile
Not quite unpleasing have my votive rites
Of you been deemed when often this lonely seat
To you I consecrated, then vonchsafe
Here with your instant energy to crown
My happy solitude. It is the hour
When most I love to invoke you, and have felt
Most frequent your glad ministry divine.
The air is calm, the sun's unveiled orb
Shines in the middle heaven; the harvest round
Stands quiet, and among the golden sheaves
The reapers lie reclined; the neighboring groves
Are mute, nor even a linnet's random strain
Echoeth amid the silence. Let me feel
Your influence ye kind Powers! Aloft in heaven
Abide ye? or on those transparent clouds
Pass ye from hill to hill? or on the shades
Which yonder elms cast over the lake below
Do you converse retired? From what loved haunt
Shall I expect you? Let me once more feel
Your influence O ye kind inspiring Powers!
And I will guard it well; nor shall a thought
Rise in my mind, nor shall a passion move
Across my bosom, unobserved, unstor'd,
By faithful Memory: and then at some
More active moment will I call them forth
Anew, and join them in majestic forms,
And give them utt'rance in harmonious strains,
That all mankind shall wonder at your sway.
IX.
ME though in life's sequestered vale
The Almighty Sire ordained to dwell,
Remote from Glory's toilsome ways
And the great scenes of public praise,
Yet let me still with grateful pride
Remember how my infant frame
He tempered with prophetic flame,
And early music to my tongue supplied.
'Twas then my future fate he weighed,
And this be thy concern he said,
At once with Passion's keen alarms,
And Beauty's pleasurable charms,
And sacred Truth's eternal light,
To move the various mind of man,
Till under one unblemished plan
His reason, fancy, and his heart, unite.
CONTENTS.
ODES.
Book I. Ode I. Page 5 Book I. Ode II. On the Winter Solstice, 1740, 7 Book I.
Ditto, as it was originally written, 11 Book I. Ode III. To a Friend
unsuccessful in Love, 14 Book I. Ode IV. Affected indifference. To the same, 16
Book I. Ode V. Against Suspicion, 17 Book I. Ode VI. Hymn to Cheerfulness, 20
Book I. Ode VII. On the Use of Poetry, 26 Book I. Ode VIII. On leaving Holland,
28 Book I. Ode IX. To Curio, 1744, 31 Book I. Ode X. To the Muse, 38 Book I.
Ode XI. On Love. To a Friend, 39 Book I. Ode XII. To Sir Francis Henry Drake,
Bt. 42 Book I. Ode XIII. On Lyrick Poetry, 45 Book I. Ode XIV. To the Hon. Cha.
Townshend, from the Country, 50 Book I. Ode XV. To the Evening Star, 53 Book I.
Ode XVI. To Caleb Hardinge, M. D. 56 Book I. Ode XVII. On a Sermon. against
Glory, 1748, 58 Book I. Ode XVIII. To the Rt. Hon. Francis Earl of Huntingdon,
1747, 59 Book II. Ode I. The Remonstrance of Shakespeare, 72 Book II. Ode II.
To Sleep, 76 Book II. Ode III. To the Cuckoo, 78 Book II. Ode IV. To the Hon.
Charles Townshend, in the Country, 1750, 80 Book II. Ode V. On Love of Praise,
87 Book II. Ode VI. To W. Hall, Esquire. with the Works of Chaulieu, 89 Book II.
Ode VII. To Tho. Edwards, Esquire. 1751, 91 Book II. Ode VIII. To the Author of
Mem. of the House of Brandenburg, 1751, 94 Book II. Ode IX. To the Rt. Rev.
Benj. Ld. Bishop of Winchester, 1754, Page 96 Book II. Ode X. 100 Book II. Ode
XI. At Study, 101 Book II. Ode XII. To the Country Gentlemen of England, 1758,
103 Book II. Ode XIII. On recovering from a fit of Sickness, 1758, 110 Book II.
Ode XIV. The Complaint, 113 Book II. Ode XV. On Domestic Manners (unfinished)
114
MISCELLANIES.
An Epistle to Curio, 117 Love. An Elegy, 130 A British Philippick, 135
HYMNS.
Hymn to the Naiads, 1746, 142 Hymn to Science, 162
INSCRIPTIONS.
I. For A Grotto, 167 II. For a Statue of Chaucer at Woodstock, 168 III.
"Whoever thou art," etc. ib. IV. "O Youths and Virgins!" etc. 169 V. "Gulielmus
III." etc. 170 VI. For a Column at Runnymede, 171 VII. The Woodnymph, ib. VIII.
"Ye Powers unseen!" etc. 172 IX. "Me though in life's sequestered vale," etc. 174
From the APOLLO PRESS, by the MARTINS, Nov. 10. 1721.

THE END.

