AN EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF LACERATED VAGINA, AT THE FULL PERIOD OF GESTATION.

WITH OBSERVATIONS, TENDING TO SHOW That many Cases related as Ruptures of the
Uterus, have been LACERATIONS OF THE VAGINA.

By WILLIAM GOLDSON, Member of the Corporation of Surgeons in London.

Exempla rara non reticenda, etiam causa incognita; ita enim scitu digna
infinita praeteribuntur. Quare veritatis studiosus, omne debet quod conspiciat,
etiamsi eum angat causa, sedulo exponere.

Galen de Cause. Pulls. LONDON: Printed for J. MURRAY, No. 32, Fleet Street; and
C. ELLIOT, Edinburgh.

M,DCC,LXXXVII.

INTRODUCTION.
RUPTURES of the uterus have been considered as accidents, mortal, for the most
part, in their nature. When part of the child remains in utero, authors give
some general directions for delivery; but agree in its fatal tendency, if the
child has escaped wholly into the cavity of the abdomen; considering any
attempts to deliver, except by the caesarean operation, as fruitless. This was
the opinion of Dr. Hunter: his high and deserved reputation has stamped such
authority upon it, that practitioners in general give up their patient for
lost, without attempting any thing for her relief. The caesarian operation, in
this country, has been attended with such ill success, that very few men are
bold enough to recommend it, supposing that it would only be an addition to the
patient's sufferings, without affording any prospect of relief.

Dr. Douglas, physician to the Asylum, some months since, published a case,
where he succeeded in the delivery of a child from the cavity of the abdomen,
and the woman recovered; from whence he infers, that those accidents, which
admit the child to escape through a rupture of the uterus, are not necessarily
fatal, and that the delivery is to be effected, without having recourse to the
caesarean operation, with more ease than has been imagined.

The case, which is now submitted to the consideration of the public, was a
laceration of the vagina, happening early in parturition: the circumstances of
which having been clearly marked during the life of the patient, and confirmed
by dissection after her death, throws a new light upon this part of midwifery,
and renders it probable that many cases deemed irremediable, from being
considered as ruptures of the uterus, were only lacerations of the vagina, and
admitted of effectual assistance from art.

This case, having given rise to many doubts upon the subject of ruptured
uterus, induced me to enquire how far authors in general have been accurate in
their observations. Upon examining such cases as were in my possession, I
found, that many which are related as ruptures of the uterus, were in fact,
lacerations of the vagina. Instances of which I shall give in cases from Vander
Wiel, Bonetus, Dr. Douglas, Pouteau, and others.

From a case communicated to me by a friend, I am further enabled to give some
account of the circumstances attending a laceration of the vagina, when, the
head being so low as to be wedged in the pelvis, the child did not escape into
the cavity of the abdomen. On examining the circumstances of some cases
described as proceeding from ruptures of the uterus, this appears sometimes to
have happened without being discovered.

The observations annexed, respecting the circumstances in which lacerations of
the vagina differ from ruptures of the uterus; in the escape of the child or
placenta into the abdomen, and the obstructions to delivery; and the other
practical inferences drawn, are such as, I hope, will merit the attention of
practitioners.

As Dr. Douglas's observations on an extraordinary case of ruptured uterus, is
the latest publication on the subject, I shall have occasion to advert to it
oftener than to any other. If it has been any means of dispelling the idea of
the impossibility of recovery in accidents of this nature, which has so long
been the general received opinion, supported by the highest authorities; I
flatter myself, that the following pages will be a further inducement to dispel
our fears; as they tend to prove the great probability there is, that the
escape of the child into the cavity of the abdomen happens oftener from
lacerations of the vagina, than from ruptures of the uterus.

WM. GOLDSON.
Portsmouth Common, March 21, 1787.
^N EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF LACERATED VAGINA.
ON August the 20th, 1786, I was desired by Mr. William Waller, of Gosport, to
visit Mrs. Wilkins, with my partner Mr. Aylward. She was a patient of Mr.
Waller's, and had been above twenty four hours in labor; after the membranes
had broke, and the os internum been considerably dilated, the labor pains
suddenly went off; the child's head could be no longer felt, and very dangerous
symptoms had come on. We met there, in consultation, his father and Dr. Waller.

Mrs. Wilkins was a large woman, much used to laborious exercise, of a dark
complexion, about thirty-six years of age, inclining to be lusty; her
constitution was naturally strong, and generally healthy; she was then in
labor with her fourth child; her former labors had been always lingering, but
was, at each time, delivered of a living child, without more than ordinary
assistance. During the present pregnancy, she was not able to move with so much
ease as with her former children, complaining of much pain in the left
hypogastrium.

We were informed by Mr. Waller, that he was called to her assistance about a
fortnight before; but finding that the pains were spurious, he ordered her an
opiate, which gave her relief, and she continued easy until the preceding day;
when being again sent to, about six o'clock in the morning, he then found her
in labor; after waiting some time, the pains beginning to increase, he made an
examination, and found that the os internum was dilated to the size of a crown
piece. The membranes broke, and the waters were evacuated. Upon a further
examination in the usual manner, the head was found to present; but being only
able to reach it with the point of his finger, he could not exactly ascertain
its situation, in respect to vertex or fontinel. Considering it a lingering
labor, he waited for the efforts of nature. The child's head advanced by slow
degrees; and, after some hours, the prospect of a more speedy delivery seemed
to be apparent, by the further dilatation of the os internum, although the head
did not appear to be much engaged in the pelvis. She was, about this time,
seized with a cramp in her left foot and leg, which afterward extended to her
belly, on the return of every pain. While he was directing a camphorated
anodyne liniment, another severe pain came on, which caused her to cry out most
vehemently, oh the cramp, the cramp! and which, she afterward said, she
believed was in her womb: this was soon after followed by a discharge of blood
from the vagina, which continued for some time.

Mr. Waller then observed that the labor pains abated in their strength, and
that they were succeeded by such as are common in colic, with peculiar twisting
in her bowels. He directed an emollient glyster, which was repeated with an
anodyne; but not finding so much relief from these as he expected, her pulse
being full and quick, he took away about eight ounces of blood from her arm,
and left her about two o'clock, giving directions, that she might be kept as
cool as possible, the weather being very warm.

He saw her again, between four and five o'clock, and found that the true
labor pains had not returned; but that, in addition to the other symptoms, she
then complained of considerable thirst; had vomited frequently; was very
restless; in great pain when moved, and felt a great degree of pain when he put
his hand upon her belly. Upon examining the state of the labor, he could feel
no presentation, the child's head having receded. In this situation, he thought
it proper to repeat the glyster, and ordered her, in the evening, another
anodyne, together with a saline julep. With hopes that real and efficient pains
would return by the morning, he left her.

On visiting her in the morning, very early, her attendants informed him, that
she had been very thirsty and restless all night; her vomiting had been more
severe, and that she was in great pain when turned, complaining of a heavy lump
which sell from side to side; it did not appear from an inspection of the
cloths, that there had been any further hemorrhage; upon inquiring more
particularly, it could not be found that she had made any urine, except as it
came away involuntarily.

On considering that there had been no return of real pains, and that the other
symptoms were more urgent, he began to think that her case was of a more
serious nature than he had at first apprehended; he therefore thought it
proper, to acquaint her friends with the opinion he entertained of the danger
of her situation, requesting them to send for such other persons of the faculty
as they might wish should be consulted.

When we visited her, which was about noon, we found her extremely restless,
complaining of great pain about the region of the pubis; her face was covered
with a cold sweat; her pulse was moderately full and rapid; she felt great
anxiety about the praecordia; her breathing was thick and short, with intense
thirst, and continual efforts to vomit. As it was observed that she had made no
water for some time, except what, by the urinous smell of the cloths, appeared
to have come away involuntarily, we determined to introduce the catheter; but
nothing passed, except a little bloody sanies. The bleeding was repeated, and
an antiphlogistic treatment agreed upon.

When we considered her situation more fully, and compared the several
symptoms, of cramp and succeeding hemorrhage; the retrocession of the child;
her severe thirst; vomiting and great pain about the region of the pubis, with
the symptoms which occurred in the case of ruptured uterus published by Dr.
Douglas; there was such similarity between them, that we agreed in the
propriety of introducing the hand for a more particular examination.

We accordingly visited her again about three o'clock, and Mr. William Waller
proceeded to make an examination. There was no difficulty in passing his hand:
upon the posterior part he felt a considerable tumor, which was moveable, and
which was not the child's head: he likewise found his hand in contact with the
intestines; whence it was evident that our suspicions were well grounded.
Immediate delivery was the only means of relief, and his endeavors to get at
the feet soon succeeded; they were brought into the vagina, and secured with a
noose; but it required a considerable degree of exertion to disengage the
breech. After the arms were brought down, the head followed with ease, little
or no discharge ensuing.

The child was large, and had been dead, no doubt, ever since its escape from
the uterus. The placenta, which was likewise in the cavity of the abdomen,
followed without any difficulty.

Not being determined as to the nature of the tumor, which Mr. Waller felt upon
the posterior part; as the woman had suffered so little in delivery, we
concurred in opinion, that he should again examine the state of the parts. Upon
introducing his hand, he soon sound that the tumor receded before his fingers,
and that it was the contracted uterus. It was evident to him that the uterus
was not ruptured; but that there was a laceration of the vagina, at the place
where it is attached to the cervix uteri, through which his hand would pass
with ease into the cavity of the abdomen. The os internum was so contracted,
that it would not admit more than two fingers, and he was convinced that it had
not been injured. She sound herself considerably relieved when we lest her at
four o'clock. An anodyne was directed to be taken in the evening.

-- 21st. -- We visited her early in the morning, when we found that her
spirits were good. Her attendants informed us, that she had passed a much
better night than could have been expected. She was capable of turning without
any inconvenience; her thirst, pain in the abdomen, and vomiting, were still
violent. Anodynes, with salt of wormwood and lemon juice, to be taken during
the effervescence, were directed for her. She had frequent stools with
tenesmus. The nurse was ordered to let her drink be mint tea with rice gruel.

The symptoms evidently arising from the injury done to the abdominal viscera,
by the child's remaining so long among them, after its escape from the uterus,
induced us to entertain some rays of hope, from the success which had attended
the case related by Dr. Douglas, that she might recover; but the approach of
the evening convinced us that our hopes were groundless. Every symptom was
become more urgent, with a very distressing sense of suffocation from globus
hystericus; she had made no water, and, from the urinous smell of the cloths,
we could not entertain the least doubt but that the bladder was ruptured,
specially when we called to our recollection, that the same had been observed
before delivery.

In this distressing state, nothing was lest for us to do, more than to
alleviate her pain, and make the small remainder of her life as easy as
possible; for which purpose, her anodyne medicines were repeated.

-- 22d. -- The persons who watched with her during the night informed us, that
she had been very restless; complained of great pain in her belly, with intense
thirst, and that she had been constantly vomiting. Her countenance was greatly
altered; the quantity of fluid thrown up was out of all proportion to the
quantity drank; the tenesmus still continued, but without any evacuations; her
anodynes were repeated, and an opiate glyster ordered to be injected in the
evening.

-- 23d. -- We found her more composed, and we understood she had been so
through the greater part of the night. She continued in the same state until
about eleven o'clock before noon, when she died, perfectly sensible.

We obtained permission to open the body the same evening.

The abdomen was much tumified. Upon making a longitudinal incision through the
integuments, a quantity of confined air rushed out. The peritoneum was
inflamed, and in some places beginning to sphacelate. The intestines were
remarkably distended with flatus; their external coats were tinged with yellow,
and inflamed through their whole extent. The ramifications of the vessels
appeared of a beautiful red, as if they had been injected; some spots were
observed in several places beginning to sphacelate, and they were for the most
part connected by a slight adhesion to each other. The omentum was contracted
and inflamed. There was a considerable quantity of bloody serum in the cavity
of the abdomen. The whole of the viscera had that appearance, which has been
generally observed on dissecting women who have died of a puerperal fever.

The uterus and its appendages, in situ, appeared perfectly sound, excepting
the left ovarium, which contained about fourteen ounces of a colorless fluid,
in a single cyst. There was no appearance of the vesica urinaria; on passing a
catheter, it went immediately into the cavity of the abdomen, confirming our
suspicion that the bladder was ruptured. On raising the uterus above the
pelvis, we were immediately convinced how accurate Mr. Waller had been in the
description he gave us, on examining the state of the parts directly after
delivery.

The os internum and cervix uteri were uninjured; the vagina was thin, and was
lacerated transversely on the superior part, close to its attachment to the
uterus: the laceration was nearly through one half of its circumference, on the
fore part, but inclining to the left side. The bladder, from its connection with
the vagina, had suffered at the same time, being ruptured through the whole of
its posterior part, at least in proportion to the size of the laceration which
had taken place in the vagina; we observed that it had extended to the outer
surface of the uterus, tearing off an angular piece of its peritoneal coat,
about half an inch in length. The uterus was contracted to the usual size it is
observed to be, in so short a space after delivery; its peritoneal coat near
the fundus showed an appearance of ^ucipient mortification. The os (...) was
contracted, as Mr. Wal^^^ (...) served, so that, without di^i^^^^ (...) could
not introduce more than two fingers.

As the nature of the case was evident, we did not proceed further in the
dissection, but contented ourselves with preserving the parts. On making an
incision into the uterus, it was found, in most places, to be nearly an inch
thick; its internal surface appearing in a healthy state, and contained a small
proportion of the membrana decidua, which had been left behind.

LACERATIONS of the vagina have been mentioned by authors, as, sometimes,
happening from laborious parturition; but I do not recollect to have heard, or
read any account, where the child had escaped, by such means, into the cavity
of the abdomen; or that they have ever conceived such an accident to be
probable. I have selected some cases, which are related as ruptures of the
uterus, but which are apparently accidents of this nature. Thus can be
reconciled, only, by the confusion into which authors have fallen, in their
divisions of this viscus.

Anatomists, at present, are pretty nearly agreed in dividing the uterus into
fundus, cervix, and os internum. Supposing that the whole of the uterus
measures three inches in length, they, for the most part, allow the fundus to
occupy the space of one inch and a quarter, the cervix to take up one inch and
three quarters, and the os internum to project within the vagina about a
quarter of an inch. But, when we consider how indeterminate they have
heretofore been on this subject, we shall not be surprised, on examining some
of the following cases, which are related as ruptures of the cervix, to find
them lacerations of the vagina. From the concurrent testimony of writers, it is
evident, that the vagina has been frequently considered as the collum uteri.

Columbus, in his description of the uterus, says, 'Colli vel cervicis nomine
in utero non corpus illud, quod supra descripsimus, fed partem illam
intelligimus, in quam mentula, tanquam in vaginam immittitur Columb. de re
anat. xi. 16.
.'

Bartholinus gives the name of 'Collum breve minus,' to that part which is now
called the cervix; 'Angusta inferior est inter os uteri et amplitudinem
incipientem, atque collum breve vocari potest, ad differentiam very et
longioris colli,' which he terms 'Collum ipsum, cervix, five canalis uteri
Bartholini Anatom. i. 30.
.'

Deventer expressly takes notice of the confusion which attended this division
of preceding writers: 'Nomen tamen vaginae prefero nomini colli, quia saepius
autores, eodem utentes, vaginam ab ipso utero, aegre distinguere possunt
Deventer nov. Lum. obstetr. p. 23.
.'

CASE I.
A Case of lacerated, vagina from VANDER WEIL, related, by him as a rupture of
the uterus.

THE daughter of Jonas Pergo had been delivered of four children, having very
difficult labors with all of them. While pregnant with the fifth, she suffered
a considerable degree of uneasiness; her pains were much more urgent, when in
labor, and came on earlier than in her former pregnancies, continuing with
violence until the third day before delivery, when they ceased. The midwife
could not, by any endeavors, deliver her. The child, which was supposed to
have been dead some days, and which appeared afterward to have been the case,
from the separation of the cuticle, presented with its hands bent behind its
neck, and the face obliquely upwards toward the pubis.

The symptoms becoming more and more violent, she being not only faint and
feverish, with oppression on the praecordia, attended with rigors; but having
vomited up some green faeces, which arose, he says, from the foetus pressing
upon the rectum, so that they could not find their passage thence, Cornelius
Solingius, an experienced surgeon, was sent for with him to her relief. In a
short time, he delivered her of a dead child. As he could not easily bring away
the after birth, he introduced his hand along the funis, but found that it was
in contact with the intestines, before it came to the placenta; which was
sound, soon after, hanging down, in three parts, within the abdomen, out of the
uterus. From the child having been expelled three days, the uterus was so hard
and contracted, that, at first, he supposed it to be a scirrhus. He separated
the placenta from the uterus, to which, he says, it still adhered. The
cartilage, which connected the bones of the pelvis, was soft, and they were
separated from each other nearly the breadth of a finger.

The woman died the same day, and the body was opened on the next, in the
presence of Vander Weil and his brother.

The abdomen was much tumified. On making an incision into it, nothing escaped
except a quantity of foetid air, and some coagulated blood of a good color,
which came, he says, from the cotyledons, or mouths of the vessels of the
uterus, at the time when the placenta was detached from it. He passed his hand
through the vagina, and again found himself in contact with the intestines, the
uterus receding above the pubis. A rupture was observed at the inferior and
posterior part, just above the os internum, at that place where the common
membrane from the peritoneum covers and surrounds the uterus, as well as the
rectum; through which rupture the whole of the child, except the parts which
presented, had passed into the cavity of the abdomen. This he assigns as the
cause why the pains ceased, and the mother became easier, a few days before
delivery Stalpaart Vander Wiel, observe. rar. med. cent. prim. obs. lxvi.
.

In the examination of this case, I shall confine my remarks to the delivery of
the placenta, and the appearances upon dissection.

After the child was delivered, Solingius, finding that the placenta did not
easily follow, introduced his hand along the funis, with an intention to
extract it, but found himself in contact with the intestines, the placenta
being, ' extra uterum,' in the cavity of the abdomen. The uterus, from which he
supposes the child to have escaped some days before, was contracted, and felt
so hard, ' ita ut initio scirrhum crederet.' In the next sentence, he speaks of
separating the placenta from the uterus: this cannot be reconciled with what he
had before related, of the placenta being ' extra uterum,' otherwise than by
supposing that the placenta, while in the abdomen, adhered to the external
surface of the uterus; its adhesion to the surface of the viscera, in some
other cases, having been found to be very considerable Douglas's case of rupt.
uterus, p. 36. Boneti sepulchret. anatom. lib. iii. sect. 38.
.

A review of the circumstances, which follow the introduction of his hand, will
elucidate the case, when compared with the appearances, which were observed on
opening the body, after death.

In the first place. No mention is made of any difficulty in introducing the
hand through the os internum into the cavity of the uterus, which must have
been considerable, from its contracted state, if the attempt had been made.

Secondly. As his hand came immediately in contact with the intestines, if the
placenta had been within the uterus, the intestines must likewise have been
within it, which does not by any means appear from the narrative.

And lastly. If his hand had been within the cavity of the uterus, how could he
have judged of the degree of its contraction, so as to have thought it, at
first, to have been a scirrhus?

If we consider the case as a partial separation of the vagina, from its
attachment to the cervix uteri, then every one of these objections are
surmounted with ease: his hand, on passing along the funis, would have found an
easy introduction into the cavity of the abdomen, and he would have been in
contact with the intestines, before his hand arrived at the placenta. The
uterus would have been found on the anterior part, and have felt contracted
like a ball, so that, at first, it might have been mistaken for a scirrhus;
neither of which could have possibly happened if his hand had been within its
cavity: besides, his expression is so clear, in respect to its contraction,
'dure admodum compactum atque in se contractum comperit,' as to leave no room
to suppose any thing to have been included within it.

We find that on dissection, after relating the external appearance of the
abdomen, and what issued on making an incision into it, he passed his hand, he
says, per vulvam, and again felt the intestines; and, what is very material in
forming a determination on the nature of the case, found the uterus receding
above the pubis, ' recedentemque supra os pubis uterum reperit.' To use the
expression of Dr. Douglas, in his late, publication, 'it fled before the tips
of his fingers.'

I think it must be evident to every one, that the uterus would not have
receded before his hand, if its attachment to the vagina had remained entire.
It must have resisted the touch.

The place where the rupture is said to have been was at the inferior and
posterior part, a little above the os internum, where the common peritoneal
membrane is continued from the rectum to the uterus.

Now the same peritoneal coat which surrounds the whole of the abdominal
viscera, in its passage from the rectum to become the external coat of the
uterus, is inflected over that part of the vagina which is attached to the
cervix uteri, beginning to form the peritoneal coat of the uterus, at the place
where the vagina is joined to the cervix, a little above the os internum. In
the same place, on the anterior part, the vagina was lacerated in the case
before related; and, I think, on comparing the different parts of Vander Wiel's
relation, with each other, it is clear that the injury, in both cases, was
nearly similar; the only difference being, that in one the laceration was in
the posterior, and in the other in the anterior part of the vagina.

CASE II.
A Case of lacerated vagina, as related by BONETUS, from LEONARDUS DOLDIUS.

IN the year 1594, a woman of Hagenaw, in Alsace, 40 years of age, who had been
the mother of seven children, at the full time, but all of them born dead, died
in labor of the eighth, on the third day, without being delivered. The night
before, her pains had been violent in the extreme; the women who were present
made many efforts to deliver her, but they were not able to afford her the
least help.

On opening the body, they were very cautious in making their incision into the
abdomen, that they might have a distinct view of the uterus in situ. The
muscles were hardly divided, when the back of the child was wounded. They had
no suspicion of what it really was, supposing it, at first, to be the uterus;
but, on continuing the incision, they found it to be a full formed foetus (with
signs of putridity from the separation of the cuticle) without the uterus, in
the cavity of the abdomen. It lay with the face to the sacrum, and its body
extended at full length. At first, nothing preternatural was observed, there
being no appearance of contusion, wound, ulceration, or abscess. They wondered
much at the singularity of the case; but this was cleared up when they sound
the uterus torn, ruptured, or rather broken off.

The child was still connected by the sunis to the secundines, which were
retracted, upon the left side, toward the spleen, and adhered so fast that
they had some difficulty to separate them. The uterus was so contracted, that
it did not exceed the size of the placenta. Near the cervix, directly under the
bladder, there was a portion of membrane hanging down, about the thickness of
the dissecting knife, and not exceeding the breadth of half a palm, which was a
part of the separated uterus, 'uteri abrupti.'

The rest of the uterus, with its proper orifice, and the secundines were
retracted, so that it was totally separated from the cervix, or 'sinus
muliebris,' and all the other parts to which it had before been attached. He
attributes this accident to the malconformation of the pubis, which was too
much flattened in ^oneti sepoi^^^ret, anatom, lib, iii. sect 38.
.

The above case requires no comment, as I think it is evident that there was a
total separation of the uterus, from its attachment to the vagina.

I remember to have read a case where the same accident happened, from the
violent efforts of an accoucheur to introduce his hand to deliver.

CASE III.
The case of Mrs. Manning, as related by Dr. DOUGLAS.

WE find that the woman, who is the subject of this case, was in her 4th
pregnancy, low in stature, about 30 years of age, and of a weak constitution,
but, in general, healthy. When the Doctor was first called to her, the
membranes had been ruptured eight hours, and the pains had continued regular
from that time: yet though the os tincae was considerably dilated, the child
did not advance. He found her extremely restless, complaining of excessive pain
in the region of the pubis. Each return of pain caused her to writhe and twist
as if suffering from violent colic, very unlike the urging throes of common
labor; but her pulse was calm and regular, nor did she make any particular
complaint, excepting of the pain about the pubis. This being the state of the
case, there seemed to be no reason to induce him to precipitate the delivery.

About nine o'clock the same evening, the midwife informed him that the patient
had had a discharge of blood from the vagina, which, however, did not continue;
and that the pains had ceased about half an hour after six o'clock; since
which, retching, with an incessant craving for drink, had come on.

He now found her face lengthened, and bedewed with cold sweat; her pulse
scarcely to be felt; her breathing short and quick, with great anxiety; but
still complaining of no pain, excepting about the pubis. 'By examination in the
common way,' he says, I could distinguish nothing, excepting a round moveable
substance, which I supposed to be the head of the child; but being only able to
reach it with my fingers, I could not determine with any certainty what it was.
The woman appeared to be in extremis; and my mind was so wholly occupied by her
danger, as to preclude all reasoning with respect to the cause.' He determined
upon immediate delivery, as the only chance of relief. 'There was no
difficulty,' he says, 'in passing my hand; and the substance which I had
supposed to be the child, fled before the tips of my fingers: by following it,
I at last found my hand in a cavity, which in no sort resembled that of the
uterus. I was then forcibly and painfully struck with the nature of the case;
and on examining all round, with caution and gentleness, I could with certainty
determine that my hand was in the cavity of the abdomen: the child being on the
fore part; on the back part, the contracted uterus like an oblong ball; and the
intestines hanging among any fingers.' There was no obstruction to the turning
and extraction of the child, excepting in the passage of the head through the
brim of the pelvis. The placenta, which was likewise in the abdominal cavity,
had so clung to the intestines, that he was again under the necessity of
introducing his hand to detach it, which was not difficult. 'The uterus
seemed,' he says, 'to have been ruptured transversely, on the lower and fore
part, some distance above where the vagina is connected with it; and it was
more contracted in its size, than I thought possible in the few hours which had
elapsed since the accident.'

After a variety of changes and alarming symptoms arising from peritoneal
inflammation, the poor woman fortunately recovered; and in about six weeks
waited upon the Doctor at his own house, to return thanks; when he persuaded
her to permit his neighbor Dr. Osborn to examine per vaginam. He thought the
os tinae somewhat more open, externally, than it usually is; and Dr. Douglas
himself fancied he felt rather more fullness than is common about the cervix
uteri: but they both agreed, that there was nothing in the touch so different
from what is observed in the natural state, as to have excited any idea of
previous disease, had they not known the complaint with which she had been
afflicted.

After examining the body of Mrs. Wilkins, and ascertaining the nature of the
injury, I began to consider the above case in a different light, from what I
did on the first perusal of it. The Doctor represents it as a case of ruptured
uterus; I now perceive it to be a case of lacerated vagina.

The circumstance which he relates, of a 'round moveable substance,' which upon
introducing his hand, he found to be 'the contracted uterus like an oblong
ball,' was so similar to what Mr. Waller described, and which every one of us
had an opportunity of observing during the dissection, that I have no doubt
remaining in my own mind, that there could have been any difference between the
two cases. Mr. Waller and the other gentlemen who were present concur likewise
with me in the same opinion.

In the preceding pages, I have had occasion, on a review of the case from
Vander Weil, to advert to a similar occurrence, when I expressed my doubts how
the degree of contraction can be ascertained, unless the hand of the accoucheur
has been passed on the outside of the uterus. I cannot suppose that, while the
fundus is contracted above the rupture, the os internum will remain for several
hours, nay days, dilated, and show no disposition to contract. The fibers, I
should apprehend, which form its texture, will assist its contraction in as
great a degree as that of the fundus.

Dr. Douglas, as well as Vander Weil, found that the uterus receded on
introducing his hand. Is it possible that the uterus should have receded before
his hand, if its attachment had been entire? It must have made some resistance.
Yet we find that, when he touched it, it fled, and upon following it, his hand
went, not into the uterus, but into a cavity which in no sort resembled it. Can
it be supposed from this relation, so pointedly marked, that his fingers ever
passed the os internum? The uterus must have been fixed, if he had entered into
its cavity; but he says, that he was obliged to follow it, and at length found
his hand within the abdomen, the child being on the fore part, on the back part
the contracted uterus, like an oblong ball.

CASE IV.
A Case of lacerated vagina from POUTEAU, related by him as a rupture of the
uterus.

HE was called to the assistance of a woman, who had been a considerable time
in labor, under the care of a midwife; she had been seized the day before with
a hemorrhage, on which the child, which had before presented with the head, was
no longer felt. On examination, his hand entered at once into a cavity, which
appeared large; on the fore part, he felt a round substance, of the size, but
not the solidity, of a child's head; yet there was not any thing to be felt,
which could assure him of a child being there. The woman died soon after,
without being further examined. On opening the body, the child and placenta
were found in the cavity of the abdomen, entirely out of the uterus, which was
of the size of a child's head of five years old, and was the round body which
had been felt per vaginam. The rupture was on the posterior and interior part,
and then about three or four inches long Poutean, page 487.
.

When the easy introduction of his hand into 'a cavity which appeared large,'
at a time when the 'uterus was contracted to the size of a child's head;' his
perceiving by the touch, during his attempt to deliver, 'a round substance,'
which afterward, on dissection, he found to be the contracted uterus, and the
state of the rupture, being then about 'three or four inches long When this
accident happens in the uterus, the size of the rupture is soon diminished.
Rungius relates, that the intestines were kept up by his hand, until the
rupture was sufficiently contracted to prevent their descent. Dr. Hamiiton
says, he had an opportunity of examining how amazingly the rupture was
diminished, by the contraction of the uterus. La Motte observes, that, on
dissection, the rupture would not admit the tip of his little finger; and in
other cases we find similar remarks. How are we then to account for his finding
the rupture to be so very extensive, at a time when the uterus was so much
contracted?
,' are considered, I think that I shall not be too hasty in pronouncing it to
have been a separation of the uterus from its posterior attachment to the
vagina.

AS in ruptures of the uterus, so in lacerations of the vagina, if the head of
the child should be advanced so far into the pelvis as to be wedged, before a
laceration takes place, it will remain there, and we shall be deprived of one
criterion, the retrocession of the presenting part, to guide us; the cessation
of the true pains must lead us then to judge of the nature of the case, when
attended with vomiting and other symptoms, as described in the relation of the
preceding narratives. The following cases is an instance of this kind.

CASE V.
A case of lacerated vagina, where the head was engaged in the pelvis, before
the accident took place; communicated by a friend.

A. B. aged about 30, was taken in labor with her third child, on April 15th,
1785, at four oclock in the morning. The waters soon came away. On examination,
the head of the child was found to be low in the pelvis. A considerable
stricture was observed in the vagina, and the sacrum projected rather forward
at its apex. About five hours after she was first taken in labor, she began to
complain of pains in her belly, which she distinguished from those of labor.
At three oclock in the afternoon, a physician, an eminent teacher of midwifery
in London, was called in, at which time, from the degree of stricture, the part
of the head which presented could not be exactly ascertained. He ordered her an
injection, which was given, but without any effect. On enquiring, it appeared,
that since she began to complain of the pain in her belly, the labor pains had
ceased. A single blade was introduced with ease, and some endeavors made to
deliver, but without success. The Doctor, considering it wrong to struggle
against nature, or do any thing without the assistance of pains, left her,
giving directions for an enema to be injected, and four or six ounces of blood
to be taken away.

He returned at half past five, when very little alteration could be perceived.
She had no labor pains, and the pains continued the same in the abdomen, which
she now complained was become tender. Injections were ordered, copious and
stimulant; four were given without any return. The forceps were at length
applied, and used moderately, with an intent to bring on a return of true
pains; but a slight discharge of the glysters was the only effect. A little
ground was at length gained, and, by increasing the force for a considerable
time, she was delivered of a dead child: the placenta came away immediately
after. She made water frequently during the labor, and had it drawn off before
the use of the forceps. She was thirsty, and vomited frequently, though little
in quantity. By her cries, she did not seem to suffer more pain, than is
usually felt in her delivery.

Her pulse were quick after she was in bed; she was disposed to vomit, and
passed a restless night; the pain in her belly continued distinct from after
pain. She lived until the morning of the 18th, during which time her pulse were
generally 130 or more, her skin hot, she complained of great pain and
tenderness of the abdomen; she vomited frequently, and her urgings to vomit
were great.

From no local injury being supposed to have happened, and from the presence of
the lochia, and other symptoms, the case was considered as truly puerperal, and
treated as such.

On dissection, the intestines were found to be inflamed, with an exudation of
lymph on their surfaces, and the gall bladder was large and distended with
bile. The uterus was contracted to the size of double fist, black, and
beginning to sphacelate. The vagina was found to be lacerated at its connection
to the cervix uteri, anteriorly, no vestige of the stricture remaining
Although, in the case which gave rise to these observations, the bladder was
unfortunately injured, yet it does not follow, that this must necessarily
happen always; for in this case we see, that a laceration may take place on the
anterior part, without its being injured; and from other cases we are taught,
that the posterior or lateral parts are as often liable to the accident, as the
anterior part of the vagina.
.

It is to be observed, that the woman had fallen down, a day or two before she
was taken in labor, and that the same gentleman had delivered her, two years
before, with forceps, on account of the same stricture.

How far the sixth case quoted by Dr. Douglas might be similar to the above, I
have some doubts; but the circumstances attending it render it probable.

It appears, that the woman had been in labor the best part of the day, with
very strong pains, before the rupture is supposed to have taken place. The head
was firmly wedged in the pelvis; but, in attempting to open it, suddenly gave
way to the force applied.

Now, let us consider for one moment the nature of the case. If a rupture had
taken place in the uterus, as the head was firmly wedged in the pelvis, the
feet must have been the part protruded; whence, when I recollect the strong
contractile power of the uterus When a part of the child only has escaped
through a rupture of the uterus, the contraction, as related by authors, is
great. Hildanus gives a case where the head of a child had passed through a
rupture of the uterus, which had contracted so strongly round its neck, that,
he says, it had no doubt been strangled by it. Hildani Centur. i. observe. 54.


, and the length of time intervening between the attempt to open the head, and
the time when the rupture is supposed to have happened, I cannot persuade
myself that the child would have escaped so easy into the cavity of the abdomen
as he found it did.

If the vagina was lacerated, it is easy to account for the sudden retrocession
of the child. It is evident, that the uterus being only attached in one place,
its resistance against the pressure could only be partial; the fundus would be
inclined, and the os internum raised in proportion; therefore, when the head
was pressed back, it would find an easy admittance, through the laceration,
into the cavity of the abdomen; from the endeavors of the uterus to free
itself, the body with the placenta would soon follow. The rupture being near
the cervix is, I think, some support to what I have advanced. I shall likewise
endeavor to show, in another place, that the placenta being in the cavity of
the abdomen, may be considered as a collateral proof.

I AM inclined to believe, that the whole of the child very seldom escapes from
a rupture of the uterus. I am, however, very well convinced, that it is always
the consequence of a laceration of the vagina, unless it should happen to be as
firmly wedged in the pelvis as in the cases I have just noticed.

On a review of fifteen cases quoted by Dr. Douglas, we shall find, that the
child escaped into the cavity of the abdomen in seven; in No. VI. VII. X. XI.
XII. XIII. and XIV. I have already endeavored to show that No. VI. and XI.
were lacerations of the vagina, and I shall draw some inferences from No. XII.
when I come to speak of the placenta being out of the uterus, tending to show a
degree of probability of that being of the same nature. Of No. VII. we have a
very uncertain account, as, from motives of delicacy, it is not particularly
entered into. No. X. without doubt, must have been a ruptured uterus. I think
that the two last cannot be considered in point, as they were at an early
period of gestation, and the accidents happened from external violence.

In the remaining eight, No. I. II. III. IV. V. VIII. IX. and XV. only part of
the child had escaped from the rupture; indeed, in the two first, it does not
appear that any part had escaped. It is therefore evident that, setting aside
the two cases from external violence, in only one out of thirteen the child
escaped wholly from a rupture of the uterus.

I am also inclined to believe, that the placenta being in the cavity of the
abdomen, is an occurrence which very seldom happens, excepting in those cases
where the vagina is lacerated. The size of the rupture, when it happens in the
uterus, must be diminished almost immediately after the child has escaped, and
the contraction of the uterus must be increased by its endeavors to propel the
placenta; it is therefore almost impossible that the placenta should escape
into the abdomen: it might indeed sometimes happen, if the funis should be much
twisted round the child's neck or body. In almost every case, where we have a
certainty that the accident was a rupture of the uterus, we find that the
placenta remained behind.

When a laceration takes place in the vagina, the propulsion of the placenta is
not different from what happens in common parturition; as every contraction of
the uterus forces it toward the os internum, from whence it passes after the
child into the cavity of the abdomen. But when there is a rupture in the
uterus, every contraction must be an impediment to its propulsion, by
diminishing the size of the aperture, through which it must pass, to be found
among the viscera.

In the case of Mrs. Wilkins, where we can entertain no doubt of the nature of
the accident, the placenta was found with the child in the cavity of the
abdomen. In that of Mrs. Manning, in those from Vander Weil, Bonetus, and
Pouteau, and in the sixth case quoted by Dr. Douglas, all of which I have
endeavored to show were of the same nature, the placenta was likewise found
among the viscera.

There are two more instances, among the cases quoted by Dr. Douglas, where the
same occurrence is said to have happened; in No. X. and XII.

The first, communicated by Dr. Garthshore, is against the opinion I have
formed, that being, as I have before observed, evidently a rupture of the
uterus. In the other, from Saviard, it appears, that the child presented
favorably, with every appearance that the labor would be soon finished; yet
the pains ceased at once, after two days continuance; the presenting part
receded, and only the placenta was to be felt. She died undelivered; and when
the body was opened, the child and secundines were in the abdomen among the
viscera, the feet of the child touching the stomach of the mother. The
intestines were all fretted, and the omentum rotten and stinking, but the
uterus was of the natural appearance. I have not Saviard's book to refer to;
but I think, from a review of this account, I shall be able to draw some
inferences in my favor.

From the manner in which he expresses himself, that the uterus was of its
natural appearance, we may be led to suppose that no injury had happened to it.
When we recollect the circumstance, that, after the presenting part had
receded, the placenta alone was to be felt, I apprehend but a small degree of
doubt concerning the nature of the case will remain.

After the body was opened, the secundines as well as the child were found in
the abdomen. As the placenta was to be felt on examination, after the rupture
had taken place, how can it be supposed that the rupture was in the uterus? The
uterus must have been at that time considerably contracted, and the aperture so
much diminished, as to have rendered the escape of the placenta impossible.

Hence I am clearly of opinion, that the placenta being felt on examination,
after the rupture had taken place, and being afterward found in the abdomen,
is a great proof that the accident was not in the uterus, but in the vagina.

Out of eight cases, therefore, where the placenta was found with the child in
the cavity of the abdomen, there is the greatest probability to suppose that
seven of them were lacerations of the vagina.

THE difficulty attending delivery, when the vagina is lacerated, must be very
trifling, when compared to that which will occur if the accident happens in the
uterus. In the case of Mrs. Wilkins, the only resistance was in bringing down
the breech, which all the gentlemen present agreed arose from the protuberance
of the child's belly projecting over the fundus of the contracted uterus;
which, as the extraction went on, was brought lower down, and, of consequence,
pressed the breech of the child over the pubis: after this was overcome, not
the least difficulty whatever occurred. In the case of Mrs. Manning, it does
not appear that there was any resistance to the delivery of the breech; but we
find there was a considerable obstruction in the passage of the head through
the pelvis. I am somewhat inclined to believe that this might have arisen from
the same cause, although Dr. Douglas supposes it to have proceeded from the
narrowness of the pelvis.

In those cases, where the uterus has been ruptured, the difficulty will be
increased or diminished, in proportion as more or less of the child has escaped
into the cavity of the abdomen.

If the rupture should be so extensive as to admit the child to escape entirely
out of the uterus, from the natural disposition of its fibers, the uterus will
almost immediately contract, and the size of the rupture will become less, of
consequence, in proportion to the degree of contraction which takes place. If
the rupture should be so small as to admit the protrusion of part of the child
only, a stricture will be formed upon such part as has escaped, which will
require a considerable degree of force to overcome, as, from its endeavors to
expel the part which remains, the uterus will still continue to contract. In
performing the caesarean operation, M. Soumain found that the edges of the
incision made in the uterus pressed so close upon the foetus, that he could
hardly get his fingers in to extract it Mem. de l'Acad. Chirurg. Paris, mem. xx.
. Hence we may account for the alternate though ineffectual pains, which, in
some cases, have been observed to continue for some time after the rupture has
taken place; and I believe we may be led to form a probable opinion that, when
this happens, some part of the child still remains within the uterus.

The hand of the accoucheur, when he sits down to deliver, must be passed
through the os internum into the cavity of the uterus, and from thence through
the rupture. The difficulty attending the passage of the hand will be in
proportion to the degree of contraction; but, unfortunately, it is very seldom
that the nature of the case is known so early, as to induce us to make any
attempt to deliver before the uterus is considerably contracted. After the
resistance from the diminished state of the rupture is overcome, and the hand
passed into the abdomen, the feet, in general, may be soon found, and brought
down with some ease; but as the operator proceeds, and the legs come forward,
every inch of the child, as the extraction takes place, will create a fresh
resistance from its increasing bulk. The irritation which must be given to the
uterus, by the introduction of the hand, will increase its endeavors to
contract, and make considerable addition to the difficulty. Caldani, of
Bologna, in a letter to Haller, relates some experiments made on the uterus of
a bitch, which show the great degree of contraction that takes place even after
death, on any stimulus being applied to it Vide Van Swieten's comment. sect.
1316.
.

The nearer likewise the rupture happens to the fundus or cervis, the greater
degree of ease or difficulty will ensue. In the first instance, the extraction
will be made nearly in a direct line. In the other, and which most commonly
happens, that part of the child which remains in the abdomen must form an angle
with the feet and legs, while they are passing through the vagina, and the
degrees of such angle will be decreased or increased, in proportion as the
rupture may happen to be, either near the cervix, or further toward the fundus.

Very little more exertion will be required than what is obliged to be made use
of in a common case, where the child is turned, when the feet are the only
parts that have escaped. When the legs have protruded as far as the knee, the
resistance will be considerably more powerful; as, in such case, the hand must
be passed to a greater distance through the rupture in search of the feet: but
how much more must the difficulty be increased, if the aperture should be large
enough to admit the child to pass out of the uterus as far as the hips? Indeed
I apprehend this situation to be worse than when the whole of the child has
escaped; as, in that case, there may be some hope that the resistance might be
overcome, and the child extracted by the feet; but when the child has escaped
as far as the hips, such a very considerable distension, if not further
laceration of the rupture, must take place, and so great a degree of force must
be made use of to overcome the contraction, in order to gain sufficient room to
bring the feet back, as leave little room to hope for success. In fact, when I
reflect on the very great difficulties that must arise when any considerable
part of the child has escaped, I do not at all wonder that authors have
concurred in pronouncing the accident mortal, and giving no encouragement for
attempting relief, except by having recourse to the caesarean operation.

In addition to Mrs. Manning's case, of which we have had occasion to speak so
often, eight others are adduced by Dr. Douglas, to evince the ease with which
delivery may be performed in cases of ruptured uterus. No. I. IV. V. VI. VII.
VIII. IX. and XV. On reading them over with attention, I have observed that the
situation of the child, in most of them, was such as to create the smaller
degree of resistance, according to the opinion I have entertained in respect to
the difficulty attending delivery.

In the first, which was related to Heister by Rungius, it does not appear that
the child, or any part of it, had ever been in the cavity of the abdomen.
Indeed Dr. Douglas is of the same opinion himself, as he says, 'the recovery of
the patients, No. I. and II. may have been in a great measure owing to the
viscera having sustained little or no injury, as there is no reason to suppose
that the child in either case had been in the cavity of the abdomen Vide
Observat. on extr. case of rupt. uter. p. 66.
.' This may give us some idea of the prospect we have of recovery when a
rupture takes place, but cannot be brought to show the ease with which delivery
may be performed, when the whole or part of the child has escaped from the
uterus.

In No. IV. which is taken from La Motte, observation 317, the feet were the
only parts out of the uterus, and the rupture was at the fundus; whence the
extraction was not attended with much difficulty, for two reasons: the
endeavors made use of were in a direct line, in the first instance, and in the
second, the feet being the only parts that had escaped, the hand of the
accoucheur was introduced until it came to the knees, so as to bring them down
and disengage the feet; after which, no more difficulty would arise than what
happens in a common case of turning.

In No. V. likewise from La Motte, observation 318, it appears that the child
had escaped out of the uterus as far as the hips, or even further, part of the
body being in the cavity of the abdomen. The child was turned, he says, and
extracted with considerable ease; en moins d'un miserere, as he expresses it
himself. I cannot think, with Dr. Douglas, that La Motte's observations are
related with such plainness and candor, as to claim our most perfect
confidence. In this instance, we have a case the most difficult that can
possibly happen, and yet the delivery was performed with the greatest ease
imaginable. I really am of opinion, that the relation is not founded in fact: I
apprehend that he has either magnified the proportion of the child which was
out of the uterus, or that he has concealed the difficulty he must have met
with, in case such a considerable part of the child had been in the abdomen.

I have advanced some reasons, in a former part of these observations, when
speaking of the head of the child being wedged in the pelvis, at the time when
a laceration happens, tending to show that No. VI. was a laceration of the
vagina.

We have a very defective account of No. VII. as from motives of delicacy to
the gentleman who attended the patient, Dr. Douglas does not think himself at
liberty to enter more particularly into it.

In No. VIII. from Peu, the time elapsed between the accident and the delivery
is not related; but I am inclined to believe that it was done very soon after,
from the apparent facility with which it was accomplished. There appears
likewise some deficiency in the contractile power of the uterus, by the
excessive hemorrhage that followed. We find however that he 'delivered with
great caution to avoid doing further injury to the uterus.' This seems to
intimate some degree of resistance, although none is mentioned.

Dr. Douglas observes, that the great contractile power of the uterus is
favorable to the process of healing, by bringing the divided parts more into
contact; 'but,' he says, 'the presence of any considerable extraneous
substance, even in the abdomen, seems, in some degree to counteract this power
of contraction Do^gl^^'s case of ruptured uterus, p. 56.
.' If the uterus after the expulsion of its contents, does not contract as in
common parturition, we must expect a considerable flooding. In the above case,
we are told that it was excessive. In the cases of Mrs. Wilkins, and the others
which I have related as lacerations of the vagina, the hemorrhage was not very
great That a considerable hemorrhage will follow, however, from a laceration of
the vagina, as well as from a rupture of the uterus, we have the authority of
Veslingius. 'Bis enim notavi, cum uteri vagina, secundum latus dextrum esset
disrupta, quamvis foetus extinctus integre cum secundis educeretur; subsequente
ex laceratis hypogastricis vasis enormi sanguinis profluvio, matrem paulo post
fato pariter cessisse.' -- J. Veslingii observe. et epist. 45.
, and the uterus was found contracted to the usual size it would have been, in
the same space of time, if no extraneous body had been in the cavity of the
abdomen.

In No. IX. from Steidele, it appears that the head had escaped from the
rupture, he brought down the feet with ease, but found some difficulty in
extracing the rest of the foetus. This diffaculty must evidently have arisen
from the stricture formed by the edges of the rupture round the child's neck;
whence I think it cannot be considered as much support, to evince the ease with
which delivery is performed, any more than the last case, where the patient
expired while the accoucheur was endeavoring to bring the head through the
pelvis.

LACERATIONS of the vagina, I have before observed, have been taken notice of
by authors, yet it does not appear that they have had any idea of the child's
escaping by such means into the cavity of the abdomen. If the case which gave
rise to these observations, in which the nature of the accident could not be
mistaken, and my reasoning on the different cases I have adduced, are allowed
to have any weight, I think I may venture to draw the following conclusions.

First, that the whole of the child escapes, into the cavity of the abdomen,
much oftener from a laceration of the vagina than from a rupture of the uterus.

Secondly, That, from the little difficulty with which delivery is accomplished
in lacerations of the vagina, there is a greater prospect of recovery in such
accidents, than when the uterus is the seat of the injury.

It is evident that the gloomy idea of inevitable death has not only been the
means of checking such endeavors as might have been sometimes successful, but
that it has likewise been often the means of preventing us from knowing the
real nature of the injury. I hope practitioners in future will, from the
fortunate event of the case of Mrs. Manning, related by Dr. Douglas, and the
new light thrown on the subject by the case I have related of Mrs. Wilkins,
entertain a more favorable opinion of the success likely to attend their
endeavors, in a situation where nothing but immediate delivery can afford the
least prospect of recovery.

When first I made my private remarks on Mrs. Wilkins's case, I did not intend
to enter further into the subject, than to draw the case up sair, and send it
to some periodical publication, as worthy the attention of the medical world.
But the similarity between it and that of Mrs. Manning was so striking, that
the more I considered it, the more reasons I saw to induce me to publish it in
the present form.

The nature of the subjct has obliged me to enter very fully into the merits of
Dr. Douglas's case. That he should be liable to cr^ in forming an opinion on
the nature of the accident, is not to be wondered at, when we consider how
silent authors have been upon it, and how seldom accidents of this nature
occur. I have not the honor of being known to him; but I am confident, from
the liberality of his sentiments as a gentleman, that he will not consider the
liberty I have taken as personal, or in any other light than as a discharge of
the duty every man in the profession owes to the world. It has a claim upon us
to elucidate any occult part of the science, and every man is bound by the laws
of humanity to comply with it, whenever an opportunity offers. Exempla rara non
reticenda, etiam causa incognita; ita enim scitu digna infinita praeteribuntur.

FINIS.

