A General HISTORY OF THE STAGE, From its Origin in GREECE down to the present
TIME. WITH THE MEMOIRS of most of the principal PERFORMERS that have appeared
on the ENGLISH and IRISH STAGE for these last Fifty Years. WITH Notes, Ancient,
Modern, Foreign, Domestic, Serious, Comic, Moral, Merry, Historical, and
Geographical, containing many Theatrical Anecdotes; also several Pieces of
Poetry, never before published.

Collected and Digested by W. R. CHETWOOD, Twenty Years Prompter to his
Majesty's Company of Comedians at the THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane, London.

-- All the World's a Stage,
And every Man and Woman, merely Actors.
SHAKESPEARE. LONDON: Printed for W. OWEN, near Temple Bar, M, DCC, XLIX.

TO DAVID GARRICK, Esquire, J. LACY, Esquire, JOHN RICH, Esquire, and THOMAS
SHERIDAN, Esquire, PATENTEES and MANAGERS OF THE THEATRES-ROYAL IN DRURY LANE,
COVENT GARDEN, and SMOCK-ALLEY. GENTLEMEN,
TO your Censures I commit the following Piece, since you are all the proper
Judges of my Trial. If I am condemned, I shall receive my Sentence without
Murmuring; and, if acquitted, with sincere Thanks: But as every Offender would
find some Pretense to mitigate his Crime, I will only put you in mind that I
have marched under all your Banners in many Winter Colds and Summer Heats, and
given Proofs of my Conduct, if not of my Courage, and have disciplined some of
your Troops. Though my Enemies have beat me to the Pit (as Brutus said), yet,
thank Heaven! some few Friends have interposed, and prevented my falling in:
There is a Consolation in Innocence that is our best Shield.

I am bad at Compliments, but I wish you all the Success your Merits deserve;
Copy the Roman Roscius (though a Heathen) while you live; and, when you die, it
may be said of you as the noble Cicero Every Person may not know that Marcus
Tullius Cicero and Roscius lived in the same Century, and were Cotemporaries,
though the Orator was much the younger, and was taught all that Energy in his
Orations he was so much famed for, by Roscius. Tully survived him many Years.
He derived his Line from Tullius Appius King of the Volsci, and took his Name
from Cicer, a Chich-pea (or as we call them in England, Vech), by having a Wart
on his Forehead which resembled that Pulse. These great Men (Cicero and
Roscius) flourished about the Year of the World 3880, 60 Years before the Birth
of Christ.
said of that celebrated Actor:

Quis nostrum tam animo agresti ac duro fuit, ut ROSCII morte nuper non
commoveretur? qui, cum esset senex mortuus, tamen propter excellentem artem, ac
venustatem, videbatur omnino mori non debuisse.

Which of us all would be so unpolished and obdurate, as not to be sensibly
moved with the Death of ROSCIUS? Who, though dying in Old Age, yet his excellent
Art, and sweet Manner of Deportment, influenced every one to wish him immortal.
With this I end, and take Leave to subscribe myself,

Your most Obedient, Humble, and Respectful Servant, W. R. CHETWOOD.

THE PREFACE.
A PREFACE is Part of the Habit to a Book, and no Author can appear fulldress'd
without it: It Is a Cockade to an Officer, a Nosegay to a Lawyer, a Patch or a
Fan to a fine Lady, or, a Ribband to her Lap-Dog.

If I should tell my Readers, I am prevailed upon with great Entreaties from my
Friends to publish this Piece, I should embark with a Falsehood (for it is my
own Free Will, Act and Deed); and I would willingly have my Readers believe I
publish naught but Truth. My Cargo is genuine, and I have taken up but little
on Credit.

If the good Reader should find better Scraps of Rhyme than my own (which I
presume will not be over-difficult), I have given them distinguishing Marks,
that there may be no Doubts on that Account.

The numerous Notes I have squeezed in, are meant to divert; if I lose my Aim,
I shall content myself with considering, I may be but one among ten thousand
that have been mistaken.

I have unnumbered Thanks to many in this Kingdom, and in particular to a young
Gentleman whose Goodnature has been indefatigable in my Interest. The other a
Gentleman eminent in the Law, who has made my Cause his own. It gives me great
Concern I am not permitted publicly to own their unbounded Goodness and
Generosity, since such Sterling Friends are but seldom met with by Wretches in
Misfortune.

I am Unfortunate I own, but (as Oroonoko says) not ashamed of being so. I bear
all with Patience and Cheerfulness; which I find has occasioned the following
Flight of Poetry from a Friend. I know Authors often write to themselves; yet
I Will assure you, on my Veracity, it is not the Case here; though I must allow a
little Vanity in my Composition makes me willing to insert it.

Integervitae, scelerisquepurus. Hor. Ode XXII.
SAY, fair Content, loved Goddess, say,
How shall I find thy soft Retreat;
Where shall I seek thy Halcyon Seat,
Or trace thy sacred Way?
Love pointed out a pleasing Scene,
Where naught but Beauty could be found,
With Roses and with Myrtles crowned;
And named thee for its Queen.
Delusion all! a specious Cheat!
At my Approach the Roses fade;
I found each Fragrance quite decayed,
And cursed the fond Deceit!
At Courts I Have sought, where Splendour shone,
Where Pomp and gilded Cars reside;
'Midst endless Hurry, endless Pride;
But there thou wast unknown.
Yet in the Captive's dreary Cell,
Lodged with a long-experienc'd Sage
(With thee, thou CHIRON of the Stage)
The Goddess deigns to dwell.
Integrity, and Truth serene,
Have eased the Labors of the Breast,
And lulled the peaceful Heart to rest,
'Midst Perfidy and Pain.
A Soul, like thine, disrobed of Guile,
In native Innocence elate;
Above the keenest Rage of Fate,
Can greet IT with a Smile.
I would wish with Horace, -- Nec turpem senectam
Degere --
To pass declining Years without Reproach;

But that I find impossible; Falsehood and Fraud are the Products of the World,
and grow spontaneous. But no more than this; I forgive my Enemies, and shall
ever cherish the Memory of my Friends. I must ask Pardon for naming Mr.
Barrington in this Theater, and Miss Bellamy in Covent Garden; the Goodness of
them both have often eased an aching Heart.

A General HISTORY OF THE STAGE.
THE STAGE is almost as old as the sacred Inspiration of the Muse; admired,
when at Nurse, and even in its Infant Prattle, pleasing: Born in Greece, and
nourished at Athens. A merry Author says, in a Prologue, Thespis, the first
Professor of our Art,
At Country Wakes sung Ballads in a Cart.
And though Bacchus is allowed to be the Father, yet all Nations, ancient and
modern, esteemed it to be a sober and instructive Entertainment.

The early Stages were, indeed, no more than native Turf, or Sod; and what was
first exhibited, of a Piece, simple Pastoral Songs, sometimes mixed with
Scandal or Abuse, and, may be, home Truths; like the Terrae Filius at Oxford,
or the blazoning Peccadillos of two opponent Members setting up for the same
Borough. Yet, from these Seeds of Satire, we owe a Juvenal, Perseus, Horace,
and Petronius, and, indeed, the whole Race of Heroic, Epic, Dramatic, and
Pastoral Poets and Poetry; your Spondees and Dactyls, the Buskin and Sock, the
Laurel and Bays.

From these Turf Stages, the Players, such as they were, mounted a Cart, or
some such Vehicle, and began to travel Bag and Baggage, perhaps like the
Picture of the Itinerants in Scarron's comical Romance. Hear what Horace says,
in Latin:

Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Camoenae
Dicitur, and plaustris vexisse Poemata Thespis:
Quae canerent agerentque peruncti faecibus ora.
Post hunc personae pallaeque repertor honestae
Aeschylus and modicis implevit pulpita tignis;
Et docuit magnumquae loqui, nitique Cothurno.
But for fear some People may understand as little Latin as myself, take the
Sense in the following English.

Thespis, an early Poet and Player, born at Athens.
Thespis, the first that did surprise the Age
With Tragedy, never trod a decent Stage;
But in a Wagon drove his Plays about,
And showed mean antic Tricks to please the Rout:
His Songs uneven, rude, in every Part;
His Actors smutted, and the Stage a Cart.
Next Aeschylus, a celebrated Greek Poet, an Athenian. There are several Greek
Tragedies of his handed down to us, and, as Casaubon imagines, many more lost.
By some Authors he is supposed to have been one of the Performers in his own
Dramatic Pieces The learned Thomas Stanley, Esquire of Hertfordshire, has published
this ancient Author in Latin, with the original Greek on one Side, illustrated
with elaborate Notes, in Folio.
Aeschylus did greater Art express,
He built a Stage, and taught them how to dress;
In decent Motion he his Parts conveyed,
And made them look as great as those they played.
CREECH. The first Theater in Athens was built, by the Directions of Aeschylus,
at the public Charge. It was a wooden Pile, yet very spacious. But at the
Representation of one of the Tragedies composed by Aeschylus, according to
Suidas, the Building gave way, by the monstrous Weight of 20000 Spectators, and
many were killed and maimed. To prevent such fatal Accidents for the future,
the City ordered one more magnificent to be erected, entirely built with Stone,
capable of holding half the Inhabitants without the former Danger: Some Authors
say of Marble, surpassing, in Elegance, the Temples of their Gods. It consisted
of two Parts, the Scena, and Cavea: The Scena, that Part which formed the
Stage, and other Conveniences belonging to it; the upper Part for their Scenes
and Machinery, which were generally flat Curtains, with all the Variety of
Painting, let occasionally down to vary the Prospect, and manage the Machinery;
as Lee intimates, in the Tragedy of Oedipus: O! that, as often I have at Athens
seen
The Stage arise, and the big Clouds descend.
The Cavea was the Place where the Spectators were seated: The under Part of
the Stage was formed for raising any thing particular for the different
Performances, where were also placed the brazen Tubes for Thunder, and Utensils
for Lightning, and many other Conveniences, according to Graevius: With brazen
Thunder, forked Lightning hurled,
That blazing streamed, to fright the mimic World.
They had also different Thunder, for good or bad Omens, according to
Athenaeus: Auspicious Omen rends the Womb of Night,
And forked Lightning flashes from the Right.
And again, Ill-Omen'd Lightning has the Welkin cleft,
And rolling Thunder bellows from the Left.


It may well be asked by Numbers, If these Theaters were so large and spacious,
what sort of Theatrical Performers must those distant Ages produce? They must
either have Stentrophon Voices, or their Auditors most delicate auricular
Faculties. No; in my Opinion the Senses of Hearing and Seeing were much the
same as now: But as to the Voice, that, indeed, doubtless, wanted Assistance;
which to help, they had Coverings to the whole Head and Face, and over the Face
a Mask, with a Mouth only, to strengthen the Sound of the Voice; in my poor
Opinion, wretched Assistance! Where were the Eyes and Muscles of the
Countenance, to command, implore, exult, upbraid, consent, refuse, and all
those different Passions that agitate the Mind, wherein the Eyes are the Index?
These Masks were made to cover the Head, as was said before, adorned with Hair
proper to the Character the Actor was to represent upon the Stage. Madam Dacier
has given an engraved Specimen of several Masks used on the Roman Theater, in
her Translation of Terence, which she procured in an ancient Manuscript of that
Author's Works. The Romans followed the Greeks in their Drama; so, we may be
assured, these Helps came from Athens to Rome. But as the Voice was to be
modeled, so was the Person; therefore the Cothurnus, or Buskin, was invented,
not like our modern Greek or Roman Buskin, but an Elevation of Person, half a
Yard, or so, to emulate the Size of Immortals, or earthly Giants, and Heroes;
like our waggish Boys, appearing upon Stilts. But the Cothurnus was only made
use of in Tragedy to step stately; for if they had hurried, they might have
been in some Danger of kissing the Ground: Neither could they, I suppose, pay
Homage to their Monarch, or their Mistress, though perhaps, in those Days,
Kneeling was neither a Mark of Submission, or Adoration, at least among the
Greeks. But thus are their Actors pictured out by many Authors. Cornelius Nepos
tells us, most of the Performers on the Grecian Theaters were the chief of the
Nobility, Persons of great Learning and Dignity, Poets, Orators, and
Historians; even Kings did not disdain to appear on the Athenian Stage. But,
what is most surprising, these monstrous Piles of Buildings were so contrived,
that two of these large Theaters could turn, join, and form an Amphitheatre for
the hunting wild Beasts, etc.

Casaubon, in his Description of the Splendour of Rome, says, that Curio, a
Roman Knight, to entertain the People, built two spacious Theaters in such a
Manner, Back to Back (if it may be so termed), first for the Histriones
Histriones, or Actors, took their Name from Hister, in the Tuscan Language, a
Player.
, or Actors, to perform in the Morning; in the Afternoon they were moved, to
meet each other, and form one spacious Amphitheatre, where the Combats of
Gladiators and Wild Beasts were performed. But when we consider the Greek and
Roman Engines of War, the Turres Turres Mobiles, or moving Towers of the
Greeks, are the same of those of the Romans, which they copied from them. They
are used in besieging the Walls of a City, generally 150 Foot high, and 30 Foot
square, containing many Rooms in Length, and Height, capable of holding a large
Body of Soldiers, with Arms and other Engines, Ladders, Bridges to throw over
the City-wall for the Soldiers to enter the Town; and all this mighty Bulk put
together in three Hours, as Gronovius tells us, with Wheels that could move it
forward or back by Men, to shove, or draw, to press on, or retreat; some of the
Stories filled with Archers and Slingers, another with Fireballs, the rest with
Spears and Darts, etc.
, and a whole Catalogue of others, the Wonder will cease.

The Athenian Theater was, beyond all doubt, the primal and eldest Child of the
Drama; and, consequently, must have the earliest of the Dramatic Poets, and
most in Number. We have not many more of the Roman Dramatic Bards, after naming
Seneca The learned Seneca was born at Cordova in Spain. This is not the Stoic
Philosopher, whom, by his moral Writings, Hierome ranks among the List of
sacred Authors; though both these great Men were born in Cordova.
for Tragedy, and Plautus Plautus was born in Umbria, in the Kingdom of Naples.
Notwithstanding his Reputation as a Comic Poet, through his extravagant Way of
Living, he was, at last, reduced to get his Subsistence by turning a Baker's
Handmill: A Memento for Poets, as well as Players.
, with Terence Terence was born at Carthage, the Capital of Africa, that so
long contended with the Roman Republic. He served Terentius Lucanus, a Roman
Knight, who recommended him to Scipio and Laelius. There are Six of his
Comedies left us, but most taken from the Greek of Menander, which makes the
learned World regret the Loss of that excellent Author. Terence, after his
great Success in Rome, embarked to visit Athens, but was supposed to perish at
Sea; for he was never after heard of.
, for Comedy, and this last borrowed from the Greek of Menander. While, among
the Grecians, we have this Menander, Menander, a celebrated Greek Comic Poet.
Suidas informs us, that he squinted, and was an inordinate Lover of the Fair
Sex Plautus and Terence borrowed as much from this Author, as our modern
Play-wrights from Corneille, Racine, Moliere, Renard, and many of the French
Tribe of Parnassus. But whom has our Immortal Shakespeare pilfer'd from? Why,
not having the Fear of Heaven before his Eyes, he has sacrilegiously stolen
from that sacred Goddess, Nature, in all her Works.
, Aeschylus, Sophocles Sophocles was a celebrated Tragic Poet of Athens. He
flourished in the Year of the World 3520. before the Birth of Christ 428.
, Euripides Euripides wrote 75 Dramatic Pieces. Although he was twice married, he
was accounted a Woman-hater. Various are the Accounts of his Death: Some say,
he was torn to Pieces by Women; others, by the King of Macedon's Dogs. He was
contemporary with Sophocles.
, and Aristophanes Aristophanes was born at Lindus, in the Island of Rhodes. He
wrote 14 Comedies. He was cotemporary with Socrates, and in one of his Plays
ridicules that great Philosopher. He flourished in the Year of the World 3527.
, the first and last for Comedy, the other for Tragedy; not forgeting Lycophron
Lycophron, an eminent Tragic Poet, born at Chalcedon, a City of Bithynia in
Asia Minor, and now called Chiutale by the Turks, in whose Government it now
remains.
. Therefore we may thank Athens Athens was built by Cecrops (as Helvicus
informs us), a King of Egypt, in the Year of the World 2390. 64 Years before
the Israelites went out of Egypt. It was obeyed by Kings, till 2812. of the
World, when the Line of Monarchs ended with Codrus. Archons then were
constituted in the Place of Regal Power, after the Reign of 31 Kings; the Hero
Theseus being the 11th of that Number, who named the City Athens. These
Archons, or joint Rulers, were nine in Number, and were generally Hereditary.
Solon, the wise Lawgiver, was an Athenian, and formed those wholesome Statutes
from which they derived their excellent Government. See the English of the
Greek of what he said of himself.

What Power was fit, I did on all bestow;
Nor raised the Poor too high, nor pressed too low:
The Rich, that ruled, and every Office bore,
Confined by Laws, they could not press the Poor.
Both Parties I secured from lawless Might:
So, none prevailed upon another's Right.
Have we better Laws now? These Archons for Life continued Governors till 3190.
They were then changed for ten Years Rule only, till 3268. then it formed a
direct Republic, and, as Alcibiades says in the Play of Timon of Athens, One
Tyrant is better than four Hundred!


Their homebred Jars made them a Prey to the Macedonians, and afterward to
the Romans. And though famous for War and Arms, yet Learning and Art, even in
their Troubles, raised them to be the first in the Esteem, though they wore the
Chains of Rome; which shall introduce the Words of the Oracle to the great
Theseus:

Hear, Theseus, Pitheus Daughter's Son,
Hear what Jove for thee has done.
In this great City thou have made,
He has, as in a Storehouse, laid
The settled Periods and fixed Fates
Of many Cities, mighty States.
But know thou neither Fear nor Pain;
Solicit not thyself in vain:
For, like a Bladder that does bide
The Fury of the angry Tide,
Thou from high Waves unhurt shall bound,
Always tossed, but never drowned. DUKE.
Athens is now called Atheni by the Turks. There are computed 7000 Christians,
and 2000 Turks, who command the Town. The Aga resides in the Acropolis, or
Castle, built upon a Rock, a Mile in Circumference; within it is a Mosque,
that, when Athens flourished, was the Temple of Minerva, built of white Marble,
217 Foot in Length, and 100 in Breadth; and (as Wheeler says) was one of the
finest Structures in the World. Near it are some of the Remains of the Theater
of Bacchus. The Area, and the Stage, are almost filled with the ruinous Marble
Seats. But it is plain to be discovered, that this Theater is much larger than
the Temple of Minerva, and built with white Marble. The Temple of the eight
Winds, some Remains of the Odeum, or Music Theater, etc. may be still
distinguished.


for her Schools of Science and Arts, whose flourishing Branches by degrees
spread over the now learned World, as Horace writes in his Epistle to Augustus
Caesar: Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit, and arts Intulit agresti Latio.
Greece conquered, did her Conquerors overcome, Polished the Rude, and sent her
Arts to Rome.

The Socci is no more than we say in English (Seck), and used in Comedy only;
For Tragedy, with the Chorus, and Comedy, were a long time the Greek and Roman
Entertainments. The Chorus might, indeed, be termed Interludes, though their
Substance were mostly relative to the Story, as Thoughts of the foregoing
Subject of the Scene, by Standers-by, or Over-hearers. Yet these, by degrees,
melted away, and Mimes or Pantomimes were instituted in their room. Some of our
English Authors have their Chorus after the ancient Manner, viz. Shakespeare in
his Henry V. and Winter's Tale; Milton in his Samson Agonistes; Sandys in his
Christ's Passion; and the late Duke of Buckingham in his two Tragedies from the
Julius Caesar of our Shakespeare, and others. The Mimes and Pantomimes crept in,
and should out these ancient Chorus's; some were loose and wanton Mimics, that
the Roman Luxury too well liked; others were more decent, who by Action and
Gesture could describe a Story without speaking, in all its Variety of
Passions. One of these was so excellent, that when a foreign Prince came to
Rome in the Time of Nero the Tyrant, at his Departure, he asked no other Favor
of the Emperor, but that Mime, whom he had seen perform, for this Reason; that
as he had many barbarous Nations bordering round him, of different Speech, this
Man by his Action could be an excellent Interpreter, whose Meaning was so well
understood without the Use of Speech. Mimes and Pantomimes are generally the
same thing; but to translate them Buffoons (as Cooper in his Dictionary) is
something too low a Meaning. I shall leave the Ancients to rest quietly in
their Graves.

The Drama in England, and all over Europe, began as meanly as its first
Original in Greece or Rome, and our Poetry as crude. The first Play, at least
that has appeared in Print, was with this Title, Gammer Gurton's Needle, a
Comedy, acted at Christ's-College, Cambridge. Writ by Mr. S. Master of Arts.
And an artful Piece it is. Gammer Gurton has lost her Needle, and truly great
Hunt is made about it; her Boy is sent to blow the Embers in order to light a
Candle to help the Search. The damned Witch of a Cat is got in the Chimney,
with her two fiery Eyes. The Boy cries, It is the Devil of a Fire; for when he
puffs, it is out; and when he does not, it is in. Stir it! cries Gammer Gurton.
The Boy does as he is bid. The Fire, or rather the Cat, flies among a Pile of
Wood; the Boy cries, The House will be burnt! All Hands to work. The Cat is
discovered by a Priest (having a little more Cunning than the rest). This is
the Episode. The main Plot and Catastrophe are full as good. Gammer Gurton, it
seems, had the Day before been mending her Man Hodge's Breeches. Now Hodge in
some Game of Merriment was to be punished by three Slaps on the Bum, by the
brawny open Hand of one of his Fellow Bumpkins. His Head is laid down in Gammer
Gurton's Lap; the first Slap is given -- Hodge, with great Exclamation, bellows
out, Oh! He declares his Grief! and searching for the Cause of his Pain -- O,
happy! the Needle was found buried up to the Eye in the Posterior of poor
Hodge! It was pulled out with great Rejoicing by all but the Delinquent, who
expressed some Pain; and so ends this excellent Comedy.

But Time has polished this Rudeness, and true English Tragedy and Comedy is
allowed to stand in the utmost Perfection. Yet Bunglers will still be dabbling.
Every polite Nation delights in the Drama. The heavy Dutch have Plays in their
own Language, but they are generally planned from the Old Testament. I had a
Description of one given me, from an English Spectator. It was the Story of
Abraham sacrificing his Son Isaac. But Abraham was armed with a Gun instead of
a sacrificing Knife. The Angel, to prevent the Gun from firing, sprinkled some
warm Water, a Distillation of its own making. The Ram in the Brake (which was
represented by Boughs of Laurel) was a plump fat Dutchman (married I suppose)
with fair brow-spread Antlers on his Head, fixed very artificially; and all the
Decorations were of a Piece. But they have a handsome regular Theater at the
Hague, occupy'd by a French Troop of Comedians. Even the distant Chinese have
very fine Theaters. I saw, in my Youth, a Chinese Performance at Canton, where
the Scenes, Machines, and Habits, were surprising and magnificent; but not
understanding the Language, the Glare growing familiar, as Addison says by
Beauty, Faded on the Eye, and palled upon the Sense.
Du Halde in his History of China has translated into French several of the
Chinese Dramatic Authors; but they seem planned mostly alike -- A Prince
secreted in his Youth by an evil Minister, and counterplotted by a good one:
The Child at last brought from its Obscurity, married to a great Princess, and
begins his happy Reign. But these illustrious Ladies have but little to say for
themselves, no more than the lost Daughters in the Comedies of Terence, found
again by the Parents, and married to the Son of a Friend. Tavernier in his
Travels to the East Indies informs us, that Theaters have been many Ages the
Diversion of the Chinese, and more magnificent than those of Europe. He relates
a long Description of them; and the more to illustrate that Account, gives you
the Plan and Picture of one engraved, with the Scenes and Machines. The People
of America had their Theater, according to Acosta Acosta, the Spaniard, that
wrote the History of the West Indies before Cortez had conquered it, says, the
Amantas, or Indian Philosophers, were also Poets, and invented Comedies and
Tragedies, which were acted on their Festivals before the King, the Royal
Family, and the Court; the Actors being the Noblemen and great Officers of the
Army. The Subject of their Tragedies were the Victories and great Actions of
their Ancestors, which seemed to be the best Means they had of preserving the
Memory of what was past. In their Comedies, their Husbandry, their Household
Affairs and Commerce were represented, and the most remarkable Follies in Life
exposed. The Poets taught them what they had to say, not by Writing, but by
Memory; for Orthography was not known among the Indians till after the Conquest.

According to Lopez de Vega, the Christian Religion was propagated among the
Americans by the Theater. Read in his own Words what he writes upon the
Subject: Every Part of Gospel-history is thrown into a Play, and the Indians
are the Actors (instructed by the Jesuits); one acts our Savior, another St.
Peter, a third Pontius Pilate, a fourth Judas, and so on. This they look upon
as the readiest Way of instructing the vulgar Indians in the Christian
Religion, and to fix the Sacred History of it in their Memories.


. But what need we travel so far from Home? It Is Time to come back to our own
Country, with this Observation, that polite Nations allow the Theater a wise
and instructive Amusement. Even the Apostles did not disapprove of Plays, and
no doubt read them; for St. Paul, in his First Epistle to the Corinthians,
quotes Menander the Greek Comic Poet, and sets down his own Phrase in his own
Words, xvth Chapter, 33d Verse, Be not deceived -- Evil Communication corrupts
good Manners. Arts, Sciences, and even Trade, generally flourish with the
Theater, and, I think, Religion and Politeness, and why may not the Drama be a
great Mark of a civilized Nation? The Greeks and Romans were in their highest
Glory when the Stage flourished. I need not say, that the Theater in England
came in with the Reformation, and the long-reign'd Queen Elizabeth, whose great
Learning not only made her give it Encouragement, but Sir Roger Naunton tells
us, that great Queen translated one of the Tragedies of Euripides from the
original Greek for her own Amusement. Our immortal Shakespeare met Reward from
that illustrious Princess, and her Influence brought forth his inimitable
Genius to that high Luster, where it will shine unrivaled to after Ages, never
once clouded but in the Time of Fanaticism, and drear Darkness of Canting and
Hypocrisy. France was poring in the thick Mist, till Hardy their first Poet
showed Dramatic Light; then all Branches of Learning began to shine, and spread
their Luster, improved their Arts and Arms, and warmed their wide-spreading
Nation to Glory, when Conquest waited on their Monarch, and Victory covered him
with Laurels, till checked by the British Lion. Ambition in great Minds stands
ranked in the Line of Virtue; but I think to bound it is more truly a Virtue,
as sweet-tongu'd Waller writes:

If the successful Troublers of Mankind,
With Laurel crowned, so great Applause do find;
Shall the vexed World less Honor yield to those,
That stop their Progress, and their Rage oppose?
Next to that Power which does the Ocean awe,
Is to set Bounds, and give Ambition Law.
But let me set Bounds to myself.

As the Stage flourished in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James the
First, with such excellent Dramatic Poets, viz. Shakespeare, Ben Johnson,
Massenger, and many others, we may be well assured the Actors did not fall much
short of the Writers. Nature is the same in every Age. Tailor, Burbidge, Lowen,
Hemmings, Condel, Allen, Mason, Field, Tarlton, and others that performed in
the Plays of Shakespeare, Johnson, etc. have their public Praises in several
cotemporary Authors. Mr. Marlow in his Preface to the Jew of Malta (a Play
acted before King Charles the First and his Queen, at Whitehall, in the Year
1633.) writes, "that Mr. Mason and Mr. Tailor performed their Parts with that
Excellence, that it was beyond conceiving." Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicles
of England, at the latter End of Queen Elizabeth, after giving an Account of
the eminent Persons in that Reign, writes thus of three Actors: "Excellency in
the meanest Things deserves Remembrance. Richard Burbidge, and Edward Allen,
two such Actors, as no Age must ever look to see the like: And, to make their
Comedies complete, Richard Tarlton, for the Clown's Part, never had his Match,
nor never will have." What this Writer calls the Clown's Part, were such as
Lancelot in the Merchant of Venice, Touchstone in As you like it, the Fool in
King Lear, and Parts of the Kind, which required Persons of infinite Humor.

Mr. Thomas Heywood was not only an excellent Actor, but a very great Author,
and Dramatic Poet. I have read all his Works that are extant, and in my poor
Judgment he may be accounted the first of the second-rank'd Poets in the Reigns
of Queen Elizabeth and King James the First. I do not think it will displease
the Reader, to give him a Catalogue of his great Labors.

1. Robert Earl of Huntingdon's Downfall, 1601.

2. Robert Earl of Huntingdon's Death, 1601. These two Pieces are the History
of Robin Hood.

3. The Golden Age, 1611.

4. The Silver Age, 1613.

5. The Brazen Age, 1613.

6. A Woman killed with Kindness, 1617.

7. If you know not me, you know nobody. This is the History of Queen
Elizabeth, with a Print of that great Queen in the Front, and the Spanish
Armada destroyed by her Majesty's Fleet, 1623.

8. The Royal King, and Loyal Subject, 1627.

9. The fair Maid of the West; or, a Girl worth Gold. First Part. 1631.

10. The fair Maid. Second Part. 1631.

11. The Duchess of Suffolk.

12. The Iron Age. First Part. 1632.

13. The Iron Age. Second Part. 1632.

14. The English Traveller, 1633.

15. A Maidenhead well lost, 1634.

16. The four London 'Prentices, with the Conquest of Jerusalem, 1635.

17. A Challenge for Beauty, 1636.

18. Fair Maid of the Exchange, 1637.

19. The wise Woman of Hogsdon, 1638.

20. The Rape of Lucretia, 1638.

21. Love's Mistress, 1640.

22. Fortune by Land and Sea, 1655.

23. Lancashire Witches. The Date of this Play was wanting.

24. Edward the Fourth. In Two Parts. The late Mr. Bowman informed me, he was
very well assured by Mr. Cleveland, a Poet of the last Age, this double Play
was performed on two succeeding Nights, and had a very great Run (a Theatrical
Term).

Several modern Authors have borrowed from Mr. Heywood. I shall only mention
two; Shadwell in his Lancashire Witches, and Fielding in his Intriguing
Chambermaid, from the English Traveller; or rather Renarde the Frenchman
translated it into French from the English, and our English Privateer retook it
back again. Though it is very possible, all three might have an Eye upon the
Mostellaria of Plautus. But this is sailing a little out of my Latitude. Yet we
may be very well assured, this Poet must be in great Reputation, by the Number
and Success of his Dramatic Works, when Skakespear and Fletcher were the
reigning Monarchs of the Stage, not forgetting Ben Johnson and Massenger. And I
repeat it here again, the Stage Performers must certainly be great in those
Times, since few of our Poets have out-shone those that went before them, more
especially Shakespeare and Johnson. This last had no other Epitaph than O RARE
BEN JOHNSON! and Burbidge, the Tragedian, by way of Estimation, Exit BURBIDGE.
Mr. Richard Allen, another great Actor, founded and endowed a College This
College was first designed for the Relief and Support of six Men, six Women,
with six Children, Persons through Indigence, Misfortunes, or old Age, belonging
to the Theaters of London. But, when the Building was going forward, Mr. Allen
having left off acting, he recommended a Doorkeeper to his quondam Brother
Actors; they absolutely refused him that small Favor, which so enraged him,
that he turned his Bounty another Way. Both Parties, perhaps, to blame; but, I
believe, few censured him out of the Theaters at that Time. He afterward
increased the Number of Children to twelve, from the Age of five Years, to be
taught and maintained till 14 or 15. We may imagine the Founder no very great
Friend to Matrimony, since he left Directions, that the Governor should
continue a Bachelor, and one of his own Name; and to give place to another
Allen, should he once change his Condition. The College is a noble Building,
with a very handsome Chapel, the Altar-piece elegantly painted, with a
well-ton'd Organ; and it is the Duty of the Organist to teach the Children to
sing the proper Services of the Church. The decent Decorum is admired by all.
There is also an elegant Pleasure-Garden, with a useful Orchard and
Kitchen-Garden, all well-stock'd with the best Fruits, etc. Fish Ponds, that
yield large Quantities of Carp, Tench, Perch, and Eels. And, much to the Credit
of the Managers of this Charity, the original Estate left by the Founder is
more than trebled in Value, and they have Money in their Treasury ready for
another Purchase. I shall end this Account with what Sir Richard Baker writes
in his Chronicle of England where he closes the Reign of King James the First:
About this Time (1624.) Edward Allen, of Dulwich in Surry, founded a fair
Hospital at Dulwich, for six poor Men, six poor Women, and twelve poor Children
from the Age of four to six Years, to be there maintained and taught till the
Age of Fourteen or Sixteen, and to have a Schoolmaster, with Diet, and a
convenient Stipend. This Man may be an Example, who, having gotten his Wealth
by Stage-playing, converted it to this pious Use; not without a kind of
Reputation to the Society of Stage Players.
at Dulwich in Surry, at his own private Expense.

We have had great Generals, knowing Admirals, worthy Discoverers of new
Worlds, as well as illustrious Poets, in the two last Ages; and why may not
their cotemporary Theatrical Performers be as great in their Way? An Author,
who wrote about Forty Years past, speaks thus of Mr. Betterton: In the Tragedy
of Hamlet Prince of Denmark, Mr. Betterton performed the Part of young Hamlet.
Sir William Davenant Sir William Davenant was, by many, supposed the natural
Son of Shakespeare. He succeeded Ben Johnson as Poet-Laureat in 1637. and
obtained a Patent for a Company of Comedians from King Charles, and was
knighted by that Monarch. He was accounted a great Poet, in several Branches of
that Science: His Poem of Gondibert is esteemed a noble Poem, which he wrote in
France during his Exile with King Charles the Second. His Works are printed in
Folio 1673, which contains 17 Dramatic Pieces, besides his Poems, with his Head
crowned with Laurel. The Features seem to resemble the open Countenance of
Shakespeare, but the want of a Nose gives an odd Cast to the Face. I shall not
inquire how he came Noseless, yet give you a stale Jest upon the Occasion. Sir
William walking by Temple Bar, a Fishmonger's Boy, in watering his Fish upon
the Stall, besprinkled the Laureat; who, snuffling, loudly complained of the
Abuse. The Master begged the Knight's Pardon, and was for chastising his
Servant with some Expostulations, as well as a Cudgel. Zounds, Sir, cried the
Boy, it is very hard I must be corrected for my Cleanliness; the Gentleman blew
his Nose upon my Fish, and I was washing it off, that is all. The Jest pleased
Sir William so well, that he gave him a Piece of Money, and went away highly
delighted. Since I have given you one old Jest upon the Nose of Sir William,
I Will venture to throw in another. As he was walking along the Mews, an
importunate Beggar-woman teiz'd him for Charity, with often repeating, Heaven
bless your Eyesight! God preserve your Worship's Eye sight -- Why, what is the
Matter with my Eyesight, Woman? replied Sir William, I find no Defect there.
Ah! good Sir, I wish you never may, returned the Beggar; for should your Sight
ever fail you, you must borrow a Nose of your Neighbor to hang your Spectacles
on. His Play of the Law against Lovers is Shakespeare's Measure for Measure,
with a very little Alteration, and as little for the better. Sir William was
the Contriver of painted Scenes in our English Theaters, as well as one of the
first Introducers of singing Operas. There is a Work of this Kind, whose Title
runs thus: The Cruelty of the Spaniards in Peru, expressed by Instrumental and
Vocal Music, and by Art of Perspective in Scenes, at the Cockpit in
Drury Lane, at three in the Afternoon, 1658.
having seen Mr. Tailor, of the Blackfriars Playhouse, act this Part (who was
instructed by the Author Shakespeare), remembered him so well, that he taught Mr.
Betterton, in every Article; which, by his exact Performance, gained the Actor
Esteem and Reputation superlative to all the other Players. This Account makes
it plain Tailor must be very great in the Part, since Betterton, his Imitator,
performed it so well. And Betterton, in the Memory of many, was esteemed the
greatest Actor of his Time. Read what the great Addison writes of him, who may
be allowed a Judge of the Drama, as well as the Performers.

Such an Actor as Mr. Betterton ought to be recorded with the same Respect as
Roscius among the Romans. The greatest Orator (Tully) has thought fit to quote
his Judgment, and celebrate his Life. Roscius was the Example to all that would
form themselves into proper and winning Behavior: His Action was so well
adapted to the Sentiments he expressed, that the Youth of Rome thought they
wanted only to be virtuous to be as graceful in their Appearance as Roscius.
The Imagination took a lovely Impression of what was great and good; and they
who never thought of setting up for the Art of Imitation, became themselves
inimitable Characters. There is no human Invention so aptly calculated for the
forming a freeborn People, as that of a Theater. Tully reports, that the
celebrated Roscius used frequently to say, the Perfection of an Actor is, only
to become what he is doing. I have hardly a Notion, that any Performer of
Antiquity could surpass the Action of Mr. Betterton, in any of the Occasions in
which he has appeared on our Stage. The wonderful Agony which he appeared in,
when he examined the Circumstance of the Handkerchief in the Part of Othello;
the Mixture of Love that intrudes upon his Mind upon the innocent Answers
Desdemona makes; betrayed in his Gesture such a Variety, and Vicissitude of
Passion, as would admonish a Man to be afraid of his own Heart, and perfectly
convince him, it is to stab it, to admit that worst of Daggers, Jealousy.
Whoever reads in his Closet this admirable Scene will find, that he cannot
(except he has as warm an Imagination as Shakespeare himself) find any but dry,
incoherent, and broken Sentences. But a Reader, that has seen Betterton act it,
observes there could not be a Word added; that longer Speeches had been
unnatural, nay, impossible, in Othello's Circumstances. Mr. Rymer, the greatest
Critic of the Age he lived in, in his Dissertation on Tragedy, speaks thus on
Mr. Heart:

The Eyes of the Audience are prepossessed and charmed by his Action, before
ought of the Poet can approach their Ears; and, to the most wretched of
Characters, Heart gives a Luster which dazzles the Sight, that the Deformities
of the Poet cannot be perceived.

Now, after the Opinions of two such eminent Judges, why may we not suppose
there were as great Stage Performers in Times past, as the present, without
lessening the Merit of those that survive? If, in my simple Judgment, I allow
the present equal to the past, I cannot allow that they exceed them, no more,
perhaps, than the next Race of Theatrical Performers will excel many that now
grace the Stage. Excellency, in this Science, does not always run in the Blood,
or, like Estates, follow hereditary. They must be born Actors, as well as Poets
and Painters: Yet there are many Dabblers in all three; but, alas! how few come
to Perfection! We very rarely see Brothers or Sisters, Sons or Daughters. or
any of the relative Line (though they sometimes take up the Calling, because
one of the Race flourishes in the Theatrical Field) succeed in their Attempts.
A Monarch may give Ribbands, Titles of Honor, or add to his Peers, but no
Power but that immortal Goddess Nature can form a perfect Actor: Yet some even
of these forget their Instructress, and Faults invade them to sully their
Perfections. Every Performer on the Stage ought to take Virtue for his Guide.
Precepts from the Pulpit will not have all their Efficacy from a Monitor
without Morals. A Discourse on Sobriety, on a Sunday, would lose something of
its Intention from an Orator known to baste the Bottle about all the past
Saturday Evening till the Noon of Night, as Shakespeare says. The Blind may
hear, the Dumb and Deaf see, but every Sense must be perfect to instruct, and
be instructed. Performers, of both Sexes, ought to imitate those virtuous
Characters they represent upon the Stage; the Dignity of the Theater, then,
might emulate that of Athens. It Is not the Business brings Scandal to the
Performers, if they will take care to avoid drawing it upon themselves. I have
known the Managers of Drury Lane, and many of the rest of the Fraternity, meet
Regard, and even Respect, from Persons of the first Rank, from their proper
Behavior; and I am convinced every one, with the like Conduct would meet with
the like Treatment from People of Sense and good Breeding; but the Two-legg'd
Brutes of the Creation will be ever incorrigible: A decent Dress will become
their Station; but Pride ought to be as far distant from them, as the licensed
Instructors of Divine Institution: For if Theatrical Performers are Servants to
the Public (as an eminent Actor publicly declared), they should never attempt
to out-dress their Masters. Veluti in Speculum (behold as in a Glass), the
Motto over the Front of Drury Lane Theater, will serve both Auditors and
Actors; and, I think, carries a more instructive Meaning than the other, of
Vivitur Ingenio (we live by Wit), which only relates to the Stage. A bad
Painter is seldom copied, and Excellence is only worth Imitation; Dress beyond
Station is Pride, and Pride very often brings Self-punishment. I have known
Fiddlers and Dancing-masters wear laced Clothes, but they seldom improved any
thing but the Taylor's Bill, and as much laughed at as the Baboon I have often
seen in a laced Coat and a Bag-wig in the Parade at Bartholomew-Fair -- Yet I
have seen gold Fringe on silk Vests, with white silk Stockens, worn by the
Dancers on the Ropes at Sadlers-Wells, that have bowed and scraped in that rich
Dress, picking up Halfpence thrown down by Cobblers and Link-Boys. Such Sights
put me in mind of the painted Eggs It is the Custom of the Muscovites at
Christmas, Easter, and many other stated Festivals, to send, as a friendly
Present to their Acquaintance and Relations, painted Eggs, generally
embellished with Flowers curiously drawn, Fruits, etc. that are very often so
expensive, that the Money laid out for the painting of one would purchase a
hundred, as simple Nature produced them, and are of no farther Use than to be
looked upon. This Custom is kept up chiefly in the Holidays of Christmas, in
Commemoration of the Eastern wise Men, led by the Star to visit our Redeemer in
the Manger at Bethlehem, where they made their Presents to the Divine Infant.
These Eggs are sometimes eaten in those Days ordained, where Flesh is
sorbidden, but not till the Sun is set, or, if no Sun appears, not till
Candlelight.
of Muscovy, they don't relish the better for their Coloring, and gaudy
Outsides. Even Roscius among the Romans (though the Actors did not keep up
their Reputations equal to those of Athens) was marked out as a Pattern for the
Youth of Rome to follow in Decency of Dress, and Morals. Tully says, Cum
artifex ejusmodi sit, ut solus dignus videatur esse, qui in scena spectetur;
tum vir ejusmodi est, ut solus dignus videatur qui eo non accedat. -- So
excellent an Artist, that he seemed the only Person to adorn the Stage; and
yet, in all other respects, so complete in every Grace and Virtue, that he
seemed the only Person that should not take up with such a Profession.

Moral Virtue, and a decent Behavior, will gain Esteem from People of every
Rank, will add Weight to the Characters they represent, and even may atone for
want of Excellency.

Lessons for the Stage may be conveyed, in one respect, stronger than from the
Pulpit, if the Audience were attentive as they should be at Church: For a Play
well wrote, and well performed, where Virtue suffers, or meets its just Reward,
must have strong Force upon the Mind, where the Eye is supposed to view the
very Persons in the real Circumstances of History. What then will add to this
Imagination? Why, the Performers to be as blameless as human Nature will allow.
I remember a virtuous Actress (or one reputed so) repeating two Lines in King
Lear, at her Exit in the Third Act, Armed in my Virgin Innocence I Will fly,
My Royal Father to relieve, or die,
receive a Plaudit from the Audience, more as a Reward for her reputable
Character, than, perhaps, her Acting claimed; when a different Actress in the
same Part, more famed for her Stage-Performance than the other, at the Words
Virgin Innocence, has created a Horselaugh (no Reflection on the Audience,
since a Theatrical Term), and the Scene of generous Pity and Compassion at the
Close turned to Ridicule. Here the Audience are disconcerted, and the Reality
of the Subject before them loses much of its Force, with the Imagination
debilitated, if not turned another Way. On the other hand, indeed, if a Person
who acts Iago, be suspected to wear a Heart that way inclined, he appears
stronger in that Character, and meets with an Applause that condemns him. We
may find, by these Examples, Virtue is of some Use upon the Stage, and would be
more so, if more practiced. To give Instructions to an Actor, is a very
difficult Task; for if much is wanting, it is not worth while to give any. A
rough Diamond may be polished, but few Pebbles are worth cutting. After many
Requisites for the Stage, bad Action will even cause a good Figure to appear
awkward; and though there may be Rules for Action, yet Nature is the best
Teacher; and if an Actor of good Understanding is truly possessed with his
Character, the true Action will involuntarily occur. I remember Mrs. Porter, to
whom Nature had been niggard in Voice and Face, so great in many Parts, as Lady
Macbeth, Alicia in Jane Shore, Hermione in the Distressed Mother, and many Parts
of the Kind, that her just Action, Eloquence of Look and Gesture, moved
Astonishment! and yet I have heard her declare, she left the Action to the
Possession of the Sentiments in the Part she performed. I have known some
tolerable Actors, as to Countenance and Elocution, that have mortified both by
the Badness of Action, more especially the proper Use of their Hands: Had they
worn each in a Scarf, they had been much more tolerable, as it is the most
expressive Part in the Action of the Body, so as Shakespeare says, like an
ill-sheath'd Knife, it will most hurt its Master. I think Quintilian says, all
the Parts of the Body assist the Speaker; but the Hands speak without a Tongue,
supplicate, threaten, call, dismiss, provoke, show every Passion of the Soul.
The Hands are the general Language of Mankind, and we need no Grammar but
Nature to understand it. So by their awkward Use upon the Stage, we may turn
the Serious into Ridicule. Mr. Booth would often regret the want of Opportunity
for an Actor to continue in a graceful Attitude, which Nicolini the Italian
Singer was so masterly familiar with, between the Retornels of a Song, and
other Occasions: Yet when Mr. Booth had the least Opportunity, he showed he
only wanted it. I remember in the 5th Act of Othello, while he is listening to
Emilia's speaking to Desdemona, after she is supposed to be strangled, he
suited his Attitude and Countenance to the Circumstances of the Scene, that I
have not Art to describe, but the treble repeated Applauses of the Audience,
while he was silent, spoke such high Approbation, that Miss Santlow (afterward
Mrs. Booth) used to say, She thought the Audience were pleased poor Desdemona
was strangled out of the Way

Of all the various Passions of Grief, a manly Sorrow is the most difficult to
express. And of all the Actors I have ever yet seen, I must be pardoned if I
give the Preference to Mr. Wilks. No Heart, that was capable of being touched,
but must have sympathiz'd at his Manner of speaking one Line in the Orphan to
Monimia, in the Fifth Act.

My fatal Love, alas! has ruined thee!
And yet I have heard it spoke when it has given me no more Concern, than if a
Voice had pierced my Ear with Kettles or Pots to mend! Old Brass to mend!
If moving the Passions is a great Art in Acting, I think Mr. Wilks was Master
of that Art. There was no avoiding feeling his Distress in another Line, when
he performed the Part of the Royal Merchant in the Beggars Bush, a Comedy of
Fletcher's. The Character is noted for beneficent Charity; and, when his
flintyhearted Creditors had just pressed him for Payment, Clause his old
Beadsman (though his Father in Disguise) comes as if to beg his usual Charity,
when the Merchant replies with such a Tone that sinks into the Soul:

Clause, I pray thee leave me; for, by my Troth, I have nothing now to give
thee.

Comparison is the true Touchstone of Excellence, and brightened Brass by a
false Light might be taken for Gold, if not tried.

In the 4th Act of Macbeth, when he is told by Lenox of the Loss of his Wife
and Children, his Mixture of Sorrow and manly Grief at He has no Children!
Butcher! If he had,
The Thought of them would sure have stirred Remorse!
drew Tears from almost every Eye, when if he had blubbered like a Schoolboy
whipped, the touching Scene would have raised Laughter, in the place of Grief.
And yet some particular People will not allow Mr. Wilks's Excellence to stand
in Tragedy. If, indeed, he had attempted the Parts of Cato, Lear, Macbeth,
Henry the VIIIth, Melantius, and a countless Catalogue of others in the same
Class, I might have joined in their Opinion; but while there is a Juba, an
Edgar, Macduff, Buckingham, and Amintor, in the same Plays, I don't desire to
see a better Performer in that Cast of Playing than Mr. Wilks: In Hamlet he
pleased all the Audience; and if the best Judges laughed at his Parts in
Comedy, I cannot conceive they have shed more Tears since his much-lamented
Death, at any of the abovementioned Plays. I remember a few Years ago a
Dispute arose between Two Theatrical Gentlemen upon this Stage, concerning the
Propriety of a particular Speech; the one, to enforce his Argument, told the
other, he never heard it spoke otherwise on the English Stage. Pho, replied the
other Disputant, that was the old Way of Acting! A truly great Actor, that
stood by, replied, Learn the old Way first, and when you are perfect, then
begin a new one, if you can find it out: Art may invent Fashions in our Dress;
but Nature is the same as the Habits of the Turks, which they have never yet
altered. The Clothes of the first Ottoman Prince is the Model of the Emperor
that now reigns, and, as the divine Pope paints the unalterable Goddess,

Unerring Nature, still divinely bright,
One clear, unchanged, and universal Light;
Life, Force, and Beauty, must to all impart,
At once, the Source, and End, and Test of Art.
I have known many Actors with excellent Voices; so I have often known common
Ballad-singers in the Streets with strong Lungs and Voices; but, for want of a
Manner with Judgment, murder an excellent Song, and yet extort Praise from
their Auditors. A Sowgelder's Horn will pierce the Ear, and alarm all the Dogs
in the Parish; but I believe most People would rather hear a Trumpet. The
Voice, like an Instrument of Music, must be put in Tune, and, if managed by a
skilful Actor, whose Mind feels the Passions, will send out the proper Tone,
when a Bungler in Music does but harshly grate upon the Ear. But who is
ignorant of this? If this is the Disease of the Stage, where is the Remedy? It
must certainly be in the Hands of the Manager, though no very easy Task. The
Circumstances of a Theater very often oblige the Directors to thrust Persons
into Characters too weak to support the Weight of them: Vanity is blended in
most human Compositions, and the Stage is seldom free from it; therefore, when
an Actor is once in Possession of a Part (Male or Female), they think it a very
great Hardship to give it up to a better Performer. There are a much larger
Number of common Soldiers in an Army than commanding Officers, and we have some
few Instances of a Soldier rising to Preferment by Merit, whilst others grow
gray with a Musket upon their Shoulders; and yet, at some Time or other, a
Soldier may do the Duty of a Corporal, if he is indisposed, or out of the Way:
But that Exigence does not give him a Title to the Post. I remember an Actor
was taken into the Theater in Drury Lane, for playing the Part of Caesar Borgia
in a private Play; and when Mr. Booth was studying the Part, he thought it the
greatest Oppression (as he called it) that could be thrown upon him: Nay, after
Mr. Booth had performed the Part, with universal Applause, several successive
Nights, this Person said, nay, bound it with an Oath, that Booth did not know
how to speak a single Line: Yet this Person was a Man of Sense and Learning.
But there are more Requisites to make a finished Actor: Therefore, as they do
not always judge heartily for themselves, it is requisite they should have one
of unbiased and superior Knowledge to judge for them. When such Actors
abovementioned take Parts, as they thrust themselves into for their Benefits,
as is too often the Case (and I think ought not to be allowed), it proves, as
Shakespeare says,

-- Like a Player,
Bellowing his Passion, till he break the Spring,
And his racked Voice jar to the Audience.
There are too many Performers, of both Sexes, that are fond of choosing
capital Parts for their Benefits, that sit upon them -- Like a Giant's Robe
Upon a dwarfish Thief:
And, at the same Time, excuse themselves from Rehearsals (that should prepare
them to act with some Decency, at least), to cultivate their Interest; and,
when they come to perform at Night, only take Shame to themselves, though they
often disconcert others; and may truly say,

Like a dull Actor, now I have forgot
My Part, and stop even to a full Disgrace.
That Is villainous, and shows a most pitiful Ambition in the Fool that uses it.
SHAK.
The noble Gift, of Playing well, is not given to all that play: Yet as, in
building of Houses, there must be provided many Hands, even to the carrying the
Mortar; a Morter-carrier must be had, as well as the rest of the Hands in the
Work: All are not equal to every Part in the Building, no more than every Actor
is fit for every Part. If they attempt to wade out of their Depths, they are in
great Danger of drowning; and, as our immortal Poet writes,

As in a Theater the Eyes of Men,
After a well-grac'd Actor leaves the Stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next;
Will think his Prattle to be tedious.
Yet I have known many Persons belonging to a Theater, not eminent in any
superior Part, never offend, through their private Characters in Life. A modest
Behavior is commendable in every Station, but much more observed in Persons of
a public Profession, where the Eyes of Thousands are upon them. Confidence,
Pride, and Vanity, will draw down Contempt and Ridicule from Superiors, with
Disregard from all.

Of all the Causes which conspire to blind
Man's erring Judgment, and misguide the Mind;
What the weak Heart, with strongest Bias, rules,
Is Pride, the never-failing Vice of Fools. POPE.
Humility, Affability, and Goodnature, will claim Regard from all Ranks; and
if any Stains are thrown upon the Profession, such Qualifications will wipe
them off: Yet I think there are no Spots but what they themselves throw upon
it. We are apt, even in strange Company, to out with some Theatrical Quotation,
that seldom fails of declaring what Business we follow. What need a Tailor talk
of his Yard and Sheers, a Smith of his Forge, or a Brewer of his Grains? Let
the Buskin and Sock be left in the Theater. I know an eminent Actor, invited to
dine in a mixed Company of both Sexes, of Condition: When the Dinner seemed a
little tedious, before it made its Entrance, a Gentleman, one of the Invited,
starts up, and cried, Zounds, Mr. --, give us the Ghost in Hamlet, by way of
Grace! The Master of the House replied, there was no Meat he could give him was
worth one Speech; besides, he did not invite Mr. -- to pay for his Dinner that
Way. It was only in Retaliation for the Supper he gave him the Night before, on
the Stage, where no Cook but himself could dress such a Dish of black Broth
(meaning Othello). So, by your Rule of Courtesy, if I had invited Fausan, I
should have desired him to dance the Buffoon before Dinner. This was the Height
of Civility to one, and a sufficient Rebuke to the other. The Fop (for he was
no less), to plead his Excuse, told the Company, he had been many Times with
several Actors, who took as much Pleasure to speak Speeches, as he to hear
them; and he did not doubt but they were People of great Judgment; for they
generally owned, other Performers did not act so well as themselves. Yes,
replied the Master of the House, Self-praise is always to be believed; yet I
have known a Sign-painter criticize upon Raphael. Wit will be often
entertaining, but a small Portion of one's own (if we had it) is better than a
Cart-load of other Peoples: Yet Quotations from the Drama may show some
Judgment, when properly applied, and not too often. The Author of a Comedy,
called The Play's the Plot, shows the Strolling Players, not improperly, by
their Style.

It is something surprising to me, that where Vice, in every Shape, with Folly,
is exposed daily to their View, Performers on the Stage should have any Faults,
or, at least, Art enough to disguise them so well, that few should find them
out. To hide the Passions Nature has sown in the Seeds of the human Race, will
prevent their Growth, and, in Time, destroy them. May we not learn Virtue, and
avoid Vice, by the instructive Lessons of the Drama? What premeditated Murderer
would not feel Compunction, or, perhaps, Repentance, at the Speech of
Torrismond to the Queen in the Spanish Friar, when she has given Commission to
the Murder of the good King Sancho?

Think, timely think, on the last dreadful Day!
How will you tremble there to stand exposed,
And foremost in the Rank of guilty Ghosts,
That must be doomed for Murder! Think on Murder!
That Troop is placed apart from common Crimes:
The Damned themselves start wide, and shun that Band,
As far more black, and more forlorn, than they.
The Queen's Answer.

It Is terrible! it shakes! it staggers me!
I knew this Truth, but I repelled the Thought.
Sure there is none but fears a future State:
And when the most obdurate swear they do not,
Their trembling Hearts belie their boasting Tongues.
We may find, by this last Speech, the former had its desired Effect; since the
Queen repented her impious Intentions.

In Rule a Wife we have another, upon the crying Sin of Adultery, which I shall
set down as another Memento.

The Duke of Modena tries all his Arts to debauch Margarita, the Wife of Leon,
a Woman of a vicious Inclination, who consented to marry Leon merely as a Tool,
that she might indulge her Passions; but by the Spirit and Conduct of her
Husband was reclaimed. When the Duke, by the Appointment of the worthy Leon,
permits their meeting, after a ridiculous Fright from a Drunkard in the Cellar,
which the Duke takes for a Spirit, he cries,

O! I am most miserable!
Margarita, the Wife, answers,

You are, indeed!
And, like a foolish Thing, have made yourself so.
Could not your own Discretion tell ye, Sir,
When I was married, I was none of yours?
Your Eyes were then commanded to look off me,
And I now stand in a Circle, and secure.
Mark me but this, and then, Sir, be most miserable,
It Is Sacrilege to violate a Wedlock:
You rob two Temples, make yourself twice guilty;
You ruin here is, and spot her noble Husband's.
We might go through the sacred Decalogue, with the Assistance of those Flowers
in the spacious Fields of Poetry.

The Stage (says the Female Spectator), by its Institution, is the School of
Virtue, and the Scourge of Vice; and when either of these noble Purposes is
defeated, it is no Wonder that Persons of true Sense and Honor choose to
absent themselves, and oblige their Families to do so too. So reasonable an
Entertainment, as the Drama in its Purity, must be, in some sort, a Promoter to
Virtue; therefore every Manager of a Theater should make it his Study to
exhibit no other Pieces but what aim to that End; and, by Degrees, throw off
the looser Drama, and constitute, in its place, those that the wisest, and most
virtuous, need not be ashamed to partake of the innocent Amusement. I do not
pretend to set up for a Monitor; but every Stage Performer would find his
Account in reforming the Stage, as well as themselves. I do not mean this
Admonition to any particular Theater, but all in general, at Home and Abroad;
for our Plantations in America have been voluntarily visited by some
Itinerants; Jamaica, in particular. I had an Account, from a Gentleman who was
possessed of a large Estate in the Island, that a Company, in the Year 1733.
came there, and cleared a large Sum of Money; where they might have made
moderate Fortunes, if they had not been too busy with the Growth of the
Country. They received 370 Pistoles the first Night, to the Beggars Opera; but
within the Space of two Months they buried their third Polly, and two of their
Men. The Gentlemen of the Island, for some Time, took their Turns upon the
Stage, to keep up the Diversion; but this did not hold long; for, in two Months
more, there were but one old Man, a Boy, and a Woman of the Company, left: The
rest died, either with the Country-Distemper The Country Distempers are, the
Dry-gripes, and Tenesmus, which generally ends in a Sanguinary Flux: Most
New-comers, for want of a proper Regimen, fall into it. The Dry-gripes brings a
final Dissolution in two Days, if no Remedy keeps it back. The other Distemper,
indeed, is slower in its Execution and Cure. Sir Hans Sloane tells us, the
Badness of the Water contributed to all these Distempers, which is brackish
near the Seacoasts: But swallowing large Draughts of Rum Punch, with the fatal
Dew that falls in the Night, when the Body is carelessly exposed, heated with
drinking, is the chief Cause. Place any woollen Garment exposed to the noxious
Vapors of the Night, and it will imbibe double its Weight of Dew before
Sunrise. Those that escape the Seasoning, as they term it, seldom feel the
fatal Effects of it afterward. This is more dangerous on the Seacoasts of the
Island; the mid Parts are much more salubrious, both as to Air and Water.
, or the common Beverage of the Place, the noble Spirit of Rumpunch, which is
generally fatal to New-comers. The shattered Remains, with upwards of 2000
Pistoles in Bank, embarked for Carolina, to join another Company at
Charlestown, but were cast away in the Voyage. Had the Company been more blessed
with the Virtue of Sobriety, etc. they might, perhaps, have lived to carry home
the Liberality of those generous Islanders.

Even the Wicked have some Regard to Virtue, are often awed by Persons that are
reputed to wear that amiable Character. Persons on the Stage, which is too
liable to Insults, escape them there, unless, as in a Crowd of Quarrellers,
where a Looker on may meet with an accidental Stroke. But these Theatrical
Squabbles are too often ungenerous from the Audience, or, I should say, from a
small Part of the Audience; for a Dozen, when they are pleased to take it into
their Heads, shall disturb the Whole, and disconcert the best Actors in the
World. Is not this a gross Affront upon the rest? What Right have I to rob my
Neighbor of his Money, and Satisfaction? He pays the Price to be entertained
for two or three Hours, and, perhaps, would be as well contented with a
well-acted Play, as a Dinner. Now, if I should come to you, Sir, be you who you
will, while you are sat down to your Meal at a Tavern, turn the Drawers down
Stairs, throw your Provision about, prevent your eating your Dinner with any
Satisfaction; I should think you a very good-natured Gentleman, if you only
thrust me out of your Room; because I should imagine I deserved worse Treatment.

I remember, above twenty Years past, I was one of the Audience, at a new Play:
Before me sat a Sea-Officer, with whom I had some Acquaintance; on each Hand of
him a Couple of Sparks, both prepared with their offensive Instruments vulgarly
termed Cat-calls, which they were often tuning, before the Play began. The
Officer did not take any Notice of them till the Curtain drew up; but when they
continued their Sow-gelder's Music (as he unpolitely called it), he begged they
would not prevent his hearing the Actors, though they might not care whether they
heard, or no; but they took little Notice of his civil Request, which he
repeated again and again, to no Purpose: But, at last, one of them condescended
to tell him, If he did not like it, he might let it alone. Why, really, replied
the Sailor, I do not like it, and would have you let your Noise alone; I have
paid my Money to see and hear the Play, and your ridiculous Noise not only
hinders me, but a great many other People that are here, I believe, with the
same Design: Now if you prevent us, you rob us of our Money, and our Time;
therefore I entreat you, as you look like Gentlemen, to behave as such. One of
them seemed mollified, and put his Whistle in his Pocket; but the other was
incorrigible. The blunt Tar made him one Speech more. Sir, said he, I advise
you, once more, to follow the Example of this Gentleman, and put up your Pipe.
But the Piper sneer'd in his Face, and clapped his troublesome Instrument to his
Mouth, with Cheeks swelled out like a Trumpeter, to give it a redoubled, and
louder Noise; but, like the broken Crow of a Cock in a Fright, the Squeak was
stopped in the Middle by a Blow from the Officer, which he gave him with so
strong a Will, that his Child's Trumpet was struck through his Cheek, and his
Companion led him out to a Surgeon; so that we had more Room, and less Noise;
and not one that saw or heard the Affair, but what were well pleased with his
Treatment; and, notwithstanding his great Blustering, he never thought it worth
his while to call upon the Officer, though he knew where to find him. It is
certainly a Mark of Cowardice to insult in public Company, or strike a Man who
has his Hands bound; and yet I have known a poor Actor pelted by Puppies, that
would run away at the Sight of a Stage-Foil, that has neither Edge or Point.

As Cheats to play with those still aim,
That do not understand the Game;
So Cowards never use their Might,
But against those that must not fight. Hud.
Actors in France meet with Respect (I mean if they will endeavor to deserve
it, which in my Opinion they may easily do); and are acceptable in the Company
of Rank and Figure in that polite Nation; and though the Clergy scrupled to give
Moliere Moliere, the great Comic Poet of France, was esteemed an excellent
Actor. He died in performing the Part of the Hypochondriac in a Comedy of his
own Writeing, called Le Malade Imaginaire, which is Part of a Comedy in English
called the Mother-in-law) on the 17th of February, 1679, in his grand
Climacteric. The Archbishop of Paris would not allow his Body to be inhum'd in
consecrated Ground, which the King being informed of, sent for the Archbishop,
and expostulated with him; but he was an obstinate Churchman, and would not
willingly condescend to his Majesty's Persuasions. The King, finding him
unwilling to comply, desired to know how many Feet deep the Holy Ground
reached? The Bishop replied, About eight. Well, replied the King, I find there
is no getting the better of your Scruples; therefore let his Grave be dug
twelve Feet, that is four below your consecrated Ground, and let them bury him
there. The Archbishop was obliged to comply; for Lewis the XIVth would be
obeyed. Moliere left behind him thirty-two Dramatic Pieces, which are held by
the French in the highest Esteem. A French Gentleman, in giving me his Opinion
of this excellent Author, told me Moliere composed 37 Pieces for the Stage; and
though he had left the World twice that Number of Years, all the Dramatic Writers
of the French Nation had not produced twice as many Comedies equal to his. Most
of his Comedies have given a Foundation to our English Dramatic Writers; but
none have met with more Success than the Miser, and the Mock-Doctor, by Mr.
Fielding.
the Rites of the Church at his Death, yet Lewis the XIVth often conversed with
him in his Closet, as well as in Public.

I shall not say much more on this Subject, and it may be, I have said too much
already. For I am convinced, Nil sub sole novum, no not even in Fashions; for
what we receive for new, are only the old ones taking their Course over again.
The Stage is the Epitome of the great World, as Boileau has said long ago.

Le monde a mon avis est comme une Grand Theater, etc.
The World, in my Opinion, is a Stage,
Where, in deceiving others, all engage:
Hence the discerning Eye can often scan
The Player widely differing from the Man:
The Blockhead, prating from another's Book,
The Scholar apes with supercilious Look;
And the sly Knave, by putting Virtue on,
Deceives the Virtuous till they are undone.
It Is very possible Boileau might have Shakespeare in view, in these Lines, from
that of Antonio's Speech in the first Act of the Merchant of Venice; I hold
this World but as a World, Gratiano,
A Stage, where every Man must play his Part, etc.
The French have borrowed from us, as well as we have from them. Le Comte d'
Essex is not only planned upon Banks's Earl of Essex, but has many Speeches for
several Pages together translated. The best modern Tragic Poet France has
produced since Corneille and Racine (Monsieur This noted Author, about twenty
Years past, resided in London. His Acquaintance with the Laureat brought him
frequently to the Theater, where (he confessed) he improved in the English
Orthography more in a Week, than he should otherwise have done by labored
Study in a Month. I furnished him every Evening with the Play of the Night,
which he took with him into the Orchestre (his accustomed Seat): In four or
five Months, he not only conversed in elegant English, but wrote it with exact
Propriety. In time, he wore off the Prejudice he first conceived at the
Catastrophe of our English Tragedy, the Custom of killing upon the Stage never
having been introduced on the French Theater, till the Zara of this Author,
which he planned from Shakespeare's Othello. The last Speech of Osmin the
Emperor (after he has stabbed Zara) which he ends by killing himself, is to the
same Purpose with Othello's, and the same Sentiments. His Attempt answered his
Wish, for Zaire in Paris had above fifty successive crowded Audiences. The
French opened their Senses to the true Fire of our English Drama, where they
discovered the Spirit of Liberty, and, for the first time, showed that Monarchs
had no Right from Heaven to enslave their Subjects, and that God-like Liberty
was a Gift from Power Almighty. The Freedom of his Pen gave Disgust to People
in Power, and their Resentment occasioned his Banishment from Paris. Shortly
after, he made himself a voluntary Exile, where his Wit gains him many
Admirers, and his good Sense and Wisdom links them in the Lands of Friendship.
Voltaire), has in Oedipus followed our English Play of that Name, and ends his
third Act with a verbal Translation from Not. Lee.

To you, just Gods, I make my last Appeal:
Or clear my Virtues, or my Crimes reveal, etc.
His Zaire looks after Othello in its Jealousy, and all the rest of his Plays
seem to be of English Extraction.

Now let us leave Greece, Rome, France, Britain, and the rest of the World, and
retire to this Kingdom, where no Snake in the Grass will rise to bite the
unwary Traveller, no Blind-worm or Adder to hiss us into Fears, Viper or Toad
to molest our Eyes, or noisome Spider to spread her Venom, which, according to
some of the ancient Irish Bards, were banished the Island many Ages before St.
Patric The Irish History informs us, that Prince Gadelus (I think of the
Milesian Race) in his Travels visited Pharaoh King of Egypt, fell in Love with
Scota the King's Daughter, and married her. This Gadelus or Gadel (for the
Royal Records of Tarah call him by both Names, as I am informed) in Egypt was
stung by a Serpent as he lay asleep, and was healed by the Prophet Moses. The
Irish is thus elegantly translated by a native Bard.

The hissing Serpent, eager for his Prey,
Ascends the Couch where sleeping Gadel lay:
In winding Mazes there himself he rolled,
And leaped upon him with a dreadful Fold,
And sheek his forked Tongue, and then around
His Neck he twists, and gave a deadly Wound.
The subtle Poison spreads through every Vein;
No Art, no Juice of Herbs, can ease the Pain;
Till Moses, with his never-failing Wand,
Touched the raw Wound, which healed at his Command.
When Gadelus, with his Wife Scota (from this Princess Ireland was first called
Scota) and his Followers, were leaving Egypt to settle some new Colony, the
following Prophecy was declared by Moses, translated by the same elegant Hand.

The Holy Prophet was inspired, to see
Into Events of dark Futurity:
And said, For thee, young Prince, has Heaven in store
Blessings, that Mortals never enjoyed before:
For wheresoe'er the Royal Line shall come,
Fruitful shall be their Land, and safe their Home;
No poisonous Snake or Serpent shall deface
The Beauty of thy Fields, or taint thy Grass;
No noisome Reptile, with envenomed Teeth,
Shall ever swell that Land, or be the Cause of Death:
But Innocence and Arts shall flourish there,
And Learning in its lovely Shapes appear;
The Poets there shall in their Songs proclaim
Thy glorious Acts, and never-dying Name.
Our English Historians mention the Bards of ancient Britain, but we cannot
find any of their Productions extant; when we are assured there are many Irish
Historians and Poets still to be found in Ireland, as well as England (more
especially in the Library of the Duke of Chandos) preserved even from the
Depredations of the Danes, Destroyers that were utter Enemies to Science and
Learning.


.

This Kingdom of Ireland is one of the last in Europe where established
Theaters were erected; yet I am assured one of the first, whose Bards or Poets
have celebrated in Verse the illustrious Actions of their Monarchs, nor any
Nation in the World, where Poetry and Poets were in such high Esteem. Every
ancient and noble Family had one in their Household, and their Kings their Poet
Laureats, as we have in England, but long, long before the English invaded
Ireland. The Poets had their Seats in their great assembled Triennial Councils,
which you may find by the following Lines translated from the original Irish by
the same Hand.

Once in three Years the great Convention sat,
And for the public Happiness debate.
The King was seated on a Royal Throne,
And on his Face majestic Greatness shone.
A Monarch for heroic Deeds designed
(For noble Acts become a noble Mind):
Around him, summoned by his strict Command,
The Peers, the Priests, and Commons of the Land:
The Bards, or POETS, are indulged a Place,
And Men of Learning the Assembly grace.
Here Love and Union every Look confessed,
And Joy and Friendship beat in every Breast.
Justice, by nothing biased or inclined,
Is deaf to Pity, to Temptation blind;
For here with stern and steady Rule she sways,
And flagrant Crimes with certain Vengeance pays;
Though just, yet so indulgently severe,
Like Heaven, she pities those she cannot spare.
A few Lines more of the same Author, and same Translator, will tell you the
Poet Laureat's Business at Court; for he was one of the ten Officers that
attended the Kings of Ireland.

A Poet to applaud, or boldly blame,
And justly to give Infamy or Fame:
For without him the freshest Laurels fade,
And Vice to dark Oblivion is betrayed.
By these Lines we may gather, that their Poets were their Historians; and it
may be supposed, if they had thought of the Drama, we might have had some
elegant Tragedies handed down to us. But to proceed.

Mr. Ogilby the Master of the Revels in this Kingdom (who had it from proper
Authority) informed Mr. Ashbury, that Plays had been often acted in the Castle
of Dublin when Blount, Lord Mountjoy, was Lord Lieutenant here in the latter
End of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. And Mr. Ashbury saw a Bill for Wax Tapers,
dated the 7 th Day of September, 1601. (Queen Elizabeth's Birthday) for the
Play of The Play of Gorboduc was written by the Right Honorable Thomas
Sackville Lord Buckhurst, afterward created Earl of Dorset in the first Year
of King James the First's Reign. This Dramatic Piece was accounted the best of
its Kind at the Time it was wrote; it was first published under the Title of
Ferrex and Porrex in 1582. and 1590. reprinted under the Title of Gorboduc.
This was a favorite Play of Queen Elizabeth's, as may be supposed by her
seeing it twice acted; first, by the Gentlemen of the Inner Temple, and
afterward by the Children of her Majesty's Revels. Mr. Spence, Professor of
Poetry in the University of Oxford, has reprinted this Play about nine Years
ago, and dedicated it to the Earl of Middlesex, Son to his Grace the Duke of
Dorset, descended from this Author.
Gorboduc done at the Castle, one-and-twenty Shillings and two Groats. But it is
to be supposed they were Gentlemen of the Court that were the Actors on this
Occasion.

I cannot find any established Theater in Dublin till the Year 1635. when the
Earl of Strafford was Lord Lieutenant of this Kingdom, in the tenth Year of the
Reign of King Charles the First, John Ogilby, Esquire then Master of the Revels,
under the Title of Historiographer to his Majesty, and Master of the Revels in
the Kingdom of Ireland, and I believe the first that wore the last Title. This
Theater was built by his Directions in Warberg-Street, where the Company
continued to act, till the unhappy Rebellion broke out in the Year 1641 Henry
Burnel, Esquire a Gentleman of Ireland, wrote a Play called Landgartha, a
Tragi-Comedy, acted at the New Theater in Dublin, 1641. with very great
Applause (so says the Title); but there are no Actors Names printed in the
Drama. The Prologue was spoken by an Amazon, armed with a Battle-ax, to bespeak
the Favor of the Audience. The Plot is taken from the Danish History of Saxo
Grammaticus. This Play was the last that was performed on the Theater in
Warberg-street before the Rebellion broke out, which was discovered by Mr. Owen
O Connolly but the Night before the Execution, which prevented the City of
Dublin being seized on the 22d of October 1641. as intended; but it was too
late to give Notice to the rest of the Kingdom, which felt the fatal Effect of
the Rebellion.
. The Theater was then shut up, by Order of the Lords Justices, signed William
Parsons, and John Borlace. We do not find any mention of a Theater in Dublin,
till the Year after the Restoration 1661. which was built on the Spot where the
Theater now stands in Orange-street, commonly called Smock-alley; how it came
by the last Name, may be easily guessed.

We find in the Year 1662. Pompey, a Tragedy acted at the Theater in Dublin,
translated from the French of Corneille: It is wrote in Verse by Mrs. Catharine
Phillips (the famed Orinda) termed by her cotemporary Poets the English Sappho.
This Lady wrote another Play called Horace, taken from the same French Author,
but neither of them played in England, till after her Death, which fell out in
the Year 1664. in the 31st Year of her Age, of the Smallpox. From this we may
gather that she resided in Ireland, since both her Plays were acted in this
Kingdom some Years before they were performed in England.

The Theater in Smock-Alley was so badly built, that in the Year 1671. some
Part of it sell down, when two were killed, and several sorely maimed. We can
give little Account of the Theater here from this Time till after the
Revolution; all that can be given will be noted in the Life of Joseph Ashbury,
Esquire Playing was discontinued during the Troubles between King William and James
the Second; but when quiet Peace was restored, the Theater opened again with
Othello Moor of Venice; the Part of Othello, by Mr. Wilks (See more of this in
the Memoirs of that excellent Player). This Play was acted by Officers mostly
about the Castle, Mr. Ashbury Iago only, for the Company was not formed till
three Months after, when they began again with Othello, which was on March 23.
1691-2. the Day of proclaiming the End of the Irish War. The Company played on
with Success many Years, and I find by the Cast of Sir George Etheridge's three
Comedies, there has not been a better in all its Branches since, which I shall
set down in proper Order, that the Reader may judge for himself. The Cast of
these three Plays I had from the late well-received Comedian, Thomas Griffith,
Esquire

The Comical Revenge; or, Love in a Tub.
Lord Bevil by Mr. Schoolding Lord Beaufort by Mr. Buckley Colonel Bruce by Mr.
Booth Louis by Mr. Keen Sir Frederic Frolic by Mr. Wilks Dufoy by Mr. Bowen
Sir Nicolas Cully by Mr. Norris Wheedle by Mr. Estcourt Palmer by Mr. Trefusis
Graciana by Mrs. Knightly Aurelia by Mrs. Ashbury Mrs. Rich by Mrs. Hook
Laetitia by Mrs. Harrison Mrs. Grace by Mrs. Martin Jenny by Mrs. Schoolding


She Would if she Could.
Sir Oliver Cockwood by Mr. Norris Sir Joscelin Jolly by Mr. Estcourt Mr.
Courtal by Mr. Wilks Mr. Freeman by Mr. Booth Mr. Rakehell by Mr. Griffith
Thomas by Mr. Trefusis


Lady Cockwood by Mrs. Smith Ariana by Mrs. Schoolding Gatty by Mrs. Hook Mrs.
Sentry by Mrs. Ashbury Mrs. Gazet by Mrs. Harrison Mrs. Trinket by Mrs. Martin


The Man of Mode; Or, Sir Fopling Flutter.
Dorimant by Mr. Wilks Medley by Mr. Booth Old Bellair by Mr. Estcourt Young
Bellair by Mr. Elliot Sir Fopling Flutter by Mr. Griffith Shoemaker by Mr.
Bowen Handy by Mr. Norris Parson by Mr. Trefusis


Lady Townley by Mrs. Smith Loveit by Mrs. Knightly Belinda by Mrs. Schoolding
Emilia by Mrs. Elliot Lady Woodvil by Mrs. Martin Harriet by Mrs. Ashbury Pert
by Mrs. Hook Busy by Mrs. Harrison Orange-Woman by Mrs. Cross


Here we may see Messieurs Ashbury, Wilks, Booth, Keen, Estcourt, Norris,
Griffith, Bowen, Cross, and Trefusis, on one Stage at the same Time in Dublin,
most of them eminently great in their different Way of acting. For the Women, I
know little of any but Mrs. Ashbury; yet I have been informed by Mr. Wilks,
that Mrs. Knightly, Mrs. Hook, and Mrs. Smith, were very good Actresses in
their different Parts. Mrs. Ashbury is taken Notice of in the Memoirs of her
Husband. I will put down the Cast of three Plays more in Year 1715. when I was
first in this Kingdom, and shall begin with

Timon of Athens; or, the Man-Hater.
Timon by Mr. Tho. Elrington Alcibiades by Mr. Evans Apemantus by Mr. Ashbury
Nicias by Mr. Fr. Elrington Phaeax by Mr. Thurmond Aelius by Mr. Trefusis Cleon
by Mr. Quin Isidore by Mr. Hall Thrasillus by Mr. Daugharty Mr. Daugharty was
found dead, supposed by some by a Fall down the Stairs of a Cellar; while
others imagine he was murdered by a Watchman with his Watch-Bill, by a Cut in
his Skull; but the Murderer was never found out.
Demetrius by Mr. Leigh Poet by Mr. Griffith Painter by Mr. Oats Jeweller by
Mr. Bowman Musician by Mr. Hallam


Those with this Mark were of the former Company.
Evandra by Mrs. Thurmond Melissa by Mrs. Wilkins Chloe by Mrs. Haywood Mrs.
Haywoo has made herself eminent to the polite World by her Writings; she is
still alive. Her numerous Novels will be ever esteemed by Lovers of that Sort
of Amusement. She is likewise Authoress of three Dramatic Pieces. 1st, The Fair
Captive, a Tragedy. 2d, Wife to be Let, a Comedy. Mrs. Haywood performed the
capital Part in this Play. 3d, Frederic Duke of Brunswick, a Tragedy. She also
joined with Mr. Hatchet, in making Songs to Mr. Fielding's Tom Thumb, which
were composed by the ingenious Mr. Frederic Lamp, and performed often with the
Title of the Opera of Operas. As the Pen is her chief Means of Subsistence, the
World may find many Books of her Writing, though none have met with more Success
than her Novels, more particularly her Love in Excess, etc. Her Dramatic Works
have all died in their first visiting the World, being exhibited in very sickly
Seasons for Poetry. Mr. Pope has taken her for his Goddess of Dulaess in his
Dunciad; but she need not blush in such good Company.
Thais by Miss Wilson Phrinia by Miss Schoolding Miss Schoolding was married to
Monsieur Moreau, a celebrated Stage-Dancer in this Kingdom.



TAMERLANE.
Tamerlane by Mr. Ashbury Bajazet by Mr. Tho. Elrington Axalla by Mr. Leigh
Moneses by Mr. Evans Prince of Tanais by Mr. Quin Mr. Quin was then a Youth.
Omar by Mr. Hall Haly by Mrs. Fitzgerald Mrs. Fitzgerald, whose Maiden Name
was Swan, generally played the Part of a young Man.
Stratocles by Mr. Oats Dervise by Mr. F. Elrington Mirvan by Mr. Minns Zama
by Mr. Boman


Arpasia by Mrs. Thurmond Selima by Miss Wilson


The Committee; or, the Faithful Irishman.

Colonel Careless by Mr. Ashbury Colonel Blunt by Mr. T. Elrington Lieutenant
Story by Mr. Evans Mr. Day by Mr. F. Elrington Abel by Mr. Quin Obadiah by Mr.
Trefusis Teague by Mr. Griffith 1st Committee-man by Mr. Hall 2d Committee-man
by Mr. Minns 3d Committee-man by Mr. Bowman Bookseller by Mr. Hallam Bailiff by
Mr. Kendall


Mrs. Day by Mrs. Martin Mrs. Martin was the original Mrs. Peachum, and Diana
Trapes, in the Beggar's Opera.
Arabella by Mrs. Ashbury Ruth by Mrs. Thurmond Mrs. Chat by Miss Schoolding


Distinguished Characters in Bills were not in Fashion, at the Time these Plays
were performed; they were printed in Order according to the Drama as they
stood, not regarding the Merit of the Actor. As for Example, in Macbeth, Duncan
King of Scotland appeared first in the Bill, though acted by an insignificant
Person; and so every other Actor appeared according to his Dramatic Dignity,
all of the same-siz'd Letter. But latterly, I can assure my Readers, I have
found it a difficult Task to please some Ladies, as well as Gentlemen, because
I could not find Letters large enough to please them; and some were so very
fond of Elbow-room, that they would have shoved every body out but themselves,
as if one Person was to do all, and have the Merit of all, like Generals of an
Army; such a Victory was gained by such a King, and such a Prince, while the
other Officers and Soldiers are forgot. But as Trim tells us in the Funeral,
or, Grief A-la-mode, 50,000 of such Rascals as these will make an Alexander. I
shall leave this last Quarter of a Hundred of Years to the Memory of others,
that I may the sooner come to the Conclusion of my little History, and fall
upon the Memoirs. I have told you the first Theater was built in 1635. and the
old Smock-Alley House in 1661. and now I shall proceed to the rest, as they
stand at present.

In the Year 1732. a Theatrical Booth was erected by Mrs. Violante an Italian
Lady, celebrated for Strength and Agility, a Qualification that does not render
the Fair-Sex the least more amiable; the Strength of the Limbs, which these
Sort of Undertakers expose, in my Opinion, is shockingly indecent; but hers
were masculinely indelicate, and were of a Piece with the Features of her Face.
I am informed, the showing her Limbs did not meet with the Success in this
Kingdom, as she had found in her elder Sister, England; that Lady's Children
delight in such Entertainments: Bull-baiting, Boxing, Bear-garden, and
Prize-fighting, will draw to them all Ranks of People, from the Peer to the
Pedlar: Our late English Gladiator, Mr. Figg, of Cutting-slashing Memory, made
much private Emolument by his public Valor, more especially in Linen Mr. Figg
informed me once, that he had not bought a Shirt for more than twenty Years,
but had sold some Dozens. It was his Method, when he fought in his Amphitheatre
(his Stage bearing that superb Title); he sent round to a select Number of his
Scholars to borrow a Shirt for the ensuing Combat, and seldom failed of half a
dozen of superfine Holland from his prime Pupils (most of the young Nobility
and Gentry made it Part of their Education to march under his warlike Banner).
This Champion was generally Conqueror, though his Shirt seldom failed of gaining
a Cut from his Enemy, and sometimes his Flesh, though I think he never received
any dangerous Wound. Most of his Scholars were at every Battle, and were sure
to exult at their great Master's Victories, every Person supposing he saw the
Wounds his Shirt received. Mr. Figg took his Opportunity to inform his Lenders
of Linen, of the Chasms their Shirts received, with a Promise to send them
home. But, said the ingenious, courageous Figg, I seldom received any other
Answer, than, Damn you, keep it. I shall not enter into the Merits of this
Method in procuring Linen; but, if it was a Fraud (as he told me), he was never
found Guilty. For, as Hudibras says, For those that meddle with his Tools,
Will cut their Fingers, if they are Fools.

.

But to Mademoiselle Violante. She, finding her Tumbling tiresome, fell into
Playing and Pantomime (another Disgrace to the Drama). Mr. Barrington, Mr. John
Morris, and, I think, Mr. Beamsly, Miss Woffington, Miss Mackay (now Mrs.
Mitchel), and many others, came under her Directions, and played several
Dramatic Pieces with Grotesque Entertainments, till stopped by the Lord Mayor of
the City of Dublin; Mrs. Violante having no Sanction, or proper Authority, to
exhibit such Entertainments. The It is now an Hospital for indigent Lying-in
Women, which is a generous, virtuous, and humane Charity, worthy the Imitation
of every civilized Nation. The Director and Inventor of this useful Institution
ought to be mentioned with great Respect. How many Subjects have been lost, for
want of such a noble Charity! The Hospital was opened in March 1745. and, by
the First of November 1747. there were 514 poor Women safely delivered of 281
Boys, and 241 Girls; 13 Women bearing Twins; the eminent Dr. Moss (the first
Promoter of this charitable Work) giving Attendance without Fee or Reward. I
wish Iberia's Elder Sister would follow the Example. It Is true, there are such
in China, but not under such Regulation; the Women there are not received, till
the Pangs of Childbirth attack them, according to Mendez Pinto; and several
Mothers, with their Infants, perish, before they can be conveyed to the
Hospital. In Paris there is one of this Kind; but the Women after the Month, if
able, are obliged to attend those that lie in, and cannot be free of the Place
till their Turn comes on, which must be one Month, at least: For, as I am
informed, they are Nurses to each other. Rome, that has Hospitals almost
without Number, has none such, though they have one for repenting Courtezans.
Although the Hospitals, in Amsterdam, maintain 20,000 Souls, of both Sexes; yet I
cannot find one that is appropriated to this Use.
Place is put to another Use.

I shall take Leave of Violante, and her Postures, and give it, as my own
Opinion, that I think such Diversions are below the Dignity of the Stage, or
Humanity. Where can be the Satisfaction, when Death and Danger attend it? I
have the Fate of Lady Isabella The Lady Isabella was born in Italy, sprung from
a noble Family in the City of Florence: She was put into a Nunnery at twelve
Years of Age, in order to take the Veil; but a Posture-master unluckily came to
that City, gained her Affections, and found Means to carry her off, and married
her; instructed her in his unseemly, dangerous Employment (if we may call it
so), and brought her to England; where Lady Isabella was greatly admired, for
her Postures, and Feats of Activity. The last, and fatal, Time of her
Performance, she was eight Months gone with Child; but the covetous Husband
loved Money so well (as it is reported), that he would not allow her the
necessary Repose required in her Condition; so that, in one of her Dances on a
slack Rope, she fell on the Stage, where the Mother and Infant, newly born with
the Force of the Fall, expired in a Moment, fatal Catastrophe! in the
Twenty-first Year of her Age. This was the running Account of the poor Lady
Isabella, after her Death, whose End was much lamented: For, notwithstanding
her disreputable Employment, she was esteemed as a Woman of strict Virtue.
ever present to my Memory at the mentioning of such dangerous Entertainments. I
should have told my Reader, that Mrs. Violante had let her Booth to Mr. Luke
Sparks, Mr. John Barrington, Miss Mackay (now Mrs. Mitchel), for three Pounds
per Week: The three mentioned Persons, being all very young, fell desperately
in Love with the Dramatic Poets, and were resolved to marry them, with their
Poetical Fortune, that is, without a Rag to cover their Nakedness, or rather
nothing but Rags; for their Scenes had showed their best Days. However, Clothes
were borrowed, some from Friends, and some to be paid for; and they began with
a Comedy of Farquhar's, called The Inconstant, or, The Way to win him; the
three chief Parts being performed by the three adventurous Undertakers; viz.

Young Mirabel by Mr. Sparks Duretete by Mr. Barrington Bisarre by Miss Mackay.


Mr. Sparks (as having played before, in a Country Company) was the Manager.
The Play was performed much better than was expected, and their Company soon
became more numerous, being joined by others that looked more to Profit than
Pleasure; for these three Lovers of the Drama could play Heroes and Heroines,
without eating; Love for the Sublime was enough for them: However, other People
did not relish this Cameleon Diet, and hunger'd after something more
substantial; therefore resolved upon Benefits, and gave the first to Miss
Mackay, in order to break the Ice. The Fop's Fortune was the Play, and she then
being a young promising Actress, several Ladies, of the first Rank, espoused
her Cause, and brought upwards of Forty Pounds to her Benefit. They might well
say, with the Herald in the Rehearsal, They had not seen so much the Lord knows
when.
The Success of this Benefit alarmed the Old Smock-alley House, who applying to
the Lord Mayor, he sent Orders to forbid their Acting; and it was with much
Difficulty they had Leave to play one more, which was, Woman's a Riddle, to a
good House, And that the last.
This was the Spring from whence Ransford-street arose, out of the Power of the
Lord Mayor of Dublin.

Ransford-street Theater was built, and opened, for the first Time, under a
License granted by the Right Honorable the Earl of Mead I saw a License,
granted by that worthy Nobleman to the late Mr. Thomas Walker, Comedian, for
Forty Pounds per Annum; which Sum was meant to be given to the Poor in the Earl
of Meath's Liberty: A pious Example!
, being Part of his Liberties. The first Play that was performed there was, a
Comedy called

LOVE for LOVE. Husband.)
Sir Sampson by Mr. Moore Since dead.
Valentine by Mr. Husband Tattle by Mr. Ravenscroft Since dead.
Foresight by Mr. Bourne Now in England.
Ben by Mr. Sparks Trapland by Mr. Daniel Jeremy by Mr. Roch


Angelica by Mrs. Ravenscroft Dead.
Mrs. Foresight by Mrs. Smith Dead.
Mrs. Frail by Miss Mackay Now Mrs. Mitchel.
Miss Prue by Miss Barnes Now Mrs. Martin.
Nurse by Mrs. Talent Lives at Cork.

I never saw this Theater, but have been informed, it was a very neat, compact
Building, capable of containing an hundred Pounds, at common Prices, which they
never raised, but at Benefits.

The Company performed here above a Year with tolerable Success, sometimes
Neap, and sometimes Spring-tides; but when Henry the Eighth, with the pompous
Coronation, was exhibited at the Theater in Aungier-street, they were almost
forsaken; good Sense with Show, for once prevailed, which is not always the
Case.

As Poverty is the Mother of Invention, all the Wit of the Company went to
work, and, at last, produced a Mock Coronation, with less Expense than a Lady's
Tail at Aungier-street Theater. It was called the Beggars Coronation (and not
unworthy that Title), in the Play of The Royal Merchant, or The Beggars Bush;
with the following Prologue, on the solemn Occasion, ushered in by this
Preamble, in Print:

APROLOGUE spoke at Ransford-street Playhouse, on the Revival of The Royal
Merchant, or The Beggars Bush; which was acted with the Mock Coronation, on the
playing King Henry the VIIIth and Coronation in Aungier-street Playhouse.

WELL, by this Time, your Eyes have ach'd with gazing
On Coronations, Masks, and Sights no less amazing!
Here, then, you come, unwilling to be pleased,
Longer than just your dazzled Sight is eased.
The Sun, it is true, will dim the strongest Eye;
And Darkness, only, can new Force supply --
Yet you must own, that, had no Show been there,
You Would been content to kill an Evening here.
The Coronation made so great a Noise,
Had there been none, Harry had missed your Voice;
Buffoon -- Jack-pudding -- Jobson -- Hob, conspired,
In vain, to make the burlesque King admired.
He played it, though, some say, with wondrous Art!
His Belly -- shook; and -- that was all the Part.
Yet, faith, it is odd -- But we surprise you more
Than Harry's Hoh! or Wolsey's envied Store.
Here honest Clause shall gain a Beggar's Crown,
Though Tyrants threaten, and proud Churchmen frown!
Each willing Subject his small Tribute brings,
Abhorring Slavery, yet adoring Kings.
Clause, though a Beggar, 'midst his Rags is free;
Henry's a Slave to Tyrants great as he.
How does their Splendour mock their wretched Fate!
They mourn in Pomp, and starve in pageant State.
Like petty Kings, who Rome's Subjection own;
To feed its Pride, they hunger on a Throne.
If any here, with indigested Rage,
Will speak malignly of our sporting Stage,
As if, in Ridicule of Rites so known,
Sacred to Britain's Fame, and GEORGE's Crown,
We thus our Mockery of State pursue,
Let others our Design with Candor view,
And own, if any Disrespect appears,
It Is them we mock; be, then, the Censure theirs.
As the World is fond of Novelty (and this Mock Coronation appearing new), the
Stream of Success flowed upon them with a rapid Torrent, swelled their Pockets
till they overflowed their Banks, and watered the Fields of many a Publican!
Debts were cleared, and every single Person might, fearless, look at the Dial
on the Tholsel.

Their Success went even beyond their Hopes, and Aungier-street suffered short
Allowance (as they say at Sea), because the Current was turned another Way: Yet
I find, by this Success, all do not think alike.

King Henry the Eighth, with the Coronation, in the utmost Magnificence, was
performed in the Year of his present Majesty's Accession to the Throne, at the
Theater Royal in Drurylane, London: The Success there was beyond the Bounds of
Expectation; it was even added to every Play, as a Pantomime, etc. and
exhibited, that one Season, 75 Times.

The Theater in Lincoln's End Fields got up a Mock Coronation, as a Burlesque
upon that in Drury lane; but the Audience took a different Turn to that in
Ransford-street; for the poor Mock Peers and Magistrates were pelted off the
Stage, in the utmost Contempt, and all their Study and Labor came to nothing.

However, this Mock Coronation filled Ransford-street Theater, seventeen
succeeding Nights: But as Mountain-rivers soon overflow, they as soon sink, and
rest in their natural Bed again: Ransford-street was too far out of the Way;
therefore the Company, after three Years Occupation, forsook it. However, I
shall subjoin a Couple of poetical Pieces of Poetry, occasioned by the above
Prologue: Wits are a Tribe like Jews, and one Production begets another. As
every Line of Battle Ship has its own Chaplain, so every Theater have their own
Poets; and sometimes, like Ragotin in Scarron, they may be found in itinerant
Troops. The opponent Theater produced one, spoken by Mrs. Bellamy in Boy's
Clothes, at a Time when an epidemic Cold had reigned greatly in Town.

Dear Ladies, may I perish, but I Am proud
To find you all recovered, and so loud.
Not one sore Throat amongst you now remains,
Of that vile Cold of which the Town complains:
And, faith, you will answer for me, I Am sincere,
When I profess I Am glad to see you here!
I found a Female Habit would not do,
And therefore tried a Pair of Breeches too:
A spruce young Blade, well made, with such Address,
Among you Belles may speak with some Success --
And I, who am a Woman -- to my Cost,
Know, by myself, what please the Ladies most --
In vain we strive our Merit here to show,
For every Night to Ransford-street you go;
Where painted Scenes, and tinsell'd taudry Dress,
Are only splendid Signs of Emptiness.
But this is Scandal; for all Dublin knows,
That Playhouse deals not overmuch in Clothes.
Two Venders of the same Commodity will be a little too apt to depreciate each
other's Goods; therefore the Poet drew his Pen in their Defense, and furnished
forth the following Prologue, spoke by Miss Mackay, in the Character of Lady
Townley, in the Provoked Husband.

As some poor 'Squire, to Country Quarters sent,
His Credit gone, and all his Money spent;
A Swarm of Duns, each Morn, attend his Door,
Crying out, Money! Faith we are very poor.
Why ay! the 'Squire replies; but pray have Patience,
Six Months Arrears comes with my next Acquittance.
Just so I Have told my Duns, this many a Day,
They Would all have Money when I got my Play This Play was for Miss Mackay's
Benefit.
.
The other House, we thank their honest Care,
Have, to their Cost, engaged the good Lord Mayor
To send us, as they thought -- the Lord knows where!
Yet we'll forgive them, if they keep their Word;
But that is more than they can yet afford.
It Is true, alas! we are scant in Clothes, while they
Abound in more -- than they can ever pay --
Our House is new -- Thanks to our Benefactors Old Smock-alley was then in a
ruinous Condition.
!
Nor do we envy those enslaved Detractors:
They may get one, but Lord knows where get Actors Aungier-strect was
afterward built for the Company in Smock-alley.
.
We may see, this last Bard did not take the least Advantage of his Antagonist:
Their Lines were exactly even, and eighteen Thrusts given on each Side, and
therefore neither could claim the Conquest; though, like Battles in Flanders,
each Side claimed the Victory, and each General put on the Wreath of Conqueror.

The Theater in Aungier-street was built by the voluntary Subscription of many
of the illustrious Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom: The first Stone was laid
by the Duke of Dorset, then Lord Lieutenant; but, I think, the Architect had
more View to the Magnificent, than Theatrical. The Audience Part is ornamented
with rich Embellishment, that gives it a superb Countenance; but, no
Disparagement to the Architect in other Buildings, this might have been more
convenient, with less Cost. But I believe the Contriver had an Eye more to
Ridottos, than the Drama: If so, indeed, his Intentions were answered; for, in
that Shape, it may vie with that in the Hay-market in London. Thrusting my own
Opinion, in this Manner, might have the Air of Presumption, if my Employment
and Observation had not taken up full thirty Years of my Time: In other
Buildings I would not pretend to give my Judgment on a Pigeon-house, or a
Centrybox, or give Directions in erecting a thatched Cabin, or a Turnpike.

Aungier-street Theater opened March the 9th, 1733-4. with the Comedy of The
Recruiting Officer; the Parts acted as follows: Captain Plume by Mr. J.
Elrington Justice Balance by Mr. Layfield Captain Brazen by Mr. R. Elrington
Worthy by Mr. Watson Kite by Mr. Vanderbank Bullock by Mr. F. Elrington Since
dead.
1st Recruit by Mr. Reed Now in his Majesty's Navy.
2d Recruit by Mr. Butler Died in England.



Silvia by Mrs. Bellamy Melinda by Mrs. Wrightson Lucy by Mrs. Reynolds Rose by
Mrs. Moreau
These were the main Body of the Theatrical Army in its first March, though
several Auxiliaries joined them afterward.

The Theater in Smock-alley The proper Name is Orange-street; but it took the
Appellation of Smock-alley from Mother Bungy, of infamous Memory, and was, in
her Days, a Sink of Sin; but a Man being found murdered in these bottomless
Pits of Wickedness, the Sheds were pulled down by the Populace, the unclean
Vermin were banished, the Place purged of its Infamy; handsome Dwellings now
show their Faces in a modest Garb, and entertain modest and reputable
Inhabitants; and therefore, I think, ought to lose its old stained Name. But if
Tyburn were removed, the Spot would be called Tyburn still.
was built by a voluntary Subscription. The Architect has considered the
Building more for the real Intention of the Proprietors, I mean for Profit: The
Cavea, or that Part where the Audience sit, is much more convenient than that
of Aungier-street, and will contain a fifth Part more in Number than the
latter, although it does not appear so to the Eye: On the contrary, the Stage is
more cramped for want of Room, which might have been otherwise at the first
building.

When I came first from England, in the Year 1741. I brought over an
experienced Machinist, who altered the Stage after the Manner of the Theaters
in France and England, and formed a Machine to move the Scenes regularly all
together; but it is since laid aside, as well as the Flies above, which were
made as convenient as the Theater would admit: However, the present Manager has
formed it as regular and convenient as the Spot would allow of, decorated it
with all the Elegance of the Theaters Abroad, with proper Scenery and Habits,
that her elder Sisters in England need not blush at the Figure she makes.

This new Theater opened with a Comedy called Love makes a Man; or, The Fop's
Fortune:

The Parts played as follows;

Don Antonio by Mr. Dash Don Charino by Mr. Bourne Carlos by Mr. Ward Don Lewis
by Mr. Wetherilt Don Duart by Mr. Cashel Clody by Mr. Sparks Governor by Mr.
Redman Sancho by Mr. Barrington


Elvira by Miss Boucher Lovisa by Mrs. Ward Angelina by Miss Barnes Now Martin.



But so eager were they to open (or to get Money), that they began to play
before the Back-part of the House was til'd in; which the Town knowing, they
had not Half an Audience the first Night, but mended leisurely by Degrees;
where we shall leave them on the mending Hand, and walk to

CAPEL-STREET.
This Theater was built, like an aggrieved People in the State of Rebellion,
their Forces raised in a Hurry, neither well clothed, armed, or paid; their
Fortifications so slightly thrown up, did not promise a long Defense, though
they had a Veteran at their Head, that might have taught them Discipline, had
he taken proper Pains with his raw Soldiers; or rather, indeed, had they been
more capable of being taught: But this hasty Building was erected in the great
Cause of Liberty!

The Love of Liberty with Life is given,
And Life itself's the inferior Gift of Heaven.
This Company opened under the Sanction of the Lord Mayor of Dublin, and called
themselves the City Company of Comedians. Their first Play was Shakespeare's
Merchant of Venice.

Duke by Mr. Rivers Morochius by Mr. Brouden Antonio by Mr. Townsend Bassanio
by Mr. Marshal Gratiano by Mr. Hall Lorenzo by Mr. Corry Shylock by Mr. Wright
Tubal by Mr. Bourne Lancelot by Mr. Morgan


Portia by Mrs. Brouden Nerissa by Mrs. Phillips Jessica by Miss Lewis


I shall leave the further Mention of this Theater to the Memoirs of the worthy
Projector of it, Harlequin Phillips, and end with its Neighbor,

PUNCH's THEATER.
O happy Manager! whose Servants never disoblige, or contradict his Will! No
clamouring for Parts, or Pay! No Envy reigns among them! No Sycophants to
corrupt his Ears with Falsehoods, or cringing Flatterers to tickle his Vices, or
swell his Pride and Vanity! But all obey him without Self-interest, or ever
trouble themselves whether they are naked, or clothed; or ever repine at the
Success of each other's Performance, or, like the Spaniards A Spanish Bishop
writes thus of the Conquest of America: The first Conquerors of this large new
World gave out, that there were mighty Giants and warlike Amazons, all of them
a Race of Cannibals that fed upon human Flesh, making War on each other for
that Purpose: But these Reports were spread to cover the Inhumanity of the
Spaniards, who put to Death, with extreme Tortures, above Six Millions of
innocent, naked, harmless Indians; pretending it was in the Service of Heaven
to rob, starve, and murder the Image of their Creator; when it has been proved,
their own Avarice was the Motive, when Millions were put to Death a thousand
Ways, because they could not, or would not, discover their hidden Wealth.

Thus it too often falls out among ourselves; when a poor Wretch is half-laden
with Injuries, they make up the other Half-burden with Falsehoods, and very
humanly throw on a Weight that entirely sinks him.


, lay Faults on the Indians, to cover their own Cruelty. Mr. Punch's Theater
has been built and occupy'd by these decent and well-behav'd Performers several
Years. It goes by the Name of the first Founder, STRETCH, as the Coffee-houses
in London still go by the Names of Tom's, White's, and Will's; though the Names
of their present Masters may be Jack, Sam, or Ned: However, it intimates, that
the first were eminent in their Stations; and it expresses Modesty in the
Survivors, in owning it, by continuing their Names, rather than their own.

Thus has this opulent City of Dublin every innocent Diversion, that may unbend
the Mind, equal to any City of Europe, leaving the Italian Opera out, which can
neither produce Mirth or Sorrow, Pity or Compassion. Yet here is Music, in
Perfection, converted to a better Use than in Britain, which produces a double
Pleasure -- the Charms of Harmony, and the Means to relieve the Poor.

I have been in most Parts of the World in my Youth, and in every Place of Note
I have touched at (as the Sailors term it) have found the Natives of this
Kingdom in Places of Trust and Power, venerated and esteemed by all. I shall
therefore conclude with two Lines of that celebrated French Author Monsieur
Voltaire I have mentioned this Author, in another Part of the Work, as an
Exile; but have learned since, that his Banishment is repealed, and he is made
Historiographer to the French King.
.

Peuple malheureux, doux, genereux, et vaillant,
En tous lieux exiles, mais par tout triomphant.
"Ill-fated Race! brave, generous, and true;
"Though Exiles in each Clime; through all, subdue."
MEMOIRS of the principal Performers on the STAGE.
JOSEPH ASHBURY, Esquire
THIS worthy Gentleman was born in London, the Year 1638. of an ancient Family.
His Father married a near Relation of that great Scholar and Soldier, Sir
Walter Raleigh, who was first Gentleman to that Duke of Buckingham, that was
killed by Lieutenant Felton in the Reign of King Charles the First. The
Gentleman I am about to give an Account of, was sent very young to The School
of Eton was founded by that unfortunate King Henry the Sixth, eminent to a
Degree for producing Men of great Learning. It Is seated on the delightful River
of Thomas in Buckinghamshire, over against Windsor in Berkshire; it is called
Eton-College. The Chapel is a handsome Gothic Pile, with an Organ and Choir.
This Place is ranked as the first Free School in the King's Dominions. It seems
by Art and Nature formed for Study; its shady Walks public or private, large
Gardens, Orchards, Groves, and the limpid River, are natural Calls for Learning.
Eton-School, near Windsor, where he received a genteel Education, being very
well instructed in classical Learning. After the Death of his Father, his
Friends procured him a Pair of Colors in the Army under the Duke of Ormond,
which was the first Time of his coming into this Kingdom, in the last Year of
Oliver Cromwell's Administration.

Mr. Ashbury was one of the Number of Officers that seized the Castle of
Dublin, when Governor Jones was made Prisoner, and secured in Behalf of King
Charles II. He was made Lieutenant of Foot of a Company granted by that Monarch
to the City of Dublin, in the Year 1660. and 1662. the Duke of Ormond, the then
Lord Lieutenant, made him one of the Gentlemen of his Retinue, and
Deputy-Master of the Revels under John Ogilby, Esquire some time after.

In the Year 1682. at the Death of the Master of the Revels, through Mr.
Ashbury's Interest with the Duke of Ormond, he was made Patentee, and Master of
the Revels in this Kingdom. His first Wife was Sister to an eminent Actor of
that Time (Mr. Richards), by whom he had two Children, who died in their
Infancy; and the Mother of them, being a very infirm Woman, was not long after
the Death of her second Child before she left the World.

Mr. Ashbury continued a Widower many Years, till, fixing his Eyes upon Miss
Darling, a blooming young Gentlewoman, Daughter to the Reverend Mr. Darling,
Dean of Emly, by this Lady he had two Sons, the eldest Mr. Boil Ashbury,
Lieutenant in Brigadier Bor's Regiment, and unfortunately killed in a Duel at
Sligoe (where he was then on Duty) June the 9th, 1725. The last of the Male
Race (Mr. Richard Ashbury) is Deputy Athlone Pursuivant, and an eminent
Undertaker in Capel-street The first Part of this Account I gathered from Mr.
Joseph Ashbury s own Mouth when I was a young Man under his Directions in this
Kingdom, about four Years before his Death, when he lived at the
Bowling-Green-House, Oxmantown, since built upon; then, I believe, the finest
Spot of its Kind in the whole Universe.
. His only Daughter was married to Mr. Thomas Elrington.

Mr. Ashbury was not only the principal Actor in his Time, but the best Teacher
of the Rudiments of that Science in the three Kingdoms. I speak not from my own
Judgment, but that of many others, as Mr. Wilks, Mr. Booth, Mr. Keen, etc. To
prove this, give me leave to insert a Letter from Mr. Wilks to Mr. Ashbury
concerning Mr. William Wilks his Nephew I was favored with this Letter by Mr.
Richard Ashbury the Son.
.

To Joseph Ashbury, Esquire Master of the Revels, Dublin.
I Have no Pretense to ask a Favor of Mr. Ashbury, but that he has a thousand
times obliged me. I take the Liberty, therefore, to recommend the Bearer, my
Nephew Mr. William Wilks, the Nephew mentioned in this Letter, came over here,
and played several Parts in the Old Smock-alley Theater; and, though young and
genteel, he was only the Shadow of his Uncle, and his Name befriended him more
than his Abilities. He returned to England, after a Year's Probation here, and
was entered one of the Company in Drury Lane, at thirty Shillings a Week, and
died before he had reached his 30th Year, or a higher Salary. He was a good
Scholar, and had a tolerable Knack of Rhyming to his PHYLLIS.
, to you for your Countenance and Favor: He was bred an Attorney, but is
unhappily fallen in Love with that fickle Mistress the Stage, and no Arguments
can dissuade him from it. I have refused to give him any Countenance, in Hopes
that Time and Experience might cure him: But since I find him determined to
make an Attempt somewhere, no one, I am sure, is able to give him so just a
Notion of the Business as Mr. Ashbury; and indeed I am proud to own, that all
the Success I have met with, both with you, and in England, on the Stage, has
been entirely owing to the early Impressions I received from You.

If you find that my Nephew wants either Genius, or any other necessary
Qualification, I beg, dear Sir, that you will freely tell him his Disabilities;
and then it is possible, he may more easily be persuaded to return to his
Friends and Business, which I am informed he understands perfectly well.

Before I had the Favor of yours, honest Jo Trefusis Mr. Joseph Trefusis was
the original Trapland in Love for Love, and a well-esteem'd low Comedian (a
Theatrical Term to distinguish that Branch from the Genteel); and was famous
for Dancing an awkward Country Clown. He was an experienced Angler. As he was
fishing by the Liffy Side, some Friends of his were going in a Boat in order to
embark for England. Jo, seeing them, called to them to take him in, that he
might see them safe on board. He gave his Fishing-Rod to a Friend on Shore, to
take care of till his Return; but Jo, it seems, was prevailed upon by his
Companions to make the Journey to London with them, with his Fishing-cloaths
upon his Back, not a second Shirt, and but seven Shillings in his Pocket. His
Companions left him at London, and Mr. Wilks found him gazing at the Dial in
the Square of Covent Garden. He hardly knew him at first (as Mr. Wilks told me)
but by his particular Gait, which was beyond Imitation When he asked him how he
came there, and in that Pickle; Hum! ha! why faith, Bobby, replied Jo, I only
came from Dublin to see what it was o'Clock at Covent Garden. However, Mr.
Wilks new-cloath'd him, supplied him with Money, and sent him back, as
mentioned in the above Letter, before he received Mr. Ashbury's Letter to
supply him.
, I believe, was near his Journey's End; and I had taken care to furnish him
with what was necessary, for which I neither expect or desire any Return; it is
sufficient that you esteem it a Kindness, and I wish it were in my Power to lay
a more lasting Obligation upon Mr. Ashbury, or any of his Family. My most
humble Service to the dearest Part of you -- In plain Terms -- your Wife -- to
Mr. Elrington and his Fanny -- and pray believe, that I shall be ready on all
Occasions, to show how much I am, dear Sir, your obliged and faithful humble
Servant,

ROBERT WILKS.
London Dec. 6, 1714.

When the Earl of Wharton was Lord Lieutenant, some needy Courtier tried all
his Interest to be made Master of the Revels; insomuch that Mr. Ashbury was
greatly alarmed at it, which was said to proceed from a Report of his Death.
Therefore, in the 74th Year of his Age he embarked for England to solicit the
Queen.

He arrived at Chester, from whence he sent the following Letter to his Wife
concerning the Affair.

I received this from the same Hand with the other.
Chester, October 13. 1713. My Dear,
THIS is only to let you know that I am safely arrived at Chester, where I had
the good Fortune to meet with Sir John Stanley, who was well pleased to see me.
After I had told him the Cause of my Journey relating to my Patent, he bid me
be assured, he would render me all the good Offices in his Power, and was of
the Opinion it lay in the Will of the Duke of Shrewsbury our good Lord
Lieutenant, without giving our gracious Queen the least Trouble concerning it.
This Morning I had the Honor of a Visit from Mr. Kightly and Sir Richard
Levinze, who are of the same Opinlon with Sir John, and have both promised me
their utmost Assistance. Good Mr. Kightly tells me, he will put her Majesty in
mind of her old Master Mr. Ashbury taught the Queen, when she was Princess
Anne, the Part of Semandra in Mithridates King of Pontus, which was acted at
Court by Persons of the first Rank in the Banqueting House, Whitehall, where
Mr. Ashbury was Prompter, and conducted the Whole.
, as he was pleased to call me. I am so well satisfied in the Affair, that I
would return to thee on the first Opportunity, if I had not resolved to see my
Sister, and my Son Tom Elrington's Father and Mother. Thou know it is
troublesome to me to write; but to satisfy thee in thy longing Desire to hear
from me, I take the Trouble with Pleasure. I remain thine for ever,

JOSEPH ASHBURY,
My Blessing to all my dear Children.

Mr. Ashbury suceeded Mr. Darling as Steward of the King's-Inns, a Post of good
Profit. I had not the Pleasure of knowing this great Man but till the latter
Part of his Life; yet, notwithstanding his great Age, I have seen him perform
several Parts with the utmost Satisfaction; and though at his Years it could not
be expected the Fire of Youth and Vigor should blaze out, yet Truth and Nature
might be seen in a just Light. His Person was of an advantageous Height
well-proportioned and manly; and, notwithstanding his great Age, erect; a
Countenance that demanded a reverential Awe, a full and meaning Eye, piercing,
though not in its full Luster; and yet I have seen him read Letters, and printed
Books, without any Assistance from Art; a sweet-sounding manly Voice, without
any Symptoms of his Age in his Speech. I have seen him acquit himself in the
Part of Careless in the Committee so well, that his Years never struck upon
Remembrance. And his Person, Figure, and Manner in Don Quixote were inimitable.
The Use of a short Cloak in former Fashions on the Stage seemed habitual to
him, and in Comedy he seemed to wear it in Imagination, which often produced
Action, though not ungraceful, particular and odd to many of the Audience; yet in
Tragedy those Actions were left off, and every Motion manly, great, and proper.

Mrs. Ashbury, even in her noontide Sun, had an amiable Person, a sweet,
innocent, modest, winning Countenance; and, having so great a Master in the
Art, was ever just in Speech and Action, without climbing to the Summit of
Perfection; yet I have seen her perform one Part that seemed a finished
Original, where all since have appeared to me but excellent Copies (if I may
use the Term), that is, Mrs. Pinchwife in Wycherly's Comedy of the Country Wife.

Joseph Ashbury, Esquire died July 24. 1720. in the 82d Year of his Age, retaining
his Judgment to the last Moment of his Life. Mrs. Ashbury survived him a few
Years, bewailing his Loss till she followed him to the Grave. This great Man
was Master of the Revels to Five Monarchs of England, viz. K. Charles II. K.
James II. K. William, Q. Anne, and K. George the First. I shall lead him to his
Grave, with the following Poem on his lamented Death.

As distant Thunder in a rolling Cloud,
First murmurs inwardly, then roars aloud;
Till the dread Clap frights every mortal Ear,
And strikes them with a just and panic Fear:
Such was the sad distracted News which bore
The Tidings to us -- Ashbury's no more!
The Muses speechless to his Shrine repair,
Even Art, and Wit, stand silent Mourners there;
Yet bolder Zeal will Bands of Duty break,
And Gratitude has Liberty to speak:
True Passion too can Inspiration bring:
'Twas Grief first taught the Nightingale to sing --
From his, as from some Hero's awful Tomb,
Even my dead Muse shall vital Warmth resume.
When first in Learning 's Orb his Lustreblaz'd,
The World looked up, transported and amazed!
His Words, as if inspired, Impression made;
Ulysses' Skill, without his Craft, displayed:
His Counsels never were varnished over with Art,
With Policy he still did Truth impart,
Spoke Oracles, but always spoke his Heart.
By Judgment's Compass every Course he steered,
And watched the Signals ere the Storm appeared.
His Prudence over the Surges did prevail,
With Ballast still proportioned to his Sail --
Precipitately never assumed a Trust,
To promise, slow; but in Performance just:
By Grace instructed, and by Nature mild;
Nor relished Life, but when he reconciled.
His Life and Aspect did just Patterns give,
What Figures we should make, and how to live.
Mr. ANTONY ASTON, commonly called TONY.
THIS Person was bred an Attorney in England; but, having a Smattering of Wit
and Humor, he left the Study of the Law for Parts on the Stage. He strained
sorth a Comedy which was acted on the Theater in Smock-alley, called Love in a
Hurry, but with no Success. He played in all the Theaters in London, but never
continued long in any; his Way of living was peculiar to himself and Family,
resorting to the principal Cities and Towns in England with his Medley, as he
called it, which consisted of some capital Scenes o Humor out of the most
celebrated Plays. His Company were generally composed of his own Family,
himself, his Wife and Son; between every Scene, a Song or Dialogue of his own
Composition, filled up the Chinks of the slender Meal. He pretended a Right to
every Town he entered; and if a Company came to any Place where he exhibited
his Compositions, he would use all his Art to evacuate the Place of these
Interlopers, as he called them. He was never out of his Way; or if he met with
a sightly House when he was Itinerant, he would soon find the Name, Title, and
Circumstances of the Family, curry them over with his humorous Verse, and by
that means get something to bear his Charges to his next Station. His Finances,
like those of Kingdoms, were sometimes at the Tide of Flood, and as often at
low Ebb. In one, where his Stream had left the Chanel dry, yet ready to launch
out on a trading Voyage without a Cargo, or Provision, he called up his
Landlord, to whom there was something due, told him of his Losses in his
present Voyage, and being sent for to another Place, desired he would lend him
a small Sum upon his Wardrobe (which he showed him in a large Box) ten times
the Value of the Debt owing, or the Sum borrowed. The honest Landlord, seeing a
proper Security, easily complied, gave him the Sum demanded, locked up the
Trunk, put the Key in his Pocket, and retired. But as no Vessel can make a
Voyage without Sails, and other proper Materials, he had contrived a false
Bottom to this great Box, took out the Stuffing, and by Degrees, sent off his
Wardrobe by his Emissaries, unperceived. And that the Weight should not detect
him, he filled up the Void with Cabbage-stalks, Bricks and Stones clothed in
Rags to prevent moving, when the Vehicle was to be taken the next Morning into
the Landlord's Custody. Every thing succeeded to his Wish, and away went Tony,
but far wide of the Place he mentioned to mine Host. A Week was the stated Time
of Redemption, which the Landlord saw elapse with infinite Satisfaction (for he
had a Bill of Sale of the Contents in the Trunk); he opened it with great
Pleasure; but when he saw the fine Lining! he was motionless, like a Statue
carved by a bungling Hand. He had recourse to Revenge. A Bailiff with proper
Directions was sent to the Place mentioned; but if he had discovered the least
Wit in his Anger, he might have thought Tony knew better than to tell him
Truth. I only mention this little Story, to let the Reader know the Shifts the
Itinerant Gentry are sometimes put to. For Tony, when his Finances were in
Order, and cured of the Consumption, honestly paid him. I have had this Tale
both from Tony and the Landlord, who then kept the Black-Boy Inn at Chelmsford
in Essex.

If Tony by chance ever came to a Town where a Company of Showmen (as People
often call them) had got in before him, he presently declared War with them; and
his general Conditions of Peace were, that they should act a Play for his
Benefit, that he might leave the Siege, and march with his small Troop to some
other Place. And as he was a Person of Humor, and a proper Assurance, he
generally, like a Cat, skimm'd off the fat Cream, and left the lean Milk to
those that stayed behind. I believe he is Traveling still, and is as well
known in every Town, as the Post-Horse that carries the Mail. He shall make his
Exit with the two following Lines.

If various Dealers the same Goods exhibit,
They wish each other dangling on a Gibbet.
BARTON BOOTH, Esquire
THIS excellent Tragedian was Son to John Booth, Esquire of the County Palatine of
Lancaster, a Branch of the Warrington Family. He was born in the Year 1681. in
that County; but soon after his Birth his Father and Family removed to
Westminster, and, at that celebrated School, the Son received his Education,
under the Correction (as he called it) of the great Dr. Busby and Dr. Knipe. He
informed me, the first Look he cast toward the Theater, was from the Applause
he received in performing in the Andria of Terence in Latin at
Westminster-School, which perverted his Thoughts from the Pulpit, for which his
Father intended him. At Seventeen he was chose out for the University, and had
Orders to prepare for his Journey; but his Inclinations prevented the Designs
of his Friends.

He first applied to Mr. Betterton, then to Mr. Smith, Two celebrated Actors;
but they decently refused him for Fear of the Resentment of his Family: But
this did not prevent his pursuing the Point in View; therefore he resolved for
Ireland, and safely arrived in June School. His first Rudiments Mr. Ashbury
taught him, and his first Appearance was in the Part of Oroonoko, where he
acquitted himself so well to a crowded Audience, that Mr. Ashbury rewarded him
with a Present of Five Guineas, which was the more acceptable as his last
Shilling was reduced to Brass (as he informed me). But an odd Accident fell out
upon this Occasion. It being very warm Weather, in his last Scene of the Play,
as he waited to go on, he inadvertently wiped his Face, that, when he entered,
he had the Appearance of a Chimney-Sweeper (his own Words). At his Entrance, he
was surprised at the Variety of Noises he heard in the Audience (for he knew
not what he had done), that a little confounded him, till he received an
extraordinary Clap of Applause, which settled his Mind. The Play was desired
for the next Night of Acting, when an Actress fitted a Crape to his Face, with
an Opening proper for the Mouth, and shaped in Form for the Nose; but, in the
first Scene, one Part of the Crape slipped off: And Zounds! said he (he was a
little apt to swear), I looked like a Magpie! When I came off, they
Lamp-black'd me for the rest of the Night The Composition for blackening the
Face are Ivoryblack and Pomatum, which is, with some Pains, cleaned with fresh
Butter.
, that I was flayed before it could be got off again.

He remained here near Two Years, and, in that Time, by Letters, reconciled
himself to his Friends in England, and returned with great Theatrical
Improvement, where he gradually stepped to Perfection. In 1704. he married the
Daughter of Sir Wm. Barkham, Bart. an ancient Family in the County of Norfolk,
who died without Issue in the Year 1711. Pyrrhus in the Distressed Mother placed
him in the Seat of Tragedy, and Cato fixed him there; and, to reward his Merit,
he was joined in the Patent, though great Interest was made against him by the
other Patentees; who, to prevent his soliciting his Patrons at Court, then at
Windsor, gave out Plays every Night, where Mr. Booth had a principal Part.
Notwithstanding this Step, he had a Chariot and Six of a Nobleman's waiting for
him at the End of every Play, that whipped him the Twenty Miles in three Hours,
and brought him back to the Business of the Theater the next Night. He told me,
not one Nobleman in the Kingdom had so many Sets of Horses at Command as he had
at that Time, having no less than Eight; the first Set carrying him to Hounslow
from London, Ten Miles; and the next Set ready waiting with another Chariot to
carry him to Windsor.

He had a vast Fund of Understanding as well as Goodnature, and a persuasive
Elocution even in common Discourse, that would even compel you to believe him
against your Judgment of Things. Notwithstanding his Exuberance of Fancy, he
was untainted in his Morals. In his younger Years he admired none of the
Heathen Deities so much as Jolly Bacchus; to him he was very devout; yet, if he
drank ever so deep, it never marred his Study, or his Stomach. But, immediately
after his Marriage with Miss Santlow, whose wise Conduct, Beauty, and winning
Behavior, so wrought upon him, that Home, and her Company, were his chief
Happiness, he entirely contemned the Folly of Drinking out of Season, and from
one Extreme fell, I think, into the other too suddenly; for his Appetite for
Food had no Abatement. I have often known Mrs. Booth, out of extreme Tenderness
to him, order the Table to be removed, for fear of overcharging his Stomach.

His profound Learning was extraordinary, since he left School at Seventeen,
took to the Stage at Eighteen, and, by his own Confession, that the Business of
the Stage, joined with his Devotion to Bacchus, had taken up most of his Time
since, yet I have seen him take a Classic, and render it in such elegant
English, that no Translator would hardly excel. I will set down his Character
from a Paper called the Prompter, by Aaron Hill, Esquire whose Writings will be a
living Monument of his own Merit.

Mr. Booth was a Man of a strong, clear, and lively Imagination. His
Conversation was lively and instructive: He had the Advantage of a finished
Education to improve and illustrate the bountiful Gifts of Nature. Two
Advantages distinguished him in the strongest Light, from the rest of the
Fraternity. He had Learning to understand perfectly whatever it was his Part to
speak, and Judgment to know how far it agreed or disagreed with his Character.
Hence arose a peculiar Grace, which was visible to every Spectator, though few
were at the Pains of examining into the Cause of their Pleasure. He could
soften, or slide over, with a kind of elegant Negligence, the Improprieties in
a Part he acted; while, on the contrary, he would dwell with Energy upon the
Beauties, as if he exerted a latent Spirit, which had been kept back for such
an Occasion, that he might alarm, waken, and transport, in those Places only,
where the Dignity of his own good Sense could be supported with that of his
Author. A little Reflection upon this remarkable Quality, will teach us to
account for that manifest Languor which has sometimes been observed in his
Action; and which was generally, though, I think, falsely, imputed to the
Indolence of his Temper. For the same Reason, though in the customary Round of
his Business he would condescend to some Parts in Comedy, he seldom appeared in
any of them with much Advantage to his Character. The Passions which he found
in Comedy, were not strong enough to excite his Fire; and what seemed Want of
Qualification, was only Absence of Impression. He had a Talent of discovering
the Passions where they lay hid in some celebrated Parts by the injudicious
Practice of other Actors; when he had discovered, he soon grew able to express
them: And his Secret for attaining this great Lesson of the Theater, was an
Adaption of his Looks to his Voice, by which artful Imitation of Nature, the
Variations in the Sound of his Words gave Propriety to every Change in his
Countenance: So that it was Booth's Excellence to be heard and seen the same,
whether as the pleased, the grieved, the pitying, the reproachful, or the
angry. His Gesture, or, as it is commonly called, his Action, was but the
Result and necessary Consequence of his Dominion over his Voice and
Countenance; for having, by a Concurrence of Two such Causes, impressed his
Imagination with such a Stamp and Spirit of Passion, his Nerves obeyed the
Impulse by a kind of natural Dependency, or relaxed or braced successively into
all that fine Expressiveness with which he painted what he spoke without
Restraint, or Affectation. As a Proof of Mr. Booth's Learning, I am desired to
insert the Latin Inscription wrote by him on the Death of Mr. Smith This
Gentleman, Mr. Smith, was zealously attached to the Interest of King James the
Second, and served in his Army as a Volunteer, with Two Servants. After the
Abdication, Mr. Smith returned to the Theater, by the Persuasion of many
Friends, and the Desire of the Town, who admired his Performance. The first
Character he chose to appear in was that of Wilmore in the Rover, his original
Part in that Comedy; but, being informed that he should be maltreated on
account of his Principles, he gave Orders for the Curtain to drop, if any
Disturbance should come from the Audience. Accordingly the Play began in the
utmost Tranquillity; but when Mr. Smith entered in the First Act, the Storm
began with the usual Noise upon such Occasions (an Uproar not unknown to all
Frequenters of Theaters, and by Time mightily improved by a particular Set that
delight in that agreeable Harmony, as pleasing to the Ear, as a Sow-gelder's
Horn, that sets all the Village Curs to imitate the Sound); Mr. Smith gave the
Signal, the Curtain dropped, and the Audience dismissed. No Persuasions could
prevail upon him to appear on the Stage again, till that great Poet, Mr.
Congreve, had wrote his Comedy of Love for Love, which was in the Year 1695.
more than three Years void from the above Accident. This celebrated Author
prevailed upon several Persons of the First Rank to move Mr. Smith to appear in
the Character of Scandal in that excellent Comedy: But he yielded more to the
Persuasions of his sincere Friends, Mr. Betterton and Mrs. Barry, and accepted
the Part; and his inimitable Performance added one Grace to the Play. He took
his Station in many Plays afterward, for, I think, three Years. He died of a
Cold, occasino'd by a violent Fit of the Cramp; for when he was first seized,
he threw himself out of Bed, and remained so long before the Cramp left him (in
that naked Condition), that a Cold fell upon his Lungs, a Fever ensued, and
Death released him in three Days after.
the Actor, with a short Account of him, as I received it from Mr. Benjamin
Husband.

Scenicus eximius,
Regnante Carolo Secundo:
Bettertono Coaetaneus and Amicus,
Nec non propemodum Aequalis:
Haud ignobile stirpe oriundus,
Nec Literarum rudis Humaniorum,
Rem Scenicam
Per multos feliciter Annos administravit,
Justoque moderamine, and morum suavitate,
Omnium intra Theatrum
Observantiam, extra Theatrum laudem,
Ubique benevolentiam and amorem, sibi conciliavit.
In English,
An excellent Actor
Flourished in the Reign of Charles the Second:
Betterton's Cotemporary and Friend,
And very near him in Merit:
Sprung from a genteel Family,
And no Stranger to Literature.
In the Management of the Theater
Heacquitted himself many Years, with deserved Success;
And, by a just Deportment, and Sweetness of Temper,
Gained the Respect of all within the Theater,
The Applause of those without;
And everywhere claimed the Friendship
And Affection of Mankind.
I shall give a Couple of Songs as a Specimen of his Taste in English Poetry,
among many that do not occur to my Memory. The Source of them both sprung from
his growing Passion for the amiable Miss Santlow, before their Marriage.

The First SONG.
CAN then a Look create a Thought
Which Time can never remove?
Yes, foolish Heart, again you are caught,
Again thou bleed'st for Love.
She sees the Conquest of her Eyes,
Nor heals the Wounds she gave;
She smiles whenever my Blushes rise,
And, sighing, shuns her Slave.
Then, Swain, be bold! and still adore her,
Still the flying Fair pursue:
Love, and Friendship, still implore her,
Pleading Night and Day for you.
The Second SONG.
I.
SWEET are the Charms of her I love,
More fragrant than the Damask Rose;
Soft as the Down of Turtle-Dove,
Gentle as Winds when Zephyr blows;
Refreshing as descending Rains,
On Sunburned Climes, and thirsty Plains.
II.
True as the Needle to the Pole,
Or as the Dial to the Sun;
Constant as gliding Waters roll,
Whose swelling Tides obey the Moon:
From every other Charmer free,
My Life, and Love, shall follow thee.
III.
The Lamb the flowery Thyme devours,
The Dam the tender Kid pursues;
Sweet Philomel, in shady Bowers,
With verdant Spring her Notes renews:
All follow what they most admire,
As I pursue my Soul's Desire.
IV.
Nature must change her beauteous Face,
And vary as the Seasons rise;
As Winter to the Spring gives Place,
Summer the Approach of Autumn flies:
No Change on Love the Seasons bring,
Love only knows perpetual Spring.
V.
Devouring Time, with stealing Pace,
Makes lofty Oaks and Cedars bow;
And Marble Towers, and Gates of Brass,
In his rude March he levels low:
But Time, destroying far and wide,
Love from the Soul can never divide.
VI.
Death, only, with his cruel Dart,
The gentle Godhead can remove;
And drive him from the bleeding Heart,
To mingle with the Blessed above;
Where, known to all his Kindred Train,
He finds a lasting Rest from Pain.
VII.
Love, and his Sister fair, the Soul,
Twin-born from Heaven together came;
Love will the Universe control,
When dying Seasons lose their Name:
Divine Abodes shall own his Power,
When Time, and Death, shall be no more.
Mr. W. BOWEN.
HE was born in this Kingdom in the Year 1666. and played on the Irish Theater
several Years. He had a loud strong Voice, which gave him the Title of an Actor
of Spirit. Through the Interest of the late Duke of Ormond, he got into the
Revenue in London. He was fiery to a Fault, and passionate to his Prejudice,
which drew on his own Death, by the unwilling Hands of Mr. Quin. Mr. Bowen was
too tenacious, and could not brook being told, that the late Ben Johnson
excelled in the Part of Jacomo in the Libertine: Though it was given against him
by the whole Company. He immediately parted, sent to Mr. Quin (in the Name of a
Gentleman) to a neighboring Tavern; when he entered, Bowen shut the Door,
clapped his Back against it, and drew his Sword. Mr. Quin mildly expostulated
with him, but all to no Purpose. He threatened to pin him to the Wainscot, if
he did not draw that Moment; which he did to defend his own Life, with an
Intention to disarm him: But Bowen pressed so furiously upon him, that he
received the Wound which occasioned his Death three Days after. However, when
the Loss of Blood had weakened his Rage, he confessed his own Folly and Madness
had justly drawn on his own Misfortune; and, at the Trial, Mr. Quin was
honorably acquitted. Mr. Bowen had several Children by his Wife, and a Boy
illegitimate, who, though he bore his Name, had none of his Care; and therefore
lived a dissolute Life, without the least Improvement from Education, and
justly gained the Nickname of Rugged-and-Tough. One Day a Clergyman in St.
Clement Danes (a Church in the Strand) was catechizing the Children of the
Parish, where Rugged-and-Tough thrust among the rest. Rugged's Dress was none
of the cleanest; which the good Parson observing, called him the first to be
examined. I shall put the short Dialogue down just as I had it from an
Ear-witness; since the Questions are short, as well as the Answers, they will
not appear very tedious.

Parson. What Is your Name?


Rug. Rugged-and-Tough.


Parson. Who gave you that Name?


Rug. The Boys of our Alley, L -- d d -- n 'em for it.

The good Parson was a little surprised, no doubt; and ordered him to wait till
the rest of the Children were examined, intending to polish Master
Rugged-and-Tough; but Tough, not liking to wait so long, stole off unperceived.
All I could learn of Mr. Rugged-and-Tough afterward was, that, having a great
Inclination to travel, he contrived Means to do it at the Charge of the
Government.

Thus bad Beginning to bad Ending tends,
And Vice in Nature, Nature seldom mends.

Mr. JOHN BARRINGTON.
THIS Gentleman was born of a good Family in the County of Cork. He was bred
to the Law, but his stronger Genius led him to the Drama, where he has proved
himself one of its favorite Children. I think his first Commencement in the
Drama was in Violante's Booth (as it was then called) in George's-Lane. He may
be well esteemed an excellent Comic Actor, of infinite Humor; a much-desir'd
pleasing Companion, and (what is not always to be met with) a Person of
Sincerity. There is a very ancient Family of the Barringtons in the County of
Essex, in England; where they show a Record, that their Ancestor was instructed
in the Christian Faith by the Preaching of St. Augustine the Monk, afterward
Bishop of Canterbury, and received Baptism in the River of Thames by that
Saint, in the Year of Redemption 597. This Account may, probably, be called a
motly one; but what of that? A good Player (from the Poet) may instruct; and,
as an old Author writes, A Verse may find him who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.


Mr. SPRANGER BARRY.
THIS Gentleman was born in Dublin. He was married very young, and,
consequently, set forward in the World, perhaps, with too little Consideration.
A lively Spirit, and good Sense, are not always prosperous, or meet with that
Success equal to their Merit. Neither does the Employment of a Father always
sit easy upon the Son. Business is not hereditary. One may gain a Fortune by
the same Employment that might be lost by the Descendent. Our young Gentleman,
by frequent Attendance at the Theater, turned his Genius to the Drama.
Inclination and Fancy are two good Instructors, and a Willingness to please is
doing some Part of the Work. A good Person, and an excellent Voice, are great
Substantives for the Stage.

The first Part he performed in this Kingdom was Othello the Moor of Venice: To
the surprising Satisfaction of the general Audience, he seemed a finished Actor
dropped from the Clouds. I hear, that in England he has gained the Summit of
Perfection. I would say more upon the Subject, but, as he received the first
Rudiments from me, I shall be silent; yet borrow a few Lines from the Poet,
that may give a Remembrance of his Person,

Such Beauty, as great Strength thinks no Disgrace,
Smiled in the manly Features of his Face:
His tall strait Body amidst Thousands stood,
Like some fair Pine, the loftiest of the Wood.
I don't think I can give the Reader a greater Pleasure, upon this Occasion,
than to insert the following Letter upon Mr. Barry's first Attempt on the
Stage; which may serve for a general Instruction to all on the Theater.

To Mr. Spranger Barry, from a Friend in the Country.
AS I lately heard you were determined for the Stage, my Affection for your
Person, and Concern for your Misfortunes, gave Occasion to some Reflections
which may, possibly, be of Use to you in this new Scene of Life. In the Time of
Athenian Elegance, when Learning was in Taste, when Liberty was the Blessing of
the Public, and the Parent of Arts; which Excellence, alone, found Honor,
Capacity, Employment, and Merit, Rewards; the Stage grew suddenly from its
Infancy to Maturity, and, from being encouraged, became itself the Encourager
of those Talents and Geniuses with which it was supplied. It was there that
each Spectator was taught his particular Conduct, by seeing his own
Representation in the general Picture of Life, where the Lights were thrown
alone upon Virtue, and the Shades upon Vice; where Great and Eminent, of every
Age, were set up for Imitation; where every noble, tender, and exalted
Sentiment, was recorded, and daily inculcated; where Purity was invited,
Obscenity exiled; and where the Heart was attached to Virtue, by affectingly
walking through all its Scenes of Misfortunes; and, lastly, exulting in its
final Reward. No Institution, less than divine, could ever be of equal
Efficacy, or Advantage: For when Instruction becomes our Entertainment, then,
only, it is, that Vice grows detestable, and Virtue delightful, from the
Pleasure it brings: And hence were the Sentiments of the Grecian Vulgar so
exalted, that an immoral Expression, though naturally introduced in an immoral
Character, has been hissed off the Stage. Shall we think, then, that where the
Doctrine was so glorious, the Preaching was dishonorable? No, sure. To be an
Actor, then, was not to be a Mimic; no Trick of Gesture, or Tone of Voice,
could avail: Those of Distinction were to be, by Nature, the very Persons they
represented; they were to have the same Elevation of Soul, the same Delicacy of
Thought, the same Morality of Life, the same Humanity of Heart, and Sweetness
of Affections, that could at once constitute the Patriot, the Hero, the Lover,
and the Friend. The Words only belonged to the Author, the Sentiments were, by
Nature, their own; and hence flowed that Aptness of Attitude, that Ease in
Elocution, that expressive Look, that eloquent Silence, that Freedom of Action,
and that Harmony of the Whole, which at once exalted, melted, and subdued a
mighty Nation to Elegance and Virtue. Where such an Actor was found, he was
justly esteemed a Blessing to the Community. As his Talents were the
Admiration, so his Person was the Delight, of all People; in his Life he was
honored, and his Posterity provided for. You will now, perhaps, be tempted to
wish, that this was the Stage of the Athenians; but Nature and Mankind are
always the same; and even on the English Theater I have known some, who gained
more Encouragement and Respect as Actors, than they deserved as Men: But if the
Members of your new Province have brought a Scandal on their Profession, let it
be your Study to retrieve it. If I have any Judgment, you are qualified to
excel in this Way; nor would I have you imagine, that any will shun you in
Private, merely because you give them Pleasure and Entertainment in Public. Let
your Heart be the true Model of whatever is great, or good, in the Characters
you represent: Take Instruction with Pleasure, and Applause with Humility; and
then fear not to be received as the Man of Worth, and the Gentleman you have
hitherto been esteemed. I am, etc.

Mr. PETER BARDIN,
WAS born in Dublin, though of French Extraction. He bent his Thoughts toward
the Stage very early in Youth, and, having seen the Performance of the best
Actors in England, upon the London Stages (where, at various Times, he has made
one in most of the Theaters in that City), if he has not improved, it must be
owing to himself. His long Intercourse of Theatrical Action has improved his
Study, and few Parts become amiss to him, either (as Shakespeare says) for
Tragedy, Comedy, History, Pastoral, Pastoral-Comical, Historical-Pastoral,
Scene undividable, or Poem unlimited, etc. It does not become me to condemn, or
uphold his Conduct, in private Life; however, I cannot avoid giving my Opinion,
that such Disputes that have fallen out, need not trouble the Public in their
public Diversions. I own, if a Person pays his Money for his Entertainment, he
ought to enjoy it quietly. If a Cook at an Ordinary has spoiled another
Person's Dinner, that Person, I think, has no Right to spoil mine; more
especially, if I had made a Tinker's Bargain, and paid for my Meal beforehand.
Give me Leave to add a printed Paper on the Subject, whose Author has said much
more than my Capacity will reach.

A small Animadversion on a late Affair in the Playhouse.
I Went, the other Night, to the Playhouse, in full Expectation of seeing the
Rehearsal performed in as high a Manner as was possible: But, to my great
Surprise, the Performance was interrupted, and the Audience disappointed, by a
Concert of most unmusical Instruments, in the Gallery. The Cause of this Noise
and Hurly-burly was soon found to be a private Dispute between somebody in the
Gallery and Bardin the Player, which Dispute might (with the Consent of the
whole Theater) have subsisted seven Years, so it had not offended a numerous
and polite Audience.

-- If a Player, in his private Capacity, offends me, will this warrant my
offending a thousand People at once? Should I have a Dispute at Law, or Play
with Mr. G -- ck, must the whole Town, for this Reason, lose the Entertainment
of the rarest King Lear and Macbeth that ever were seen in this, or any other
Country? If B -- n had done any unwarrantable and injurious Thing to a
Gentleman, B -- n should have made proper and ample Satisfaction, in his
private Capacity, for the Offense. The Audience had no Right in, nor Care for B
-- n, but they certainly have for Prince Volscius; he was their Player; they
had paid for him: The Prince had managed his Horse with wondrous Dexterity, and
had an undoubted Right to have ridden him to the Battle. There is nothing more
mistaken than that Right which some People imagine they have in Theaters, and
other public Places; for, in Truth, their Right consists only in decently
partaking of the Entertainment, and, where they think it deserves it, giving a
proper and timely Applause. It is the same Right that a Man has in a
Ferry-boat, that is (if he behaves himself properly), to be safely and
pleasantly landed on the opposite Shore; but, if he disturbs the Passage, and
endangers the Boat, the Ferryman and Passengers will certainly join, and throw
him overboard. A surly Swain at a Horse-race, fansying he had a Right to any
Part of the Sod, would needs ride directly in the Course; the first of the
Racers threw him and his Horse twenty Yards on the Ground; and better had it
been if he had died with his Horse on the Spot; for he received a Lash from
every Whip in the Field. Every Gentleman, properly habited, has a Right to go
to Court; but if a Person, having a Pique to a Battle-ax, should breed an
Uproar in the Levee-room, he would certainly have a Halberd in his Guts, or be
sent to the Black Hole. There can be no Excuse for doing an Injury to a
Multitude.

I have often dined at a Two-dish Ordinary, where I had a Right to partake of
each; but if I should have taken it into my Head to have thrown one Dish at the
Waiter, and kicked the other about the Floor, I do verily believe I should have
been kicked down Stairs. If a Gentleman (Heaven defend us!) should have a
Quarrel on his Hands with a Porter, the Gentleman certainly has a Right to do
himself Justice; but I should think it somewhat untimely, if he should knock
the Fellow down when he had a Dozen of my Wine on his Back. Shakespeare, who
well understood the Decorum of Theaters, gives strong Advice for proper
Behavior: He speaks it to the Players, but he meant it to the Spectators
likewise, though, in his Modesty, he held it not meet so to set it down. He
directs them to be extremely careful not to create the least Noise or
Disturbance in the House when the Play should be duly attended to. He
concludes, that, to disturb the House, is villainous, and betrays a pitiful
Ambition in the Fool that does it.

I am, Sirs, your humble Servant.

How necessary it is, we may see, for Stage-performers to have a strict Guard
on their Behavior; and I have said it before, their own Conduct will make them
esteemed or slighted, will draw Regard or Insult. To strengthen my own Opinion,
I shall insert a very small Paragraph from a very late News-Paper.

Naples, August 16. 1748.
One of the Lords of the Court has been banished, for having publicly
insulted, upon the New Theater, one of the Singing-women of the Opera.

But many Things are spoke without a Thought,
That, badly construed, have Confusion brought.
Mr. JOHN BEAMSLY.
THIS Person has had a large Experience, of Time and Travel, in England and
Ireland, for improving his Theatrical Genius. He is decent in many Parts, and
seldom offends in any; is ever very perfect, a Voice strong and intelligible,
not unharmonious, and may rank in the File of good Actors, either in Tragedy or
Comedy.

Merit may shine in various Beams of Light,
And different Men, in different Roads, are right.
Mrs. BULLOCK.
THIS Gentlewoman was the Natural Daughter of the late perfect Comedian Robert
Wilks, Esquire by Mrs. Rogers, an Actress of Merit, among great Stage Performers.
So parented, one might have expected a finished Genius for the Stage: She,
however, pleased in several dramatic Characters, assisted by a graceful Form
and Figure. In the Year 1717. she was joined in Wedlock to Mr. Christopher
Bullock, a very promising Comedian, who died in the Road to Excellence.

After various Turns of Fortune, she came over to this Kingdom, with her
Daughter (now Mrs. Dyer). Her Person may put us in mind of her Mother; but she
is a happy Stranger to any Failing of here is. Mrs. Bullock died in this Kingdom
in the Year 1739.

A Scion often proves different from the Root,
And better Branches will yield better Fruit.
Miss BELLAMY.
THIS young and amiable Actress was born in this Kingdom in the Year 1727. She
has a most admirable improving Genius; therefore it will be no Wonder, if she
soon reaches the Top of Perfection. She has a liberal open Heart, to feel and
ease the Distresses of the Wretched. How amiable must blooming Beauty appear,
that forms the Mind with every moral Virtue! She has lately left this Kingdom,
to the Regret of all Lovers of the Drama. I cannot avoid, upon this Occasion,
setting down a few Lines from a Poem on Bellamy; the Motto from Milton.

Grace was in all her Steps, Heaven in her Eye,
In every Gesture Dignity and Love.
The Maid, in Action just, in Judgment strong,
Exacts our Wonder, and inspires our Song;
From slavish Rules, mechanic Forms, untied,
She soars, with sacred Nature for her Guide.
The Grace-adorning Smile! the feigned Despair!
The softening Sigh! the Soul-dissolving Tear!
Each magic Charm, lamented Oldfield knew,
Enchanting Bellamy! revives in you.
It Is thine, O beauteous Maid! the wondrous Art,
To search the Soul, and trace the various Heart,
With native Grace, with unaffected Ease,
To form the yielding Passions, as you please.
Oldmixon Mrs. Oldmixon, a celebrated Singer from England now in Dublin.
, Syren-voice, improved by Art,
Steals softly on the Song-enamour'd Heart;
But ah! how weak, how feebly, must she wound,
The Maid whose chiefest Charm consists in Sound.
Or should Mechel Mademoiselle Mechel, an agreeable Dancer, now performing in
Smock-alley Theater.
, all languishing, advance,
Her Limbs dissolved in well-conducted Dance
(The Soul untouched), she may subdue the Sight:
But breathing Wit with Judgment must unite,
To give the Man of Reason unconfined Delight.
COLLEY CIBBER, Esquire
THIS great Actor, as well as Author, was once in this Kingdom, many Years age,
which I gathered from his saying he landed in the Night; and when he asked what
Place they were in, was answered, Ringsend. O! then I am sure we are right;
meaning the Answer a^ a native Blunder. But, to rescue that Place from the
Aspersion, I am credibly informed, it was the original Dwelling of a Person
whose Surname was Ring, and from him took its Denomination. The Father of this
Gentleman was a Native of Holstein Holstein is a Dukedom of Lower Saxony in
Germany One Part belongs to the King of Denmark, the rest the Duke of Holstein.
It has two Imperial Cities: The first, Lubeck, a large, fair, and rich Town,
accumulated by Trade and Navigation, seated about two Miles from the Baltic
Sea; the other City is Hamburgh upon the Elbe, one of the most opulent Marts in
Lower Germany, it being a free City, and self-dependent. It is very strongly
fortified. The River Elbe ebbs and flows with the Tide, and wafts Ships of
large Burden to the Port, from all Parts of the World.
, a Statuary by Profession, without his Equal in this Kingdom. The Figures over
the Gate of Bethlehem (or Bedlam, as it is vulgarly called) in Moorfields, and
the Pedestal, or Base, of the Monument Since this is a Pillar, now the finest
in the World, and not generally known in this Kingdom, I Will give a Description
of it. This noble Structure is erected near the Spot where the dreadful Fire
began in the Year 1666. designed by that great Architect Sir Christopher Wren.
It is a fluted Column, Two hundred and two Feet high, the greatest Diameter of
the Shaft fifteen Foot, the lower Part of the Pedestal Twenty-eight Foot
square, and Forty Foot high; built with Portland Stone, finely polished; the
winding Staircase within (containing 345 Steps, ten Inches and an half broad)
black Marble, enclosed in the spiral Round with Balustrades of Iron, turned and
ornamented. Thirty-two Foot from the Top, is a square Balcony, secured with
Iron Rails, with their Capitals and Bases gilt. The Top of this noble Pillar is
crowned with a Flame, gilt. On the West Side of the square Pedestal, London is
described by the Figure of a Woman lamenting the Ruins of the City in Flames on
one Side of her; and, fronting her, London in all its Magnificence, rebuilt.
This noble Sculpture was designed and finished, in Bassorelievo, by Caius
Gabriel Cibber, Father to the Laureat. This Pillar was begun in 1671. and
finished in the Year 1677. at the Charge of the Public, in Commemoration of
that fatal Fire in 1666. on the Second Day of September, which consumed 13200
Houses, 400 Streets, 89 Churches, and most of the public Structures. The Top of
the square Base is ornamented by large Dragons, between them the Arms of
England, with Engines of War displayed; Time, with the rest of the Figures,
masterly finished; with London, represented in the Clouds in another Figure of
a Woman looking on the City once more in her Glory; form a noble Group, that
cannot be described in Words. The three other Squares are filled with
Inscriptions relating to the fatal Accident (though some Authors impute it to
Design) too long to mention here.
, were carved by him.

Mr. Colley Cibber, the Son of this great Artist, was born the Sixth of
November 1671. in London; but I shall refer the Reader to the Apology for his
own Life, printed for G. Faulkner. The excellent Dramatic Works of this Author
are, 1. Love's last Shift; or, The Fool in Fashion. 1696. 2. Woman's Wit; or,
The Lady in Fashion. 1697. 3. Xerxes; a Tragedy. 1699. 4. Love makes a Man; or,
The Fop's Fortune. 1700. 5. The Careless Husband. 1704. 6. The Lady's last
Stake; or, The Wife's Resentment. 1708. 7. The Comical Lovers. 8. She Would and
she Would Not; or, The kind Impostor. 9. Richard the Third. 10. The Rival
Fools. 11. Perolla and Izadora, a Tragedy. 12. The Double Gallant; or, The Sick
Lady's Cure. 13. The Schoolboy. 14. The Nonjuror. 1717. 15. Venus and Adonis,
a Masque; set to Music. 1717. 16. Myrtilla, a Masque. 1717. 17. The Refusal;
or, The Lady's Philosophy. 1720. 18. Ximena; or, The Heroic Daughter. 19.
Caesar in Egypt. 1725. 20. The Provoked Husband; or, A Journey to London. 1727.
21. Love in a Riddle. 1728. 22. Damon and Phillida. 23. Papal Tyranny in the
Reign of King John. 24. The Country Wake.


Besides these Dramatic Pieces, he has wrote innumerable Songs, Prologues, etc.
several humorous Pamphlets, the excellent Apology for his own Life, and a
Critic upon Middleton's Translation of Cicero.

As Envy seldom attacks any other Object but conspicuous Merit, this Gentleman
was generally attacked by the Tribe of Scribblers, his cotemporary Authors,
that, Like Village-curs, bark when their Fellows do; which he regarded not; and
if he ever seemed to rouse, it was like the Lion in Don Quixot: Rise, stretch,
and p -- ss in his Face.

As to his Person, he is strait, and well made; of an open Countenance, even
free from the conspicuous Marks of old Age. Meet or follow him, and no Person
would imagine he ever bore the Burden of above two Thirds of his Years. He is
Head of a numerous Family; and it might be said, as a German Author writes of
the Nestorian Lady Malburges, of that Country; Matter ait natae, Dic natae,
filia natam
Ut moneat natae plangere filiolam.


"The aged Mother to her Daughter spoke,
"Daughter, said she, arise!
"Thy Daughter to her Daughter take,
"Whose Daughter's Daughter cries."
Mr. THEOPHILUS CIBBER.
THIS Gentleman came into the World on the Day of the great and destructive
Storm in 1703. whose Rage ranged over the greatest Part of Europe, but, I
think, most fatal to England. He is Son to Colley Cibber, Esquire that excellent
Comedian, the present Poet Laureat, whose dramatic Works are so well known.

Mr. Theophilus Cibber received his Education at Winchester School: His strong
Genius for the Theater brought him early upon the Stage, where he has appeared
in full Luster in the various Branches of Comedy; and though he has performed
several Parts in Tragedy with Success, in my Imagination the Sock sits easier
upon him than the Buskin. His first Wife, mentioned in the Account of Mrs.
Clive, was Miss Johnson, by whom he had two Daughters. The eldest, I am
informed, has appeared on the Stage with great Prospect of excelling, first in
the Part of Juliet, in Romeo and Juliet, by Shakespeare. His second Wife, Miss
Arne (by whom he has no living Issue), is arrived at the highest Pitch of
Excellence in the amiable, soft, and tender.

Mr. Theophilus Cibber has appeared twice as a dramatic Author; viz. first,
Henry the Sixth, altered from Shakespeare, which was played in the Summer-season
of 1721. without any Critics laying hold of it: His second Performance in the
Drama was, a Comedy called The Lover; but as the Critics were always ready
armed to attack the Father, they drew their Indignation on the Son, with the
false Imagination that the Father was the concealed Author. But I am positively
convinced to the contrary; for that Gentleman to me refused the Sight of it
before it appeared on the Stage, for the very Reasons, he suspected, that fell
out accordingly. However, he wrote an Epilogue, that was spoken by Mr.
Theophilus and his Wife, that took away the Sting of the Revelrout, and the
Play was performed six Nights in the Year 1731. The Epilogue, for its
Singularity, I shall insert here.

EPILOGUE, Spoken by the AUTHOR, and his WIFE.
Wife. NOW, I suppose, you will find your Work is done;
Did not I say -- you were your Father's Son?
Be what it might, your Play, the Town would game it,
That your bare Name were half a Cause to damn it?
Experience, to your Cost, will show you now,
Who wears the wiser Head, your Wife, or you.

Author. Though all this should be true, my pretty Rogue,
Yet what is all this, dear Jane, to the Epilogue?

Wife. Why, what is an Epilogue to such a Play?
Will it be saved, by ought that I can say?

Author. No matter what is its Merit -- no, my Dear,
When many a Husband's Case has known Despair,
A wheedling Wife has brought the Thing to bear.

Wife. O, I Am your humble Servant, humble Sir!
Now you're distressed, you my weak Head prefer --
No, Sir, since you have had your Frolic, pay it --
When you have raised the Storm, your Wife must lay it.

Author. I Will give you Composition, gentle Spouse,
All my clear Benefit of my Third-day's House,

Wife. Which may amount to -- not one single Souse.

Author. Were mine, alone, the Case, that may be true;
Yet to your very Sex some Pity's due:
They Will not, with me, destroy the Guiltless, too.

Wife To the Audience. Gallants, in this,
I hope, he has touched your Hearts;
Let not me suffer for his weak Deserts:
Do not to last Extremes your Censure drive;
Give us, at least, an honest Chance to live.
Our Fate is in your Hands -- If you are brave,
You Will think the Triumph less to ruin, than to save.

This Comedy the Author dedicated to his Wife, in order to make a perfect
Agreement between them. He has also wrote several small Pieces in Verse and
Prose, occasionally, besides several Letters in an odd Dispute between him and
Mr. Thomas Sheridan, printed here, and in London.

I shall not meddle with conjugal Affairs; these short Memoirs would swell too
large, and the Belly, out of Proportion for the Body, appear dropsical, and
require Tapping.

Then draw a Veil over what must be concealed,
To hide those Faults that should not be revealed.
Mrs. CIBBER.
THIS true and perfect Actress was Daughter to Mr. Arne, an eminent Upholder in
Covent Garden. Her first Appearance on the Stage was as a Singer; her Voice and
Judgment gained her universal Applause: But when she commenced a speaking
Actress, she charmed anew. Her first Appearance was in the Part of Zara, to the
Admiration of every Spectator that had their auricular Faculties; and, since
that, has proved herself the Daughter of Nature in Perfection. I shall add a
Prologue wrote by the Laureat, on her first appearing in the Part of Zara, and
leave her to enjoy her deserved Praise.

Spoke by Mr. CIBBER.
THE French, however Mercurial they may seem,
Extinguish Half their Fire by critic Phlegm;
While English Writers Nature's Freedom claim,
And warm their Scenes with an ungoverned Flame.
It Is strange that Nature never should inspire
A Racine's Judgment with a Shakespeare's Fire!
However, Tonight (to promise much we are loath)
But -- you have a Chance to have a Taste of both.
From English Plays Zara's French Author fired,
Confessed his Muse beyond herself inspired:
From racked Othello's Rage he raised his Style,
And snatched the Brand that lights this tragic Pile:
Zara's Success his utmost Hopes outflew,
And a twice twentieth weeping Audience drew.
As for our English Friend, he leaves to you,
Whatever may seem to his Performance due.
No Views of Gain his Hopes or Fears engage,
He gives a Child of Leisure to the Stage;
Willing to try, if yet forsaken Nature
Can charm, with any one remembered Feature.
Thus far the Author speaks -- But now the Player
With trembling Heart presents his humble Prayer.
Tonight, the greatest Venture of my Life
Is lost, or saved, as you receive -- a Wife.
If Time, you think, may ripen her to Merit,
With gentle Smiles support her wavering Spirit.
Zara, in France, at once an Actress raised,
Warmed into Skill by being kindly praised:
O! could such Wonders here from Favor flow,
How would our Zara's Heart with Transport glow!
But she, alas! by juster Fears oppressed,
Begs but your bare Endurance, at the best:
Her unskilled Tongue would simple Nature speak
Nor dares her Bounds for false Applauses break.
Amidst a thousand Faults, her best Pretense
To please -- is unpresuming Innocence.
When a chaste Heart's Distress your Grief demands,
One silent Tear outweighs a thousand Hands.
If she conveys the pleasing Passions right,
Guard and support her this decisive Night.
If she mistakes, or finds her Strength too small,
Let interposing Pity break her Fall --
In you it rests to save her, or destroy.
If she draws Tears from you -- I weep -- for Joy.
Mr. OLIVER CASHEL.
I Know little more of this Gentleman, than that he was born in Ireland, of a
very ancient reputable Family. He commenced Actor in this Kingdom, where he
made but slow Progress, as I have been informed. He was recommended to the
Manager in Drury-lam by his Friend and Countryman Mr. Charles Macklin, who
brought him from the Bristol Theater, where they both played the Summer before,
I think in the Year 1738.

The first Part he played on Drury-lam Theater was, Sir Julius Caefar in Sir
Walter Ralegh, where his good Figure was his best Friend; for Fear had made his
Voice not his own (if I may be allowed that Term). It is a Theatrical
Observation, that Fear, in the first setting-out Attempt on the Stage, is not
an il Omen; for many, that have set on without it have played their best, and
never mended afterward. This Gentleman is one Proof of it; for he got the
better of his Fear, proving a very good Theatrical Officer in a little Time The
first Dramatic Piece of Mr. Dryden, that great Poet, was, a Comedy called The
Wild Gallant, that met with so little Success (as Langbain says), "that if he
had not a peculiar Force of Inclination to the Drama, he would have been
sufficiently discouraged from any farther Progress in Dramatic Writing".
: And I hear, since I have left England, has so far excelled in Captain
Macheath in the Beggars Opera (which requires a good Singer, to the
Qualifications of a good Actor), that his Merit has given this excellent Piece
a large fresh Run in Covent Garden, which he went to from Drury Lane, eight or
nine Years ago.

This Gentleman died at Norwich (the capital City of the County of Norfolk). He
was taken speechless on the Stage in the Part of Frankly, in a Comedy called
The Suspicious Husband: He was carried to his Lodgings, where Physicians and
Surgeons attended, but to no Purpose; for he expired in a few Hours, in spite
of the Doctor.

Death eases Lovers, sets the Captive free,
And, though a Tyrant, offers Liberty.
Mrs. CATHARINE CLIVE (formerly Miss RAFTOR).
THIS celebrated natural Actress was the Daughter of Mr. William Raftor, a
Gentleman born in the City of Kilkenny in Ireland. The Father of her Father was
possessed of a considerable Paternal Estate in the County where he was born;
but the Parent of our Actress being unhappily attached to the unfortunate King
James the Second, the late Revolution gave it, among many others, to the Crown.
Mr. James Raftor, her Brother, went over to Ireland, some Years ago, in order
to solicit for his Grandfather's Fortune; but did not meet with Success.

Mr. William Raftor, the Father, was bred to the Law; however, when King James
was in Ireland, he entered into his Service; and, after the decisive Battle of
the Boyne, in the Year 1690. he followed his Master's Fortune, and, by his
Merit, obtained a Captain's Commission in the Service of Lewis the Fourteenth;
but, gaining a Pardon, with many other Gentlemen in his Condition, he came to
England, where he married Mrs. Daniel, Daughter to an eminent Citizen on
Fishstreethill, with whom he had a handsome Fortune: By her he had a numerous
Issue.

Miss Catharine was born in the Year 1711. She had an early Genius for the
Stage; for she told me, when she was about twelve Years old, Miss Johnson
(afterward the first Wife of Mr. Theo. Cibber, another rising Genius, if Death
had not overtaken her in her Prime of Youth) and she, used to tag after the
celebrated Mr. Wilks (her own Words) whenever they saw him in the Streets, and
gape at him as a Wonder.

Miss Raftor had a facetious Turn of Humor, and infinite Spirits, with a Voice
and Manner in finging Songs of Pleasantry peculiar to herself. Those Talents
Mr. Theo. Cibber and I (we all at that Time living together in one House)
thought a sufficient Pasport to the Theater. We recommended her to the Laureat,
whose infallible Judgment soon found out her Excellencies; and the Moment he
heard her sing, put her down in the List of Performers at twenty Shillings per
Week. But never any Person of her Age flew to Perfection with such Rapidity;
and the old discerning Managers always distinguished Merit by Reward. Her first
Appearance was in the Play of Mithridates King of Pontus, in Ismenes the Page
to Ziphares, in Boy's Clothes, where a Song proper to the Circumstances of the
Scene was introduced, which she performed with extraordinary Applause. But
after this, like a Bullet in the Air, there was no distinguishing the Track,
till it came to its utmost Execution.

I remember the first Night of Love in a Riddle (which was murdered in the same
Year) a Pastoral Opera wrote by the Laureat, which the Hydra-headed Multitude
resolved to worry without hearing, a Custom with Authors of Merit, when Miss
Raftor came on in the Part of Phillida, the monstrous Roar subsided. A Person
in the Stage Box, next to my Post, called out to his Companion in the following
elegant Style -- Zounds, Tom! take Care; or this charming little Devil will
save all.

In the Year 1732. she was married to Mr. G. Clive, Son to Mr. Baron Clive. I
shall be silent in conjugal Affairs; but in all my long Acquaintance with her,
I could never imagine she deserved ill Usage.

I shall take Leave of this excellent Actress with the following Lines (as
every Part cannot fit the best Performers): Merit mistaken often may lose its Way,
And pore in Darkness with the Blaze of Day.


Mademoiselle CHATEAUNEUF.
THIS agreeable Dancer (as she played Polly in the Beggars Opera, etc.) must
come under my Cognizance. She was born in France, what Town or Province, has
stole from my Memory. Her real Name was not what she bore. She was in her
Infancy an Orphan, and Monsieur Chateauneuf took her from her Distresses, and
bred her up as his own Daughter. Her Virtue never was tainted in most Peoples
Opinion; but as our immortal Shakespeare says, Be thou as chaste as Ice, as pure
as Snow,
Thou shall not 'scape Calumny.


When I was instructing her in the Part of Polly, she told me, a Lady that
Morning was surprised to hear from a Gentleman of her Acquaintance, that she
was taken for a Boy in Disguise. (This Gentleman, it seems, was a Person that
would have been very willing to have been certain of the Distinction of Sexes.)
I told the Lady, said Miss Chateauneuf, I was very glad he knew no more of me.
Which I think was a quick and witty Answer. She was born the same Day that our
young Hero the Duke came into the World, April 15. 1721.

Since leaving this Kingdom she is married to her supposed Father, Monsieur
Chateauneuf; and now it is made her real Name. This Intelligence I had from a
Gentleman that lately came from Bourdeaux It Is possible every body cannot tell
where Bourdeaux lies: It is a very fine City and Seaport, the Capital of the
Province of Guicnne. It is graced with a Parliament, a University, and an
Archbishop, seated on the fine River Garonne, and is esteemed one of the
richest trading Cities in France. Ausonius, a celebrated Latin Poet, owes his
Birth to this Place. Most Lovers of Bacchus very much commend the Growth of its
Grape. One of our English Monarchs (Richard the Second) drew here his first
Breath. This Dukedom was once an Attendant upon the Crown of England, as tacked
to the Tail of Eleanor Heiress of Poictiers, wedded to King Henry the Second,
which is my chief Reason for this Scrap of Geography. There is also a very
handsome Theater in this City, and the Country exceeding pleasant about it,
being in the South of France.
, where he conversed with them, being at the Head of a Troop of Comedians of
their own, where he heard Madem Chateauneuf sing several English Songs by
Desire of the Audience, particularly the Song of Rosy Wine from the Masque of
Comus altered from Milton.

Thus Midwife Time brings many Things to Light,
That long lay hid within the Womb of Night.
Mrs. CHETWOOD.
SHE was upon this Stage in the Year 1741. an agreeable Actress, when the Part
suited her Voice; a tolerable Dancer, and a pleasing Colombine. Being
Granddaughter to the present Laureat, it is no Wonder if she had a little Wit.

But Wit and Wisdom seldom well agree:
Wisdom would fetter what the Wit would free.
Mr. DENIS DELANE,
IS a Native of Ireland, descended from an ancient Family. He received his
Education in Trinity College, Dublin, a Fountain of Learning, whose Streams
have watered the Universe.

He appeared first on the Dublin Stage, and was very well received; his Person
and excellent Voice, joined with his other Merits, gained him the Esteem as he
justly deserved. However, he set out for London, where he was recommended to
the Managers of Drury Lane, I think in the Year 1731. but their Company being
brimful, even to the running over, the Managers did not give him the
Encouragement that the Promise of his Voice and Person deserved. Mr. Giffard
took hold of the Occasion, and engaged him for his Theater in Goodman's-
Fields, where he had a better Opportunity of shining without any Rival Ray. Mr.
Quin, as I am informed (who can distinguish Merit from his own superior
Judgment), prevailed upon him to leave that Corner of the Town, and act on the
same Stage with him (Covent Garden). Persons of the Drama may be compared to
the Swiss-Cantons, willing to fight for those who give the best Pay; therefore
it is no Novelty to see them change Sides.

Mr. Delane is now marching under the Banner of Covent Garden. He has an Estate
in this Kingdom, and came over last Year (though I had not the Pleasure of seeing
him). I am informed he is inclining more to the Bulky since I saw him last,
which is a Recommendation to many capital Parts that may sit easy, and give
Pleasure, when the Bloom of Youth is gone.

Truncheons, or Lawn, do seldom Youth become,
For distant War, or Bishoprics at Home.
Mr. DYER,
IS not only a useful, but a very pleasing Actor; his good Voice, and
easy-acquired Manner, gives him a Cast above many of his Cotemporaries, being
the best allowed Singer on the Dublin Theater, that is not a professed Singer.
I am no Friend to Mimicry, yet if I could be pleased with that natural
Qualification (if I may be allowed to call it so), I do not know one could give
me more Pleasure than Mr. Dyer; for he can take off (as the Theatrical Term
expresses it) not only every Actor, Male and Female, he has seen and heard,
worth mimicking, but also Singers and Dancers, foreign and domestic. All these
Qualifications, joined to a good Understanding, will render him acceptable in
any Theater.

A just Behavior claims a due Regard,
Though Modesty will fail to meet Reward.
THOMAS ELRINGTON, Esquire
THIS excellent Actor was born in June 1688. in London. His Father having a
numerous Issue, put his Son Apprentice to an Upholder in Covent Garden, where I
was first acquainted with him. He was early addicted to the Drama. I remember,
when he was an Apprentice, we played in several private Plays together: when we
were preparing to act Sophonisba, or, Hannibal's Overthrow, after I had wrote
out my Part of Massiva, I carried him the Book of the Play to study the Part of
King Masinissa; I found him finishing a Velvet Cushion, and gave him the Book;
but alas! before he could secret it, his Master (a hot voluble Frenchman) came
in upon us, and the Book was thrust under the Velvet of the Cushion. His
Master, as usual, rated him for not working, with a Mortbleu! why a you not
vark, Tom? and stood over him so long, that I saw, with some Mortification, the
Book irrecoverably stitched up in the Cushion, never to be retrieved till the
Cushion is worn to Pieces. Poor Tom cast many a desponding Look upon me when he
was finishing the Fate of the Play, while every Stitch went to both our Hearts.
His Master observing our Looks, turned to me, and with Words that broke their
Necks over each other for Haste, abused both of us: The most intelligible of
his great Number of Words, were Jack Pudenges, and the like Expressions of
Contempt.

But our Play was gone for ever! Another time we were so bold to attempt
Shakespeare's Hamlet, where our 'Prentice Tom had the Part of the Ghost, Father
to young Hamlet. His Armor was composed of Pasteboard, neatly painted. The
Frenchman had Intelligence of what we were about, and to our great Surprise and
Mortification, made one of our Audience. The Ghost in its first Appearance is
dumb to Horatio. While these Scenes past, the Frenchman only muttered between
his Teeth, and we were in Hopes his Passion would subside; but when our Ghost
began his first Speech to Hamlet, Mark me, he replied, Begar me vil mark you
presently! and, without saying any more, beat our poor Ghost off the Stage
through the Street, while every Stroke on the Pasteboard Armor grieved the
Auditors (because they did not pay for their Seats) insomuch that three or four
ran after the Ghost, and brought him back in Triumph, with the avenging
Frenchman at his Heels, who would not be appeased till our Ghost promised him
never to commit the Offense of Acting again. A Promise made like many others,
never intended to be kept. However, in the last Year of his Time, his rigid
Master gave him a little more Liberty, and our young Actor played different
Parts, till he was taken Notice of by Mr. Keen, an excellent Player at that
Time. He was introduced upon the Stage in the Part of Oroonoko, where he met
with a good Reception in the Year 1711.

The next Season he was invited over by Joseph Ashbury, Esquire and in the Year
1713. wedded the Daughter of that worthy Gentleman, by whom he had a numerous
Issue, particularly three Sons, who are now alive; the eldest, Mr. Joseph
Elrington, who makes a considerable Figure on the present Theater here; Mr.
Richard Elrington, now of a Country Company in England; and Mr. Thomas
Elrington, the youngest, first an Ensign, now a Lieutenant in Colonel
Flemming's Regiment in Flanders.

Mr. Elrington the Father was a true Copy of Mr. Verbruggen, a very great Actor
in Tragedy, and polite Parts in Comedy; but the former had an infinite Fund of
(what is called Low) Humor upon the Stage. I have seen him perform Don
Choleric in the Fop's Fortune with infinite Pleasure; he entered into the true
Humor of the Character, equal to the Original, Mr. William Penkethman. His
Voice was manly, strong, and sweetly full-ton'd; his Figure tall and
well-proportion'd. His eldest Son, Mr. Joseph Elrington, is most like him in
Person and Countenance.

This excellent Player succeeded his Father-in-law, Joseph Ashbury, Esquire in the
Place of Steward of the King's-Inns; and the more to establish him in the
Kingdom, a Post was given him of fifty Pounds a Year in the Quit-Rent Office;
also Gunner to the Train of Artillery, a Gift of the Lord Mountjoy, Father to
the present Earl of Blessington, which at the Death of that noble Lord, he got
Permission to dispose of. He was a Gentleman of Honor, Humanity, and extensive
Goodnature, of a facetious well manner'd Conversation, a little too desirable
for his Health, from Company of the best Condition. He was taken ill the very
Day he was consulting a Plan for a new Theater, after the Form of that in
Drury Lane, London, with an eminent Builder of this City. He went home, where
his Malady increased to a violent Pleuritic Fever, which never left him
(notwithstanding all the Physicians Art) till he expired July 22. 1732 He was
interred in St. Michan's Churchyard, near the Remains of his Father-in-law,
Joseph Ashbury, Esquire Mr. Elrington had one Daughter married to Mr. Wrightson,
now in England with a Country Company. I never saw her; but have been informed
she has many promising Theatrical Talents.
.

I shall leave him to eternal Rest, with the following Lines, and a short
Epitaph.

Thus, when our stated Time of Life is come,
And Power Almighty has pronounced our Doom;
The best Physician's Art is shown in vain,
And Death's the Doctor that must end our Pain.
EPITAPH, On THOMAS ELRINGTON, Esquire
THOU best of Actors here interred,
No more thy charming Voice is heard,
This Grave thy Coarse contains:
Thy better Part, which used to move
Our Admiration, and our Love,
Has fled its sad Remains.
Though there is no monumental Brass,
Thy sacred Relics to encase,
Thou wondrous Man of Art!
A Lover of the Muse divine,
O! Elrington, shall be thy Shrine,
And carve thee in his Heart.
Mr. FRANCIS ELRINGTON,
WAS born in London in the Year 1692.

He had a small Post in the Wardrobe under his Grace the Duke of Montague; but
hearing the Success of his elder Brother in Ireland, he left his Post, to
follow the Call he had to the Stage. By his Theatrical Observations in England,
he set out in Ireland with Success, improving his Talents so well, that he gave
the utmost Satisfaction in many capital Parts. His Grace the Duke of Dorset,
when Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, gave him a Post in the Revenue, which he
faithfully executed, and enjoyed to his Death.

He was in a languishing State of Health near two Years; but the last Stroke he
received at Kilkenny, where Part of the Company were playing during the Time of
the Camp being at Bennet's-Bridge; he was carried back to his House in
Drumcondra-lane, where, after a few Days Struggle, Death overcame him in
August, 1746. in the 53d Year of his Age, of a Polypus A Polypus is an
Excrescence, or fleshy fungous Substance that grows in or about the Heart; a
slow, but certain Death. This Distemper is sometimes found in the thick
Membrane of the Brain, which proves fatal. This Disease often seizes the Nose,
and other hollow Parts of the Body, fixing its Fibers like the Root of a Plant,
which must be cut off, and entirely eradicated, or it will grow again.

How many Ways has proud imperious Death,
To plunder, storm, and steal away our Breath!

, to the Regret of all his Acquaintance.

Mr. RALPH ELRINGTON,
IS the younger Brother of the late eminent Player Thomas Elrington, Esquire born
in England, and came early upon the Stage, though without any Countenance (as I
have been informed) from his Friends and Relations. Since his elder Brother's
Death he has undertaken many of his Parts, which he copies as near as possible.

He was admired some Years ago as a good executing Harlequin, Agility and
Strength being two main Ingredients in the Composition of that motly Gentleman,
where Heels are of more Use than the Head. In one of his Feats of Activity he
was much hurt, and was in some Danger of breaking his Neck to please the
Spectators, the Ears having little to do in such Entertainments; yet this
unlucky Spring met with universal Applause.

I remember a Tumbler in the Hay-market Theater in London by such an Accident
beat the Breath out of his Body, which raised such vociferous Applause, that
lasted longer than the venurous Man's Life, for he never breathed more. Indeed
his Wife had this Comfort, when the Truth was known, Pity succeeded to the Roar
of Applause.

Another Accident like this, fell out in Dr. Faustus, a Pantomime Entertainment
in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields Theater, where a Machine in the Working broke, threw
the mock Pierrot down headlong with such Force, that the poor Man broke a Plank
on the Stage with his Fall, and expired: Another was so sorely maimed, that he
did not survive many Days; and a third, one of the softer Sex, broke her Thigh.
But to prevent such Accidents for the future, those Persons are represented by
inanimate Figures, so that if they break a Neck, a Leg, or an Arm, there needs
no Surgeon.

Another Accident of the same Kind happened in Smock-alley, which gave me much
Concern, as having a Hand in the Contrivance. The late Mr. Morgan being to fly
on the Back of a Witch, in the Lancashire Witches, through the Ignorance of the
Workers in the Machinery, the Fly broke, and they both fell together, but through
Providence they neither of them were much hurt; and such Care was taken
afterward, that no Accident of that Kind could happen.

When Danger's fled, it dwells upon the Mind,
And leaves the strong Impression still behind.
Mr. RICHARD ESTCOURT.
THIS excellent Comedian was born at Tewksbury, in the County of Gloucester, in
the Year 1668. where he received his Education in the Latin School of that
Town. He had an early Desire for the Stage; for, in the 15th Year of his Age,
he stole from his Father's House with a Country Company, and at Worcester, for
fear of being known, set out with the Part of Roxana, in Woman's Apparel (in
Alexander the Great); but his Father, having Notice of it, sent to secure the
Fugitive, who made his Escape in a Suit of Woman's Clothes that he borrowed of
one of the Itinerant Ladies, and trudged it to Chipping-Norton, a
Corporation-town in Oxfordshire, twenty-five long Miles in one Day. When he
came to the Inn, Beds were scarce, and he was obliged to take up with that of
the Daughter's behind the Bar: The young Woman, going to Bed, found the wearied
Traveller in a profound Sleep; but, observing the Shirt instead of a Shift, she
began to suspect her designed Bedfellow; and, stooping to look on the Dress
that lay upon the Ground, she saw a Pair of Man's Shoes under the Bed, that
convinced her she might have been in an odd Situation, if she had gone to Bed
in the Dark. She, upon the Discovery, instantly called in the People of the
House, and waked our drowsy Traveller. The Landlord had designed to carry him
decently to the Horse-pond, till Dick made a true Confession of the whole
Affair. By Accident, a Person of the Town of Tewksbury put up at the said Inn
that Night, who knew our young disguised Wanderer; and that Knowledge signed his
Pardon. In two Days afterward his Clothes were brought him from Worcester,
accompanied with a Messenger from his Father, who led him the Road home again.

Soon after, the Father went with him to London, where he bound him fast to an
Apothecary in Hatton-garden. He was too impatient to wait so long a Time for
Liberty; therefore he stretched his Bonds till they broke, and, after an
itinerant Life two Years in England, he went to try his Fortune in Ireland,
where he shone in an exalted theatrical Sphere for some Years, when he returned
to London; where, by his Wit, and mimic Humor, his Conversation was taken up
by Persons of the highest Rank, and Parts.

He was made Providore of the Beef-Stake-Club, and, for a Mark of Distinction,
wore their Badge, which was a small Gridiron of Gold, hung about his Neck with
a green silk Ribband. This Club was composed of the chief Wits and great Men of
the Nation.

Mr. Estcourt was the original Sergeant Kite, and every Night of Performance
entertained the Audience with Variety of little Catches, and Flights of Humor,
that pleased all but his Critics. He was a great Favorite with the late Duke
of Marlborough, whose just Fame he celebrated in several out-of-the way witty
Ballads. He was Author of a Comedy called The Wife's Excuse; or, Cuckolds make
themselves; and acted at the Theater Royal in the Year 1706. but, as I have
been informed, with moderate Success. Another little Piece was produced by him,
called Prunella, a Burlesque upon the Italian Operas, then stole into Fashion,
too much supported by the excellent Voice and Judgment of Mrs. Tofts: But such
an odd Medley -- Mrs. Tofts, a mere Englishwoman, in the Part of Camilla,
courted by Nicolini in Italian, without understanding one single Syllable each
other said or sung; and, on the other Hand, Valentini courting amorously, in
the same Language, a Dutchwoman, that committed Murder on our good old English,
with as little Understanding as a Parrot: Though it was reported a Lady, of
some Quality, fell desperately in Love with Nicolini; which occasioned the
following Lines, that were pinned to Nicolini's Coat in a Chocolatehouse.

Soft thrilling Notes, swelled out with Art,
May wound, alas! the fair one's Heart;
Yet these Italians will not feel;
The Wounds they give, they cannot heal.
Yet, notwithstanding the Lashes given by Estcourt, and others, the enervating
Weakness took more Hold, like Folly, and new Sects in Religion. Persecution but
gains more Proselytes.

This celebrated Comedian paid his Debt to Nature in the Year 1733. after
leaving the Stage some Years. Sir Richard Steel gives him this Character, in
his Lucubrations: "An excellent Companion, one who was perfectly Master of
well-turned Compliments, as well as smart Repartees; which shows a ready Wit
The first Account of this eminent Performer I had from the late Mr. John
Bowman, an Actor more than Half an Age on the London Theaters.

This Gentleman was born in the Year 1666. and died in the Year 1739. I have
often heard him say, he never remembered that any Indisposition retarded his
coming to the Theater during his long Course of Life; and this Declaration was
made not a Month before he died. He never met with Contempt in the latter Part
of his Life; and we may end with two Lines in Jane Shore: Age sat with decent
Grace upon his Visage,
And worthily became his silver Locks.



."

Mr. JOHN EVANS.
THIS Person was an Actor of very good Repute in this Kingdom, joined in the
Management with Mr. Thomas Elrington, Mr. Thomas Griffith, etc. His Person was
inclineable to the Gross; therefore wanted Delicacy for the amiable Parts; he
had an excellent harmonious Voice, and just Delivery, but a little too indolent
for much Study or Contemplation.

In the last Year of the Reign of Queen Anne, the Company of Dublin went down,
in the Summer Season, to play at Cork: One Evening Mr. Evans was invited, by
some Officers of a Regiment then on Duty in that City, to a Tavern: Many
Healths were proposed, and went round, without Reluctance; when it came to Mr.
Evans's Turn, he proposed the Health of her Majesty Queen Anne, which so much
disgusted one of the Company (though clothed in the Livery of his Royal
Mistress), that he ran down Stairs, and sent up a Drawer to whisper Mr. Evans;
who immediately put on his Sword, and went after him, without taking the least
Notice to the Company. He found his Antagonist in a Room in the Passage of the
Tavern, with the Door half open, who courageously made a Thrust at Mr. Evans,
which he put by with his left Hand; at this, Mr. Evans drew, thrust the Door
wide open, entered, and soon drove his Opposer out to the Passage, where he
disarmed the doughty Hero, before the Company above Stairs knew any thing of
the Matter. The rest of the military Gentlemen expressed an Abhorrence to the
Treatment Mr. Evans received, and, seemingly, reconciled them on the Spot; but,
notwithstanding, when the Company returned to Dublin, the Person who sent the
Challenge up Stairs at Cork, being then returned also, told his own Story in
such a Manner, that several warm Gentlemen of the Army were made to believe,
that Mr. Evans had affronted the whole Body Military; and when the poor
supposed Culprit came to his Business of the Theater, their Clamor, in the
Audience, was so great, that the House was dismissed, and no Play to be acted
till Mr. Evans had asked public Pardon upon the Stage. His high Spirit was,
with great Difficulty, brought to submit, but at last he consented. I remember
the Play was, The Rival Queens; or, The Death of Alexander the Great; the Part
of Alexander to be acted by the Delinquent. He came to ask Pardon before the
Curtain: When he addressed the Audience, one Smart, from the Pit, cried out,
Kneel, you Rascal! Evans, then collected in himself, replied, in the same Tone
of Voice, No, you Rascal! I Will kneel to none but God, and my Queen! A dangerous
Paroxysm, at such a Crisis. However, as there were many worthy Gentlemen of the
Army who knew the whole Affair, the new-raised Clamor ceased, and the Play
went through without any Molestation, and, by Degrees, Things returned to their
proper Chanel. By this we may see, it is some Danger for an Actor to be in the
right.

Three Years after this Affair, Mr. Evans went to the Theater in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, and, in his Journey back to Ireland, was taken ill of a
Fever, at the Town of Whitchurch in Shorpshire; from whence he was removed, for
better Advice, to Chester, where he ended his Progress of Life, in the 41st
Year of his Age; and was privately buried in the Cathedral, without Monument,
Stone, or Inscription.

Thus may great Merit in Oblivion lie,
And rest forgotten to Eternity.
Mr. WILLIAM ESTE.
THIS Gentleman was related to the late Bishop of Waterford. He died in the
Prime of Youth, in the Year 1743. It Is a Pity he took such Pains in getting the
better of his Constitution; but he succeeded at a Time when he might have made
some Figure on the Stage. He had Qualifications sufficient for Improvement,
some Learning, a Person amiable, a sweet Voice, and sung not unpleasingly:
Notwithstanding, the Neglect of himself depreciated his Merit. He truly made
out a Saying of that late great Comedian Mr. Wilks: "The Man that drinks a
Glass of strong Liquor in a Morning, for every one he swallows, drives a Nail
in his Coffin." Many a Genius has been drowned in Drink. I remember an Author,
whose sweet Writings will keep his Memory fragrant, that was so much addicted
to that Weakness, that if there were no other Spirits to be come at, he would
empty a Lady's Hungary Water-bottle; and yet the flowing Numbers of his Pen
seemed as if he had drank no other Liquid but what came from the pure Streams
of Helicon. I shall end this with Shakespeare's Reflection from the Mouth of
Cassio in Othello:

O! that Men should put an Enemy in their Mouths to steal away their Brains! O!
thou invisible Spirit of Wine! if thou have no Name to be known by, let us call
thee Devil!

He died of a lingering Illness, the 24th of January 1742-3.

Mrs. ELMY.
HER maiden Name was Mors. She was born in England, but when, or where, I know
not Mr. Elmy, her Husband, I know, was born at Norwich; but where he is now, I
believe neither she nor I can tell.
. She has been an Actress about seventeen Years, began very young, and was
entered first in a Country Company. She knows what she does, as well as what
she says. She seems to have more Spirits off the Stage, in a Chamber, than she
has in the public Theater, which is owing to her weak Voice; but she means very
well there. I do not know her well enough to be any Judge of her Morals;
therefore I shall not speak of what I do not know; and even this I have
gathered more from common Fame, than my own particular Knowledge: Therefore I
shall not say any more of her, as Fame is a Gossip not always to be believed,
as Hudibras tells us.

There is a tall long-sided Dame,
But wondrous light, ycleped Fame:
Two Trumpets she does sound at once,
But both of clean contrary Tones;
But whether both with the same Wind,
Or one before, or one behind,
We know not -- only this can tell,
The one sounds vilely, the other well:
And therefore vulgar Authors name
The one Good, the other Evil Fame.
Mr. GEORGE FARQUHAR.
SINCE this Gentleman owes his Birth to this Kingdom, and on the Irish Stage
commenced Actor, I hope it will not be thought improper to give a short Account
of him, which I shall take from his Life, that I collected several Years past,
to prefix to his Works. The Materials I received from Mr. Wilks, who approved
of them before they went to the Publisher.

Mr. George Farquhar was born, in the North of Ireland, of Parents that held no
mean Rank in that Part of the Country; who, having a numerous Issue, could
bestow on him no other Fortune than a genteel Education. As those who are
blessed with a poetical Genius always show some Glimmerings of their Fancy in
their Youth; so he, ere he arrived at his tenth Year, gave several Specimens of
a peculiar Turn that Way. One of his juvenile Productions I shall here mention,
in which he discovered a Way of Thinking, as well as an Elegancy of Expression,
far beyond his Years.

I took these Lines of Verse from the Mouth of Mr. Wilks.
The pliant Soul of erring Youth
Is, like soft Wax, or moistened Clay,
Apt to receive all heavenly Truth,
Or yield to Tyrant Ill the Sway.
Shun Evil in your early Years,
And Manhood may to Virtue rise;
But he who, in his Youth, appears
A Fool, in Age will never be wise.
He was educated in the University of Dublin, where he acquired a considerable
Reputation: He began very early to apply himself to the Stage as an Actor,
following the Examples of Lee and Otway with our great Shakespeare, and with
like Success; who, though all excellent dramatic Poets, made but indifferent
Actors. However, Mr. Farquhar, having the Advantage of a very good Person, though
with a weak Voice, was never repulsed by the Audience; but the following
Accident made him determine to leave off the Occupation: Playing the Part of
Guyomar in the Indian Emperor, who is supposed to kill Vasquez, one of the
Spanish Generals; not remembering to change his Sword for a Foil Foils are the
Name of those Swords used in the Theater, with the Edges ground off, and a
blunted Point.
, in the Mock Engagement, he wounded the Person that represented Vasquez, though
(as it fell out) not dangerously; nevertheless, it put an End to his appearing
on the Stage as an Actor.

He was very young when he wrote his first Comedy of Love and a Bottle, acted
at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane School. He was peculiarly happy in the Choice
of his Subjects, which he took Care to adorn with Variety of Characters and
Incidents. He lashed the Vices of the Age, though with a merciful Hand. His Plays
were wrote in the following Order: 1. Love and a Bottle, School. 2. The Constant
Couple, 1700. This Piece was played 53 Nights the first Season. 3. Sir Harry
Wildair, the Sequel to the former, 1701. 9 Nights. 4. Inconstant; or, The Way
to Win Him; 1703. 11 Nights. 5. Twin Rivals, 1705. 13 Nights. 6. Recruiting
Officer, 1707. 15 Nights. 7. The Beaux Stratagem, 1710. 10 Nights. (All acted
at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.)
His last Comedy he wrote in six Weeks, with a settled Illness all the Time. He
perceived the Approaches of Death before he had finished the last Act, and (as
he had often foretold) died before the Run of the Play was over. It was
affirmed, by some of his near Acquaintance, his unfortunate Marriage shortened
his Days; for his Wife (by whom he had two Daughters), through the Reputation
of a great Fortune, tricked him into Matrimony. This was chiefly the Fault of
her Love, which was so violent, that she was resolved to use all Arts to gain
him. Though some Husbands, in such a Case, would have proved mere Husbands; yet
he was so much charmed with her Love and Understanding, that he lived very
happy with her. Therefore when I say an unfortunate Marriage, with other
Circumstances, conduced to the shortening of his Days; I only mean, that his
Fortune, being too slender to support a Family, led him into a great many Cares
and Inconveniences: For I have often heard him say Mr. Wilks's own Words.
, That it was more Pain to him in imagining that his Family might want a
needful Support, than the most violent Death that could be inflicted on him Mr.
Farquhar was a Person of infinite Humor, as I have been informed, even in his
last Indisposition. He died in the Run of the Stratagem. Mr. Wilks often
visited him in his Illness. In one of these Visits, Mr. Wilks told Mr.
Farquhar, that Mrs. Oldfield thought he had dealt too freely with the Character
of Mrs. Sullen, in giving her to Archer without a proper Divorce, which was not
a Security for her Honor. To salve that, replied the Author, I Will get a real
Divorce -- Marry her myself, and give her my Bond she shall be a real Widow in
less than a Fortnight. While Mr. Farquhar was in Trinity College, Dublin, he
sent to a Gentleman to borrow Burnet's History of the Reformation; but the
Gentleman sent him Word he never lent any Book out of his Chamber; but, if he
would come there, he should make use of it as long as he pleased. A little
While after, the Owner of the Book sent to borrow Mr. Farquhar's Bellows; he
returned him the Compliment -- I never lend my Bellows out of my own Chamber;
but if he pleased to come there, be should make use of them as long as he
would. When he expired, Mr. Wilks took Care to bury him decently in St. Martin
in the Fields. Among his Papers he found this short Note:

Dear Bob,
I have not any thing to leave thee to perpetuate my Memory, but two helpless
Girls; look upon them sometimes, and think of him that was, to the last Moments
of his Life, Thine,

G. FARQUHAR."


Even the two last Lines he ever wrote, seemed to be playing with Words.

Death now appears to seize my latest Breath;
But all my Miseries will end in Death.
Mr. Farquhar attempted to play the Part of Sir Harry Wildair for his own
Benefit, as I am informed from a Gentleman that saw him in this Kingdom, which
answered his Design, in gaining a crowded Audience; but he executed the Part so
lamely, as an Actor, that his Friends were ashamed for him. Thus we see a good
Poet may make but an indifferent Actor.


.

The Mind diseased strikes Poison to the Heart,
And baffles all the best Physician's Art.
Mr. FOOT.
AS I never had the Fortune to be present at this Gentleman's public
Performance, I cannot pretend to be a competent Judge of his Merit; though, I
must own, I have heard him launch out into Mimicry, which might perhaps give
Pleasure to others, but, I must own, very little to me.

I remember an Instance of this kind of Satire in my Youth, that gave
Satisfaction to some light Hearts, but greater Disgust to the more judicious
Sort of the Audience.

Mr. George Powell, a reputable Actor, with many Excellencies, gave out, that
he would perform the Part of Sir John Falstaff in the Manner of that very
excellent English Roscius, Mr. Betterton. He certainly hit his Manner, and Tone
of Voice; yet, to make the Picture more like, he mimick'd the Infirmities of
Distemper, old Age, and the afflicting Pains of the Gout, which that great Man
was often seized with. Certainly Mimicry is a Gift from Nature, and laudable,
if made use of like the ancient Mimes, who could dumbly describe every Passion
of the Mind, and tell a Tale without a Tongue: But to mimic the Infirmities of
Nature, may well be termed Incivility, Barbarity, and Inhumanity.

I remember D'Urfey, the late Lyric Poet, stuttered extremely when in a
Passion, though he could speak an Oration, read a Scene in a Play, or sing any of
his own Songs or Dialogues, without the least Hesitation. He came one Morning
to the Rehearsal a little disturbed about a depending Benefit Play, and asked,
in a Passion, Wh, wh, where wa, wa, was M, M, Mr. Wi, Wilks? The Drole
Penkethman answered, H, h, he d, d, did n, n, not kn, kn, know. But the
choleric Poet broke his Head for his Joke, and it was with great Difficulty the
Bard was appeased.

Mimicry, as it now stands with us, is like a Statue, larger than the Life,
made for a certain Height and Distance; while upon the Level with you, its
coarse Proportion seems monstrous, and overdone. Many excellent Comedians have
had this natural Talent. Mr. Rymer, that great Critic, tells us, that Mr.
Mountford was so excellently gifted that Way (if we may call it Excellence),
that when he was Train-bearer to the late Chancellor Jefferies, in the Reign of
King James the Second, at an Entertainment for the most eminent Lawyers, his
Master ordered him to come before him, and plead a feigned Cause, which he
performed with great Eloquence; and in his Pleadings, to the Admiration of all
present, assumed the Manner and Voice of several of the best Pleaders then at
the Bar, even some of those that were present at the Entertainment. As I said
before, every thing of this kind must be over-done, to make it the more
ridiculous; and Actors of great Merit, thus mimick'd, are liable to some little
Disgrace, which is neither Justice nor Goodnature. I have seen Faces painted
in a Scene of a Multitude, which is generally used in Drury lane Theater at the
Coronation of Anna Bullen, that make most ridiculous Figures, so like to be
known; and yet the Persons they represent have nothing particularly faulty in
their Countenance or Figures. But the Painter was a merry Italian Wag, and did
it to show his exuberant Fancy.

But to return to Mr. Foot. He is a Gentleman of a good Family, and seems to
have some Claim to the Estate of the Goodieres. One of that Family was, not
many Years past, murdered by his own Brother at Bristol. I believe he has
Merit, or a Wou'd-be-Wit would not have published the following Lines in the
Newspapers: For, I have observed, those that have Merit, are generally liable
to bespattering Defamation. However, here are the Lines.

On a Pseudo-Player.
THOU Mimic of Cibber -- of Garrick thou Ape!
Thou Fop in Othello! thou Cipher in Shape!
Thou Trifle in Person! thou Puppet in Voice!
Thou Farce of a Player! thou Rattle for Boys!
Thou Mongrel! thou dirty-face Harlequin Thing!
Thou Puff of bad Paste! thou Ginger-breadKing!
Was a Quin, or Delane, the Boast of our Stage,
Set up as fit Marks for thy Envy, or Rage?
Was a Quin, or Delane, who excel in their Art,
To be ap'd by a Cobbler, who bungles his Part?
Thou Mummer in Action! thou Coffee-house Jester!
Thou Mimic sans Sense! Mock Hero in Gesture!
Can the Squeak of a Puppet present us a Quin?
Or a Pigmy, or Dwarf, show a Giant's Design?
Shall Deficience, unpunished, at Excellence rail?
Or a Sprat; without Ridicule, mimic a Whale?
Can a Foot represent us the Length of a Yard?
Where, then, shall such Insolence meet its Reward?
Contempt were the best, like the Mastiff that feels,
With superior Derision, the Cur at his Heels --
O Ireland! too prone to encourage new Toys!
In Trinkets, and Novelty, fickle as Boys!
O Dublin! alas! to a Proverb well known,
To receive what is foreign, yet scoff at thy own;
Learn truly to judge 'twixt a F -- t and a Tune:
Applaud the good Player -- but damn the Buffoon!
This Poet is too passionate to be in the Right; neither would I have inserted
it, if I had not received it enclosed with the following Laconic Epistle.

SIR,
I Know what you are about; insert the enclosed in its proper Place, or you
will neither do yourself, or your Readers, Justice. If you fail, you shall hear
of it --

Bob!


Notwithstanding this angry Author, I dare swear it will not do the Gentleman
any Prejudice: For Passion is the worst Persuader in the World. For, as the
Poet says, Truth is too naked, of all Art bereaved:
Since the World will -- why -- let them be deceived.


Mrs. FURNIVAL.
I Cannot tell when Mrs. Furnival first commenced Actress; but I know her
Reputation for a Stage-performer was so great, that a Person of high Birth and
Station, who had seen her act several capital Parts at the Theater in York,
prevailed on the Manager of Drury Lane to send for her in the Year 1737.
Accordingly, I received a Commission for that Purpose, which she approved of.
The first Part she acted, at her Arrival in London, was that of the Scornful
Lady, in a Comedy of Beaumont and Fletcher's that bears the Title. I own it was
a Character of my own choosing, and for no other Reason, but that the Play had
slept since the Death of the inimitable Mrs. Oldfield. The Success did not
entirely answer the Meaning of my Intention, though she acquitted herself so
well, that there was a very good Actress in Prospect. But the Parts in Tragedy
were so taken up, that her Talent that Way was never once tried in the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane: Therefore, by the Advice of the same worthy
Gentleman, that was the Cause of her leaving York for London, she left London
for Dublin, where her Merit was so conspicuous, that her Loss is much
regretted. She is once more returned to England, I believe without any other
Advice but her own; yet, I fear, she will be remembered here, till a better
Alicia in Jane Shore, Lady Macbeth, Hermione in the Distressed Mother, or Zara
in the Mourning Bride, with many other Parts, rises up to outdo her.

But what, at first, gives infinite Delight,
When often seen, hangs heavy on the Sight.
DAVID GARRICK, Esquire
THIS complete Actor was born, in Staffordshire, of an ancient Family in that
County; had a genteel Education, and was, by his Father, designed for the Law.
I doubt not, from his good Sense and Affability, if he had continued in that
honorable Society in Lincoln's End, but he might have made a considerable
Figure at the Bar, and, by his Elocution, walked in the foremost Rank of
eminent Orators.

His Genius led him early to study Nature, and leave the crabbed Tracts of the
Law. His facetious good Humor gained him Entrance behind the Scenes, two or
three Years, in Drury Lane, before he commenced Actor; where his excellent
Understanding could profit by the Faults of others, mend them, and improve the
Beauties.

In the Year 1740. he set out, in full Luster, at the Theater in
Goodman's-Fields, with the Part of Richard the Third; and, by the Force of
Attraction, drew even the Court to the farthest Suburbs of London. After making
that remote Part of the Town as familiar to Courtiers and Quality, as Wapping
to Sailors; he came, with a Blaze of Light, to Drury Lane; where he began with
an Act of Charity worthy of his Humanity and Goodness, by assisting the Widow
of Mr. Harper with a Sum, that, by good Management, will make her Circumstances
easy the rest of her Life. She was at Kilkenny, the Place of her Birth, two
Summers ago, where I received this Account from her own Mouth. The Part he
performed was Chamont, in the Orphan.

When this Gentleman was in this Kingdom last, I was unfortunately seized by a
stubborn Indisposition, and his Goodnature prevailed upon the eminent Dr.
Barry to give me his Assistance: But what need I repeat, to those that are not
blind, that the Sun shines in Summer? I shall end with two Copies of Verses
that were printed, at his first Arrival, in the Newspapers, at that Time.

On Mr. GARRICK.
Cur in Theatrum, Cato severe, venisti?
An ideo tantum veneras, ut exires? MART.
IN Roman Days, once, Cato the severe,
With awful Brow, went to the Theater:
But, O! instead of manly Fire, and Rage,
And all the true Pathetic of the Stage,
He saw, he heard, the Rant, the Droll, the Stare;
Saw Nature, and the Passions, murdered there --
Saw, and retired -- But, should he now revive,
And see glad Nature in her Garrick live,
He Would laugh at Bays, and weep with injured Lear,
Curse Tyrant Richard, but applaud the Player!
By Joy, Rage, Pity, all the Passions moved,
Garrick would well by Cato be approved:
The Wise, the Virtuous Cato, would forbear
His rigid Censures, and in Raptures swear,
That by some Power Divine the Stage was trod,
And, in the matchless Actor, own the God.
This great Actor is Author of Three Dramatic Pieces, the Lying Valet, Miss in
her Teens, and Lethe; as also several well-wrote Prologues, Epilogues, Songs,
and Poems of a peculiar Turn of Wit. I shall take Leave to insert one Song, as
a Specimen.

To SYLVIA.
IF Truth can fix thy wavering Heart,
Let Damon urge his Claim;
He feels the Passion void of Art,
The pure, and constant Flame.
Though sighing Swains their Torments tell,
Their sensual Love contemn:
They only prize the beauteous Shell,
But slight the inward Gem.
Possession cures the wounded Heart,
Destroys the transient Fire;
But when the Mind receives the Dart,
Enjoyment whets Desire.
Your Charms each slavish Sense control,
A Tyrant's short-lived Reign;
But milder Reason rules the Soul,
Nor Time can break the Chain.
By Age your Beauties will decay,
Your Mind improves with Years;
And, when the Blossoms fade away,
The ripening Fruit appears.
May Heaven and Sylvia grant my Suit,
And bless each future Hour,
That Damon, who can taste the Fruit,
May gather every Flower!
THOMAS GRIFFITH, Esquire
IS descended from an ancient Family in Wales. His Parents came to settle in
Dublin, where this Son was born in the Year 1680. He was put 'Prentice to a
Mathematical Instrument-maker; but a lively-spirited Genius made him cast his
Thoughts toward the Theater, when he saw a young Actress that had sufficient
Charms to engage his Heart. The Passion of Love is not to be controuled in
Youth. He married her before he had served a Third Part of his Time, quitting
his Mathematical Master, and bent his Thoughts entirely to the Drama. His
Talent led him to Comedy, of the merry Cast, in which he gave great Pleasure to
the Audience.

His Wit and facetious Humor gained him many Friends, of the best Sort, and
superior Rank. In the Year 1710. the late Lord Southwell gave him a Post in the
Revenue, which he enjoyed till Death, which fell out in January 24. 1743-4. in
his grand Climacteric, two Days before the Night of his Benefit; which was
performed for the Widow, his second Wife, who was Daughter to the Rev. Mr.
Foxcroft, of Portarlington in the Queen's County, a Gentlewoman of Merit and
Virtue.

Mr. Griffith was not only a good Actor, but a pleasing Poet, in what he
attempted: His Person was well made, though low in Stature. I have seen a Bill of
mock Alexander runs thus:

The Part of Alexander the Great to be performed by little Griffith.
He was an excellent Companion, and told a Story with a peculiar Grace; and
would often tell little Histories of himself, even in Ridicule of himself. I
shall mention one I had from his own Mouth.

After his commencing Actor, he contracted a Friendship with Mr. Wilks; which
Chain remained unbroke till the Death of that excellent Comedian. Though Mr.
Griffith was very young, Mr. Wilks took him with him to London, and had him
entered for that Season at a small Salary. The Indian Emperor being ordered on
a sudden to be played, the Part of Pizarro, a Spaniard, was wanting, which Mr.
Griffith procured, with some Difficulty. Mr. Betterton being a little
indisposed, would not venture out to Rehearsal, for Fear of increasing his
Indisposition, to the Disappointment of the Audience, who had not seen our
young Stripling rehearse. But, when he came ready, at the Entrance, his Ears
were pierced with a Voice not familiar to him: He cast his Eyes upon the Stage,
where he beheld the diminutive Pizarro, with a Truncheon as long as himself
(his own Words). He steps up to Downs the Prompter, and cried, Zounds, Downs!
what sucking Scaramouch have you sent on there? Sir, replied Downs, He Is good
enough for a Spaniard; the Part is small. Betterton returned, If he had made
his Eyebrows his Whiskers, and each Whisker a Line, the Part would have been
two Lines too much for such a Monkey in Buskins. Poor Griffith stood on the
Stage, near the Door, and heard every Syllable of the short Dialogue, and by
his Fears, knew who was meant by it; but, happy for him, he had no more to
speak that Scene. When the first Act was over (by the Advice of Downs) he went
to make his Excuse, with -- Indeed, Sir, I had not taken the Part, but there
was only I alone out of the Play. I! I! (replied Betterton, with a Smile) Thou
art but the Tittle of an I. Griffith seeing him in no ill Humor, told him,
Indians ought to be the best Figures on the Stage, as Nature had made them.
Very like, replied Betterton; but it would be a double Death to an Indian
Cobbler to be conquered by such a Weazle of a Spaniard as thou art! And, after
this Night, let me never see a Truncheon in thy Hand again, unless to stir the
Fire. This Story, as I said before, was of his own telling. However, he took
his Advice, laid aside the Buskin, and stuck to the Sock, in which he made a
Figure equal to most of his Cotemporaries.

Our Genius flutters with the Plumes of Youth,
But Observation wings to steady Truth.
Mr. HENRY GIFFARD.
THIS Gentleman is descended from an ancient Family, originally in
Buckinghamshire. His Father had a numerous Issue, he being the last of Eight
Sons. He was born in London, in 1699. In the Year 1716. he was made a Clerk to
the South Sea Company; in which Post he remained Three Years. But having a
strong Propensity to the Stage, he first appeared in Public on the Theater in
Bath, in 1719. and, in two Years Probation, he made such a Progress, that the
Manager of Lincoln's-Inn-Fields Theater invited him to join his Company, where
he continued two Years more: From thence he went to try his Fortune in Ireland,
where his Merit soon brought him into the Management.

During his Stay there, he married the Daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Lydal, Persons
that made very good Figures in the Theater. This Gentlewoman died in Childbed
very young, leaving behind her one Son, born in his Father's House on the
North-Strand, who is now an Actor in this Kingdom. Some Years after Mr. Giffard
married a second Wife, who is now alive. She has an amiable Person, and is a
well-esteemed Actress, both in Tragedy and Comedy; born, if am not misinformed
by her Mother, the Widow Lydal, in the Year 1711.

Mr. Giffard and Spouse, if I mistake not, came over to England 1730. where
they supported a Company of Comedians, then under the Management of Mr. Odell,
now Deputy-Licenser of Plays under the Lord Chamberlain his Grace the Duke of
Grafton. Mr. Odell, from not understanding the Management of a Company (as,
indeed, how should any one, that is not, in some sort, brought up to that
Knowledge?) soon left it to Mr. Giffard that did; who, in the Year 1733. caused
to be built an entire, new, beautiful, convenient Theater, by the same
Architect with that of Covent Garden; where Dramatic Pieces were performed with
the utmost Elegance and Propriety. Some Years after he was obliged to quit that
Theater (I may say by Oppression), and occupy'd the vacant Theater in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields: But his Success did not answer his Merit. From thence he
transplanted himself into the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

Merit will sometimes fail of due Regard,
And Virtue's Self must be its own Reward.
Mr. BENJAMIN HUSBAND,
WAS born in Pembrokeshire, January 1672. His Ancestors were an ancient and
reputable Family, long seated in that County. He fell in Love with the Tragic
Muse very young, but dangled after the Drama full two Years, sighing, at great
Expense, before he was suffered to declare his Passion publicly. Yet, certainly
he possessed most of the Requisites that compound a good Actor, to assure
Success. But the Managers of those Theatrical Days were very cautious in their
Proceedings; no Persons were fit for their Stages, without a visible
Appearance, at least, of not displeasing. And yet it was with some Difficulty
he gained Permission to personate Sir Walter Ralegh in the Earl of Essex; but
he came off so well, that, the following Pay-Day, he received a Week's Salary,
the usual Stipend of young Actors (Ten Shillings a Week); but, unluckily, the
Death of good Queen Mary put a Stop to their Acting for near Six Months.
However, when Permission was given to open the Theaters again, Mr. Husband soon
gained better Parts, and a larger Salary.

In the Year 1696. Mr. Dogget This truly great Comedian was born in
Castle-street, Dublin (a Circumstance overlooked by the Laureat). He left his
Occupation, as an Actor, several Years before his Death; and, in his Will,
bequeathed to Watermens-Hall a Sum for ever, sufficient to buy a Coat and
Silver Badge, to be rowed for on the Thames by 'Prentices every Year, that have
fulfilled their Indentures. A humorous Poet wrote the following Lines upon the
Occasion on a Glass Window at Lambeth, the First of August 1736.

Tom Dogget, the greatest sly Drole in his Parts,
In Acting, was certain a Master of Arts,
A Monument left -- no Herald is fuller,
His Praise is sung yearly by many a Sculler:
Ten thousand Years hence, if the World lasts so long,
Tom Dogget will still be the Theme of their Song.
Old Noll, with great Lewis and Bourbon, forgot,
And numberless Kings in Oblivion shall rot.

, being then in Ireland, recommended Mr. Husband to Mr. Ashbury, as a very
promising young Actor, and fit for his Purpose. He set out from London with Mr.
Trefusis I have mentioned Jo Trefusis before, but shall add something here
which I have learned from Mr. Husband. Jo was reputed the natural Son of Oliver
Cromwell; but, I must own, he did not seem to have any Resemblance of Features
with his Father, if we may judge by the Pictures and Gravings of the Protector:
Jo had a long Chin, and naturally a most consummate foolish Face, by Nature
formed for suitable Characters; yet a Person of infinite Humor, and shrewd
Conceits; with a particular Tone of Voice and Manner, that gave a double
Satisfaction to what he said: Adhering strictly to Honesty, without Guile or
Falsehood; which, I suppose, he inherited from his Mother; he acquired the
Appellative, from all that knew him, of Honest Jo! A Character he bore with
Justice. Jo, by the following Account of himself, must have been very young on
the Stage. He entered a Volunteer on board the Ship where the Duke of York
commanded in the Chanel, in that memorable Sea-Engagement with the Dutch Fleet,
commanded (I think) by Van Tromp, in the Year 1673. When the Preparations were
making for the Battle, Jo, though a Volunteer, confessed, Fear began to invade
him; but, when the Man at the Topmast Head cried, a Sail! then two Sail! and
after, Zounds, a whole Wood! Jo's Terrors augmented: But his Fears came to the
full Height, when a Sailor asked him, If he had not performed on the Stage? Jo
replied in the Affirmative Why then (replied the blunt Tarr) Tomorrow, if you
are not killed the first Broadside, by G -- d you will see the deepest and
bloodiest Tragedy you ever saw in your Life.

Jo was so inimitable in dancing the Clown, that General Ingoldsby was so well
pleased, that he sent him Five Guineas from the Box where he sat. Jo dressed
himself next Day, and went to the Castle to return Thanks. The General was hard
to be persuaded it was the same Person; but Jo soon convinced him, by saying,
Ise the very Mon, an't please your Ex-cell-en-cey and, at the same time,
twirling his Hat, as he did in the Dance, with his consummate foolish Face and
Scrape Nay, now I am convinced, replied the General (laughing), and thou shall
not show such a Face for nothing here -- So gave Jo Five Guineas more; which so
well please him, that he paid his Compliments in his awkward clownish Manner,
and, as Shakespeare says, Set the Table on a Roar. So Exit Jo.


, and embarked for Ireland; and was at Sea in that violent Storm when Brigadier
Fitzgerald was cast away in the Packet-Boat, near Hoath, where every
Souperished but the Master of the Vessel. However, after much Difficulty, and
great Danger he landed safe in Dublin. Mr. Husband continued on the Stage with
great Reputation as an Actor, and a Gentleman of exact Conduct An Example truly
worthy imitating.

He afterward passed and repassed from England to Ireland several Times, till,
in the Year 1713. he was settled in this Kingdom for (I believe) the remaining
Part of his Days fixed in the Esteem of all that know him.

The Lees of Life with Cheerfulness he wears,
And from an upright Mind no Death he fears.
Mr. CHARLES HULET.
THIS Person performed one Season on the Dublin Stage. He was born in the Year
1701. and was by his Father put 'Prentice to a Bookseller. By reading of Plays
in his Master's Shop, he used to repeat Speeches in the Kitchen, in the
Evening, to the Destruction of many a Chair, which he substituted in the Room
of real Persons in his Drama. One Night, as he was repeating the Part of
Alexander, with his wooden Representative of Clytus (an old Elbow-Chair), and
coming to the Speech where the old General is to be killed, this young mock
Alexander snatched a Poker instead of a Javelin, and threw it with such
Strength against poor Clytus, that the Chair was killed upon the Spot, and lay
mangled on the Floor. The Death of Clytus made a monstrous Noise, which
disturbed the Master in the Parlour, who called out to know the Reason; and was
answered by the Cook below, Nothing, Sir, but that Alexander has killed Clytus.

His Master, Mr. Edmund Curll Mr. Curll was a Person of extraordinary Talents,
very pleasing in Conversation, and could extract Gold from Dirt. He had the Art
of forming a Title to a Book beyond the rest of the Craft, or even the Author
themselves. I have forgot how he came to stumble over Mr. Pope; for Mr. Curll
was a little purblind, and lost his Sight some Years before his Death. But Mr
Pope in Revenge invited him to a Tavern, under the Color of Friendship: Sack
being a favorite Liquor with Mr. Curll, this great Poet had a Draught prepares
in an antimonial Cup, which the unsuspecting Book seller cheerfully drank off
to the Health of his good Friend Mr. Pope. But the Operation began to work
before he could reach his own House, with such violen Motions, that the
intended Farce was near ending in the Tragedy of Mr. Edmund Curll. The next
Day, to complete his Revenge, Mr. Pope published a humourous Account of the
Murder of Mr. Curll by Poison. By this Poet and Bookseller, to their Deaths,
declared fe War against each other; and though the latter might b^ put to his
Shifts sometimes, yet he often found Meat to gall his Kibe. Pope, in his
Dunciad, had made Cur a Demi-hero, and has filthily bedaub'd him with Honors;
but enraged Wit, like a Wasp disturbed, w^^ fly at harmless Passengers, and
leave their poisoned Sting behind.
(a Person well noted in London from Mr. Pope' commencing Physician), finding
his Inclination so strong for the Stage, agreed to let him try his Fortune
there. He had a most extraordinary melodious Voice, strong, and clear and in
the Part of Macheath, in the Beggar' Opera, he was allowed to excel the
Original Then he was an excellent Mimic, if Excellency may be joined to
Mimicry. He took a little too much Pride in the Firmness of his Voice; for he
had an odd Custom of stealing unperceived upon a Person, and, with a Hem! in
his Ear, deafen him for some time, with the Strength and Loudness of his Voice.
Yet this customary Folly (for Folly it may be justly called) proved his Fate;
for the last Hem! he gave broke a Blood-Vessel, which was the Cause of his
Death in Twenty-four Hours after. He was a great Benefactor to the Malt-Tax,
which, in my Opinion, was the Cause of that Mountain of Flesh he was loaded
with.

At the Time of his Death, he was under Mr. Henry Giffard, at the Theater in
Goodman's-Fields. He was buried at the Charge of that Gentleman, in St. Mary's
Church, White-chapel, in the 35th Year of his Age. We shall end with Mr. Hulet
in Mr. Giffard's own Words.

Mr. Charles Hulet was endowed with great Abilities for a Player; but labored
under the Disadvantage of a Person rather too corpulent for the Hero or the
Lover; but his Port well became Henry the Eighth, Falstaff, etc. and many other
Characters, both Tragedy and Comedy, in which he would have been equally
excellent, had his Application and Figure been proportionable to his
Qualifications; which had he duly cultivated, he would have become a very
considerable Performer. What Machines are we poor Mortals! that a Person should
be killed with a Hem!

As in a Watch, if the least Engine flies,
The Work is stopped, and the whole Movement dies.
Mr. BENJAMIN JOHNSON,
COmmonly called Ben Johnson, was bre^ a Painter, where his Employment led him
to paint, under his Master, the Scenes for the Stage; but he took more Pleasure
in hearing the Actors rehearse, than in his Pencil or Colors; and, as he used
to say in his merry Mood, left the Saint 's St. Luke was a Painter, and those
that follow that Art have chosen him for their Patron; and make his Day a Time
of Mirth and Jollity.
Occupation to take that of a Sinner.

He arrived to as great a Perfection in Acting, as his great Namesake did in
Poetry. He seemed to be proud to wear that eminent Poet's double Name, being
more particularly great in all that Author's Plays that were usually performed,
viz. Wasp in the Play of Bartholomew-Fair, Corbaccio in the Fox, Morose in the
Silent Woman, and Ananias in the Alchymist.

He was but once in this Kingdom, about fifty Years ago, in the Summer Season.
I have heard him often give most extravagant Praises to one Baker, a
Master-Paver in Dublin, for excelling in Sir John Falstaff, the Spanish Friar,
Sir Epicure Mammon in the Alchymist, and many other Parts. He would be studying
in the Streets, while he would be overlooking his Men at their Work. One Day
two of his Men, that were newly come under their Master, and were Strangers to
his Manner, observing his Countenance, Motions, Gestures, and talking to
himself, imagined their Master was mad. Baker, seeing his Men neglect their
Work to gaze at him, bid them, in a hasty Manner, mind their Business! The
Country-Fellows (for they but lately came from Chester) went to work again, but
still with an Eye upon their Master. The Part was Sir John Falstaff that Baker
was rehearsing; and, when he came to the Fifth Act, where the humourous Knight
is supposed to see Sir Walter Blunt lie dead upon the Stage -- He gives a Look
on one of his new Pavers, and muttered loud enough to be heard, with Eyes fixed
upon him, -- Who have we here? -- Sir Walter Blunt! -- There Is Honor for you.
The Fellow, that was stooping, rose on the Instant, clapping hold of his Master
-- Wauns! Ise blunt enough to take care of you, Ise warrant you! So, with the
Help of his Companion, they bound Mr. Baker's Hands and Feet, assisted by other
People, no wiser than themselves; and, notwithstanding their Master's Noise and
Struggle, they carried him home in that Condition, with a great Mob at their
Heels. Mr. Johnson informed me, when he returned to England, he gave Mr.
Betterton the Manner of Baker's playing Falstaff; which that great Actor not
only approved of, but imitated; and allowed the Manner was better than his own.
Mr. Husband gave me much the same Account of this Mr. Baker.

Mr. Johnson played to the last Year of his Life, with the same standard
Reputation; and died in August 1742. in the 77th Year of his Age.

He fell like Autumn Fruit, that mellow'd long,
Even wondered at, because he dropped no sooner.
OEDIPUS. Miss J. JONES.
THE Father of this young Gentlewoman was born in Wales, a Branch of an ancient
and reputable Family in that Country; but an unforeseen Misfortune falling upon
him, he made the Stage his Refuge, and governed a Country Company many Years,
with Judgment, Honesty, and Reputation. Miss Jones, more by the Will of her
Father than her own Inclinations, was thrust on the Stage a mere Infant, and
now makes a very good Figure there: But her Virtue, and sober discreet
Behavior, may be a Pattern for Imitation; therefore I shall say no more, but
conclude, that she deserves a better Fate.

Our Guardian Angel is fair Innocence,
And virtuous Actions are our best Defense.
Mr. THEOPHILUS KEEN.
I Mention this Gentleman, as receiving Instructions from the late Joseph
Ashbury, Esquire Mr. Keen was an excellent Scholar, and a very good Actor: But,
having some Share in the Government of the Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,
under Mr. Rich, either for the Want of Performers, or, perhaps, overlooking his
Talents (a Fault sometimes very good Actors, of both Sexes, are guilty of), he
stood for Parts something out of his Road, as Oroonoko, Earl of Essex, Edgar in
King Lear; when, in the Part of Gloucester, in the same Play, and others of that
Cast, no Actor of his Time could excel him. Although a very good Figure and
Voice, his Person wanted Elegance for the soft Characters.

It was reported, the ill Success of the Theater, when he was Sharer in Profit
and Loss, broke his Heart. He died in the Year 1719 and was buried in the Body
of the Church of St. Clement-Danes, by a voluntary Subscription from both
Houses. It was what we term in England a Walking Funeral; and there were
upwards of Two hundred Persons in deep Mourning. His Life was published by Mr.
Savage, illegitimate Son to the Earl of Rivers. Several Wou'd-be Wits wrote
Copies of Verses upon his Death: One I remember ending with this Line: And
Death was found too Sharp for Keen.


Mr. LAURENCE KENNEDY.
THIS Gentleman is a Native of Ireland, born in Dublin. His good Figure,
agreeable Voice, and genteel easy Carriage, render him a pleasing Actor; and we
may expect from such Qualifications, that Time may bring him to great
Perfection. All Arts are learned by Time, Observation, and Industry; and, when
Choice guides Youth in any Occupation, Nature seems to lead the Way.

But many blunder on in various Ways;
Some ill succeed, while others merit Praise.
Mr. JOHN LEIGH,
I Think, was born in Ireland. He commenced Actor, however, on the Irish
Theater. He was a Person of some Education, with a particular amiable Form, and
genteel Address, insomuch that he gained the Appellative of Handsome Leigh. A
good Figure was the chief Advantage in the Parts he performed. He was called
from this Kingdom, to fill up the Troop of Comedians raised to garrison the New
Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, in the Year 1714. at its first Opening; where
he set forth the First Night in Captain Plume, in the Recruiting Officer; which
occasioned the following Lines to be wrote on the Back of one of their Bills:
It Is right to raise Recruits; for, faith, they are wanted;
For not one acting Soldier's here, it is granted.


Mr. Leigh, I believe, might have been in the good Graces of the Fair-Sex, if
his Taste had led him that Way. He was addicted to Poetry, and produced a
Comedy called Kensington-Gardens, acted at the Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields
in the Year 1720. which walked consumptively six Nights, and then expired. He
also trimmed up a Farce called, Hob's Wedding, taken from a Comedy called, The
Country Wake, written by that perfect Comedian Mr. Thomas Dogget. He has wrote
several humourous Songs. Here follows a Sample, which as it is a Theatrical
Anecdote, will require a little Illustration by way of Notes.

To the Tune of, Thomas I cannot.
MY scandalous Neighbors of Portugal-street Portugal-street, where the Theater
in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields is built.
,
Come listen awhile to my Ditty;
I Will sing you a Song, though my Voice be not sweet,
And that you will say is a Pity:
As merry a Sonnet as Times can afford,
Of Egleton Mr. Egleton, commonly called Baron Egleton, for taking that Title
upon him in France, where he squandered away a small Patrimony. His Person was
perfectly genteel, and a very pleasing Actor; but through a wild Road of Life,
he finished his Journey in the 29th Year of his Age.
, Walker b Mr. Walker (the original Macheath). Vide the Account of his Life.
, Jack Hall Mr. John Hall, a Sharer in old Smock alley Theater above thirty
Years ago. He went from hence with Mr. Leigh to the New Theater in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. He was something too corpulent, and a Thickness of Speech
that might be mimic'd with Ease, which adds some Humor to this Ballad. He
understood Music, and was once a Dancing Master, and the original Lockit in the
Beggar's Opera.
, and my Lord My Lord, a young Nobleman weak in Intellects (Title and Estates
do not always inherit Wisdom)
;
If you doubt of the Truth, to confirm every Word,
I Will call for a Witness -- Will Thomas! Will Thomas A Waiter at a Coffee-house
in Portugal-street, overagainst the Stage-Door; a Person in Understanding
pretty near upon a Par with my Lord.
!
I Will call for a Witness -- Will Thomas!
II.
First, Egleton coax'd the Fool over the Way The young Lord.,

With Sentences sweeter than Honey;
A Toad in a Hole A Cant Word for any baked Meat with a Pudding.
was their Dinner that Day,
And my Noodle he lent them his Money.
What though I have got by him many a Crown?
What I never can forgive him is, that he came down
Five Guineas the Night ere he went out of Town.
Is this true, or no? -- O yes! says Will Thomas,
O yes, etc.
III.
Tom Walker, his Creditors meaning to chouse,
Like an honest good-natured young Fellow,
Resolved all the Summer to stay in the House,
And rehearse by himself Massianello Massianello, a Play, or rather two Plays,
on the Rebellion of Naples, by Thomas Anello, a Fisherman of that City, who was
near subverting the Government, having the whole Power and Command in his Hands
for several Days; but plunging himself into Wine instead of his Element of
Water, he at last ended his Life and mock Reign in a Ditch. Mr. Walker took
some Pains that Summer to contract the two Plays into one, which was performed
the following Winter, with some Success. The two Plays were originally written
by Mr. Thomas Durfey.
.
As soon as he heard of the Baron's Success Mr. Egleton received the five
Guineas from the Lord.
,
He stripped off his Nightgown, and put on his Dress,
And cried, D -- mn my B -- d! I will strike for no less;
So he called over the Hatch The Hatch of the Stage-door: The Bounds of those
Theatrical Princes, that might receive four Pounds a Week, and by their
Industry make Shift to spend six. A great Virtue in some Theatrical Gentry.
for Will Thomas! Will Thomas!
So he called, etc.
IV.
Go tell my young Lord, says this modest young Man,
I beg he would invite me to Dinner;
I Will be as diverting as ever I can,
I will by the Faith of a Sinner!
I mimic all Actors, the worst and the best,
I Will sing him a Song, I Will crack him a Jest,
I Will make him Act better than Henley the Priest Orator Henley, who was taught
to speak by Mr. Walker.

I Will tell him so, Sir, says Will Thomas, Will Thomas,
I Will tell him so, etc.
V.
Jack Hall, who was then just awakened from Sleep,
Said (turning about to Grace Moffet Grace Moffet, Daughter to Mr. Hall s
Second Wife, that kept the Bell and Dragon in Portugal-street.
),
'Twou'd vex any Dog to see Pudding thus creep,
And not have a Share of the Profit:
If you have not, says Grace, you're not Mr. Hall!
And if I have not, it shall cost me a Fall;
For half a Loaf's better than no Bread at all;
And so I Will call out for Will Thomas, Will Thomas,
And so, etc.
VI.
Go tell my young Lord, I can teach him to Dance,
Although I Am no very great Talker;
I Will show him good Manners just landed from France,
That Is more than he will learn from Tom Walker!
I Sing, and I Act, I Dance, and I Fence;
I am a rare Judge of -- good Eating -- and Sense --
And then -- as for English -- I understand French.
I Will tell him so, Sir, says Will Thomas, Will Thomas,
I Will tell him so, etc.
VII.
The Peer was just going his Purse-strings to draw,
In order to lend them his Money --
As soon as his forward Goodnature I saw As soon, etc. This Ballad was to be
supposed to be made by the Woman that kept the Coffee-house.
,
I cried out, My Lord! fie upon you!
To us you're as hard as a Turk, or a Jew;
If you part with your Money, pay where it is due;
Poor Betty's Betty, Maid to the Coffee-woman, that could serve the Peer, and
the Porter.
with Child, and it may be by you.
Here Is Fun for us all! cried Will Thomas, Will Thomas,
Here Is Fun, etc.
VIII.
When his Lordship heard this, away down he ran,
And drove away strait to the Devil The Devil Tavern, Temple Bar.
;
Will Thomas sneaked over to the Green-man A Brandy shop over the Way
;
Thus our Customers use us uncivil Thus our Customers, etc. Reflections of the
Coffee-woman.
.
Poor Betty's Misfortune is pitied by all,
Who expects every Moment in Pieces to fall,
Though she swears it is my Lord's, 'twas got by Jack Hall,
Or else by poor sneaking Will Thomas, Will Thomas,
Or else, etc.
The Author died in 1726. the 37th Year of his Age.

A Time that should to true Perfection tend;
But many promise well, that never mend.
Mr. LEWIS LAYFIELD,
WAS born in England, has been in many Employments both by Sea and Land, and
was formerly very active and strong, able to go through Fatigues. As I do not
know the Offices he bore in the Service, I must be silent on that Head. I
remember him in Drury Lane, when I was in my Youth, a nimble active Scaramouch,
before he was laden with that Burden of Flesh he now carries about him. At
that Time he was such a Person as his eldest Son, Mr. Robert Layfield, appears
at present, who is a very good Player in several Cast of Parts, particularly
Sergeant Kite, etc.

Mr. Layfield has been a main Pillar, Time past, in supporting the Dublin
Theater, and therefore ought to be respected in his Decline; but he is happily
engaged for Life, and of Consequence (if Articles are binding) will receive his
Salary to the Day of his Death. There are several Parts he might still perform
with Satisfaction, as Hob, Jobson, and many others; for the Audience (in
well-esteemed Actors) will 'bate them something of their Years for the Service
they have done. I do not know whether that Circumstance will have any Weight
with the Managers here, though it is an old-fashioned Custom in England; but
different Nations, different Customs.

It Is said the Natives of the Cape Good-Hope It is a Custom with the Inland
Hottentots (who are not under the Eye of the Dutch at the Cape) when they
perceive their Relations drooping with Age and Infirmities, either to carry
them into some distant Wood for Beasts to devour, or end them by Ax or Halter
at Home; and have a Saying among them -- No Work, no Meat.
,
When Age is failing, end it with a Rope.
Mr. WILLIAM MILWARD.
THIS Gentleman was born at Lichfield in Staffordshire the 29th of September in
the Year 1702. His Great Grandfather Sir Thomas Milward was Chief Justice of
West-Chester, and raised a Troop of Horse in Defense of that unhappy Monarch
King Charles the First, and was then a County Palatine, which occasioned the
Rump Parliament in the Year 1659. to vote their Charter void; and I do not find
it ever restored. The Family were originally from Derbyshire. The Father of our
Actor, a few Years after the Birth of his Son, removed to Uttoxeter (commonly
called Tociter) in the County of Stafford, distant from London 126 measured
Miles, formerly a Colony of the Romans.

He had his Education in a School of that Town, accounted one of the best in
that Part of the Country. At fifteen his Father brought him to London, where he
was put Apprentice to an eminent Apothecary in Norfolk-street in the Strand;
but he has often declared, there were so many Dangers in the Employment, that
he could never like it. The following Accident made him determine to leave it.

He was ordered by his Master to carry his Prescriptions to a Gentleman and
Lady ill of different Maladies at the same time; the Labels were wrong
directed, but he did not discover this Mistake till the next Day, when he
carried other Medicines to the same Persons, and by his Judgment in the
Operation soon found out the Mistake. He was greatly terrified, but for fear of
more, he let fall the Phial he had in his Hand, as by Accident, ran back to his
Master, and told him what had been done. The Master ordered more proper Doses,
the Patients recovered, and all was well

Mr. Milward's first Essay in Acting was among young Gentlemen, privately, for
their own Diversion. In a small time after he mixed with a Country Company of
Comedians, where his Merit shone so bright, that it opened the Eyes of the
Manager in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, with whom he rose in that Theater, and
Covent Garden, to be placed in the foremost Rank of Perfection. He died in the
40th Year of his Age, in the very Meridian of an Actor, then belonging to the
Theater in Drury Lane.

Mr. Milward shall make his Exit from this worldly Stage, with an Epilogue
spoke for the Benefit of his Widow, which will better speak his Excellencies.

WHEN Roscius died, each generous Roman wept,
While Cicero's deathless Page his Plaudit kept;
Such was the Harvest in that Golden Age,
Who toiled to till the Vineyard of the Stage:
The Romans wept! more generous Britons, ye
Dry up the Tears of Milward's Family:
Your bounteous Cares beyond the Grave extend!
Lo! what a Scene, dead Merit to befriend;
For Merit sure he shared in every Part,
Merit most rare -- Integrity of Heart.
Whatever of Friendly, Generous, Good, he played,
In Scenes of real Life he still displayed:
Young Hamlet's Sable when he chose to wear,
Young Hamlet's filial Piety was there:
When the fond Lover Phocyas in the Siege of Damascus.
Phocyas was his Part,
Each tender Line sprang glowing from his Heart;
Or when Macduff's dire Anguish was his Theme,
The Husband and the Father bled in him.
Well might he please, when with each virtuous Thought
The Poet penned, the Player's Breast was fraught.
Such Milward was, as such his early Grave
Calls down the Pity of the Fair and Brave;
Cut off just at the Noontide of his Days,
Just when he hoped to have deserved your Praise:
The Player, steeled to counterfeit the Tear,
Distills an undissembled Eye-drop here;
Whilst by this splendid Circle fired, his Breast
With Emulation burns, and claims his best,
That his own Manes may like Milward's rest.
Mr. CHARLES MACKLIN,
WAS born in the Kingdom of Ireland, but left that Country very young. He cast
his Thoughts toward the Stage in England in his early Years. The Science of
Acting is not to be learned without great Labor and Study; and, not copying
any Performer that went before him, he has at length shone out a finished
Original. I never knew him undertake any Part, but, as in Painting, I found
some Strokes of Nature that gave fresh Touches to the Picture he was drawing.

He rose gradually in the Theatrical Corpse, like the late Northern Star of
Russia, till he came to be chief Leader; he regularly gained the Topmast Step,
and now is seated in the Throne of Perfection, dispensing Laws to that Part of
the Province where the SOCK is worn, where he reigns sole Monarch, and
deservedly so, since with long laborious Pains he has found out the true Rule
of Reigning. Shylock the Jew, in the Merchant of Venice, is so immitably
counterfeited, that we cannot say more than what a Gentleman said extempore on
seeing him perform the Part: This is the Jew
That Shakespeare drew.


This excellent Comedian is Author of a Play called Henry the VIIth, or the
Popish Impostor, acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, the Story of Perkin
Warbeck. The Piece (in my Judgment) is well-plann'd, the Diction is not
considered critically; but no wonder, since he was put upon the Subject, and
had but six Weeks from the first Line in Writing to the first Night in Acting.
The following One-Act Pieces have been performed with great Success, but not
printed.

A Will, or no Will; or, a new Case for the Lawyers.

A Critic on the Suspicious Husband; or, the Plague of Envy.

The Fortune-Hunters; or, the Widow Bewitched.

I shall conclude with two Lines, wrote b7 a Gentleman in this Kingdom.

This Jew, this Colonel, Lopez, Ben, has shown,
He makes each various Character his own.
Mrs. MACKLIN,
MAY (by her Judgment and Execution in the Parts she undertakes) be equally
ranked with the first Class of Actresses, and, in some Articles, lead the Way.
She never sets up for a Heroine, or attempts to appear in an improper Light;
she knows the Power of her own Talents, and always shines with unborrow'd
Light, without the Danger of being eclipsed. Her Propriety in Dress, for the
various Characters she performs, is another Excellence that most of her
Cotemporaries either pass over with very little Regard, or not enough.

In my Theatrical Course of above thirty Years, I have not seen her Equal in
many Parts, viz. the Widow Black-Acre in Wycherly's Plain-Dealer, Mrs. Day in
the Committee, Widow Lackit in Southern's Oroonoko, Lady Pliant in Congreve's
Double-Dealer, Doris in Aesop by Sir John Vanbrugh, Mrs. Amelet in the
Confederacy by the same Author, Lady Wishfort in the Way of the World, and a
Number of other Characters, that are wrote in the true Spirit of Comedy. But a
Vessel need not fail of arriving at the desired Port with the Care of so good a
Pilot.

We may find by these two Examples, that Ireland has produced as complete
Comedians as her Sister England: But I shall give a few Lines, the Sentiments
of a young Gentleman in this City.

To Mrs. MACKLIN.
WHILE Macklin charms the listening Throng,
A nobler Subject warms my Song:
Of Nature's sacred Name I Would sing,
From whom her various Beauties spring;
The swelling Sense! -- the genial Fire!
The nameless Graces we admire!
To her -- she frankly did impart
A Clue -- to trace the mazy Heart:
She gave her Wit -- with graceful Ease,
And every Attribute to please;
But know -- thou finished Nymph -- to you
Nor Wonder -- nor Applause -- is due
For Charms -- which Nature only drew.
Mr. JOHN MORRIS,
WAS born in this Kingdom. I understand his first Entrance on the Stage was
under the Conduct of Mrs. Violante: With her he traveled to England, and by
various Changes has been in most of the Theaters in London as well as Dublin.
There are several old Men's Parts that he masterly executes. He sings passingly,
is esteemed a good Teague, and an excellent Pierrot. He has a Brother of the
same Calling.

Dancing is certainly one of the Appendages to Education that few polite People
would be without; yet, if it mends the Manners, it does not always mend the
Mind; but, as Othello says,

-- It Is not to make me jealous,
To say my Wife is fair, feeds well, loves Company,
Is free of Speech, sings, plays, and dances well;
Where Virtue is, these are most virtuous.
Mr. CHARLES MORGAN,
WAS born in London in the Year 1717. His Father and Mother both belonging to
the Stage at his Birth, the Son played the Childrens Parts as soon as he could
speak plain. He came into this Kingdom in the Year 1737. with his Parents,
where he made a great Progress in what is called low Comedy, and gave great
Hopes of Perfection, if a lingering Consumptioh had not taken him off in the
Flower of his Age. I fear he took a little too much Freedom with his
Constitution, and by Perseverance made shift to get the better of it. He died
in May 1745. in the 28th Year of his Age. The last Part he performed was Beau
Clincher in the Constant Couple, being the first Time of Mr. Sherridan's
appearing in the Character of Sir Harry Wildair, where Mr. Morgan,
notwithstanding his ill Habit of Body, like a Taper in its last Blaze, gave a
brighter Flame than all that shone before. This was November, though he lingered
on till the May following.

Thus manly Health is often overcome,
When its worst Woe is to be found at Home.
Mr. MOZEEN.
I Think I know enough of him to imagine he is a very improving Actor: He has
many Requisites that may make out what I assert for him, a good Person joined
to a genteel Education, Judgment, Voice, and Understanding. His Success already
(since he has had but three Years Experience) shows us a larger Prospect of
Advantage.

He was born in England (though of French Extraction) and (if it is any Honor to
him had the much-talk'd-of Dr. Henry Sachevere for a Sponsor.

Mrs. Mozeen (formerly Miss Edwards) knew a Child. She sprung up under the Car^
of that eminent Actress Mrs. Clive. I know Mrs. Mozeen is an Adept in Music,
has a charming Manner and Voice: If her innate Modesty keeps her back as an
Actress, Time may get the better of her Timidity. Modesty may assume a proper
Spirit, when it is assured of being justly right in what is undertaken; for
Virtue has ever Courage, and is its own Guardian.

Virtue could see to do what Virtue would
By her own radiant Light, though Sun and Moon
Were in the flat Sea sunk. Milton.
Mr. WILLIAM MYNITT.
THIS Gentleman was born of a good Family, at Weobly in Herefordshire, in the
Year 1710. where he received a good Schoo Education: He was sent to London very
young to be put into Business, but his Friends or rather Relations (who often
prove our greates^ Enemies) neglecting his Fortune, he turned hi Thoughts to
the Drama. However he had no the Vanity of most of the Theatrical young Heroes,
who jump at once into your Othello Oroonoko, Hamlet, or Captain Plume; but
wisely weighing his own Talents, stepped into the Part of Polonius in Hamlet,
where he gained such Applause, that he resolved to put on the Sock, with which
he walked an easy Pace in the right Road to Perfection.

His first Trial of Skill was at the Theater in the Hay-market (commonly called
the French House), where he gave such Strokes of Judgment that alarmed his best
Antagonists. From his beginning Encouragement he was solicited to add a
promising Member to the Company of Bath, where there is a regular Theater, and
an Audience as difficult to be pleased as that in London, being generally
Persons of the highest Rank that frequent those Diversions in the Capital. He
had the good Fortune to give Satisfaction there, insomuch that several Persons
of Distinction and Taste promised to recommend him to one of the established
Theaters in London: But a Company that Season setting out for Ireland, he was
resolved to accompany them, and cultivate his Genius in this Kingdom. His
Knowledge in Music is some Addition to his Merit, and in his Walk of Acting he
may keep Pace with the best on both Sides the Water.

I never saw Mrs. Mynitt perform any Part; but as she has an amiable Person,
and excellent Voice, I have taken it upon Trust, that she is an agreeable
Actress both in Tragedy and Comedy. But the Bulk of the Letters in the Bills
are the distinguished Characteristics of Merit. It puts me in Memory of a
Mandarin I saw at Canton in China, who was lifted on a Throne of State to
public View, while a Dozen of his Slaves that bore him in Triumph through the
Streets, were covered with a Curtain, and no more of their Persons seen but the
regular Steps of their Feet.

In every Region it is a Maxim tried,
Custom in spite of Reason will preside.
Mr. HENRY NORRIS (alias JUBILEE DICKY).
THIS natural Comedian was born in Salisbury Court in 1665. near the Spot where
the Theater was afterward erected that went by the Name of Dorset-Garden
Theater, it being in Queen Elizabeth's Days the Gardens of the Palace belonging
to the Earl of Dorset. He played on the Irish Stage in 1695 Though a diminutive
Figure, there were many Parts that he excelled in, viz. Barnaby Brittle in the
Wanton Wife, etc. I remember when Mr. Norris was in his Decline, Mr. Cibber se^
made some Alterations in the Play, and performed the Part himself; Mrs.
Oldfield tha of Mrs. Brittle. But she complained she couk not perform it with
that Spirit with him, as she did with little Norris (as she called him). When
asked her the Reason, she replied, Cuckold^^ did not sit so easy on Cibber 's
Figure as it di^ upon that of Norris 's, who seemed formed by Nature to be one.

The Mother of this little great Comedian was one of the first Women that came
on the Stage as an Actress; for some Time after the Restoration of King Charles
the Second young smooth-faced Men performed the Women's Parts. That humourous
Monarch, coming before his usual Time to Shakespeare's Hamlet, sent the
facetious Earl of Rochester to know the Reason of their Delay; who brought Word
back, That the Queen was not quite shaved. Ods Fish (his usual Expression), I
beg her Majesty's Pardon! we'll wait till her Barber has done with her.

Mr. Norris married Mrs. Knapton, the Sister of the late Mr. Wilks's first
Wife, by whom he had several Children. The Females are since dead, and
resembled the Mother in Stature, she being a very personable Woman; but the
Sons copied the Father, our Jubilee Dicky, which Nickname came for his
inimitable humourous Performance of a Part so called in The Constant Couple;
or, A Trip to the Jubilee.

He spoke Tragedy exceedingly knowing in the different Passions, though he never
performed any Part of the serious Cast: for, notwithstanding his Judgment, on
the London Theaters his Figure must have made the Sentiments ridiculous. After
the Death of that celebrated Author Mr. Addison, the merry Mr. Penkethman, at
his Theater at Richmond There are two Richmonds in England; one in Yorkshire,
that gives the Title to that illustrious Family; the other Richmond is Ten
Miles from London. It may rank with some Cities in England for its Extent, but
I know of none that can equal it in its fine Situation upon the noble River
Thames, its healthful Air, beautiful various Prospects from the Hill, and its
increasing noble Buildings.
, played the Tragedy of Cato, or, rather, defiled those noble Sentiments of
Liberty, out of such merry Mouths. Norris was ridiculously dressed for Cato,
Penkethman Juba, low Comedians for the other Characters, and the two Ladies
supplied by Men of the same Cast: Yet a blind Man might have borne with Norris
in the Roman Patriot, for he spoke it with all the Solemnity of a suffering
Hero; while Penkethman, and the rest of the motley Tribe, made it as ridiculous
by Humor and Action: And yet some of the first Rank in the Kingdom seemed
highly diverted, whilst others invoked the Manes of the dead Roman and Briton
to rise, and avenge their own Cause. I remember the next Morning the following
four Lines were pasted on the Door of the Playhouse:

While Greatness hears such Language spoke,
Where godlike Freedom's made a Joke;
Let such mean Souls be never free
To taste the Sweets of Liberty.
An illustrious Nobleman, who had a Seat near Richmond, seeing several People
reading the Lines as he was riding up the Hill, stopped, and perused them; and
said, in his usual grave Manner, -- I wish the Poetry had been better.

Mr. Norris died in the 69th Year of his Age. His eldest Son may be remembered
here as an Actor, some few Years ago, on old Smockalley Stage; but neither he,
nor his Brother (who has likewise troubled several Country Stages in England),
resembled the Father in any Thing but Stature.

Great Nature differs in the human Race;
Some worthless Stems the Parent-roots disgrace.
Mrs. ANNE OLDFIELD.
THE Reason why I have thrust this celebrated Actress into my Account, may be
learned by the following Epistle.

Dublin, May the 27th. SIR,
WE find, by the Newspapers, you intend to give us the History of the Stage.
It is desired by several, that you would be pleased to add Mrs. Oldfield to the
Number (though we are all assured she never was in this Kingdom). We know the
Task is in your Power; and you will oblige many that have a Regard for you.

Yours, etc.


Every Art has its Origin, but, when brought to full Perfection, it is often in
Danger of decaying, and, sometimes, of being quite lost in Oblivion. Painting
on Glass, in this Age, is but a faint Copy of our Forefathers in that Art; and
the perdurable Cement of our ancient Castles, etc. is now unknown. The Sun sets
to rise again, but Oldfield's Light is lost for ever.

I was too young to view her first Dawn on the Stage, but yet had the infinite
Satisfaction of her Meridian Luster, a Glow of Charms not to be beheld but with
a trembling Eye! which held her Influence till set in Night.

Mr. Farquhar (as I have been informed by herself) brought her first to shine
in Public. He accidentally, at a Tavern kept by a near Relation of Mrs.
Oldfield's, heard a Person reading a Comedy in a Room behind the Bar, with such
a just Vivacity, and Humor of the Characters, as gave him infinite Surprise,
and Satisfaction. His Curiosity was too prevalent to observe the Height of good
Manners; therefore he made a Pretense to go into the Room, where he was struck
dumb, for some Time, with her Figure, and blooming Beauty; but was more
astonished at her Discourse, and sprightly Wit. Mr. Farquhar pressed her to
pursue her Amusement, but was obliged to depart without that Satisfaction.

Mr. Wilks was, at that Time, in Ireland; therefore he took some Pains to
acquaint Sir John Vanbrugh (who had some Share in the Theater) with the Jewel
he had found thus by Accident. It was some Time before she would be prevailed
upon; though she has merrily told me, I longed to be at it, and only wanted a
little decent Entreaties.

Alinda, in the Pilgrim, was the first Part she was taken Notice of in, which
Sir John Vanbrugh altered and revived upon her Account; which is a Character of
different Species of Passions and Variety; where she charmed the Play into a
Run of many succeeding Nights.

I remember, in her full Round of Glory in Comedy, she used to slight Tragedy.
She would often say, I hate to have a Page dragging my Tail about. Why do they
not give Porter these Parts? She can put on a better Tragedy Face than I can.
When Mithridates was revived, it was with much Difficulty she was prevailed
upon to take the Part; but she performed it to the utmost Length of Perfection,
and, after that, she seemed much better reconciled to Tragedy. What a
majestical Dignity in Cleopatra! and, indeed, in every Part that required it:
Such a finished Figure on the Stage, was never yet seen. In Calista, the Fair
Penitent, she was inimitable, in the Third Act, with Horatio, when she tears
the Letter, with

-- To Atoms! thus!
Thus let me tear the vile detested Falsehood,
The wicked lying Evidence of Shame!
Her excellent clear Voice of Passion, her piercing flaming Eye, with Manner
and Action suiting, used to make me shrink with Awe, and seemed to put her
Monitor Horatio into a Mouse-hole. I almost gave him up for a troublesome
Puppy; and though Mr. Booth played the Part of Lothario, I could hardly lug him
up to the Importance of triumphing over such a finished Piece of Perfection,
that seemed to be too much dignified to lose her Virtue.

Even her Amors seemed to lose that Glare which appears round the Persons of
the failing Fair; neither was it ever known, that she troubled the Repose of
any Lady's lawful Claim; and was far more constant than Millions in the
conjugal Noose.

She was of a superior Height, but with a lovely Proportion; and the Dignity of
her Soul, equal to her Form and Stature, made up of benevolent Charity, affable
and good-natured to all that deserved it. Mr. Savage, Son to the Earl Rivers,
when he was persecuted by his unnatural Mother, received from her evergiving
bountiful Hand, Fifty Pounds a Year during her Life; and she was, with Mr.
Wilks, a main Means in saving him from an ignominious End.

The Part of Sophonisba, a Tragedy (by Mr. Thomson, famed for many excellent
Poems), was reputed the Cause of her Death; for, in her Execution, she went
beyond Wonder, to Astonishment! From that Time her Decay came slowly on, and
never left her till it conducted her to eternal Rest, the 23d of October 1730.
She left several charitable Legacies, and very handsome Fortunes to her two
Sons. But let us see what better Writers say of this Phoenix of the Stage. O!
that we might have another from her Ashes!

You may read, if you please, what a French Author has wrote on this inimitable
Actress, as well as some Touches on our English Drama.

Sir Roger Mostings, Baronet, was passionately in Love with a famous Actress
called Mrs. Oldfield; and, notwithstanding her Indifference, and even bad
Usage, could not be cured -- He being at Supper with us when his Disgrace and
Banishment were notified to him, his greatest Concern was for his Mistress,
whom he must abandon: His Grief and Love made him shed Tears. His Order bore,
That he should retire to his Estate the next Day; and therefore, as the last
Remedy for his Love, he proposed instant Marriage to Mrs. Oldfield, which
produced no other Effect than a mortifying Refusal We may gather, from this
Author, that the Passage mentioned was in the Year 1715. when the Rebel Lords
suffered Death, and Lord Nithisdale made his Escape from the Tower, disguised
by his Lady in her Habit. Sir Roger Mostings, then Commander in the Fourth
Troop of Life-guards, spoke too freely in Favor of the imprisoned Noblemen
that were concerned in the Rebellion, and therefore was ordered to leave the
Court, and retire to his Estate; as also the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of
Ailesford, the Lords Finche and Guernsey, my Lord Portmore, the Earl of Orkney,
Lord Windsor, and many others; all deprived of their Posts and Places, with the
same Orders to retire to their Estates. Sir Roger was esteemed one of the
handsomest Men in the Kingdom, witty, wellbred, and had a great Estate; which
proves that Mrs. Oldfield despised Interest, and would not give her Hand
without her Heart.
. This amiable Woman was admitted, with Pleasure, into the Company of Ladies of
the first Rank for Birth and Virtue; who seemed to take her Visits as an Honor
done them. It must be owned, she is an incomparable sweet Girl! She reconciled
me to the English Stage. Her Voice, her Shape, and all her Actions, so charmed
me, that I made the more Haste to learn the Language, that I might understand
her.

The English are passionately fond of Dramatic Entertainments, and I doubt if
France can produce so many excellent Works of this kind as Britain; and I have
seen some superior to Greece or Rome. They have their Shakespeare, Dryden,
Otway, Congreve, Cibber, Farquhar, and a numerous Train of excellent Tragic and
Comic Poets; that have the Force of moving the Soul, with their Energy of
Sentiments and Expression, far beyond the Ancients.

I shall conclude this Account with an Abstract of a Copy of Verses wrote by
Mr. Savage, illegitimate Son to Earl Rivers, though the Author of that
unfortunate Gentleman's Life seems to deny it; I suppose, because his Name is
not in the Title Page: But first, her Epitaph.

Hic juxta requiescit
Tot inter poetarum laudata nomina
ANNA OLDFIELD.
Nec ipsa minore laud digna,
Quippe quae eorum opera,
In scenam quoties prodivit,
Illustravit semper and nobilitavit.
Nunquam ingenium idem ad parts diversissimas
Habilius fuit:
Ita tamen ut ad singulas
Non facta, sed nata esse videretur.
In Tragoediis
Formae splendour, oris dignitas, incessus, majestas,
Tanta vocis suavitate temperabantur,
Ut nemo esset tam agrestis, tam durus spectator,
Quin in admirationem totus raperetur.
In Comoedia autem
Tanta vis, tam venusta hilaritas, tam curiosa
Felicitas,
Ut neque sufficerent spectando oculi,
Neque plaudendo manus.
In English thus:

Near this (among the celebrated Poets)
Rests the Body of
ANNE OLDFIELD,
Herself not less deserving to be celebrated:
For, whenever on the Stage,
Her Action illustrated and ennobled
Their Compositions.
Never was one Genius so adapted to the most
Different Parts:
She seemed born for each distinct.
In TRAGEDY,
Her noble Presence, elevated Speech, and
Majestic Gait, tempered with so peculiar
Sweetness of Voice, never failed to transport the
Most Rustic, and Insensible, into Admiration.
In COMEDY,
She discovered such a happy Air, such a
Sprightly and becoming Gaiety,
And so delicate an Address,
That neither Eyes were satisfied with Seeing,
Nor Hands weary of Applauding.
A POEM to the Memory of Mrs. ANNE OLDFIELD.
OLDFIELD's no more! and can the Muse forbear
Over Oldfield's Grave to shed a grateful Tear?
Shall she, the Glory of the British Stage,
Pride of her Sex, and Wonder of the Age;
Shall she, who, living, charmed the admiring Throng,
Die undistinguished, and not claim a Song?
No; feeble as it is, I Will boldly raise
My willing Voice, to celebrate her Praise,
And with her Name immortalize my Lays.
Had but my Muse her Art to touch the Soul,
Charm every Sense, and every Power control,
I Would paint her as she was -- The Form divine,
Where every lovely Grace united shine;
A Mien majestic, as the Wife of Jove;
An Air as winning, as the Queen of Love:
In every Feature rival Charms should rise,
And Cupid hold his Empire in her Eyes.
A Soul, with every Elegance refined
By Nature, and the Converse of Mankind:
Wit, which could strike assuming Folly dead;
And Sense, which tempered every thing she said;
Judgment, which every little Fault could spy;
But Candor, that would pass a Thousand by:
Such finished Breeding, so polite a Taste,
Her Fancy always for the Fashion past;
Whilst every social Virtue fired her Breast
To help the Needy, succor the Distressed;
A Friend to all in Misery she stood,
And her chief Pride was placed in doing Good.
But now, my Muse, the arduous Task engage,
And show the charming Figure on the Stage;
Describe her Look, her Action, Voice, and Mien,
The gay Coquet, soft Maid, or haughty Queen.
So bright she shone, in every different Part,
She gained despotic Empire over the Heart;
Knew how each various Motion to control,
Sooth every Passion, and subdue the Soul:
As she or gay, or sorrowful appears,
She claims our Mirth, or triumphs in our Tears.
When Cleopatra's Form she chose to wear,
We saw the Monarch's Mien, the Beauty's Air;
Charmed with the Sight, her Cause we all approve,
And, like her Lover, give up all for Love:
Antony's Fate, instead of Caesar's, choose,
And wish for her we had a World to lose.
But now the gay delightful Scene is over,
And that sweet Form must glad our World no more;
Relentless Death has stopped the tuneful Tongue,
And closed those Eyes, for all, but Death, too strong:
Blasted that Face where every Beauty bloomed,
And to eternal Rest the graceful Mover doomed.
Mr. PACK,
IN the Remembrance of many, was once on the Stage in this Kingdom, to his no
small Terror: For a Storm at Sea, he told me, frightened him so much, that the
Anxiety of returning dwelt so strongly on his Mind, that he could not appear
half himself to the Public; and, to lessen his Sea-voyage back again, he went
to Dunaghadee, in the North of Ireland, and embarked for Scotland; verifying
the old Proverb, The farthest Way about, is the nearest Way home.

He first came upon the Stage as a Singer; and being, as they say, a
smock-fac'd Youth, used to sing the Female Parts in Dialogues, with that great
Master Mr Leveridge, who has so many Years charmed with his manly Voice. But
Mr. Pack was excellent in many Parts; as Marplot in the Busy Body, Beau Maiden
in Tunbridge-Walks, Beau Mizen in the Fair Quaker of Deal, etc. indeed Nature
seemed to mean him for those sort of Characters. He had such an Antipathy to
the Water, that he would sooner choose to go from the Haymarket to Lambeth
round the Bridge, than just cross in a Boat. I heard a certain Peer (as much
famed for his Wit as his Principles, who died in the Service of Spain) ask Pack
if he would go with him to France for a Month? Yes, replied Mr. Pack, if your
Grace will get a Bridge built from Dover to Calais. For Gads curse me if I ever
set my Foot over Salt Water again!

Mr. Pack left the Stage in the Meridian of Life, and set up a a Tavern (the
Globe) near Charing Cross, over against the Haymarket, where he died, having no
Wife, or Issue. I know not any Relation he left behind, to lament his Death.

Had Transportation been this Player's Doom,
Conviction had brought sudden Death at Home.
Mr. WILLIAM PHILLIPS (Harlequin).
THIS extraordinary Person was born in Wales, though he never knew one Word of
his Mother Tongue; neither did I ever hear of the School-mistress that taught
him English: Yet he got perfect in two Parts, and performed them both with
Applause; viz. the Welsh Collier in the Recruiting Officer, and the Drunken
Colonel in the Intriguing Chambermaid: But his great Talent lay in the Mimes
and Pantomimes. Though the Art does not require much Rhetoric, yet they should
have Heads, as well as Heels.

He was taught Tumbling, and Slight of Hand, by that great Master of Arts, the
stupendous Mr. Faux, and out-did his Master in several Tricks; and was very
happy at Invention, in escaping to Ireland This great Man was taken up in
London for Suspicion of Debt, and dealt with the honest Officer in the
following Manner: He first called for Liquor in abundance, and treated all
about him, to the no small Joy of the Bailiff, who was rejoiced to have a Calf
that bled so well (as they term it). Harlequin made the honest Bailiff believe
he had six Dozen of Wine ready packed up, which he would send for, to drink
while in Custody, and likewise allow him Sixpence a Bottle for drinking it in
his own Chamber. Shoulder-dab listened to the Proposal with Pleasure: The
Bailiff went to the Place, as directed, and returned with Joy, to hear that it
should be sent in the Morning early. Accordingly, it came by a Porter, sweating
under his Load: The Turnkey called to his Master, and told him, the Porter and
Hamper were come in: Very well, says he, then let nothing but the Porter and
Hamper out. The Porter performed his Part very well; came heavily in with an
empty Hamper, and seemed to go lightly out, with Philips on his Back. He was
dishamper'd at an Alehouse near the Waterside, crossed the Thames, and, soon
after, embarked for Ireland. He was very fond of this Trick, and would take
Pride in his Project, which was contrived long before he was taken, to be ready
on such an Emergency. When this Scheme was concerted with the Porter, he made
this threatening Speech to him; G -- d strike me plump (his usual Speech)! if
you are not as secret as the Sun at Noonday, I Will broil you, and eat you
alive, you Dog! Exit Phillips.
, where he became a Sharer in Smock-alley, till he, with his Namesake, broke
the Fraterhood. He was the first Projector of the Theater in Capel-street;
neither was he much to blame in this, since a Sort of Manager for the
Proprietors, who knew as much of the Matter as a Journeyman Tailor does of
Bell-founding, by his inimitable Rhetoric persuaded his Employers, that he and
his Wife had too much Salary; and yet, the next Season, gave twenty Times the
Sum, to prevent their Playing: Yet Phillips opened, and got Money. But, to show
his Dexterity, he played a Harlequin Trick; and, in one of his Deceits, made
his Escape (with his Wife he had here, who was no bad Actress) back to England;
but did not forget to take more Money than his own along with him -- Traveling
is chargeable. But Capel-street Theater has been since occupied, and is still
ready, on all Occasions.

Thus Juglers Tricks are formed to cheat the Eyes,
And Knaves have found the Art to trick the Wise.
Mrs. PASQUALINO,
WAS a very sightly Actress, with a good Voice: I have forgot her maiden Name,
which she first changed for Ravenscroft, an Actor, I am told, of some Merit.
After his Demise, being musically inclined, she tied her Fate to Signor
Pasqualino, an Italian, eminent for his great Talents that Way. She has left
the Stage, to follow the Fortune of her Spouse; and, I have been informed, they
were both lately in Holland. Wherever he is, he cannot fail of Reward, from
his Merit: For Music has Charms to sooth a savage Breast,
To soften Rocks, and bend the knotted Oak.


I shall conclude with Mrs. Pasqualino, by inserting a few Lines of a Poet, on
her leaving the Stage; though some Poets, like some Painters, do not draw exact
Likenesses; and are too prone to Flattery.

Adieu! unspotted Excellence, adieu!
Chaste, spite of Censure; spite of Envy, true --
Mature in Judgment far above thy Age,
And, what is more wondrous, virtuous on the Stage!
Ah! yet return! nor rob us of Delight;
Continue still to ravish with thy Sight!
Whether in Desdemona's tender Strain,
Or softer Belvidera, you complain;
Or in Monimia force the pitying Tear,
Or in the Airs of Millamant appear;
Or Lady Betty Modish, you impart,
In Characters assumed, a real Dart!
Receive this Plaudit from the admiring Muse,
Nor Tribute, to thy Merit paid, refuse --
And must we, then, the Loss of thee deplore?
Shall we, then, see thy lovely Face no more?
Adieu! -- The Stage is, nearly, its Decline;
Since we must thee, the Boast of it, resign.
Mr. JAMES QUIN.
THIS great and just Actor was born in King Street, Covent Garden, the 24th of
February, 1693. though Numbers believe he owes his Birth to Ireland. His
Ancestors were of an ancient Family in this Kingdom: His Grandfather, Alderman
Mark Quin, was Lord Mayor of the City of Dublin in the Year 1676. in the Reign
of King Charles the Second; the Father of our Roscius received a liberal
Education in Trinity College, Dublin; from thence he went over to Lincoln's-
Inn, to finish his Studies, where he was called to the Bar; but, at the Death
of his Father (who left him a plentiful Estate), he returned with his Son, then
an Infant, to take Possession.

Mr. James Quin was educated under the Care of Dr. Jones, of Dublin (a Person
eminent for Learning), till the Death of his Father in the Year 1710. Mr. Quin
was undoubted Heir to his Estate, but through his Youth, and Inexperience of
the Courts, a Suit of Law hung so long in Chancery, till he, unenabled to carry
the Cause farther, was obliged to drop it, for want of proper Assistance. I am
informed, a powerful Guider of the Law was his Antagonist; and a Person has but
a bad Chance to fight a Duel with a Fencing-master.

Our eminent Actor first appeared on the Stage in old Smock-alley, in the Part
of Abel in the Committee. I must take some little Pride, when I declare I
imagine myself the first that persuaded him not to smother his rising Genius in
this Kingdom, where, at that Time, there was no great Encouragement for Merit,
and try his Fortune in London; whither, by his kind and ever-to-be-remember'd
Recommendation, I soon followed him.

It is, in some sort, a Hardship to a rising Genius, in the first Entrance to a
regular established Company: The Parts are all supplied, and, like
Underofficers in an Army, they must wait for Preserment, or do something
extraordinary, before they can expect it. An Accident fell out, that gave our
young Actor a happy Opportunity.

The Managers had an Order, from the Lord Chamberlain, to revive the Play of
Tamerlane, for the 4th of November 1716. which was got up with the utmost
Magnificence. The third Night the late Mr. Mills (who performed Bajazet) was
taken suddenly ill, and, with much Persuasion, Mr. Quin was prevailed upon to
read the Part, which was thought a great Undertaking for a young Actor of his
Standing; but, to the Mortification of several Competitors, he succeeded so
well, that the Audience gave him their general Applause, through the whole
Course of the Part. The next Night he made himself perfect, and performed it
with redoubled Applauses of Approbation; and was complimented by several
Persons of Distinction, and dramatic Taste, upon his early rising Genius.

But as the Theatrical World is a Picture, in Miniature, of the Great, Envy
will shake her snaky Locks; People of twice his Age thought his Progress a
little too rapid for their Approbation. His Temper took fire at the visible
Depression; he bore it some Time with Temper, but the first Opportunity he
engaged with Mr. Rich in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, where, by just Degrees, he
attained the highest Round of Perfection; and (not to take any Merit from other
Performers) was certainly the chief Pillar that supported all the Theaters
wherever he has performed. I will not take upon me to point out his
Excellencies in any particular Part, since he is excellent in all: Therefore I
shall end, with the immortal Shakespeare, He is a Man, take him for all in all,
I never shall look upon his Like again.


The great Honor this Gentleman has received from the second Illustrious
Person in the Kingdom, in trusting the Royal Blood to his Care, will better
speak his Excellence than my weak Skill can do.

Mr. LACY RYAN.
THIS Gentleman was once in Ireland with the celebrated Mr. Quin, and Mrs.
Clive, in the Year 1741. He was born in England in the Year 1694. The first
Part he was taken Notice of in, was that of Marcus in Cato, which was first
acted in 1712.

In the Run of that celebrated Tragedy he was accidentally brought into a Fray
with some of our Tritons on the Thames; and, in the Scuffle, a Blow on the Nose
was given him by one of these Water-bullies, who neither regard Men nor
Manners: I remember, the same Night, as he was brought on the Bier, after his
supposed Death in the Fourth Act of Cato, the Blood, from the real Wound in the
Face, gushed out with Violence; that Hurt had no other Effect than just turning
his Nose a little, though not to Deformity; yet some People imagine it gave a
very small Alteration to the Tone of his Voice, though nothing disagreeable. He
acquitted himself in many capital Parts, both in Tragedy and Comedy, to the
Satisfaction of his Auditors; and has been ever esteemed in the first Rank of
Actors.

Some few Years ago another unfortunate Accident befell him: As he was going
home to his House after his Night's Performance, he was attacked by a Street
robber; and, making Resistance, the Villain shot a Brace of Pistol-Bullets into
his Mouth, which broke some Part of his Jaw: By the Help of a Lamp the Robber
knew Mr. Ryan, as I have been informed, begged his Pardon for his Mistake, and
ran off. Of this Hurt, too, he recovered, after a long Illness, and played with
Success, as before, without any seeming Alteration of Voice or Face. His Royal
Highness, upon this Accident, sent him a handsome Present; and others, of the
Nobility, copied the laudable Example of the second illustrious Person in the
three Kingdoms. I shall say no more of Mr. Ryan, but that he is genteel, and
well-made.

This Gentleman has made several Excursions in the Region of Poetry;
particularly a Piece, of one Act, called The Cobblers Opera, which has often
been performed with good Success.

No Mark of Age in Face or Form appears,
But Manhood bord'ring on the Vale of Years.
Mrs. REYNOLDS.
THE Husband of this Person gathered a Company of Actors in the Hay-market,
London, where they, some Years ago, met with Success, for a Time; but at last
it fell to-pieces, the Sinews being relaxed by an intemperate Constitution.
Mrs. Reynolds was well esteemed, for a very good Performer, in this Kingdom;
but her Reputation seems now to be forgot: She Is to be pitied, if it is not her
own Fault.

Scandal may heal, like gaping Wounds in War;
Yet leave behind the long-distinguish'd Scar.
THOMAS SHERIDAN, Esquire
THIS excellent Actor was born in this Kingdom, Son to that very eminent the
Reverend Dr. Sheridan, a Gentleman whose Memory will never be forgot, while
Learning holds the Reins to check the vicious Mind, and guide us in the Paths
of Virtue. Men are but human Brutes, poring in the Dark, without some Light of
Education. Under such a Father, and at such a Fountain of Learning as this
Nursery of Erudition (Trinity College), no Wonder for our young Actor to rise
in Perfection. He was some Time in Westminster School, and as his Mind led him
to look early toward the Drama, he had the Advantage of seeing the Regularity
of the British Theaters, which he does not only copy, but many, who have seen
both, find the Colors and Drapery so strong, that, at this Distance, it stands
in equal Goodness to the Original.

To this Gentleman we owe the Decency that has been long wanting on the
Hibernian Stage, a Difficulty no one Person could have surmounted but himself;
and though Merit does not always meet its proper Reward, yet the Seeds of Flowers
and Roots he had planted and sown in this theatrical Garden, flourish sweet and
amiable, and, like a Master in the Art, Reward follows his Pains and Judgment
in Culture.

The Unmeritorious pass unobserved, while Merit is commonly the Butt for Envy
to empty her whole Quiver of poisoned Arrows at; yet they generally fall short
of their intended Mark. I shall leave this Gentleman to his prosperous and
deserved Success, with the Character of Envy drawn by the inimitable Pen of Mr.
Pope.

Envy will Merit, as its Shade, pursue;
But, like the Shadow, proves the Substance too;
For envied Wit, like Sol eclipsed, makes known
The opposing Body's Grossness, not its own.
When first that Sun too-pow'rful Beams displays,
It draws up Vapors, which obscure its Rays;
But even those Clouds, at last, adorn its Way,
Reflect new Glories, and augment the Day.
Mr. LUKE SPARKS.
MR. Sparks was born in this Kingdom, and has, by incessant Attention to the
Drama, arrived to be a well-esteemed Person in the Business of the Theater; and
there are many capital Parts in the Compass of his Power; so that he may be
accounted a Person in the highest second Class. I have seen him bear up the
Burden of a leading Part to please the Audience, without thinking of a better
to stand in his Place. He is equally useful in the Buskin and Sock, and has the
Advantage of a good Person and Voice, joined to diligent Study. He is esteemed
an excellent Oeconomist, which may be accounted a very valuable Disposition in
the theatrical World; there is something in the very Science of the Stage that
urges on to pleasurable Expense I knew a Gentleman that called London the Body
of Pleasure, and the Theater the Heart.

Mr. Sparks is now in London, at the Fountain of theatrical Erudition; and, I
make no doubt, from his good Sense, at his Return to his native Country, he
will meet with the proper Esteem his Merit deserves. All, or most People, find
Satisfaction in Novelty; and a long Possession of the best Things is apt to
depreciate them.

It Is Novelty that brightens all our Joys;
Even Beauty's Self, by long Possession, cloys.
Mr. ISAAC SPARKS.
THERE are many Parts that become the Figure of this Person, which is of a
superior Height; and Nature has bestowed upon him a Vein of Humor that gives
Satisfaction to the Audience. I have not seen him act since his Return to his
native Country; but I am informed, by very good Judges, that he performs the
Character of Sir Samson Legend, in Love for Love, to the utmost Perfection,
with many Characters of that Cast; which will prove almost as useful in a
Theater as a Hero, or a Lover.

True Merit, with magnetic Impulse, draws
A willing Contribution of Applause.
Mr. CHARLES STORER,
WAS born in England, in the Town of Lancaster. His strong Inclination for the
Stage led him early to try his Fortune there, where he has succeeded very well.
His good Understanding keeps him within the Bounds of his own Power, which is
the ready Road never to meet with Displeasure. I think his Talent leads him to
old Men in Comedy, and the artificial Wrinkles in his Face seem to content him
best, which is something singular with young Persons in a Theater: For to
appear pretty Fellows, is generally the Aim of all young Attempters in the
theatrical Province. I have seen him give great Satisfaction in Gomez in the
Spanish Friar, Foresight in Love for Love, with other Parts of the same Cast:
And what, in my Opinion, shows the Strength of his Judgment is, that he was
some Years before he entered into any established Theater: Therefore he has
followed the best Guide, Nature, which is ever sure to be right.

Good Sense and Nature are not formed by Art;
But spring from secret Movements of the Heart.
Mrs. STORER (formerly Miss CLARK),
REcommends herself by her amiable Person, Goodnature, and her excellent sweet
harmonious Manner in Singing; therefore she is too much desired to show her
Excellence that Way, to perform many Speaking Parts, but where her exalted
Talent is required: And then, whatever she says, or sings, thus properly
introduced, she doubly charms in. I shall end with four Lines of a Poem on
Ranelagh Gardens, written last Summer in London.

Then Storer -- with her sweet enchanting Strains,
Steals to our Hearts, and over our Senses reigns;
With ravished Ears we hear the pleasing Sounds,
And heavenly Joys the vaulted Roof resounds.
GEORGE SWAN, Esquire
IS a Gentleman of a good Family, born in England. He was made Manager of the
Playhouse in Aungier-street; which, I think, was a difficult Attempt for a
Gentleman almost a Stranger to the Affairs of a Theater. It is a very thinking
Task; and a Person of Pleasure must either drop his Pursuits of that Kind, or
sink in the boisterous Waves, which will require all his Time and Art to steer
his Vessel right: As well may a Country Gentleman, who never saw the Sea, by
Interest take the Command of a First Rate Man of War. However, this Person, by
a genteel Behavior, accompanied with Affability, joined with good Nature,
gained the Esteem of every one. He played several Parts with a delicate
Decency. A Person of Distinction asked an Actor his Opinion of Mr. Swan's
Performance, who replied, He played very well as a Gentleman. The Person
replied, I should be very glad to see you play like one with all my Heart.

I have heard Mr. Swan has espoused a Lady of considerable Fortune in England I
have been informed this Gentleman had a considerable Post at Cape-Breton: If it
be true, the Duration of his Office (now Peace is concluded) may not last him
longer than the Government of the Theater.
, which he may know how to use to the best Advantage; but the Management of a
Theater was a Task too hard for him.

As well may Readers turn reverse the Book,
Or reap the Harvest with a Pruning-hook.
Mr. JOHN THURMOND,
WAS an Actor of Repute in this Kingdom about Thirty Years past, and stood in
many capital Parts, being then a Sharer in old Smock-Alley Theater with Mr.
Thomas Elrington, etc.

To let you see how formerly even Tragedy Heroes were now-and-then put to their
Shifts, I Will tell you a short Story that befell Mr. Thurmond.

It was a Custom, at that Time, for Persons of the First Rank and Distinction
to give their Birthday Suits to the most favored Actors. I think Mr. Thurmond
was honored by General Ingoldsby with his. But his Finances being at the last
Tide of Ebb, the rich Suit was put in Buckle (a Cant Word for Forty in the
Hundred Interest): One Night, Notice was given that the General would be
present with the Government at the Play, and all the Performers on the Stage
were preparing to dress out in the Suits presented. The Spouse of Johnny (as he
was commonly called) tried all her Arts to persuade Mr. Holdfast the Pawnbroker
(as it fell out, his real Name) to let go the Clothes for that Evening, to be
returned when the Play was over: But all Arguments were fruitless; nothing but
the Ready, or a Pledge of full equal Value. Such People would have despised a
Demosthenes, or a Cicero, with all their Rhetorical Flourishes, if their
Oratorian Gowns had been in Pledge. Well! what must be done? The whole Family
in Confusion, and all at their Wits-End; Disgrace, with her glaring Eyes, and
extended Mouth, ready to devour. Fatal Appearance! At last Winny the Wife (that
is, Winnifrede) put on a composed Countenance (but, alas! with a troubled
Heart); stepped to a neighboring Tavern, and bespoke a very hot Negus, to
comfort Johnny in the great Part he was to perform that Night, begging to have
the Silver Tankard with the Lid, because, as she said, a Covering, and the
Vehicle Silver, would retain Heat longer than any other Metal. The Request was
complied with, the Negus carried to the Playhouse piping hot -- popp'd into a
vile earthen Mug -- the Tankard L'argent traveled Incog. under her Apron (like
the Persian Ladies veiled), popp'd into the Pawnbroker's Hands, in exchange for
the Suit -- put on, and played its Part, with the rest of the Wardrobe; when
its Duty was over, carried back to remain in its old Depository -- the Tankard
returned the right Road; and, when the Tide flowed with its Lunar Influence,
the stranded Suit was wasted into safe Harbor again, after paying a little for
dry Docking, which was all the Damage received.

Mr. Thurmond died in London, when he was one of the Company in Drury Lane
Theater; a merry, good-natured Companion to the last.

Thus Woman's Wit (though some account it evil)
With artful Wiles can overreach the Devil.
Mrs. THURMOND.
HER maiden Name was Lewis, born of reputable Parents at Epsom in Surry. She
was married to Mr. John Thurmond, the Son of the abovementioned: He is a
Person of a clean Head and a clear Heart, and inherits the Mirth and Humor of
his late Father.

Mrs. Thurmond has an amiable Person and good Voice: She wisely left the Bustle
and Business of the Stage, in her full and ripe Performance; and, at that time,
left behind her but few that excelled her. Mr. Thurmond contrived many
profitable Pantomimes for the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, and was esteemed
formerly a very good Stage Dancer; but left the Practice, before it left him.

The flowery Bloom of May adorns the Stage:
We shed our Luster in declining Age.
But, yet, how few observe the laboring Ant,
To save a Winter-Store, when most they want!
Mr. VANDERBANK,
WAS born in England, in the Year 1684. His Father came originally from
Holland. Mr. Vanderbank was brought up in the Sea-Service; but, not liking that
inconstant Element, he embarked on a Trading Theater in England for some time,
till he made a Voyage to this Kingdom, where he has remained these
Two-and-thirty Years. He was, as Shakespeare says, Sunk in the Vale of Years,
when I arrived here in 1741. and has not performed many Parts since that Time,
But I am informed, both he and Mrs. Vanderbank stood in high Esteem formerly;
but they have both left the Stage some time.

Declining Age to sprightly Youth gives place,
As these must do the next Theatric Race.
Mr. BENJAMIN VICTOR.
I Might have, in one respect, omitted this Gentleman, as he only performed for
his own Diversion. But as few Persons, that are not professed Actors, know
better, as I may say, the Dignity of the Theater, than himself, I hope he will
excuse this mentioning him to the Public. He was bred in London, had a genteel
Education, and, from a just Way of Thinking and Acting, has improved his
Merits. Though he does not make Poetry his Profession, yet I have seen several
correct little Poems of his. As he has wrote many agreeable Pieces, that have
never come to the Press, I shall beg Leave, as a Taste, to give one that has.

A CANTATA, Dublin the 21st of January 1747-8. the Birthday of his Royal
Highness FREDERIC, Prince of WALES. Set to Music by Mr. Dubourg.
RECITATIVE.
LET the soft captivating Strains
Of swelling Harmony begin:
In tuneful Numbers let the Swains
Great Harrington's Attention win:
Hibernia, pleased, will listen to the Lay,
That welcomes in our FRED'RIC's natal Day!
AIR.
Hail! Day of Hope! O Prince renowned!
Beloved! with every Virtue crowned!
Enriched with Merit in thy earliest Youth,
Friend to the Friends of Liberty and Truth!
The social Titles all are thine:
They make the Great illustrious shine!
The Muse can with Delight commend,
The Husband, Father, and the Friend.
Da Capo.
RECITATIVE.
Never shall corroding Cares his Breast intrude;
For such can no Admission find
Within the bright unblemished Mind,
That knows the Joys of heavenly Solitude.
DUET.
There, happy, free from public Strife,
He tastes the Sweets of private Life;
Blessed with AUGUSTA, and her Race,
With whom our Hopes and Joys increase;
Future Sceptres they shall wield,
Shine in Courts, and grasp the Shield.
Da Capo.
CHORUS.
Live, FRED'RIC! live, to teach their Youth,
How to rule where Freedom reigns;
More than Crowns to value Truth,
And bind fierce Tyranny in Chains.
This Gentleman has ushered Two little Pieces on the Stage; one, a Pastoral;
the other, The Mock Pilgrim, altered into One Act from a Comedy of Beaumont and
Fletcher.

Mrs. VINCENT (formerly Miss BINKS),
WHEN I left England, Seven Years ago, was a very promising young Actress; and
I am informed, from those that have seen her on the Stage here, that she is
greatly improved; which I am apt to believe from the Judgment of the Manager,
who would certainly give the best Parts to the best Performers. It Is the
Interest of all Theatrical Managers to perform every thing in the best Manner;
to do otherwise would be hurting themselves.

That Teacher might be justly called a Fool,
Who placed a Dunce in his first Class at School.
ROBERT WILKS, Esquire
THE Ancestors of this most excellent Comedian, were seated many Ages in an
affluent Inheritance at Bromsgrove Bromsgrove is one of the chief trading Towns
in the County for the finest Broad Cloths, containing about 500 well built
Houses on the Brink of the River Salwarp, 93 measured Miles from London.
in Worcestershire, where most of the chief Inhabitants bear the Name of Wilks.

The Grandfather of our excellent Comedian (Judge Wilks), in the Civil Wars,
raised a Troop of Horse, at his own Expense, for the Service of the unfortunate
King Charles the First, which was commanded by Col. Wilks, Brother to the
Judge, and Great Uncle to our Comedian.

In that unnatural War, the Family suffered greatly by Rapine and Persecution;
which was the main Motive that sent Edward Wilks, Esquire with his Wife, and the
shattered Remains of an ample Fortune, to Dublin, for the Security of his
Person, etc.

Our great Comedian was born at Rathfarnham near Dublin, in the Year 1670. His
Father gave him a genteel Education. He wrote an excellent fine masterly Hand,
with such Celerity that was surprising. His Genius recommended him to Secretary
Southwell, who confirmed him one of his Clerks when Eighteen Years of Age.

His first Inclination to the Theater proceeded from the Praises of Mr.
Richards, then an Actor on the Dublin Stage. Mr. Richards lodged near Mr.
Wilks; and, being intimate with each other, he used to hold the Book of the
Play, to hear if Richards was perfect in the Part he was then studying. Mr.
Wilks used to read the introductive Speeches, with such proper Emphasis,
Cadence, and all the various Passions, that the Encomiums given by Mr. Richards
began to fire his Mind for the Drama. It was with very little Persuasion he
ventured to act privately the Colonel in the Spanish Friar, at Mr. Ashbury's,
the ensuing Christmas; where he received such Approbation from that great
Master, as confirmed his Intention.

The first Part he played on the Theater was Othello, with the utmost Applause;
and, as he told me, pleased all but himself. He went on with great Success, for
Two Years, when his Friend Mr. Richards Mr. Ashbury informed me, that Mr.
Richards was a very good Actor, both in Tragedy and Comedy, but not over-happy
in his personal Appearance.
advised him to try his Fortune in England, and gave him Letters of
Recommendation to Mr. Betterton, who received him very kindly, and entered him
at Fifteen Shillings a Week.

His first Appearance on the English Stage, was in the Part of the young Prince
in the Maid's Tragedy, a very insignificant Character, requiring little more
than an amiable Figure. Mr. Betterton performed Melantius; but when that
veteran Actor came to address him on the Battlements, to excuse himself for the
Death of the King in the Play, Mr. Wilks affirmed to me, that the Dignity of
Mr. Betterton struck him with such an Awe, that he had much ado to utter the
little he had to say. Mr. Betterton, observing his Confusion, said to him,
Young Man, this Fear does not ill become you; a Horse that sets out at the
Strength of his Speed will soon be jaded.

However, Mr. Wilks soon shook off his Apprehensions, and began to rise in the
Esteem of the Audience, and better Parts gained him a better Salary.

He often assisted Mr. Harris (an eminent Dancing Master at that time) in
teaching his Scholars; and, by his genteel Address, gained the Affection of a
young Lady, Daughter to Ferdinand Knapton, Esquire Steward of the New Forest in
Hampshire, and by Consent of the Father they were joined in Wedlock. By this
Gentlewoman he had one Son and Daughter; the Son died in his Youth; the
Daughter was married to Captain Price Mrs. Price did not survive her Marriage
above a Twelvemonth. She expired childless in the Year 1712. the 20th Year of
her Age.
, to whom he made up a Fortune of a thousand Pounds.

Mr. Wilks's Finances not well answering the State of an increasing Family, he
pressed for an Addition to his Salary, which every Person but the Manager
thought he deserved; but his Request was not complied with.

Mr. Ashbury in Ireland, hearing of his Discontent, came over on Purpose to
engage him. He agreed with Mr. Wilks for Sixty Pounds a Year, and a clear
Benefit, which in those Times was much more than any other Actor ever had. When
he went to take his Leave of Mr. Betterton, the Manager was with him. That
great Actor expressed some Concern at his leaving the Company. "I fansy (said
Mr. Betterton) that Gentleman (pointing to the Manager), if he has not too much
Obstinacy to own it, will be the first that repents your parting; for, if I
foresee aright, you will be greatly wanted here."

Mr. Wilks told me this Speech gave him infinite Pleasure; and made him resolve
to search into himself, to find out what Mr. Betterton's known Judgment seemed
to promise he might find. Praise from an Adept in any Science will excite
Emulation, and, with some People, do more than Reward. From this Time Mr. Wilks
grew more assiduous, and thought every Moment lost, that was not laid out upon
his Studies, till he arrived at that supreme Excellence, even now remembered by
innumerable Judges of the Drama.

It was not long before the prophetic Words of Mr. Betterton were fulfilled.
For the unfortunate Death of Mountford Mr. William Mountford was accounted an
excellent Comedian; and Mr. Wilks often confessed, he was the Glass that he
ever adjusted himself by.

Mr. Mountford was basely murdered by a Thrust through the Back, while a false
Friend held him in his Arms with a treacherous Embrace, in Norfolk-street in
the Strand, in the Year 1692. He was the Author of the following Plays.

1. Injured Love, or, The Ambitious Father. A Tragedy, 1688.

2. The Successful Strangers. A Comedy, 1690.

3. Greenwich Park. A Comedy, 1691.

4. The Life and Death of Dr. Faustus, 1691. with the Humors of Harlequin and
Scaramouch. An Entertainment of Three Acts.


was the Sickness of all their genteel Comedies, till his Parts could be
supplied. Mr. Wilks, therefore, was immediately sent to, with Proposals of Four
Pounds a Week; which was a Salary equal to Mr. Betterton. This was too
advantageous an Offer to be refused; therefore he prepared for his Journey
privately. Mr. Ashbury was so unwilling to part with him, that he procured an
Order from the Duke of Ormond (then Lord Lieutenant) to prevent his going; but
a particular Friend giving him timely Notice thereof, he went secretly to
Hoath, where a Boat waited to convey him on board, and he landed safe in
England.

The first Part he performed of Mountford's was Palamede Mr. Cibber has, from
this Play of Marriage Alamode, and the Comedy Part of Secret Love, or the
Maiden Queen, compounded (with some Ingredients of his own) an excellent Comedy
called the Comical Lovers.
in Dryden's Marriage Alamode, a Comedy, with such extraordinary Success, as he
often said, it made him almost mad with Joy. I need say no more of his Progress
in Success, than that he sailed in the full Tide of Fortune, till he arrived
safely to reign unrivalled to his Death.

And, as a Reward for his great Merit, he was joined in the Patent granted by
Queen Anne in the Year 1709. He was also Manager of the Whole; and I shall not
take from the Merit of others, when I say, From his sole Directions the Stage
gained new Life, and Reward followed the Industry. For a continued Course of
the Three Managers, for more than Twenty Years, the Stage was in full
Perfection; their Green-Rooms Green-Rooms are the Chambers where the principal
Performers retire, till they are called to their Entrances where they are to go
on the Stage.
were free from Indecencies of every Kind, and might justly be compared to the
most elegant Drawing-Rooms of the Prime Quality: No Fops or Coxcombs ever
showed their Monkey Tricks there; but if they chanced to thrust in, were awed
into Respect; even Persons of the First Rank and Taste, of both Sexes, would
often mix with the Performers, without any Stain to their Honor or
Understanding: And, indeed, Mr. Wilks was so genteelly elegant in his Fancy of
Dress for the Stage, that he was often followed in his Fashion, though, in the
Street, his Plainness of Habit was remarkable.

In March 1713-14. Mrs. Wilks Mrs. Wilks was interred in the Church of
Covent Garden, with the following Inscription on her Tomb, wrote by her Husband.

Beneath this Marble
Lies Elizabeth Wilks, late Wife to Robert Wilks,
of this Parish, Gent.
The Purity of her Mind, which appeared in all the
Duties of a virtuous Life, made her a good Wife,
Daughter, Mother, and Friend.
Her Affection was like her Piety,
Constant, as unfeigned, to her last Moment.
In Memory of her Virtues,
This Monument was erected by her Husband.
She died the 21st of March 1713-14, in the 42d Year of her Age.

left this World, to the inconsolable Sorrow of her worthy Husband: He
continued unmarried upwards of Seven Years. In the mean time he renewed his
Acquaintance with Mrs. Fell, Relict of Charles Fell, Esquire of an ancient Family
in Lancashire, and married her. This Gentlewoman's maiden Name was Brown, of a
reputable Family in Sussex I shall relate an unfortunate Accident concerning
John Brown, Esquire the Father of Mr. Wilks's Second Wife, which he informed me of.
This Gentleman lived near Spelmonden in Kent, on a handsome Estate. He took
great Delight in Shooting. One Day he went out with his Servant to his usual
Diversion; they sprung some Game that flew over a neighboring Hedge; he
ordered his Servant to follow and observe them on the other Side, while he
would take care on the Side where he was. The Hedge was of great Extent, and
Mr. Brown went slowly by the Side, in Expectation of the Game; at last they
came, and he fired. The Servant on the other Side of the Hedge did the same,
and unfortunately shot his Master in the Face, only with Two Grains of Shot;
but, alas! one in each Eye, that for ever deprived him of Sight! Yet Mr. Wilks
informed me, he was as cheerful a Gentleman as ever he conversed with; and
would lead him to every particular Fruit-tree in his large Garden, and nominate
the Fruit they bore; and that very Servant, the Innocent Guilty, as he called
him, lived with him at the Time I received this Account from Mr. Wilks.
.

Mr. Wilks's Excellence in Comedy was never once disputed, but the best Judges
extol him for the different Parts in Tragedy; as Hamlet, Castalio in the
Orphan, Ziphares in Mithridates, Edgar in King Lear, Norfolk in the Albion
Queens, Piercy in Anna Bullen, Earl of Essex, Shore, Macduff, Moneses in
Tamerlane, Jaffeir in Venice Preserved; and a countless Catalogue of other
Parts in Tragedy, which he was allowed to perform in their full Perfection.

He was not only perfect in every Part he acted, but in those that were
concerned with him in every Scene, which often prevented Mistakes.

But let me have recourse to other Pens for his Excellencies. One writes thus:

No sooner had Mr. Wilks left the Hibernian Stage, and appeared on the British,
but that sinking Theater raised its drooping Head; and what was reckoned almost
a Scandal to belong to, has ever since been, by that great Man's Management and
Justice, raised to the greatest Theater in the Universe. Female Tatler.

The Person and Behavior of Mr. Wilks, in the Part of Essex, has no small
Share in conducing to the Popularity of the Play. Tatler, No. 14. Vol. 1.

This Performance (The Trip to the Jubilee) is the greatest Instance that we
can have of the irresistible Force of proper Action. Mr. Wilks enters into the
Part with so much Skill, that the Gallantry, the Youth, and Gaiety, of a young
Man of a plentiful Fortune, is looked upon with as much Indulgence on the
Stage, as in real Life. Tatler, No. 19.

In the Preface to the same Play the Author says: "Whenever the Stage has the
Misfortune to lose Mr. Wilks, that Wildair may go to the Jubilee."

In the Preface to the Stratagem, the Author ends thus: The Reader may find
some Faults in this Play, which my Illness prevented the amending of; but there
is great Amends made in the Representation, which cannot be matched, no more
than the friendly and indefatigable Care of Mr. Wilks, to whom I chiefly owe
the Success of the Play.

Here is enough said to illustrate the personal Qualifications of this
Gentleman as an Actor; therefore let me attempt to delineate his Mind.

His Purse was ever open to proper Objects of Charity; and I have often seen
Tears in his Eyes at the Relation of any Misfortune that befell others. He was
ever the first Proposer in any joint Charity from the Theatrical Stock, and, I
am convinced, has often prevailed upon their unwilling Liberality. His Care of
the Orphan Daughters of Mr. Farquhar, by giving them several Benefit Plays,
continued to the last of his Days; and, in losing him, they have in Reality
lost a Father: But, I hope, his constant Stream of Bounty has placed them above
Want. In short, his private Acts of Charity are numberless. I shall add one in
particular.

A Gentleman, a Native of Ireland, whose Name is Smith, who received a liberal
Education in Trinity-College, Dublin, brought a Tragedy to the Managers of the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane, for their Approbation: The Play was read, and
returned, with Desire to make some Alterations for the next Season. This
postponing but ill agreed with our Author's Circumstances, that loudly called
for a speedy Supply. Mr. Wilks, knowing the ill State of his Finances, bought a
Night of his Brother there Managers, and gave it to Mr. Smith for a Benefit. Yet
he did not think that susficient, but used all his Interest to make it truly a
Benefit, and put a Hundred Guineas clear in the Author's Pocket; with which he
took Leave of his Benefactor, and the Muses; embarked for Holland, where he put
himself under the Tuition of the great Boerhaave at Leyden; and, in time,
profited so well, that his great Master of Medicine sent him to Petersburgh, at
the Request of the Czarina, where, at his first Arrival, a handsome Pension was
settled upon him. I have seen several Letters from this Gentleman to Mr. Wilks;
a Copy of one I procured from his Widow, which I shall give as a Note, for the
Singularity of it Petersburgh, Jan. 7. O. S. My dear Friend,
I Received yours with inexpressible Pleasure, by Captain Pawlet, with the
Books. How shall I thank you? But no Matter. You desire I would give you an
Account of myself. I am, at this Instant, alone in my Chamber, wrapped up to my
Nose in Furs, before a Wood-fire, that might serve you in the Street for a
Night of Rejoicing (for Stoves I do not use); on my Right of the Table, my Ink
and Paper; on the Left, a Bottle of good Nantz, though I Am no Sot; and yet the
Moon and Stars shine bright, without a Cloud large enough to cover a Tragedy
Plume. When Day appears, I must see it with a Candle; for my Windows will be
covered with a cold Coat of Frost, more of a thick Substance than the Glass;
and yet it is not three to one, but Tomorrow's Sun's short Progress will
uncloath 'em, and leave 'em slark naked again. If I were to appear before you,
fashionably dressed, you would take me for a Russian Bear, I am so clumsily
befurr'd, not only from Top to Toe (as Hamlet says), but Head and Feet.

I have Practice, more than I desire, this cold, cold Weather, and well paid: A
Physician to the Crown here never wants Practice. I was sent for Yesterday to a
Man that had been dead some Hours, a Nobleman's Servant, frozen to Death behind
his Master's Sled; but I left him to be buried (first receiving my Fee, and a
Pint Glass of Brandy); for I am not holy enough to work Miracles.

I have a good Stomach, and eat and drink well. Here is no want of any thing,
but Warmth in our long Winter, and Coolness in our short Summer, being many
Degrees different from you in both. However, we have our Winter Fires, and
Summer shady Groves and Bowers. I have served my Time to the Language of the
Country, and it is now become my Servant. My Royal Mistress is a good plump
roundfac'd Lady, and does me the Honor to ask me some Questions, now we
understand each other. Were you here, you would have but a small Share in
Amors; Love goes by Weight in Russia, and those that thrive in Flesh, succeed
best. A native Painter would draw Venus like an overgrown Hostess, and Harper
would make an excellent Mars in Picture, lolling at the Feet of the fat Cyprian
Goddess: Were the well-grown Bear here, he would be Bojar (or Lord) at his
first Landing. My greatest Task is to keep sober amongst a Nation of Drunkards.
Captain Pawlet will bring you a few Furs, with a small Quantity of Ermin, the
Product of Russia. Were I settled in Geeenland, I should do the same, and land
you a Whale, or a White Bear. You will receive them without any other Weight
but themselves. But who gave me these Furs? this Affluence? this Royal
Mistress? this happy Situation? A Man just of your Age and Stature. If you
cannot find him out, ask my dear and worthy Friend Sir Harry Wildair, and tell
him at the same time the Grain was his; and the Reaper, with the Crop, shall
ever be at his Command, etc.



.

This great and good Man continued to charm till the last of his performing on
the Stage. He left this World the 27th of September 1732. and, I must declare,
I have not yet seen his Equal in Comedy. His disconsolate Widow caused the
following Inscription to be put on his Monument in St. Paul's, Coventgarden
This superexcellent Comedian, by his own Request, was interred at 12 o'Clock at
Night, to avoid Ostentation; yet, to pay his Memory the greatest Honor that
was ever done to a Subject, the Gentlemen of the Choir belonging to the King's
Chapel came voluntarily, and performed ar Anthem prepared for the solemn
Occasion.
, with the Arms of the Wilks's Family; which are, Three Roses, and a Rose for
the Crest. His second Wife lies also in the same Vault, lately deceased.

Near this Place
(In Hopes of a happy Resurrection)
Lies the Body of ROBERT WILKS, Esquire
One of the Patentees of his Majesty's Theater.
A Man in private Life,
For many amiable Qualities, justly esteemed;
In Public universally applauded.
In the same Vault
(United again in Death)
Lies his beloved and loving Wife, MARY,
Daughter of John Brown, Esquire of Spelmonden
In the County of Kent,
Relict of Charles Fell, Esquire of Swarthmore-hall In Lancashire;
An affectionate Wife, and indulgent Mother;
A kind Mistress, and a faithful Friend.
Her charitable Disposition to the Poor
Was at all times extended, to the utmost of Her Power,
And flowed from a Heart sensibly affected
With Compassion and Benevolence.
There is no Issue left of this excellent Man to perpetuate his Memory; but his
good Deeds will last for ever. I shall finish with two Lines of a Poem wrote
upon his Death.

Farewell! O born with every Art to please!
Politeness, Grace, Gentility, and Ease.
Mr. HENRY WOODWARD,
WAS born in the Year 1717. in London, where he received a genteel Education.
He is a very thriving Comedian, and a very peaceable Mimic, for he never
strikes first; but, if he receives the first Blow, he generally returns it with
double the Strength of his Adversary. He is an excellent Harlequin, and has
what most of the motley-coat Gentry want, an excellent Head to his Heels; and
if his black Mask should be thrown aside for a whole Age (though Levity will
hardly lie so long obscured), yet, as a just and pleasing Actor in Comedy, he
can never want Encouragement any-where, if Theaters are in Use, joined to his
good Understanding and Pleasantry. His Goodnature is ever conspicuous upon all
proper Occasions, cool in his Resentments, and warm in his Friendships, a Man
fit for the World, and the World for him; and knows how to look on Fortune.

Fortune a Goddess is to Fools alone;
The Wise are always Masters of their own.
Mr. ROBERT WETHERILT.
THIS Person was born at Stamford in Lincolnshire, in the Year 1708. where his
Father and Mother, belonging to a Country Company, were then playing. He
played, as he informed me, the Part of the Duke of York in Richard the Third,
before he could speak plain; so that it may be said, he was born an Actor. He
came with his Mother (who was a well-esteemed Actress at that Time) to
Drurylane a Boy, where he showed his rising Genius, first, in the Part of
'Squire Richard in the Provoked Husband; from thence he went to the Theater in
Goodman's-Fields, where he married the Sister of Mr. Denis Delane, then of that
Theater.

In the Year 1738. he came over into this Kingdom, and may be well remembered;
his Excellence, in several Parts of Comedy, having not yet been outdone. I
cannot avoid mentioning a Passage in the Life of this truly good Comedian.

While he and his Family belonged to the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, after the
Company had finished the Season of Playing in London (which generally is at the
End of May), he, with his Father and Mother, went, for the Summer-season, to
play at several Towns in Lincolnshire (the Custom of many of both established
Theaters). When the Company were summoned to meet in London at the usual Time
(the latter End of August) to begin the Winter-season, I received the following
short Letter:

Grantham, August 2. SIR,
MR. Wetherilt, and his Wife, beg you will excuse them to Mr. Wilks; their Son
is at the Point of Death. They beg an Answer. Be pleased to direct to your
humble Servant

R. Stukely, Apothecary,
in Grantham, Lincolnshire.

The Meaning why I mention this Letter is, that the Son, the very Night this
Letter was wrote, in all Appearance, expired, was stripped and washed, the Bed
taken away, and he laid stretched on a Mat, with a Basin of Salt (a common
Custom in England) placed on his Stomach, the inconsolable Parents removed to
another House, the Coffin brought to the Son's Chamber, and the Windows all
open. About Eight at Night a Person was sent with a Light to watch the Corpse:
When she opened the Door, the first Object she perceived was poor Bob (as he
was generally called by his Familiars) sitting up, with his Teeth trembling in
his Head (and well they might) with Cold. The Woman, in her Fright, dropped the
Candle, and scream'd out, The Devil! the Devil! This Fright alarmed another
Woman below, who ran up-stairs to see what was the Matter: In the mean time
Bob, with much ado, had made a Shift to get from the Bed; and, taking up the
Candle, which lay upon the Floor unextinguish'd, was creeping to the Door to
call for Assistance, as naked as from the Womb of his Mother; which the two
Women perceiving, with joint Voices repeated again, A Ghost! a Ghost! the
Devil! the Devil! The Master of the House, hearing this Uproar, ran himself, to
know the Reason; where poor Bob, the supposed Devil, and he, soon came to a
right Understanding. He was put into a warm Bed, to the unspeakable Joy of his
desponding Parents, and in ten Days after in London (viva voce) told me the
whole Story of his Death.

This Accident, when real Death paid him a Visit, worked so strongly upon his
forlorn Parents, that they would not let his Corpse be coffined till five Days
after he expired. Vain Hope! He died in 1743. in the 35th Year of his Age. Both
his Parents died soon after him. I am sorry to end this Account with saying,
his Company was so desirable, that he had many Trials of Skill with his
Constitution. He was buried, in a very genteel Manner, in the Round Churchyard.

In Trials of Drinking, pray let me assure ye,
I never intend to be one of the Jury.
Mr. THOMAS WALKER.
THIS Person was born in the Year 1700. In his Youth he was a very promising
Actor. The Part of Charles in the Nonjuror, a Comedy founded upon Moliere's
Tartuff, by Mr. Cibber, which was performed at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane
in the Year 1717. gave him the first Establishment as an Actor. The Applause he
gained from performing the Part of Macheath in the Beggars Opera, was fatal to
him: He followed Bacchus too ardently, insomuch that his Credit was often
drowned upon the Stage, and, by Degrees, almost rendered him useless.

He was the supposed Author of two dramatic Pieces; viz. The Quakers Opera, and
a Tragedy called The Fate of Villainy. This Play he brought to Ireland in the
Year 1744. and prevailed on the Proprietors to act it, under the Title of Love
and Loyalty. The second Night was given out for his Benefit; but not being able
to pay in Half the Charge of the common Expenses, the Doors were ordered to be
kept shut: But, I remember, few People came to ask the Reason. However, I fear
this Disappointment hastened his Death; for he survived it but three Days;
dying, in the 44th Year of his Age, a Martyr to what often stole from him a
good Understanding.

He who delights in Drinking out of Season,
Takes wondrous Pains to drown his manly Reason.
Mr. THOMAS WRIGHT.
THIS Gentleman was born in the Year 1707. He is descended of a good Family,
and had a liberal Education. It is with some Concern I say he had once a good
Fortune.

His first Appearance as an Actor, in London, was with Mr. Giffard, at the
Theater in Goodman's-Fields, from whence he removed with that Gentleman to
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields Theater; and from thence he was invited to the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane: But, receiving some ill Usage from Mr. Fleetwood,
then Patentee, he came over to this Kingdom in the Year 1741. where he appeared
to great Advantage in several capital Characters. He afterward went out, with
a Country Company, to several Parts of this Kingdom, and is now, as I am
informed, Head of a Company of Players in England. In my Opinion, his
Deservings might make him desirable in any regular Theater; he having a proper
Person, pleasing Voice, and being always perfect in what he performs, joined to
a good Understanding to feel what he speaks.

But various Causes various Minds employ;
Some love to save, while others would destroy.
Mr. JAMES WORSDALE.
THIS facetious Person must not be forgot, whose Performance, as an Actor and a
Poet, has often diverted the Town. He was taught the Use of the Pencil under
that celebrated Painter Sir Godfrey Kneller. I do not pretend to rescue him
from the Lash of a Lady who has thought fit to correct him; but this I know,
that I have been in his Company, when his quick Imagination has struck out
several Pieces of Humor that have given great Pleasure, in his Manner of
Singing. To give one Instance of it: He and I were together, without any other
Company; when, on the Back of a Play-bill, he struck out the following Song,
for his little Opera called A Cure for a Scold.

Whoever to a Wife
Is linked for his Life,
Is placed in a wretched Condition;
Though plagued with her Tricks,
Like a Blister she sticks,
And Death is his only Physician, Poor Man,
And Death, etc.
So the Cur who possessed
A Bone of the best,
Could lick it, or leave it, at Pleasure;
But if to his Tail
It Is tied, without fail
He Is harassed and plagued, without Measure, Poor Cur,
He Is harassed, etc.
Now what convinces me of the quick Coinage of this Song is, that the last
Stanza was produced by the Accident of seeing a Dog run, at that Instant, by
the Window, with a Bone tied to his Tail, followed by a hooting Mob.

This may certainly be said of him, that he had an inexhaustible Fund of
Good Humor, Goodnature, and Generosity; and might have had a heavier Purse,
if he had not been so light of Heart. I shall end with two Lines of his own,
with very little Variation.

May be ever from Duns and from Bailiffs be freed,
And shake a loose Leg on each Side of the Tweed.
Mr. JOHN WATSON,
IS a Person worthy of Imitation, from his Economy and Behavior in private
Life. He belonged to the Stage from his Youth, first as a Prompter, but many
Years as an Actor: If he does not excel, he is ever decent. His long
Continuance in the Business has made him perfect almost in every Character, and
such a Person must be extremely useful in a Theater.

He best can guide a Stranger in the Road,
Who often the mazy Labyrinth has trod.
Mr. JAMES WILLIAMS,
MUST not be forgot, since what he does, he does well; and, in my Judgment,
were he put forward in some Parts in Low Comedy, his Execution would not lose
him any Reputation. In one Ingredient to make up a Play, I think him the best I
have ever known; that is, a Property-man Property-man is the Person that
receives a Bill from the Prompter, for what is necessary in every new or
revived Play; as Purses, Wine, Suppers, Poison, Daggers, Halters, Axes, and
many more Implements of Execution, with a Thousand other etc. etc. etc.
.

His bloodless Weapons only kill in Jest;
And those that drink his Poisons, fare the best.
Mrs. WOFFINGTON.
THIS amiable Actress was born in Dublin of reputable Parents, who gave her a
genteel Education. Her sprightly Genius led her early to the Stage, where she
made a rapid Progress: Her first Establishment was in the Character of Sir
Harry Wildair in this Kingdom, which was the first Part she performed in
Covent Garden Theater, and had a successive Progress of upwards of twenty
Nights, with universal Applause. The Manager of that Theater having some
Dispute with her relating to Salary (as I am informed), she engaged with the
Manager of Drury Lane, where she has reigned in full Perfection, unrivaled in
the Parts she undertakes; till her late Re-establishment at Covent Garden.

As Merit too often creates Envy, the little World the Theater is not free from
it. This agreeable Actress, in the Part of Sir Harry, coming into the
Green-Room, said, pleasantly, In my Conscience! I believe Half the Men in the
House take me for one of their own Sex. Another Actress replied, It may be so;
but, in my Conscience! the other Half can convince them to the contrary. As the
Theater is the Test of other Peoples. Wit, why may they not find a little among
themselves?

I am informed, she now shines in several capital Parts in Tragedy; viz.
Cleopatra in All for Love, Jane Shore, Monimia, Calista in the Fair Penitent,
etc. I shall mention, as my last Note, an Accident that fell out at this Play,
the first Season it was performed, in the Year 1699. which I gathered from that
Stage Chronicle, Mr. John Bowman.

Lothario, after he is killed by Altamont in the 4th Act, lies dead by Proxy in
the 5th, raised on a Bier covered with Black by the Property-man, and the Face
whitened by the Barber, the Coat and Perriwig generally filled by one of the
Dressers. Most of the capital Actors in the established Theaters have generally
a Dresser to themselves, though they are paid by the Manager, to be ready, on all
Occasions, for Stage-guards, Attendance, etc.

Mr. Powell played Lothario, and one Warren, his Dresser, claimed a Right of
lying for his Master, and performing the dead Part of Lothario, which he
proposed to act to the best Advantage; though Powell was ignorant of the Matter.
The Fifth Act began, and went on, as usual, with Applause; but, about the
Middle of the distressful Scene, Powell called aloud for his Man Warren, who as
loudly replied, from the Bier on the Stage, Here, Sir! Powell (who, as I said
before, was ignorant of the Part his Man was doing) repeated, without Loss of
Time, Come here this Moment, you Son of a Whore! or I Will break all the Bones in
your Skin. Warren knew his hasty Temper; therefore, without any Reply, jumped
off, with all his Sables about him, which, unfortunately, were tied fast to the
Handles of the Bier, and dragged after him. But this was not all; the Laugh and
Roar began in the Audience, till it frightened poor Warren so much, that, with
the Bier at his Tail, he threw down Calista (Mrs. Barry), and overwhelmed her
with the Table, Lamp, Book, Bones, together with all the Lumber of the
Charnel-house. He tugged, till he broke off his Trammels, and made his Escape;
and the Play, at once, ended with immoderate Fits of Laughter: Even the grave
Mr. Betterton Smiled in the Tumult, and enjoyed the Storm.
But he would not let the Fair Penitent be played any more that Season, till
poor Warren's Misconduct was something forgot.


.

I shall leave this Lady to proceed in her Path of Merit where she still leads,
with an Epilogue wrote purely for her Manner of Speaking: And as Prologues and
Epilogues are the most difficult Tasks of both Sexes on the Stage, it is to be
remarked, but few, besides the capital Performers, are trusted with them; and a
good Prologue and Epilogue have often helped a bad Play out of the Mire, or, at
least, sent the Audience home a little better humored.

EPILOGUE, Volunteer.
Enters, reading the Gazette. CURSE on all Cowards! say I -- why -- bless my
Eyes --
No -- no -- it cannot be true -- this Gazette lies --
Our Men retreat before a scrub Banditi,
Who scarce could fright the Buff-coats of the City!
Well -- if it is so, and that our Men will not stand,
It Is time we Women take the Thing in Hand --
Thus, in my Country's Cause, I now appear
A bold, smart Khevenhuller Volunteer --
And really, mark some Heroes in the Nation,
You Will think this no unnat'ral Transformation:
For if in Valor real Manhood lies,
All Cowards are but -- Women in Disguise --
They cry, These Rebels are so stout and tall!
Ah! Lard! I Would lower the proudest of 'em all:
Try but my Courage, place me in the Van,
And, post me, if I don't bring down my Man --
Had we an Army of such charging Wenches,
What Man, do you think, would dare to attack our Trenches?
O! how the Cannon of our Eyes would maul 'em,
But our masked Batt'ries -- Lud! how they would gall 'em!
No Rebel against such Force durst take the Field --
For, damme! we would die before we'd yield!
Joking aparr, we Women have strong Reason
To stop the Progress of this Popish Treason:
For now, when Female Liberty's at stake,
All Women ought to bustle for its Sake.
Should these audacious Sons of Rome prevail,
Vows, Convents, and that Heathen Thing, a Veil,
Must come in Fashion; and such Institutions
Would suit but oddly with our Constitutions.
What gay Coquet would like a Nun's Profession?
And I Have some private Reasons against Confession.
Besides, our good Men of the Church, they say
(Who now; thank Heaven, may love, as well as pray),
Must then be only wed to cloistered Houses --
Hold! there we are fobb'd of twenty thousand Spouses;
And, faith, no bad ones, as I Am told -- Then judge ye,
Is It fit we lose our -- Benefit of Clergy?
In Freedom's Cause, ye Patriot Fair, arise;
Exert the sacred Influence of your Eyes:
On valiant Merit deign alone to smile,
And vindicate the Glory of our Isle.
To no base Cowards render up your Charms;
Disband the Lover who deserts his Arms:
So shall you fire each Hero to his Duty,
And British Rights be fixed by British Beauty.
FINIS.

