DON QUIXOTE IN ENGLAND. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the NEW THEATER in the
Hay-Market.

By HENRY FIELDING, Esquire

-- facile quis
Speret idem, sudet multum, frustraque laboret,
Ausus idem --
Hor. LONDON: Printed for J. WATTS at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near
Lincoln's End Fields. MDCCXXXIV. [Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]

To the RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP EARL of CHESTERFIELD, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the GARTER.
MY LORD,
HOWEVER unworthy these Scenes may be of Your LORDSHIP'S Protection, the Design
with which some of them were written, cannot fail of recommending them to ONE
who has so gloriously distinguished Himself in the Cause of Liberty, to which
the Corruption I have here endeavored to expose, may one Day be a very fatal
Enemy.

The Freedom of the Stage is, perhaps, as well worth contending for, as that of
the Press. It is the Opinion of an Author well known to Your LORDSHIP, that
Examples work quicker and stronger on the Minds of Men than Precepts.

This will, I believe, my LORD, be found truer with regard to Politics than to
Ethics: The most ridiculous Exhibitions of Luxury or Avarice may likely have
little Effect on the Sensualist or the Miser; but I fansy a lively
Representation of the Calamities brought on a Country by general Corruption,
might have a very sensible and useful Effect on the Spectators.

Socrates, who owed his Destruction greatly to the Contempt brought on him by
the Comedies of Aristophanes, is a lasting Instance of the Force of Theatrical
Ridicule: Here, indeed, this Weapon was used to an ill Purpose; but surely,
what is able to bring Wisdom and Virtue into Disrepute, will with great
Facility lay their Opposites under a general Contempt. There are among us who
seem so sensible of the Danger of Wit and Humor, that they are resolved to
have nothing to do with them: And indeed they are in the right on it; for Wit,
like Hunger, will be with great Difficulty restrained from falling on, where
there is great Plenty and Variety of Food.

But while the powerful Sons of Dullness shed all their Influence on their
inferior Brethren, be You, My LORD, who are the most favorite Offspring of the
British Muses, the Patron of their younger Children; whom Your LORDSHIP has as
much Reason to love, as others to fear; for you must have seen, that to be
celebrated by them, and applauded by the more discerning and worthy, are the
only Rewards which true Patriotism (a Word scandalously ridiculed by some) can
securely expect. And here I am pleading the Cause of others; for the only Title
I have to enrol my self in the Number of those I have recommended to Your
Favor, is by being, with the most perfect Admiration and Respect,

My LORD, Your LORDSHIP'S most obedient and most humble Servant, HENRY FIELDING.

PREFACE.
THIS Comedy was begun at Leyden in the Year 1728, and after it had been
sketched out into a few loose Scenes, was thrown by, and for a long while no
more thought of. It was originally writ for my private Amusement; as it would
indeed have been little less than Quixotism itself to hope any other Fruits
from attempting Characters wherein the inimitable Cervantes so far excelled.
The Impossibility of going beyond, and the extreme Difficulty of keeping pace
with him, were sufficient to infuse Despair into a very adventurous Author.

I soon discovered too, that my too small Experience in, and little Knowledge
of the World, had led me into an Error. I soon found it infinitely more
difficult than I imagined, to vary the Scene, and give my Knight an Opportunity
of displaying himself in a different manner from that wherein he appears in the
Romance. Human Nature is every where the same. And the Modes and Habits of
particular Nations do not change it enough, sufficiently to distinguish a
Quixore in England from a Quixote in Spain.

In these Sentiments Mr. Booth and Mr. Cibber concurred with me, who, upon
seeing the aforesaid Sketch, both dissuaded me from suffering it to be
represented on the Stage; and accordingly it was remanded back to my Shelf,
where, probably, it would have perished in Oblivion, had not the Solicitations
of the distressed Actors in Drury Lane prevailed on me to revise it, at the same
time that it came into my Head to add those Scenes concerning our Elections.

Being thus altered, it was often rehearsed on that Theater, and a particular
Day appointed for its Action; but the Giant Cajanus, of a Race who were always
Enemies to our poor Don, deferred his Appearance so long, that the Intervention
of the Actor's Benefits would have put it off till the next Season, had I not
brought it on where now it appears.

I have troubled the Reader thus long, to account for this Comedy's appearing
as it now does, and that he might distinguish those Parts of it which were the
Production of this Season from those which were written in my more juvenile
Years, and before most of the Pieces with which I have endeavored to entertain
the Public.

A TABLE of the SONGS.
AIR 1. Rogues there are of each Nation. Page 3 AIR 2. Oh! think not the Maid
whom you scorn. p. 6 AIR 3. The Pain which tears my throbbing Breast. p. 9 AIR
4. Oh hasten my Lover, dear Cupid. p. 12 AIR 5. When mighty roast Beef was the
Englishman's, etc. p. 14 AIR 6. Happy the Animals who stray. p. 16 AIR 7. The
Doctor is feed for a dangerous Draught. p. 26 AIR 8. The dusky Night rides down
the Sky. p. 29 AIR 9. Like Gold to a Miser, the Wit of a Lass. p. 33 AIR 10.
The more we see of Human-kind. p. 40 AIR 11. Would Fortune the Truth to
discover. p. 45 AIR 12. A Virgin once was walking along. p. 51 AIR 13. Sweet's
the little Maid. p. 52 AIR 14. Thus the Merchant, who with Pleasure. p. 60 AIR
15. All Mankind are mad, it is plain. p. 64
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Don Quixote, Mr. Roberts. Sancho, Mr. Mullart. Sir Thomas Loveland, Mr.
Machen. Squire Badger, Mr. Macklin. Fairlove, Mr. Warwell. Mayor, Mr. Turbutt.
Voter, Mr. Machen. Guzzle, Mr. Jones. John, Mr. Hewson. Brief, a Lawyer, Mr.
Topham. Dr. Drench, a Physician, Mr. Hallam. Mr. Sneak, Mr. Hicks.
WOMEN.
Dorothea, Miss Atherton. Jezebel, Mrs. Hide. Mrs. Guzzle, Mrs. Martin. Mrs.
Sneak, Mrs. Egerton. Miss Sneak, Miss Jones.
Stage-Coachman and Mob.
SCENE, An Inn in a Country Borough. INTRODUCTION.
MANAGER, AUTHOR. MANAGER. NO Prologue, Sir! The Audience will never bear it.
They will not bate you any thing of their due.


Auth. I am the Audience's very humble Servant; but they cannot make a Man
write a Prologue, whether he can or no.


Man. Why, Sir, there is nothing easier: I have known an Author bring three or
four to the House with one Play, and give us our Choice which we would speak.


Auth. Yes, Sir; and I have now three in my Pocket, written by Friends, of
which I choose none should be spoke.


Man. How so?


Auth. Because they have been all spoke already twenty times over.


Man. Let me see them, pray.


Auth. They are written in such damned cramp Hands, you will never be able to
read them; but I will tell you the Substance of them. One of them begins with
abusing the Writings of all my Cotemporaries, lamenting the fallen State of the
Stage; and lastly, assuring the Audience that this Play was written with a
Design to restore true Taste, and their approving it is the best Symptom they
can give of their having any.


Man. Well, and a very good Scheme.


Auth. May be so; but it has been the Subject of almost every Prologue for
these ten Years last past. The Second is in a different Cast: The first twelve
Lines inveigh against all Indecency on the Stage, and the last twenty Lines
show you what it is.


Man. That would do better for an Epilogue: But what is the Third?


Auth. Why, the Third has some Wit in it, and would have done very well, but
for a Mistake.


Man. Ay! What Mistake?


Auth. Why, the Author never read my Play, and taking it for a regular Comedy
of Five Acts, has fallen very severely on Farce: However, it is a pretty good
one, and will do very well for the first genteel Comedy you bring on the Stage.


Man. But don't you think a Play, with so odd a Title as yours, requires to be
a little explained? May they not be too much surprised at some things?


Auth. Not at all. The Audience, I believe, are all acquainted with the
Character of Don Quixote and Sancho. I have brought them over into England, and
introduced them at an Inn in the Country, where, I believe, no one will be
surprised that the Knight finds several People as mad as himself. This I could
have told them in forty dull Lines, if I would, but I rather chose to let it
alone; for, to tell you the Truth, I can draw but one Conclusion from the
Prologues I have ever seen, that the Authors are so sensible of the Demerits of
their Plays, that they desire to set the Audience asleep before they begin: But
of what real Use is a Bill of Fare to any Entertainment, where the Guests are
not left to their Choice what Part they will pick at, but are obliged to
swallow the Whole indifferently?


Enter a Player. Play. Sir, the Audience make such a Noise with their Canes,
that, if we don't begin immediately, they will beat the House down before the
Play begins; and it is not advisable to put them out of Humor, for there are
two or three of the loudest Cat-calls, in the Gallery, that ever were heard.


Auth. Be not frightened at that. Those are only some particular Friends of
mine, who are to put on the Face of Enemies at first, and be converted at the
End of the First Act.


Man. Order then to play away the Overture immediately. Come, Sir, what do you
do with yourself?


Auth. I shall dispose my self in some Part of the House, where I shall see,
and not be seen: And I can assure you, Sir, if the Audience are but half as
well entertained with this Play, as I shall be my self, it will go off with
universal Applause.


DON QUIXOTE IN ENGLAND.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, An Inn. GUZZLE, SANCHO. GUZZLE. NEVER tell me, Sir, of Don Quixote, or
Don Beelzebub; here is a Man comes into my House, and eats me out on it, and then
tells me he is a Knight Errant; he is an arrant Rogue, and if he does not pay me
my Bill, I Will have a Warrant for him.


San. My Master fears no Warrant, Friend; had you ever been in Spain, you would
have known that Men of his Order are above the Law.


Guz. Tell not me of Spain, Sir; I am an Englishman, where no one is above the
Law; and if your Master does not pay me, I shall lay his Spaniardship fast in a
Place, which he shall find it as difficult to get out of, as your Countrymen
have found it to get into Gibraltar.


San. That Is neither here nor there, as the old Saying is; many are shut into
one Place, and out of another. Men bar Houses to keep Rogues out, and Jails to
keep them in. He that is hanged for stealing a Horse today, has no reason to
buy Oats for him tomorrow.


Guz. Sirrah, your Horse, nor your Ass neither, shall have any more Oats at my
Expense; never were Masters and their Beasts so like one another. The Don is
just such another lean Ramscallion as his -- what do you call him -- his
Rozinante; and thou art just such another squat Bag of Guts as thy Dapple. Send
my House and my Stable once well emptied of you, and if ever I suffer a
Spaniard to enter my Doors again, may I have a whole Company of Soldiers
quartered on me; for if I must be eaten up, I had rather suffer by my own
Country Rogues, than foreign ones.


AIR I.
^ San. Rogues there are of each Nation,
Except among the Divines;
And Vinegar, since the Creation,
Has still been made of all Wines.
Against one Lawyer Lurch
A County scarce can guard;
One Parson does for a Church,
One Doctor for a Churchyard.



SCENE II.
Don Quixote, Sancho. Quix. Sancho!


San. An't please your Honor --


Quix. Come hither, Sancho, I smell an Adventure.


San. And so do I, an't please your Worship; the Landlord of the House swears
bitterly that he will have a Warrant against us.


Quix. What Landlord! What House! Will thou never be in thy Senses? Are we not
in a Castle?


San. No, marry are we not; but we are in a fair way to be in one.


Quix. What do thou mean, Oaf?


San. I mean that I shall see your Honor in a Goal within these two Days.


Quix. Me in a Goal! Ha! Caitif!


San. Ay, Sir, we are got into a terrible Country. A Man's Quality here cannot
defend him, if he breaks the Laws.


Quix. Then indeed Knight-Errantry were of no Use: But I tell thee, Caitif,
Goals in all Countries are only Habitations for the Poor, not for Men of
Quality. If a poor Fellow robs a Man of Fashion of Five Shillings, to Goal with
him: But the Man of Fashion may plunder a thousand Poor, and stay in his own
House. But know, thou base Squire of the great Don Quixote de la Mancha, that
an Adventure now presents it self, not only worthy me, but the united Force of
all the Knights upon Earth.


San. Ah, poor Sancho! there is an end of thee, a Leg or an Arm will not suffice
this Bout.


Quix. There is now arrived in this Castle, one of the most accursed Giants
that ever infested the Earth. He marches at the Head of his Army, that howl
like Turks in an Engagement.


San. Oh Lud! Oh Lud! this is the Country Squire at the Head of his Pack of
Dogs.


Quix. What do thou mutter, Varlet?


San. Why, Sir, this Giant that your Worship talks of, is a Country Gentleman
who is going a courting, and his Army is neither more nor less than his Kennel
of Fox-Hounds.


Quix. Oh, the prodigious Force of Enchantment! Sirrah, I tell thee this is the
Giant Toglogmoglogog, Lord of the Island of Gogmogog, whose Belly has been the
Tomb of above a thousand strong Men.


San. Of above a thousand Hogsheads of strong Beer, I believe.


Quix. This must be the Inchanter Merlin, I know him by his Dogs; but, thou
Idiot! do thou imagine that Women are to be hunted like Hares, that a Man
would carry his Hounds with him to visit his Mistress?


San. Sir, your true English Squire and his Hounds are as inseparable as your
Spanish and his Toledo. He eats with his Hounds, drinks with his Hounds, and
lies with his Hounds; your true Errant English Squire is but the first Dog-Boy
in his House.


Quix. It Is pity then, that Fortune should contradict the Order of Nature. It
was a wise Institution of Plato to educate Children according to their Minds,
not to their Births; these Squires should sow that Corn which they ride over.
Sancho, when I see a Gentleman in his own Coach-box, I regret the Loss which
some one has had of a Coachman; the Man who toils all Day after a Partridge or
a Pheasant, might serve his Country by toiling after a Plough; and when I see a
low, mean, tricking Lord, I lament the Loss of an excellent Attorney. [Singing
within.] But, hark, some courteous Lady in the Castle prepares an Entertainment
for my Ears.


AIR II. Tweed Side.
^ Oh! think not the Maid whom you scorn,
With Riches delighted can be;
Had I a great Princess been born,
My Billy had dear been to me.
In Grandeur and Wealth we find Woe,
In Love there is nothing but Charms;
On others your Treasures bestow,
Give Billy alone to these Arms.
In Title and Wealth what is lost,
In Tenderness often is repaid;
Too much a great Fortune may cost;
Well purchased may be the poor Maid.
Let Gold's empty Show cheat the Great,
We more real Pleasures will prove;
While they in their Palaces hate,
We in our poor Cottage will love.


SCENE III.
Don Quixote, Guzzle, Sancho. Quix. Most illustrious and most mighty Lord, how
shall I sufficiently pay you for those Sounds with which I have been ravished?


Guz. Sir, I desire no other Payment but of this small Bill; your Worship's
Cattle are saddled, and it is a charming Day for traveling.


Quix. Nothing, my Lord, shall ever tempt me to leave you, till what I have
this Day seen within the Castle-Walls be utterly demolished.


Guz. So! he has seen the Sirloin of Beef at the Fire, I find. [Aside.] -- But
if your Worship intends to stay any longer, I hope you design to satisfy this
small Matter here: I am in great Necessity, I assure you.


Quix. To what mean Actions does Necessity force Men! That ever a mighty Lord
should be obliged to borrow Money!


Guz. I am ashamed to ask your Worship so often for this Trifle, but --


Quix. My Lord, I see you are; I see the generous Confusion which spreads your
Face.


Guz. I am so poor, an't please your Honor, that it will be quite Charity in
you. It is the same as if you gave it me.


Quix. My Lord, I am more confused than you; but do not think it a Gift, since
I see you so backward to receive it in that Light. And since, my Lord, every
thing I have, saving to the charming Dulcinea del Toboso, her fixed and
unalterable Right, be justly yours. Give me leave to call it a Debt, my Lord.
Sancho, pay his Lordship a thousand English Guineas.


San. If your Worship will please to tell me where I shall get them; but
there is no paying with an empty Hand; where nothing is, nothing can come on it.
Twelve Lawyers make not one honest Man.


Quix. Cease thy Impertinence, and pay the Money immediately.


San. If I have seen the Color of Gold this Fortnight, may I never see Teresa
Pancha again.


Quix. I am confounded, my Lord, at the Extravagance of my Squire, who, out of
the Spoils of so many Giants he has plundered, should not have reserved enough
to oblige your Lordship with such a Trifle; but, if you know any one who will
disemburse that Sum, or any other, I will sell him the Reversion of the next
Island I conquer.


Guz. Do you make a Jest of me, Sir?


Quix. Be not incensed; I am sorry I am not able to give it you.


Guz. Sorry, forsooth! a pretty way of paying Debts, truly; I fansy if I was to
tell the Exciseman, and my Brewer, I was sorry I could not pay 'em, they would
send me and my Sorrow to Goal together: In short, Sir, I must and I will have
my Money.


San. You must get the Philosophers Stone, before you can make any Money of us.


Guz. You shall neither eat nor drink any more in my House, 'till I am paid,
that I Am resolved.


San. I wish your Worship would think of changing your Quarters; if it must be
a Balnketing, why let it be a Blanketing. I have not eat any thing these twelve
Hours; and I don't find I am like to fare much better for the next twelve; and
by that time I shall be so light, you may as well toss a Feather in a Blanket.


Quix. Sancho, come hither; I intend to make thee my Ambassador.


San. Why truly, Sir, that is a Post I should like hugeously well; your
Bassadours lead rare fat Lives, they say; and I should make a very good
Bassadour, I can assure your Worship.


Quix. Thou shall go my Ambassador to the Court of Dulcinea del Toboso.


San. I suppose it is equal to your Worship what Court you send me to; and, to
say the Truth, I had rather go to some other; for though my Lady Dulcinea be a
very good Woman, yet she has got such a waundy Trick of being chanted, and I
fansy your Bassadours fare but ill at your chanted Courts.


Quix. Reptile! reply not on thy Life, but go and prepare thy self for thy
Journey; then come to me and receive farther Instructions, for thou shall set
out this very Evening. -- But, Ha! the charming Voice begins again.


AIR III. Why will Florella, etc.
^ [Dorothea sings within.] The Pain which tears my throbbing Breast,
What Language can deplore?
For how should Language have expressed
A Pain never felt before?
In other Virgin wounded Hearts,
Love's cruel Sport we see;
But the most cruel of his Darts,
He has reserved for me.



Quix. Unhappy Princess!


Dor. Thy Curse, O Tantalus! I Would prize;
Thy Curse a Bliss would prove.
Ah! Heaven were kind, if with my Eyes
I could enjoy my Love.
Enchanted thus, Romances tell
Their Moans poor Virgins make;
But where is found the powerful Spell,
Can this Enchantment break?



Quix. In this Arm it is found. Look forth, most adorable, though most unhappy
Princess; look forth, and behold whom Fate has sent to your Relief; the most
renowned Knight of the woeful Figure, the invincible Don Quixote de la Mancha,
for whose victorious Arm alone this Adventure is reserved. -- Oh cursed
Inchanter, do thou keep this charming Princess invisible to my Eyes? Open the
Castle-Gates, open them this Instant, whoever is on the Guard, or you shall
feel the Force of my Attack. You shall find, Caitifs, that one single Knight is
too many for you all.


[He attacks the Walls, and breaks the Windows. SCENE IV.
Don Quixote, Guzzle, and Mob. Guz. Heyday! What, in the Devil's Name, are you
doing? What, do you intend to beat down my House?


Quix. Thou most uncourteous Lord, deliver the Princess whom thou so unjustly
do detain; or think not that all the Inchanters on Earth shall preserve thee
from my Vengeance.


Guz. Don't tell me of Princesses and Lords, I Am no Lord, I am an honest Man;
and I can tell you, you may be a Gentleman, but you don't act like one, to
break a poor Man's Windows in this manner.


Quix. Deliver the Princess, Caitif.


Guz. Pay me my Bill, Sir, and go out of my House, or I Will fetch a Warrant for
you; I Will see whether a Man is to have his Victuals eat up, and Drink drank
out, and Windows broke, and his Walls shattered, and his Guest disturbed, for
nothing.


Quix. Ungracious Knight! who so often throwest in my Teeth that small
Entertainment, which thou art obliged to give Men of my heroic Profession.


Guz. I believe, indeed, your Profession does oblige People sometimes to give,
whether they will or no.


Quix. It is too plain, thou Wretch, why thou would have me gone; thou
know the Delivering of this high Lady thou do detain, is reserved for me
alone; but deliver her this Moment, with all her Attendants, all her Plate and
Jewels which thou have robbed her of.


Guz. Hear this, Neighbors, I am accused of stealing Plates and Jewels, when
every Body knows I have but five Dozen of Plates, and those I bought and paid
for honestly; and as for Jewels, the Devil of any Jewels are there in this
House, but two Bobs that my Wife wears in her Ears, which were given her by Sir
Thomas Loveland at his last Election.


Quix. Cease thy Equivocations, and deliver them this Instant, or thou shall
find how vainly thou do trust to all those Giants at thy Heels. [The Mob
laugh.] Do you mock me, Caitifs? Now, thou most incomparable Dulcinea del
Toboso, assist thy valiant Knight.


[He drives them off, and Exit. SCENE V.
A Chamber. Dorothea, Jezebel. Dor. Ha, ha, ha! in spite of all my Misfortunes,
I cannot help laughing at the pleasant Adventure of the Knight of the woeful
Figure.


Jez. Do you think, Madam, this is the very same Don --; what do you call him,
whom your Father saw in Spain, and of whom he has told us such pure pleasant
Stories?


Dor. The same, it can be no other. Oh, Jezebel! I wish my Adventure may end as
happily as those of my Namesake Dorothea's did; I am sure they are very near
as romantic: But have not I reason to blame Fairlove for suffering me to be
here before him? The Lover that does not outfly his Mistress's Desires, is slow
indeed.


Jez. And let me tell you, Madam, he must be very swift who does.

AIR IV.
^ Dor. Oh hasten my Lover, dear Cupid,
Wing hither the Youth I admire;
The Wretch is too lazy and stupid,
Who leaves me but Time to desire.
Let Prudes, who leave Lovers in Anguish,
Themselves in their fonder Fits stay;
But leave not the Virgin to languish,
Who meets her true Lover half way.



Well, I Am a mad Girl: Don't you think this Husband of mine, that is to be,
will have a delightful Task to tame me?


Jez. By what I can see, he is in a pretty fair way to be tamed himself.


SCENE VI.
Sancho, Dorothea, Jezebel. San. Pray, Ladies, which of you is the chanted
Princess; or are you both chanted Princesses?


Jez. What is it to you what we are, Saucebox?


Dor. Peace, dear Jezebel. -- This must be the illustrious Sancho himself. -- I
am the Princess Indoccalambria.


San. My Master, the Knight of the Woeful Figure (and a woeful Figure he makes,
sure enough) sends your Ladyship his humble Service, and hopes you will not
take it amiss that he has not been able to knock all the People in the House on
the Head; however, he has made it pretty well up in breaking the Windows; your
Ladyship will lie pure and cool, for the Devil a whole Pane is there in all
your Apartment; if the Glazier had hired him, he could not have done better.


Dor. Thou mighty Squire of the most mighty Knight upon Earth, give my grateful
Thanks to your Master for what he has undertaken upon my Account; but tell him
not to get his precious Bones bruised any more, for I am sufficiently assured
this Adventure is reserved for some other Knight.


San. Nay, nay, like enough; all Men cannot do all things; one Man gets an
Estate, by what another gets a Halter. All is not Fish that swims. Many a Man
wants a Wife, but more want to get rid of one. Two Cuckolds see each other's
Horns when neither of them can see his own. Money is the Fruit of Evil, as
often as the Root of it. Charity seldom goes out of her own House; and
Ill Nature is always a rambling abroad. Every Woman is a Beauty, if you will
believe her own Glass; and few, if you will believe her Neighbors.


Dor. Ha, ha, ha! Pray, Mr. Sancho, might not one hope to see your illustrious
Master?


San. Nothing would rejoice his Heart so much, Madam, unless it were to see my
Lady Dulcinea herself. Ah, Madam, might I hope your Ladyship would speak a good
Word for me?


Dor. Name it, and be assured of any thing in my Power, honest Sancho.


San. If your Princess-ship could but prevail on my Master, that I might not be
sent home after my Lady Dulcinea; for, to tell you the Truth, Madam, I am so
fond of the English roast Beef and strong Beer, that I don't intend ever to set
my Foot in Spain again, if I can help it: Give me a Slice of roast Beef before
all the Rarities of Camacho's Wedding.


Dor. Bravely said, noble Squire.


AIR V. The King's Old Courtier.
^ When mighty roast Beef was the Englishman's Food,
It enobled our Hearts, and enriched our Blood;
Our Soldiers were brave, and our Courtiers were good.
Oh the Roast Beef of Old England,
And Old England's Roast Beef!
Then, Britons, from all nice Dainties refrain,
Which effeminate Italy, France, and Spain;
And mighty Roast Beef shall command on the Main.
Oh the Roast Beef, etc.

San. Oh the Roast Beef, etc.



Dor. I have been told, noble Squire, that you once imposed a certain Lady for
Dulcinea on your Master; now what think you if this young Lady here should
personate that incomparable Princess?


Jez. Who, I?


San. Adod! your Princess-ship has hit it; for he has never seen this Dulcinea,
nor has any body else that I can hear of; and who my Lady Dulcinea should be, I
don't know, unless she be one of your chanted Ladies: The Curate of our Parish,
and Mr. Nicholas the Barber, have often told me there was no such Woman, and
that my Master was a Madman; and sometimes I am half at a loss to guess whether
he be mad or no. I Am sure, if it was not for the sake of a little Island that I
am to govern, I should not have followed his Errantries so long.


Dor. Fie, do not entertain such unworthy Thoughts of that most glorious Knight.


San. Nay, Madam, I cannot find in my Heart to think him mad neither; for he
will talk sometimes, 'twould do one good to hear him talk; he will talk ye
three Hours, and I shall not understand one Word he says. Our Curate was a Fool to
even; and yet he has talked what I could not understand neither, but that is
neither here nor there; an empty Purse causes a full Heart; an old Woman's a
very bad Bribe, but a very good Wife; Conscience often stops at a Molehill, and
leaps over a Mountain; the Law guards us from all Evil but itself; what is Vice
today is Virtue tomorrow; it is not only Plumbs that make a Pudding; Physic
makes you first sick, and then well; Wine first makes you well, and then sick.


Jez. And your Proverbs would make the Devil sick.


Dor. Lose no time, good Sancho, but acquaint the most invincible Knight that
the Lady Dulcinea is in the Castle; we'll manage the matter so dexterously, you
shall be in no danger of a Discovery.


San. Since my bringing the last Dulcinea to him, I do not fear that; he that
can swallow a Goose will hardly keck at a Gander; the Bear may well dance when
the Ass plays on the Fiddle.

[ Exit Sancho.
SCENE VII.
Dorothea, Jezebel. Dor. Ha, ha, ha! Well, for the future, I will never
disbelieve a Traveller; the Knight and his Squire are full as ridiculous as
they were described: We shall have rare Diversion.


Jez. Poor Fairlove! thou art quite forgotten.


Dor. I Have rather reason to think Dorothea so: I am sure, when a Lover suffers
his Mistress to come first to the Place of Appointment, he cannot blame any
innocent Amusement with which she would shorten his Absence; and to confess a
Truth to you, while I am still under Apprehensions of the Match my Father
intends for me, I have too great Cause to try to divert my Grief.


AIR VI. From Aberdeen to Edinburgh.
^ Happy the Animals who stray,
In Freedom through the Grove;
No Laws in Love they ever obey,
But those prescribed by Love:
While We, confined to Parents Rules,
Unfortunate, are told,
None follow Love's sweet Laws, but Fools;
The Wise are Slaves to Gold.


[Exeunt. SCENE VIII.
The Street. Mr. Mayor, and a Voter. May. Well, Neighbor, what is your Opinion
of this strange Man that is come to Town, Don Quixote, as he calls himself?


Vot. Think! why, that he is a Madman. What should I think?


May. 'Ecod! it runs in my Head that he is come to stand for Parliament Man.


Vot. How can that be, Neighbor, they tell me he is a Spaniard?


May. What Is that to us? Let him look to his Qualifications when we have chose
him. If he cannot sit in the House, that is his Fault.


Vot. Nay, nay, he cannot be chose if he should stand; for, to my certain
Knowledge, the Corporation have promised Sir Thomas Loveland and Mr. Bouncer.


May. Pugh! all Promises are conditional; and let me tell you, Mr. Retail, I
begin to smoke a Plot. I begin to apprehend no Opposition, and then we are sold,
Neighbor.


Vot. No, no, Neighbor; then we shall not be sold, and that is worse: But
rather than it should come to that, I would ride all over the Kingdom for a
Candidate; and if I thought Sir Thomas intended to steal us in this manner, he
should have no Vote of mine, I assure you. I shall vote for no Man who holds
the Corporation cheap.


May. Then suppose we were to go in a Body, and solicit Sir Don Quixote to
stand? As for his being mad, while he is out of Bedlam it does not signify.


Vot. But there is another Objection, Neighbor, which I am afraid the
Corporation will never get over.


May. What Is that, pr'ythee?


Vot. They say he has brought no Money with him.


May. Ay, that indeed: But though he has no Money with him here, I am assured by
his Servant that he has a very large Estate: And so, if the other Party come
down handsomely with the Ready, we may trust him; for you know, at last, we have
nothing to do but not to choose him, and then we may recover all he owes us.


Vot. I do not care to be sold, Neighbor.


May. Nor I neither, Neighbor, by any but myself. I think that is the
Privilege of a free Briton.


SCENE X.
Guzzle, Mayor, Retail. Guz. Mr. Mayor, a good Morrow to you, Sir; are you for
a Whet, this Morning?


May. With all my Heart; but what is become of the Gentleman, the Traveller?


Guz. He Is laid down to sleep, I believe; pretty well tired with Work. What the
Devil to do with him, I cannot tell.


May. My Neighbor and I have a strange Thought come into our Heads; you know,
Mr. Guzzle, we are like to have no Opposition, and that I believe you will feel
the want of, as much as any Man. Now, do you see, we have taken it into
Consideration, whether we should not ask this Sir Don to represent us.


Guz. With all my Heart; if either of you will hang out a Sign and entertain
him; but he is far enough in my Books already.


May. You are too cautious, Master Guzzle; I make no doubt but he is some very
rich Man, who pretends to be poor in order to get his Election the cheaper; he
can have no other Design in staying among us. For my part, I make no doubt but
that he is come to stand on the Court Interest.


Guz. Nay, nay, if he stands at all, it is on the Court Side, no doubt; for he
talks of nothing but Kings, and Princes, and Princesses, and Emperors, and
Empresses.


May. Ay, ay, an Officer in the Army too, I warrant him, if we knew but the
bottom.


Guz. He seems, indeed, to be damnably sond of Free Quarter.


Ret. But if you think he intends to offer himself, would it not be wiser to
let him; for then, you know, if he spends never so much, we shall not be
obliged to choose him.


May. Brother Alderman, I have reproved you already for that way of Reasoning;
it savours too much of Bribery. I like an Opposition, because otherwise a Man
may be obliged to vote against his Party; therefore when we invite a Gentleman
to stand, we invite him to spend his Money for the Honor of his Party; and
when both Parties have spent as much as they are able, every honest Man will
vote according to his Conscience.


Guz. Mr. Mayor talks like a Man of Sense and Honor, and it does me good to
hear him.


May. Ay, ay, Mr. Guzzle, I never gave a Vote contrary to my Conscience. I have
very earnestly recommended the Country-Interest to all my Brethren: But before
that, I recommended the Town-Interest, that is, the Interest of this
Corporation; and first of all I recommended to every particular Man to take a
particular Care of himself. And it is with a certain way of Reasoning, That he
that serves me best, will serve the Town best; and he that serves the Town
best, will serve the Country best.


Guz. See what it is to have been at Oxford; the Parson in the Parish himself
cannot out-talk him.


May. Come, Landlord, we'll have one Bottle, and drink Success to the
Corporation: These Times come but seldom, therefore we ought to make the best
of them. Come along.

[Exeunt.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE, A Chamber in the Inn. Don Quixote, Sancho. Quix. THOU have, by this
time, fully perceived, Sancho, the extreme Difficulties and Dangers of
Knight-Errantry.


San. Ay, and of 'Squire-Errantry too, an't please your Worship.


Quix. But Virtue is its own Reward.


San. Your Worship may have a Relish for these Rewards, perhaps; but to speak
truly, I am a poor plain Man, and know nothing of these fine things; and for
any Reward I have hitherto got, I had much rather have gone without it. As for
an Island, I believe I could relish it as well as another; but a Man may catch
cold while his Coat is making: And since you may provide for me in a much
easier way, if I might be so bold as to speak --


Quix. Thou know I will deny thee nothing, which is fit for me to give, or
thee to take.


San. Then if your Worship would be so good as to set me up in an Inn, I should
make a rare Landlord; and it is a very thriving Trade among the English.


Quix. And could thou descend so low, ignoble Wretch?


San. Any thing to get an honest Livelihood, which is more than I find we are
like to do in the way we are going on: For, if I durst speak it --


Quix. Speak fearlesly. -- I will only impute it to thy Ignorance.


San. Why then I find, Sir, that we are looked on here to be, neither more nor
less, better or worse, than a couple of Madmen.


Quix. Sancho, I am not concerned at the evil Opinion of Men. Indeed, if we
consider who are their Favorites, we shall have no reason to be so fond of
their Applause. Virtue, Sancho, is too bright for their Eyes, and they dare not
behold her. Hypocrisy is the Deity they worship. Is not the Lawyer often called
an honest Man, when for a sneaking Fee he pleads the Villain's Cause, or
attempts to extort Evidence to the Conviction of the Innocent? Does not the
Physician live well in his Neighborhood, while he suffers them to bribe his
Ignorance to their Destruction? But why should I mention those whose Profession
it is to prey on others? Look through the World, What is it recommends Men, but
the Poverty, the Vice, and the Misery of others? This, Sancho, they are
sensible of, and therefore, instead of endeavoring to make himself better,
each Man endeavors to make his Neighbor worse. Each Man rises to Admiration
by treading on Mankind. Riches and Power accrue to the One, by the Destruction
of Thousands. These are the general Objects of the good Opinion of Men: Nay,
and that which is professed to be paid to Virtue, is seldom more to any thing
than a supercilious Contempt of our Neighbor. What is a good-natured Man? Why,
one, who seeing the Want of his Friend, cries he pities him. Is this real? No:
If it was, he would relieve him. His Pity is triumphant Arrogance and Insult:
It arises from his Pride, not from his Compassion. Sancho, let them call me
mad; I Am not mad enough to court their Approbation.


San. Oh! good your Worship, proceed: I could fast an Hour longer to hear your
Discourse.


SCENE II.
Guzzle, Don Quixote, Sancho. Guz. An't please your Honor, the Mayor of the
Town is come to wait on you.


Quix. Give him Admittance. This is the chief Magistrate of the Place, who
comes, I suppose, to congratulate me on my Arrival; he might have come sooner;
but the Neglect of his Duty is better than the total Omission. In the mean
while, Sancho, post thou away this Instant to Toboso; and Heaven prosper thy
Embassy.


San. Prosperity may travel with me, without tiring itself.


[Aside. SCENE III.
Mayor, Don Quixote. May. I am your Honor's most humble Servant.


Quix. Sir, I am glad to see you; I think you are the chief Officer of the Town.


May. Yes, an't please your Honor, I am Mr. Mayor of this Town. I should have
done myself the Pleasure to have waited on you sooner, but I was quite ignorant
of the Design with which you came hither.


Quix. Be seated, Sir; you are a worthy Man, and to your Praise be it spoken,
the first that has done his Duty since my Arrival.


May. I cannot answer for the whole Town; but the Corporation is as well
affected a Corporation as any in all England, and I believe highly sensible of
the Honor you intend them. No Man knows his Strength till he tries it; and,
notwithstanding what you may have heard of the Knight of the Long-Purse, if you
oppose him briskly, I dare answer for your Success.


Quix. Is there a Knight on Earth I dare not oppose? Though he had as many Hands
as Briareus, as many Eyes as Argus, I should not fear him.


May. This is a special Stick of Wood, I find. -- A Benefit-Ticket, adod.

[Aside.
Quix. I see the Reason of your Apprehension; you have heard of my ill Success
in my last Adventure -- that was not my Fault!

[Sighing.
May. I see he has been thrown out at some other Place already. -- I don't in
the least, Sir, apprehend it was your Fault; but there is nothing to be done
without bleeding freely on these Occasions.


Quix. Ha! do you think I fear to bleed?


May. Be not so passionate, Sir; this I assure you, you will do your Business
with less than any other. I suppose, Sir, it may lay in your Power to do some
Services to this Town.


Quix. Be assured it does. I will, for your sake, preserve it for ever from any
Insults. No Armies shall ever do you any Harm.


May. I assure you, Sir, that will recommend you very much: If you can keep
Soldiers from quartering upon us, we shall make very little Difficulty in the
Affair: But I-hope your Honor will consider that the Town is very poor, Sir; a
little Circulation of Money among us would --


Quix. Sir, you make me concerned that it is not now in my Power to give
whatever you desire; but rest secure of this, there is not one whom you shall
recommend, that shall not, within this Twelvemonth, be Governor of an Island.


May. This is a Courtier, I find, by his Promises.

[Aside.
Quix. But who is this Knight whom I am to encounter? Is he now in the Castle?


May. Yes, Sir, he is now at Loveland Castle, a Seat of his about ten Miles
off. He was here the very Day before your Honor came to Town, randying for a
Knight of his Acquaintance, with no less than Six Hundred Freeholders at his
Heels.


Quix. Humph! those are a sort of Soldiers I never heard of in Spain. -- How
were they armed?


May. Armed, Sir?


Quix. Ay; with Carbines, with Muskets, Spears, Pistols, Swords, or how? I ask,
that I may choose proper Weapons to encounter them.


May. Ha, ha! your Honor is pleased to be merry; why truly, Sir, they were
pretty well armed when they went out of Town; every Man had four or five
Bottles in his Head at least.


Quix. Base-born Cowards! who owe their Courage to the Spirit of their Wine!
But be easy, Sir, within these two Days not one of them shall be alive.


May. Marry, Heaven forbid! Some of them are as honest Gentlemen as any in the
County.


Quix. Ha! honest! and in the Train of the Knight of the Long-Purse! Do I not
know him to be a Deflowerer of Virgins, a Destroyer of Orphans, a Despoiler of
Widows, a Debaucher of Wives --


May. Who, Sir Thomas Loveland, Sir? Why, you don't know him. He Is as
good-natured, civil a Gentleman, as a Man may say --


Quix. Why then do you petition me against him?


May. Nay, Sir, for that matter, let him be as civil as he pleases, one Man's
Money is as good as another's. You seem to be a civil Gentleman too; and if you
stand against him, I don't know which would carry it: But this, I believe, you
guess already, that he who spends most would not have the least Chance.


Quix. Ha! Caitif! do thou think I would condescend to be the Patron of a
Place so mercenary? If my Services cannot procure me the Election, do thou
think my Money should make me their Knight? What should I get by undertaking
the Protection of this City and Castle, but Dangers, Difficulties, Tolls, and
Enchantments? Hence from my Sight! or by the peerless Dulcinea's Eyes, thy
Blood shall pay the Affront thou have given my Honor. -- Was it for this that
I was chosen in full Senate the Patron of la Mancha? Gods! to what will Mankind
degenerate! where not only the vile Necessaries of Life; but even Honors,
which should be the Reward of Virtue only, are to be bought with Money.


SCENE IV.
Another Chamber. Squire Badger, Scut his Huntsman, and Guzzle. Badg. That Is
it, Honey's, Oh! that is it. -- What, have you no Company in the House,
Landlord? Could not you find out an honest Lad, one that could take a hearty
Pot?


Guz. Faith, noble Squire, I wish you had spoke a little sooner, Mr. Permit the
Officer is just gone out of the House; your Worship would have liked him
hugely; he is rare good Company.


Badg. Well, but hang it, have thou no body?


Guz. I have not one Guest in the House, Sir, but a young Lady and her Maid,
and a Madman, and a Squire, as he calls himself.


Badg. Squire! who, pr'ythee?


Guz. Squire -- It is a cursed hard Name, I never can remember it. Squire
Pancho Sancho -- he calls himself.


Badg. Pr'ythee, what is he, a Whig or a Tory? Hey!


Guz. Sir, I don't know what he is: His Master and he have been here in my
House this Month, and I cannot tell what to make of 'em; I wish the Devil had
'em before I had seen 'em, the Squire and his Master both.


Badg. What, has the Squire a Master?


Guz. I don't know which is Master, nor which is Man, not I; sometimes I think
one is Master, and then again I think it is the other. -- I am sure I had rather
be the Squire, for he sleeps most, and eats most; he is as bad as a Grayhound
in a House; there is no laying down any thing eatable, but if you turn your
Back, slap, he has it up. As for the Knight, as he calls himself, he has more
to pay for breaking Windows, than eating: Would I were well rid of him! He will
sit you sometimes in the Yard to guard the Castle, as he calls it; but I am
afraid his Design is to rob the House, if he could catch an Opportunity. I
don't understand one Word in ten of what he says; he talks of Giants, and
Castles, and Queens, and Princesses, and Chanters, and Magicians, and
Dulcineas; he has been a mighty Traveller it seems.


Badg. A comical Dog, I fansy; go, give my Service to him, tell him I should be
glad of his Company, go.


Guz. I am afraid he is not in any of the best Humors, for he was most
confoundedly drubb'd just now.


Badg. Well, pr'ythee go and call him; here is some of the best Physic for
him. Come, Scut, sit down, and sing that Song once more.


AIR VII. Mother, quoth Hodge, etc.
^ Scut. The Doctor is feed for a dangerous Draught,
Which cures half a Dozen, and kills half a Score;
Of all the best Drugs the Dispensaries taught,
'Twere well could each cure one Disease, and no more.
But here is the Juice,
Of sovereign Use,
'Twill cure your Distempers, whatever they be;
In Body, or Spirit,
Wherever you bear it;
Take of this a large Dose, and it soon sets you free.
By cunning Directors, if tricked of your Pelf,
Your Losses a Dose of good Claret can heal;
Or if you have been a Director your self,
'Twill teach you no Loss of your Honor to feel:
Stocks fall or rise,
Tell Truth or Lies,
Your Fame and your Fortune here Remedy find;
If Silvia be cruel,
Take this Water Gruel,
'Twill soou cure the Fever that burns up your Mind.



SCENE V.
Don Quixote, Guzzle, Scut, and Badger. Quix. Most illustrious and mighty
Knight, I Am proud to kiss your Hands.


Badg. Your Servant, Sir, your Servant. -- A devilish odd Figure this.

[Aside.
Quix. To meet a Person of your Distinction, is a Happiness I little expected;
for I am much mistaken but you are either the Knight of the Sun, or of the
Black Helmet.


Badg. Or of the Black Cap, Sir, if you please.


Quix. Sir Knight of the Black Cap, I rejoice in meeting you in this Castle;
and I wish the Achievements of this glorious Adventure, in which I have been,
by the cursed Power of Enchantment, foiled, may be reserved for you.


Badg. This is honest Cousin Tom, faith, as mad as a March-Hare.

[Aside.
Quix. Would you guess, Sir Knight of the Black Cap, that this uncourteous
Person, the Lord of this Castle, should detain within his Walls, the most
beautiful Princess in the Universe?


Badg. The Devil he does!


Quix. Enchanted; and, if I mistake not, by that Inchanter Merlin; I humbly
suppose, the Delivery of this Princess was the Design with which you came to
this Castle.


Badg. Ay, ay, Sir, I Will deliver her, I warrant you: But come, Sir -- Pray,
Sir, may I crave the Honor of your Name?


Quix. I am known, Sir, in Chivalry, by the Name of the Knight of the Woeful
Figure.


Badg. Sir Knight of the Woeful Figure, will you please to sit down? Come, Sir,
Here Is to you. Landlord, draw your Chair. How long, Sir Knight of the Woeful
Figure, have you been in these Parts?


Quix. It is not, Sir Knight of the Black Cap, the Business of a Knight Errant
to number Time, like the inferior Part of Mankind, by the Days which he lives,
but by the Actions he performs; perhaps you may have sojourned longer here than
I. Are there many Knights in this Kingdom?


Badg. Oh, numberless! -- there are your Knights and Baron Knights, and Knights
of the Post; and then there are your blue Knights, and your red Knights, and
your green Knights.


Quix. Well, may this Kingdom be said to be happy, when so many Knights
conspire for its Safety.


Badg. Come, let us be metry; we'll have a Hunting-Song. -- Sir Knight, I
should be glad to see you at my CountryS-Seat. Come, Scut, sing away.


AIR VIII. There was a Jovial Beggar, etc.
^ Scut. The dusky Night rides down the Sky,
And ushers in the Morn;
The Hounds all join in glorious Cry,
The Huntsman winds his Horn:
And a Hunting we will go.
The Wife around her Husband throws
Her Arms, and begs his Stay;
My Dear, it rains, and hails, and snows,
Your will not bunt today.
But a Hunting we will go.
A burshing Fox in yonder Wood,
Secure to find we seek;
For why, I carried sound and good,
A Cartload there last Week.
And a Hunting we will go.
Away he goes, he flies the Rout,
Their Steeds all spur and switch;
Some are thrown in, and some thrown out,
And some thrown in the Ditch:
But a Hunting we will go.
At length his Strength to Faintness worn,
Poor Reynard ceases Flight;
Then hungry, homeward we return,
To feast away the Night:
Then a Drinking we will go.



Badg. Ha, ha, ha! Sir Knight of the Woeful Figure; this is the Life, Sir, of
most of our Knights in England.


Quix. Hunting is a manly Exercise, and therefore a proper Recreation: But it
is the Business of a Knight Errant to rid the World of other sort of Animals
than Foxes.


Badg. Here is my dear Dorothea to you, the most beautiful Woman in the World.


Quix. Ha, Caitif! do thou dare say that in my Presence, forgetting that the
peerless Dulcinea yet lives? Confess thy Fault this Instant, and own her
inferior to Dulcinea, or I will make thee a dreadful Example to all future
Knights who shall dare dispute the Incomparableness of that divine Lady.


Badg. Throw by your Spit, Sir, throw by your Spit, and I don't fear you.
'Sbud! I Will beat your Lanthorn-Jaws into your Throat, you Rascal.

[ Squire Badger offers to strike Don Quixote.
Guz. Oh, that this Fellow were at the Devil! Dear Squire, let him alone.


Quix. Ha! have I discovered thee, Impostor? Thanks, most incomparable Lady,
that have not suffered thy Knight to pollute his Hands with the base Blood of
that Impostor Squire.


SCENE VI.
Don Quixote, Sancho, Squire Badger. San. Oh, Sir, I have been seeking your
Honor, I have such News to tell you!


Quix. Sancho, uncase this Instant, and handle that Squire as he deserves.


San. My Lady Dulcinea, Sir --


Quix. Has been abused, has been injured, by the slanderous Tongue of that
Squire.


San. But, Sir --


Quix. If thou expectest to live a Moment, answer me not a Word, 'till that
Caitif has felt thy Fist.


San. Nay, Sir, with all my Heart, as far as a Cuff or two goes. -- I hate your
Squire-Errants that carry Arms about them.


Badge. I Will box you first one Hand, second with both. Sirrah, I am able to
beat a Dozen of you. -- If I don't lamb thee! --

[They both strip.
San. May be not, Brother Squire, may be not; threatened Folks live long; high
Words break no Bones; many walk into a Battle, and are carried out on it; one
Ounce of Heart is better than many Stone of Flesh; dead Men pay no Surgeons;
safer to dance after a Fiddle than a Drum, though not so honorable; a wise Man
would be a Soldier in time of Peace, and a Parson in time of War.


SCENE VII.
Mrs. Guzzle, Squire Badger, Sancho. Mrs. Guz. What in the Devil's Name is the
matter with you? Get you and your Master out of my House, for a couple of
Pickpockets as you are. -- Sir, I hope your Worship will not be angry with us.


Badg. Stand away, Landlord, stand away. -- If I don't lick him!


San. Come along, out into the Yard, and let me have fair Play, and I don't
fear you -- I don't fear you.


Mrs. Guz. Get you out, you Rascal, get you out, or I Will be the Death of you;
I Will teach you to fight with your Betters, you Villain, you; I Will curry you,
Sirrah.


SCENE VIII.
Fairlove, Squire Badger. Fair. I am sorry to see a Gentleman insulted, Sir.
What was the Occasion of this Fray?


Badg. I hope you are no Knight Errant, Sir?


Fair. Sir!


Badg. I say, Sir, I hope you are no Knight Errant, Sir?


Fair. You are merry, Sir.


Badg. Ay, Sir, and you would have been merry too, had you seen such a Sight as
I have. Here is a Fellow in this Inn, that outdoes all the Shows I ever saw. He
was going to knock my Brains out for drinking my Mistress's Health.


Fair. Perhaps he is your Rival, Sir.


Badg. Od! that is like enough, now I think on it; who knows but this may be that
Son of a Whore, Fairlove, whom I have been told on?


Fair. Ha!


Badg. As sure as a Gun -- this is he -- Odsbodlikins! Mrs. Dorothea, you have
a very strange sort of a Taste, I can tell you that.


Fair. Do you travel toward London, Sir? because I shall be glad of your
Company.


Badg. No, Sir, I have not above Fifteen short Miles to go, and quite across
the Country.


Fair. Perhaps you are going to Sir Thomas Loveland's?


Badg. Do you know Sir Thomas then, Sir?


Fair. Very intimately well, Sir.


Badg. Give me your Hand, Sir. -- You are an-honest Cock, I warrant you. --
Why, Sir, I am going to fall in Love with Sir Thomas's Daughter.


Fair. You cannot avoid that, Sir, if you see her; for she is the most agreeable
Woman in the World


Badg. And then she sings like a Nightingale! Now that is a very fine Quality
in a Wife; for you know, the more she sings, the less she will talk. Some Folks
like Women for their Wit; Odsbodlikins! it is a sign they have none of their
own; there is nothing a Man of good Sense dreads so much in a Wife, as her
having more Sense than himself.


AIR IX. Lillibulero.
^ Like Gold to a Miser, the Wit of a Lass,
More Trouble than Joy to her Husband may bring.

Fair. That Fault's in the Miser, and not in the Mass;
He knows not to use so precious a Thing.

Badg. Wit teaches how
To arm your Brow;
A Price for that Treasure some Husbands have paid.

Fair. But Wit will conceal it;
And if you don't feel it,
A Horn's but a Pimple scarce seen on your Head.



SCENE IX.
Fairlove, Squire Badger, John. John. Sir, Sir!


Fair. Well, what now?


John. [Whispers.]


Fair. How! here?


John. I saw her, Sir, upon my Honor.


Fair. I am the happiest of Mankind. [Aside.] -- Brother Traveller, farewell.


Badg. What, shall not we drink together?


Fair. Another time, Sir; I am in a little Haste at present. -- [Aside.]
Harkye, John, I leave you with my Rival, I need say no more. -- Dear Dorothea,
ten thousand Raptures are in the dear Name.


[Exit. SCENE X.
John, Squire Badger, Don Quixote. Badg. Harkye, Mister; what is your Master's
Name, pray?


John. Master, Sir?


Badg. I say, your Master's Name.


John. What do you see in me that should make you ask me my Master's Name? I
suppose you would take it very ill of me, if I were to ask you what your
Master's Name is. Do I look so little like a Gentleman as to stand in need of a
Master?


Badg. Oh, Sir, I ask your Pardon; your Dress, Sir, was the Occasion of my
Mistake.


John. Probable enough; among you Country Gentlemen, and really in Town,
Gentlemen and Footmen dress so very like one another, that it is somewhat
difficult to know which is which.


Badg. May be, Sir, then, you are only an Acquaintance of this Gentleman's.


John. A traveling Acquaintance.


Badg. May I crave his Name, Sir?


John. Oh, Sir! his Name, his Name, Sir, is Sir Gregory Nebuchaddonnezzar. He
is a very rich Jew, an Italian by Birth, born in the City of Cork. He is a
going into Cornwall to take possession of a small Estate of Twenty thousand
Pounds a Year, left him the other Day by a certain Dutch Merchant's Mistress,
with whom he had an Intrigue. He is a Gentleman, Sir, universally esteemed in
the Beau Monde.


Badg. Beau Monde! Pray, what is that?


John. Beau Monde, Sir, is as much as to say, a Man of Figure; when you say, he
is a Man of the Beau Monde, you mean just such another Person as I am.


Badg. You will pardon the Ignorance of a Country Gentleman.


John. Oh, Sir! we of the Beau Monde are never offended at Ignorance.


Quix. [Within.] Avaunt, Caitifs! -- think not, thou most accursed Giant, ever
to enter within this Castle, to bring any more captive Princesses hither.


Badg. Heyday! What Is the matter now?


Coachman. [Within.] Open the Gates, will you? Are you Mad?


Quix. You, my Lord of the Castle, suffer them to be opened at your Peril.


John. One might think, by this Noise, that we were at the Outside of the
Opera-House, at a Ridotto.


SCENE XI.
Mrs. Guzzle, John, Squire Badger. Mrs. Guz. For Heaven's sake, Gentlemen, come
and assist us; this mad Don Quixote will ruin my House; he will not suffer the
Stage-Coach to come into the Yard. Dear, good Gentlemen, come and speak to him.
-- Oh! that ever I should live to see him!


John. I am too much a Gentleman not to assist a Lady in Distress. -- Come, Sir.


Badg. After you, Sir; I am not quite unbred.


John. O dear, Sir.


SCENE XII.
A Yard. Don Quixote armed Cap-a-pee, his Lance in his Hand; Sancho, Guzzle,
Squire Badger, John, Mrs. Guzzle. Coachman. [Within.] If you don't open the
Gates this Instant, I Will go to another Inn.


Brief. [Within.] Sir, I Will have your House indicted; I Will have your Sign taken
down.


Guz. Gentlemen, here is a Madman in the Yard. -- Will you let me open the
Gates, or no, Sir?


Quix. Open them, and I will show thee, that I want no Walls to secure me. --
Open them, I say. -- You shall see the Force of one single Knight.


Mrs. Guz. Dear Gentlemen, will no body knock his Brains out?


John. This is the most comical Dog I ever saw in my Life. [Aside.


Badg. If I have any thing to say to him while he has that Thing in his Hand,
may I have it in my Guts that Moment.


Guz. There, the Gates are open.


Quix. Now, thou peerless Princess, Dulcinea.


[Exit. Coachman, Gee, Gee, Boys, Hup!


[ Exeunt Sancho, etc. SCENE XIII.
Mrs. Guzzle, Mr. Brief, Dr. Drench, Mr. Sneak, Mrs. Sneak, Miss Sneak; Maid
with Candles. Mrs. Sneak. Don't be frightened, my Dear, there is no Danger now.


Mr. Sneak. That Is owing to me, my Dear; if we had not got out of the Coach, as
I advised, we had been in a fine Condition.


Brief. Who is this Fellow, Woman, that has caused all this Rout?


Mrs. Guz. Oh! dear Mr. Counselor, I am almost frightened out of my Wits; he is
the Devil, I think. -- I cannot get him out of my House.


Brief. What, have you no Justice of the Peace near you? You should apply to a
Justice of Peace. The Law provides a very good Remedy for these sort of People;
I Will take your Affair into my Hands. Dr. Drench, do you know no neighboring
Justice?


Drench. What, do you talk of a Justice? The Man is mad, and Physic is
properer for him than Law. I Will take him in hand my self, after Supper.


Mrs. Sneak. I wish, Mr. Sneak, you would go into the Kitchen, and see what we
can have for Supper.

[Exit.
Mr. Sneak. Yes, my Dear.


Brief. Ay, do; the fresh Air of the Downs, I protest, has got me an Appetite.
-- Ladies, how do you do after your Fright? Doctor, I fansy a Dram of that
Cordial, you carry in your Pocket, would do the Ladies no harm.


Mrs. Sneak. You are a merry Man, Mr. Counselor; come, Child.


Mrs. Guz. This way, Ladies.


[Exeunt Women. SCENE XIV.
Mr. Brief, Dr. Drench, Don Quixote, Sancho, Squire Badger, John. Badg. Huzza!
Hark, hark! -- Agad, he has routed the Coach and Horses bravely! my Landlord
and the Coachman will not overtake them one while, I warrant.


Quix. Most illustrious, and high Lords, it is with great Pleasure that I
congratulate you on your Delivery, which you owe only to the peerless Dulcinea;
I desire therefore no other Return, but that you both repair immediately to
Toboso, and render your selves at her Feet.


Drench. Poor Man! poor Man! he must be put to Bed. I shall apply some proper
Remedies. His Frenzy is very high, but I hope we shall be able to take it off.


Brief. His Frenzy! his Roguery; the Fellow's a Rogue; he is no more mad than I
am; and the Coachman and Landlord both have very good Actions at Law against
him.


Quix. Sancho, do thou attend those Princes to the richest and most beautiful
Apartments. -- Most illustrious Princes, the Governor of this Castle is an
Inchanter; but be not alarmed at it, for all the Powers of Hell shall not hurt
you. I will my self keep on the Guard all this Night for your Safety; and
tomorrow I expect you set forward for Toboso.


Drench. Galen calls this Phrenzy the Phrenabracum.


Brief. My Lord Coke brings these People into the Number of common Cheats.


Drench. I shall order him Bleeding, Glistering, Vomiting, Purging, Biistering,
and Cupping.


Brief. He may, besides an Action of Assault and Battery, be indicted in the
Crown; he may also have an Action of Damages and Trespasses laid on him. -- In
short, if he be worth Five thousand Pounds, I don't question but to action him
out on it. -- Come, Doctor, if you please, we will attend the Ladies.

[Exeunt.
Badg. Why, Mr. Quixote, do you know who these People were you called Princes?


Quix. One of them I take to be the Prince of Sarmatia, and the other of the
Five Mountains.


Badg. One of them is a Lawyer, and the other a Physician.


Quix. Monstrous Enchantment! what odd Shapes this Merlin transforms the
greatest People into! but Knight-Errantry will be too hard for him at last.

[Exit.
John. Ha, ha, ha! a comical Dog!


Badg. If you will accept of one Bottle of Stout, Brother-Traveller, it is at
your Service.


John. With all my Heart, Sir. I Am afraid this Fellow has no good Champaign in
his House.

[Exeunt.
San. Hey! is the Coast cleared? Where in the Devil's Name has this mad Master
of mine disposed himself? for mad he is now, that is certain; this last
Adventure has put it past all manner of Dispute. Ah, poor Sancho! what will
become of thee? Would it not be the wisest way to look out for some new Master,
while thou have any whole Bones in thy Skin: And yet, I cannot find in my Heart
to forsake my old one, at least till I have got this small Island; and then
perhaps, when I have it, I shall lose it again, as I did my former Government.
-- Well, if ever I do lay my Fingers on an Island more, I Will act like other
wise Governors, fall to plundering as fast as I can, and when I have made my
Fortune, why, let them turn me out if they will.


AIR X. Black Joke.
^ The more we see of Human-kind,
The more Deceits and Tricks we find,
In every Land, as well as Spain:
For would he ever hope to thrive,
Upon the Mountains he must live;
For naught but Rogues in Vales remain:
The Miser and the Man will trick,
The Mistress and the Maid will nick.
For Rich and Poor
Are Rogue and Whore;
There Is not one honest man in a Score,
Nor Woman true in Twenty-four.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE, A Room. Fairlove, Dorothea, Mrs. Guzzle. FAIRLOVE. DEPEND on it, you
shall be made amends for your Damage you have sustained from this heroic
Knight and his Squire.


Mrs. Guz. You look like a very honorable Gentleman, Sir, and I would take
your Word for a great deal more than he owes me.


Dor. But pray, Mrs. Guzzle, how came you by this fine Dress, in which the Lady
Dulcinea is to be exhibited?


Mrs. Guz. About a Month ago, Madam, there was a Company of Stage Players here,
and they staid for above a Fortnight acting their Shows: But I don't know how
it happened, the Gentry did not give them much Encouragement; so at last they
all run away, except the Queen, whom I made bold to strip of her Finery, which
is all that I have to show for their whole Reckoning.


Dor. Ha, ha, ha! Poor Queen! Poor traveling Princess!


Mrs. Guz. The Devil travel with her to the World's End, so she travel not
hither; send me any thing but Stage Players and Knight-Errants. I Am sure Fifty
Pounds will not make me whole again; would your Ladyship think it, Madam? Beside
other Articles, she ran in tick Twenty Shillings for Thunder and Lighting.


SCENE II.
Jezebel, Sancho, Fairlove, Dorothea, Mrs. Guzzle. Dor. Behold the peerless
Princess! Ha, ha, ha! Oh, I shall die! Ha, ha, ha!


San. Zooks! she will put the real Dulcinea out of countenance, for no such
gorgeous fine Lady have I seen in all Toboso.


Fair. Is the Knight appris'd, Mr. Sancho, of the Approach of his Mistress?


San. Yes, Sir, it had like to have cost me dear, I Am sure; for when I told him
of it, he gave me such a Hug, that I thought I should never have fetched Breath
any more in this World. I believe he took me for the Lady Dulcinea her self.


Dor. But why bootted and spurred, Mr. Sancho? Are you going a Journey?


San. Yes, Madam, your Ladyship knows I was ordered to go for my Lady Dulcinea;
so what does me I, but rides into the Kitchen, where I whipped and spurred about
a Sirloin of roast Beef, for a full half Hour. Then slap, I returned to my
Master, whom I found leaning upon his Spear, with his Eyes lifted up to the
Stars, calling out upon my Toboso Lady, as if the Devil were in his Guts; as
soon as he sees me, Sancho, says he, with a Voice like a great Gun, will thou
never have sufficiently stuffed thy Wallet? Will thou never set out for Toboso?
Heavens bless your Honor's Worship, and keep you in your Senses, says I; I am
just returned from thence; I am sure, if you felt half the Weariness in your
Bones that I do, you would think you set out with a Vengeance. Truly then, Sancho,
thou must have traveled by Chantment. I don't know whether I traveled by
Chantment; but this I know, that about Five Miles off I met my Lady Dulcinea.
How! says he, and gave such a Spring, I thought he would have leapt over the
Wall. Ay, says I, sure I know her Ladyship. He that has stood in the Piliory
ought to know what Wood it is made of; and a Woman, who walks the Streets,
ought to know whether they are paved or no.


Jez. I hope he will not offer to be rude.


San. Your Ladyship need not fear that. I dare swear he loves your Ladyship so
much, he would not take a Hundred Pound to come within a Yard of you; he is one
of your high bred sort of Gentry, and knows his Distance.


Jez. Should he offer to touch me, I should faint.


San. If your Ladyship pleases, I Will convey you to a proper Place where you may
see my Master, and then I Will go and prepare him a little more for your Arrival.


Mrs. Guz. I Will go see this Show, I Am resolved; and, faith, I begin to doubt
which of my Guests is the maddest.


SCENE III.
Fairlove, Dorothea. Dor. Shall we follow to the Window, and see the Sport?


Fair. How can my Dorothea think of trifling at this time?


Dor. Had I sound you at my first Arrival, I should scarce have invented this
Design; but I cannot see any Retardment 'twill be to our Purpose.


Fair. Why should we not fly away this Instant; who knows but you may be
pursued? I shall have no easy Moment till you are mine beyond any possibility
of losing you.


Dor. The Morning will be time enough; for I have taken such Measures, I shall
not be missed till then; besides, I think there was something so lucky in your
coming hither without having received my Letter, that I cannot suspect the
happy Success of our Affair. Ah, Fairlove! would I were as sure it would be
always in your Will, as it will be in your Power, to make me happy: But when I
reflect on your former Life, when I think what a Rover you have been, have I
not a just Occasion then for Fear?


Fair. Unkind Dorothea!


AIR XI. Have you heard of a frolicksom Ditty, etc.
^ Would Fortune, the Truth to discover,
Of him you suspect as a Rover,
Bid me be to some Princess a Lover,
No Princess would Billy pursue.

Dor. Would Heaven but grant me the Trial,
A Monanch should meet my Denial;
And while other Lovers I Would fly all,
I Would fly, my dear Billy, to you.

Fair. Whole Ages my Dolly enjoying,
Is a Feast that could never be cloying;
With thee while I Am kissing and toying,
Kind Fortune can give me no more.

Dor. With thee I Am so blessed beyond Measure,
I laugh at all Offers of Treasure;
I laugh at all Offers of Pleasure;
Thou art all my Joy and my Store.

Both. With thee, etc.



SCENE IV.
Servants with Lights before Sir Thomas and Guzzle. Sir Tho. Landlord, how
fares it? You seem to drive a humming Trade here.


Guz Pretty well, considering the Hardness of the Times, an't please your
Honor.


Sir Tho. Better Times are a coming, a new Election is not far off.


Guz. Ay, Sir, if we had but an Election once a Year, a Man might make a shift
to pick up a Livelihood.


Sir Tho. Once a Year! why, thou unconscionable Rogue! the Kingdom would not be
able to supply us with Malt. But pr'ythee whom have thou in thy House, any
honest Fellows? Ha!


Guz. Here Is Lawyer Brief, Sir, and Dr. Drench; and there is Mr. Sneak and his
Wife; then there is one Squire Badger of Somersetshire.


Sir Tho. Oho! give my Service to him instantly, tell him I should be very glad
to see him.


Guz. Yes, an't please your Honor.

[Exit.
Sir Tho. This Fellow is not quite of a right Kidney, the Dog is not sound at
the Bottom; however, I must keep well with him till after the next Election.
Now for my Son-in-law, that is to be, whom I long mightily to see; I Am sure his
Estate makes him a very advantageous Match for my Daughter, if she can but like
his Person; and if he be described right to me, I don't see how she can fail of
doing that.


SCENE V.
Sir Thomas, Squire Badger, Guzzle, John. Guz. Here Is the Squire, an't please
your Honor.


Sir Tho. Mr. Badger, I Am your most humble Servant; you're welcome into this
Country; I Have done my self the Honor, Sir, to meet you thus far, in order to
conduct you to my Daughter.


Badg. I suppose, Sir, you may be Sir Thomas Loveland.


Sir Tho. At your Service, Sir.


Badg. Then I wish, when you had been about it, you had brought your Daughter
along with you.


Sir Tho. Ha, ha! you are merry, Sir.


Badg. Ay, Sir, and you would have been merry, if you had been in such Company
as I have been in. My Lord! 'Sbud! where is my Lord? 'Sbud! Sir Thomas, my Lord
Slang is one of the merriest Men you ever knew in your Life; he has been
telling me a Parcel of such Stories!


John. I protest, Sir, you are so extremely well-bred, you put me out of
countenance; Sir Thomas, I am your most obedient humble Servant.


Sir Tho. I suppose this Lord cannot afford to keep a Footman, and so he wears
his own Livery.


Badg. I wish, my Lord, you would tell Sir Thomas the Story about you and the
Duchess of what do you call her. -- Odsheart! it is one of the pleasantest
Stories! about how she met him in the Dark at a Masquerade, and about how she
gave him a Letter; and then about how he carried her to a, to a, to a --


John. To a Bagnio, to a Bagnio.


Badg. Ay, to a Bagnio. 'Sbud, Sir, if I was not partly engaged in Honor to
court your Daughter, I Would go to London along with my Lord, where Women are, it
seems, as plenty as Rabbets in a Warren. Had I known as much of the World
before, as I do now, I believe I should scarce have thought of marrying. Who'd
marry, when my Lord says, here, a Man may have your great sort of Ladies, only
for wearing a broder'd Coat, telling half a Dozen Lies, and making a Bow.


Sir Tho. I believe, Sir, my Daughter will not force ye against your Inclination.


Badg. Force me! No; I believe not Icod! I should be glad to see a Woman that
should force me. If you come to that, Sir, I Am not afraid of you, nor your
Daughter neither.


Sir Tho. This Fellow's a great Fool; but his Estate must not be lost. [Aside.]
-- You misunderstand me, Sir, I believe you will have no Incivility to complain
of, from either me or my Daughter.


Badg. Nay, Sir, for that matter, when People are civil to me, I know how to be
civil to them again; come, Father-in-law of mine, that is to be, what say you
to a cherishing Cup; and you shall hear some of my Lord's Stories?


Sir Tho. As far as one Bottle, Squire, but you must not exceed.


Badg. Nay, nay, you may even sneak off when you please: My Lord and I here,
are very good Company by our selves. Pray, my Lord, go first; I Would have you
think I have got some Manners.

[Exeunt.
Sir Tho. A very hopeful Spark this. But he has a great Estate; and I have no
Notion of refusing an Estate, let the Man be what he will.


SCENE VI.
The Yard. Don Quixote, Sancho. Quix. How far do thou think the advanced
Guards are yet from the Castle?


San. Sir!


Quix. But perhaps she may choose to travel incognita, and may, for the greater
Expedition, have left those cursed, useless, heavy Troops, her Horse-Guards, to
follow a Month or two hence. How many Coaches did thou number?


San. Truly, Sir, they were so many, I could not number them. I dare swear
there were a good round Baker's Dozen, at least.


Quix. Sancho, thou will never leave debasing the greatest things in thy vile
Phrases. Will thou eternally put my Patience to the Test? Take heed, unworthy
Squire, when thou art talking of this incomparable and peerless Princess, thou
do it not in any of thy low Ribaldry; for if thou do, by all the Powers of
this invincible Arm --


San. Oh, spare me, spare me! -- And if ever I offend your Worship any more, if
ever I crack a Jest on my Lady Dulcinea --


Quix. Proceed! What Knights attend her Presence?


San. They make such a Glittering, Sir, it is impossible to know one from the
other; they look for all the World at a Distance, like a Flock of Sheep.


Quix. Ha! again!


San. Nay, Sir, if your Worship will not let a Man talk in his own Language, he
must even hold his Tongue. Every Man is not bred at a Varsity, who looks for a
Courtier's Tongue between the Teeth of a Clown. An ill Phrase may come from a
good Heart. Many Men, many Minds; many Minds, many Mouths; many Mouths, many
Tongues; many Tongues; many Words.


Quix. Cease thy Torrent of Impertinence, and tell me, is not the Knight of the
Black Eagle there?


San. Ay marry is he, Sir, and he of the black Ram too. On they trot, Sir,
Cheek by Jole, Sir, for all the World like two Butter-Women to Market; then
comes my Lady Dulcinea all Rampant in her Coach, with half a score dozen Maids
of Honor; it would have done your Heart good to see her, she looks even just
like --


Quix. Like a milk-white Dove amongst a Flight of Crows.


San. To all the World, like a new half Crown Piece, amongst a heap of old
Brass Farthings.


SCENE VII.
Drawer with a Light, Brief, Don Quixote, Sancho. Draw. This Way, Sir, take
care how you tread.


Quix. Ha! she approaches! the Torches are already arrived at the Gate, the
great Fulgoran is alighted. O thou most welcome of all Knights, let me embrace
thee.


Brief. Let me alone pr'ythee, Fellow, or I shall have you laid by the Heels;
what do you mean to rob me, hey?


Quix. Is it possible, the mighty Fulgoran should not know me?


Brief. Know ye! it is not to your Advantage, I believe, to be known. Let me
tell you, Sirrah, you may be tried on the Black Act, for going about disguised
in this Manner; and but that I shall go a better Way to work with you, as good
an Indictment would lie on that Act --


Quix. Behold, Sir, my Lady Dulcinea her self.


Brief. Light on, Boy, the next Justice ought to be indicted for not putting
the Laws in Execution against such Fellows.


SCENE VIII.
Don Quixote, Sancho, Jezebel. Quix. O most illustrious, and most mighty
Princess, with what Looks shall I behold you? with what Words shall I thank you
for this infinite Goodness to your unworthy Knight?


Jez. Rise, Sir.


Quix. Do not overwhelm me with too much Goodness; though to see you be
inexpressible Happiness, yet to see you here gives me some Uneasiness: For, O
most adorable Princess, this Castle is enchanted, Giants and captive Ladies
inhabit only here.


Jez. Could I but be assured of your Constancy, I should have no Fear; but,
alas! there are so many Instances of perjured Men.


AIR XII. Cold and raw, etc.
^ A Virgin once was walking along,
In the sweet Month of July,
Blooming, beautiful and young,
She met with a Swain unruly,
Within his Arms the Nymph he caught,
And swore he would love her truly;
The Maid remembered, the Man forgot,
What past in the Month of July.


Quix. Eternal Curses light on all such perjured Wretches!


Jez. But though you may be constant at first, when we have been married a great
while, and have had several Children, you may leave me, and then I should break
my Heart.


Quix. Rather may the universal Frame of Nature be dissolved, perish first, all
Honesty, Honor, Virtue, nay Knight-Errantry it self, that Quintessence of all.


Jez. Could I always remain young as I am now, but alack-a-day I shall grow
old, and then you will forsake me for some younger Maiden; I know it is the way
of all you Men, you all love young Flesh. You all Sing,


AIR XIII. Giminiani's Minuet.
^ Sweet's the little Maid,
That has not learnt her Trade,
Fears, yet languishes to be taught;
Though she is shy and coy,
Still she will give you Joy.
When she is once to Compliance brought,
Women full of Skill
Sooner grant your Will;
But often purchased are good for naught.
Sweet's the little Maid, etc.


Quix. Oh most Divine Princess! whose Voice is infinitely sweeter than the
Nightingale: Oh, charm my Ears no more with such transporting Melody, lest I
find my Joy too exquisite for Sense to bear.


SCENE IX.
Don Quixote, Sancho, Fairlove, Dorothea, Jezebel. Dor. Pity, illustrious
Knight; oh, pity an unhappy Princess, who has no hopes of Safety, but from your
victorious Arm. This Instant I am pursued by a mighty Giant.


Quix. Oh, most adorable Dulcinea! unless some Affair of your own forbid,
permit your Knight to undertake this Adventure.


Jez. You cannot oblige me more.


San. Nor me less; Oh! the Devil take all Giant Adventures, now shall I have my
Bones broke, I Would give an Arm or two to secure the rest with all my Heart, I Will
even sneak off if I can, and preserve the whole.


Quix. Sancho, come here! Stand thou in the Front, and receive the first Onset
of the Enemy, that so I may wait a proper Opportunity, while the Giant is
aiming at thy Head, to strike off his.


San. Ah, Sir, I have been a Squire-Erranting to some purpose truly, if I don't
know better than to stand before my Master. Beside, Sir, every Man in his Way.
I am the worst Man in the World at the beginning of the Battle, but a very
Devil at the end of it.


SCENE X.
John, Fairlove, Don Quixote, Dorothea, Jezebel. John. Oh Sir, undone, ruined!
Sir Thomas himself is in the Inn; you are discovered, and here he comes with a
hundred and fifty People, to fetch away Madam Dorothea.


Fair. We know it, we know it.


Quix. And were he to bring as many thousand -- I Will show him one single Knight
may be too many for them all.


Fair. Ten thousand Thanks, great Knight; by Heaven's I Will die by your Side,
before I Will lose her.


Quix. Now, thou most adorable Princess Dulcinea del Toboso, now shine with all
thy Influence upon me.


Sir Tho. [Within] Where is my Daughter, Villains? where is my Daughter?


Quix. Oh, thou cursed Giant Tergilicombo, too well I know thy Voice; have at
thee, Caitif.


Dor. Dear Jezebel, I am frightened out of my Wits, my Father or Mr. Fairlove
will be destroyed -- I am resolved I Will rush into the middle of them, and with
my own Danger put an end to the Fray.


Jez. Do so, and in the mean time I Will into the Closet, and put an end to a
small Bottle I have there; I protest I am horribly frightened my self.


SCENE XI.
Sancho solus. There they are at it Pell-mell, who will be knocked on the Head
I know not; I think I Am pretty sure it will not be Sancho. I have made a shift to
escape this Bout, but I shall never get out of this cursed fighting Country
again as safe as I came into it. I shall leave some Pounds of poor Sancho
behind me; if this be the effect of English Beef and Pudding, would I were in
Spain again. I begin to think this House or Castle is chanted; nay, I fansy the
Devil lives in it, for we have had nothing but Battles, since we have been
here. My Bones are not the Bones they were a Fortnight ago, nor are they in the
same Places. As to my Skin the Rainbow is a Fool to it for Colors; it is like
-- What is it like? Ecod it is like nothing but my Master's. Well, Master of
mine, if you do get the Day you deserve it, I Will say that for you; and if you
are well drub'd, why, you deserve that too. What had we to do with the Princess
and be hanged to her? Besides I verily believe she is no more a Princess than I
am. No good ever comes of minding other Men's Matters. I seldom see any Meat got
by winding up another Man's Jack. I Will even take this Opportunity, and while
all the rest are knocking one another on the Head, I Will into the Pantry and
stuff both Guts and Wallet as long as they will hold.

SCENE XII.
Sir Thomas, Dorothea. Sir Tho. See, ungracious Girl, see what your cursed
Inclinations have occasioned!


Dor. I Am sure they are the Cause of my Misery; if Fairlove be destroyed, I
never shall enjoy a Moment's Quiet more.


Sir Tho. Perhaps it were better for him if he were; I shall handle him in such
a Manner, that the rest of his Life shall not be much worth wishing for.


Dor. Thus on my Knees, Sir, I entreat you by all the Tenderness you ever
professed to me! by all the Joy you have so often said I gave you! by all the
Pain I now endure! do not attempt to injure Fairlove. You can inflict no
Punishment on him, but I must feel much more than half. Is it not enough to
pull me, tear me bleeding from his Heart? Is it not enough to rob my Eyes of
what they love more than Light or than themselves? Hinder me from all those
Scenes of Bliss, I Would painted to my self? Oh, hear me, Sir, or kill me, and do
not make this Life you gave a Curse.


Sir Tho. Away, you're no Child of mine.


Dor. Would you keep me from him, try to make him happy; that Thought would be
some Comfort in his Absence -- I might perhaps bear to be no Partaker of his
Happiness, but not so of his Sufferings; were he in a Palace, you might keep me
wretched alone; but were he in a Prison, not all the Powers on Earth should
keep me from him.


SCENE XIII.
Guzzle, Mrs. Guzzle, Constable, Don Quixote, Fairlove, John. Guz. We have made
a shift, an't please your Worship, to secure this mad Fellow at last; but he
has done us more Mischief than ever it will be in his power to make us
Reparation for.


Mrs. Guz. Our House is ruined for ever, there is not one whole Window in it;
the Stage-Coachman swears he will never bring a Company to it again. There Is Miss
Sneak above in Fits, and Mr. Sneak, poor Man, is crying, and Madam Sneak, she is
a swearing and stamping like a Dragoon.


Sir Tho. Mr. Fairlove, you shall answer for this -- As for that poor Fellow
there, I suppose you have hired him. Hark'e, Fellow, what did this Gentleman
give you to do all this Mischief?


Quix. It is your Time now, and you may use it. I perceive this Adventure is
not reserved for me, therefore I must submit to the Enchantment.


Sir Tho. Do you banter me, you Rascal?


Quix. Poor Wretch! I scorn to retort thy injurious Words.


Sir Tho. I Will make you know who I am presently, I will so.


Quix. Do thou then think I know thee not to be the Giant Tergilicombo? --
yet think not because I submit to my Fortune, that I fear thee; No, the time
will come, when I shall see thee the Prey of some more happy Knight.


Sir Tho. I Will Knight you, you Dog, I will.


Mrs. Guz. Do you hear, Husband? I suppose you will not doubt whether he be mad
any longer or no; he makes no more of his Worship, than if he were talking to a
Fiddler.


Guz. I wish your Worship would send him to Goal, he seems to look most
cursedly Mischievous. I shall never think my self safe till he is under Lock
and Key.


Fair. Sir Thomas, I do not deserve this Usage at your Hands; and though my Love
to your Daughter has made me hitherto Passive, do not carry the Thing too far;
for be assured if you do you shall answer for it.


Sir Tho. Ay, ay, Sir, we are not afraid of that.


SCENE XIV.
Squire Badger, Sir Thomas, Dorothea, Fairlove, Don Quixote, Mrs. Guzzle. Badg.
Oons! what is the Matter with you all? Is the Devil in the Inn that you will not
let a Man sleep? I was as fast on the Table as if I had been in a Feather-bed.
-- 'Sbud, what is the matter? Where Is my Lord Slang?


Sir Tho. Dear Squire, let me entreat you would go to Bed, you are a little
heated with Wine.


Badg. Oons, Sir! do you say that I am drunk? I say, Sir, that I am as sober as
a Judge; and if any Man says that I am drunk, Sir, he is a Liar, and a Son of a
Whore. My Dear, an't I -- sober now?


Dor. O nauseous, filthy Wretch!


Badg. Before George, a good pretty Wench; I Will have a Kiss; I Will warrant she is
twice as handsome as my Wife, that is to be.


Sir Tho. Hold, dear Sir, this is my Daughter.


Badg. Sir, I don't care whose Daughter she is.


Dor. For Heaven's sake, some body defend me from him.


Fair. Let me go, Dogs! Villain! thou had better eat thy Fingers than lay 'em
rudely on that Lady.


Sir Tho. Dear Mr. Badger, this is my Daughter, the young Lady to whom you
intended your Addresses.


Badg. Well, Sir, and an't I making Addresses to her, Sir, Hey?


Sir Tho. Let me beseech you, Sir, to attack her in no rude manner.


Badg. Pr'ythee, do thou know who I am? I fansy if thou did know who I
was, thou would not talk to me so; if thou do any more, I shall lend thee a
Knock. Come, Madam, since I have promised to marry you, since I cannot be off
with Honor, as they say; why, the sooner it is done, the better; let us send
for a Parson and be married, now I Am in the Humor. 'Sbodlikins! I find there is
nothing in making Love, when a Man's but once got well into it. I never made a
Word of Love before in my Life; and yet it is as natural, seemingly, as if I
had been bound Prentice to it.


Quix. Sir, one Word with you, if you please; I suppose you look upon your self
as a reasonable sort of Person.


Sir Tho. What?


Quix. That you are capable of managing your Affairs; that you don't stand in
need of a Governor.


Sir Tho. Hey!


Quix. And if this be true of you, is it possible you can prefer that Wretch,
who is a Scandal to his very Species, to this Gentleman, whose Person and Parts
would be an Honor to the greatest of it.


Sir Tho. Has he made you his Advocate? Tell him, I can prefer Three Thousand
to One.


Quix. The usual Madness of Mankind! Do you marry your Daughter for her sake,
or your own? If for here is, sure it is something whimsical, to make her miserable
in order to make her happy. Money is a Thing well worth considering in these
Affairs; but Parents always regard it too much, and Lovers too little. No Match
can be happy, which Love and Fortune do not conspire to make so. The greatest
Addition of either, illy supplies the entire Absence of the other; nor would
Millions a Year make that Beast, in your Daughter's Eye, preferable to this
Youth with a Thousand.


Sir Tho. What have we here, a Philosophical Pimp! I cannot help saying, but the
Fellow has some Truth on his Side.


Dor. You are my eternal Aversion.


Badg. Lookye, Madam, I can take a Joke, or so, but if you are in earnest --


Dor. Indeed I am, I hate and despise you in the most serious earnest.


Badg. Do you, then you may kiss. -- 'Sbud, I can hate as well as you. Your
Daughter has affronted me here. Sir, what is your Name, and I Will have
Satisfaction?


Quix. Oh, that I were disinchanted for thy sake!


Badg. Sir, I Will have Satisfaction.


Sir Tho. My Daughter, Sir --


Badg. Sir, your Daughter, Sir, is a Son of a Whore, Sir. 'Sbud, I Will go find
my Lord Slang. A Fig for you and your Daughter too; I Will have Satisfaction.
[Exit.


Quix. A Turk would scarce marry a Christian Slave to such a Husband.


Sir Tho. How this Man was misrepresented to me! Fellows, let go your Prisoner.
Mr. Fairlove, can you forgive me? Can I make you any Reparation for the
Injustice I have shown you on this Wretch's Account?


Fair. Ha!


Dor. Ha!


Sir Tho. If the immediate executing all my former Promises to you, can make
you forget my having broken them; and if, as I have no Reason to doubt, your
Love for my Daughter will continue, you have my Consent to consummate as soon
as you please; hers, I believe you have already.


Fair. Oh Transport! Oh blessed Moment!


Dor. No Consent of mine can ever be wanting to make him happy.


AIR XIV.
^ Fair. Thus the Merchant, who with Pleasure,
Long adventured on the Main,
Hugging fast his darling Treasure,
Gaily smiles
On past Toils,
Well repaid for all his Pain.

She. Thus the Nymph whom Dream affrighting,
With her Lover's Death alarms,
Wakes with Transports all delighting;
Madly blessed,
When carest
In his warm entwining Arms.



Mrs. Guz. Lard bless 'em! who could have parted them, that had not a Heart of
Oak!


Quix. Here are the Fruits of Knight-Errantry for you. This is an Instance of
what admirable Service we are to Mankind. -- I find, some Adventures are
reserved for Don Quixote de la Mancha.


Sir Tho. Don Quixote de la Mancha! Is it possible that you can be the real Don
Quixote de la Mancha?


Quix. Truly, Sir, I have had so much to do with Inchanters, that I dare not
affirm whether I am really my self, or no.


Sir Tho. Sir, I honor you much; I have heard of your great Achievements in
Spain; what brought you to England, noble Don?


Quix. A Search of Adventures, Sir; no Place abounds more with them. I was told
there was a plenteous Stock of Monsters; nor have I found one less than I
expected.


SCENE XV.
Don Quixote, Sir Thomas, Fairlove, Dorothea, Guzzle, Mrs. Guzzle, Brief, Dr.
Drench. Brief. I Will have Satisfaction, I will not be used after this manner for
nothing, while there is either Law, or Judge, or Justice, or Jury, or
Crown-Office, or Actions of Damages, or on the Case, or Trespasses, or
Assaults, and Batteries.


Sir Tho. What Is the matter, Mr. Counselor?


Brief. Oh, Sir Thomas! I am abused, beaten, hurt, maimed, disfigured, defaced,
dismembered, killed, massacred, and murdered, by this Rogue, Robber, Rascal,
Villain. I shall not be able to appear at Westminster Hall the whole Term; it will
be as good a Three Hundred Pounds out of my Pocket as was ever taken.


Drench. If this Madman be not blooded, cupped, sweated, blister'd, vomited,
purged, this Instant, he will be incurable. I am well acquainted with this sort
of Phrenzy; his next Paroxysm will be six times as strong as the former.


Brief. Pshaw! the Man is no more mad than I am. -- I should be finely off if
he could be proved Non compos mentis; it is an easy thing for a Man to pretend
Madness Ex post facto.


Drench. Pretend Madness! give me leave to tell you, Mr. Brief, I am not to be
pretended with; I judge by Symptoms, Sir.


Brief. Symptoms! Gad, here are Symptoms for you, if you come to that.


Drench. Very plain Symptoms of Madness, I think.


Brief. Very fine, indeed! very fine Doctrine! very fine, indeed! a Man's
beating of another is a Proof of Madness; so that if a Man be indicted, he has
nothing to do, but to plead, Non compos mentis, and he is acquitted of course;
so there is an end of all Actions of Assaults and Battery at once.


SCENE XVI.
Sir Thomas, Cook, Don Quixote, Sancho, Fairlove, Dr. Drench, Servants haling
in Sancho. Sir Tho. Heyday! what is the matter now?


Cook. Bring him along, bring him along! Ah Master, no wonder you have
complained so long of missing your Victuals, for all the time we were out in
the Yard, this Rogue has been stuffing his Guts in the Pantry. Nay, he has not
only done that, but every thing he could not eat, he has crammed into that great
Sack there, which he calls a Wallet.


Quix. Thou Scandal to the Name of Squire! will thou eternally bring Shame on
thy Master by these little pilfering Tricks!


San. Nay, nay, you have no reason to talk, good Master of mine; the Receiver's
as bad as the Thief; and you have been glad, let me tell you, after some of
your Adventures, to see the Inside of the Wallet, as well as I. What a Pox, are
these your Errantry Tricks, to leave your Friends in the Lurch?


Quix. Slave! Caitif!


Sir Tho. Dear Knight, be not angry with the trusty Sancho, you know by the
Laws of Knight-Errantry, stuffing the Wallet has still been the Privilege of
the Squire.


San. If this Gentleman be a Knight Errant, I wish he would make me his Squire.


Quix. I Am pacified.


Fair. Landlord, be easy. Whatever you may have suffered by Mr. Sancho, or his
illustrious Master, I Will see you paid.


Sir Tho. If you will honor my House, noble Knight, and be present at my
Daughter's Wedding with this Gentleman, we will do the best in our Power for
your Entertainment.


Quix. Sir, I accept your Offer, and, unless any immediate Adventure of moment
should intervene, will attend you.


San. Oh rare Sancho! this is brave News, in faith! Give me your
Wedding-Adventures, the Devil take all the rest.


Drench. Sure, Sir Thomas, you will not take a Madman home with you to your
House.


Quix. I have heard thee, thon ignorant Wretch, throw that Word in my Face,
with Patience; for alas! could it be proved, what were it more than almost all
Mankind in some degrees deserve? Who would doubt the noisy boisterous Squire,
who was here just now, to be mad? Must not this noble Knight here have been
mad, to think of marrying his Daughter to such a Wretch? You, Doctor, are mad
too, though not so mad as your Patients. The Lawyer here is mad, or he would not
have gone into a Scuffle, when it is the Business of Men of his Profession to
set other Men by the Ears, and keep clear themselves.


Sir Tho. Ha, ha, ha! I don't know whether this Knight, by and by, may not
prove us all to be more mad than himself.


Fair. Perhaps, Sir Thomas, that is no such difficult Point.


AIR XV. Country Bumpkin.
^ All Mankind are mad, it is plain;
Some for Places,
Some Embraces;
Some are mad to keep up Gain,
And others mad to spend it.
Courtiers we may Madmen rate,
Poor Believers
In Deceivers;
Some are mad to hurt the State,
And others mad to mend it.

Dor. Lawyers are for Bedlam fit,
Or they never
Could endeavor
Half the Rogueries to commit,
Which we are so mad to let 'em.
Poets Madmen are, no doubt,
With Projectors,
And Directors;
Women all are mad throughout,
And we more mad to get 'em.

Since your Madness is so plain,
Each Spectator
Of Goodnature,
With Applause will entertain
His Brother of La Mancha;
With Applause will entertain
Don Quixote and Squire Sancho.



FINIS.

