THE POETRY OF ANNA MATILDA.

Verse shall amuse, and Prose amend. ANON. LONDON: PRINTED BY JOHN BELL,
British Library, STRAND, Bookseller to His Royal Highness the PRINCE of WALES.
MDCCLXXXVIII.

THE POETRY OF ANNA MATILDA.

CONTAINING A TALE FOR JEALOUSY, THE FUNERAL, HER CORRESPONDENCE WITH DELLA
CRUSCA,
And several other poetical Pieces.

To which are added RECOLLECTIONS, Printed from AN ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT, Written
by GENERAL SIR WILLIAM WALLER.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. BELL, BOOKSELLER TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF
WALES. 1788.

PREFACE.
IN this little Collection of POEMS, all those signed ANNA MATILDA, except the
REPLY to REUBEN, have been before the Public. Desirous to have her name united
with that of DELLA CRUSCA 's, longer than the fleeting fame of Newspapers
allows, ANNA MATILDA had begun to recall some fugitive trifles, in order to
form them into a volume -- when she saw the Poetry of DELLA CRUSCA, etc.
advertised by Mr. Bell. This did not induce her to change her design, only the
mode of it; and still wishing to be united with her favorite bard in a
distinct publication, she offered his publisher her Poems, on condition of
their being formed into a volume, similar to his -- the offer was accepted.

Not having, however, Poetry enough to form such a volume, she was persuaded to
enrich it with some curious PROSE -- written "in other times." The Fragment
subjoined to the Poems, is from the autograph of the famous Sir William Waller;
an important Actor in the busy drama of the last century. The manuscript has
been preserved in a family to which its Editor is allied, and who are pleased
at an opportunity of making their treasure public; how then can ANNA MATILDA
fear for her poetic existence, when it is protected on the one hand by the best
Lyric of the present age, and on the other by one of the most pious men, and
greatest Warriors of the last?

CONTENTS.
LINES written the Morning after Anna Matilda's return from a Friend's House,
close on the verge of Windsor Forest, Page 1 Address to Two Candles, Page 4 On
seeing the Palette of acelebrated Painter, Page 6 The Funeral, Page 9 The Adieu
and Recall to Love, Page 11 To Della Crusca. The Pen. Page 14 To Anna Matilda,
Page 16 To Della Crusca, Page 19 To Anna Matilda, Page 21 Elegy, written on the
Plain of Fontenoy, Page 24 Stanzas to Della Crusca, Page 28 To Anna Matilda,
Page 33 To Della Crusca, Page 37 Invocation to Horror, Page 40 To Anna Matilda,
Page 44 To Reuben, Page 45 Ode to Indifference, Page 50 -- to Anna Matilda,
Page 54 -- to Della Crusca Page 59 To Anna Matilda, Page 62 To Della Crusca,
Page 65 To Anna Matilda, Page 72 To Della Crusca, Page 77 A Tale for Jealousy,
Page 82 Anna Matilda to those who read, Page 97 Recollections, written by
General Sir William Waller, Page 103
WRITTEN THE MORNING AFTER ANNA MATILDA's RETURN FROM A FRIEND's HOUSE,
Close on the verge of WINDSOR FOREST.
HAVE I then left you, sweet Hygeian bowers --
Oh! have I left you friendship's holy hours?
Why are ye vanished, dear inviting shades?
Why ceased, the cheering music of your glades?
Not that which on the surging ether floats,
Or trembles in the linnet's gurgling notes; --
But that which gives you Harriet's polished mind,
Her sense reflective, and her taste refined;
That, which your venerable Dryads love,
When midst their haunts they see her graceful move;
That which adorns the clearest, strongest sense,
And clothes in lightest dress, the thought intense.
INVOCATION.
Written on a very hot day, in August 1783.
COOLING zephyrs haste away,
Round my humid temples play;
Groves and grots in pity leave,
On my fainting bosom breathe!
Skim, as you pass, your silken wings
Over gurgling founts, and glassy springs.
Oh! come from Greenland's icy plains,
Where silver Winter constant reigns;
Or from the Arctic, higher fly
Through the chill Norwegian sky --
Turn not to Gallia's sunny vales,
Nor mix with yours Italia's gales,
Strait over the northern ocean sweep,
Where pearls the frozen Naiads weep;
But on high Grampia's fleecy top,
Where kids, the gelid herbage crop,
There zephyr touch! -- then, with new wing
Fresh from its chilly caverns spring.
Oh! linger not, midst England's fields,
Nor taste the sweets the garden yields;
Heed not our meadows' gaudy charms,
But dart, with vigor, to my arms!
ADDRESS TO TWO CANDLES.
"No subject so mean, that Poetry cannot elevate, and render interesting."
ANON.
At a Cottage on an eminence, ANNA MATILDA had ordered the Candles to be
removed from the Window, but the Night was dark; and recollecting the
situation, she replaced, and thus addressed them: -- BURN -- lucid tapers!
fiercer burn!
Refine each ray to purer light,
Pervade the circumambient air
And pierce the closest robe of Night!
Why faintly glow your spiral fires,
Whilst Charity invokes your beams?
Why, inauspicious to my prayer, --
Still faint and fainter are your gleams?
Oh think, that on the distant heath,
Whose canopy's a sombre sky,
Some weary traveller may roam --
No hut, no guide, no shelter nigh!
Perhaps, an aged parent tries
To find amidst the thick'ning shades
Her doubtful path; -- perhaps a child
Bemoans, forlorn, in yonder glades.
Your honest light they need not dread,
No ignis false instructs your ray
To guide amiss their trembling feet,
Or lure them from the intended way.
No vapor gross your fulgence feeds;
From snowy wax your flame is drawn,
By virgin bees extracted pure
From every sweet that decks the lawn.
The rose, the violet, and the thyme
That scent the Morning's dewy shower,
Combined their aromatic gifts,
And formed ye for the present hour.
Then, gentle tapers! brisker burn,
Dart with new vigor through the night;
Tinge every ray with brighter hues,
And pour them on the wand'rer's sight!
ON SEEING THE PALETTE
OF A CELEBRATED PAINTER.
THIS wild chaotic mass of every dye,
Where principles of beauteous order lie,
Is sure an emblem of the scene,
When out of dark confusion sprung
The variegated orb terrene,
And in the solar system hung.
Soon as the mighty artist gives the sign,
This formless mass, as at the word divine,
Shall regulate its shade and light,
Harmonious move as he shall will --
Its tints divide, or else unite,
Obedient to his powerful skill.
And as the GLORIOUS VISION fills his mind,
They, to its plastic impulse all resigned,
Shall into prospects vast expand --
Foaming, in surfy billows rise,
Then stretch their velvet into land,
Then bid their radiance stream -- in skies.
In cumbrous Alps ascend, whose tops explore
Regions, where day-ey'd eagles fear to soar;
Or in the soft jonquil unfold,
Midst the low beauties of the vale,
Her robe of imitative gold,
Which loads with sweets the dancing gale.
In distant forests spread the inviting brown,
Or hide, with spikey furze, the barren down --
Then, tumbling from the flinty rock,
In white meanders lead the eye;
And then the eye's keen search to mock
Through some time-fretted cavern fly.
Richly festoon'd in luscious purple shine,
Extending over the slope the nect'rous vine,
Or in the gaudy spheroids swell,
Which the swart Indian's groves illume,
Or dye the spicey nonpareil,
Or the soft peach's stain assume.
Yet more -- he wills, and from the palette starts
The form divine -- of soul illumined parts!
Here springs a HEBE, there a SAGE,
Here HEROES from the mass break forth,
There the soft LAIS of the age,
From hence, the CAESAR of the North.
Oh wondrous science! first of arts among!
And do those mighty powers to thee belong?
Here -- here then, POETRY, thy numbers bring,
Here MUSIC strike thy sweetly trembling string!
Creative PAINTING asks the adoring knee,
Who, though a sister called, shall hence your Sovereign be.
THE FUNERAL.
THE paper black'd a full inch deep,
At every corner seemed to weep;
The seal with fearful speed was broke,
When thus the Writer sadly spoke: --
" Oh Charles, beloved! my dear is dead,
" And every bliss for ever fled;
" You and your wife, her constant friend,
" Her funeral rites must now attend."
The day approached; the solemn bell
In dismal notes rang Laura's knell;
Charles and his mate in blackness clad,
With rueful thoughts and faces sad
Saw her interred -- heard " dust to dust,"
And cried -- to this all come, and must.
The coaches now in sad array
Pace back the mournful late trod way;
Whilst floating plumes on shoulders borne,
The dusty lanes and streets adorn.
The widower sad, alone they found,
In sable length upon the ground.
His consolation, Charles essayed,
And many a weary moment stayed;
From Scripture culled a sacred store,
And drained, from heathenish learned lore,
All that was ever thought or said
To prove we cannot call back the dead;
He soothed his tears at every gush,
And saw at length his sorrows hush.
Oh! Charles, James cried, you are very kind!
This shall live long within my mind; --
How shall the friendship I repay
Thou'st proved upon this mournful day
Which tore my dearest wife away
And placed her with her kindred clay?
Charles rubbed his cheek, and thus replied,
With head a little turned aside --
Why, dearest James, thou shall to me
Be just the friend I Have been to thee;
Would Fate grant that, it is all I ask,
Be mine the SORROW, thine the TASK!
[In the following Correspondence, which has occasioned much notice, it has
been suggested that there has been some collusion; -- ANNA MATILDA, therefore,
declares that though she has lately guessed at DELLA CRUSCA, she is yet uncertain
as to his name and rank, and she is persuaded that he cannot have the most dis
tantidea of here is.

The beautiful lines of the ADIEU AND RECALL struck her so forcibly, that
without rising from the table at which she read, she answered them. DELLA
CRUSCA's elegant Reply surprised her into another, and thus the Correspondence
most unexpectedly became settled, ANNA MATILDA's share in it has little to
boast; but she has one claim of which she is proud -- That of having been the
first to point out the excellence of Della Crusca; if there can be merit in
discerning what is so very obvious.]

THE ADIEU AND RECALL
TO LOVE.
Go, idle Boy! I quit thy power;
Thy couch of many a thorn and flower;
Thy twanging bow, thine arrow keen,
Deceitful Beauty's timid mien;
The feigned surprise, the roguish leer,
The tender smile, the thrilling tear,
Have now no pangs, no joys for me,
So fare thee well, for I am free!
Then flutter hence on wanton wing,
Or lave thee in yon lucid spring,
Or take thy bev'rage from the rose,
Or on Louisa's breast repose:
I wish thee well for pleasures past,
Yet bless the hour, I Am free at last.
But sure, methinks, the altered day
Scatters around a mournful ray;
And chilling every zephyr blows,
And every stream untuneful flows;
No rapture swells the linnet's voice,
No more the vocal groves rejoice;
And even thy song, sweet Bird of Eve!
With whom I loved so often to grieve,
Now scarce regarded meets my ear,
Unanswered by a sigh or tear.
No more with devious step I choose
To brush the mountain's morning dews;
To drink the spirit of the breeze,
Or wander midst o'er-arching trees;
Or woo with undisturbed delight,
The pale-cheek'd Virgin of the Night,
That piercing through the leafy bower,
Throws on the ground a silv'ry shower.
Alas! is all this boasted ease,
To lose each warm desire to please,
No sweet solicitude to know
For others bliss, for others woe,
A frozen apathy to find,
A sad vacuity of mind?
O hasten back, then, idle Boy,
And with thine anguish bring thy joy!
Return with all thy torments here,
And let me hope, and doubt, and fear.
O rend my heart with every pain!
But let me, let me love again.
DELLA CRUSCA.

TO DELLA CRUSCA.
THE PEN.
O! SEIZE again thy golden quill,
And with its point my bosom thrill;
With magic touch explore my heart,
And bid the tear of passion start.
Thy golden quill APOLLO gave --
Drenched first in bright Aonia's wave:
He snatched it fluttering through the sky,
Borne on the vapor of a sigh:
It fell from Cupid's burnished wing
As forcefully he drew the string
Which sent his keenest, surest dart
Through a rebellious frozen heart;
That had till then defied his power,
And vacant beat through each dull hour.
Be worthy then the sacred loan!
Seated on Fancy's air-built throne,
Immerse it in her rainbow hues,
Nor, what the Godheads bid, refuse!
APOLLO, CUPID, shall inspire,
And aid thee with their blended fire,
The one poetic language give,
The other bid thy passion live;
With soft ideas fill thy lays,
And crown with LOVE thy wint'ry days!
ANNA MATILDA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
I KNOW thee well, enchanting Maid!
I Have marked thee in the silent glade,
I Have seen thee on the mountain's height,
I Have met thee in the storms of night:
I Have viewed thee on the wild beach run
To gaze upon the setting sun;
Then stop aghast, his ray no more,
To hear the impetuous surge's roar.
Have thou not stood with rapturous eye
To trace the starry worlds on high,
T'observe the moon's weak crescent throw
Over hills, and woods, a glimmering glow:
Or, all beside some wizard stream,
To watch its undulating beam?
O well thy form divine I know --
When youthful errors brought me woe;
When all was dreary to behold,
And many a bosom-friend grew cold;
Thou, thou unlike the summer crew
That from my adverse fortune flew,
Came with melodious voice, to cheer
My throbbing heart, and check the tear.
From thee I learnt, 'twas vain to scan
The low ingratitude of Man;
Thou bad'st me Fancy's wilds to rove,
And seek the ecstatic bower of Love.
When on his couch I threw me down,
I saw thee weave a myrtle crown,
And blend it with the shining hair
Of her, the Fairest of the Fair.
For this, may every wandering gale
The essence of the rose exhale,
And pour the fragrance on thy breast,
And gently fan thy charms to rest.
Soon as the purple slumbers fly
The opening radiance of thine eye,
Strike, strike again the magic lyre,
With all thy pathos, all thy fire;
With all that sweetly-warbled grace,
Which proves thee of celestial race.
O then, in varying colors dressed,
And living glory stand confessed,
Shake from thy locks ambrosial dew,
And thrill each pulse of joy anew;
With glowing ardours rouse my soul,
And bid the tides of Passion roll.
But think no longer in disguise,
To screen thy beauty from mine eyes;
Nor deign a borrowed name to use,
For well I know -- thou art the MUSE!
DELLA CRUSCA.

TO DELLA CRUSCA.
THOU bidst! -- " my purple slumbers fly"
Day's radiance pours upon my eye.
I wake -- I live! the sense o'erpays
The trivial griefs of early days.
What! though the rose-bud on my cheek
Has shed its leaves, which late so sleek,
Spoke youth, and joy -- and careless thought,
By guilt, or fear, or shame un-smote,
My blooming soul is yet in youth,
Its lively sense attests the truth.
O! I can wander yet, and taste
The beauties of the flowery waste;
The nightingale's deep swell can feel,
Whilst from my lids the soft drops steal;
Rapt! gaze upon the gem-deck'd night,
And mark the clear moon's silent flight;
Whilst the slow river's crumpled wave
Repeats the quivering beams she gave.
Nor yet, the pencil strives in vain,
To wake upon the canvas plain,
All the strong passions of the mind,
Or hint the sentiment refined;
To its sweet magic yet I bow,
As when Youth decked my polished brow.
The chisel's feath'ry touch to trace,
Through the nerv'd form, or softened grace,
Is lent me still. Still I admire,
And kindle at the Poet's fire --
My torch, at Della Crusca's light,
And distant, follow his superior flight.
O Time! since these are left me still,
Of lesser thefts even take thy fill:
Yes, steal the luster from my eye,
And bid the soft Carnation fly;
My tresses sprinkle with thy snow,
Which boasted once the auburn glow;
Warp the slim form that was adored
By him, so loved, my bosom's LORD --
But leave me, when all these you steal,
The mind to taste, the nerve to feel!
ANNA MATILDA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
AND art thou then, alas! like me,
OFFSPRING of frail mortality?
Must ruthless Time's rude touch efface
Each lovely feature's varying grace?
And must toward earth that form incline,
And even those eyes forbear to shine?
Yet, when with icy hand he throws,
Amongst thine auburn locks, his snows,
The freezing influence never shall dart,
To chill thy warmly-beating heart;
And scorning Death's oblivious hour,
Thou shall exult -- beyond his power.
Methinks, as Passion drives along,
As frantic grown, I feel thy Song;
Eager I Would traverse LYBIA's plain,
The tawny Lion's dread domain
To meet thee there: nor flagging Fear,
Should ever on my cheek appear:
For even the Forest's King obeys
Majestic WOMAN' s potent gaze.
Or, left on some resourceless shore,
Where never-ceasing billows roar;
Which teeming clouds, and heavy hail,
And furious hurricanes assail,
Far to the Pole -- while half the year,
On Ebon throne sits NIGHT severe;
And to her solitary court,
Sea-fowl, and monsters fierce resort --
Even there, MATILDA! there with thee,
Impending horrors all should flee;
Thy luster of poetic ray,
Should wake an artificial day.
Sure thou wast never doomed to know
What pangs from care, and danger flow;
But fairest scenes thy thoughts employ,
And Art, and Science, bring thee joy.
The quickening sense, the throb divine,
Fancy, and Feeling, all are thine;
It Is thine, by blushing Summer led,
A shower of roses round thee shed,
To hie thee forth at Morn's advance,
In wild excess of rapturous trance;
And see the Sun's proud deluge stream,
In copious tides of golden beam;
While faint his Sister-Orb on high,
Fades to a vapor of the sky.
When gradual evening comes, to hide,
In sabling shades, CREATION' s pride;
When heaving hills, and forests drear,
And lessening towns, but scarce appear;
While the last lingering western glow,
Hangs on the lucid lake below;
Then trivial joys (I deem) forgot,
Thou love to seek the humble cot,
To scatter Comfort's balm around,
And heal pale Poverty's deep wound;
Drive sickness from the languid bed,
Raise the lorn Widow's drooping head;
Render the new-made Mother blessed,
And snatch the Infant to thy breast.
O ANNA, then, if true thou say,
Thy radiant beauties steal away,
Yet shall I never fail to find
Eternal beauties in thy mind.
To those I offer up my vows,
And Love, which Virtue's self allows;
Unknown, again thou art adored,
As once by him, thy " bosom's Lord."
DELLA CRUSCA.

ELEGY,
Written on the PLAIN OF FONTENOY.
CHILL blows the blast, and Twilight's dewy hand
Draws in the West her dusky veil away;
A deeper shadow steals along the land,
And NATURE muses at the DEATH of DAY!
Near this bleak Waste no friendly mansion rears
Its walls, where Mirth, and social joys resound,
But each sad object melts the soul to tears,
While Horror treads the scattered bones around.
As thus, alone and comfortless I roam,
Wet with the drizling shower, I sigh sincere;
I cast a fond look toward my native home,
And think what valiant BRITONS perished here.
Yes, the time was, nor very far the date,
When carnage here her crimson toil began;
When Nations' Standards waved in threatening state,
And Man the murderer met the murderer Man.
For WAR is MURDER, though the voice of Kings
Has styled it Justice, styled it Glory too!
Yet from worst motives, fierce Ambition springs,
And there, fixed Prejudice is all we view!
But sure, it is Heaven's immutable decree,
For thousands every age in fight to fall;
Some NATURAL CAUSE prevails, we cannot see,
And that is FATE, which we Ambition call.
O let the aspiring Warrior think with grief,
That as produced by CHYMIC art refined; --
So glittering CONQUEST, from the laurel leaf
Extracts a GENERAL POISON for Mankind.
Here let him wander at the midnight hour,
These morbid rains, these gelid gales to meet;
And mourn, like me, the ravages of Power!
And feel, like me, that Victory is defeat!
Nor deem, ye vain! that ever I mean to swell
My feeble Verse with many a sounding Name;
Of such, the mercenary Bard may tell,
And call such dreary desolation, Fame.
The genuine Muse removes the thin disguise
That cheats the World, whenever she deigns to sing;
And full as meritorious to her eyes
Seems the Poor Soldier, as the Mighty King!
Alike I shun in labored strain to show,
How BRITAIN more than triumphed, though she fled,
Where LOUIS stood, where stalked the column slow;
I turn from these, and DWELL UPON THE DEAD.
Yet much my beating breast respects the brave;
Too well I love them, not to mourn their fate,
Why should they seek for greatness in the grave?
Their hearts are noble -- and in life they are great.
Nor think it is but in War the Brave excel, --
TO VALOR EVERY VIRTUE IS ALLIED!
Here faithful friendship 'mid the Battle fell,
And Love, true Love, in bitter anguish died.
Alas! the solemn slaughter I retrace,
That checks life's current circling through my veins,
Bathed in moist sorrow, many a beauteous face,
And gave a grief, perhaps, that still remains.
I can no more -- an agony too keen
Absorbs my senses, and my mind subdues,
Hard were that heart which here could beat serene,
Or the just tribute of a pang refuse.
But lo! through yonder opening clouds afar
Shoots the bright PLANET's sanguinary ray
That bears thy name, FICTITIOUS LORD OF WAR!
And with red luster guides my lonely way.
Then FONTENOY, farewell! Yet much I fear,
(Wherever chance my course compells) to find
Discord and Blood -- the thrilling sounds I hear,
" The noise of battle hurtles in the wind."
From barbarous Turkey to Britannia's shore,
Opposing interests into rage increase;
Destruction rears her scepter, tumults roar,
Ah! where shall hapless man repose in peace?
DELLA CRUSCA.

STANZAS
TO DELLA CRUSCA.
HUSHED, be each ruder note! -- soft silence spread,
With ermine hand, thy cobweb robe around;
Attention! pillow my reclining head,
Whilst eagerly I catch the golden sound.
Ha! What a tone was that, which floating near,
Seemed Harmony's full soul -- whose is the lyre?
Which seizing thus on my enraptured ear,
Chills with its force, yet melts me with its fire.
Ah dull of heart! thy Minstrel's touch not know,
What Bard but DELLA CRUSCA boasts such skill?
From him alone, those melting notes can flow --
He, only knows adroitly thus to trill.
Well have I left the Groves, which sighing wave
Amidst November's blast their naked arms,
Whilst their red leaves fall fluttering to their grave,
And give again to dust May's vernal charms.
Well have I left the air-embosom'd hills,
Where sprightly Health in verdant buskin plays;
Forsaken fallow meads, and circling mills,
And thyme-dress'd heaths, where the soft flock yet strays.
Obscuring smoke, and air impure I greet,
With the coarse din that Trade and Folly form,
For here the Muse's Son again I meet --
I catch his notes amidst the vulgar storm.
His notes now bear me, pensive, to the Plain,
Clothed by a verdure drawn from Britain's heart;
Whose heroes bled superior to their pain,
Sunk, crowned with glory, and contemned the smart.
Soft, as he leads me round the ensanguin'd fields,
The laureled shades forsake their grassy tomb,
The bursting sod its palid inmate yields,
And over the immortal waste their spirits roam.
Obedient to the Muse the acts revive
Which Time long past had veiled from mortal ken,
Embattled squadrons rush, as when alive,
And shadowy falchions gleam over shadowy men.
Ah, who art thou, who thus with frantic air
Fly'st fearless to support that bleeding youth;
Binds his deep gashes with thy glowing hair,
And die beside him, to attest thy truth?
" His Sister I; an orphan'd pair, we grieved
" For Parents long at rest within the grave,
" By a false Guardian of our wealth bereaved --
" The little ALL parental care could save.
" Chill looked the world, and chilly grew our hearts,
" Oh! where shall Poverty expect a smile?
" Gross, lawless Love, assumed its ready arts,
" And all beset was I, with Fraud and Guile.
" My Henry sought the war, and dropped the tears
" Of love fraternal as he bade farewell;
" But fear, soon made me rise above my fears --
" I followed -- and Fate tolls our mutual knell."
Chaste Maiden rest; and brighter spring the green
That decorates the turf thy bloom will feed!
And oh, in softest mercy 'twas I ween,
To worth like thine, a Brother's grave's decreed.
The dreadful shriek of Death now darts around,
The hollow winds repeat each tortured sigh,
Deep bitter groans, still deeper groans resound,
Whilst Fathers, Brothers, Lovers, Husbands die!
Turn from this spot, blessed Bard! thy mental eye;
To hamlets, cities, empires bend its beam!
'Twill there such multiplying deaths descry,
That all before thee'll but an abstract seem.
Why waste thy tears over this contracted Plain?
The sky which canopies the sons of breath,
Sees the whole Earth one scene of mortal pain,
The vast, the universal BED OF DEATH!
Where, do not Husbands, Fathers, dying moan?
Where, do not Mothers, Sisters, Orphans weep?
Where, is not heard the last expiring groan,
Or the deep throttle of the deathful Sleep!
If, as Philosophy does often muse,
A state of war, is natural state to man,
Battle's the SICKNESS bravery would choose --
Noblest DISEASE in Nature's various plan!
Let vulgar souls stoop to the fever's rage,
Or slow, beneath pale atrophy depart,
With Gout and Scrophula weak variance wage,
Or sink, with sorrow cank'ring at the heart;
These, be to common Minds, the unwish'd decree!
The FIRM select an illness more sublime;
By languid pains, scorn their high souls to free,
But seek the Sword's swift edge, and spurn at Time.
ANNA MATILDA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
ON the seashore with folded arms I stood,
The Sun, just sinking, shot a level ray,
Luxuriant crimson glowed upon the flood,
And the curled surf was tinged with golden spray.
Far of I faintly track'd the feath'ry sail;
When thy sweet numbers caught my yielded ear,
Borne on the bosom of the fluttering gale,
They struck my heart -- and roused me to a tear.
Yet flowed no bitter anguish from mine eye,
A while remembrance left my wayward state;
And the soft cadence of thy warbled sigh,
Poured healing balm into the wounds of Fate.
What though grim Winter's desolating frown,
The wild waves uproar when rough Eurus blows,
The tangled forest, and the desert down,
Be all the solace DELLA CRUSCA knows:
Yet from MATILDA's pure celestial fire,
One ruby spark shall to his gloom be given,
Lured by its light, his fancy may aspire,
And catch a ray of bliss -- a glimpse of Heaven.
Vain in the morn of life, and thoughtless too,
He rushed impetuous as strong passion drove,
But soon each flattering prospect fled his view,
Deceived by Friendship much, but more by Love.
Yes, he has loved to Transport's dire excess,
Has felt the potent eye inflict the wound;
Has felt the female voice each pulse oppress,
And grown a breathless statue at the sound.
But why recall the moments that are fled?
For ever fled, like yonder sweeping blast;
With Love, each active principle is dead,
And all, except its sad regret, is past.
Ah! had he met thee in this happier hour,
Ere yet he languish'd in the gripe of Care,
Thy minstrel then had fondly owned thy power,
Thy minstrel then might have escaped Despair.
O different lot! for he who daily grieves,
Then with thy beauty blessed, and generous mind,
Had not, like sallow Autumn's falling leaves,
Been shrunk, alas! and scattered in the wind.
Happily, he had not roam'd for lingering years
On many a rugged Alp, and foreign shore;
He never had known the cause of all his tears,
The cherished cause, that bids him -- hope no more.
He would have led thee with attentive gaze,
Where the brown hamlet's neighboring shades retire,
Have hung entranced upon thy living lays,
And swept with feebler hand a kindred lyre.
While the dear Songstress had melodious stole
Over every sense, and charmed each nerve to rest,
Thy Bard, in silent ecstacy of soul,
Had strained the dearer Woman to his breast.
Or had she said, that War's the worthiest grave,
He would have felt his proud heart burn the while;
Have dared, perhaps, to rush among the brave,
Have gained, perhaps, the glory -- of a smile.
And it is most true, while Time's relentless hand,
With sickly grasp drags others to the tomb,
The Soldier scorns to wait the dull command,
But springs impatient to a nobler doom.
Though on the plain he lies, outstretch'd, and pale,
Without one friend his steadfast eyes to close;
Yet on his honored corse shall many a gale,
Waft the moist fragrance of the weeping rose.
Over that dread spot, the melancholy Moon
Shall pause a while, a sadder beam to shed,
And starry Night, amidst her awful noon,
Sprinkle light dews upon his hallowed head.
There too the solitary Bird shall swell
With long-drawn melody her plaintive throat;
While distant Echo from responsive cell,
Shall often with fading force return the note.
Such recompense be Valor's due alone!
To me, no proffered meed must ever belong;
To me, who trod the vale of life unknown,
Whose proudest boast was but an idle song.
DELLA CRUSCA.

TO DELLA CRUSCA.
I HATE the tardy Elegiac lay --
Choose me a measure jocund as the day!
Such days as near the ides of June
Meet the Lark's elab'rate tune,
When his downy fringed breast
Ambitious on a cloud to rest
He soars aloft; and from his gurgling throat
Darts to the earth the piercing note --
Which softly falling with the dews of morn
(That bless the scented pink, and snowy thorn)
Expands upon the Zephyr's wing,
And wakes the burnished finch, and linnet sweet to sing.
And be thy lines irregular and free,
Poetic chains should fall before such Bards as thee.
Scorn the dull laws that pinch thee round,
Raising about thy verse a mound,
Over which thy Muse, so lofty! dares not bound.
Bid her in verse meand'ring sport;
Her footsteps quick, or long, or short,
Just as her various impulse wills --
Scorning the frigid square, which her fine fervor chills.
And in thy verse meand'ring wild,
Thou, who art FANCY's favorite Child,
May sweetly paint the long past hour,
When, the slave of Cupid's power,
Thou could the tear of rapture weep,
And feed on Agony, and banish Sleep.
Ha! did thou, favored mortal, taste
All that adorns our life's dull waste?
Have THOU known Love's enchanting pain --
Its hopes, its woes, and yet complain?
Thy senses, at a voice, been lost,
Thy mad'ning soul in tumults tossed?
Ecstatic wishes fire thy brain --
These, have thou known, and yet complain?
Thou then deserve never more to FEEL; --
Thy nerves be rigid, hence, as steel!
Their fine vibrations all destroyed,
Thy future days a tasteless void!
Never shall thou know again to sigh,
Or, on a soft idea die;
Never on a recollection gasp,
Thy arms, the air-drawn charmer, never grasp.
Vapid Content her poppies round thee strew,
Whilst to the bliss of TASTE thou bidst adieu!
To vulgar comforts be thou hence confined,
And the shrunk bays be from thy brow untwin'd.
Thy statue torn from Cupid's hallowed nitch,
But in return thou shall be dull, and rich;
The Muses hence disown thy rebel lay --
But thou, in Aldermanic gown, their scorn repay;
Crimsoned, and furred, the highest honors dare,
And on thy laurels tread -- a PLUMP LORD MAYOR!
ANNA MATILDA.

INVOCATION
TO HORROR.
FAR be removed each painted scene!
What is to me the sapphire sky?
What is to me the earth's soft dye?
Or fragrant vales which sink between
Those velvet hills? yes, there I see --
(Why do those beauties burst on me?)
Pearl dropping groves bow to the sun;
Seizing his beams, bright rivers run
That dart redoubled day:
Hope ye vain scenes to catch the mind
To torpid sorrow all resigned,
Or bid my heart be gay?
False are those hopes! -- I turn -- I fly,
Where no enchantment meets the eye,
Or soft ideas stray.
HORROR! I call thee from the mouldering tower,
The murky churchyard, and forsaken bower,
Where, 'midst unwholesome damps
The vap'ry gleamy lamps
Of ignes fatui show the thick-wove night,
Where morbid MELANCHOLY sits,
And weeps, and sings, and raves by fits,
And to her bosom strains the fancied sprite.
Or, if amidst the arctic gloom,
Thou toilest at thy sable loom,
Forming the hideous phantoms of Despair --
Instant thy grisly labors leave,
With raven wing the concave cleave,
Where floats, self-borne, the dense nocturnal air.
Oh! bear me to the impending cliff
Under whose brow the dashing skiff
Beholds Thee seated on thy rocky throne;
There, 'midst the shrieking wild wind's roar,
Thy influence, HORROR, I Will adore,
And, at thy magic touch, congeal to stone.
Oh! hide the Moon's obtrusive orb,
The gleams of every star absorb,
And let CREATION be a moment thine!
Bid billows dash; let whirlwinds roar,
And the stern, rocky-pointed shore,
The stranded bark, back to the waves resign!
Then, whilst from yonder turbid cloud,
Thou roll'st thy thunders long, and loud,
And lightenings flash upon the deep below,
Let the expiring Seaman's cry,
The Pilot's agonizing sigh
Mingle, and in the dreadful chorus flow!
HORROR! far back thou dat'st thy reign;
Ere KINGS the historic page could stain
With records black, or deeds of lawless power;
Ere empires Alexanders cursed,
Or Faction, mad'ning Caesar's nursed,
The frighted World received thy awful dower!
Whose pen JEHOVAH's self inspired;
He, who in eloquence attired,
Led Israel's squadrons over the earth,
Grandly terrific, paints thy birth.
The ALMIGHTY, 'midst his fulgent seat on high,
Where glowing Seraphs round his footstool fly,
Beheld the wanton cities of the plain,
With acts of deadly name his laws disdain;
He gave the irrevocable sign,
Which marked to man the hate divine;
And sudden from the starting sky
The Angels of his wrath bid fly!
Then, HORROR! thou presided'st over the whole,
And filled, and rapt, each self-accusing soul!
Thou did ascend to guide the burning shower --
On THEE the Omnipotent bestowed the hour!
'Twas thine to scourge the sinful land,
'Twas thine to toss the fiery brand;
Beneath thy glance the temples fell,
And mountains crumble at thy yell.
ONCE MORE thou wilt triumph in a fiery storm;
ONCE MORE the Earth behold thy direful form;
Then shall thou seek, as holy prophets tell,
Thy native throne amidst the eternal shades of HELL!
ANNA MATILDA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
TO THEE a Stranger dares address his theme!
To Thee, proud Mistress of Apollo's lyre;
One ray emitted from thy golden gleam,
Prompted by LOVE, would " set the World on fire."
Adorn then LOVE, in fancy-tinctur'd vest,
Camelion like, anon of various hue;
By " Penserosa," and " Allegro" dressed --
Such Genius claimed, when she Idalia drew.
I see the Pencil on the canvas shine!
REYNOLDS admires! -- in Science then proceed;
The name of Poet, Painter, both are thine,
We view the speaking painting -- as we read.
Paris.
REUBEN.

TO REUBEN.
MIDST the proud fervor of the day,
Whilst the sun darts a torrid ray,
The humble daisey sinks its head,
And faints upon its lowly bed;
But when moist eve has quenched his fire,
And treads the fields in cool attire,
The daisy spreads again her bloom,
And offers up her mild perfume.
Thus your resuscitating praise,
Breathed life upon my dying lays.
REYNOLDS ADMIRES! flattery so sweet
With blushing vanity I meet,
But Bard polite! how hard the task
Which with such elegance you ask.
When DIDO bad ENEAS tell
The woes he knew to paint so well --
Did he not tell the queen, she tore
His closing wounds, and drew fresh gore,
From stabs that time had almost healed? --
Such, REUBEN, such, the thorn concealed,
Within your verses' flowery spell,
Which barbarous! dares my pen compel.
Yet how describe the various god,
T'whom Proteus' self's a heavy clod?
Differing in each differing heart,
Scorning to play a constant part.
A tiger! -- tyrant! -- such is he,
Whom painted with bandeau you see,
With downy wings, and childish face,
As though of the blessed Cherub's race --
But oh! a serpent in disguise,
And as the lynx, his piercing eyes!
A raging fire, a deadly pain,
That gentlest heart strings most will strain;
A fever, tempest, madness he --
Of all life's ills -- A DREAD EPITOME!
Ha! do thou fear, and will thou run?
The little monster try to shun?
And will thou, REUBEN, too succeed --
And shall thy bosom never bleed;
Never his poisoned rankling dart
Quiver within thy tender heart?
Oh, hapless man! -- oh, wretched fate!
Fly to Love's altar ere too late,
And deprecate the doom accursed,
Or bid that heart with sorrow burst.
Welcome the deadly fiery pain,
That gentlest heart strings most will strain --
MADNESS IS HIS -- but it is replete
With all that makes life's blessings sweet; --
A TYRANT he, but oh! his chains
Are richer than an empire's gains!
Sweet, the delirium which by love is spread,
Whatever the paths his raptured vot'ries tread!
He paints the mist which hangs upon the eve,
With colors dearer than the Sun can give;
It Is he who lends the nightingale its trills,
When her rich pipe the Empyrean fills,
Oh, it is the softness in his heart
Which makes the Lover in her song take part,
And faint upon each touching pause,
And lengthen out each added clause,
Till rapt attention, strained too high,
Rolls down its gushing tear, and breathes its gentle sigh.
Charming to Love is MORNING's hour,
When, from her crystal roseate tower,
She sees the Goddess HEALTH pursue
The skimming breeze through fields of dew:
Charming, the flaming hour of noon,
When the sunk Linnet's fading tune,
Allures him to the beechy grove --
Or when some crag'd grotesque alcove
Sounds in his ear its tinkling rill,
And tempts him to its moss grown sill;
Most charmed when on his tranced mind
Is wisper'd in the passing wind,
The name of her, whose name is bliss;
Or when he all unseen can kiss
The fringed bank where late she lay,
Hidden from the imperious day.
Oh, ye rapt glades, which glist'ring Luna decks,
Whose stretching shadows her refulgence checks!
Oh, ye soft floods, that hang upon the peak
Of lofty rocks, and bound in wanton freak,
Where thirsty meads your rushing streamlets crave,
And crowd their flowers around to drink your wave --
What are ye all, should Love withhold the dart,
Which wakes nice feelings in the torpid heart?
Where is the heart, that would such feelings fly,
Or fear the enchanting, MAD'NING CUP to try?
Must I speak more of love? the boundless theme
Might run beyond the edge of life's short dream:
His spells are blessings -- witch'ries so sublime
They triumph over distress, and fate, and time.
Would ask the joys of love? -- Oh! change the prayer,
Thou little know his power, to fasten there!
Let the mean bosom crave its love's return,
Thine shall with more distinguished ardors burn:
To know the passion -- yes, be that thy strain,
Invoke the god of the mysterious pain!
Whatever thy nature -- gentle, fiery, rough --
To LOVE -- learn but TO LOVE -- and thou have bliss enough!
ANNA MATILDA.

ODE
TO INDIFFERENCE.
OH nymph, long sought, of placid mien,
With careless step, and brow serene!
I woo thee from the tufted bowers,
Where listless pass thy easy hours --
Or, if a Naiade of the silver wave
Thou rather love thy pearly limbs to lave
In some clear lake, whose fascinating face
Lures the soft willow to its pure embrace!
Or, if beneath the gelid rock
Thy smiles all human sorrows mock,
Wherever thou art, in earth or air,
Oh! come, and chase the fiend DESPAIR!
Have I not marked thee on the green
Roving, by vulgar eyes unseen?
Have I not watched thy lightsome dance
When Evening's softened glows advance?
Dear Goddess, yes! and whilst the Rustic's mirth
Proclaims the hour which gives wild gambols birth,
Supine, I Have found thee in the elm-row's shade,
Lulled by the hum returning bees have made,
Who, chary of their golden spoils,
Finish their fragrant, rosy toils,
With rest-inviting, slumb'rous song,
As to their waxen couch they throng.
Chaste Nymph! the Temple let me seek
Where thou resid'st in luster meek;
My future life to thee I give --
Irradiate every hour I live!
It Is true, no glowing bliss thy vot'ries know,
From thee no poignant ecstacy can flow,
But oh! thoushield'st the heart from rankling pain,
And Misery strikes, when blessed with thee, in vain;
Wan Jealousy's empoisoning tooth,
And Love, which feeds upon our youth,
And holy Friendship's broken tie,
Never dim the luster of thy eye.
For thee, it is, all Nature blooms,
For thee, the Spring new charms assumes,
Nor vainly flings her blossoms round,
Nor vainly bids her groves resound;
Her music, colors, odours, all are thine,
To thee her months their richest gifts consign;
To thee the morn is bright, and sweet the ray
That marks the progress of the sinking day;
Each change is grateful to thy soul,
For its fine taste no woes control;
The powers of Nature, and of Art,
Alike entrance the easy heart.
And oh! beneath thy gentle dome,
Which the calm comforts make their home,
That cruel imp is never found
Whose fame such idle songs resound --
Dread SENSIBILITY! -- Oh! let me fly
Where Greenland darkness drinks the beamy sky,
Or where the Sun, with downward torrid ray
Kills, with the barbarous glories of the day!
I Would dare the excess of every clime,
Grasp every evil known by Time,
Ere live beneath that Witch's spells
With whom no lasting pleasure dwells.
Her lovely form deceives the heart,
The tear, for ever prompt to start,
The tender look, the ready sigh
And soft emotion always nigh;
And yet Content the insidious fiend forbids --
Oh! she has torn the slumbers from my lids:
Often roused my torpid sense to living woe,
And bid chill anguish to my bosom grow.
She seals her prey! -- in vain the Spring
Wakes Rapture, through her groves to sing;
The roseate Morn's hygean bloom,
Fades down, unmarked, to Evening's gloom.
Oh SENSIBILITY! thy scepter sad
Points, where the frantic glance proclaims THE MAD!
Strained to excess, Reason is chained thy slave,
Or the poor Victim, shuns thee in the grave;
To thee each crime, each evil owes its birth,
That in gigantic horror treads the earth!
SAVAGE UNTAMED! she smiles to drink our tears,
And where is no solid ill, she wounds with fears;
Riots in sighs, is soothed when most we smart --
Now, while she guides my pen, her FANG's within my heart.
ANNA MATILDA.

ODE
TO ANNA MATILDA.
O CEASE, MATILDA! Cease the strain,
That woo's INDIFFERENCE to thy arms;
For what are all her boasted charms?
But only to be free from Pain!
And would thou then, her torpid ease,
Her listless apathy to know,
Renounce the magic POWER to PLEASE,
And lose the LUXURY of WOE?
Why does thy stream of sweetest song,
In many a wild maze wind along;
Foam on the Mountain's murmuring side;
Or through the vocal covert glide;
Or among fairy meadows steal? --
It is, because thy HEART can FEEL!
Alas! if Peace must be unknown,
Till every nerve is turned to stone,
Till not a tear-drop wets the eye;
Nor throbs the breast for Sorrow's sigh,
O may I never find relief,
But PERISH, in the PANG of GRIEF!
Think not I reason thus, my Fair!
A stranger to corroding Care!
Ah! if Thou, seldom find'st repose,
" I, rest not on a bed of rose."
DESPAIR, cold Serpent, loves to twine
About this helpless heart of mine!
Yet, though neglected and forlorn,
I scarce can check the smile of Scorn,
When those, the VULGAR call the GREAT,
Bend the important brow of state;
And strive a consequence to find
By seeming more than Humankind;
Well, let them strut their hour away,
Till grinning Death demand his prey!
Meanwhile, my ANNA! let us rove
The scented vale, the bending grove,
Mix our hot tears with evening dews,
And live for FRIENDSHIP and the MUSE!
Yes, let us hasten hand in hand,
Where the blue billows lave the land,
And as they quick recoiling fly
Send on the surf a lengthened sigh,
That strikes the soul, with truth sublime,
As 'twere the whispering TONGUE of TIME:
For thus our short Life's ebbing day
Murmurs awhile, and hastes away!
Or let us seek the mouldering wall,
Or some lone Abbey's Gothic Hall;
Recline upon the knee-worn stone,
And catch the North Wind's dismal moan,
That 'midst his sorrows, seems to boast
Of many a gallant vessel lost!
Friends and Lovers sunk in death --
By the fury of his breath!
What though at the imagined Tale,
Thy altered cheek be sadly pale;
Never can such SYMPATHY annoy;
For it is the price of dearest JOY!
When far off the Night Storm flies,
Let us ponder on the SKIES!
Where million stars are ever rolled,
Which yet our weak eyes dare behold;
Adore the SELF-EXISTING CAUSE
That gives to each its separate laws;
That, when the impetuous Comet runs
Athwart a wilderness of Suns;
Tells it what mandate to obey,
Nor ever wander from its way;
Till back it hasten whence 'twas brought,
Beyond the boundaries of Thought!
Let not the studious Seer reply,
" Attraction regulates the Sky,
" And lends each Orb the secret force,
" That urges on, or checks its course."
Or with his Orrery expound
Creation's vainly fancied round.
Ah! quit thy toil, presumptuous Sage!
Destroy thy calculating page;
No more on Second Causes plod;
It Is not ATTRACTION, but it is GOD!
And what the UNIVERSE we call,
Is but a POINT, compa^'d to ALL.
SUCH BLISS the sensate bosom knows,
Such bliss Indiff'rence never bestows;
Though small the circle we can trace,
In the abyss of time and space;
Though LEARNING has its limits got,
The feelings of the soul have not.
Their vast excursions find no end:
And RAPTURE needs not comprehend!
It Is true, we are ign'rant how the Earth
Wakes the first principles of birth,
With vegetative moisture feeds
To different purpose, different seeds:
Gives to the Rose such balmy sweet,
Or fills the golden ear of Wheat,
Paints the ripe Peach with velvet bloom,
Or weaves the thick Wood's mingling bloom; --
YET, we can wander in the bower;
Can taste the fragrance of the flower;
Drink the rich fruit's nectareous juice,
And bend the harvest to our use. --
Then give thy pure perceptions scope,
And sooth thy heaving heart with hope.
HOPE shall instruct my sorr'wing Friend;
The soul's fine fervor never can end;
But when her limbs by Death are laid
Beneath some yew-tree's hallowed shade,
Then shall her soaring spirit know
The seraphim's ecstatic glow.
Then shall the ESSENTIAL MIND confess,
That ANGUISH has the power to BLESS,
That FEELING was in BOUNTY given,
And own THE SACRED TRUTH -- IN HEAVEN.
DELLA CRUSCA.

ODE
TO DELLA CRUSCA.
O THOU!
Who from " a wilderness of Suns"
Can stoop to where the low brook runs!
Through space with rapid comets glow; --
Or mark where, soft, the snow-drops grow!
O THOU!
Whose burning Pen now rapture paints!
Then moralizes, cold, with Saints!
Now trembling ardors can infuse --
Then, seems as dipped in cloistered dews --
O say! thy BEING quick declare,
Art thou a Son of Earth, or Air?
Celestial Bard! though thy sweet song
Might to a Seraph's strains belong,
Its wondrous beauty, and its art
Can only touch, not change, my heart.
So Heaven-sent lightning powerless plays,
And wanton, throws its purple rays;
It leaps through Night's scarce pervious gloom,
Attracted by the Rose's bloom;
The illumined shrub then quivering round,
It seems each scented bud to wound;
Morn shakes her locks, and see the Rose
In renovated beauty blows!
Smiles at the dart which past away,
And flings her perfume on the day.
Thy lightning Pen it is thus I greet,
Fearless its subtle point I meet;
Never shall its spells my sad heart move,
From the calm state it vows to love.
All other bliss I Have proved is vain --
All other bliss is dashed with pain.
My waist with myrtles has been bound,
MY BROW WITH LAURELS HAS BEEN CROWNED;
LOVE, has sighed hopeless at my feet,
LOVE, on my couch, has poured each sweet;
All these I Have known, and now I fly
With thee, INDIFFERENCE, to die!
Nor is thy gift " dull torpid ease,"
The Mind's quick powers that do not freeze:
No! blessed by Thee, the soul expands,
And darts over fresh-created lands;
Springs from the confines of the earth
To where new systems struggle into birth;
The germ of future Worlds beholds,
The secrets of dark space unfolds;
Can watch how far the Erratic runs,
And gaze on DELLA CRUSCA's Suns;
In some new Orb can meet, " his starry mail,"
And him, on earth unknown, in Heaven with transport hail!
ANNA MATILDA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
NOR will I more of Fate complain;
For I have lived to feel thy strain;
To feel its sun-like force divine,
Swift darting through the clouds of woe,
Shoot to my soul a sainted glow.
Yet, yet, MATILDA, spare to shine!
One moment be the blaze suppressed!
Lest from this clod my spirit spring,
And borne by Zephyrs' trembling wing,
Seek a new Heaven upon thy BREAST.
But say, does calm INDIFFERENCE dwell
On the low mead or mountain swell,
Or at gray Evening's solemn gloom,
Bend her bosom to the tomb?
Or when the weak dawn's orient rose,
In silv'ry foliage decked, appears;
Tell me, if perchance she goes
To the fresh garden's proud array,
Where, doubtful of the coming day,
Each drooping flow'ret sheds translucent tears.
Ah! tell me, tell me where,
For thou shall find me there,
Like her own son, in vestment pure,
With deep disguise of smile secure:
So shall I once thy form descry,
For once, hold converse with thine eye.
Vain is the thought, for at thy sight,
Soon as thy potent voice were found,
Could I conceal the vast delight,
Could I be tranquil at the sound,
Could I repress quick Rapture's start,
Or hide the bursting of my heart?
Let but thy lyre impatient seize
Departing Twilight's filmy breeze,
That winds the enchanting chords among,
In lingering labyrinth of song:
Anon, the amorous Bird of Woe
Shall steal the tones that quivering flow,
And with them sooth the sighing woods,
And with them charm the slumbering floods;
Till, all exhausted by the lay,
He hang in silence on the spray,
Drop to his idle flower beneath,
And, 'midst her blushes, cease to breathe.
Warned by his Fate, 'twere surely well
To shun the fascinating spell;
Nor still, presumptuous, dare to fling
My rude hand over the sounding string;
As though I fondly would aspire,
To match MATILDA's heavenly fire.
Yet may I sometimes, far remote,
Hear the loved cadence of her note,
And though the Laurel I resign,
O may the bliss of TASTE be mine!
DELLA CRUSCA.

The following was not composed, from an idea that enough had not been said on
the subject of INDIFFERENCE, -- it was hastily written, merely to let DELLA
CRUSCA know that he was GUESSED AT; -- but the line which would to him have
particularly pointed that out, was, when given in The WORLD, altered -- it is
now printed as originally written. For its many careless passages ANNA MATILDA
begs this apology may be accepted, that she wrote it literally whilst sitting
for her portrait; -- and whilst the sublimity of Egyptian groves, Zenobia's
desert, Confucious, Marc Antony, etc. etc. had their ideas continually broken
in upon, with "SMILE A LITTLE;" -- "MORE TO THE RIGHT;" "NOW LOOK UP," and so
forth. Both the poetry and the painting have suffered for this -- the one has
been less happy, the other less correct.

" -- Does calm Indifference dwell,
" On the low mead, or mountain swell?
" Oh tell me where,
" For thou shall find me there!"
To DELLA CRUSCA.
YES, on the mountain's haughty swell,
And in the prostrate dell,
And where the Dryades fling their shades --
There may thou meet the Maid serene,
Or trace her on the zephyr'd green
Whilst Day's carnation gently fades.
Does Nature make the prospect vast,
With rocks o'erhang, and rivers cast
Tumbling headlong to their base?
Do seas stretch out their foamy plains,
Compelling with their crystal chains
Wide Continents to embrace?
All these attract the smooth-brow'd fair; --
Or where can Art evince her powers,
Where, Science strew immortal flowers,
And gay Indifference -- haste not there?
Whilst PASSION narrows up the heart,
TASTE can no ray of bliss impart,
One strong idea grasps the mind --
Extends itself through all the soul,
Through every vein its furies roll,
And tears with fangs unkind.
When NEWTON trod the starry roads,
And viewed the dwellings of the Gods,
And measured every Orb --
Did silly Love his steps attend,
His mighty purposes suspend,
Or his grand mind absorb?
When intellectual LOCK explored
The Soul's sad vacuum, where no hoard
Of budding young ideas lay --
Oh tell, thus robbed in Wisdom's stole,
Did Love's coarse torch his view control,
Or light him in the darksome way?
Ha! DELLA CRUSCA, cease to feign,
Thy cheek with red repentance stain,
For having feigned so long;
Quick seize thy Lyre, sweep each bold string,
Over every chord thy music fling --
To calm INDIFFERENCE raise the Song!
Propitiate first, then with her haste
Over the Globe's peopled, motley waste;
Watch CHARACTER wherever it runs;
Drink newer air, see fiercer suns:
Seek the bland realms where first the Morn
Pours dawn-light from her beamy horn; --
Pours scent and colors over the vale,
And wakes its song, and wakes its tale.
Mark how CONFUCIUS' feeble race,
(Whose records vast fail not to trace)
To Imitation still confine
Their powers, nor deviate from its line.
Their fourteen thousand glowing springs
Passing through their yearly rings,
Not one suggestion left behind,
No Art, nor Virtue more refined;
Philosophy no inroads made,
But mute, within its awful shade
Its thoughts occult arrang'd --
Whilst Learning, blindfold in its pen,
This costly precept gave to men --
" BE WISE, but be unchanged."
Haste! -- leave the insipid herd -- away!
Where EGYPT' s sons imbrown the day,
For their primeval Wisdom formed her wreath,
And Science first was taught to breathe.
Oh linger here! the Classic clime
Demands, and will reward thy time.
Here shall thou seek the immortal Dome
Where Pleasure triumphed over ROME;
And tread were CLEOPATRA trod,
And moisten with thy tear the sod
Where Taste and Love their banners waved,
Snatching from the grave Old Time --
Whose life fast-fading Rapture, saved,
And Phoenix-like renewed its prime.
Then find the myrtled tomb,
The now unenvied Lover's home;
But, lest thy pensive steps should stray,
To guide thee in the unknown way,
The Moon her bright locks quick unshrouds;
Her veil of gossamour thin clouds,
Dissolves to air, and her soft eye
Through the palm grove's haughty shade,
And the lofty aloed glade,
Shall guide thee where thy long-ow'd sigh
Breathed over the mingling Lover's dust,
Shall gratify their hovering souls
Beyond an EMPIRE' s votive Bust.
Is a soft willow bending near,
Whose drooping leaves speak grief sincere?
Its drooping leaves, ah! instant seize,
The happy violence will please --
Bend its tender flaccid boughs
(Murmuring soft mysterious vows)
Into garlands -- leave them there,
OFFERINGS to the love-lost pair!
These duties paid, with lingering look,
With heart by silent sorrow shook,
The marbled desert next explore
Where Beauty's glance, and Learning's lore,
Ages long past the soul beguiled --
Oh think! in that unlettered wild
LONGINUS wrote, ZENOBIA smiled!
Where now a humbled column lies
Streamed radiance from impassioned eyes;
The roof where odious Night Birds rest,
Once sheltered Wit, once echoed Jest;
Where Peasants cumbrous oxen stall,
THERPSICHORE swam through the ball;
Serpents convolve, where music trill'd,
And lost Palmyra's fate's fulfilled.
Does splendid scenes thy light heart prize?
Fly to Italia's downy skies!
Where Fancy's richest strokes abound,
Where NATURE's happiest points are found;
The pleasures here -- a rosy band!
Linked to her car with flowery chains,
Bear their rapt Goddess over the plains,
And strew their glories over her land.
The dulcet groves, burst with rich notes,
Flung from a thousand trembling throats,
The glossy rivers as they fly --
Their curv'd embroidered bounds between,
Whose glowing tints be-gem the green,
Bear on their curls the ecstatic sigh; --
The breeze detained rests its pure wing,
To hear blessed Love its triumphs sing.
And ah! be Italy never named,
Without a pause to those so famed --
The glorious MEDICIS!
Oh SCULPTURE! lift thy pillar high,
And grave the name amidst the sky!
Its base, let marble sorrows tend,
And chissel'd woes in high relief,
Look their unutterable grief,
And mute Despair its tresses rend!
Blessed POETRY! compel thy lyre
To sound the loud immortal praise
Of those who cherished thy proud bays,
And fed thy near extinguished fire!
Thy pencil, PAINTING! dip in shades!
To last till Europe's Glory fades --
Thy trophy'd canvas shall be Fame
To those who nursed thy infant Art,
And bear to mightier shores the Name!
Swiftly, my DELLA CRUSCA, turn
To where the Medicean Urn,
The once proud City hallows still,
There thy fine taste may drink its fill. --
To FLORENCE fly --
O, no! for ever shun her tempting skies,
For there, if right I ween, the Maid INDIFFERENCE dies!
ANNA MATILDA.

TO ANNA MATILDA.
Age, jam meorum,
Finis amorum.

AND have I strove in vain to move
Thy Heart, fair Phantom of my Love?
And could thou think 'twas my design,
Calmly to list thy Notes Divine,
That I responsive Lays might send,
To gain a cold Platonic Friend?
Far other hopes thy Verse inspired,
And all my Breast with Passion fired.
For Fancy to my mind had given
Thy form, as of the forms of Heaven --
Had bathed thy lips with vermil dew;
Had touched thy cheek with Morning's hue!
And down thy neck had sweetly rolled
Luxuriant locks of mazy gold.
Yes, I had hopes, at least to press,
And lure thee to the chaste caress;
Catch from thy breath the quivering sigh,
And meet the murder of thine eye.
Ah! when I deemed such joys at hand,
Remorseless comes the stern command,
Nor calls my wandering footsteps home,
But far, and farther bids me roam;
And then thy Vestal Notes dispense
The meed of COLD INDIFFERENCE!
Cursed Power! that to myself unknown,
Still turns the heart I love, to stone!
Dwells with the Fair whom most I prize,
And scorns my tears, and mocks my sighs.
Yes, ANNA! I will hasten forth
To the bleak regions of the North,
Where Erickson, immortal Lord!
Poured on the Dane his vengeful sword;
Or where wide over the barbarous plain,
Fierce Rurick held his ancient reign.
Then once more will I trace the Rhine,
And mark the Rhone's swift billows shine;
Once more on VIRGIL's tomb I Will muse,
And Laura's gemm'd with evening dews;
Once more ROME's Via Sacra tread,
And ponder on the mighty dead.
More Eastward then direct my way,
To thirsty Egypt's deserts stray,
Fix in wonder, to behold
The Pyramids renowned of old;
Fallen near one of which, I ween,
The Hieroglyphic Sphinx is seen!
The The overflowing of the Nile always happens while the Sun is in Leo and
Virgo.
Lion Virgin Sphinx, that shows
What time the rich Nile overflows.
Then will I sail the Egean tide,
Or seek Scamander's tuneful side;
Wander the secret groves among,
Where HOMER waked the immortal Song;
Traverse the Nemaean Wood,
Mark the spot where Sparta stood;
Or at humbled Athens see
Its still remaining Majesty! --
Yet to Indiff'rence ever a foe,
May Beauty other joys bestow;
Her rapturous Science I Will pursue,
The Science NEWTON never knew.
Now blows the wind with melancholy force,
And over the Baltic points my weary course;
Loud shout the mariners, the white sails swell --
ANNA MATILDA! fare thee, fare thee well!
Farewell, whoever thou art, and may thou find
Health and repose, and lasting peace of mind;
Still pour the various Verse with fancy clear,
To thrill the pulse, and charm the attentive ear;
Nor may relentless Care thy days destroy,
But every hope be ripened into joy!
And O! farewell to distant Britain's shore,
Which I perhaps am doomed to see no more;
Where Valor, Wisdom, Taste, and Virtue dwell,
Dear Land of Liberty, alas! farewell, --
Yet often, even there, by wild Ambition tossed,
The Soul's best season settles in a frost.
Yet even there, desponding, late I knew,
That Friendship, foreign-form'd, is rarely true.
For they, whom most I loved, whose kindness saved
My shattered Bark, when erst the tempest raved:
At home, even with the common herd could fly,
Gaze on the wounded Deer, and pass him by!
Nor yet can Pride subdue my pangs severe,
But scorn itself evap'rates in a Tear.
Thou, too, delusive Maid! whose winning charms
Seduced me first from slow Wealth's beck'ning arms;
Sweet POETRY! my earliest, falsest Friend,
Here shall my frantic adoration end.
Take back the simple Flute thy treach'ry gave,
Take back, and plunge it in Oblivion's wave,
So shall its sad Notes hence no malice raise --
The Bard unknown -- forgotten be the Lays.
But should, with ANNA's Verse, his hapless Rhyme,
In future meet the impartial eye of Time,
Say, that thy wretched victim long endured,
Pains which are seldom felt, and never cured!
Say, 'midst the lassitude of hopes overthrown,
MATILDA's strain could comfort him alone.
Yet was the veil mysterious never removed,
From him the admiring, and from her the loved,
And no kind intercourse the Song repaid,
But each to each remained -- a Shadow and a Shade.
DELLA CRUSCA.

TO DELLA CRUSCA.
OH stay, oh stay! thy rash speed check,
Not yet ascend the flying deck;
Nor Europe's Hemisphere forsake,
Nor from THY NATION's pleasures take
A bliss so exquisite and chaste --
A feast so dear to polished taste,
As that thy Lyre correctly flings,
As that they feel when DELLA CRUSCA sings.
Alas! you are gone, and to my straining eye
Thy Bark seems buoyant on the distant sky; --
See! in the clouds its mast it proudly laves,
Scorning the aid of Ocean's humble waves:
Well may it soar and bear aloft the prize
Whose verse immortal links him to the skies;
Well may it scorn rough Neptune's rocky way,
Which bears the Genius of the GOD OF DAY!
And now, MATILDA, bind thy lyre
With cypress wreathes! the lambent fire
Thou kindled'st at his fervid rays
Can gleam no more; -- thy future days
Lost to the Muses and to Taste,
Each torpid hour will joyless waste.
In vain each morning now will glow --
In vain soft MAIA's music flow,
And to my pillow force its way,
And on my wak'ning senses play.
Her notes my wak'ning senses fill,
And conscious slumbers own the trill;
But when at length Remembrance bids
The filmy slumber quit my lids,
Saying "THE WORLD its Wit has brought,
" Its various point, its well-turn'd thought,
" But DELLA CRUSCA lends no ray" --
Oh what is Morning -- what is May?
Yet hold! some solace yet remains,
And pensive joys await my pains.
I too must leave this laureled coast
Which all, that ROME adorned, can boast;
But not like thee, for GRECIAN shores; --
Ah no! my humbler prow explores
The Sea unsung, which lies between
Dover's proud cliffs, and France serene.
Thou Wilt skim the Egean's brilliant tide,
I, over the British channel glide This passage when given in the WORLD was by
mistake altered, and some of its lines left out; -- it is here printed from the
original copy.
;
Thou, all enthusiast! fondly trace
The Isle where PHAON's beauteous face
Gave birth to SAPPHO's glorious art --
Illum'd her name, but tore her heart:
Thy SAPPHO seek the shores vicine,
Where England's lovely great-soul'd QUEEN
Sublimely knelt, and snatched from blushing Fate
The Godlike victims of her Edward's hate.
Thou, at AONIA's sacred feet
Wilt duly pour libations meet;
I, roam over GALLIA's sportive plains
Where thoughtless Pleasure ever reigns.
But it is not sportive GALLIA's plains,
Though Pleasure there for ever reigns,
Which promises the boasted bliss --
No, BARD BELOVED! the hope is this,
That there thy footsteps I may tread,
Press the same turf where sunk thy head;
Sip the quick stream thy thirst has slaked,
And greet the Dawn where thou have waked --
Fancying her waves of mazy gold
Never with such rich refulgence rolled;
And when her tints of various dye
Burst from the pallid sickly sky,
There rush in violet, there in green,
Here in soft red imbue the scene;
Then lose themselves by growing bright,
'Till swallowed up in one vast flood of light --
Thus shall I say, HE saw her rays,
Thus was HE roused to adore and praise!
Oh SYMPATHY, of birth divine,
Descend, and round my heart strings twine!
Touch the fine nerve whenever I breathe
Where DELLA CRUSCA dropped his wreath!
Lead me the sacred way of ROME,
Lead me to kneel at Virgil's tomb,
Where he th'enduring marble round
With fresh-wove laurels graceful bound.
Then guide where still with sweeter note,
Than flowed from Petrarch's tuneful throat,
On Laura's grave he poured the lay
Amidst the sighs of sinking day:
Then point where on the sod his tear
Fell from its crystal source so clear,
That there my mingling tear may sink,
And the same dust its moisture drink!
Thus dying Swans are said to sing,
And their last breath in numbers fling.
Over the dear liquid shining plains,
Which nursed their joys, and nursed their pains.
Like them my Muse pines fast away,
And this her last, her closing day.
When one blessed word her lips has sealed,
In lasting silence she will be veiled.
Expiring, still her note's the same,
She murmurs DELLA CRUSCA's name! --
The SACRED WORD! ye heard it spoke; --
Her Book is closed -- her Lyre is broke!
ANNA MATILDA.

A TALE
FOR JEALOUSY.
A Recent Event in CATALONIA.
LOUD shrieked the wind; hoarse struck the hour,
When from his couch, Alphonso rose;
Bedecked with gold his splendid bower --
Gold, had his couch, but not repose!
The Night sat brooding on the hill:
Beneath, the sable rivers rolled,
Not glist'ring, now, the tinkling rill; --
Its stream opaque, its spirit cold.
His chamber, long with restless feet
The Lord Alphonso traversed over;
Here once he tasted slumbers sweet,
But slumber sweet he knows no more!
His roused domestics strait obey
The signal of their Lord, unloved;
Their torches flash a second day,
As through the costly rooms they moved.
His favorite, from the obsequious train
Was to his inmost closet led;
There heard confessed the amorous pain
Which tore him from his midnight bed.
Oh, thou were near, Alphonso cries,
When in the progress late we made,
Gonsalvo's daughter in our eyes
Made every other virgin fade.
Her noble mien, her blushes mild,
The burnish of her tresses bright;
Her age -- but just no longer Child,
Her rosy mouth, her graceful height;
All these have in my time-worn heart,
Lighted a youthful, amorous fire --
I sink beneath the poignant smart,
I faint with eager, strong desire.
Often did I try her soul to melt,
But ign'rant she of Cupid's power --
His ecstacies she never felt --
But now is come her fated hour.
With flames illicit I essayed
To touch her iced, unwaken'd heart;
Let Hymen sooth the bashful maid,
She Will wakened, play a softer part.
Strait to her father's, speed thy way,
The fleetest mules with haste prepare;
And ere tomorrow scants his day,
Thou Wilt reach the village of my fair.
These pearls, these di'monds, speak my truth,
Woo her with treasures to my arms;
When love no longer boasts of youth,
Riches may plead their meaner charms.
Oh how unlike the rapturous hour,
When love is bought by love alone;
When a soft look, a touch, a flower,
Is prized beyond IND's brightest stone.
But go, and to her parents bear
Thy Lord's designs -- his hopes unfold;
Plead with due force his meaning fair,
And in thy promises be bold.
Much more, the Lord Alphonso spoke;
His servant's mind the whole retains,
Whose lashes soon the mules provoke;
The mules skim over the distant plains.
The awakened night with streaks of gold
Her jetty robes begun to lace;
Her drowsy car far off she rolled --
The blithe Sun urging to the race;
And ere his wheels had run behind
The western mountain's giddy slope;
Julia, with meekness all resigned
Had listened to Alphonso's hope.
Not so resigned, but that her thought
Recoiled at such unequal love,
Till by parental wisdom taught,
She learned to bear, and then approve.
The Sire attends his darling child,
For so Alphonso's pride allows;
And with the transport almost wild,
Saw her receive a Grandee's vows.
He saw that form where speaking grace
Gave soul to beauty most refined,
The robe of dignity embrace,
By taste magnificent designed.
Her hair, which floated over her dress,
A dress, which to be seen demands
Its rich luxuriance to repress,
They tie in folds with diamond bands.
But the soft curls which hap'ly fell
Upon her bosom's heaving snow,
Were suffered there, unbound, to dwell,
And spread their wavy golden glow.
Thus the fond parent saw her rove
Through gaudy halls and rooms of state;
Whilst humble trains at distance wait,
And from her nod receive their fate.
Succinct the time in which such joy
Around his aged heart might play;
Bitter, oh! bitter the all^y^
And set full soon is Pleasure's day:
For Lord Alphonso names the hour,
When he the sumptuous dome must quit,
And seek again the humble bower --
For birth like his a mansion fit:
Tells him to take a last farewell,
Of her more dear then sense or light;
Bids him never hope again to dwell
Where filial Julia blessed his sight.
His daughter, overwhelmed with woe,
The haughty cruel order hears;
She sees her mournful parent go,
And bathes his last steps with her tears.
Now slow, and sadden'd, rolls the time
Which late flew rapid with delight;
Heedless is she of Morning's prime,
Nor hails the soft approach of Night.
Her only solace was to roam
Midst the deep wood's embosom'd calm,
Where distant from her gaudy home
Meek solitude bestowed its balm.
There, on a river's fringy side,
Which snatched her breath as stealing by,
She Would watch its curled, unequal glide,
And swell with here is the zephyr's sigh:
Mark with what truth it objects drew,
When ruffling zephyr ceased to breathe,
Its surface polished to the view --
A phantom forest underneath.
Two drooping willows there displayed
Their foliage to the painting wave;
Which in their pensive green arrayed
Would still their jutting bare roots lave.
These, by her hands, in garlands dressed,
She Would sometimes chide the low bent branch,
Which would its blooming fragrant vest
Upon the escaping river launch.
Thus was she one bright eve employed,
Whilst carols sad her sweet voice sung;
Evening's own bird her note enjoyed --
When from its shades a soldier sprung.
His form, like that Apollo wears,
When from his bow the swift dart sings;
Or when the discus through the air
With equal force and grace he flings.
Martial his step; his beamy eye
Bright as fair Julia's own appears;
Strait to each others arms they fly --
They mingle joy -- they mingle tears.
'Twas Julia's brother whom she saw,
'Twas Julia whom her brother pressed;
Both dear by Nature's dearest law,
For twins they were, who thus caressed.
From Calpe's glorious rock he came --
Immortal monument decreed
Of English ELLIOT's laureled name;
Where English heroes often shall bleed.
And there his blood did Gusman shed
Amongst the boldest ever found,
By sacred thirst of honor led --
Nor shunned the deaths that flew around.
But when bright Peace her silver flute
Had sounded through wide Europe's skies,
And when the voice of war was mute,
Sped by fond duty, home he flies.
There he first learned his sister's fate,
How elevated -- and how cursed!
Heard, that amidst her brilliant state
Her heart consuming sorrow nursed.
Her husband's tyrant law revealed,
No dear relation to behold;
Obliged him thus in shades concealed,
His sister to his heart to fold.
And often he mourned her cruel lot,
And often he dried her tears away,
When from the interesting spot
They each were warned by closing day.
Adieu, my Gusman, Julia cries!
Yet let me see thee, once again;
Tomorrow bless thy sister's eyes,
Then seek our dear paternal plain:
From forth my little treasured hoard,
Fond tokens to my mother bear;
No miser is my cruel Lord,
And gifts, like these, I well can spare.
Gusman, with pure, fraternal love,
Kissed either beauteous, fading cheek,
Vowing, when Morn should light the grove,
In its mild haunts her steps he would seek.
Now Evening hung its silv'ry dews,
On every shrub that decked the glades;
And fainter scents the flowers effuse --
As loath to greet with sweets, her shades.
Often had fair Julia lingered there
In hours like these -- and traced the beam,
Which sent from Luna's brilliant sphere,
Shot through the wood a shivered gleam.
Marked how each sound, stole soft away,
As gliding off to shores more bright;
Bribed by the gaudy tumid day,
To fly the dove-eyed, tender night.
By Julia these are all forgot,
For pleasure has her soul suffused;
Blind to the beauties of the spot,
She deigns not now to be amused.
Braced with young joy, the sportive fawn
Pursues her dam, with motion fleet,
Regardless of the sprinkled lawn
That weaves its flowers around her feet.
So speeds the fair one to her home,
Whose towers return the moon's broad glare;
Whilst to point out the distant dome,
They flash their gold vanes through the air.
On her soft pillow soon reclined,
Round her, the slumbers spun their veil;
And over her placid gentle mind,
The softest dreams their phantoms steal.
At Morning's dawn, her Lord commands,
Her placid slumbers must be broke;
He grasped in his her trembling hands,
He led her forth, but never spoke.
And oh! these horrid sounds, she cried --
Those piteous shrieks, which tear the ear!
With terror struck, she faintly sighed,
And sunk, at length, o'erpower'd with fear.
He dragged her on; the screams of pain,
More piercing as they nearer grow,
Left her scarce power to sustain
Her crimson life's unequal flow.
There, wretch, behold! Alphonso cried,
As wide he threw the grating gate:
There feast thy loose adulterous eyes,
See there, thy paramour's just fate!
There, stretched upon the racking wheel,
She saw her brother's tortured form;
From his torn flesh the jagged steel,
Bad rush the blood, with life yet warm.
She saw -- but oh! she spoke no more!
The agony too fierce to bear;
Groaning she sunk upon the floor,
And breathed her spirit on the air.
Sister! the writhing Gusman said --
Oh, Sister! plead -- then swoon'd with pain!
On his gash'd bosom sunk his head,
His limbs convulsed, the cords still strain.
Alphonso, when he heard the sound,
Leapt sudden to the deathful wheel;
With eager haste the youth's unbound,
And stern Alphonso learns to feel.
He raves, he sinks, he strikes his breast,
But oh! the guilty deed is past,
The victims pure are now at rest --
Thy tortures shall for ever last!
Vain is all art, for life no more
Can lift their pulse, their cheeks can paint;
Thou'st freed their souls, they quit the shore --
Each seeks its God -- a murdered Saint!
There, tyrant, lie! and let the fangs
Of deep remorse thy bosom tear!
Each wak'ning morn awake new pangs --
Teach thee to pity, and despair!
ANNA MATILDA,
TO THOSE WHO READ.
THE following little Tract, printed carefully from the Manuscript of the once
famous Sir William Waller, is considered as a curiosity worthy of being given
to the public: -- It contains the memoranda and reflections of a man who had a
considerable share in forming the fate of England, at a time when the strong
convulsions of its state arrested the attention of Europe, and of the world.

Sir William Waller was a member of the House of Commons, and Major General of
the Parliament army. It appears from WHITLOCK, that he was a man of great
consideration in the army, and with the public. Oliver Cromwell served under
him -- the KING feared him -- the PARLIAMENT depended on him.

The purity of his intentions, and the uprightnes^ of his principles -- the
transcript before you will sufficiently establish; -- it is a mental mirror, in
which you behold the features of the writer's mind, as distinctly as a looking
glass reflects, to a young beauty, her cheek of roses, and her eye of fire*
That he was popular as to courage and resolution, is plain from a formal
petition sent to Parliament by the inhabitants of Portsmouth, praying that Sir
William Waller might be made their Governor.

That he had a mind capable of the tenderest impressions, and alive to all the
charms of love, appears, from this, that he never lived unmarried. Three times
he exulted in the flowery hymeneal chain; and speaks of each Lady with exalted
fondness and affection. But those, alas! were days in which the connubial
passion was the only one tolerated!

Of WALLER, Hume begins to speak in the following words: -- " In the year 1643,
Sir William Waller began to distinguish himself among the Generals of the army.
Active, and indesatigable; in his operations rapid and enterprising; he was
fitted by his genius to the nature of war." Vol. VI. p. 516.

It has been lately so much the taste to read the ana of celebrated men, that
the Editor of these is persuaded, their being combined with the effusions of
her own idle hours, will not render them unwelcome. To the public, perhaps,
there is no occasion for apology, but toward the writer himself, she has some
consciousness of delinquency. The brave General, who wore himself out in
campaigns, cased in armor, and peeping half his life through an iron vizor,
thought of nothing less, probably, than of turning author; -- yet it happens,
that after he has been at rest with his tumultuous ancestors (I hope they will
forgive my guessing at their characters) almost a century, and his military and
moral character long ago decided on, he is now made to hold up his hand at the
literary bar, to be tried by his Critics, and his Country.

To his critics and countrymen, it may be observed, that if they have an
appetite for anecdote, the following pages will not tend much to satisfy it.
They are filled with the recollections of a man, who, at the close of a busy
life, thought it time to recollect himself, and who recollects only about
himself. In the retrospect, his imminent dangers, and hairbreadth escapes,
light up his gratitude to Heaven, and make his little book rather a compendium
of piety, than a register of events. A piety not much differing from that which
has provoked our sneers at the posthumous works of the great Johnson; -- but
then, he was a scholar, and a philosopher, and his piety, in course, very much
unlike other people's. What you are now offered, is the piety of a General --
we have many Generals, and they can answer for the similitude.

In a word -- this peculiar little volume is presented not to the world as an
amusement, but to the curious as a medal. A medal struck at an era when the
events of this country were MIGHTY, and when the characters of men were GRAND:
when every action was on an enlarged scale, and in high relief; -- when the
kingdom, like Sir Joshua's infant Hercules, was struggling between the two
deadly serpents which assailed its vitality -- the TYRANNY OF THE COMMONWEALTH,
and the PREROGATIVE OF THE CROWN.

The internal evidence the book carries with it is so strong, that it is judged
not necessary to say one word on its authenticity. But it is necessary to say,
that besides the pages suppressed (mentioned in the conclusion), there has been
an elision of one entire section, under the head OF PERILS BY WATER; a part
likewise of that under the head BY GREAT SICKNESSES, has been cut out, because
the circumstances mentioned, and the terms used, are not exactly correspondent
to the ideas of delicacy, which happily, is in this age one of its
characteristics.

In the opening of the manuscript, there appears to be two leaves wanting;
whether what is lost contained events or reflections, it is impossible to judge
-- the leaves are not torn, but cut out carefully with a knife, close to the
margin. The beginning of the third leaf, is the end of a reflection, of which
itt, is the first word. For further information the reader shall be now left to
Sir William himself, and it is hoped he will not rank the half hour spent in
his society, amongst the most unprofitable half hours of his life.

RECOLLECTIONS,
BY GENERAL SIR WILLIAM WALLER.
itt, but a stormy sea? If I cast my eyes backward the billows are still
heaving, and the angry waves are tossing their heads; if I look forward the
prospect does present to my imagination nothing new, itt is still a stormy
sea, and the billows and the waves, and the breakers surround the poor
mariner, who if by chance he does escape, comes wounded and torn, and almost
spent, to shore. But

" Many, O Lord, are thy wonderful works! which thou have don, and thy
thoughts which are to me ward, they cannot be reckoned upp in order unto thee."
Ps. xl.5.

" Come therefore and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has don for my Soul." Ps. lxvi.16.

1. IN PERSONAL DELIVERANCES

I may say, with the Apostle, glorying, as he did, of the things which concern
mine infirmityes. I have been

IN PRISONS FREQUENT,

Seissed upon by the army, as I was going to discharge my duty in the House of
Commons, and, contrary to privilege of Parliament, made a prisoner in the
Queen's court; from thence carried ignominiously to a place under the Exchequer
called Hell, and the next day to the King's Head in the Strand; after, singled
out (as a sheep to the slaughter) and removed to St. James's: thence sent to
Windsor Castle, and remanded to St. James's again; lastly tossed, like a ball
into a strange country, to Denbigh Castle in North Wales, remote from, my
relations and interests. -- After above three years imprisonment, and thus
being changed as itt were from vessel to vessel, itt pleased the Lord to turn
my captivity, and to restore me to the comforts of my poor family again; and
here let me call to mind how much reason I had to be thankful to him, who
chasteneth those whom he loves, for the great consolation experienced in the
dear partner of my captivity. She came to me disguised in mean apparel, when I
had groaned in my bonds seven months, thinking itt the duty of a wife, to riske
all things for the satisfaction of her husband. Much difficulty had she in
coming, and was frequent on the brink of being discovered; but at length over
mountains and unknown roads, sometimes with a guide, and sometimes with none,
she arrived at my prison: and she seemed when she discovered herself to me, to
be like the Angel who appeared unto Peter in like circumstances: she did not
indeed bid my prison gates fly open, but by her sweet converse and behavior,
she made those things seem light, which were before heavy, and scarce to be
borne* -- I must ever acknowledge itt also a very great mercy, that being so
long subject to so great a malice, armed with so great a power, I was not given
as a prey to their teeth; and that after all the endeavors that were used to
find out matter of charge against me, I came off with an entire innocence, not
only uncondemned, but unaccused.

The 5th of August, 1659, I was seized a prisoner by a party of horse in Kent,
and the 22d following I was committed to the Tower, only upon jealousy; and,
because I refused to inform the council further than in what singly concerned
my self, and because I denied to give any engagement. The 31st of October
following, the Lord delivered me by my habeas corpus in an open clear way,
notwithstanding all opposition. Blessed be his holy name who has been my
constant keeper, and has not only delivered me out of the mouth of the lion
(as he did Paul) but preserved me in itt. And my trust is, the Lord shall
deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly
Kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

2. IN DEATHS OFTEN;

1. By sudden accidents.

In my infancy, when I lay in my cradle, I escaped a great danger, upon the
casual discharge of a piece, the shot whereof missed me very narrowly.

At Winchester Castle, I ran a great hassard of being buried under the ruins
of an old outwall, which I had been viewing, and considering how to have it
taken down, and I was no sooner stepped into the house (not above an easy stone's
cast off) but itt fell, and covered all the place where I had been, and diverse
yards beyond itt. My dear wife (the Lady Ann) had a deliverance of the very
same kind there likewise; having been to look at an old staircase which was
repairing, she was no sooner gone, but the place where she stood fell, and in
humane reason, she could not but have perished in the ruins. --

At Cropredy in Oxfordshire, I escaped a great danger of the like nature, when
being with my officers at a council of war, the floor of the room (where I
was) sunk under me, and I lay overwhelmed with a great deal of lumber that
fell upon me, and yet, blessed be God, I had no hurt at all. And at this
place I did likewise escape a snare. After the battle, a message was sent to
me by the King; when I had given my answer that I could not treat with his
Majesty but by command of Parliament, I turned shortly round; when the trumpet
said he had a private mesage for me, and prayed me to hear him: I replied there
need be no privacy, not caring to give an handle to mine Enemies: but some that
were near me did persuade me to hear the man, and went out. He then presently
pulled forth a letter, which to my great shame and surprise came from the Lady
******; in itt she besought me to betray my cause; and this she did so wittily
and kind, that I had much ado to be angry. Before this lady's marriage I had
been her suitor, and did dearly love her, and she remembered me of this, and of
some soft passages. Whether or not she was putt on this by some greater than
herself, I never knew; but I returned for answer, that as I had never been
traitor to my love, so would I not to my cause, which I should be, if I did as
she would advise, and after this I heard no more. --

2. BY GREAT SICKNESSES. --

I had a great deliverance from the plague at my house in Aldersgate Street, a
chambermaid of my wifes being struck with itt (who died within a day or two
after at the pesthouse, whither she was removed) my wife being then great with
child (of my son Thomas) had her by the hand in her sickness, and was near
her, when she was in sweats, yet neither she nor any of my family, were
infected.

At Calais I escaped the plague, when Sir Philip Stapleton died of itt, and I
was with him and had him by the hand, not above five or six hours before he
departed.

3. BY HASSARDS IN WAR.

In the wars between the Venetians, and the Archduke Ferdinand (afterward
Emperor) at the leaguer before Rubia, I escaped several very near shot;
one grazing at my foot, another lighting between Sir John Vere and me, as we
sat close together by the battery; and yet touched neither of us, besides
diverse others, both great and small shot that endangered me.

In the war between the Emperor Ferdinand, and the King of Bohemia, I escaped
miraculously out of the hands of the Cossacks, when in a skirmish my horse was
killed under me, and in the clearing of myself from him, I fell with my foot
hanging in the stirrup, I was encompassed by them, and in making my way through
them to my own men, had several shot made at me, at a close distance, yet
itt pleased the Lord, none wounded; only one grazed lightly on the topp of my
head, and I came off with safety.

At the battle of Edghill, I had my horse shot under me, but I was preserved
from any hurt.

At the taking of Farnham Castle, I escaped a very near shot, from one of
mine own men, as he followed me in a narrow passage, after I was entered.

In my retreat from Chepstow, when Prince Maurice had lined all the passages
between that and Gloucester, with a very considerable army, to intercept me; I
had no way left, but to transport my foot and train of Artillery cross the
Severn to Barkley Castle (from whence they were secured) and with my horse and
dragoones to beat through his quarters; upon the march that night thorough the
Forest of Dean; itt happened thorough the sleepiness of an officer, that the
maine body was separated a great distance from the fore troop (with which I
marched) so that I was feign to make an halt for above half an hour, within
little more than a mile of the princes head quarter, in broad day light, the
alarm taken, and not one hundred and twenty horse with me. Nevertheless itt
pleased God in his infinite mercy to direct the rest of my troops to me, and
under the conduct of his providence, I made a safe and an honorable retreat to
Gloucester, in despite of the enemy who charged me in the rear, but with more
loss to him, than to me.

At Landsdown, when I made the retreat, I escaped a shower of shot.

At the Devises, when I beat the Lord Marquess Harford, Prince Maurice, and the
Lord Hopton, with their remaining forces into the town, the second night after
I sat down before itt, having been out to visit the gardes, and returning to a
farmhouse (at the foot of Roundway Down) where I had given order to my cook,
that my supper should be ready against I came in, and finding my meat but newly
laid to the fire; in a sudden impatience I resolved not to supp at all, and
so took horse again, and rode upp to the topp, where the body of my horse lay.
I was not gone above a muskett shot, but some of the ennemy (knowing the
pasages thereabout, which I did not; and rationally supposing I might quarter
in that place; in regard of the convenient situation of itt, between my horse
and my foot) came into the house and enquired, and made a search for me, and if
I had stayed there (as at first I intended) in all probability they might have
suddenly dispatched me, and retired in the darkness of night, with safety
enough.

Some days after, whilst I lay before the town, I rode with a small party
about the quarters, particularly to see how the dragoones were laid, on the
further side of the town; and being to return back, itt pleased God to putt
itt suddenly into my mind, to go by another way than that I came, which some
of the party, and some of mine own servants (who staid a little behind) not
observing, but taking the former way, they were almost all taken by the ennemy.
I came back safely.

At Farnham God appeared wonderfully for me, when the Lord Hopton, drew upp
his whole army within culverin shot of me, being (with the forces of Sir Jacob
Ashly, who was then joined to him) at the least eight thousand horse and foot;
and (thorough the mistake or neglect of my adiutant-generall, and the slackness
of my men, in drawing to the rendevous) I was not able to face him with two
thousand men. In that extremity the Lord took opportunity to show himself for
me, and sent so thick a mist all the morning, that by reason of the darkness
the ennemy durst not give on, and when the mist brake upp, I had such an
advantage of the ground, that my weakness remained undiscovered, and he drew
off from me, I was that day delivred from an imminent destruction.

At Cheriton Field, I was in danger to have been taken or killed, the ennemy
having by a charge given upon some troops of mine, shutt me off from mine own
men, I having then but three with me; but itt pleased God they were repulsed
again, and thereby a way opened for my retreat.

I may reckon itt a mercy, that upon a sudden occasion that day, charging
without my headpeece, and being known by the ennemy (as I afterward
understood) I came off safe and unhurt.

When the King came suddenly upon me with his whole army at Andover, and I
had then nothing but a body of horse and dragoones with me, I made a fair
retreat to Basingstoke.

At the second Newbery fight, when I fell on with my troops by the way off
Speenfield, and we were mingled with the ennemy, I had a great deliverence,
for one of the adverse party coming behind me, and being ready to fire his
pistol in my reins; in that instant one of my life guard killed him, or
otherwise in all probability he had killed me.

" O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation: thou have covered my head in
the day off battle." Ps. cxl.7.

" The Angel of the Lord, encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them." Ps. xxxiv.7.

IN JOURNYINGS OFTEN.

In my travel between Venice and Florence, I escaped the danger of the
Inquisition at Bolonia, where through the information of a priest (that came
along in company with me from Venice) I was searched, my trunk, wherein I had
nothing but clothes, was rifled to the bottom, but itt pleased God to so order
itt, that they let alone a box, wherein I had some papers, which might have
exposed me to question; when they had itt in their hands ready to open itt.

In my journey into Yorkshire, to my Sisters house at Hickleton, (being
accompanied with my wife the Lady Ann, and my dear mother) I reckon itt a great
deliverance, that when my coach mares, upon the descent of an hill, had broken
their raines, and overthrown the coachman from the box, and begun to run away,
the raines falling down upon the ground, one of the mares, treading upon them,
they checked her bitt, and made her stopp, which made the rest stand like-wise.

IN PERILS IN THE CITY.

When the army first marched up to the city of London, and made that breach
upon the Parliament, I was voted to command a body of horse and dragoones, in
the nature of a flying army, for the defense of the King, Kingdom, Parliament,
and City; and whilst I was acting (with others) according to my duty, at the
Committee of Militia, to advance that levy; we were all unexpectedly deserted
and betrayed by the city and left out of all capitulation; so that upon the
entering of the army, we were enforced to lie hidd, and within a few days after
to make use of the passes which the House of Commons had given us, and to quit
the kingdom. The Lord all that time preserved me from falling into the hands
of the army, though I was pursued by land and sea.

When after the death of my late dear wife, I had sent out my sons to school,
and removed my daughters, with some part of my goods, to the Lady Blanyes house
in Long Acre (myself remaining in that desolate condition, a prisoner at St.
James's) there was a base information given to the Council of State, by a
servant of mine (whom for a falsness I had putt away) that I had deposited
plate and jewels, to a great vallue, in that good Ladies custody; whereupon
(without any cause alleged, or any thing at all in charge against me) they
sent a warrant signed Bradshaw, by a sargeant at arms, to seize upon all
thatt I had there, as belonging to an ennemy of the State. But itt pleased the
wisdom of God to befoole their malice, that they made no search in mine own
house, where all that I had of vallue was, but only in that place, where there
was nothing but so inconsiderable a parcel of plate, that they were ashamed to
keep itt, when they had itt; and so they sent itt back again. In the mean time
I had leisure to dispose of what I had by me, to a place of safety.

March 22d, 1657. I was seized upon as a prisoner by a warrant from the
Protector, and brought to Whitehall, where I was examined by him. He did examine
me as a stranger, not as one whom he had aforetime known, and obeyed; yet was
he not discourteous, and itt pleased the Lord to preserve me, that not one
thing objected could be prooved against me; so I was delivered, and returned
with comfort to my family again; blessed be the Name of the Lord!

IN PERILS AMONG FALSE BRETHREN.

It pleased the House of Commons to command my service, in taking care for the
drawing upp for the Ordinance in favor of the Apprentices; upon which account
some Apprentices (who negotiated that business for the rest) made their
application to me; shortly after, when that petition from the city was to be
presented, which was followed with so much confusion, that it gave occasion, or
pretense to the speaker, and diverse others of the House to withdraw to the
army; myself and the rest of the eleven members, having then gained the leave
of the House, to absent ourselves, for six months (by that denial of our own
right and privilege, to preserve (if possible) the privilege of Parliament from
any further violation by the army) some two days before the presentation of
the above said petition, there came two persons to my house in Drury Lane, to
speak with me, who, when I came out unto them, told me they were apprentices
of the City, and came to be advised by me, how they should manage their
petition; to whom I replied, that I knew no advice to be given, but that they
should be careful to attend the House as early as they could, before they were
praeingaged in other business: but this did not serve their purpose, who came
only to ensnare me; whereupon they moved further, and said, that myself and the
other impeached gentlemen were concerned in their petition, and that they must
and would have us into the House again. To which I returned no more, but that
I should have no more to do in that business, and so I left them. This was all
that passed, and yet those false impudent creatures made their report at the
army, that I abetted that disorder and assault upon the House, and cooperated
with the apprentices in itt, which served to exasperate the army so much the
more against me. But it pleased the Lord that they never had power to act any
thing upon itt to my prejudice.

After I was made a prisoner by the army, and removed from the King's Head in
the Strand to St. James, I had a message sent me from one Colonel Fitz-James
with the signification of his respect to me, and compassion of me, representing
the extreme danger in which I was, and the enevitable destruction that attended
me, if I did not endeavor to prevent itt by some escape; in order to that, he
made me a tender of his assistance, engaging himself, that he would set me
safe aboard a shipp, that lay ready in the river for me to transport me beyond
the reach of all mine ennemies. But itt pleased God to prevent the effect of
his treachery, both by giving me the confidence to stand upon mine own
innocence, and by discovering to me, that that perfidious man (in the midst
of all his protestations of friendshipp to me), had privately offered himself
to give evidence against me at the bar of the House of Commons; so that it
was a mere train, laid to bring a guiltiness upon me, and to take away my life.

The like offer was made to my wife in reference to the procurement of my
escape out of Windsor Castle, by one Captain Kempe of Collonell Prides
regiment, with the addition of an intended cheat; but I was delivered as a
bird, out of the snare of these fowlers, so that I was not caught with their
chaff. --

About the same time, shortly after my coming to Windsor Castle, having
opportunity to send to my dear wife (whom I had left in a disconsolat
condition at London, great with child, and within a few weeks of her delivery)
as I had sealed my letter and was ready to dispatch itt away, I had notice
given me by my keeper, that the Governor must see whatever letters I wrote or
received; whereupon I bad him carry itt unto him, that he might open it if he
thought fit: But the Governor returned itt back unto me untouched, with this
compliment, that I was very much mistaken in him if I thought he would be so
unworthy, as to open letters between a man and his wife; and with some further
expressions of respect to me, in regard, he had formerly served as a Lieutenant
Colonel under me. This I took as a civility from him, but I found it after to
be no other than a mere insiduous practice; for after an uninterrupted pasage
of letters between my wife and me, for about a fortnight or three weeks, by
which time he supposed, we might be grown to a confidence to write freely, he
suddenly seized upon all my letters. But there was nothing to be found in them
that could prejudice me, and so that snare likewise broke, and I escaped the
danger of it. Blessed be God.

March 1654. I have reason to acknowledge itt a great mercy of God, that he
preserved me in so insnaring a time, wherein the Lord heard my prayer.

" The wicked plotteth against the just; -- The Lord shall laugh at him: for he
sees that his day is coming." Ps. xxxvii.12, 13.

" The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged."
Ps. xxxvii.33.

2. In several prosperous successes.

1. THE TAKING OF SOUTHSEA CASTLE.

2. THE TAKING OF PORTSMOUTH.

It was about this time that those misunderstandings grew between me and the
Lord General Essex, which were afterward noticed in some sort by the
Parliament; and there were those who fomented our discord for their own
advancement. Some whom I at that time commanded, but who have since sat in a
higher seat, were not wanting to misrepresent, and to inflame on either side;
and the country did suffer for these things, which the Parliament well knew,
but thought itt not convenient at all times to notice.

3. THE TAKING OF FARNHAM CASTLE.

4. THE TAKING OF CHICHESTER.

5. THE TAKING OF MALMESBURY.

6. THE TAKING OF HEIGHNAM, AND RELEIVING OF GLOUCESTER.

7. THE TAKING OF MONMOUTH.

8. THE TAKING OF HEREFORD.

9. THE FIGHT AT CHERITON near Wells in Somersetshire, where Prince Maurice
was wounded, and I putt a stopp to his pursuit of the forces under Coll.
Popham: whilst in these parts itt was told that the Queen had something
endeared herself when at Exeter, by the following Charity. Walking out
northward of the city, soon after her laying in, she stopped at the cottage
of a poor woman whom she heard making doleful cries. She sent one of her train
to know what itt might be which occasioned itt; the page returned and said the
woman was sorrowing grievously, because her daughter had been two days in the
straw, and was almost dead for want of nourishment, she having nothing to give
her but water, and not being able for the hardness of the times to get any
thing. On this the Queen took a small chain of gould from her neck at which
hung an agnus; she took off the agnus and putt itt in her bosom, and making
the woman be called to her, gave her the chain and bad her to go into the city
to a gouldsmith and sell itt, and keep the money to provide for the good woman
in the straw. And for this her confessor did afterward rebuke her, because
they were heretics: when this thing was told to the King, he asked, jestingly,
if her Confessor had made the Queen do a penance for itt; as she haddon once
before, for some innocent act, when she was made to walk to Tyburn, some say
barefoot.

10. THE BEATING UP OF COLL. HAMILTON's QUARTERS.

11. THE FIGHT AT LANDSDOWN.

12. THE BEATING OF THE MARQUESS OF HARTFORDS ARMY INTO THE DEVIZES.

13. THE ROUTING OF THE EARL OF CRAWFORDS PARTY, and taking the ammuniton,
which he was conveying into the Devizes.

14. THE BEATING UPP OF THE EARL OF CRAWFORDS QUARTER AT ALTON; where five
hundred of the taken, to make my success the greater, took the covenant, and
served under me; great was my exultation, but itt had bitter endings, for the
Parliament wrote to Essex to join me, intending that we together should do a
mighty work, but the General would not, to their no small displeasure; for
which no good reason could be given, but that he would have his great name
stand alone. My dismal defeat at Roundway Down was owing to those heart
burnings and jealoucies; for the General suffered the enemies horse to pass
quietly, and without molestation, to the succor of their infantry which lay
at the Devizes in miserable plight. The proud have laid snares for me, says
the Psalmist, and set traps in my way. So sure was I of victory that I wrote
to Parliament to bid them be at rest, for that I would shortly send them an
account of the numbers taken and the numbers slain, but it pleased the Lord to
turn my victory into mourning, and my glory into shame: with a small number of
cavalry I retired to Bristol, and there heard continually of the successes of
the royal party; who took heart on this mischance of mine, that had never
happened had others don their duty.

15. THE TAKING OF ARUNDELL.

16. THE BATTLE AT CHERITON.

17. THE TAKING OF CHRISTCHURCH.

18. THE TAKING OF THE PASS AT NEWBRIDG.

19. THE TAKING OF SUDELY CASTLE.

20. THE FIGHT AT SPEENFIELD BY NEW-BERRY.

21. THE BEATING UPP OF COLL. LONG's QUARTERS, in which Cromwell's horse did
good service. And here I cannot but mention the wonder which I have often times
had, to see this eagle in his eirey: he at this time had never shown
extraordinary parts, nor do I think that he did himself believe that he had
them; for although he was blunt, he did not bear himself with pride, or
disdain. As an oficer he was obedient, and did never dispute my orders, nor
argue upon them. He did, indeed, seem to have great cunning, and whilst he was
cautious of his own words, not putting forth too many lest they should betray
his thoughts, he made others talk, until he had as it were sifted them, and
known their inmost designs. A notable instance was his discovering in one short
conversation with one Captain Giles (a great favorite with the Lord General,
and whom he most confided in), that although his words were full of zeal, and
his actions seemingly brave, that his heart was not with the cause: and in
fine, this man did shortly after join the enemy at Oxford, with three and
twenty stout fellows. One other instance I will here set down, being of the
same sort, as to his cunning.

When I took the Lord Piercy at Andover, having at that time an inconvenient
distemper, I desired Collonell Cromwell to entertain him with some civility;
who did afterward tell me, that amongst those whom we took with him (being
about thirty), their was a youth of so fair a countenance, that he doubted of
his condition; and to confirm himself willed him to sing; which he did with
such a daintiness that Cromwell scrupled not to say to Lord Piercy; that being
a warrior, he did wisely to be accompanied by Amazons; on which that Lord, in
some confusion, did acknowledge that she was a damsel; this afterward gave
cause for scoff at the King's party, as that they were loose and wanton, and
minded their pleasure, more than either their Country's service, or their
Maister's good.

22. THE INFALL AT THE DEVIZES, and the taking of Major Rowles, and his horse,
the remainder of Colonel Long's regiment.

" Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory: for thy
mercy, and for thy truth's sake." Ps. cxv.1.

" Thine, O Lord! is the victory." 1 Chronicles. xxix.11.

IN RETURNS FOR PRAYER.

When it pleased God (after seven years expectation), that my first wife fell
into travel, I could not but be very apprehensive of the weakness of her
condition; and having retired myself to prayer, and earnestly besought God to
strengthen her, and being desirous to comfort myself out of Gods word, I took
the bible to read, and letting itt fall, with some passion, upon the table
(without any particular design upon one place more than another) itt opened
upon the 128 Psalm, in the singing Psalms, " Like fruitful vines on thy
house side, so does thy wife spring out," with which being surprised, I
presumed to make a trial, whether itt were more than an accident or no (the
good Lord forgive me for that presumption), and taking upp another bible that
lay by, itt opened likewise upon the same place: within a few hours after, my
wife was safely delivered.

Not long after this, being at London, I was suddenly taken with a fit of the
stone, in that violence, that itt grew insupportable to me, whereupon I cast
myself upon my knees, and besought God for his mercy to me, and before I rose
upp, my pain was mitigated, and within one quarter of an hour I was perfectly
well.

After the death of my first wife, and of my son which I had by her (both very
dear blessings to me) when I putt on a resolution to marry again, I humbly
besought God to provide such a wife for me, as might be an help to me in the
way of his service, and that I might have a religious woman, or none, and when
his providence directed me to Lady Ann Finch, and that all things were agreed
upon between my Lord her father and me, in reference to the marriage, upon her
motion, she and I agreed together, to set a day apart to seek God for his
blessing in itt. Itt pleased the Lord to answer our prayers in as full a
measure of comfort, as ever was powered out opon a married couple: and though
at the first there were some little differences in our natures, and judgments
(as to some particulars) yet within a little while, that good God wrought us to
that uniformity, that I may say we were but as one soul, in two bodies.

After I had quitted the service of the Parliament in the field, and was
returned to London, and there settled with my family; my estate began to fall
short, part thereof lying in the Kings Quarters; and the rest (through the
distraction of the times) affording me very little subsistence. To supply my
necessityes, I was feign to sell several things; and in the end I was at such
a pinch, as that without selling my plate (which I had kept as my last reserve
of vallue) I knew not how to send to markett: whereupon my wife and I having
recommended our condition to God, resolved the next morning to send our plate
to the gouldsmiths, and to make money of itt. But the next morning I was
wakened by my servant, who let me know there was one come from Barnstaple with
some money for me. The sum was not above fifteen pounds, but that served my
present occasions, and before that was spent. I received a further releife, so
as I was put to no more such exigencyes. Blessed be God.

When his Majesty was at Worcester, I thought itt my duty to seek God for him
in that distressed condition; itt pleased the Lord to enlarge my heart, with
much comfort, and to give me a confident assurance, that I should have an
answer of peace. The issue was, that his royal person was miraculously
delivered out of the hands of those hunters.

After my return from D --, when I took upp a resolution to marry again; I
besought God for his direction in my choice, who heard my petition, and sent me
the Lady Harcourt to repair the breach formerly made in my poor family; which
was so rich a blessing, that I can never sufficiently acknowledge itt. That God
(hearing prayer) who has (with the general approbation of good men) united us
by his sacred ordinance, and made us not only one flesh, but one spirit; one in
our affections, judgments, ways, ends, (as if we had been both cut out of
one piece) he vouchsafes to preserve us together for the advancement of his
service and glory.

" Because thou have been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice; my soul follows hard after thee." Ps. lxiii.7.

" Because he has inclined his care unto me; therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live." Ps. cxvi.2.

IN FATHERLIKE CHASTICEMENTS.

1. My endeavor to supplant Mr. Yard in his possession of the markett of
Newton Abbot, though upon a dormant title, yet proceeding from a covetous end,
was justly punished, both in the loss of the thing I sued for, and in all that
trouble befell me in Kings Bench.

2. When out of a covetuous desire to gain a good bargain upon Mr. Price his
lease by Winchester, I laid down five hundred pounds, as a claw upon itt, by
way of morgage, God justly punished me both in the loss of the lease, and of my
money too.

3. It was just with God, for the punishment of my giving way to the plunder of
the City of Winchester, to permit the demolition of my house at Winchester.

4. My vanity in furniture, justly punished in the loss of a great part of itt,
by the treachery of Ellis.

5. My presumption upon mine own strength, and former successes, justly humbled
at the Devises This was the most heavy stroke of any that did ever befall me;
General Essex had thought to persuade the Parliament to compromise with the
King; which so inflamed the zealous that they moved that the command of their
army might be bestowed upon me; but the news of this defeat arrived whilst they
were deliberating on my advancement, and itt was to me a double defeat. I had
nearly sunk under the affliction, but that I had a dear and sweet Comforter;
and I did at that time prove according to Ecclesiasticus, chap. xxvi. "A
virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband -- As the Sun when itt arises in the high
Heaven, so is the beauty of a good wife." verse 16.


, by an utter defeat, and at Croperdy with a dishonorable blow.

6. Itt was just with God to lay me by all employment, as a broken vessel, in
regard of the corruption of my heart, in my first engagement, and neglect of
reformation in the officers, and soldiery under me.

7. My not attending unto, nor improoving by sermons, when itt pleased the Lord
to come under my roof, and to visit me by his ministers at St James's, was
justly punished at Denbigh, by a restraint from all ordinances.

8. After the end of the war, that I began to enjoy my estate, and the
comforts of my family again, and upon passing of the vote in the House of
Commons of 2500 l. to be settled upon me as a compensation for my service, I
was puffed upp with a presumption that I should never be moved, whereupon God
most justly within a few months after sent those several chastisements upon
me, banishment, imprisonment, sickness, the death of my wife, poverty.

9. The not paying my vow, upon the marriage with my wife, justly punished by
Gods taking her from me.

" It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes." Ps. cxix.71.

" Rejoice not against me, O mine ennemy! when I fall I shall arise, when I
sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteosness." Micah. vii.9.

In acknowledgment of Gods infinite mercy and goodness, declared in his many
deliverances of me, and in his comforts and blessings to me; particularly, in
my enlargement from my long captivity, my return with comfort to my children
and family, and that inestimable blessing he has been pleased to bestow upon
me in a most dear good wife; I vow, by his grace assisting and enabling me, to
restrain them in a thankful memory, and to transmitt the recordation of them
to my children, that they may never be forgotten, neither by me nor my
posterity.

I humbly renew my vows both against the practice, or purpose, of every gross
sin, or the allowance of any, though never so small; and resolve (so far as I
am able) to shun the occasions of them; and in particular I protest (by the
help of the divine grace) against giving any entertainment or lodging in my
heart to A. P. S. C. H. W. L.

As a poor thank offering for so many undeserved mercyes, I humble renew the
consecration of the tenth of whatsoever I receive in my estate, to pious uses;
and (besides the 100th formerly devoted to those ends, in acknowledgment of my
deliverance out of prison) I vow one hundred pounds more, as an oblation to God
for the blessing and happiness I enjoy in my present married condition, to be
employed in such ways, as I shall be directed by my godly friends. And if I be
repaid the debt owing me from my L. K. I engage myself to dispose forty pounds
of itt (with the addition of tenn pounds more unto itt) to the town of Newton
Abbot in Devon, for the making upp of their stock, for the setting of the poor
at work, in the workhouse there erected by me. I humbly devote my life to God,
who has so often preserved itt, and so many ways blessed itt, resolving by
his grace to do all I can, for the setting of him upp in my heart; to love,
fear, and trust him more; to pray, read, and hear more, and more zealously
than I have don hitherto; to walk in my particular calling more uprightly,
constantly, cheerfully, fruitfully; and to endeavor to become better in all
relations, both to the public, in church and state, whenever I shall be in a
capacity to serve them; and in private, as a father, husband, master, etc. --

As a father, endeavoring to bring upp my children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, teaching them his fear, both by precept and example,
with a spirit of meekness that they may not be discouraged.

As an husband, dwelling with my dear yokefellow according to knowledge, loving
her as mine own body, as mine ownself, as Christ loved his Church, so taking
care with her for the things of this world, that as we study to please one
another, we may likewise remember the homage we both owe to God, and labor
above all things to please him.

As a master, so carrying my self toward my servants, forbearing threatening,
giving them what is just and equal, as knowing that I also have a master in
Heaven, and making provision for my family, according to my duty.

I will pay thee my vows, which my lips have uttered, " and my mouth has
spoken, when I was in trouble." Ps. lxxvi.13, 14.

" I will pay that that I have vowed; Salvation is of the Lord." Jonah. ii.9.

A DAILY DIRECTION.

EVERY day is a little life; in the account whereof, we may reckon our birth
from the womb of the morning; our growing time from thence to noone (when we
are as the Sun in his strength): after which like a Ps. cii.11.
shadow that declineth, we hasten to the evening of our age, till at last
we close our eyes in sleep, the image of death: and our whole life is but this
tale of a day told over and over. I should therefore so spend every day, as if
itt were all the life I had to live; and in pursuance of this end, and of the
vow I have made to walk with God in a closer communion, than I have formerly
don, I would endeavor by his grace, to observe in the course of my remaining
spann, or rather inche of life this daily directory: --

Ps. cxxxix.18. Ps. lxiii.1.
To awake with God, as early as I can, and to consecrate the first fruits of my
thoughts unto him by prayer and meditaion, and by renewed acts of faith and
repentance, that so God may awake for me, and make the habitation of my
righteosness prosperous Job, vili.5, 6.
. To this end I would make itt my care to lie down the night before in the
peace of God, who has promised, that his commandment shall keep me when I
sleep, and talk with me when I awake; otherwise itt may be justly feared that
those corruptions that bid me last good night, will be ready to give me first
good morrow.

[ After this follows sixteen pages of text from scripture, and scriptural
allusions, under the head of DAILY DANGERS, of which the publisher thought the
preceding pages had sufficient, and on his judgment the rest are suppressed.
But the writer's concluding reflections on his own situation, and on that of
the Protector's, shall be preserved. He speaks of some enmities he had
encountered, and continues]

When that poor man who relied on his maister's word, understood that the King
had consented to his death, he piteously cried out, putt not your trust in
princes; and nearly as good cause have I to say, putt not your trust in
Parliaments: I have served Parliament with my blood, and with my estate, and
gained nothing the while but mistrusts, prisons, and neglect: at one time so
full of my services, they were going to make me General of all their forces,
but a panic of my horse which deserted me, turned the tide of their good will,
and Essex was taken again into favor; and then again as a preliminary of
peace, they would have me made a Baron and two thousand five hundred pounds a
year settled therewith, but on a sudden took me into custody, and committed
me to the Tower.

Now after all these traverses and manifold injuries both in person and estate,
itt has pleased the Almighty that I am sat down, on the remnants of my
fortune, which are yet sufficient for my comfort, sound in body and mind; and
I can see there be those who stand as Job did, even amongst Princes, that may,
and that not far off, be glad to be no worse. The humor of the times does
already begin to change, and the declaration putt forth by Major J. Wildman for
which he was confined in Chepstow Castle, speaks the temper of most men* O. C.
was derided lately in going to Hampton Court, by one who cried out no
Protector, no Roundhead, which he thought fit to pass unnoted: and not long
before, a woman said, as he was going into his coach at Whitehall, that bonny
heads were cut off, whilst ugly ones did keep upon their shoulders. These
things are but small, but as the distant speck at sea, betokens a storm, so
do these speak a brewing some where, that may burst out, and overwhelme the
helmsman.

" Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." Prove.
xvi.18.

" Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly than to divide the
spoil with the proud." Prove. xvi.19.

THE END.

