AN ELEGY ON THE ANCIENT GREEK MODEL.

ADDRESSED TO The Right Reverend ROBERT LOWTH, LORD BISHOP OF LONDON.

SUNT ET ALIAE POESEOS SPECIES, QUAE QUANQUAM NOBISCUM COMITER PLERUMQUE ET
FAMILIARITER VERSANTUR, GRAVIOREM TAMEN PERSONAM NONNUNQUAM INDUUNT, TALIS EST
ELEGIA; NON HANC LEVEM DICO ET AMATORIAM, SED ANTIQUAM ILLAM SAPIENTEM,
SANCTAM, SEVERAM, DUCEM VITAE, MAGISTRAM MORUM, CIVITATUM ADMINISTRATICEM,
VIRTUTIS ANTISTITEM, NE PLURES AUCTORES NOMINEM, QUORUM NULLAE JAM SUPERSUNT
RELIQUIAE DE QUIBUS JUDICARE POSSIMUS; ECCE VOBIS SOLON, VIR SANCTISSIMUS,
LEGUM LATOR SAPIENTISSIMUS, POETA OPTIMUS.

Lowth Praelecti. (...),
(...).
Ex Solonis Elegiis. BY WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: Printed by P. BYRNE, No. 35, COLLEGE-GREEN, opposite the Statue of
King William.

M DCC LXXXIII.

ELEGY.
MOURN! Son of Amos, mourn! in accent sharp
Of angry sorrow strike thy heavenly harp.
Mourn! thou sublimest of the sainted choir!
Those lips, that, touched with thy celestial fire,
Cleared, from the gathered clouds of many an age,
The bright'ning flame of thy prophetic rage;
Those lips, through Learning's sacred sphere renowned,
Have stained their*glory by a servile sound.
Envy with ranc'rous joy these accents heard,
And dwells with triumph on the fatal word;
Waging against Renown eternal wars,
Thus she insults the merit she abhors:
See Isaiah, chap. xiv.
"How has the radiance of the mitre ceased!
"Oblivion's poppy shades the prostrate priest:
"In dark servility's expanding cave
"Forgotten prelates hail thee from the grave;
"O Lucifer! of prophecy the star,
"Rolling through Hebrew clouds thy radiant car!
"Art thou too fallen as we? Can Flatt'ry's tide
"Drown thy free spirit and thy Attic pride?
"Is this the man who spoke, in language strong,
"The praise of Liberty's Athenian song?
"Blessed are her notes, but cursed the sordid things
"That priestcraft offers to the pride of Kings;
"For never, never shall fair Freedom's hand
"Enroll one prelate in her sacred band!"
Peace! Envy, peace! nor deem, with bigot rage,
Long labors cancelled by a hasty page;
Nor, if a word unweigh'd her lips escape,
Paint injured Virtue in Corruption's shape!
Shall sland'rous Prejudice, with general blame,
Plunge ranks unsifted in the gulf of Shame?
If some be servile, shall we madly rave
That every churchman is in soul a slave?
Abhorred idea! fraught with basest guile!
Turn to the splendid annals of our isle!
See mitred Langton lead the patriot van,
And bear, O Liberty! thy sacred plan!
Though lust of vengeance regal pride inflame
To brand his virtue with Rebellion's name,
Still in the tented field, from fear exempt,
No menace shakes him, and no offers tempt;
Till England, saved from tyrannous control,
Owes her bright charter to his guardian soul.
Let Freedom's eye our later story search!
Her modern champion issues from the church;
See Hoadley's persevering zeal withdraw
The veil of bigotry from heavenly law;
With decent truth expound, with reason scan
God's gracious edict, and the rights of man!
To shield the dearest gift of Nature's hand
Was thine, pure spirit! and thy name shall stand
Engraved on Liberty's eternal rock,
With ardent Sidney, with the milder Lock,
And guarded by the Muse of Glory, shine
In manly Akenside's immortal line.
But these examples rise from hallowed earth;
The church has models still of living worth:
Though some grave bishops, fond of dull repose,
Without a dream of Learning's friends or foes,
Enjoy their table, or from thence withdrawn,
Sink in soft slumber on their sleeves of lawn;
Though one fierce pedant, proud of ancient rule,
Rashly mistook a senate for a school,
Till angry nobles bid his fury cease,
And lashed the fiery pedagogue to peace;
We boast a Shipley, who with taste refined
Enjoys that richest treasure, wealth of mind;
Intent to pen, in Leisure's learned hour,
His just Philippic on oppressive power,
Or teach thy flowers, Simplicity, to bloom
With Attic sweetness over an English tomb.
Nor you with honor can we fail to name,
Law! generous guardian of that sage's name, See the preface to the new edition
of Lock, by the Bishop of Carlisle.

Who made mild government with faith agree,
And "stripped intolerance of every plea."
Nor dignity corrupts, nor time subdues
Your spirit, glowing with the noblest views;
While your keen eyes, undimm'd by age, explore
The utmost depths of metaphysic lore,
Still guard his fame, whose genius you enjoy,
And the dark sophist's baleful web destroy,
That seeks to shroud, with subtle falsehood spun,
The praise of Freedom's scientific Son!
O Lowth! we saw thy radiant name on high
Amid the the purest lights of Learning's sky;
And long, if true to Freedom's guiding voice,
Long in thy splendour shall that sphere rejoice;
One passing vapor shall dissolve away,
And leave thy glory's unobstructed ray.
But while on Fame's high precipice you stand,
Be nobly firm! nor bend the virtuous hand,
Filled with rich sweets from Freedom's flowery mead,
To pluck Servility's oblivious weed!
High in the Court's rank soil that creeper winds,
And often with dark embrace the Crosier binds;
While squeezed from thence the subtle prelate flings
Its luscious poison in the ear of Kings.
Nor spread in courts alone these noxious leaves,
My Lord, as largely as he pays, receives,
And supple chaplains to a prelate bring
A dose as rich, as what he gives a King.
Such sycophants (could such to thee belong)
Might vent their venom on this friendly song;
"Shame on the wretch (these flatt'rers would exclaim)
"Who dares one accent of your voice to blame,
"But fearing with your foes his name to blend,
"Yet, more abusive, calls himself your friend.
No! let that radiant Truth, whose power supreme
Rewards her genuine bard with Glory's beam,
Search my free spirit, and pronounce it clear
From meanness, spleen, malignity, or fear!
To ardent friendship I my numbers owe;
Whatever their failings, from that source they flow;
If weak, yet honest; if presumptuous, true;
Thy worth the motive, and thy fame the view!
The man whose writings pure delight dispense,
Enchant my fancy, or enlarge my sense,
Whose heavenly wisdom mending human faults,
Warms my chilled virtue and my soul exalts;
Friend of my bosom I this man declare,
And in my inmost-heart the treasure wear,
Bishop or clerk! his fortune bright or blank!
Revered as noble whatsoever his rank!
His praise I echo with a fond acclaim,
Joy in his health, and triumph in his fame.
With pure attachment, and with joy refined,
I boast such friendship with thy lettered mind.
Whenever, with deep delight and new regard,
We search thy comments on each Hebrew bard,
Where thy bold precepts to young minds impart
The end and value of the poet's art,
Its powers ennobled by applause like thine,
Yet more we idolize that art divine;
Vivas hic virtutis voces audimus, vivam effigiem cernimus.

Lowth de Poeticae fine et utilitate.
In that fair Virtue's living voice we hear,
In that behold her living form appear:
With joy the justice of your wrath we own,
When your mild spirit takes a sharper tone,
When touched by Warburton's vindictive gall
It fires at Freedom's controversial call;
From wounded Genius flows your splendid line,
As from the trodden grape the sparkling wine:
Your hand, like Israel's unanointed King
Launching the pebble from his certain sling,
Strikes to the dust Presumption's mighty boast,
The proud Goliath of her critic host.
Thus robe'd in honor of the richest dye,
And viewed by Freedom with a parent's eye,
From thee that goddess with amazement hears
One note that sounds discordant in her ears;
Wild sparkles flash from her astonished eyes,
O save my falt'ring son! (she fondly cries)
Call his past glories to his sharpened sight,
And let him learn from their collected light,
My flowers, immortal, ^ear no winter's frown;
While lost in darkness Adulation's down
Flies like the gossamer, that whirlwinds bear,
In sport contemptuous, through the waste of air.
Tell him, though bright the smile of Kings may seem,
There shines a jewel of a brighter beam,
Above that smile, all human wealth above,
It Is worn by Keppel in his country's love.
Shall Lowth adapt no more his Attic style
To the meridian of my favorite isle?
But feebly speak, in France's languid tone,
Faint as beneath Oppression's burning zone?
Or, blazing only with a bigot's fire,
Awake the slumbering flames of regal ire;
Stretch the state-theorist on Priesthood's rack,
And from the pulpit See the late sermon by the Bishop of London, and his note
on Dr. Price.
aim the personal attack?
Far other precepts suit the hallowed sage,
Who aims to purify this venal age:
With juster wrath our mitred Lords declaim
On man's adult'rous guilt, and woman's shame;
Yes! lovely woman! Fashion's wayward spleen
Has idly plunged, like Aegypt's giddy queen,
Thy purity, that pearl of richest price,
In the deep chalice of dissolving Vice.
Though thy unblushing frailties scorn excuse,
Let Pity still her palliatives produce!
Confirmed by ages, let this truth be known,
This is particularly proved by the celebrated chastity of the Roman ladies in
the early days of the republic: and yet more by that of our Gothic ancestors in
the purest ages of Chivalry.

See Stuart's admirable View of Society in Europe*
Thy Honor's guardian first forgets his own:
While man holds Freedom as the noblest wealth,
Pride of his heart, and of his days the health,
With native charms his fair companion's graced,
If plain, yet lovely; and if simple, chaste;
Endearing age succeeds to rapturous youth,
Her life is virtue, and her love is truth.
But, when her guard, in Luxury's venal hour,
Yields his chaste soul a prostitute to Power,
Heaven, in just vengeance on the abject slave,
Corrupts the purest gift its bounty gave;
The tree of Comfort bears the thorn of Strife,
And poisoned marriage grows the pest of life;
Ills after ills in dire succession flow,
And private misery mounts to public woe.
O Lowth! whose voice, by purest Learning taught
To speak the language of exalted thought,
May best encounter Vice's murky crew,
And Faith and Virtue's fainting powers renew,
Still by sage efforts of a soul sublime
Correct the rank abuses of the time!
Rememb'ring still, with Wisdom's just regard,
(...).

Ex Solonis Elegiis*
Thy favorite maxim of the Attic bard:
"As from the clouds bursts forth the weight of snow,
"Lightnings or hail, that blast the scene below,
"So bursts the ruin of a sinking State
"From the dark vices of the guilty grate."
In this blessed isle, and shining only here,
Astraea, safe in Freedom's guardian spear,
With native boldness in her balance flings
The weak, the mighty; Ministers and Kings;
And Piety's blind zeal would curse the land,
If it could force this balance from her hand.
Rise, then! O rise! with Hoadley's spirit fired,
But in thy richer eloquence attired;
Teach us to guard from every mean control
That manly vigor of the judging soul,
Which Faith approves, which Loyalty allows!
Teach us, while Honor to thy doctrine bows,
That Duty's praise in no blind worship lies,
But Reason's homage to the just and wise!
So to thy Country, to thy God endeared,
By Heaven protected as on earth revered,
May thy mild age in purest fame rejoice;
In fame, where Envy hears no jarring voice!
So may Religion, with divine relief,
Drop her rich balm on thy parental grief!
May that sweet comforter, the heavenly Muse,
Who fondly treasures Sorrow's sacred dews,
In Glory's vase preserve the precious tear
Shed by paternal Love on Beauty's bier!
And O! when thou, to Learning's deep regret,
Must pay at Nature's call our common debt;
While life's last murmurs shake the parching throat,
And Pity catches that portentous note;
While in its hollow orb the rolling eye
Of Hope is turned convulsive to the sky,
May holiest visitants, each sainted seer
Whose well known accents warble in thine ear,
Descend, with Mercy's delegated power,
To soothe the anguish of that awful hour;
With lenient aid release thy struggling breath,
Guide thy freed spirit through the gates of Death,
Show thee, emerging from this earthly storm,
Thy loved Maria in a seraph's form,
And give thee, gazing on the Throne of Grace,
This bold expression of exalted piety was borrowed from St. Paul, by the great
Conde, the sublime and enviable circumstances of whose death are thus described
by the eloquent Bossuet -- Oui, dit il, nous verrons Dieu comme il est, face a
face, il repetoit en Latin, avec un gout merveilleux, ces grands mots: Sicuti
est: facie ad faciem, et on ne se lassoit point de le voir dans ce doux
transport.

Oraison Funebre le Louis de Bourbon.
To view thy mighty Maker face to face.
THE END.

