POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.

By STEPHEN DUCK.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR. M.DCC.XXXVI.

TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
THE great Honor Your Majesty has done me, in giving me leave to prefix Your
Royal Name to the following Poems, does not encourage me to presume they are
worthy to be laid at Your Feet on any other account, but only as they are an
humble Tribute of Duty, offered from a thankful Heart to a gracious
Benefactress. Your Majesty has indeed the same Right to them, as You have to
the Fruits of a Tree, which You have transplanted out of a barren Soil into a
fertile and beautiful Garden. It was Your Generosity which brought me out of
Obscurity, and still condescends to protect me; like the Supreme Being, who
continually supports the meanest Creature, which his Goodness has produced.

I have Room here to expatiate upon a very inviting Subject; but Your Majesty
has nobly prevented all Panegyric, even from the best Pens, by building Your
Fame on a much more lasting Basis, than that of Praise in Dedications. Your
Encouragements of Arts and Sciences, Your Esteem and Friendship for all
Defenders of Truth, while they are living, the Regard You pay to their Memories
when dead, and Your generous Care of their Widows and Orphans, record Your
Virtues in such Characters as will ever be legible. Your Christian Love to
Mankind, Your zealous Endeavors to promote Religion, a Soul made tender to
feel our Misfortunes, and a Will inclined to redress them, are such amiable and
heavenly Qualities, as shine best by their own Light, and can receive no new
Luster from the finest Description.

MAY Heaven long preserve Your Majesty to practice all these Virtues, to be a
perpetual Source of Comfort and Joy to our glorious Monarch, a Blessing to the
Nation, and a noble Pattern of Beneficence and Generosity to future Queens.
Your Majesty's great Goodness to myself draws this Prayer from a Heart filled
with Gratitude. As there is so little Merit in what You now honor with Your
Royal Protection, I shall endeavor to supply the Defects, the only way that is
in my Power, by my Thanks, and Prayers for Your Majesty: These I will ever
continue, and always make it my greatest Ambition to show with what profound
Respect I am,

MADAM, Your MAJESTY's Most Grateful, Most Devoted, and Most Dutiful Servant,
Stephen Duck.

THE PREFACE.
WHAT I propose in this Preface, is only to bespeak the Reader's Goodnature,
and to say something which may incline him to pardon what he cannot commend. I
have indeed but a poor Defense to make for the Things I have wrote: I don't
think them good, and better Judges will doubtless think worse of them than I
do. Only this, I believe, I may say of them, That, if they have nothing to
delight those who may chance to read them, they have nothing to give Modesty a
Blush; if nothing to entertain and improve the Mind, they have nothing to
debauch and corrupt it.

ANOTHER Motive, that I hope may induce the Reader to overlook the Defects in
this Volume, is, That the oldest Poem in it is little more than six Years of
Age; and a considerable Part of the Time since that was writ, has been spent in
endeavoring to learn a Language, of which I was then entirely ignorant; though I
fear, the few Attempts I have made in Translations, will too well convince the
Public, to how little Purpose I have employed my Time. I confess myself guilty
of a great Presumption in publishing Imitations of HORACE, when many eminent
Hands have done it much better before me: But when I was only endeavoring to
understand him, I found it difficult to conquer a Temptation I had to imitate
some of his Thoughts, which mightily pleased me. If I may be forgiven this
Experiment, I promise to trouble the World with nothing of this Nature again,
at least, till I may be able to do my Author more Justice.

I have not myself been so fond of writing, as might be imagined from seeing so
many Things of mine as are got together in this Book. Several of them are on
Subjects that were given me by Persons, to whom I have such great Obligations,
that I always thought their Desires Commands. My want of Education will be too
evident from them, for me to mention it here: And I hope, when the Reader
weighs my Performances, he will put that, and other Disadvantages into the
Scale.

I am afraid, the Letter relating to myself, wrote by a worthy and learned
Gentleman, will be thought an improper Thing in a Publication made by myself:
But, as I was desired to prefix it, by Persons whom I think it an Honor to
obey, I hope it will be pardoned; and the rather, because a very false Account
had been published before, by a Person who seems to have had as little Regard
for Truth, as he had for Honesty, when he stole my Poems.

I would willingly here make known my Obligations to those worthy Persons who
first took notice of me in the midst of Poverty and Labor, were I not afraid,
my Gratitude, thus publicly expressed, would offend them more than my Silence.
However, I must beg leave to return my Thanks to a Reverend Gentleman of
Wiltshire, and to another of Winchester: The former made my Life more
comfortable, as soon as he knew me; the latter, after giving me several
Testimonies of his Bounty and Goodness, presented my first Essays to a Lady of
Quality, attending on the Queen, who made my low Circumstances known to Her
Majesty.

I hope too, that all those Honorable Persons, whose Names do me so much
Credit at the Beginning of my Book, will accept my Acknowledgments and Thanks
for so liberal a Subscription: And as this Volume, I fear, will tell them, they
have not encouraged a Poet, I will endeavor to let them see they have been
generous to an honest Man.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR, In a LETTER to a FRIEND.
Written in the Year 1730.
SIR,
I Don't wonder that you should desire so distinct an Account, how Stephen Duck
came to write Verses, and how he managed in writing them. Philosophers find as
much Subject for their Admiration in the minutest Bodies, as in the largest;
and a Poet from the Barn, though not so great a Man, is as great a Curiosity, as
a Dictator from the Plow. I can be particular enough as to his first setting
out in Poetry; and, since you seem to desire it, shall give you all the
Circumstances I could learn from a Week's Conversation with him in all his
Simplicity; without considering, that many of them, to a Person less curious,
might appear too trifling to be mentioned even in a Letter.

MY Friend Stephen had originally no other Teaching, than what enabled him to
read, and write English; he had never taken a single Step toward any other
Language. As Arithmetic is generally joined with this Degree of Learning, he
had a little Share of that too. About his Fourteenth Year he was taken from
School, and was afterward successively engaged in the several lowest
Employments of a Country Life. This lasted for some Years; so long, that he had
forgot almost all the Arithmetic he had learned at School: However he read
sometimes, and thought oftener. He had a certain Longing after Knowledge; and
when he reflected within himself on his want of Education, he began to be
particularly uneasy, that he should have forgot something of what he had
learnt, even at the little School he had been at. He thought of this so often,
that at last he resolved to try his own Strength; and, if possible, to recover
his Arithmetic again.

HIS first Attempt of this kind I take to have been about Six Years ago.
Considering the Difficulties the poor Fellow lay under, this Inclination for
Knowledge must have been very strong in him. He was then married, and at
Service; he had little Time to spare; he had no Books, and no Money to get any:
But he was resolved to go through with it; and accordingly used to work more than
other Day-labourers, and by that means got some little matter added to his Pay.
This Overplus was at his own Disposal. With this he bought first a Book of
Vulgar Arithmetic, then one of Decimal, and a third of Measuring of Land; all
which by degrees he made himself a tolerable Master of, in those Hours he could
steal from his Sleep, after the Labors of the Day.

WHERE there was such a Desire for Knowledge, there must be good Sense at
bottom, and a Soul, at least, somewhat above the common Conversation he must
meet with in his poor State of Life. I have asked him, whom he had that he
could talk and converse with in the Country; and was pleased to find him, in
this Particular, happier than I expected. He said, he had one dear Friend, that
he mentioned with uncommon Affection. They used to talk and read together, when
they could steal a little Time for it. This Friend had been in a Service at
London for two or three Years: He had an Inclination to Books; he had purchased
some, and brought 'em down with him into the Country; and Stephen had always
the Use of his little Library; which by this Time, possibly, may be increased
to two or three dozen of Books. This Friend knew no more out of English than
Stephen; but by talking together they mutually improved each other. Stephen is
all Simplicity: He says, "That his Friend can talk better than he, as having
been more used to Company; but that he himself has been more used to Poetry,
and in that can do better than his Friend."

HAD it not been for this, Stephen must have been placed in the same Class with
Hai Ebn Yokdhan, and the young Hermes in Mr. Ramsay's Cyrus: But the Story of
their Improvements without any Assistance agrees only with Romances; and you
know, what I am writing to you is a true History. Our retired Philosopher had
his Friend; and it seems to have been the greatest Happiness of his Life, that
he had one. They did not only read, but reasoned over Points together; and I
have sometimes thought, how agreeable a thing it would have been, to have been
concealed within hearing of them, when they were in the midst of some of their
most knotty Debates. We may imagine 'em both to have had good natural Sense,
and a few good Books in common between 'em: Their Minds were their own; neither
improved, nor spoiled, by laying in a Stock of Learning: They were perhaps
equally well inclined to learn, both struggling for a little Knowledge; and,
like a Couple of Rowers on the same Bottom, while they were only striving
perhaps, which should out do his Companion, they were really each helping the
other, and driving the Boat on the faster.

PERHAPS you would be willing to know what Books their little Library consisted
of. I need not mention those of Arithmetic again, nor his Bible: Milton, the
Spectators, and Seneca, were his first Favorites; Telemachus, with another
Piece by the same Hand, and Addison's Defense of Christianity, his next. They
had an English Dictionary, and a sort of English Grammar, an Ovid of long
Standing with them, and a Bysshe's Art of Poetry of later Acquisition: Seneca's
Morals had made the Name of L'Estrange dear to them; and, as I imagine, might
occasion their getting his Josephus in Folio, which was the largest Purchase in
their Collection: They had one Volume of Shakespeare with Seven of his Plays in
it. Beside these, Stephen had read Three or Four other Plays; some of
Epictetus, Waller, Dryden's Virgil, Prior, Hudibras, Tom Brown, and the London
Spy. You may see I am a faithful Historian, by my giving you the Bad with the
Good.

WITH these Helps Stephen is grown something of a Poet, and something of a
Philosopher. I find by him, that from his Infancy, he has had a Cast in his
Mind toward Poetry. He has delighted, as far back as he can remember, in
Verses, and in Singing. He speaks of strange Emotions, that he has felt on the
top Performances of the little Choir of Songsters in a Country Chancel; and
mentions his first hearing of an Organ, as a remarkable Epoch of his Life. He
seems to be a pretty good Judge too of a musical Line; but I imagine, that he
does not hear Verses in his own Mind, as he repeats them. I don't know whether
you understand me. I mean, that his Ideas of the Notes in a Verse, and his
Manner of repeating the same Verse, are often different: For he points out an
harmonious Line well enough; and yet he generally spoils its Harmony by his way
of speaking it.

WHAT first gave him a higher Taste of Poetry, than he had been used to, was
Milton's Paradise Lost. This came oddly enough into his Hands; and when I see
you, I Will tell you the History of it. Stephen read it over twice or thrice with
a Dictionary, before he could understand the Language of it thoroughly. This,
and a sort of English Grammar they had, have been of the greatest Use to him of
any thing.

INDEED it seems plain to me, that he has got English just as we get Latin. He
studied Paradise Lost, as others study the Classics. The new Beauties in that
Poem, that were continually opening upon his Mind, made all his Labor easy to
him. He worked all Day for his Master; and, after the Labor of the Day, set to
his Books at Night. The Pains he has taken for the Pleasure of improving
himself, are incredible; but it has answered too beyond what one could have
expected; for he seems to understand some of the great and deeper Beauties of
that Poem tolerably well; and points out several particular Beauties in it,
which it requires a good nice Eye to discover.

'TWAS his Friend that helped him to the Spectators; they read them often
together, and often by themselves. Stephen tells me, that he has frequently
carried them with him to his Work. When he did so, his Method was to labor
harder than any body else, that he might get half an Hour to read a Spectator,
without injuring his Master. By this means he used to sit down all over Sweat
and Heat, without regarding his own Health, and often to the Prejudice of it.
If this affects you, as it has me, I ought not to pass it over, that you may
not lose the Pleasure of so strong an Instance of Honesty and Industry mixed
together.

THE Spectators improved his Understanding, he says, more than any thing. The
Copies of Verses, scattered in those Pieces, helped on his natural Bent that
way; and made him willing to try, whether he could not do something like 'em.
He sometimes turned his own Thoughts into Verse, while he was at Work; and at
last begun to venture those Thoughts a little on Paper. What he did of this
kind, was very inconsiderable; only scattered Thoughts, and generally not above
four or five Lines on the same Subject; which, as there was nobody thereabouts
that cared for Verses, nor any body that could tell him whether they were good
or bad, he generally flung into the Fire, as soon as he had pleased himself
enough in reading them.

WHATEVER Care he took to burn these little Pieces, he found it not sufficient
to conceal them. The Thing took Air; and Stephen, who had before the Name of a
Scholar among the Country People, was said now to be able to write Verses too.
This was mentioned accidentally, about a Year ago, before a young Gentleman of
Oxford, who sent for Stephen; and after some Talk with him, desired him to
write him a Letter in Verse. That Letter is the Epistle which stands the last
in his Poems, but was the first whole Copy of Verses that ever he wrote. This
happened to fall into the Hands of some Clergymen in the Neighborhood, who
were very well pleased with it; and upon examining him, found the Man had a
good deal of Merit. They gave him some Presents, which, as Things stood then,
were a great Help to him; and encouraged him to go on as much as they could.

THIS made him proceed with more Courage: And, as he had wrote some scattered
Verses on Poverty, before this happened, he carried those Thoughts on, and
filled it up, as it stands at present in the printed Collection I send you: So
that this is his second Copy. I am very careful in settling the Chronology of
his Poems, that you may see how he has gone on Step by Step, if you please.

THE Composition which was next in Order, is that on his own Labors: That
Subject was given him by one of those who first encouraged him; and after this
was finished, he was employed from the same Quarter in his Shunammite. As this
exceeded any of the rest, I think from hence we may date the Era of his rising
in his Character and Circumstances. Upon this it was that Persons of
Distinction began to send for him different ways. In short, it got him Fame
enough to be pretty trouble some to him at first; though it is likely to end in a
much happier Settlement of him and his Affairs, than could ever have been
dreamt of by him at his first setting out.

WHEN you have read his Poems, and consider the Manner he has been bred up in,
I doubt not you will think they have their Merit: But I assure you, they give
an imperfect Idea of the Man; and, to know how much he deserves, one should
converse with him, and hear on what Reasons he omitted such a Part, and
introduced another; why he shortens his Style in this Place, and enlarges in
that; whence he has such a Word, and whence such an Idea. I Will give you all I
can recollect of this kind, in relation to what is generally reckoned the best
Thing he has wrote, The Shunammite.

IN the first Place, I found upon Inquiry, that he wrote by a Plan; he thought
over all the Parts, as he intended to use them, before he made the Verses. For
a Poem of any Length, no doubt it is as necessary to do this, as it is to have a
Draught of a House, before you go to building it; and yet I believe, the common
Run of our Poets have generally thought themselves above it, or not thought of
it at all. Though the Shunammite was written on a Story given to his hand, still
something of this kind was convenient enough; because, in forming it anew, he
did not make use of all the Materials before him, and has brought in some of
his own. He thought, the Stretching of the Prophet in so particular a manner,
must sound strange. The Woman introduced to tell her Story, is a new Cast of
his own; so is her Doubting, and then Confirming herself again, by a particular
Induction of all Elisha's Miracles; so the Bringing an Audience about her, and
their Chorus's, when they join together in congratulating her Happiness; the
last of which closes the Poem in a good proper manner.

UPON being asked, Why he introduced a Person to tell all the Story in the
Shunammite, and why he could not as well tell it himself; he said, he had read
Prior's Solomon; and that, in reading it, Solomon's speaking every thing
touched him particularly. He was then asked, since it was to be spoken, why he
did not rather choose the Prophet, as the Person of the greater Dignity, to
speak it. He said to this, That the Woman was to be pitied; That there seemed
to him to be Such as these: Ver. 16. And she said; Nay, my Lord, thou Man of
God, do not tie unto thy Handmaid. Ver. 28. Did I desire a Son of my Lord? Did
I not say, Do not deceive me?
some Expressions of the Woman in the History, which, if not omitted, might
lessen our Regard and Compassion for her; That, if the Prophet had related the
Thing, he could not have omitted a Word; but when the Woman did, she might well
be allowed to soften her own Case; and to drop, when she was cool, any thing
wrong, that she had said in the Violence of her Grief and Passion. This is
rather fuller in Words than he expressed it; but nothing, I think, is added to
his Meaning.

AS Milton had been his favorite Poet, you may wonder why none of his Pieces
are in blank Verse. I asked him about this too: Upon which he told me, That he
had originally written the whole Shunammite in blank Verse; That, upon reading
it over, he found his Language was not sublime enough for it; and that
therefore he was forced to write it all over again, and turn it into Rhyme.

UPON reading over the Chapter and his Poem together, you will see how justly
he shortens and enlarges some of the particular Passages, in order to adapt
them the more to Poetry. Besides some Things already mentioned, he drops
several little Circumstances in it See 2 Kings, Chap. iv. Verses 10, 12, 14,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 34, and 35.
. On the other hand, he enlarges on the Line 33 to 49.
Contentedness and Charities of the Woman; on the 55, etc.
Look and Attitude of the Prophet; on her 76.
Thanks for bearing a Son; on 112 to 134.
the Death of the Child; on the 152, etc. See 205.
Reasons of her Confidence in the Prophet; in 211.
pointing out the Prophet, when she comes to him; and in 219.
his Answer; in her 232.
pressing the Prophet more earnestly to assist her; in 246.
pointing out the dead Child; his being 258.
freed from Death; and her Thoughts 266.
upon receiving him again into her Arms.

IT IS agreeable to see what Use he has made of the little Reading he can have
had, and how he has improved the Thing, by observing some good Strokes in the
Books he has met with. Upon my telling him, that I liked nothing better in it,
than his altering From Line 55 to 63.
the Prophet's Countenance as he does; he said, he took that Hint from
Telemachus; where the young Prince comes to Idomeneus's Court, while they are
sacrificing. The Priest, on seeing Telemachus, breaks off from what he was
about, assumes a more inspired Air, and begins speaking of his future Fortunes.
This Alteration of the Prophet's Countenance, Stephen says, he took from
thence; but that at the same time he thought himself obliged to drop the
Wildness and Enthusiasm of it, in order to adapt it more to the Nature of a
true Prophet.

THE Chorus in the Close of the Shunammite, he said, was brought into his Mind
by the Paradise Lost, Book 7. Line 565, and 602.
general Rejoicing of the Angels in Milton, upon God's finishing the Creation of
the World. The first Chorus was not in the Work originally; he inserted it,
when he new-form'd it all into Rhyme.

HE had also been very careful as to single Words; and had Authorities to
produce in several little Particulars, where one would not expect it. For The
Shunammite, Ver. 210.
flowery Carmel, he quotes Mr. Pope; and the Prophet's Arbor on the Top of
that Mount is covered with 212.
Vines, on the Authority of Mr. Sandys in his Travels: For the Words 177, and
249.
adust and supernal, he refers to Milton: 56.
Fanatic he uses according to the true, and not the vulgar Sense of the Word;
he had learned the proper Meaning of it from his Dictionary: 143.
Dilated Heart, as spoken of Sorrow, is certainly a Fault; but it is a Fault
that Stephen was naturally enough led into by the common Notion and Expressions
in the Country, of the Heart's swelling and being ready to burst with Grief.

HE owns his Faults very readily; and if he thinks a Line of his better than
ordinary, he will say so without any Reserve. He seems to be exceedingly open
and honest in every thing he says; and 'twould be very difficult for you to be
with him a Week, as I have been, without going away very much his Friend.

THOUGH I have been so long in showing you how critically he has proceeded as to
his own Works; I shall add some of his Thoughts on the Works of others, to give
you as full an Idea of him as I can.

IT IS not yet three Years ago that he first met with Milton; and I believe,
that was the first Poet of real Value, that he ever studied in earnest. He has
assured me, with all his Innocence and Simplicity, that when he came afterward
to read Addison's Criticisms on Milton in the Spectators, 'twas a high Pleasure
to him to find many Things mentioned there, in the Praise of Milton, exactly as
he had before thought in reading him. Here we must depend on his Credit, which
I need not tell you with me is very good.

THE Name of Milton, whom he admires and dotes on so particularly, has not
prevailed on him enough to make him like his Paradise Regained. In speaking of
these two Poems, he said, "he wondered how Milton could write so incomparably
well, where he had so little to lead him; and so very poorly, where he had
more."

THE Spectators, you know, he has read with great Pleasure, and great
Improvement. I remember particularly, that on somebody's calling them Prose, he
said, "'It Was true, they were Prose; but there was something in 'em, that
pleased almost like Verse." -- He mentioned, with more Regard than usual, the
critical Papers on Wit, those on Milton, the Justum and tenacem from Horace,
Mr. Pope's Messiah, and the several scattered ones written in the Cause of
Virtue and Religion.

UPON asking him what Plays he had read, he named particularly Julius Caesar,
Hamlet, Cato, Venice Preserved, and the Orphan. Venice Preserved, he said, gave
him the most Horror; a Word which I took notice he used sometimes for Sorrow,
and sometimes in its proper Sense: He could not bear the comic Parts in it.
Hamlet he liked better than Julius Caesar; and in Hamlet pointed out that
celebrated Speech, To be, or not to be, etc. as having been his favorite Part,
merely of his own Taste. He did not admire Shakespeare's Comedy; and said, "He
was too high, and too low." I read over to him some of Hamlet, and the
celebrated Speeches of Antony to the People in Julius Caesar. He trembled, as I
read the Ghost's Speech; and admired the Speeches and Turns in the Mob round
Caesar's Body, more, he said, than ever he had done before. As I was reading to
him, I observed that his Countenance changed often in the most moving Parts:
His Eye was quick and busy all the time; and, to say the Truth, I never saw
Applause, or the shifting of proper Passions, appear so strongly in any Face as
in his.

HE had formerly read Tom Brown's Letters from the Dead, and the London Spy,
not without some Pleasure; but, after he had been some time conversant with the
Spectators, he said, "He did not care much to look into them." He spoke of
Hudibras in another manner; he saw a great deal of Wit in it, and was
particularly pleased with the Conjurer's Part in that Poem: But, after all,
it is not a Manner of writing that he can so sincerely delight in, as in the
Moral, the Passionate, or the Sublime.

INDEED what every body seems to admire him for, is, that he seems to have an
excellent moral Turn in his Thoughts. He is, as I told you before, something of
a Philosopher; and, what is better than a Philosopher, a good honest-hearted
Man. He has read, and speaks highly of, the Archbishop of Cambray's
Demonstration of the Being of a God, and Mr. Addison's Defense of the Christian
Religion. He said, "That they touched his Mind; and that nothing did so well,
as when one's Reason is moved by what is said." He had liked the little he had
read of Epictetus; but 'twas Seneca that had made him happy in his own Mind. He
seems as yet not to be hurt at all by any Applauses that have been given him,
and to have been perfectly contented with his Condition before: When he had
only received some Presents from Gentlemen in the Country, he was quite easy as
to his Circumstances. The only Thing then, that he was solicitous about, was,
how he might succeed as to the Poetry he should be employed in. This was his
chief Concern: But even this seemed to proceed not so much from any Desire of
Fame, as from a Principle of Gratitude; or, as he expressed it, his Longing to
please those Friends that had been so generous to him. He was not lifted up
with the Character some People gave him, and talked of Fame absolutely like a
Philosopher. After his best Fortune, many of his Friends told him the Danger of
being vain; and, if he should once be so, that he would be as much despised as
he had been applauded. He said, "That he could not well tell what they meant;
That he did not know what it was to be vain: But, since so many great Men, who
knew the World so much better than he did, were apprehensive for him on that
head, he began to be terribly alarmed at his Danger, though he had no settled
Ideas of what it was." He was told upon this, That he should never speak too
highly in Praise of the Poems he had written. He said, "If that was all, he was
safe; that was a Thing he could never do, for he could not think highly of
them: Gentlemen indeed, he said, might like 'em, because they were made by a
poor Fellow in a Barn; but that he knew, as well as any body, that they were
not really good in themselves."

THUS, Sir, I have obeyed your Commands as faithfully as I am able. You desired
me not to spare Paper; but to send you a Book rather than a Letter. You see I
have taken you at your Word; and that I am resolved, in this, as well as in
every thing else, to show you how punctually I would ever be,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, J. SPENCE.

THE NAMES OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.
His Royal Highness the Prince of WALES His Royal Highness the DUKE Her Royal
Highness the Princess AMELIA Her Royal Highness the Princess CAROLINE Her Royal
Highness the Princess MARY Her Royal Highness the Princess LOUISA.
A
DUKE of St. Albans Earl of Albemarle Earl of Antrim Earl of Ashburnham
Countess of Abingdon Countess of Albemarle William Allanson, Esquire Ralph Allen,
of Bath, Esquire Robert Allen, Esquire The Hon. Richard Arundel, Esquire Surveyor General
of his Majesty's Board of Works The Hon. Charles Areskine, Esquire Mark Anglesey,
Esquire The Rev. Mr. Allmond. Mrs. Archer Mr. Askew Mr. Richard Atkins Mr.
Alexander.
B
Duchess of Bolton Countess of Bristol, Lady of the Bedchamber to the Queen
Lord Bishop of Bristol Lord Brook Lord Vere Beauclerc Lord Beauchamp Lady
Baltimore Countess of Burlington, Lady of the Bedchamber to the Queen Lady
Bateman The Right Hon. Lady Bruce Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Bart. Richard Bateman,
Esquire The Hon. Peter Bathurst, Esquire five Books John Bows, Esquire his Majesty's
Solicitor General in Ireland George Bows, Esquire John Brown, Esquire one of his
Majesty's learned Council The Hon. Mr. Thomas Bruce, Rector of Collingbourn,
Wilts The Rev. Mr. Ball The Rev. Mr. Ballard The Rev. Dr. Baker, Residentiary
of St. Paul's The Rev. Dr. Barton, Canon of Christ Church, Oxford Mrs. Bave Mr.
Auditor Benson Mr. John-Earnest Bernard Rev. Dr. Bearcroft Mrs. Bethel The Rev.
Mr. Bradbury Mr. Bilderbeck The Rev. Mr. Biscow The Hon. Mr. Bing Mr. Bridgeman
Mrs. Bridges Mrs. Bindon The Rev. Mr. Archdeacon Brideauke Mr. Bickerton
Richard Bostock, M. D. John Bonythont of Bristol, M. D. The Rev. Mr. David
Bowen, A. M. The Rev. Mr. Brougham Dr. Broxholm The Hon. Mr. Brudenal Mrs.
Brudenal The Rev. Dr. Burton, Master of Winchester School The Rev. Dr. Byrche,
Chancellor of the Diocese of Worcester Mr. Francis Baxter Charles Bridgeman,
Esquire
C
The Most Rev. Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Earl of Chesterfield Earl of
Cholmondeley Earl Cowper Lord Carteret Lord Bishop of Cork, six Books Lord
Cornbury Lady Anne, Countess Dowager of Coventry Lady Clayton Lady Judith Coote
Marquess of Carnarvon Sir Francis Child, Knt. Samuel Campbell, Esquire George
Caswell, Esquire James Clitherow, Esquire The Hon. Mr. Carry The Hon. William Cavendish,
Esquire Henry-Thomas Carr, Esquire John Clarke, of Sarum, Esquire Charles Clarke, of
Lincoln's End, Esquire -- Clavering, Esquire Groom of the Bedchamber to the King
Charles Coker, Esquire John Conduit, Esquire Master of the Mint Velters Cornwell, Esquire
Sir William Cotherington The Hon. Brigadier Churchill William Churchill, Esquire
Mr. Churchill The Rev. Dr. John Cowper, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty Mr.
Carne The Rev. Mr. Cartwright Samuel Chandler, of Portsmouth, Gent. The Rev.
Dr. Alured Clarke Reuben Clarke, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty Mr.
Samuel Clarke The Rev. Dr. John Clarke, Dean of Sarum Mrs. Clarke of
Hanover-Street The Rev. Mr. Clarke of Beverly in Yorkshire Christopher
Clarkson, D. D. The Rev. Dr. Creswick, Dean of Bristol The Rev. Dr. Cobden,
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty The Rev. Mr. Colcire The Rev. Mr. Croft
Thomas Cranmer, of Kingston, M D. Jonas Cockerton Mrs. Cross Mrs. Crowley of
Greenwich Mr. Cure Mr. Edward Cave.
D
Duke of Dorset Duchess of Dorset Duchess of Devonshire Earl of Dunmore,
Gentleman of the Bedchamber to his Majesty Countess of Dysert Countess of
Deloraine Lord De la War, Treasurer of the King's Household Peter Delme, Esquire
Lord Bishop of Londonderry Right Hon. Lord Duplin Lord Dunkeron The Hon. Sir
Conyers Darcy, Comptroller of the Household The Hon. Colonel Darby The Rev. Dr.
Day William Denny, Esquire Sir Francis-Henry Drake, Bart. -- Duncomb, Esquire Robert
Downs, Esquire Mr. William Davis The Right Hon. George Doddington, one of the
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury Capt. Degge The Rev. Dr. Done, Prebendary
of Canterbury The Hon. Miss Dive, Maid of Honor to her Majesty The Hon. Miss
Dive, Maid of Honor to her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales Mr. Deveil Mr.
Dawson Mr. Francis Drake Mr. Dunbar Dr. Douglas Mr. Samuel Davis Mr. Gregory
Dennis.
E
Earl of Egmont Lord Chief Justice Air Lady Air Sir Richard Else, Bart. Sir
John Evelyn, Bart. Edward Air, Esquire Robert Air, Esquire one of the Commissioners
of the Excise -- Eckersell, Esquire Clerk of the Kitchen to his Majesty John
Eckersell, Esquire Charles Erskine, of the Inner Temple, Esquire Mr. Edgcomb Mrs. Jane
Egerton Mr. John Else, Painter Mrs. Katherine Edwin.
F
Earl of Fitzwalter Lady Bell Finch Lady Forrester Lady Franklyn Sir Andrew
Fountain Robert Fenwick, of Lincoln's End, Esquire Frederick Franklyn, Esquire Richard
Fleming, Esquire The Rev. Dr. Friend William Friend, Esquire John Friend, Esquire Alexander
Forrester, of the Middle Temple, Esquire John Fuller, Esquire Stephen Fox, Esquire Henry
Fox, Esquire Mrs. Fox Mrs. Jane Foul, of Charleton, Wilts The Rev. Mr. Thomas
Foul Mr. George Farrell Mr. Nicholas Franklyn Mr. Fraigneau Mr. Fleetwood Mr.
Flitcroft Mr. Robert Far.
G
Duke of Grafton Earl of Grantham, Lord Chamberlain to her Majesty Earl of
Godolphin, Lord Privy Seal Lord Viscount Gage Lord Bishop of Gloucester Lady
Betty German Lady Godschall Lady Glenarke Thomas Green, Esquire Edward Green, of
the Inner Temple, Esquire Nicholas Grice, Esquire -- Godschall, Esquire John Gordon, Esquire
Thomas Green, Esquire The Rev. Dr. Gally Mr. William Greening Mr. Thomas Greening
Mrs. Greening The Rev. Dr. Gilbert Mrs. Sarah Gilbert The Rev. Mr. Thomas
Giffard Mr. Giffard of Goodman's-Fields Mrs. Godolphin Mr. Gordon
H
Earl of Halifax Earl of Hertford Countess of Hertford, Lady of the Bedchamber
to the Queen, 5 Books Earl of Huntingdon Countess of Huntingdon Lord Archibald
Hamilton Lady Susan Hamilton Mr. Charles Hamilton Lady Hanmer Lady Viscountess
Dowager Harcourt Lord Harcourt The Right Hon. Lord Harrington, one of his
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State Earl of Hay Lord Chief Justice
Hardwick Lady Betty Hastings Lady Harriot Herbert The Right Hon. the Lady
Hereford The Right Hon. the Lord Hervey, Vice-Chamberlain to the King The Right
Hon. the Lady Hervey Lady Betty Heathcote Lord Hinton Lady Gertrude Hotham Lady
Dowager Effingham Howard The Hon. Sir Charles Hotham The Hon. Col. Hurst The
Hon. Genesis Hunnywood The Rev. Mr. Howlett, Vicar of Ramton in Northamptonshire
Mrs. Horner Mr. Howlett Edw. Hooper, of Lincoln's End, Esquire William Holder, of
Barbados, Esquire The Hon. Henry Hoare, Esquire Richard Hollings, Esquire Solicitor
General to his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales William Hippesley, Esquire John
Hilton, Esquire Mr. Heidegger The Hon. Mr. Hedges, Treasurer to his Royal Highness
the Prince of Wales Samuel Hetherington, of the Middle Temple, Esquire Mr. Huet
Mrs. Mary Hungerford Dr. Benjamin Hoadley The Rev. Mr. John Hoadley The Hon.
George Heathcote, Esquire Mrs. Heathcote Sir William Halton, Bart. Dr. Halley of
Greenwich Henry Hawly, Esquire Mr. Hambden Philip Harcourt, Esquire Edward Harley, Esquire
Richard Harley, Esquire George Harrison, Esquire Edward Harrison, Esquire Mr. John
Harrison, jun. Heron Heart, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Hartley Sir John Hartopp, Bart.
The Hon. Richard Hay, Esquire Mrs. Hayes The Hon. Mrs. Herbert
I
The Right Hon. Sir Joseph Jekyll, Master of the Rolls Lady Jekyll The Hon. Sir
John Jennings, Master of the Royal Hospital at Greenwich, and Rear-Admiral of
England The Hon. Sir William Irby, Chamberlain to her Royal Highness the
Princess of Wales Francis Jackman, Esquire Mr. Jackson John Idle, of Lincoln's End,
Esquire Orlando Johnson, Esquire Mr. Johnson, of Milk-Street, London Mrs. Johnson Mrs.
Johnson of Twickenham The Rev. Mr. Ince Ambrose Isted, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Edward
Jones of Mottesfont Mr. Jones, Painter, two Books Mr. Jones, Upholster The Rev.
Mr. Jumar Robert Jocelyn, Esquire his Majesty's Attorney General in Ireland Mr.
Robert Jennens.
K
Duke of Kent Duchess of Kent Earl of Kildare Lord Kingston The Right Hon. the
Lady King Lord Kitcarr Lady Kay The Rev. Mr. John Kay, Vicar of Moulton in
Northamptonshire William Kent, Esquire William Kinaston, Esquire Master in Chancery The
Rev. Dr. Kenrick, Prebendary of Westminster The Rev. Dr. Knight.
L
Duke of Leeds Lord Bishop of Lincoln Lord Lynn The Rev. Dr. Lynch, Dean of
Canterbury The Right Hon. the Lord Viscount Lymington Lady Anne Lumley, Lady of
the Bedchamber to the Princesses Lady Lawley Lord Lemster The Hon. Col. Lumley
Lord Lifford Edward Lloyd, Esquire Henry Lloyd, Esquire Henry Lloyd, of Acton, Esquire Mrs.
Lloyd of Greenwich Mr. Charles Longville, Auditor to the Queen Richard Long, of
Rood Ashton, Esquire Joseph Lock, Esquire Thomas Lewis, Esquire David Lewis, Esquire The Rev.
Dr. Lewis, Canon of Windsor Mr. Leake of Bath Mr. Lawrence Mr. John Lavington
John Lane, Esquire Surveyor of his Majesty's Works at the Horse Guards The Hon.
Col. Lascelles The Rev. Nathaniel Lancaster, LL. D. Chaplain to his Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales Mr. Richard Lambert Mr. Larcum Mrs. Mary Layton
Mr. William Love Mr. Joseph Low.
M
Duke of Manchester Duchess of Marlborough Earl of Macclesfield, two Books
Earl of Mead Lord Middlesex Lady Milbank The Right Hon. Lady Monson Lord
Robert Montagu, Vice-Chamberlain to her Majesty Lord Viscount Montjoy The Hon.
Col. Montagu Charles Madox, Esquire Sir Richard Mead, Bart. Thomas Matthews, of the
Inner Temple, Esquire Sir Richard Mill, Bart. Edward Milles, of the Inner Temple,
Esquire William Moore, Esquire Charles Montagu, Esquire Auditor to the Prince of Wales
Roger Morris, Esquire Joseph Moyle, Esquire The Rev. Dr. Marten, Canon of Windsor Mrs.
Marten, two Books Mr. Martin The Rev. Dr. Maddox, Dean of Wells Mrs. Maddox The
Rev. Dr. Mangey The Rev. Dr. Mawson, Master of Corpus Christi College,
Cambridge Dr. Mead Mr. John Mist Miss Moore The Rev. Mr. Morell, A. M. Fellow
of King's College, Cambridge Mr. Morris The Hon. Mr. Mordaunt The Rev. Mr. John
Mylles.
N
Duke of Newcastle, one of the Principal Secretaries of State, 2 Books Lord
North and Guilford, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to his Royal Highness the
Prince Lord Bishop of Norwich James Nash, Esquire Gray Nevyl, Esquire The Rev. Dr.
Naylor, Dean of Winchester Library of New College, Oxford.
O
Earl of Orrery Earl of Orkney Earl of Oxford Countess of Oxford Charles O
Hara, Esquire The Right Hon. Arthur Onslow, Speaker to the Hon. House of Commons
Thomas Orby-Hunter, Esquire Mr. Edward Oram Captain Henry Osborn of Falmouth Dr.
Owen
P
Earl of Pomfret, Master of the Horse to the Queen Countess of Pomfret, Lady of
the Bedchamber to the Queen Duke of Portland Duchess of Portland Earl of
Portmore Countess Dowager of Pembroke Countess of Pembroke Lord Viscount
Palmerston Lady Viscountess Palmerston, five Books Lord Harry Pawlett Lord
William Pawlett -- Page, Esquire The Hon. Mrs. Page Colonel Paget, Groom of the
Bedchamber to the King Nicholas Paxton, Esquire The Hon. Henry Pelham, Esquire James
Pelham, Esquire Secretary to his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales William Pescod,
Esquire The Right Hon. Stephen Poyntz, Esquire Governor to the Duke, two Books The Hon.
Mrs. Poyntz Alexander Pope, Esquire James Powel, Esquire Henry Powel, Esquire Philip Powys,
Esquire The Hon. William Pulteney, Esquire Mrs. Paget Mrs. Paget Mr. Joseph Patteson
Mr. Pawlet, Secretary to the Lord Bishop of London The Rev. Dr. Pe^^^g, Canon
of Windsor Dr. Pemberton Mr. Jeremiah Pierce, Surgeon The Rev. Dr. Pearce,
Rector of St. Martin, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty The Rev. Mr.
Persehouse The Rev. Mr. Thomas Persehouse The Hon. Mrs. Percival The Rev. Mr.
Marmaduke Philips Mrs. Theresia-Constantia Philips Mr. Thomas Philips The Rev.
Mr. Pit Mr. Thomas Powell Mrs. Purcell Mr. Joseph Pepper.
R
Duchess of Richmond, Lady of the Bedchamber to the Queen Duchess of Rutland
Lord Ranelagh Lord Chief Justice Reeve Lady Rich The Right Hon. Lady Russell
Sir Thomas Robinson, Bart. Sir John Rushworth, Bart. Dudley Ryder, Esquire his
Majesty's Solicitor General The Hon. Col. Russell Richard Raynsford, Esquire Capt.
Reddish John Revelt, Esquire Thomas Ridge, of Portsmouth, Esquire -- Roberts, of
Twickenham, Esquire Edward Rudge, Esquire Mrs. Rotherham The Rev. Mr. Robert Rogers
Alexander Rayner, M. D. Mr. Isaac Rider, Surgeon of Greenwich Hospital Mr.
Richardson Mr. Francis Roberts Mrs. Roberts
S
Earl of Scarborough Earl of Selkirk, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to the King
Earl of Stafford Countess of Suffolk Lord Bishop of Salisbury Lady Betty
Seymour Lord Shelburn Lord Viscount St. John The Right Hon. Lord Sundon, one of
the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury The Right Hon. Lady Sundon, 2 Books
Lord Sunbury The Hon. Lady Stanhope Sir Brownlow Sherard, Bart. Thomas Shearer,
Esquire The Hon. Pawlet St. John, Esquire Sir Hugh Smithson, Bart. John Strange, Esquire
one of his Majesty's learned Council James Steuart, Esquire The Hon. Mr. Shutz The
Hon. Col. Shutz Henry Singleton, Esquire his Majesty's Prime Sergeant Sir Hans
Sloane, Bart. William Sloane, Esquire Mrs. Elizabeth Sloane Sir Thomas Stradling
William Strode, Esquire Dr. Samuel-Legg Samber of Salisbury The Rev. Mr. Archdeacon
Sayer The Rev. Mr. Scott, LL. B. Mr. William Scott The Rev. Mr. Seed, A. M.
Fellow of Queen's College, Oxford The Hon. Col. Selwin Mrs. Selwin Mrs. St.
George Mr. Richard Smith Mrs. Barbara Smith, of Stanton, Wilts Mr. Sharp, of
Dunstable, Surgeon Mr. William Sparks The Rev. Mr. Spence, Fellow of New
College, and Poetry Professor of Oxford Mr. Spencer, Gardener The Rev. Mr.
Stanley Mrs. Stanley of Salisbury Mrs. Stanley, of Old Bond-Street, London, two
Books Mr. Stevens, Surgeon The Rev. Jonathan Swift, Dean of St. Patrick's Miss
Lucy Strong of Greenwich The Rev. Mr. Archdeacon Stubbs, first Chaplain of the
Royal Hospital at Greenwich Mr. Philip Sproson.
T
Earl of Tankerville Lord Viscount Torrington Lord Trevor Lord Tullamore Lord
Viscount Tyrone Lord Viscount Tyrconnel, 2 Books The Right Hon. Charles Talbot,
Lord Chancellor The Hon. John Talbot, Esquire The Hon. Mrs. Talbot Miss Talbot John
Talbot, of Lacock, Esquire John Tarver, Esquire Richard Taunton, Esquire The Hon. Henry
Temple, Esquire The Hon. Richard Temple, Esquire The Hon. Mrs. Elizabeth Temple The
Hon. Sir William Thompson, Knt. one of the Barons of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, and Recorder of the City of London Thomas Tickell, Esquire Henry
Tichburn, Esquire The Hon. Thomas Townshend, Esquire Sigismond Trafford, Esquire The Hon.
George Trenchard, Esquire John Thresher, of Bradford, Esquire Dr. Tessier The Rev. Dr.
Terry, Canon of Christ Church in Oxford Mr. John Thornhill Mr. James Thornton
The Rev. Mr. Tomlinson, Vicar of Blyth in Nottinghamshire The Hon. Mrs.
Tichburn The Hon. Col. Townshend The Hon. Mrs. Townshend The Hon. Mrs.
Townshend Mrs. Trafford Mrs. Trevors Mrs. Trenchard Mr. Robert Tunstall.
V
Lady Vanbrugh Richard Vaneck, Esquire The Hon. Mr. Vane The Hon. Mr. Villars
Henry-Chivers Vince, Esquire Samuel Underhill, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Venn Mrs. Elizabeth
Upton.
W
The Right Hon. Sir Robert Walpole The Hon. Lady Walpole His Excellency Horatio
Walpole The Right Hon. Earl of Wilmington, Lord President of his Majesty's
Council Lord Viscount Weymouth Lady Viscountess Weymouth The Right Hon. Lady
Wentworth Lord Bishop of Winchester Sir Marmaduke Wyvil, Bart. The Hon. General
Wade The Right Hon. Sir Charles Wager, first Commissioner of the Admiralty
William Walmesly, Esquire Robert Waller, Esquire Edward Walpole, Esquire The Hon. Mr.
Wallop Lady Waters Lewis Way, Esquire Spicer Weldon, of Lincoln's End, Esquire Peter
Wentworth, Esquire Equerry to the Queen Richard Wesley, Esquire Sir Nicholas Williams,
Bart. William Willis, Esquire Francis Whitworth, Esquire Richard Whitshed, of Acton,
Esquire The Hon. Mr. Wyndham, Sub-Governor to the Duke Richard Wingfield, Esquire Ermin
Woodhouse, Esquire The Hon. Mr. Wollaston Christopher Wyvil, Esquire Sir William Wynn
-- Wynn, of the Board of Green Cloth, Esquire Mr. Thomas Wagg The Rev. Mr.
Wakefield The Hon. Mr. Baron Wainwright Mrs. Anne Wainwright Mrs. Rebecca
Wainwright Mr. Walker The Rev. Mr. Ward Mr. Ware Mr. William Waters Mrs. Mary
Wetenhall Mrs. Katherine Wetenhall Mrs. Windham, of Fir Grove, Hampshire Dr.
Wintle, two Books Isaac Whood, Painter Mr. James Worsdale, Painter Mrs. Lucy
Woodcock, in Marlborough-Street, London Mr. George Worrel Thomas Wright, Gent.
Mr. John Williams Mr. Warrener Mrs. Wenborne.
Y
The Rt. Rev. Lord Archbishop of York The Right Hon. Sir William Young,
Secretary at War John-Paul Yuounet, Esquire

The following are since come to Hand. Levett Blackborne, Esquire Benjamin
Goodison, Cabinet-Maker to their Majesty's.


Upon Her MAJESTY's Bounty to the Thresher.
Written in the Year 1730.
TO cheer the Muse by Poverty oppressed,
To free from meaner Cares th'inspired Breast,
To give the Genius Liberty to fly,
And mount with easier Wings its native Sky,
Was worthy HER, who always understood
The noblest Use of Power was doing Good.
SO, when the oaten Pipe's melodious Strain
Reached CAESAR's Royal Ear, nor reached in vain,
Safe, and protected, for himself employed,
His Song, his Harvest, TITYRUS enjoyed;
Over his own Fields, his Flocks, and Cattle, strayed,
And on the Mincio's Bank securely played.
WHAT equal Hand shall now an Altar raise,
Like that erected to AUGUSTUS' Praise?
From Pindus come, come, all ye tuneful Choir,
And in this Work with various Arts conspire;
Come all, by PALLAS, or by PHOEBUS taught,
To form the Plan, or to express the Thought:
Inscribe the Stone with CAROLINA's Name,
Sacred to Her, and her immortal Fame;
Firm fix the Basis, wreathe the Foliage round,
Begin the Rites, and let the Music sound.
Ye Sons of Came and Isis, leave the Shade;
Be here your Duty, here your Offerings paid;
No longer let true Merit lie concealed,
As soon rewarded, as to Her revealed;
Produce your Labors on the public Stage,
And She shall raise a new Augustan Age.
J. WAINWRIGHT.

To STEPHEN DUCK: Occasioned by his Poem on FRIENDSHIP.
NO fancied Muse, nor Heliconian Stream,
Inspires my Verse, but thy well-chosen Theme;
Well-chosen, well-express'd, while, void of Art,
Thou speak the Dictates of an honest Heart.
Truth needs no specious Gloss; but, ever bright,
Shines, like the Sun, with pure unborrow'd Light;
And such thy pleasing Strains: No pompous Phrase
Bribes the Unworthy with unhallowed Praise;
No servile Flattery, nor dull Design,
Creeps, with soft Accent, through the fawning Line;
Nor jealous Envy rears its hateful Head,
To sting the Living, or revile the Dead;
Nor Malice, nor Caprice have thou, like those,
Whose pointed Satire dares a thousand Foes:
(Not but, if Fops lay Snares for Ridicule,
And Smartlings think it Wit to play the Fool,
Indignant Satire has a just Pretense,
With all her Whips to lash them into Sense)
To please, and only please, thy Nature tends,
And, Friend to all Men, makes them all thy Friends.
WITH double Transport therefore I peruse
The genuine Truths of your untutored Muse;
While thus you teach us Friendship's sacred Law,
And are yourself the faithful Friend you draw.
So to those Priests we glad Attention give,
Whose Precepts Sanction from their Lives receive.
'TWAS this that raised thee from thy lowly Seat,
It Is this shall make thy Happiness complete;
A Soul sincere, to Gratitude inclined,
An Heart untainted, and an humble Mind.
Inspired by these, write on, and charm the Age,
Nor dread the envious Critic's idle Rage:
For who the snarling ZOILUS regards,
When SPENCE approves, and CAROLINE rewards?
T. MORELL.

THE CONTENTS.
TO a Gentleman, who requested a Copy of Verses from the Author Page 1 On
Poverty 5 The Thresher's Labor 10 The Shunammite 28 Gratitude. A Pastoral 47 A
Pastoral Elegy 54 On a Good Conscience 66 On Music 68 On Richmond Park, and
Royal Gardens 72 Avaro and Amanda 85 To a Young Lady, who had a Cupid given her
129 On the Honorable Mrs. Horner's Traveling for the Recovery of her Health
130 The Absent Lover 133 On a Screen, worked in Flowers by Her Royal Highness
ANNE, Princess of Orange 135 To His Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland, on
His Birthday 137 To Death. An irregular Ode 140 On Mrs. L^s 148 Truth and
Falsehood. A Fable 149 Proper Ingredients to make a Skeptic 157 On Two Young
Ladies leaving the Country 158 On Mites. To a Lady 160 Chloe's Conquest 162
Occasioned by a Dispute with a Lady 163 To Mr. Worsdale: Occasioned by seeing
Celia's Picture unfinished 165 On the Queen's Grotto, in Richmond Gardens 166
To the Author of a Poem on the Duke of Lorrain's Arrival at the British Court
169 On Florella's Birthday 171 To the Rev. Dr. Friend, on his quitting
Westminster School 173 On Celia's Picture, drawn by Sir Godfrey Kneller 176 On
the Marriage of His Serene Highness the Prince of Orange 177 Verses to the
Author, in Imitation of Horace's Ode on Pindar 186 The Answer 193 On Delia
singing, and playing on Music 195 To the Right Hon. William Clayton, Esquire (now
Lord Sundon) on his being elected Representative in Parliament for Westminster
without Opposition 197 To Mr. Winder (now Fellow) of Corpus-Christi, Oxford; in
Answer to a Latin Epistle, which he sent me 201 A Description of a Journey to
Marlborough, Bath, Portsmouth, etc. 205 Penelope to Ulysses. Paraphrased from
Ovid 237 An Epigram 248 A Poem on Her MAJESTY's Birthday 249 Felix and
Constance 253 Ad Joannem Miltonum 294 Imitated ibid. An Imitation of the Tenth
Ode of the Second Book of Horace 295 An Imitation of the Sixteenth Ode of the
Second Book of Horace 299 An Imitation of the Sixteenth Ode of the Third Book
of Horace 305 Felix, qui patriis, etc. imitated from Claudian 311 Of Friendship
316 An Ode, presented to their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of
Wales, in Richmond Gardens.
POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
To a Gentleman, who requested a Copy of Verses from the Author.
SIR,
I Have, before the Time prescribed by you,
Exposed my weak Production to your View,
Which may, I hope, have Pardon at your Hand,
Because produced to Light by your Command
Perhaps you might expect some finished Ode,
Or sacred Song, to sound the Praise of God;
A glorious Thought, and laudable! But then
Think what illit'rate Poet guides the Pen:
Ill suit such Tasks with one who holds the Plough,
Such lofty Subjects with a Fate so low.
SIR, were your Eloquence and Learning mine,
And I, like you, a Favorite of the Nine;
I quickly would Parnassus' Summit climb,
And find a Hero worthy of my Rhyme:
Nor should my Muse the Grecian Monarchs trace,
Nor would I celebrate the Trojan Race;
Nor any of those martial Sons of Fame,
Pagans, unworthy of a Christian's Theme.
Far nobler Thoughts my grateful Voice should raise,
In lofty Strains, to great MESSIAH's Praise:
I Would joyfully resound his wondrous Birth,
And paint his Godlike Virtues, whilst on Earth;
Then, with Reluctance, Horror, and Surprise,
I Would mournfully relate his Agonies;
I Would trace the heavenly Hero to the Tree,
Sing what he suffered there for you and me;
Next, in heroic Numbers, would I tell,
How soon he baffled Death, and vanquished Hell,
Subdued the Grave, and showed the glorious Way,
From Realms of Darkness, to eternal Day.
Such noble Subjects should my Lays excite;
And you, my Patron, would in such delight;
Grateful to me, when you, well-pleased, should view
Th'accomplish'd sacred Song inscribed to you.
BUT now I must omit MESSIAH's Praise,
Lest I degrade him with unworthy Lays;
My Fate compels me silent to remain,
For want of Learning to improve my Strain:
By which no Thought, though well conceived, can rise
To full Perfection, but in Embryo dies:
Yet my unpolished Genius will produce,
And bring forth something, though of little Use.
THUS, in the Country, often have I found,
Through slothful Man's Neglect, a Plat of Ground,
Waste and uncultivated, void of Seeds,
Producing nothing, but some trifling Weeds.
BUT why stand I my Fate accusing so?
The Field calls me to Labor; I must go:
The Kine low after Meat; the hungry Steed,
Neighing, complains he wants his usual Feed.
Then, Sir, adieu: Accept what you did crave,
And be propitious to your humble Slave.
On POVERTY.
NO Ill on Earth we timorous Mortals fly
With so much Dread, as abject Poverty:
O despicable Name! We, thee to shun,
On every other Evil blindly run.
For fear of thee, distrustful Niggards go
In tattered Rags, and starve their Bodies too,
And still are poor, for fear of being so.
For fear of thee, the cheating Trader vows,
His Wares are good, although his Conscience knows,
He has employed his utmost Skill and Care,
To hide their Faults, and make their Beauties glare.
The Sailor, terrified with Thoughts of thee,
Boldly attempts the Dangers of the Sea;
From East to West, over Rocks and Quicksands steers;
It Is Poverty, and that alone, he fears;
The Soldier too, whom naught but thee can scare,
In Hopes of Plunder, bravely meets the War;
To fly from Poverty, he runs on Death,
And shows he prizes Riches more than Breath.
Strange Terror of Mankind! By thee misled,
Not Conscience, Quicksands, Rocks, or Death they dread!
And yet thou art no formidable Foe,
Except to little Souls, who think thee so:
Who through the Glass of Prejudice survey
Thy Face, a thousand frightful Forms display.
THUS Men, at Night, in foolish Fears grown old,
Who mind the Fairy Tales their Nurses told,
Start at a Goblin, which their Fancy made,
And, for a Spectre, often take a Shade.
CONTENTED Poverty's no dismal Thing,
Free from the Cares unwieldy Riches bring:
At Distance both alike deceive our View;
Nearer approached, they take another Hue.
The poor Man's Labor relishes his Meat;
His Morsel's pleasant, and his Rest is sweet:
Not so the Rich, who find their wearied Taste
Palled with the Prospect of the cumb'rous Feast;
For what they have more than they can enjoy,
Instead of satisfying, does but cloy.
BUT let us state the Case another way:
Were Poverty so hideous as they say,
It Is nobler cheerfully to bear our Fate,
Than murmur and repine beneath its Weight.
That Man deserves the Praise of human Kind,
Who bears ill Fortune with a Christian Mind:
How does his great heroic Soul aspire
Above that sordid Wealth the rest admire!
His nobler Thoughts are fixed on Things above;
His faithful Eyes survey the GOD of Love
Hold forth the heavenly Prize, which makes him run
His mortal Race, to gain the immortal Crown.
Not all the Snares a crafty Devilish can lay,
Can intercept, or daunt him in his Way.
Not all the scornful Insults of the Proud,
Not all the Censures of the groveling Crowd,
Not Poverty, in all her Terrors dressed,
Can shake the solid Quiet of his Breast:
Unmoved he stands against the worst of Foes,
And mocks the Darts, which adverse Fortune throws,
Calm and composed, amidst or Ease or Pain;
And finds Content, which others seek in vain.
So stands a steady Rock, sublimely steep,
Within the Confines of the briny Deep;
Lashed by the foaming Surge on every Side,
Yet cannot be shaken by the furious Tide.
THEN why should Phantoms discompose the Mind;
Or Woes, so far from real, fright Mankind?
Since Wealth can never make the Vicious blessed,
Nor Poverty subdue the virtuous Breast;
Since both from Heaven's unerring Hand are sent,
LORD, give me either; give me but CONTENT.
The THRESHER's LABOR.
To the Revd. Mr. STANLEY.
THE grateful Tribute of these rural Lays,
Which to her Patron's Hand the Muse conveys,
Deign to accept: It Is just she Tribute bring
To him, whose Bounty gives her Life to sing;
To him, whose generous Favors tune her Voice;
And bid her, 'midst her Poverty, rejoice.
Inspired by these, she dares herself prepare,
To sing the Toils of each revolving Year;
Those endless Toils, which always grow anew,
And the poor Thresher's destined to pursue:
Even these, with Pleasure, can the Muse rehearse,
When you and Gratitude demand her Verse.
SOON as the golden Harvest quits the Plain,
And CERES' Gifts reward the Farmer's Pain;
What Corn each Sheaf will yield, intent to hear,
And guess from thence the Profits of the Year,
He calls his Reapers forth: Around we stand,
With deep Attention, waiting his Command.
To each our Task he readily divides,
And pointing, to our different Stations guides.
As he directs, to distant Barns we go;
Here two for Wheat, and there for Barley two.
But first, to show what he expects to find,
These Words, or Words like these, disclose his Mind:
" So dry the Corn was carried from the Field,
" So easily 'twill thresh, so well 'twill yield;
" Sure large Days-works I well may hope for now:
" Come, strip and try; let us see what you can do."
DIVESTED of our Clothes, with Flail in Hand,
At proper Distance, Front to Front we stand:
And first the Threshal's gently swung, to prove
Whether with just Exactness it will move:
That once secure, we swiftly whirl them round;
From the strong Planks our Crab-tree Staves rebound,
And echoing Barns return the rattling Sound.
Now in the Air our knotty Weapons fly,
And now with equal Force descend from high;
Down one, one up, so well they keep the Time,
The CYCLOPS' Hammers could not truer chime;
Nor with more heavy Strokes could Aetna groan,
When VULCAN forged the Arms for THETIS' Son.
In briny Streams our Sweat descends apace,
Drops from our Locks, or trickles down our Face.
No Intermission in our Work we know;
The noisy Threshal must for ever go.
Their Master absent, others safely play;
The sleeping Threshal does itself betray.
Nor yet, the tedious Labor to beguile,
And make the passing Minutes sweetly smile,
Can we, like Shepherds, tell a merry Tale;
The Voice is lost, drowned by the louder Flail.
But we may think -- Alas! what pleasing thing,
Here, to the Mind, can the dull Fancy bring?
Our Eye beholds no pleasing Object here,
No cheerful Sound diverts our listening Ear.
The Shepherd well may tune his Voice to sing,
Inspired with all the Beauties of the Spring.
No Fountains murmur here, no Lambkins play,
No Linnets warble, and no Fields look gay;
It Is all a gloomy, melancholy Scene,
Fit only to provoke the Muse's Spleen.
When sooty Pease we thresh, you scarce can know
Our native Color, as from Work we go.
The Sweat, the Dust, and suffocating Smoke,
Make us so much like Ethiopians look,
We scare our Wives, when Evening brings us home;
And frighted Infants think the Bugbear come.
Week after Week, we this dull Task pursue,
Unless when winn'wing Days produce a new:
A new, indeed, but frequently a worse!
The Threshal yields but to the Master's Curse.
He counts the Bushels, counts how much a Day;
Then swears we have idled half our Time away:
" Why, look ye, Rogues, do you think that this will do?
" Your Neighbors thresh as much again as you."
Now in our Hands we wish our noisy Tools,
To drown the hated Names of Rogues and Fools.
But wanting these, we just like Schoolboys look,
When angry Masters view the blotted Book:
They cry, "their Ink was faulty, and their Pen;"
We, "the Corn threshes bad, 'twas cut too green."
BUT soon as Winter hides his hoary Head,
And Nature's Face is with new Beauty spread;
The lovely Spring appears, refreshing Showers
New cloth the Field with Grass, and blooming Flowers.
Next her, the ripening Summer presses on,
And SOL begins his longest Race to run.
Before the Door our welcome Master stands;
Tells us, the ripened Grass requires our Hands.
The grateful Tidings presently imparts
Life to our Looks, and Spirits to our Hearts.
We wish the happy Season may be fair;
And, joyful, long to breathe in op'ner Air.
This Change of Labor seems to give such Ease,
With Thoughts of Happiness ourselves we please.
But, ah! how rarely's Happiness complete!
There Is always Bitter mingled with the Sweet.
When first the Lark sings Prologue to the Day,
We rise, admonished by his early Lay;
This new Employ with eager Haste to prove,
This new Employ, become so much our Love.
Alas! that human Joys should change so soon!
Our Morning Pleasure turns to Pain at Noon.
The Birds salute us, as to Work we go,
And with new Life our Bosoms seem to glow.
On our right Shoulder hangs the crooked Blade,
The Weapon destined to uncloath the Mead:
Our left supports the Whetstone, Scrip, and Beer;
This for our Scythes, and these ourselves to cheer.
And now the Field, designed to try our Might,
At length appears, and meets our longing Sight.
The Grass and Ground we view with careful Eyes,
To see which way the best Advantage lies;
And, Hero-like, each claims the foremost Place.
At first our Labor seems a sportive Race:
With rapid Force our sharpened Blades we drive,
Strain every Nerve, and Blow for Blow we give.
All strive to vanquish, though the Victor gains
No other Glory, but the greatest Pains.
BUT when the scorching Sun is mounted high,
And no kind Barns with friendly Shade are nigh;
Our weary Scythes entangle in the Grass,
While Streams of Sweat run trickling down apace.
Our sportive Labor we too late lament;
And wish that Strength again, we vainly spent.
THUS, in the Morn, a Courser have I seen
With headlong Fury scour the level Green;
Or mount the Hills, if Hills are in his Way,
As if no Labor could his Fire allay;
Till PHOEBUS, shining with meridian Heat,
Has bathed his panting Sides in briny Sweat:
The lengthened Chase scarce able to sustain,
He measures back the Hills and Dales with Pain.
WITH Heat and Labor tired, our Scythes we quit,
Search out a shady Tree, and down we sit:
From Scrip and Bottle hope new Strength to gain;
But Scrip and Bottle too are tried in vain.
Down our parched Throats we scarce the Bread can get;
And, quite o'erspent with Toil, but faintly eat.
Nor can the Bottle only answer all;
The Bottle and the Beer are both too small.
Time flows: Again we rise from off the Grass;
Again each Mower takes his proper Place;
Not eager now, as late, our Strength to prove;
But all contented regular to move.
We often whet, and often view the Sun;
As often wish, his tedious Race was run.
At length he veils his purple Face from Sight,
And bids the weary Labourer Goodnight.
Homewards we move, but spent so much with Toil,
We slowly walk, and rest at every Style.
Our good expecting Wives, who think we stay,
Got to the Door, soon eye us in the Way.
Then from the Pot the Dumplin's caught in haste,
And homely by its Side the Bacon placed.
Supper and Sleep by Morn new Strength supply;
And out we set again, our Work to try;
But not so early quite, nor quite so fast,
As, to our Cost, we did the Morning past.
SOON as the rising Sun has drank the Dew,
Another Scene is open to our View:
Our Master comes, and at his Heels a Throng
Of prattling Females, armed with Rake and Prong;
Prepared, whilst he is here, to make his Hay;
Or, if he turns his Back, prepared to play:
But here, or gone, sure of this Comfort still;
Here Is Company, so they may chat their Fill.
Ah! were their Hands so active as their Tongues,
How nimbly then would move the Rakes and Prongs?
THE Grass again is spread upon the Ground,
Till not a vacant Place is to be found;
And while the parching Sunbeams on it shine,
The Hay-makers have Time allowed to dine.
That soon dispatched, they still sit on the Ground;
And the brisk Chat, renewed, afresh goes round.
All talk at once; but seeming all to fear,
That what they speak, the rest will hardly hear;
Till by degrees so high their Notes they strain,
A Stander by can naught distinguish plain.
So loud's their Speech, and so confused their Noise,
Scarce puzzled ECHO can return the Voice.
Yet, spite of this, they bravely all go on;
Each scorns to be, or seem to be, outdone.
Meanwhile the changing Sky begins to lour,
And hollow Winds proclaim a sudden Shower:
The tattling Crowd can scarce their Garments gain,
Before descends the thick impetuous Rain;
Their noisy Prattle all at once is done,
And to the Hedge they soon for Shelter run.
THUS have I seen, on a bright Summer's Day,
On some green Brake, a Flock of Sparrows play;
From Twig to Twig, from Bush to Bush they fly;
And with continued Chirping fill the Sky:
But, on a sudden, if a Storm appears,
Their chirping Noise no longer dins your Ears:
They fly for Shelter to the thickest Bush;
There silent sit, and All at once is hush.
BUT better Fate succeeds this rainy Day,
And little Labor serves to make the Hay.
Fast as it is cut, so kindly shines the Sun,
Turned once or twice, the pleasing Work is done.
Next Day the Cocks appear in equal Rows,
Which the glad Master in safe Ricks bestows.
THE spacious Fields we now no longer range;
And yet, hard Fate! still Work for Work we change.
Back to the Barns we hastily are sent,
Where lately so much Time we pensive spent:
Not pensive now, we bless the friendly Shade;
And to avoid the parching Sun are glad.
Yet little Time we in the Shade remain,
Before our Master calls us forth again;
And says, "For Harvest now yourselves prepare;
" The ripened Harvest now demands your Care.
" Get all things ready, and be quickly dressed;
" Early next Morn I shall disturb your Rest."
Strict to his Word! for scarce the Dawn appears,
Before his hasty Summons fills our Ears.
His hasty Summons we obey; and rise,
While yet the Stars are glimmering in the Skies.
With him our Guide we to the Wheat-field go,
He to appoint, and we the Work to do.
YE Reapers, cast your Eyes around the Field;
And view the various Scenes its Beauties yield:
Then look again, with a more tender Eye,
To think how soon it must in Ruin lie!
For, once set in, wherever our Blows we deal,
There Is no resisting of the well-whet Steel:
But here or there, wherever our Course we bend,
Sure Desolation does our Steps attend.
THUS, when Arabia's Sons, in Hopes of Prey,
To some more fertile Country take their Way,
How beauteous all Things in the Morn appear!
There rural Cots, and pleasant Villa's here!
So many grateful Objects meet the Sight,
The ravished Eye could willing gaze till Night.
But long ere then, wherever their Troops have past,
These pleasing Prospects lie a gloomy Waste.
THE Morning past, we sweat beneath the Sun;
And but uneasily our Work goes on.
Before us we perplexing Thistles find,
And Corn blown adverse with the ruffling Wind.
Behind our Master waits; and if he spies
One charitable Ear, he grudging cries,
" Ye scatter half your Wages over the Land."
Then scrapes the Stubble with his greedy Hand.
LET those who feast at Ease on dainty Fare,
Pity the Reapers, who their Feasts prepare:
For Toils scarce ever ceasing press us now;
Rest never does, but on the Sabbath, show;
And barely that our Masters will allow.
Think what a painful Life we daily lead;
Each Morning early rise, go late to Bed:
Nor, when asleep, are we secure from Pain;
We then perform our Labors over again:
Our mimic Fancy ever restless seems;
And what we act awake, she acts in Dreams.
Hard Fate! Our Labors even in Sleep don't cease;
Scarce HERCULES ever felt such Toils as these!
BUT soon we rise the bearded Crop again,
Soon PHOEBUS' Rays well dry the golden Grain.
Pleased with the Scene, our Master glows with Joy;
Bids us for Carrying all our Force employ;
When strait Confusion over the Field appears,
And stunning Clamours fill the Workmens Ears;
The Bells and clashing Whips alternate sound,
And rattling Wagons thunder over the Ground.
The Wheat, when carried, Pease, and other Grain,
We soon secure, and leave a fruitless Plain;
In noisy Triumph the last Load moves on,
And loud Huzza's proclaim the Harvest done.
OUR Master, joyful at the pleasing Sight,
Invites us all to feast with him at Night.
A Table plentifully spread we find,
And Jugs of humming Ale, to cheer the Mind;
Which he, too generous, pushes round so fast,
We think no Toils to come, nor mind the past.
But the next Morning soon reveals the Cheat,
When the same Toils we must again repeat;
To the same Barns must back again return,
To labor there for Room for next Year's Corn.
THUS, as the Year's revolving Course goes round,
No Respite from our Labor can be found:
Like SISYPHUS, our Work is never done;
Continually rolls back the restless Stone.
New-growing Labors still succeed the past;
And growing always new, must always last.
The SHUNAMMITE.
To Mrs. STANLEY.
DEIGN, heavenly Muses, to assist my Song:
To heavenly Muses heavenly Themes belong.
But chiefly Thou, O GOD, my Soul inspire,
And touch my Lips with thy celestial Fire:
If Thou delight'st in flowery Carmel's Shade,
Or Jordan's Stream; from thence I crave thy Aid:
Instruct my Tongue, and my low Accents raise,
To sing thy Wonders, and display thy Praise:
Thy Praise let all the Sons of Judah hear,
And to my Song the distant Tribes repair.
So prayed the Shunammite; Heaven heard the Dame;
The distant Tribes around her listening came,
To hear th'amazing Tale; while thus her Tongue,
Moved by some heavenly Power, began the Song.
ATTEND, ye Seed of ABRAM, and give Ear,
While I JEHOVAH's glorious Acts declare:
How Life from Death, and Joy from Sadness spring,
If He assist the Muse, the Muse shall sing.
My Lord and I, to whom all-bounteous Heaven
His Blessings with no sparing Hand had given,
Like faithful Stewards of our wealthy Store,
Still lodged the Stranger, and relieved the Poor.
And as ELISHA, by divine Command,
Came preaching Virtue to a sinful Land;
He often deigned to lodge within our Gate,
And often received an hospitable Treat:
A decent Chamber for him we prepared;
And he, the generous Labor to reward,
Honors in Camp, or Court, to us proposed;
Which I refused, and thus my Mind disclosed:
Heaven's King has placed us in a fertile Land,
Where he showers down his Gifts with copious Hand:
Already we enjoy an affluent Store;
Why should we be solicitous for more?
Give Martial Camps, and Kingly Courts to them,
Who place their only Bliss in fleeting Fame:
There let them live in golden Chains of State;
And be unhappy, only to be great.
But let us in our native Soil remain,
Nor barter Happiness for sordid Gain.
Here may we feed the Indigent in Peace,
Or cloth the Bare with the superfluous Fleece,
And give the weary fainting Pilgrim Ease.
This we prefer to Pomp, and formal Show,
Which only serve to varnish over our Woe;
Refulgent Ornaments, which dress the Proud,
Objects of Wonder to the gazing Crowd;
Yet seldom give Content, or solid Rest,
To the vain Man, by whom they are possessed.
ALL Blessings, but a Child, had Heaven supplied;
And only that The Almighty had denied:
Which when the holy prescient Sage had heard,
He said, and I before him strait appeared:
And, as my Feet approached his awful Room,
I saw his Face diviner Looks assume;
Not such a Wildness, and fanatic Mien,
With which, some say, the Delphic Priests are seen;
When they, for Mysteries of Fate, explain
The odd Chimera's of a frantic Brain;
But with a grave majestic Air he stood,
While more than human in his Aspect glowed;
Celestial Grace sat on his radiant Look,
And Power diffusive shone, before he spoke.
Then thus: "Hail, generous Soul! Thy pious Cares
" Are not forgot, nor fruitless are thy Prayers:
" Propitious Heaven, thy virtuous Deeds to crown,
" Shall make thy barren Womb conceive a Son."
So spoke the Seer; and, to complete my Joy,
As he had spoke, I bore the promised Boy.
SOON to my Friends the welcome News was known,
Who crowded in apace to see my Son,
Hailing, with kind Salutes, the recent Child;
And, with their pious Hymns, my Pain beguiled.
When all had said, I moved my joyful Tongue;
And thus to Heaven addressed my grateful Song:
" O GOD, what Eloquence can sing thy Praise?
" Or who can fathom thy stupendous Ways?
" All Things obey at thy divine Command;
" Thou make a fruitful Field of barren Land:
" Obdurate Rocks a fertile Glebe shall be,
" And bring forth copious Crops, if bid by Thee;
" Arabian Deserts shall with Plenty smile,
" And curling Vines adorn the sterile Soil.
As thus she spoke, her Audience raise their Voice;
And interrupt her Song, as they rejoice:
" O GOD, we gladly hear thy mighty Power,
" With joyful Heart thy gracious Name adore:
" All Nature is subservient to thy Word;
" And shifts her wonted Course, to please her Lord.
" We, for thy Servant's Joy, our Thanks express;
" As grows the Child, so may her Bliss increase:
" And may the Guardian Angels, who preside
" Over the Blessed, his future Actions guide;
" Make spotless Virtue crown his vital Date,
" And hoary Honor end his Life but late;
" Then safely bear" -- The Dame here waved her Hand;
The People straight obey her mute Command:
All silent stand, and all attentive look,
Waiting her Words, while thus she, mournful, spoke:
ALL Pleasures are imperfect here below;
Our sweetest Joys are mixed with bitter Woe:
The Draught of Bliss, when in our Goblet cast,
Is dashed with Grief; or spilt, before we taste.
Ere twice four Years were measured by my Son,
(So soon, alas! the greatest Blessing's gone)
In Harvest-time he to the Reapers goes,
To view the bearded Sheaves, erect in Rows,
Like an embattled Army in the Field;
A new delightful Prospect to the Child!
But either there the scorching Sun displayed
His Heat intense, and on his Vitals preyed;
Or else some sudden apoplectic Pain,
With racking Torture, seized his tender Brain;
His Spirits failed, he straight began to faint,
And to his Father vainly made Complaint:
The glowing Rose was quickly seen to fade;
At once his Beauty, and his Life, decayed.
SOON, at my House, the dismal News I heard;
Soon, at my House, the dying Child appeared:
To Embrace him I, with fond Affection, run;
And, O! said I, what Pain afflicts my Son?
He tried to speak; but, fault'ring, gave a Groan;
No perfect Word proceeded from his Tongue;
But on his Lips the broken Accents hung.
All Means I used, that might allay his Pain;
All Means I used, but used them all in vain.
Yet, while he lived, my Soul would not despair;
Nor, till he ceased to breathe, I ceased my Prayer:
Deluding Hope now stopped the falling Tears;
Now his increasing Pains increased my Fears:
By Hope and Fear alternate was I tossed,
Till Hope, in a sad Certainty, was lost:
Short, and more short, he drew his panting Breath,
(Too sure Presage of his approaching Death!)
Till soon the Blood, congealing, ceased to flow;
He dropped his Head with a declining Bow:
Thrice, from my Breast, to raise himself he tried,
And thrice sunk down again; then, groaning, died.
THUS, when with Care we have nursed a tender Vine,
And taught the docile Branches where to twine;
An Eastern Gale, or some pernicious Frost,
Nips the young Tree, and all our Labor's lost.
WITH Horror chilled, awhile I speechless stood,
Viewing the Child, and trembling as I viewed:
My Eyes discharged their humid Store apace,
And Tears succeeded Tears adown my Face:
Scarcely my Heart the Load of Grief sustained;
At length, recov'ring Speech, I thus complained:
O fleeting Joys! inconstant as the Wind!
Which only for a Moment please the Mind;
Then fly, and leave a Weight of Woes behind!
But yet in vain I thus lament and mourn;
The Soul, once fled, shall never more return;
And the fair Body now must be conveyed
To Earth's dark Bosom, and eternal Shade --
Yet let me not prescribe a Bound to Heaven;
'Twas by a Miracle the Child was given;
Nor can I think the Wonder is more great,
Should the departed Soul resume her Seat.
What if I to Mount Carmel haste away,
To him who did his mystic Birth display?
His powerful Word the barren fruitful made;
His powerful Word, perhaps, may raise the Dead.
The famous Tishbite raised a Widow's Son;
ELISHA has as wondrous Actions done.
When he to Jordan's rapid Torrent came;
And, with the Mantle, smote the impetuous Stream;
Obsequious to the Stroke, the Waves divide;
And raise a liquid Wall on either Side!
At Jericho long had the barren Soil
Deceived the Husbandman, and mocked his Toil;
Yet, at his Word, it grew a fertile Field,
And poisonous Springs did wholesome Waters yield.
Nor can he only such great Blessings send;
But Curses, if invoked, his Call attend:
Else how at Bethel brought he Vengeance down,
As a just Scourge, on that opprobrious Town?
Again, when Moab Peace with Israel broke,
And vainly strove to quit the servile Yoke;
Our powerful Kings led forth th'embattled Host
Through Edom's sultry Wilds, and Air adust;
Where the confed'rate Troops no Water found,
Dry were the Springs, and sterile was the Ground;
The Captains wonted Strength and Courage failed,
When Thirst and Foes at once their Host assailed:
The Kings to him their joint Petitions made,
And fainting Soldiers craved his timely Aid;
Nor craved in vain: The powerful Word he spoke,
And flowing Waters formed a spacious Lake;
The shining Streams advanced their humid Train,
Till Edom's Wilds became a liquid Plain:
Not in more Plenty did the Waters run
Out of the Rock, when struck by AMRAM's Son.
And who can that amazing Deed forget,
Which he performed to pay the Widow's Debt?
Whose Quantity of Oil one Pot contained;
Yet numerous Vessels filled, before 'twas drained.
Sure he, who such stupendous Acts has done,
If GOD propitious prove, can raise my Son.
So saying, up I caught the Child with Speed;
And laid him on the sacred Prophet's Bed;
Then called my Servant to prepare the Steed.
Pensive and sad, my mourning Husband said,
It Is now in vain to crave ELISHA's Aid:
No God Today the Prophet does inspire;
Nor can he answer, what thou would inquire.
RATHER than sink, said I, attempt to raise
My Hopes, nor talk of Ceremonial Days;
His God is present still, and hears him when he prays.
Thus said, urging my Steed with eager Haste,
Swift as a Mountain Roe, the Plains I passed;
Over Hills and Dales my Journey I pursued;
Nor slack'd my Pace, till Carmel's Mount I viewed;
On whose delightful Brow, in cool Retreat,
Among the curling Vines, the Prophet sat;
Whose twining Arms a verdant Arbor made;
The verdant Arbor formed a grateful Shade;
The fanning Zephyrs gently played around,
And shook the trembling Leaves, and swept the Ground;
Down humbly at his Feet I prostrate fell,
Submiss; and, weeping, told the mournful Tale.
STRIVE to compose thy anxious Soul, said he;
Tears cannot revoke JEHOVAH's fixed Decree:
We live and die, and both, as He thinks fit,
Who may command; but Mortals must submit.
This Fate the King, as well as Peasant, finds;
Nor is it evil, but to evil Minds --
Yet if from Heaven I can my Suit obtain,
Thy lifeless Son shall yet revive again.
THUS said, with Looks divine, his Staff he views,
As if some powerful Charm he would infuse:
Then calls his Servant hastily, and said,
On the Child's Face let this be quickly laid.
O Thou, said I, on whom my Hopes depend,
Do not this Work to Servants Care commend:
If Thou thyself with me refuse to go,
Here, to the listening Vines, I Will vent my Woe;
Still prostrate lie, lamenting for my Son,
Till every Hill prove vocal to my Moan.
More had I said, but Grief the Words suppressed;
Yet Sighs, and silent Tears, explained the rest.
At length he from his verdant Seat arose,
And hastily adown the Mountain goes:
To Shunem we, with Speed, our Way pursue;
The City soon appears within our View;
And the obedient Servant, at the Gate,
Returning sad, without Success, we met:
The beauteous Child by Death still vanquished lay;
Still Death insulted over the beauteous Prey;
Till to the House the sacred Seer was come,
And, with supernal Power, approached the Room.
BY the dead Child, awhile, he pensive stood;
Then from the Chamber put the mourning Crowd:
That done, to GOD he made his ardent Prayer,
And breathed upon the Child with vital Air:
And now the Soul resumes her pristine Seat;
And now the Heart again begins to beat;
Life's purple Current over the Body spreads,
While Death, repulsed, ingloriously recedes.
THUS, when a prowling Wolf has stolen a Lamb,
He sternly guards it from the bleating Dam;
But if the Keeper comes, he quits his Prey,
And lowering, with Reluctance, makes away.
AND now the Prophet, to my longing Arms,
Resigned the Child, with more than wonted Charms:
The blushing Rose shone fresher in his Face,
And Beauty smiled with a superior Grace.
SO, when Heaven's Lamp, that rules the genial Day,
Behind the sable Moon pursues his Way;
Affrighted Mortals, when th'Eclipse is over,
Believe him more illustrious than before.
HERE ends the Dame; and the promiscuous Throng,
With Hallelujahs, thus conclude the Song:
" Holy and good art Thou, Lord God of Host,
" And all thy Works are wonderful and just:
" Both Life and Death are in thy powerful Hand;
" Both Life and Death obey thy great Command:
" By thy great Power the Heavens and Earth are awed;
" Then let the Heavens and Earth adore their GOD.
" Thou glorious Sun, that measur'st all our Days,
" Rising and setting, still advance his Praise:
" Thou Moon, and ye less glittering Orbs, that dance
" Round this terrestrial Globe, his Praise advance:
" Ye Seas, for ever waving to and fro,
" Praise, when ye ebb, and praise him, when ye flow:
" Ye wandering Rivers, and each purling Stream,
" As ye pursue your Course, his Praise proclaim:
" Ye Dews, and Mists, and humid Vapors, all,
" Praise, when ye rise; and praise him, when ye fall:
" But chiefly Israel, who do daily view
" His powerful Works, his daily Praise renew."
GRATITUDE.
A PASTORAL.
MENALCAS, COLIN. MENALCAS. FRiend COLIN! well o'ertook. I have of late
Observed thy cheerful Mien, and airy Gait:
Say, what auspicious Change, since the other Day,
When by thy lonely Cot I took my Way?
Sorrow and Sadness then overspread thy Brows,
And every Look did gloomy Cares disclose:
Now Joys diffusive in thy Aspect rise,
And Mirth and Gladness sparkle in thy Eyes.

COLIN. WHERE have thou lived, MENALCAS, not to know,
Whose generous Bounty has removed my Woe?
I thought, the gracious CAROLINA's Name,
Ere this, had filled the sounding Trump of Fame.

MENALCAS. THAT gracious Name the World is bound to bless;
All grateful Swains her generous Deeds confess:
But, COLIN, say, has she removed thy Care?
I Am happy, when thy Happiness I hear.

COLIN. O You, MENALCAS, know my abject Birth,
Born in a Cot, and bred to till the Earth;
On rigid Worldlings always doomed to wait,
Forced at their frugal Hands my Bread to get:
But when my Wants to CAROLINE were known,
She blessed me with a Pasture of my own.
This makes new Pleasures in my Bosom glow;
These joyful Looks I to her Bounty owe.

MENALCAS. AND may kind Heaven reward that gracious QUEEN,
Who to thy Wants has so propitious been!
Yet, though her Bounty has thy Wants supplied,
Let not her Bounty ever exalt thy Pride;
But keep an humble Mind, a grateful Heart;
Her Favors far exceed thy own Desert:
Heaven moved the Goodness of the Royal Dame;
And Heaven and She thy Gratitude must claim.

COLIN. WHEN me she first into her Favor took,
I cut this oaken Staff, ('it is now my Crook)
And engraved her Royal Bounty in the Rind;
But engraved it deeper in my grateful Mind:
The Letters in the Staff may wear away;
Those written in my Soul shall never decay.

MENALCAS. SO may thy little Flock increase their Tale;
So may thy Field of Pasture never fail;
May Heaven and She, in just Proportion, still
Or smile, or frown, as thou art good, or ill.

COLIN. MAY hungry Foxes kill my tender Lambs,
May poisonous Serpents suck their bleating Dams;
And may my Cows distended Udders fail,
Elude my Hopes, and never fill the Pail;
In short, (to make my Curse the more complete,
Though it is the only Thing I dread and hate)
May Heaven and Heavenly CAROLINE remove
Their Smiles, if COLIN ever ungrateful prove.

MENALCAS. THY Thanks and Prayers her generous Soul will please;
A Tribute justly due, and paid with Ease:
Sometimes a Song perhaps she may require;
And thou to sing but lately did aspire;
When in an abject, low, laborious State,
Sunk deep in Cares, and pressed beneath their Weight;
Then (so, at least, it is said among our Swains)
In Sonnets COLIN charmed away his Pains:
Much sooner now thou may a Song rehearse,
Whenever she condescends to hear thy Verse.

COLIN. O Friend! too well you know, my simple Strains
Are far inferior to each rural Swain's:
Yet, since Great CAROLINA thinks no Scorn,
To patronize a Shepherd meanly born;
Henceforth I Will strive to raise my Voice sublime,
And with her Royal Name adorn my Rhyme;
I Will on each verdant Mountain sing her Praise,
And vocal Groves shall echo to my Lays;
To every Swain her Godlike Worth proclaim,
Nor ever drop the pleasing glorious Theme.

MENALCAS. THEN, since we are met, where friendly Branches spread,
And trembling Leaves diffuse a cooling Shade;
Since, on the Sprays, the Thrush and Finch rejoice,
Invoke thy Muse, and tune thy rural Voice.

COLIN. ANOTHER Day my rural Voice I Will raise,
Another Day the Muse shall tune her Lays:
But now, alas! such crowding Joys I find,
No Words can speak the Transports of my Mind.
Would PHOEBUS warm me with poetic Fire,
Or would the Mantuan Muse my Tongue inspire;
As Great ELIZA shone in SPENCER's Line,
The Greater CAROLINA should in mine;
Then would I emulate the tuneful Throng,
And with her glorious Name immortalize my Song.

A PASTORAL ELEGY.
AT first in Vales obscure the Lyre I strung;
Vales, where the Muse her annual Labors sung:
Now, leaving these, she ranges over the Plains,
And tunes her Voice to Flocks and Shepherd Swains;
Yet, fresh in Grief, but feebly moves her Wings,
Weeps, while she flies, and trembles, as she sings.
TWO Country Swains, in Friendship firmly joined,
Loved each alike, and were, like Brothers, kind:
Great CAROLINE her Royal Bounty showed
To one, and raised him from the groveling Crowd;
When straight his smiling Looks, and cheerful Mien,
Proclaimed the Goodness of a gracious QUEEN;
But gloomy Sadness soon his Face possessed,
And clouded all the Joys before expressed:
The other gay and pleasant still appeared;
Nor grieved for Evils past, nor future feared:
One Day they met; MENALCAS first began;
And thus the mournful Tale, alternate, ran.
MENALCAS. WHY, COLIN, do thou wear that pensive Look,
And sighing stand, supported by thy Crook?
Say, from what Cause this Melancholy springs;
Or do thou verify what DAMON sings?
" Vain Man can never satiate his Desires;
" The more he has, the more he still requires:
" Today he is craving, and Tomorrow cloyed;
" New Pleasures grow insipid, when enjoyed."
So, when our Sheep on Hills refuse to feed,
We straight remove them to the verdant Mead;
Where all, intent, the luscious Herbage graze;
And, for that Day, their Pasture seems to please:
The next, they range around the flowery Space;
And bleating tell, they loath the tainted Grass.

COLIN. 'TWAS Yesterday a giddy Sheep I viewed,
Which rose in CUDDY's Fold, and stagg'ring stood;
While one, with burly Horns, secure from Pain,
Ran, enviously, and pushed him down again.
So you, vain jesting Youth! unmoved with Care,
Insult the hapless Swain, that is in Despair.

MENALCAS. I nor insulted, nor intended Guile;
And, if I jested, 'twas to make thee smile:
But tell me, Swain, what wondrous Turn of Fate
O'erclouds thy Face, that looked serene of late?
What, is thy Harvest blasted on the Ground?
Or has the Royal CAROLINA frowned?
Unveil thy Griefs, and make thy Sorrows known;
You know, my Friend's Misfortunes are my own.

COLIN. MY Harvest is not blasted on the Ground,
Nor has the Royal CAROLINA frowned:
But lately, when the Sun had gaily dressed
The lofty Mountains in a purple Vest,
I early rose, to tend my fleecy Care;
Wet was the Grass, and piercing cold the Air.
My lovely SYLVIA, stay behind, I said,
Till I have weaved a Garland for thy Head;
Till I a Bower, with shady Branches, form,
To shun the scorching Ray, or rapid Storm;
And, when the Dew's exhaled, which Night distilled,
Bless COLIN with thy Presence in the Field.
She answered not; but from her Bosom sent
A deep presaging Sigh, before I went.
The Sun had painted every Object gay,
When to the cheerful Field I took my Way;
The Lark with Mattins welcomed in the Morn;
The Thrush and Finch sat chirping on the Thorn;
The Swallows round, in airy Circles, flew;
And, ah! poor COLIN then was joyful too:
But suddenly I saw the Mists arise,
And dark'ning Clouds overspread the dusky Skies,
Th'Horizon seemed to cast a gloomy Frown,
While from his airy Height the Lark sunk down
The tuneful Birds their joyous Songs denied;
And boding Owls, and sooty Ravens, cried.
My drooping Heart, which felt unusual Weight,
Shocked with such Omens, ceased almost to beat:
Yet these, said I, portend no Evil, while
My Royal Mistress condescends to smile:
If She Is propitious, what can COLIN fear?
Inured the lesser Ills of Life to bear.
Thus said, I took my Way to yonder Grove;
And formed, with spreading Boughs, an arched Alcove:
So close I twisted in each pliant Spray,
As might exclude the Wind, or sunny Ray.
With sweetest Flowers I decked the mossy Ground,
And strewn the fragrant Woodbinds all around.
Here, when, said I, my SYLVIA comes a-field,
This grateful Bower a safe Retreat shall yield:
If rainy, here she may the Storms evade;
If fair, the Branches will project a Shade:
Here SYLVIA shall, with COLIN, take her Rest;
And COLIN here, with SYLVIA, shall be blessed.
As thus I spoke, around I cast my Eye,
And saw celestial CELIA drawing nigh:
I saw; but wondered why her heavenly Mien
Was clouded over, that used to be serene.
CELIA's the Mistress of the flowery Plain,
Whose Bounty's known to every worthy Swain
Not Godlike PAN presided with more Care,
Nor to Arcadian Shepherds was so dear.
When CELIA to the rural Shade retires,
She every Breast with rising Hope inspires;
Expecting Swains, with joyous Looks, proclaim
The happy Time, and hail the generous Dame:
As languid Plants, which half the Year lie dead,
When Spring approaches, raise their drooping Head.
She crossed the Plains with a dejected Air;
Her pensive Aspect showed her pious Care;
And, loath th'unwelcome Tidings to reveal,
She sighing spoke, and left th'unfinish'd Tale:
" Ah poor unhappy Swain! return, return;
" The sable Clouds foretell a rainy Morn:
" Nor only is the Day overcast with Gloom;
" Thy pleasing Hopes are blasted all at home;
" Thy SYLVIA, O!" She said, and dropped the rest;
But my presaging Heart too rightly guessed:
I silent stood, and spoke my Grief with Tears;
You know, my Heart was firmly linked to hers.

MENALCAS. I know, your Hearts are linked in Friendship fast;
Long may that mutual Bond of Friendship last:
May HYMEN to you both propitious prove,
And Death but late untie the Knot of Love.

COLIN. O! stop, MENALCAS, and my Loss deplore;
The good, the faithful SYLVIA is no more:
That gloomy Morn she, in my Absence, died;
And rigid Death the last Farewell denied.
Another Loss I could content have born;
But must the Loss of SYLVIA always mourn.
My lovely SYLVIA was my softest Theme,
My Song by Day, by Night my pleasing Dream:
But now in Sighs I spend the lingering Day;
And, weeping, pass the tardy Night away:
Nor does thy Friend indulge a needless Care;
My Loss is great, and just is my Despair.

MENALCAS. THY Loss and Sorrows equally are great;
But Death's the Law of Nature, fixed by Fate:
Our Flocks, our Herds, our All precarious stands;
And fall we must, when Heaven our Fall commands.

COLIN. YET Flocks and Herds are with Reluctance spared;
And what are Flocks and Herds, with her compared?
A hungry Fox stole ten of CUDDY's Lambs,
A lurching Mongrel killed their bleating Dams:
Say, did not CUDDY for his Loss repine?
But, ah! what Loss was his, compared with mine?

MENALCAS. I have a Flute, which DAMON lately made;
No Shepherd on a sweeter ever played:
I tuned it Yesterday, and straight a Throng
Of Nymphs and Swains ran crowding to my Song;
My listening Ewes, awhile, forsook their Meat;
My tender Lambs, though hungry, ceased to bleat:
I Will tune again the soft harmonious Lay;
Music, perhaps, may chase thy Cares away.

COLIN. MENALCAS, Music's for a lighter Ill;
Such Woes as mine would baffle all thy Skill.
Upon his Flute ALEXIS often plays,
And strives to charm my Sorrows with his Lays;
Upon his Flute ALEXIS plays in vain;
His Lays, though charming, cannot charm my Pain.
The tuneful Birds rejoice on every Spray,
My wanton Lambkins in their Pasture play;
In vain the tuneful Birds rejoice, in vain
My wanton Lambkins sport upon the Plain.
WITH cheerful Green the spacious Fields are crowned,
And beauteous Flowers adorn the painted Ground;
The snowy Blossoms on the Branches shine,
A pleasing Scene to every Eye, but mine!
For neither cheerful Green, that crowns the Field,
Nor snowy Blossoms, which the Branches yield,
Nor Flowers, that spread the painted Meadows over,
Delight my Eyes, now SYLVIA is no more.

MENALCAS. IT IS more than Time thy mournful Dirge to end;
For, see, the whistling Ploughmen homeward tend;
Our fleecy Flocks stand waiting round the Fold;
Damp feel the Dews, the ruffling Breezes cold;
The setting Sun forsakes the blushing Skies,
And hazy Fogs from marshy Grounds arise:
Then fold thy Sheep, thy anxious Cares remove;
Nor weep on Earth, for her who sings above.

On a GOOD CONSCIENCE.
THE solid Joys of human Kind
Are those that flow from Peace of Mind;
For who the Sweets of Life can taste,
With Vice, and timorous Guilt, oppressed?
It Is Virtue softens all our Toils,
With Peace our Conscience crowns;
Gives Pleasure, when our Fortune smiles,
And Courage, when it srowns;
Calms every Trouble, makes the Soul serene,
Smooths the contracted Brow, and chears the Heart within.
WHILE guilty Minds, involved with Woe,
Anticipate the future Blow;
Which is (to make Damnation more complete)
The lesser Hell, in Passage to the great;
Bold and intrepid honest Men appear;
For, as they know no Evil, none they fear:
A glorious Shield of Virtue guards their Breast;
Armed with themselves, they always walk at Rest.
THUS, under bursting Clouds, and stormy Skies,
When Thunder roars, and Lightning flies,
The Imperial Eagles boldly rove,
Nor dread the fiery Bolt of JOVE;
While meaner Birds in secret creep below;
And trembling fear, and often feel, the Blow.
On MUSIC.
I.
MUSIC the coldest Heart can warm,
The hardest melt, the fiercest charm;
Disarm the Savage of his Rage,
Dispel our Cares, and Pains assuage;
With Joy it can our Souls inspire,
And tune our Tempers to the Lyre;
Our Passions, like the Notes, agree,
And stand subdued by Harmony.
This found the melancholy King,
When DAVID tuned the trembling String:
Sweet MUSIC chased the sullen Spleen away,
And made his clouded Soul serenely gay.
II.
WHILE MUSIC breathes in Martial Airs,
The Coward durst forget his Fears;
Or, if the Notes to Pity sound,
Revenge and Envy cease to wound:
The Power of MUSIC has been known
To raise or tumble Cities down:
Thus Theban Turrets, Authors say,
Were raised by MUSIC's magic Lay;
And ancient Jericho's Heav'n-hated Wall,
To sacred MUSIC, owed its destined Fall.
III.
NOR Mortals only MUSIC love;
It chears celestial Saints above:
Sweet Hallelujahs Angels sing
Around their great Ethereal KING;
Ceasless they sound the FATHER's Praise,
The FATHER too approves their Lays;
For HE (as all Things) MUSIC made,
And SERAPHIMS before Him played:
When over Horeb's Mount He came,
Arrayed in Majesty and Flame;
After the sounding Trump, sublime, He rode;
The sounding Trump proclaimed the approaching GOD.
IV.
MUSIC had Being, long before
The solemn Organ learnt to roar:
When MICHAEL, over the heavenly Plain,
Advanced, to fight the rebel Train;
Loud Trumpets did his Wrath declare,
In MUSIC, terrible to hear:
And when the Universe was made,
On golden Harps the Angels played:
And when it falls, (as fall it must)
MUSIC shall penetrate the Dust;
The Trump shall sound with the Archangel's Breath;
And, sweetly dreadful! wake the Dead from Death.
On RICHMOND PARK, and ROYAL GARDENS.
OF blissful Groves I sing, and flowery Plains:
Ye Sylvan Nymphs, assist my rural Strains.
Shall Windsor Forest gain a deathless Fame,
And grow immortal, as the Poet's Name;
While not a Bard, of all the tuneful Throng,
With these delightful Fields adorns his This was writ in the Year 1731; since
when, great Alterations and Improvements have been made in the Gardens, and
several Poems published on the same Subject.
Song?
Thy Gardens, Richmond, boast an equal Theme,
And only ask an equal Muse's Flame.
What, though no Virgin Nymphs, of CYNTHIA's Train,
With Belt and Quiver grace the verdant Plain?
What, though no fabled consecrated Floods
Flow over thy Fields, or murmur through thy Woods?
My Song thy real Beauties shall pursue,
And paint the lovely Scenes, and paint 'em true;
A pleasing Task! Nor slight shall be the Praise,
If Royal CAROLINE accept the Lays.
DELIGHTED, often through the mazy Groves,
The Muse, in pensive Contemplation, roves;
Or climbs the slow ascending Richmond Hill.
Hill, whose Brow
Hangs over the silver Stream, which rolls below;
Where all around me shining Prospects rise,
And various Scenes invite my gazing Eyes;
And, while I view one Object with Delight,
New pleasing Wonders charm the feasted Sight:
Now this allures, now that attracts it most;
And the first Beauty's in the second lost.
THUS, in a grateful Concert, may we hear
The Sounds at once surprise, and charm our Ear;
The trembling Notes, in hasty Fugues, arise;
And this advances, ere the former flies;
All seem to be confused, yet all agree,
To perfect the melodious Harmony.
BENEATH the Mount, with what Majestic Pride
The Sire of Rivers rolls his silver Tide!
Let Poets sing of Hermus' golden Shore,
His amber Foam, and Sands of shining Ore:
Nor Tagus envy we, nor fruitful Nile,
Whose fatt'ning Floods enrich the thirsty Soil:
Happy BRITANNIA boasts as fair a Stream,
As great in Bounties, and as great in Fame;
Since DENHAM's deathless Muse has sung his Tide,
And India's Riches over his Surface glide.
OBSEQUIOUS River, when my Eyes survey
Thy Waves, or East, or West, pursue their Way;
Now swiftly roll, to meet the briny Main,
At stated Periods, now return again;
How vain the Schemes of Infidels appear!
How weak their Reas'nings, and the GOD how clear!
Say, Atheists, since you own, by Nature's Laws,
There Is no Effect produced without a Cause;
Why should the restless Stream run to and fro,
And, with alternate Motion, ebb and flow;
Did not some Being, of superior Force,
Rule the wild Waves, and regulate their Course?
HENCE lofty Windsor to the Sight appears;
And, high in Air, her pompous Turrets rears:
Wide, round her Domes, the spacious Forest shines.
Though brighter much in POPE's harmonious Lines:
O! would his tuneful Muse my Breast inspire,
With equal Warmth, with her sublimer Fire;
Then Richmond Hill renowned in Verse should grow,
And Thames reecho to the Song below;
A second Eden in my Page should shine,
And MILTON's Paradise submit to mine.
OFTEN, lost in Thought, forgetful of my Way,
I, over the Park, through Wilds of Beauty, stray;
Where sportive Nature wantons at her Will,
And lavishes her Bloom, uncheck'd by Skill.
Old venerable Trees, majestic, rise,
Sublime in Air, and brave the vaulted Skies;
Which, free from cruel Steel, or Lab'rer's Hand,
In peaceful Age, and hoary Honor, stand.
Here, when AURORA first begins to dawn,
The wakeful Larks spring mounting from the Lawn;
Poised by their Plumes, in lofty Flights they play;
With joyful Warblings hail the approaching Day:
But, when the Sun displays a purple Scene,
And drinks the pearly Dew, that decked the Green;
A thousand tuneful Birds in Concert meet,
A thousand tuneful Notes the Groves repeat;
And, when their Music ceases with the Day,
Sweet PHILOMELA chants her pensive Lay.
BUT, hark! I hear a louder Music sound;
From Woods and Vales the various Notes rebound:
It Is Albion's KING pursues the Royal Chase;
The nimble Stag skims over th'unbending Grass:
The Way which Fear directs, he trembling tries;
Nor knows, where Fear directs, or where he flies:
A hundred different Sounds assail his Ears;
A Death, in every different Sound, he fears:
And now he faintly moves a slower Pace,
And closer now the Hounds pursue the Chase;
Till, in Despair, back on his Foes he turns;
Makes feeble Efforts with his branchy Horns;
Short is the Combat, soon he yields his Breath,
And gasping falls, and trembling pants in Death.
Now to a softer Theme descends my Muse;
Through artful Walks her pleasing Path pursues;
Where lofty Elms, and conic Lindens rise,
Or where th'extensive Terras charms her Eyes;
Where Elegance and noble Grandeur meet,
As the Ideas of its Mistress, great,
Magnificently fair, majestically sweet.
See, on its Margin, Fields of waving Corn;
These bearded Crops, and Flowerets this, adorn;
CERES and FLORA lovingly embrace,
And gay Varieties the Landscape grace.
HENCE lead me, Muses, through yon arched Grove,
Adorned with Sand below, and Leaves above;
Or let me over the spacious Oval trace,
Where verdant Carpets spread the lovely Place;
Where Trees in regular Confusion stand,
And sylvan Beauties rise on every Hand:
Or bear me, Nymphs, to the sequestered Cell,
Where BOIL and NEWTON, mighty Sages! dwell;
Whose Fame shall live, although the Grot decay,
Long as those sacred Truths their Works display.
HOW sweetly pleasing is this cool Retreat,
When PHOEBUS blazes with meridian Heat!
In vain the fervid Beams around it play;
The rocky Roof repels the scorching Ray;
Securely guarded with a sylvan Scene,
In Nature's Liv'ry dressed, for ever green.
TO visit this, the curious Stranger roves,
With grateful Travel, through a Wild of Groves;
And, though directed, often mistakes his Way,
Unknowing where the winding Mazes stray;
Yet still his Feet the magic Paths pursue,
Charmed, though bewildered, with the pleasing View.
NOT so attractive lately shone the Plain,
A gloomy Waste, not worth the Muses Strain;
Where thorny Brakes the Traveller repelled,
And Weeds and Thistles overspread the Field;
Till Royal GEORGE, and Heavenly CAROLINE,
Bid Nature in harmonious Luster shine;
The sacred Fiat through the Chaos rung,
And Symmetry from wild Disorder sprung.
SO, once, confused, the barbarous Nations stood;
Unpolished were their Minds, their Manners rude;
Till Rome her conquering Eagles wide displayed,
And bid the World reform -- The World obeyed.
HOW blessed the Man in these delightful Fields!
New Pleasures each indulgent Moment yields.
Let gayer Minds in Town pursue their Joys,
Exchanging Quietness for Crowds and Noise;
Consume the Night at Masquerade or Play;
Or waste, in busy Idleness, the Day:
I envy not Augusta's pompous Piles,
Since rural Solitude more pleasing smiles.
O Solitude! the Sage's chief Delight!
What Numbers can thy lovely Charms recite!
Hail, peaceful Nymph! thou eldest Thing on Earth!
Nay, like Eternity, thou had no Birth:
The Heavens alone can thy Commencement tell,
Ere MICHAEL fought, or peccant Angels fell;
Before the Skies with radiant Light were clad,
In awful Gloom, and venerable Shade,
The FATHER thee his sole Companion made.
When to Creation first his Thoughts inclined,
And future Worlds were rising in his Mind;
He sat with thee, and planned the mighty Scheme;
With thee adjusted the stupendous Frame;
Contrived how Globes, self-balanc'd in the Air,
With restless Rounds should rule the circling Year;
How Orbs over Orbs in mystic Dance should roll,
What Laws support, and regulate the Whole:
Nor art thou yet impaired, celestial Dame;
Thy Charms are still attractive, still the same;
With thee the Mind, abstracted from the Crew,
May study Nature, and her Ends pursue;
With thee I hear the feathered Warblers sing;
With thee survey the Beauties of the Spring,
When Blossoms, Leaves, and Fruits the Branches yield,
And Eden's Glory crowns the happy Field.
HERE first the Muse (auspicious was the Place!)
Rejoiced to see her Royal Guardian's Face:
How mild, yet how majestic, was her Look!
How sweetly condescending all she spoke!
On every pleasing Accent Wisdom hung,
And Truth and Virtue dwelt upon her Tongue.
O! were I equal to the glorious Theme,
Then should my Lays immortalize her Fame;
Or paint Great GEORGE in peaceful Laurels dressed,
With Albion's Safety laboring in his Breast;
Who (while contending Nations round him jar,
And Subjects Wealth supports their Monarchs War)
Guards happy Britain, with his floating Towers,
From purple Slaughter, and invading Powers;
No plund'ring Armies rob our fruitful Plain;
But, blessed with Peace and Plenty, smiles the Swain.
NOT so he smiles upon the foreign Shores;
But starving walks through Nature's lavish Stores;
Poor Peasants with their rigid Burdens groan,
And Till the Glebe for Harvests not their own.
What, though their more propitious PHOEBUS shines
With warmer Rays, and chears the curling Vines?
What, though rich Olives grace the fertile Soil,
And the hot Climate teems with fatt'ning Oil?
The hungry Farmer views his Crops in vain,
In vain the Vineyard tempts the thirsty Swain;
While their stern Tyrant's arbitrary Power
Rifles the Plains, and ravages their Store:
Thy Sons, BRITANNIA, from such Evils free,
Enjoy the Sweets of Peace and Liberty;
A gracious Sovereign smiles upon the Throne,
And Heaven confirms the happy Realm his own.
AVARO and AMANDA.
A POEM, in FOUR CANTO's, Taken from the Spectator, Vol. I. No. xi.
CANTO I.
WHAT Ills from Want of Education flow,
From Avarice what cruel Scenes of Woe;
I mean to sing, except the tuneful Maid
Neglect my Numbers, and refuse her Aid.
Say, Goddess, first, what made the Youth explore
A foreign Clime, and quit his native Shore?
Say too, how on the barbarous Isle he came;
What moved the Kindness of the Negro Dame?
What could provoke a faithless Youth to sell
A Friend, whose only Crime was loving well?
NOW had AVARO twenty Winters passed,
His blooming Features every Beauty graced;
In silver Rings, his loosely flowing Hair
Hung over his Shoulders, with a comely Air;
Robust his Limbs, and daring was his Soul,
And Vigor crowned the well-proportion'd Whole:
His graceful Charms the Ladies often surveyed,
And often their Eyes an amorous Signal made;
But never could the tender Passion move,
The stubborn Youth was still averse to Love;
Yet, though his Breast was Proof to CUPID's Dart,
A more ignoble God enslaved his Heart.
NO Mysteries of Faith disturbed his Head;
For Mysteries of Faith he seldom read;
That moral Law, which Nature had impressed,
He blotted from the Volume of his Breast;
Yet in his Mind his Father's Precepts bears,
Who often rung this Lesson in his Ears:
" Would you, my Son, to Happiness aspire,
" Know, Gold alone can Happiness acquire;
" He that has Gold, is powerful as a King,
" Has Valor, Virtue, Wisdom, every thing!
" This to obtain, your utmost Skill bestow;
" And if you gain it, be not careful how:
" If in the Court, or Camp, you take Delight,
" Then dare to flatter there, or here to fight:
" Or, should the Merchant's Life your Fancy please,
" Be bold, and bravely venture on the Seas;
" Many by Merchandise have gained Renown,
" And made the Indies Wealth become their own."
The Youth imbibed the Precepts of his Tongue,
Neglecting every Law of Right and Wrong;
Taught by his Sire to court destructive Gain,
He burns to try his Fortune on the Main.
WHILE other Youths, by Wit or Pleasure swayed,
Frequent the Play, the Ball, or Masquerade;
AVARO studious in his Chamber stays,
Careless of Balls, of Masquerades, and Plays;
There adds, subtracts, and, with unwearied Pain,
Learns all the Rules of Interest, Loss and Gain.
NEXT, from an old Astronomer, he tries
To learn the Planets Journey through the Skies;
With him, at Night, when Heaven serene appears,
He points the Quadrant at the shining Spheres;
The HYADES, and frozen Pole surveys,
Which guide the Sailor over the distant Seas;
Then Maps and Models of our Globe prepares,
And carefully inspects both Hemispheres;
From East to West he views the spacious Round,
Pleased with the modern World COLUMBUS found:
In Hope elate, the Youth impatient stands,
And seems to grasp both Indies in his Hands.
This sees the Sire, and hastily provides
A Vessel, proof against the Wind and Tides.
The Youth embarks, the soft propitious Gales
Arise, and soon expand the swelling Sails;
The Ship glides swiftly over the liquid Plain,
And NEPTUNE smiles, and courts him on the Main.
BUT see, how Mortals are the Sport of Fate!
How often unhappy, striving to be great!
Ere CYNTHIA twice her monthly Race had run,
An Omen of the fatal Storm begun:
The murmuring Wind arises by degrees,
And rocks the Ship, and sweeps the curling Seas;
Now louder, with impetuous Force, it roars,
And shoves the swelling Surges to the Shores;
Till rapid Rain, and Flakes of bick'ring Flame,
With dreadful Thunder, vex th'ethereal Frame.
Struck with Surprise, the timorous Merchant stands,
Nor knows what he forbids, or what commands:
Nor safely back, nor can he forwards go;
But trembling waits, and fears the fatal Blow.
LONG time the Sailers work against the Wind,
With fruitless Toil, to gain the Port assigned;
Till Courage, Hope, and all Provisions failed,
And Fear, Despair, and Want their Souls assailed.
Forced by the Storm into a winding Bay,
Their joyful Eyes an Indian Isle survey;
When straight they quit their Ship, and gain the Shore,
And for Recruits the Savage Land explore.
ADJOINING to the dreary Beach, there stood
Wild Shrubs and Trees, that formed a gloomy Wood;
Where, close obscured, the crafty Natives lay,
And watched the wandering Crew, remote from Sea:
Then forth they rush, and strait their Bows prepare;
Too late the Sailers see the approaching War:
In vain the Brave engage, or Timorous fly;
The Timorous, and the Brave, promiscuous die;
The barbarous Fields are stained with purple Gore.
And dreadful Groanings echo to the Shore.
Our youthful Merchant escapes, and flies alone;
His Fear impels, and Safety prompts him on;
Through dusky Woods he takes his trembling Flight,
The dusky Woods conceal him from their Sight;
Till in the devious Wilds, remote from Foes,
Then, on the Ground, he weeping vents his Woes,
Often cursed his hapless Fate, and often thought
On what the hoary Star-monger had taught;
How, at our Birth, as different Planets rule,
They form a Wit, or constitute a Fool;
How, in the Maze of Life, we act as they
Attract, retard, or force us in the Way.
And, as he these uncertain Censures made,
Against the Stars he thus exclaiming said:
THE Planets sure some noxious Power display,
And rule my Life with arbitrary Sway;
Else had I never forsook my native Home,
Nor in this baleful Desert met my Doom --
And yet, when I reflect, I cannot see,
How Globes insensible should influence me!
I choose my Actions; when the Choice is made.
I nor invoke, nor yet consult their Aid.
When Mortals act according to their Will,
Can Heaven be called the Author of their Ill?
Too late I find, the Stars are not in Fault;
But it is that golden Wish my Sire has taught:
Enticing Gold, that damned deceiving Guide,
Induced me first to stem the foaming Tide;
Fallacious Charm, that led me from Repose,
Now leaves me in a Labyrinth of Woes.
SO, when compacted Vapors, in the Night,
Skim over the Fields, with a delusive Light,
The injudicious Traveller surveys
Th'alluring Scene, and courts the glist'ring Blaze;
Till, tempted over a Rock's impending Brow,
He falls to some tremendous Gulf below.
THUS the unhappy Youth laments his Fate,
Conscious of all the Ills, that round him wait;
Till setting PHOEBUS leaves the blushing Sky,
And glimmering Stars a feeble Light supply:
The Shades of Night increase his anxious Care,
And add a greater Horror to Despair.
CANTO II.
ALL Night in Tears the pensive Merchant lay,
And often wished, and feared the coming Day;
Till, on the Hills, the rising Sun displayed
His golden Beams, and chased away the Shade:
Harmonious Birds salute his cheerful Rays,
And hail the rosy Morn with joyful Lays;
While, stretched upon the Ground, AVARO moans,
Answ'ring their tuneful Songs with piercing Groans.
NOT distant far from where the Youth was laid,
A purling Stream, in pleasing Murmurs, played;
And, by the Margin of the crystal Flood,
Two Rows of Trees in beautcous Order stood;
Whose Branches formed a pendent Arch above,
Diffusing gloomy Verdure over the Grove.
An Indian Princess hither daily came,
Pleased with the grateful Shade, and cooling Stream:
She now was walking to her loved Retreat,
And heard the mourning Youth lament his Fate:
Fixed in Amaze, awhile she listening stood;
Then swift approached him, rushing through the Wood.
The affrighted Merchant rose with gazing Eyes,
And timorous Looks, that testified Surprise:
Backward he starts; the Dame, with equal Fears,
Recedes as fast, and wonders what appears:
Yet, bolder grown, she soon advanced again,
Smit with the Beauty of the godlike Man:
His Dress, and fair Complexion, charmed her Sight;
Each glowing Feature gave her new Delight;
While Love and Pity both arose within,
And kindled in her Soul a Flame unseen.
With equal Joy AVARO now surveyed
The native Graces of the Negro Maid:
He viewed her Arms, with various Ribbands bound;
Her downy Head, with painted Feathers crowned;
With Bredes, and lucid Shells, in Circles strung,
Which shone refulgent, as they round her hung.
AS when, in splendid Robes, a courtly Maid
Begins the Dance at Ball or Masquerade;
The Pearls and Di'monds shine with mingled Light,
And glittering Pendants blaze against the Sight.
SO shone the beauteous Shells around her Waist,
And sparkling Gems, that decked her jetty Breast;
All which AVARO's gazing Eyes pursue,
Charmed with her lovely Shape, disclosed to View:
Each Limb appears in just Proportion made,
With Elegance through every Part displayed:
And now his Cares dissolve, new Passions move;
And Nature intimates, the Change is LOVE.
NOT far remote, a cooling Grot was made,
In which the Virgin often sought a Shade:
Thick Shrubs, and fruitful Vines, around it grew;
And none, except herself, the Mansion knew.
To this obscure Recess the Royal Dame,
Rejoicing, with her lovely Captive came:
Then, from the Branches, with officious Haste,
She plucks the Fruits, which yield a sweet Repast:
That done, she, with her Bow, explores the Wood;
Pierced with her Shaft, the Fowl resigns his Blood.
Then back she hastens to her cool Retreat,
And for AVARO dressed the grateful Meat:
To slake his Thirst, she next directs his Way,
Where crystal Streams in wild Meanders stray:
Nor lets him there, exposed to Foes, remain;
But to the Cave conducts him safe again.
SO doats AMANDA on the Merchant, while
She scorns the Lovers of her native Isle:
For all the Heroes of her Country strove,
With Emulation, to attract her Love;
And, when they could the painted Fowls ensnare,
Or pierce the savage Beast in sylvan War,
The Skins and Feathers, Trophies of their Fame,
They gave for Presents to the Royal Dame;
All which she to her loved AVARO brought,
And with them gaily decked his shining Grot:
The spotted Panther here she hung; and there,
With Paws extended, frowned the shaggy Bear;
Here gaudy Plumes appear, in Luster bright;
There Shells and Pearls diffuse a sparkling Light.
AS when, to grace some Royal Prince's Hall,
The skilful Painter animates the Wall;
Here warlike Heroes frown in Martial Arms,
There a soft Nymph displays her blushing Charms
A pleasing Landscape next invites our Eye,
And the Room glows with sweet Variety.
YET, still to give her Lover more Delight,
(Lest what he daily saw, should pall the Sight)
When SOL with Purple clothed the Western Sky,
And Shades extended showed the Evening nigh,
She to some verdant Grove the Youth conveyed,
Where Nightingales harmonious Music made:
Soft Flowerets were their Couch; and, all around,
Diffusive Sweets perfumed the fragrant Ground.
There often she would his snowy Bosom bare,
Often round her Fingers wind his silver Hair;
Charmed with the Contrast, which their Colors made,
More pleasing than the Tulip's Light and Shade.
Nor was the Youth insensible; but soon
Repaid her Love, by showing of his own:
Often would his Bosom heave with speaking Sighs;
Often would he gaze, and languish with his Eyes:
Now on her panting Breast his Head repose,
To meet his Head her panting Breast arose;
While in her Soul ecstatic Raptures glowed,
And her fond Arms believed they clasped a God.
SO lived the happy Pair, observed by none,
Till both had learnt a Language of their own;
In which the Youth, one Evening, in the Shade,
Beguiles the harmless unsuspicious Maid;
Leans on her Breast, and, with a Kiss, betrays;
Then vents his specious Fraud in Words like these;
WITNESS, ye Gods, and all ye Blessed above,
(For Ye can witness best, how well I love)
If ever, among our blooming Nymphs, I knew
Such Pleasures, as my Soul receives from you!
O dear AMANDA! could I but, with thee,
Once more my happy native Country see,
You should not there in lonely Caves retreat,
Nor trace the burning Sands with naked Feet;
Your Limbs, which now the Sun and Wind invade,
Should neatly be in softest Silks arrayed;
In gilded Houses gaily should you ride,
By Horses drawn, which prancing Side by Side,
Neigh, foam, and champ the Bit with graceful Pride;
Our Time, in Pomp and Peace, should slide away,
And blooming Pleasures crown the smiling Day;
And, when the setting Sun forsook the Skies,
Approaching Night should but increase our Joys:
We would not on the chilling Ground embrace,
Nor Foes, as now, should interrupt our Peace;
But both reposing on some easy Bed,
Soft, as the fleecy Down, that decks thy Head,
The sportive God of Love should round us play,
While we, in Raptures, passed the Night away:
Then let us carefully, my Dear, explore
The Haven, where I first approached the Shore.
Perhaps we shall some floating Ship survey,
Safe to conduct us over the watery Way:
Nor let the foaming Waves your Steps retard;
I Will guard you over, and be a faithful Guard.
How often, alas! is Innocence betrayed,
When Love invites, and Flatterers persuade?
How could the Dame, a Stranger to Deceit,
Imagine such a heavenly Form a Cheat?
She paused, she sighed; then, with a pensive Look,
Half loath, and half consenting, thus she spoke:
ONCE has AVARO escaped the raging Main:
Why would you tempt the fickle Seas again?
To seek new Dangers, when in Safety here,
Would but provoke the Deities you fear --
Sometimes, I own, we have been surpised by Foes,
Whose nightly Walks have waked you from Repose:
Yet still I guard your sacred Life secure,
And always will -- What can AMANDA more?
THUS said, she clasped him in her loving Arms,
Embraced his Neck, and doated on his Charms:
And now both show their Passions in their Look,
And now Connubial HYMEN both invoke;
In sportive Joys they closed the genial Day,
While PHILOMELA sung the Nuptial Lay;
Till soon the Youth reclined upon her Breast,
And golden Slumbers sealed their Eyes to Rest.
CANTO III.
SOON as the Sun began to gild the Day,
And on the Hills emit a trembling Ray;
AMANDA, from her flowery Bed, awoke;
Sad was her Heart, and discomposed her Look;
The briny Torrent flows adown her Cheeks,
While thus she to her dear AVARO speaks:
O Thou, on whom my Life and Love depend,
If ever AMANDA claimed the Name of Friend;
If ever I gave thy troubled Mind Repose,
Or hid thee, when pursued with furious Foes;
Explain this Dream, that terrifies my Breast;
The strangest, Fear, or Fancy, ever impressed!
METHOUGHT a God descended from the Skies;
Celestial Beauty sparkled in his Eyes;
Like Rays of PHOEBUS shone his radiant Hair,
His Shape like thine, like thine his graceful Air;
A Robe was neatly girt about his Waist,
Fine as my loved AVARO's silken Vest;
His shining Lips upon my Breast he laid,
And softly pressed my Hand, and smiling said:
" ARISE, my Dear, my loved AMANDA, rise;
" An easier Lodging waits thee in the Skies:
" I am descended from the blessed Abodes,
" To bear thee hence to Heaven among the Gods:
" No Enemies shall there disturb thy Rest;
" There, with thy Lover, live for ever blessed."
THUS said, he raised me from the dewy Plain,
And bore, or seemed to bear me, over the Main:
But soon he led me to a distant Isle,
Where Horrors reign, and Comforts never smile:
Thick Brakes and Brambles choked the dreary Coast,
The only Product, which the Land could boast;
Till a dejected, servile Race arose,
With gloomy Sadness brooding on their Brows:
This Crowd, promiscuous, with incessant Toil,
Or rooted up the Wood, or plough'd the Soil:
How each performed his Task, a Tyrant viewed;
And sternly shook his Whip, and menaced, as he stood.
Sometimes, to shun the direful Lash, they fled;
The Insulting Lord pursued with greater Speed:
Sure not so fearful fly the trembling Bears,
To shun our Hunters Darts, and missive Spears;
Sure not so swift our Hunters ever pursued
The trembling Bears, when flying through the Wood;
As from the Tyrant's Wrath they swiftly run,
Or, as the Tyrant, swifter, urged 'em on.
Each to his wonted Task he drove again,
And made me mix among the servile Train;
Doomed with the rest to groan beneath the Yoke,
Alike I felt the dire correcting Stroke.
But, O! what added most to my Despair,
My Godlike Guide was false, and left me there --
As thus she spoke, confused her Looks appeared;
For still her Soul the dreadful Vision feared:
Deciding Reason from her Seat withdrew,
And Fancy painted all the Scene anew.
The Youth to cheer the drooping Dame essayed,
When straight a Boar came rushing through the Shade;
The crashing Woods proclaimed his rapid Force,
While two fleet Youths pursued the sylvan Course:
The Lovers started from their flowery Seats,
Surpised, and each a different Way retreats.
As when some Musquet's Thunder has expelled
Two loving Turtles from the verdant Field;
Both, diverse, through the wide ethereal Plain
Fly swift; and flying, fear their Mate is slain.
So parting, devious fled the affrighted Pair;
Such was AVARO's, such AMANDA's Fear.
The foaming Boar between 'em swiftly past,
The nimble Coursers urge the Chase as fast;
Till soon they pierce him with a mortal Wound;
He falls, and purple Gore distains the Ground:
Then, from the savage War, they take their Way;
And to their Cave, triumphant, bear the Prey.
SOON as the sportive Hunters left the Wood,
The loving Pair concealed no longer stood;
But trembling both forsook the dusky Shade,
Both trembling met upon the opening Glade:
Mute with Surprise awhile they stood; the Man
Broke Silence first, and thus his Tale began:
O dear AMANDA! soon we have surveyed
This mystic Vision of the Night displayed:
These are the frowning Tyrants in thy Dream,
That chased the Slaves, and we their flying Game.
SOME Part, said she, resembled this, I own;
And some remains a Riddle yet unknown:
What meant that God, which still, methinks, I view?
That radiant Deity! so much like You!
And what the Fields above, which he proposed?
Say, if the Mystery can be disclosed.
To whom the Youth: Our active Fancy seems
For ever roving, roving most in Dreams:
For then the Soul, disburden'd of her Load,
Soars high, and grows prophetic, like a God;
Minds Things when past, as present to our View;
And, by Allusion, knows the future too.
Thus, when to Sleep your musing Head reclined,
She kept our Evening Converse in her Mind;
Reflected on the Joys my Country yields,
Joys, sweet as those in yonder azure Fields;
Till, soaring higher, striving to discern
Her hidden Fate, and future Fortune learn,
Heaven showed her something like this Morning Chase,
By trembling Slaves, who fled their Tyrant's Face;
Perhaps, to warn us timely from our Bed;
For, O my dear AMANDA! had we stayed,
I had not lived to tell this mystic Tale,
Nor you, to hear the Secrets I reveal --
But let us to my happy Country steer,
Nor longer wait impending Ruin here.
So spoke the Youth; and, with a gracious Look,
He seemed to sanctify the Words he spoke.
Go, she replied; go where you are inclined;
Your faithful Lover will not stay behind.
If over the Seas you shall attempt your Way,
The Seas shall not compel me here to stay;
Nor will I fear the Surges of the Deep;
(For Surges often, you say, assail the Ship)
Calm and composed, intrepid, will I stand,
Till you conduct me to your native Land.
Or, if you would some other Clime pursue,
Then shall some other Climate please me too.
And when the happy destined Land we meet,
Where Providence shall fix our wandering Feet;
With joyful Servitude, I Will still attend
On you, my nuptial Lord, and dearest Friend.
Soon as AURORA spreads her purple Ray,
When you awake, to chase the nimble Prey,
I Will also rise; and, with an equal Art,
Display the Net, or speed the pointed Dart;
Or search the Plains, and tasteful Herbs provide;
Or strip the Vines, and press their juicy Pride:
Each Evening will I fondly deck your Bed
With sweetest Flowerets, gathered from the Mead
And when, dissolved in downy Sleep, you lie,
I Will wake, and watch if Foes approach too nigh:
To guard your Life, all Hazards will I run;
And, for your Safety, sacrifice my own.
TO whom the Youth: No Hazards shall you run;
Nor, for my Safety, sacrifice your own;
Nor yet at Evening fondly deck my Bed
With sweetest Flowerets, gathered from the Mead;
Nor shall AMANDA tasteful Herbs explore;
Nor shall AVARO chase the savage Boar:
A softer Bed, than Flowers, shall give you Rest;
A choicer Meat, than Fruits, indulge your Taste.
Ten thousand Things my grateful Soul shall find,
To charm your Fancy, and delight your Mind;
I Will vary Love a hundred different Ways,
And institute new Arts to make it please:
So shall our future Race of Children see
A constant Proverb made of you and me:
When British Youths shall court the doubting Dame,
And want Expressions equal to their Flame;
Then, strongly to attest it, shall be said,
" True, as AVARO to the Indian Maid."
To whom AMANDA, (pausing at the Name)
What meant AVARO by the doubting Dame?
Has any of your British Damsels made
A Doubt of what such godlike Beings said?
Or is it customary to your Clime?
Has ever Youth committed such a Crime,
As base Ingratitude? Has any there
Deluded first, and then forsook, the Fair?
I cannot think, your Love will ever decline,
Nor can my radiant Angel question mine.
By yon bright Beams, which paint the rising Day;
By thy bright Charms, as beautiful as they;
By all our pleasing Hours of Love, I vow
To share your Fate through every Scene of Woe;
Content, with you, to yield my vital Breath;
For Life, without you, would but lengthen Death.
WITH such sweet Talk their Moments they beguile;
Both seem impatient for the destined Isle:
He daily vows, and daily is believed;
She daily hears, and daily is deceived.
CANTO IV.
FAREWELL, bright Goddess of the Idalian Grove!
Farewell, ye sportive Deities of LOVE!
No longer I your pleasing Joys rehearse;
A rougher Theme demands my pensive Verse;
A Scene of Woes remains to be displayed,
Indulgent Love with Slavery repaid:
Ingratitude, and broken Vows, and Lies,
The mighty Ills, that spring from Avarice,
Provoke my Lays: Your Aid, ye Muses, bring;
Assist my Tragic Numbers, while I sing.
Say, what ensued, when, on the briny Deep,
The watchful Dame beheld a floating Ship?
She called, and beckoned to it from the Shore;
Then to the Youth the grateful Tidings bore;
And said, I something see, like winged Trees,
(Strange to behold!) fly swiftly over the Seas;
Their bulky Roots upon the Billows float:
Say, is not this the Ship, you long have sought?
Or I mistake, or, by the Gods Command,
This comes to bear us to your native Land:
Then hasten, see the Partner of your Heart,
With You, her Guide, is ready to depart;
My Father, Mother, Friends, I bid Adieu,
Friends, Father, Mother, not so dear as You.
To whom the Youth, with smiling Brow, replied:
O thou true Pattern of a faithful Bride!
Who dare thy Father, Mother, Friends resign;
And risque thy own dear Life, to rescue mine! --
If I forget the Debt I owe to Thee,
May all the Gods forget their Care of Me!
In more wild Deserts let me rove again;
Nor find a Friend, like Thee, to ease my Pain!
There let the Vulturs, Wolves, and Tigers tear
This Body, Thou have kindly nourished here!
So saying, to the Beach he straight descends;
And, by the Flag, discerns the Crew his Friends:
And now his Heart exults within his Breast;
His loving Mate an equal Joy confessed;
She, with him, gladly ventures on the Main,
Unthinking of her future Toil and Pain.
So, to the Plough, the Heifer, yet unbroke,
Walks cheerful on, nor dreads the impending Yoke;
Till, in the Fields, urged with the piercing Goad,
She groans, and writhes, reluctant with her Load.
THE British Bark was to Barbados bound:
The Expected Shore the Sailers quickly found;
Where, safe from Danger, now the perjured Youth,
False to his former Vows of sacred Truth,
Reflecting, counts the Interest he had lost,
While Fate detained him on the Indian Coast:
The frugal Thoughts suppress his amorous Flame,
And prompt him to betray the faithful Dame.
Yet scarce he can the cursed Fact pursue;
But hesitates at what he fain would do:
For, though his Avarice moves him to the Ill,
His Gratitude within him struggles still;
And, 'twixt two Passions, neither guides his Will.
AS when two Scales, which equal Loads suspend,
Sway to and fro; alternate both descend,
Till undeclining each aloft abides,
Nor this, nor that, the doubtful Weight decides.
SO stood the doubtful Youth awhile; nor would
Forsake the Evil, nor pursue the Good;
Till, as the Sailers in the Haven stay,
To purchase Slaves, the Planters crowd the Key:
One asks, for what the Negro may be sold;
Then bids a Price, and shows the tempting Gold:
Which when AVARO views with greedy Eyes,
He soon resolves to gain th'alluring Prize;
Nor Oaths, nor Gratitude, can longer bind;
Her Fate he thus determines in his Mind:
" SUPPOSE I should conduct this Indian over;
" And thus, instead of Gold, import a Moor --
" Would not my Sire, with stern contracted Brows,
" Condemn my Choice, and curse my nuptial Vows?
" Was it for this I learned the Merchant's Art?
" Only to gain a doting Negro's Heart!
" Was it for this the raging Seas I crossed?
" No; Gold induced me to the Indian Coast;
" And Gold is offered for this simple Dame;
" Shall I refuse it, or renounce my Flame? --
" Let amorous Fools their tiresome Joys renew,
" And dote on Love, while Interest I pursue."
He added not; for now, intent on Gold,
And dead to all Remorse, the Dame he sold.
AMANDA stood confounded with Surprise,
And silently reproached him with her Eyes:
She often tried to speak; but when she tried,
Her Heart swelled full, her Voice its Aid denied;
And, when she made her fault'ring Tongue obey,
These Words, commix'd with Sighs, found out their Way.
" WHO can the mystic Ways of Fate explain?
" Am I awake, or do I dream again?
" Is this the sad Reward of all my Care?
" Was it for this I cheered thee in Despair?
" The Gods above (if any Gods there be)
" Witness what I have done to succor thee!
" Yet, if my Kindness cannot thy Pity move,
" Pity the Fruits of our unhappy Love:
" O let the Infant, in my pregnant Womb,
" Excite thee to revoke my threatened Doom;
" Think how the future Slave, in Climes remote,
" Shall curse the treacherous Sire, that him begot."
SO spoke the mourning Dame, but spoke in vain;
Th'obdurate Youth insults her with Disdain;
Not all her Kindness could his Pity move,
Nor yet the Fruits of their unhappy Love.
But, as the Flames, which soften Wax, display
The same warm Force to harden sordid Clay;
That Motive, which would melt another Heart,
More hardened his, and made him act a double Villain's Part.
He, for the Child, demands a larger Sum;
And sells it, while an Embryo in the Womb.
AND now he sternly takes her by the Hand,
Then drags her on, reluctant, to the Land;
While, as she walks, her dismal Fate she moans,
The Rocks around her echo to her Groans:
" O base, ungrateful Youth!" she loudly cries;
" O base, ungrateful Youth!" the Shore replies:
" And can thou, cruel, perjured Villain! leave
" Thy tender Infant too, an abject Slave,
" To toil, and groan, and bleed beneath the Rod?
" Fool that I was, to think thou were a God!
" Sure from some savage Tiger art thou sprung --
" No: Tigers feed, and fawn upon their Young:
" But thou despisest all paternal Cares,
" The Fate of Infants, and their Mother's Prayers."
IN vain she does her wretched State deplore;
Pleased with the Gold, he gladly quits the Shore;
The ruffling Winds dilate the Sails, the Ship
Divides the Waves, and skims along the Deep.
Three Days the bellying Canvas gently swells,
Clear shines the Sun, and friendly blow the Gales;
Then frowning Clouds invest the vaulted Sky,
And hollow Winds proclaim a Tempest nigh:
Fierce BOREAS loudly over the Ocean roars,
Smoke the white Waves, and sound the adverse Shores;
While, to increase the Horrors of the Main,
Descends a Deluge of impetuous Rain.
The giddy Ship on circling Eddies rides,
Tossed, and retoss'd, the Sport of Winds and Tides.
Redoubled Peals of roaring Thunder roll,
And Flames, conflicting, flash from Pole to Pole,
While guilty Thoughts distract AVARO's Soul.
Of Life despairing, though afraid to die,
One fatal Effort yet he means to try:
While all the busy Crew, with panting Breath,
Were laboring to repel the liquid Death;
AVARO from the Stern the Boat divides,
And yields up to the Fury of the Tides:
Tossed on the boisterous Wave, the Vessel flies,
Now sinking low, now mounting to the Skies;
Till soon the Storm decreased, and, by degrees,
Hushed were the Winds, and calm the ruffled Seas;
The Sailers safely steer their Course again,
And leave AVARO floating on the Main;
Who landed quickly on a lonely Isle,
Where human Feet never print the baleful Soil;
A dreary Wilderness was all appeared,
And howling Wolves the only Sound he heard;
A thousand Deaths he views before his Eyes,
A thousand Guilt-created Fiends arise;
A conscious Hell within his Bosom burns,
And racks his tortured Soul, while thus he mourns:
" CURSED be the Precepts of my selfish Sire,
" Who bad me after fatal Gold aspire!
" Cursed be myself, and doubly cursed, who sold
" A faithful Friend, to gain that fatal Gold! --
" O! could these gloomy Woods my Sin conceal,
" Or in my Bosom quench this fiery Hell;
" Here would I pine my wretched Life away,
" Or to the hungry Savage fall a Prey --
" But can the gloomy Woods conceal my Sin,
" Or cooling Shadows quench the Hell within?
" No; like some Spirit banished Heaven, I find
" Terrors in every Place, to rack my Mind;
" Tormenting conscious Plagues increase my Care,
" And guilty Thoughts indulge my just Despair --
" O! where shall I that piercing Eye evade,
" That scans the Depths of Hell's tremendous Shade?"
SO saying, straight he gave a hideous Glare,
With rolling Eyes, that witnessed strong Despair:
Then drew his pointed Weapon from the Sheath,
Confusedly wild, and all his Thoughts on Death;
To pierce his trembling Heart he thrice essayed,
And thrice his coward Arm denied its Aid:
Meanwhile a howling Wolf, with Hunger pressed,
Leaped on the Wretch, and seized him by the Breast;
Tore out his Heart, and licked the purple Flood;
For Earth refused to drink the Villain's Blood.
To a Young LADY, who had a CUPID given Her.
FAIR Lady, take a special Care,
This pleasing Toy become no Snare;
The subtle God is full of Wiles,
And mischiefs most, when most he smiles:
Beware to clasp him in your Arms,
Nor gaze too much upon his Charms;
Lest in a borrowed Shape he wound,
As once unhappy DIDO found;
For, while she viewed his smiling Look,
Her Heart received a fatal Stroke.
On the Hon. Mrs. HORNER's Traveling for the Recovery of her Health.
CLARISSA long has sought, in vain,
Physicians Aid, to ease her Pain;
But now their Aid she seeks no more,
Nor longer will their Drugs endure;
Spite of their Art, her Spirits fail,
Her Cheeks are turned a languid Pale;
Yet, though her mortal Part's decayed,
Her nobler Virtue does not fade;
Her Soul, inflexible to Ill,
In Piety advances still:
So Metals lie in chymic Fires;
And, while the grosser Part expires,
The Flames refine the golden Ore,
And make it brighter than before.
SHE now a warmer Clime explores,
To prove the Air of foreign Shores:
O! may the temperate Breezes bring
Salubrious Medicines on their Wing:
Thou, PHOEBUS, too, propitious shine;
And (since the Power of Physic's thine)
Send blooming Health on every Beam,
Dispel her Pains, and cheer the Dame.
Else must my melancholy Strain,
In mournful Elegies, complain.
Even now, too well, these Numbers show,
My drooping Fancy's damped with Woe:
Yet, though my Verse deserves no Praise,
Let no sour Critic damn my Lays;
Since OVID's Self but faintly sung,
When only Grief inspired his Tongue.
The ABSENT LOVER.
ALEXIS, walking in the Park,
Met CHLOE, just before 'twas dark:
He asked a Kiss, nor she denied;
I don't know what they did beside:
But, as a Child, in Thought, chews over
The Sweetmeats, which he eat before;
So in his Mind ALEXIS keeps
The dear Impression of her Lips:
He felt it all the foll'wing Day,
At Night indulged it at the Play;
One lingering Act he musing stayed,
But knew not what the Actors said;
He thought the Park in Drury Lane,
Believed the Nymph appeared again;
He seems to view her snowy Neck,
Her ruby Lip, and rosy Cheek,
Her graceful Smiles, and sparkling Eyes,
Her panting Bosom fall and rise:
And now he clasped her in his Arms,
('It Was all imaginary Charms)
When, rising to the Height of Bliss,
His Lips essayed to take a Kiss;
An Orange-wench trod on his Foot;
And screaming, " Will you have some Fruit?"
Surpised, he dropped the pleasing Theme,
And found his Joys a waking Dream;
He swore, and wept, and kicked the Wench,
Forgot his Hat, and left the Bench.
On a Screen, worked in Flowers by Her Royal Highness ANNE, Princess of ORANGE.
ILLUSTRIOUS Nymph! whose Art could raise
This skilful Monument of Praise,
Forgive the Bard, who strikes the Lyre;
Accept the Verse, your Toils inspire:
For, when your Labors strike my Eyes,
The voluntary Numbers rise.
Who can be silent, when they view
This fair Creation, wrought by You?
Each Flower does with such Luster shine,
Such Beauties crown the gay Design;
That Nature fixed in Wonder stands,
To see she is rivaled by your Hands;
And, jealous of your Art, displays
A Blush, when she the Work surveys.
Yet this accomplished Piece, we find,
Shows a faint Image of your Mind;
The lovely Charms, and Graces here,
But copy those, that center there.
To His ROYAL HIGHNESS The DUKE of CUMBERLAND, On His BIRTHDAY.
TWELVE This was writ, when the DUKE entered into the Twelfth Year of his Age.
times has SOL his annual Race begun,
Since JOVE descended from his radiant Throne:
Around the pendent Globe, the God pursued
His circling March, and human Actions viewed;
But grieved that Virtue drooped her languid Head,
While Vice, from Clime to Clime, contagious spread.
Back, to his native Seat, he sternly flies;
And sends an Edict through the spacious Skies,
To call th'Ethereal Powers: Swift flew his Word;
Th'Ethereal Powers, as swift, attend their Lord.
Upon Olympus' Top the Synod met,
Where, high enthroned, the thundering Monarch sat;
And, with a Nod, that shook the Spheres, he swore,
The Minor Gods should visit Earth no more.
What, must your earthly Sons, MINERVA cried,
Explore their doubtful Way without a Guide?
If PALLAS must no more to Mortals go,
Let PALLAS beg a Substitute below,
Worthy to rule the World, whose noble Mind
May copy out the Gods to human Kind.
She lowly bowed; and JOVE, consenting, smiled;
Go, form, said he, this new-imagin'd Child:
Collect the best Materials, where you will;
And let us see, for once, MINERVA's Skill.
He said; she hastens over the bright Abodes,
Selecting each Perfection of the Gods:
From MARS she warlike Strength and Courage took;
But softened them with VENUS' graceful Look:
To these she added HERMES' Eloquence,
And crowned it with her own superior Sense:
Some of APOLLO's piercing Rays she stole;
And, while the MUSES played, she formed a Soul.
When thus composed the bright Ingredients lay,
She nobly dressed them in Ethereal Clay;
JOVE touched the Mass with his enlivening Hand,
And vital Warmth inspired a CUMBERLAND.
To DEATH.
An IRREGULAR ODE.
I.
HAIL, formidable KING!
My Muse thy dreaded Fame shall sing.
Why should old HOMER's pompous Lays
Immortalize ACHILLES' Praise?
Or why should ADDISON's harmonious Verse
Our MARLBRO's nobler Deeds rehearse?
Alas! no more these Heroes shine;
Their Power is all subdued by Thine.
Where are these mighty Leaders now,
Great POMPEY, CAESAR, and Young AMMON too,
Who thought he drew immortal Breath?
These bold ambitious Sons of MARS,
Who died the Globe with bloody Wars,
Are vanquished all by thee, victorious DEATH!
II.
EVEN while they lived, their Martial Hate
But firmer fixed thy Throne;
Nor, though it hastened others Fate,
Could it delay their own.
Nor did thou want their Rage to kill;
Thy own can execute thy Will:
Whenever thou do exert thy Power,
A thousand morbid Troops thy Call obey;
Sometimes thy wasting Plagues devour,
And sweep whole Realms away.
Now with contagious Biles the City mourns,
And now thy scorching Fever burns,
Or trembling Quartan chills;
Of Heat and Cold the dire Extremes
Now freeze, now fire the Blood with Flames,
Till various Torment kills.
III.
CONSUMPTIONS, and Rheumatic Pain,
And Apoplectic Fits, that rack the Brain;
Soul-panting Asthmas, Dropsy, and Catarrh,
Gout, Palsy, Lunacy, and black Despair;
Pangs, that neglected Lovers feel;
Corroding Jealousy, their earthly Hell,
Which makes the injured Woman wild;
And powerful Spleen, that gets the Man with Child;
Physicians, Surgeons, Bawds, and Whores, and Wine,
Are all obsequious Ministers of Thine;
Nay, and RELIGION too,
When Hypocrites their Interest pursue,
Or frantic Zeal inspires,
It calls for Racks, and Wheels, and Fires:
Then all our mystic Articles of Faith,
Instead of saving Life, become the Cause of DEATH.
IV.
GREAT MONARCH! how secure must be thy Crown,
When all these Things conspire to prop thy Throne?
Yet, in thy universal Reign,
Thou do not use tyrannic Sway.
Whatever the Weak and Timorous say,
Who tremble at thy Frown;
Thou art propitious to our Pain,
And break'st the groaning Pris'ner's Chain,
Which Tyranny put on.
In Thee the Lover quits his Care,
Nor longer courts the cruel Fair,
Her Coldness mourns no more:
In Thee Ambition ends its Race,
And finds, at length, the destined Place,
It never could find before:
The Merchant too, who plows the Main,
In greedy Quest of Gain,
By Thee to happier Climes is brought,
Than those his wild, insatiate Avarice sought.
V.
PROPITIOUS Succourer of the Distressed,
Who often, by the Dead, do make the Living blessed!
How could profusive Heirs attend
Their Mistress, Bottle, Ball, and Play,
If timely Thou wert-not their Friend,
To snatch the scraping Sire away?
How would dull Poets weary Time
With their insipid Rhyme,
And teaze and tire the Readers Ears
With Party Feuds, and Paper Wars,
If Thou, great Critic! did not use
Thy Power, to point a Period for their Muse?
The Bard, at thy decisive Will,
Discards his mercenary Quill;
Then all his mighty Volumes lie
Hid in the peaceful Tomb of vast Obscurity.
VI.
I, like the rest, advance my Lays;
With uncouth Numbers, rumble forth a Song,
Sedately dull, to celebrate thy Praise;
And lash, and spur the heavy laboring Muse along:
But soon the fatal Time must come,
(Ordained by Heaven's unerring Doom)
When Thou shall cut the vital Thread,
And shove the verbal Embryos from my Head.
Then, since I Am sure to meet my Fate,
How vain would Hope appear?
Since Fear cannot protract the Date,
How foolish 'twere to fear?
I Will strive, at least, to stand prepared,
Thy Summons to obey;
Nor would I think thy Sentence hard,
Nor wish, nor fear the Day;
But live in conscious Peace, and die without Dismay.
VII.
FALLACIOUS Reas'ners wrong Thee, when
They call thy Laws severe;
Severe! to whom? To wicked Men;
Then let the Wicked fear.
Thou judge all with equal Laws,
No venal Witness backs thy Cause,
No Bribes to Thee are known;
If thy impartial Hand but strike,
The Prince and Peasant fall alike,
The Courtier, and the Clown.
What though awhile the Beggar groans,
While Kings enjoy their gilded Thrones?
What are Distinctions, Pomp, and Regal Train,
And Honors, got with Care, and kept with Pain?
One friendly Stroke of thine sets level all again.
All earthly Grandeur must decline;
Nay, even Great GEORGE's Power submit to thine:
But thy Dominion shall endure,
Till PHOEBUS measures Time no more:
Then all shall be in dark Oblivion cast,
And every mortal Kingdom fall; but thine shall fall the last.
On Mrs. L^s.
SUCH Sweetness and Goodness together combined;
So beauteous her Face, and so bright is her Mind;
So loving, yet chaste; and so humble, yet fair;
So comely her Shape, and so decent her Air;
So skilful, that Nature's improved by her Art;
So prudent her Head, and so bounteous her Heart;
So wise without Pride, and so modestly neat;
It Is strange, this agreeable Creature's a Cheat!
For, though she to Man, for a Mortal, was given,
These Virtues betray her Extraction from Heaven.
TRUTH and FALSEHOOD.
A FABLE.
SOON as the Iron Age on Earth began,
And Vice found easy Entrance into Man;
Forth from her Cave infernal FALSEHOOD came;
FALSEHOOD, the Hate of Gods, of Men the Shame:
A silken Robe she wore, of various Hue,
Its Color changing with each different View:
Studious to cheat, and eager to beguile,
She mimic'd TRUTH, and ap'd her heavenly Smile;
But mimic'd TRUTH in vain; the varying Vest,
To every searching Eye, the Fiend confessed.
AT length she saw celestial TRUTH appear:
Serene her Brow, and cheerful was her Air;
Her silver Locks with shining Fillets bound,
With Laurel Wreaths her peaceful Temples crowned:
A Lily Robe was girded round her Waist;
And, over her Arms, a radiant Mantle cast:
With decent Negligence, it hung behind;
And, loosely flowing, wantoned in the Wind.
Thus TRUTH advanced, unknowing of Deceit;
And FALSEHOOD, bowing low, began the Cheat:
HAIL, charming Maid, bright as the Morning Star,
Daughter of JOVE, and Heaven's peculiar Care!
It Is thine to weigh the World in equal Scales,
And chide the conscious Soul, when Vice prevails,
Dispensing Justice with impartial Hand,
The mightiest Powers submit to thy Command:
Even Gods themselves, though in their Actions free,
Consult, resolve, and act, as you decree:
Great Sovereign JOVE, the first Ethereal Name,
Advised with thee to form the heavenly Frame:
As TRUTH approved, he bad the Fabric rise,
And spread the azure Mantle of the Skies;
Placed every Planet in its proper Sphere,
Nor rolls this Orb too wide, nor that too near --
But why thus walk we, mindless of our Ease,
Exposed beneath the Sun's meridian Blaze?
Better retire, and shun the scorching Ray,
Till fanning Zephyrs cool our Evening Way.
Hear how yon limpid Streams run murmuring by,
And tuneful Birds their sylvan Notes apply;
See fragrant Shrubs along the Borders grow,
And waving Shades beneath the Poplar Bough;
All these invite us to the River's Side,
To bathe our Limbs, and sport within the Tide:
So cool the Stream, the flowery Banks so sweet,
DIANA's Self might covet the Retreat:
Nor can a short Diversion check your Haste;
Fresh Strength will soon succeed such welcome Rest:
As rapid Currents, held awhile at Bay,
With swifter Force pursue their liquid Way.
So spoke the Phantom; and, with friendly Look
Supporting what she said, approached the Brook:
TRUTH followed, artless, unsuspicious Maid!
And, in an evil Hour, the Voice obeyed.
Both, at the crystal Stream arrived, unbound
Their different Robes; both cast them to the Ground:
The Fiend, upon the Margin, lingering stood;
The naked Goddess leapt into the Flood:
Sporting, she swims the liquid Surface over,
Unmindful of the matchless Robe she wore.
Not FALSEHOOD so -- She hasty seized the Vest,
And with the beauteous Spoils herself she dressed:
Then, winged with Joy, outflew the swiftest Wind,
Her own infernal Robe far left behind.
Straight she aspires above her former State,
And gains Admittance to the Rich and Great:
Nay, such her daring Pride, that some report,
When thus equipped, she boldly went to Court:
There spoke and looked with such a graceful Air,
Mistaken FAME pronounced her Wise and Fair.
She filled the Wanton's Tongue with specious Names,
To deal in Wounds, and Deaths, in Darts, and Flames;
He prefac'd all his lewd Attempts with Love;
And Fraud prevailed, where Reason could not move.
At length she mingled with the learned Throng,
And tuned the Muse's mercenary Song.
In all the Labyrinths of Logic skilled,
She taught the subtle Reas'ner not to yield;
Instructed how to puzzle each Dispute,
And boldly baffle Men, though not confute.
Now, at the Bar, she played the Lawyer's Part;
And shaped out Right and Wrong by Rules of Art:
Now, in the Senate, raised her pompous Tone;
Talked much of Public Good, but meant her Own.
Often to the Olympian Field she turned her Eyes,
And taught the Racers how to gain the Prize.
In Schools and Temples too she claimed a Share,
While FALSHOOD's Self admired her Influence there.
DELUDED TRUTH observed the Fraud too late,
Nor knew she to repair a Loss so great:
In vain her heavenly Robes she, sighing, seeks;
In vain the humid Pearls bedew her Cheeks;
In vain she tears the Laurel from her Hair,
While Nature seems to sympathize her Care:
The glowing Flowers, that crown th'enamel'd Meads,
Weep fragrant Dews, and hang their drooping Heads;
The sylvan Choirs, as conscious of her Pains,
Deplore her Loss in melancholy Strains.
Thus, pensive and unclothed, upon the Shore
She stands; and sees the Robe, which FALSEHOOD wore:
Detested Sight! Nor longer now she mourns;
But, Grief to Rage transformed, with Anger burns:
Into the Stream, the hellish Robe she tossed;
And scorned a Habit, so unlike the lost.
HENCE TRUTH now naked roves, as in Disgrace;
None, but the Wise and Virtuous, see her Face:
From Cities far she modestly retreats,
From busy Scenes of Life, to peaceful Seats;
Is chiefly found in lonely Fields and Cells,
Where Silence reigns, and Contemplation dwells.
Hence FALSEHOOD cheats us in the fair Disguise,
And seems TRUTH's Self to all unwary Eyes;
Triumphs and thrives, in Power, and Wealth, and Fame;
And builds her Glory on her Rival's Name;
With Safety dares to flatter, fawn, and sooth;
For who knows FALSEHOOD, when arrayed like TRUTH?
Proper Ingredients to make a Skeptic.
WOULD you, my Friend, a finished Skeptic make,
To form his Nature, these Materials take:
A little Learning; twenty Grains of Sense,
Joined with a double Share of Ignorance;
Infuse a little Wit into the Scull,
Which never fails to make a mighty Fool;
Two Drams of Faith; a Tun of Doubting next;
Let all be with the Dregs of Reason mixed:
When in his Mind, these jarring Seeds are sown,
He^^^ censure all Things, but approve of none.
On Two Young Ladies leaving the Country.
SAY, lovely Nymphs! who fly from rural Sweets,
To noisy Crowds, thick Air, and smoaky Streets,
Do Balls, or Plays, your graceful Steps invite?
Can Balls, or Plays, like Richmond Groves, delight?
No tuneful PHILOMEL, in Town, complains,
To charm your listening Ear with varied Strains;
No fragrant Gales refresh the sickening Fields,
No cheerful flowery Scenes the City yields:
But Mists, and lambent Fogs, wherever you pass,
Shall cloud the Graces, that adorn your Face;
While those bright Eyes, like sullied Gems, appear,
Or Stars, just glimmering through the dusky Air.
NOR will you only Change of Beauty find;
Illusive Scenes will mock your pensive Mind:
In cloudless Mornings, when you have drank your Tea,
And read a Page in SHERLOCK, or in -- GAY;
Perhaps your Thoughts, transported, here may rove,
And, to your Mind, present the blissful Grove:
You Will think to walk by silver Thames's Shore;
Or trace the verdant Mead, as heretofore:
When at the Door, the rural Vision flies;
Smoke, Coaches, Fops, and Carmen meet your Eyes:
Straight back you will turn, vexed with the fruitless Search;
Bid The Footman.
ROBERT call a Chair, and go to Church.
On MITES.
To a LADY.
It Is but by way of Simile. PRIOR.
DEAR Madam, did you never gaze,
Through Optic-glass, on rotten Cheese?
There, Madam, did you never perceive
A Crowd of dwarfish Creatures live?
The little Things, elate with Pride,
Strut to and fro, from Side to Side:
In tiny Pomp, and pertly vain,
Lords of their pleasing Orb, they reign;
And, filled with hardened Curds and Cream,
Think the whole Dairy made for them.
SO Men, conceited Lords of all,
Walk proudly over this pendent Ball,
Fond of their little Spot below,
Nor greater Beings care to know;
But think, those Worlds, which deck the Skies,
Were only formed to please their Eyes.
CHLOE's CONQUEST.
'TWAS by a purling Stream, beneath a Shade,
Young CHLOE, CUPID, and ALEXIS played:
LOVE's Goddess, with her Doves, sat looking on;
And, smiling, nodded to her wanton Son:
Her wanton Son his keenest Arrow drew;
Swift, to the Swain, the pointed Weapon flew.
Inflexible to Love, the Shepherd stood,
Repelled the Shaft, and mocked the baffled God;
Till CHLOE raised her Eyes with killing Art,
And shot him with a more pernicious Dart:
Yours is the Victory, ALEXIS cries;
Not CUPID's Shaft has killed, but CHLOE's Eyes.
Occasioned by a Dispute with a LADY.
I.
FORGIVE me, CHLOE; 'twas a Deed,
That from Ambition sprung;
I Will never again presume to plead
With your victorious Tongue.
II.
SUCH Wisdom in your Words appears,
Such Music makes them please;
Mine lose their Force, like Morning Stars
Before the Solar Rays.
III.
CONQUERED by your superior Sense,
I drop the wordy War,
Convinced, your powerful Eloquence
Is strong, as you are fair.
IV.
YET, though subdued, my Fall is great,
Nor shamefully I yield;
It Is Honor to contend, though beat,
When Angels take the Field.
To Mr. WORSDALE: Occasioned by seeing CELIA's Picture unfinished.
Writ extempore at Kensington.
YET, WORSDALE, yet, thou must exert thy Art,
To paint the matchless Virtues of her Heart:
It Is not enough, that Wit and Beauty join;
But, in her Face, let Sense and Judgment shine;
Let godlike Bounty crown her generous Soul,
And solid Wisdom dignify the Whole:
So, in thy Piece, shall each Beholder see
A finished CELIA Her, a KNELLER Thee.
On the QUEEN's Grotto, in RICHMOND Gardens.
NOW blush, CALYPSO; it is but just to yield,
That all your mossy Caves are here excelled.
See how the Walls, in humble Form, advance,
With careless Pride, and simple Elegance:
See Art and Nature strive with equal Grace,
And Fancy charmed with what she cannot surpass.
Flow swiftly, THAMES; and flowing, still proclaim.
This Building's Beauty, and the Builder's Fame;
Tell Indian Seas, thy NAIADS here have seen
The sweetest Grotto, and the wisest QUEEN;
Whose Royal Presence blessed this humble Seat:
How small the Mansion, and the Guest how Great!
So Angels sat in Canaan's sweet Abodes,
So rural Shades were honored with the Gods.
Here may her Soul The Almighty's Wonders trace,
Far as the Worthies, that adorn the Place;
Whose awful Busts around the Grot appear,
The brightest Stars in Learning's Hemisphere:
Their Fathers dimly viewed the dawning Ray;
These rose like Suns, and brought a Flood of Day.
BUT cease, my Muse, and cast thy wondering Eyes,
Where PHOEBUS' lofty Eaton and Westminster Schools.
Domes majestic rise;
Whose tuneful Train have sung this Grotto's Praise,
Contending each, till each deserves the Bays.
O pardon me, ye learned Sons of Fame!
Who saintly, after you, attempt the Theme;
Nor think, I rival your poetic Fires;
My QUEEN commands, and Gratitude inspires
And You, Imperial Foundress! deign to smile,
Nor scorn the least, the latest Muse's Toil;
Who brings the tardy Offering of her Lays,
The first in Duty, though the last in Praise.
To the Author of a Poem on the Duke of Lorrain's Arrival at the British Court.
IS DENHAM's nervous Muse revived again,
To hail the Regal Visit of LORRAIN?
Or is it POPE's harmonious Voice we hear,
Or whose majestic Numbers charm our Ear?
What modest Youth fears to expose his Name,
When every Line so justly merits Fame?
LORRAIN may learn to rule of Britain's KING;
But British Bards may learn of Thee to sing.
Whoever thou art, these feeble Lays receive,
Though I this Tribute with Reluctance give;
For, when my Eye thy pompous Verse surveys,
I read with Wonder, but with Envy praise.
SO, when Britannia's Senators contest,
And jarring Feuds enrage the Patriot's Breast;
If some judicious Speech great WALPOLE makes,
Opposing Parties praise him, while he speaks;
His Foes resign the long-disputed Cause;
And, spite of Malice, Envy gives Applause.
On FLORELLA's Birthday.
THE Queen of Love, and PALLAS once, it is said,
Had both agreed to form a finished Maid:
Upon a noted Day they flew to Earth,
A Day still noted by FLORELLA's Birth:
Both Deities employed their utmost Care,
To make their darling Lady wise and fair:
This gave her Beauty, that a sprightly Wit,
Which rendered Soul and Body justly fit:
But MERCURY, that nimble-winged Thief,
Who loves his Joke, as dearly as his Life,
Down from Olympus to his Sisters flew,
When just to Life their little Embryo grew;
And poured a little Folly in her Breast;
A little Folly leavened all the rest:
Hence it is, she is sometimes sprightly, sometimes dull;
And sometimes witty, sometimes quite a Fool;
Scarce foolish now, nor witty, sprightly neither;
But sprightly, witty, foolish, all together.
To the Rev. Dr. Friend, on his quitting Westminster School.
IF void of Art my languid Verse appears,
Forgive, O FRIEND, the Bard, who sings in Tears:
Rude are the Lays, which only Grief adorns;
And dull the Muses, when APOLLO mourns;
When Science trembles over MINERVA's Shrine,
To see her favorite Priest his Charge resign.
Yet why should Grief debase his glorious Name,
Or blast the Bays, his Merits justly claim?
No venal View his noble Temper sways;
He quits with Honor, what he kept with Praise.
As some wise Leader, in successful Wars,
Worn out with Age, and covered over with Scars,
Resigns the Post, he bravely long sustained,
Crowned with the Palm, his former Valor gained:
So thou, paternal Sage! may now repose;
Nor seek new Laurels, to adorn thy Brows;
Review thy Toils, and see what polished Peers
Honor thy forming Hand, and studious Cares:
Let learned CART'RET, elegant of Taste,
Confess the Mould, in which his Mind was cast:
Let HERVEY's Muse her Tutor's Worth proclaim,
And PELHAM's Royal Trust declare thy Fame;
PELHAM, in whose capacious Soul we find
The Scholar, Statesman, and the Patriot joined.
Nor shall the tender Plants, which round thee stand,
Ever prove ungrateful to the Planter's Hand;
Watered by Thee, their well-fix'd Roots extend,
Their Branches flourish, and the Fruits ascend;
While pleasing Hope with Expectation smiles,
To reap the future Product of thy Toils,
Intent to see thy Pupils shining forth,
Whose Actions soon shall better speak thy Worth;
When in the Train of Senators they come,
Refined with all the Arts of Greece and Rome;
While, in each Act, their prudent Counsels show
Their Master's Loyalty, and Learning too.
Thus have thy Precepts made thy Province shine,
And even MINERVA's Athens yield to thine.
On Celia's Picture, drawn by Sir Godfrey Kneller.
WITH such a sapient Eye, and heavenly Mind,
MINERVA taught her Arts to human Kind;
With such attractive Charms, and graceful Air,
VENUS was judged the Queen of all the Fair:
Such Sense and Beauty to the Painter shone,
He drew Two Goddesses, to finish One.
On the Marriage of his Serene Highness the Prince of Orange.
ILLUSTRIOUS Prince! forgive the feeble Lay,
That now aspires to hail your Nuptial Day;
Nor scorn a Muse, the meanest of the Nine,
Who brings her humble Offering to your Shrine.
And you, Imperial Nymph! whose lovely Face
Invites the Hero to your chaste Embrace,
Vouchsafe a Spark of your celestial Fire;
Harmonious Words, and pleasing Thoughts inspire,
Soft, as your Love, and tuneful, as your Lyre:
So shall my Numbers charm the listening Ear,
And even the glad NASSAU delighted hear.
NASSAU has long enriched the Book of Fame,
And ANNA now adorns the noble Name.
Nations, who saw the Light of ORANGE rise,
With awful Splendour, in the Belgian Skies;
Shall soon behold it with new Luster shine,
Joined to a glorious Star, of BRUNSWIC's Line.
SO, where the flowing Sambre gently glides,
The Swain delights to view the beauteous Tides:
But, when his more extended Eye surveys
The shining Torrent join the spacious Maese;
Both Rivers, thus, with friendly Union flow,
And to the Sight superior Beauty show.
WHENEVER the Gods a noble Race intend,
They suit the Causes to the destined End,
Nor yoke unequal Hearts in Nuptial Love:
JOVE's valiant Bird disdains the fearful Dove;
Great Minds, by native Sympathy, combine,
As golden Particles the closest join.
Paternal Virtues in their Bosom roll,
Allied in Love by Nobleness of Soul:
Hence Thrones and Sceptres shine neglected Things,
Hence Royal ANNE prefers NASSAU to Kings;
While Britons with united Hearts rejoice,
And willing Senators applaud the Choice,
To see their KING (to Honor ever true)
Discharge the Debt to sacred WILLIAM due;
Immortal WILLIAM! by whose prudent Cares
We yet enjoy the Fruits of all our Wars;
Our Laws, Religion, Liberty, and Peace,
And even the Blessings of the BRUNSWIC Race.
NOR Thou, Illustrious ORANGE! blush to own,
Thy Honor, thus allied to Albion's Crown;
Blessed with a Princess, in whose Form we trace
Her Father's Majesty, and Mother's Grace;
Bright Orbs of Power, that, with propitious Ray,
Dispel our Clouds, and beautify our Day:
Not as the Comet, raging through the Air,
Infects the World with Pestilence and War;
But, like the Sun, their Beams of Goodness glow,
Inspiring Life, and chearing all below.
Such are the glorious SIRE, and gracious DAME,
From whence the beauteous Bride of ORANGE came.
And shall unerring Nature change her Kind?
What Lion ever produced a timorous Hind?
The Royal Eagles Royal Eagles breed,
And Heroes from heroic Sires proceed:
Rome's Founder, thus, confessed his Race Divine;
Thus NASSAU copies the NASSOVIAN Line;
Thus ANNA's noble Stream of Virtue flows,
High, as the Regal Spring, from whence it rose.
Thrice happy Nymph, with every Grace supplied!
Thrice happy Prince, with such a heavenly Bride!
In whom superior Sense with Judgment joins,
Her Beauty much, but more her Merit shines.
How glorious! When such Worth adorns the Great,
We hear, we see, admire, and imitate:
Virtue, in Them, attracts remotest Eyes;
But, in the vulgar Soul, unheeded lies.
As radiant PHOEBUS darts superior Light,
While smaller Planets shun the watchful Sight.
ACCOMPLISHED thus, let her Example fire
The drooping Muse, and wake the sounding Lyre:
To aid Religion, be her chiefest Care,
(Heaven justly claims the Soul, it made so fair)
To stem the Torrent of licentious Rage,
And prop the Virtues of a sinking Age;
Exalting Science to her ancient Height,
To raise declining Arts, and make the Rude polite:
While great NASSAU, whom native Glory warms,
Whenever his Country calls him forth to Arms,
May fire the Belgians in the Field of MARS,
Consult their Peace, or animate their Wars;
Paint his Forefathers to their wondering Eye,
And teach 'em how to conquer, or to die;
Like him, who bravely dared to break their Chain,
Though held by all the Force and Fraud of Spain:
For injured Liberty the Sword he draws,
Resolved to gain, or perish in the Cause;
And having long the doubtful Combat tried,
Like CAESAR vanquished, and like CAESAR King WILLIAM's Great-Grandfather, the
First great Assertor of the Belgian Liberties, assassinated at Delph.
died;
Though different far the Motives of their Mind;
That fought to conquer, this to save Mankind;
Till praised, lamented, envied, and admired,
The Hero, Patriot, and the Prince expired.
O! where did then the Guardian Angels hide?
Nor watched to turn the guilty Ball aside;
When he, whom armed Hosts could not withstand,
Now falls a Victim to one Villain's Hand!
BUT rise, ye Muses, quit the pensive Lay:
Nor damp the Joys of this auspicious Day.
Since yet the glorious Name of ORANGE stands,
Since Royal ANNA seals the Nuptial Bands;
Soon may Imperial ADOLPHS rise again,
Again new FRED'RICS thunder on the Main,
Rouzing the Martial Youth to War's Alarms,
(If proud Iberians shine again in Arms)
To guard their Country from tyrannic Power,
And be, what glorious WILLIAM was before.
NOR shall the States invading Forces fear,
Ere pregnant Time the promised Heroes bear;
Nor want Allies their Freedom to defend,
Since BRUNSWIC reigns, and ALBION is their Friend.
As branching Oaks protect the rural Swain,
Secure from Summer Heat, and Winter Rain;
So shall our Monarch, with paternal Aid,
His Regal Shelter over Batavia spread:
Long as the Scepter fills his Royal Hand,
A true Palladium shall insure the Land.
AND if the prescient Muses guide my Lay,
Or future Secrets PHOEBUS can display;
The Day shall shine distinguished from the rest,
That ANNA dignified, and HYMEN blessed;
In which AUGUSTUS fortifies his Throne,
And plans a Scheme of Union for his Son;
Bespeaks Allies for Princes yet to come,
New Friends to Britain, and new Foes to Rome.
PROCEED, Great MONARCH! new Allies to gain,
And with new Nuptial Leagues our Peace maintain:
So shall thy beauteous Nymphs secure with Charms
That Safety, other Kings defend with Arms;
They, VENUS like, could MARS himself surprise,
And awe stern Tyrants with their conquering Eyes.
VERSES to the Author, In IMITATION of HORACE's ODE on PINDAR.
By a DIVINE.
Applied to the Marriage of his Highness the Prince of Orange with ANNE,
Princess Royal of Great Britain.
WHO hopes to rival MILTON's Flame,
With waxen Pinions fondly flies;
His Fall will give the Sea a Name,
While he attempts to reach the Skies.
MILTON is like a Flood, whose Tide,
Swelled with tempestuous Deluge, roars;
Which from some lofty Mountain's Side
Resistless foams, and knows no Shores.
With sacred Laurels justly crowned,
Whether, in bold, unfettered Strains,
His towering Muse the common Bound,
Superior to all Rhyme, disdains;
Whether the Realms of endless Day
He fill with Wars, and rude Alarms;
Or set, in terrible Array,
Seraphic Legions, clad in Arms.
Aloft, with all their Forests, thrown
See Hills, from their Foundations razed!
See Angels hurled with Vengeance down,
When the MESSIAH's Standard blazed!
Or leads he to connubial Bowers
The new-form'd Pair? The teeming Ground
Smiles with a Wilderness of Flowers,
Diffusing Gales of Fragrance round.
Lo! ADAM, with majestic Mien,
For Empire and Command designed!
Consummate Beauty crowns his Queen,
With Dignity and Sweetness joined.
While he the charming Scene displays,
Where Innocence and Pleasure reigned;
Delighted with his sacred Lays,
We hear it lost, and feel it gained.
His Lays, inimitably fine,
With Ecstasy each Passion move,
When loud they trumpet War divine,
Or softly warble human Love.
O STEPHEN! this Britannic Swan
Surmounts the Clouds with noble Flight,
While I, at Distance, only can
Admire him lessening to the Sight.
As the poor Be, with endless Toil,
To suck the Thyme, and blooming Rose,
Skims over Richmond's fragrant Soil,
Thus I with pleasing Pain compose.
You, with a happy Genius blessed,
In bolder Strains shall NASSAU sing,
When ANNA, by the Graces dressed,
He to the Nuptial Dome shall bring:
ANNA, enriched with various Charms
By the indulgent Care of Heaven;
Than whom, into his longing Arms,
No greater Treasure can be given.
Not, though with Riches of the East,
At his Command, the Ganges flow;
Though, with full Empire, he possessed
Whatever Ambition wished below.
Ye NEREIDS, with propitious Gales
The gilded Vessel kindly aid;
Let CUPIDS fan the swelling Sails,
And waft him to the Royal Maid.
This was written before the Prince came to England.
When THAMES, with floating Forests crowned,
LEANDER safe arrived proclaims,
And of tumultuous Joy the Sound
Shall bid AUGUSTA rise in Flames;
Loud Thunder, bursting from her Towers,
Shall signalize the sacred Day;
And Transport to the Belgic Shores,
For Blessings which they lent, convey.
Around while Hymeneals ring,
My Voice to highest Pitch I Will raise;
Thrice happy, if I can but sing
An humble Ode to NASSAU's Praise.
You, soaring in Heroic Verse,
By native Strength of Wing upborn,
His godlike Virtues shall rehearse,
And Beauties, which the Bride adorn.
He, in your Lays, shall finished rise,
For Council, or th'embattled Field;
Immortals the contested Prize
To her superior Charms shall yield.
Then, ravished with prophetic Views,
Succeeding Glories shall presage;
And, from the Genial Bed, the Muse
Raise Princes, to improve the Age:
Who, bravely prodigal of Blood,
Shall prove, that to set free Mankind,
And conquer for the Public Good,
The Race of NASSAU was designed.
Thus great ALCIDES (Poets feign)
By Labors gained the Seats above;
Countries preserved, and Monsters slain,
Assert the genuine Son of JOVE.
The ANSWER.
WHEN I, in feeble Verse, essayed
NASSAU and ANNA's Praise,
A Lyric Muse flew over my Head,
And dropped a Branch of Bays:
I would have fixed it on my Brow;
But PHOEBUS said, Forbear;
It Is Vanity to touch the Bough,
And Sacrilege, to wear.
Give it the Bard, who boldly dares
Attempt the Roman Lyre;
Who wisely checks, but not impairs
The towering PINDAR's Fire.
Thus, Sir, to you, in PHOEBUS' Name,
The Laurel Wreath I send;
And, since the God denies me Fame,
Am glad it crowns my Friend.
On Delia singing, and playing on Music.
I.
WHEN DELIA tunes her vocal Song,
And strikes the trembling Strings;
The listening Audience round her throng,
Admiring, while she sings.
II.
BUT, when we view the skilful Fair,
We Are struck with more Surprise:
Before, she only pleased our Ear;
But now, inchants our Eyes.
III.
BEAUTY and Harmony combined,
Like secret Charms betray;
Like Ghosts in magic Rings confined,
We cannot stir away.
IV.
So Birds, imprudent, fall to Ground,
When pleasing Notes they hear,
Charmed with the Piper's artful Sound,
Till taken in his Snare.
To the Right Honorable William Clayton, Esquire (now Lord Sundon) on his being
Elected Representative in Parliament for Westminster without Opposition.
TO You, great Steward of the public Trust,
True to your King, and to your Country just!
No venal Bard his joyful Tribute brings,
Nor Envy sure can censure what he sings;
Since each impartial Tongue your Praise declares,
The Muse but echoes, what the Poet hears.
SOME, by their Birth, to Senates lay their Claim,
Whose Folly shames the Seat, which honors them:
But You, whose Merits moved the People's Voice,
Unanimous, to make so wise a Choice,
With solid Sense, and prudent Conduct show,
You grace the Senate, not the Senate You.
Where, in the List of Patriots, could we find
A sounder Judgment, a sincerer Mind?
Or where a juster Hand, to poise the Scale
Of Kings Prerogative, and Public Weal?
Nor this you strive to sink, nor that extend;
Bigot to neither Side, to both a Friend.
So flow the Spirits through our vital Frame;
Nor yet this Member chill, nor that inflame.
TRUE to your Principles, you never stray
From Public Good, though Interest lead the Way:
For Public Good you still employ your Tongue;
And, rather than commit, you suffer Wrong.
When South sea 1720.
Waves o'erflow'd the British Plain,
And Members bartered Honesty for Gain;
No Gain, no Place, nor Profit could control
The stubborn Virtue of your steady Soul:
You firm to Honor, Truth, and Conscience stood,
Unfashionably just, and obstinately good.
BUT why should I in feeble Numbers tell
Those Virtues, which your Actions paint so well?
For all the Actions of your Life proclaim
A Subject's loyal Love, a Patriot's Fame.
Your Care to keep the People's Interest sure,
Your Zeal to guard the Prince's Crown secure,
Make Prince and People both espouse your Cause;
Witness their latest Choice, and loud Applause;
When crowded Streets with Acclamations rung,
And CLAYTON's Praises dwelt on every Tongue;
Parties themselves agreed your Worth to boast,
Or differed only, who should praise it most;
While timorous Candidates the Test declined,
And, to your nobler Brow, the Palm resigned:
So fly the Stars before the rising Sun;
And, from his brighter Beams withdraw their own.
To Mr. Winder, (now Fellow) of Corpus-Christi, Oxford; in Answer to a Latin
Epistle, which he sent me.
I.
SOON as your partial Lays I saw,
I guessed your crafty Views;
And thought you writ in Verse, to draw
A Bill upon my Muse.
II.
BUT, since the Treasure you convey,
Comes from the Roman Mine;
Forgive me, if I cannot repay
The Value of your Coin.
III.
WHILE on thy manly Lines I dwell,
Lines, that might POPE employ;
What strange Vicissitudes I feel
Of Sorrow, Love, and Joy!
IV.
NOW Pleasure charms my glowing Soul,
To hear thy pompous Song
In soft, majestic Numbers roll,
Like FLACCUS, sweet and strong.
V.
BUT quickly sympathizing Pain
Succeeds my short Delight,
To find thy moving, mournful Strain
Describe thy Mr. Winder was much afflicted with sore Eyes, when he sent the
Epistle.
Loss of Sight.
VI.
I grieve to think, MACHAON's Art
Can give thee no Relief;
I weep, and wish my grateful Heart
Could cure, or share, thy Grief.
VII.
NO more to me Encomiums send,
In such a learned Strain;
But, if you would compliment your Friend,
Present him half your Pain.
VIII.
TO PHOEBUS make thy Music soar,
To Him direct thy Lays;
Invoke his Aid, and healing Power,
To purge the visual Rays.
IX.
FOR, if your Lyre but strike his Ear,
(The Lyre you lately strung)
The God of Verse and Light must hear
A Suit so sweetly sung.
A Description of a Journey To Marlborough, Bath, Portsmouth, etc.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount PALMERSTON.
WHILE some, my Lord, the Roman Coast explore,
Survey the Fanes, and trace their Beauties over,
Studious of Arts, by which ingenious BOIL
Now draws the Plan, or now erects the Pile;
More bounded in my Fancy, and my Purse,
I, over domestic Plains, pursue my Course;
And every pleasing Object in the Way,
The Muse shall sing, if you accept her Lay.
WHEN CANCER fiercely glowed with PHOEBUS' Heat,
And Clouds of Dust flew even in Brentford-street;
Over Hounslow-heath my early Course I steer,
For Robbers famed; but I no Robbers fear:
Let Gold, like Guilt, increase the Miser's Grief;
A Poet's Purse, like Virtue, dares a Thief.
Colebrook I quickly pass, and soon my Eyes
Survey the Royal Towers of Windsor rise:
Charmed with the Theme of POPE's harmonious Song,
I check my Steed, and slowly move along;
As lingering Mariners contract their Sails,
To feast on Odours of Arabian Gales.
But lest, my Lord, your Patience should accuse
The dull Narration of a tedious Muse,
I will not sing each Trifle that occurred,
How much I eat, and drank, and whipped, and spurred:
How often my Palfry stumbled in the Way,
Till A little Village, near Farringdon in Berks.
Hatford ends the Travel of the Day;
Where kind A Farmer, once the Author's Master, and still his Friend.
MENALCAS, Partner of my Soul,
Revives me with his friendly, flowing Bowl;
Yet forces no intemp'rate Bumpers round,
Except when DELIA's Health the Glasses crowned.
A thousand Labors past, we now run over,
What Scenes we acted, and what Toils we bore:
No Party Feuds, nor Politics we name;
The Joys of Friendship mostly were our Theme.
Warned by the Clock, we now retire to Rest,
Till rising PHOEBUS streaked the purple East.
Breakfast soon over, we trace the verdant Field,
Where sharpened Scythes the laboring Mowers wield:
Straight Emulation glows in every Vein;
I long to try the curvous Blade again.
AS when, at Hockley-hole, old Gamesters view
Young Combatants their Martial Sports renew,
A youthful Vigor fires their ancient Soul,
Nor former Wounds their Courage can control;
Again they mount the Stage, again they play,
Again they bear the noble Prize away:
So with Ambition burns my daring Breast;
I snatch the Scythe, and with the Swains contest;
Behind 'em close, I rush the sweeping Steel;
The vanquished Mowers soon confess my Skill.
NOT long at this laborious Sport I stay;
But, with my Friend, to Where the Author lived a Thresher.
Charlton take my Way:
'Twas there, my Lord, induced by potent Ale,
Swains leave their Ploughs, and Threshers quit their Flail:
Your Money which his Lordship sent to treat the Threshers.
Bounty soon provokes the Bells to ring;
Clowns dance, Boys hollow, and hoarse Cobblers sing.
Not greater was the Joy in ancient Greece,
When AESON's Son produced the Golden Fleece,
Than now appeared in every Thresher's Breast,
Soon as your Gold sung Prologue to the Feast.
WHY should the Muse recite our Bill of Fare,
And with a long Description tire your Ear?
None can your generous Treat with Want reproach;
All eat enough, and many drank too much:
Full twenty Threshers quaff around the Board;
All name their Toast, and every one, my Lord.
No Cares, no Toils, no Troubles now appear;
For Troubles, Toils, and Cares are drowned in Beer;
Till soon the chol'ric Fumes of Liquor rise,
Flush in their Face, and sparkle in their Eyes:
They now the rustic Feats of Manhood boast,
Who best could reap, or mow, or thresh the most:
Contention doubtful! All with Anger burn,
While each appears a Hero in his Turn:
Hard Words succeed; so far can Beer prevail,
That Blows are menaced, even without the Flail;
Till thus our Landlord, rising from his Chair,
Like prudent NESTOR, stops impending War:
" WHAT Madness, Friends, what Madness can engage
" Your Minds to burn with this unseemly Rage?
" For Shame, stain not with Blood our grateful Cheer;
" Desist from Blood -- or else desist from Beer.
" Are these the only Thanks you give my Lord?
" And is it thus his Favors you reward?
" If no Respect you pay this cheerful Feast,
" Yet pay the noble Founder some, at least -- "
HE said: Abashed the conscious Heroes stood,
Shook Hands, and thirsted more for Beer -- than Blood:
Another Glass to TEMPLE's Health they pour;
And praise their Liquor much, his Bounty more.
OFTEN as this 30th of June, on which his Lordship treats the Threshers every
Year.
Day returns, shall Threshers claim
Some Hours of Rest sacred to TEMPLE's Name;
Often as this Day returns, shall TEMPLE cheer
The Threshers Hearts with Mutton, Beef, and Beer:
Hence, when their Childrens Children shall admire
This Holiday, and, whence derived, inquire;
Some grateful Father, partial to my Fame,
Shall thus describe from whence, and how it came.
" HERE, Child, a Thresher lived in ancient Days;
" Quaint Songs he sung, and pleasing Roundelays;
" A gracious QUEEN his Sonnets did commend;
" And some great Lord, one TEMPLE, was his Friend:
" That Lord was pleased this Holiday to make,
" And feast the Threshers, for that Thresher's sake."
THUS shall Tradition keep my Fame alive;
The Bard may die, the Thresher still survive.
NEXT, over Pewsey's fertile Fields I haste,
Fields with the bearded Crops of CERES graced!
While pleasing Hopes my grateful Bosom cheer;
But soon they vanished -- Rev. Mr. Stanley, Rector of Pewsey, who first
encouraged the Author.
STANLEY was not here.
FROM hence the Muse to silver Kennet flies,
On whose green Margin Hertford's Turrets rise.
Here often round the verdant Plain I stray,
Where Mr. Thomson composed one of his Seasons here.
THOMSON sung his bold, unfettered Lay;
Or climb the winding, mazy Marlborough Mount.
Mountain's Brow;
And, though I swiftly walk, ascend but slow.
The spiral Paths in gradual Circles lead,
Increase my Journey, and elude my Speed:
Yet, when at length I reach the lofty Height,
Towns, Valleys, Rivers, Meadows meet my Sight;
A thousand grateful Objects round me smile,
Whose various Beauties overpay my Toil.
So may you often see the studious Youth
Begin the long, laborious Search for TRUTH;
How slow his Progress, but how great his Pain!
How many mazy Problems vex his Brain!
Before he over the Hills of Science rise,
Where, far from vulgar Sight, the Goddess lies:
Yet, there arrived, he ends the happy Chase;
Reflects, with Pleasure, on his glorious Race;
Sees the bright Nymph so many Charms display,
As crown the Labors of the lengthened Way.
WITHIN the Basis of the verdant Hill,
A beauteous Grot confesses HERTFORD's Skill;
Who, with her lovely Nymphs, adorns the Place;
Gives every polished Stone its proper Grace;
Now varies rustic Moss about the Cell;
Now fits the shining Pearl, or purple Shell:
CALYPSO thus, attended with her Train,
With rural Palaces adorns the Plain;
Nor with more Elegance her Grots appear,
Nor with more Beauty shines the Immortal Fair.
THE Muse her Journey, next, to Bath pursues;
Bath, fixed by Nature to delight the Muse!
Where flowery Shrubs, and curling Vines unite;
Hills, Vales, and waving Woods attract the Sight;
A varied Scene! For Nature here displays
A thousand lovely Charms, a thousand Ways:
ALLEN attends, to dress her beauteous Face,
With Handmaid Art improving every Grace;
Now forms the verdant Walk, or sunny Glade,
Or pours the Waters over the steep Cascade;
Or now contracts 'em with judicious Skill,
And leads 'em, gently murmuring, down the Hill.
A Son of AESCULAPIUS here I meet;
Polite his Manners, and his Temper sweet:
His sage Discourse, with soft, persuasive Art,
Charmed the pleased Ear, till it improved the Heart:
Bright Truth, and Virtue, were his lovely Theme;
Which seemed more lovely, when described by him.
VARIOUS Diversions here employ the Fair;
To Dancing some, and some to Play repair:
Not Mrs. Stanley, who desired the Author to write the Shunammite.
MUSIDORA so consumes her Days,
The Dame who bad me sing JEHOVAH's Praise:
Uncharm'd with all the fluttering Pomp of Pride,
Heaven, and domestic Care her Time divide:
In her own Breast she seeks a calm Repose,
And shuns the crowded Rooms of Belles and Beaux;
Where COQUETILLA often her Eyes has rolled,
Often won a worthless Heart, and lost her Gold.
FROM Bath, I travel through the sultry Vale,
Till Sal'sb'ry Plains afford a cooling Gale:
Arcadian Plains, where PAN delights to dwell,
In verdant Beauties cannot these excel:
These too, like them, might gain immortal Fame,
Resound with CORYDON and THYRSIS' Flame;
If, to his Mouth, the Shepherd would apply
His mellow Pipe, or vocal Music try:
But, to his Mouth, the Shepherd never applies
His mellow Pipe, nor vocal Music tries:
Propt on his Staff, he indolently stands;
His Hands support his Head, his Staff his Hands;
Or, idly basking in the sunny Ray,
Supinely lazy, loiters Life away.
Here, as I passed the Plains, (a lovely Scene,
Arrayed in Nature's Liv'ry, gaily green!)
On every Side the wanton Lambkins played,
Whose artless Bleatings rural Music made;
Too harsh perhaps to please politer Ears,
Yet much the sweetest Tune the Farmer hears.
SOON as the Plains are ravished from my Sight,
New different Prospects equally delight;
Where Earl of Pembroke's Seat at Wilton.
PEMBROKE's Turrets charm my gazing Eyes,
And awful Statues solemnly surprise:
Bards, Sages, Heroes, Patriots, Princes stand,
A mixed, majestic, venerable Band!
Here mighty HOMER, PHOEBUS' eldest Son,
Or sings, or seems to sing, in breathing Stone.
See Martial PHOCION silently persuade,
And smooth tongued CICERO, in Marble, plead:
Here shines great POMPEY, greater JULIUS there,
With daring BRUTUS, honestly severe:
Friendship, and Freedom in his Soul contend;
Forgive him, CAESAR, if he wronged his Friend!
Though BRUTUS' Dagger pierced thy Bosom through,
'Twas Liberty, not Malice, struck the Blow.
Unhappy BRUTUS, destined to withstand
Thy Friend's Ambition with a fatal Hand!
Unhappy CAESAR, whose Ambition moved
That fatal Hand, to murder whom it loved!
Had thou, like Britain's MONARCH, strove to save
Expiring Nations, not the World enslave;
Thy Laurels then had still unblasted stood,
Nor BRUTUS ever been stained with CAESAR's Blood.
NOT far from hence, old Sarum's Ruins stand,
High on a bleak and barren Tract of Land;
A Mount, which once sustained a City's Weight,
And lofty Towers adorned its awful Height;
Till Want of Water forced the thirsty Crowd
To seek the Vale, where crystal Rivers flowed.
There Bishop Poor, who built the Cathedral.
POOR the first auspicious Work began;
First, for a Temple, drew the glorious Plan;
Then quickly makes the sacred Columns rise,
And bids the lofty Spire invade the Skies.
The prudent People too, with equal Haste,
New Dwellings built, which far their old surpast:
Cautious of Thirst, they make the docile Tide,
In winding Currents, through the City glide:
In every Street the wanton NAIADS play,
To every Door their liquid Urns convey;
In which the lately thirsty Peasant spies
At once the cooling Draught, and scaly Fries;
Scenes, which, before, the lofty Mount denied!
Hence let Ambition learn to check its Pride:
High Stations often bring a Weight of Cares;
True Happiness is found in humble Spheres:
This useful Truth let Sarum's Glory show,
Which faded when on high, but flourishes below.
I next to BATHURST's Clarendon Park.
rural Seat ascend,
BATHURST, my infant Muse's generous Friend!
And, as around his spacious Park I strayed,
Charmed with the Prospect, which the Fields displayed,
Musing on Verse, the willing Numbers came,
My Song began, and Clarendon my Theme.
What sweeter Subject could I wish to choose?
What Scenes more lovely can delight a Muse?
See, FLORA paints the Ground with varied Dies,
And fragrant Shrubs with Odours fill the Skies!
Here curling Vines their luscious Sweets disclose,
There fair POMONA loads the blushing Boughs:
See, fruitful CERES crowns the Vales with Corn,
And fleecy Flocks the verdant Hills adorn!
Here waving Trees project a cooling Shade,
Where BATHURST often converses with the Dead;
Reads over what the ancient Sages wrote;
Nor only reads, but acts as Sages taught;
Improves the present Hour, that Fortune gives;
Nor trusts Tomorrow, but Today he lives.
As thus my careless Lay, unlabored, flows,
Before my Eyes a King-Manor, where the Constitutions of Clarendon were made.
See Camden of Wiltshire.
Pile of Ruins rose;
Whose rugged Walls, like native Rock-work, shone;
For Time had turned the Cement into Stone.
Our Second HENRY here, if Fame be true,
Measured the Prince's Right, and People's Due;
Made Laws to bound the Priests and Barons Claim --
Nor even those Laws did haughty BECKET blame;
BECKET! true Tyrant of the Roman State,
Cursed with Religion just enough to hate;
Whose stern, ambitious Zeal his King defied,
And damned all those, who dared oppose his Pride.
O Thou Supreme! whose Mercy ever shone
The best, the brightest Jewel in thy Crown!
Never let me such cruel Faith approve,
Which bids me hate, whom Heaven commands to love!
Let Christian Charity incline my Mind
To wish the Happiness of all Mankind!
In social Friendship always let me live,
Slow to be angry, easy to forgive!
PAULTONS affords me next a kind Retreat,
Where crowding Joys my grateful Heart dilate;
To see the Friend, who first my Lays approved,
Who loves the Muse, and by her is beloved;
Who taught her tender Pinions how to fly,
Told when she crept too low, or soared too high.
O STANLEY! if, forgetful of thy Love,
I ever to Gratitude rebellious prove;
Still may I want a Friend, but never find;
May FORTUNE, PHOEBUS, STANLEY, prove unkind!
HERE often through the gloomy Woods I rove,
Pleased with the silent Horror of the Grove.
And now the Lawn, and winding Walks delight;
And now the Memphian Turret charms my Sight:
Here conic Firs in graceful Order stand;
Tall Cedars there, the Growth of Syrian Land.
Lead me, ye sacred DRYADS! leads me through
Your sylvan Scenes, where future Navies grow;
Where lofty Oaks their branching Arms extend,
And towering Pines to kiss the Clouds ascend;
Where opening Glades admit the sunny Ray,
Or venerable Groves exclude the Day.
There let me Knaves, and Fools, and Fops despise,
And think of Actions worthy of the Wise.
MY Friend and me, Southampton next receives;
Southampton, washed with THETIS' silver Waves:
Upon whose sandy Margin Mount Bevis, Seat of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Peterborough, who was then living.
Bevis rears
His Head, on which a stately Dome appears;
Where British SCIPIO, crowned with Martial Bays,
In Solitude enjoys his ancient Days:
Yet, still inclined to conquer, wages here,
With stubborn Woods and Wilds, innoxious War;
Subdues the native Rudeness of the Soil,
And makes the barren Sand with Verdure smile;
Bends the young Plant obedient to his Will,
Or through the Valley leads the crystal Rill;
Sublimes the Mount, or bids the Mole subside,
To stretch the Prospect over the lucid Tide:
The Foils of Art illustrate his Design;
And make the Di'mond NATURE brighter shine.
CHARMED with the Beauties of the silver Sea,
We board a Ship, and skim the watery Way:
Blown with propitious Gales, we quickly view
BRITANNIA's Strength, her Guard, and Glory too;
Where Spithead.
GEORGE's dreadful Eagles waiting stood,
To bear his fatal Thunder over the Flood.
The wondrous Scene delights my gazing Eyes,
At once imparting Pleasure and Surprise:
Intrepid Sailers, swarming in the Sky,
Intent on Business, different Labors try:
Some stride the Yard, or towering Mast ascend;
Some on the Ropes, in airy Crowds, depend;
Thick as the Insects, round the Poplar, play,
When PHOEBUS gilds 'em with a Western Ray.
BUT unexpected Dangers often deceive
The daring Man, who tempts the foamy Wave:
While on the Fleet we all delighted gaze,
The sudden Winds arise, and sweep the Seas;
With rapid Force they fly, and from the Ship
Disjoin the Boat, and drive it over the Deep:
Our cautious Pilot quickly shifts the Sails,
Reverts his Course against the furious Gales.
O CHLOE! then what ruthless Pains distressed
Thy dizzy Head, and racked thy tender Breast!
How often did the Bard thy Fate bemoan!
How often did he wish thy Pains his own!
How did the TRITONS, moved with Pity, gaze
On thy fair Face, distorted twenty Ways!
Yet, though distorted, still thy Features show
Bright in Distress, and innocent in Woe.
So VENUS often her silver Light displays,
Through Evening Mists, that rise to cloud her Rays.
BUT NEPTUNE now, who pitied CHLOE's Pain,
Returns the Boat; we steer our Course again,
At Six, we safely land at Port smouth Key,
And soon forget the Dangers of the Sea.
Straight to some hospitable Inn we haste,
Revive our Spirits with a sweet Repast:
The smiling Glass, with rosy Liquor crowned,
Sacred to friendly Healths, goes cheerful round;
While Time, in mirthful Converse, sweetly flows,
Till gentle Sleep invites us to Repose.
THE Morning come, we to the Wharfs repair,
Survey the mighty Magazines of War:
Tremendous Rows of Cannon meet our Eyes;
And Iron Deaths, in massy Mountains, rise:
Storehouse of MARS! where, ranged in Order, lay
Ten thousand Thunders for some fatal Day.
DEPARTING hence, the Dock we travel round,
Where laboring Shipwrights rattling Axes sound:
Some bend the stubborn Planks, while others rear
The lofty Mast, or crooked Timber square;
Some ply their Engines, some direct the Toil,
And carefully inspect the mighty Pile;
See every Chink securely stopped, before
The winged Castle ventures from the Shore.
So, when the youthful Crane intends to fly
Her first long Journey through the spacious Sky;
Before she rears herself sublime in Air,
She ranges every Plume with prudent Care;
Tries if her Pinions can her Flight sustain;
Then springs away, and soars above the Main.
BUT see! the smoking fiery Forge appears;
Vulcanian Sounds surprise our listening Ears:
See! busy Smiths around their Anvils sweat;
Their brawny Arms the glowing Anchor beat;
Alternately the chiming Hammers fall,
And loud Notes echo through the sooty Hall.
Such, happily, on the sounding Anvil rung,
When first the Harp melodious TUBAL strung:
As TUBAL-CAIN the ductile Metal wrought,
And VULCAN's heavenly Art to Mortals taught;
The Brother, pleased to hear his Hammers chime,
Soon harmoniz'd their Notes to proper Time:
Man's Bosom then sonorous Organs warmed,
The softer Lyre his gloomy Sorrows charmed;
While Tyrants Hearts unusual Pity found,
And savage Tempers softened with the Sound.
'TWAS now the Time, when PHOEBUS' piercing Ray
Shot down direct, and measured half the Day:
A bold Captain Reddish, Commander of the Amelia.
Commander luckily we meet,
Who courteously invites us to the Fleet:
A Table elegantly spread we found,
And loyal Healths the Captain pushes round;
AUGUSTUS first, and all the Royal Line,
Give sweeter Flavor to the sparkling Wine;
WAGER, and NORRIS, next, who boldly reign,
In floating Castles, Monarchs of the Main.
BUT now again our winged Sails we spread,
Again we visit Paulton's sylvan Shade;
Where, parting from my Friend, I mount my Steed,
And, over the Wilds of Wellow, urge his Speed:
Wilds, which were lately sterile, as the Coast,
Where patient CATO marched his fainting Host!
Nor could the Swain explore a cooling Shade,
When fervid PHOEBUS burnt his glowing Head;
Till CHANDOS bad the dreary Desert smile
With verdant Groves, and beautified the Soil:
He said; ten thousand Trees adorned the Plain,
Ten thousand Shades, delightful to the Swain.
HENCE, over the Plains, and fruitful Fields I pass,
Full forty Miles, till Witney ends my Race.
I visit here an elegant Reverend Dr. Friend.
Divine,
In whom the Scholar, Friend, and Critic join;
Who freely judges of an Author's Thoughts,
Improves his Beauties, and corrects his Faults;
Severely kind, and heartily severe;
Polite, as Courtiers; and, as Truth, sincere;
Who, in MINERVA's Temple, taught our Youth
The Path to Wisdom, Virtue, Honor, Truth;
Till having, with a generous Mind, bestowed
The Flower of all his Years in doing Good;
Fatigued with Labors, and with Age decayed,
Retires, with Honor, to the rural Shade.
SO, when the Prince of Rivers, fruitful Nile,
Has flowed, and fatten'd all the Memphian Soil,
Spent all the Richness, that his Waves contain,
Back to his Banks, he draws his humid Train.
I pay my Offerings next at PHOEBUS' Shrine,
Oxford, the Seat of all the tuneful Nine.
Forgive me, God of Verse, who daring greet
Thy sacred Temples with unhallowed Feet!
As pious Mussulmen to Mecca roam,
Zealous to worship at their Prophet's Tomb;
So comes the Poet to thy reverend Fanes,
Invoking thee to aid his humble Strains.
O! might a Spark of thy celestial Flame
But raise my Numbers equal to my Theme,
ALFRED immortal in my Page should shine;
ALFRED, the Monarch, Hero, and Divine!
Who, having bravely all his Foes overthrown,
Advanced thy Kingdom, and confirmed his own;
Watered his Realm with the Pierian Spring,
Recalled the banished Arts, and bad the Muses sing.
Then should my Numbers sound with Founder of New College.
WICKHAM's Praise;
Nor less should Founder of Corpus-Christi College, where the Author was kindly
entertained.
FOXE's Fame adorn my Lays,
Whose pious Care the decent Fabric reared,
Which kindly sheltered the unworthy Bard;
Nor the unworthy Bard should leave unpaid
The grateful Debt, contracted while he stayed:
Thy Favors, chiefly, WINDER, should be known,
In lasting Numbers, tuneful as thy own.
Thee, BODLEY, would I sing; who can refuse
A Verse to BODLEY, Patron of the Muse?
Whose lettered Bounty to the World declares
The treasured Wisdom of three thousand Years.
Nor should the Muse forget the Wainflet, Bishop of Winchester, Founder of
Magdalen College, where Mr. Addison writ a Panegyric on Mr. Dryden, the first
English Verses he ever made public.
Prelate's Fame,
Who graced the River with a stately Frame,
Known by the flowery Meads, which round it lie,
And beauteous Walks, that charm the Student's Eye;
Where courtly ADDISON attun'd his Lays,
And raised his own, by singing DRYDEN's Praise.
Hail, happy Bard! whose Genius still could shine
In every Art; for every Art was thine:
Whether thou did the Critic's Pen engage,
The Critic's Pen improved the Poet's Rage;
Whether thou did the Hero's Deeds rehearse,
The Hero's Deeds shone brighter in thy Verse:
Or did thy tragic Muse sublimely tell,
How stubborn CATO for his Country fell;
Parties no more retained their factious Hate;
All pitied CAESAR's, honored CATO's Fate:
Nor less thy soft diurnal Essays please,
That Glass, where every Fool his Folly sees;
Where Virtue shines with such attractive Grace,
She tempts the Vicious to her chaste Embrace.
O! may thy Labors be a Star to guide
My Thoughts and Actions over Life's devious Tide!
If Pride, or Passion check my doubtful Sail,
Let thy Instructions lend a friendly Gale,
To waft me to the peaceful, happy Shore,
Where thou, immortal Bard! art gone before:
Then those who grant me not a Poet's Name,
Shall own I left behind a better Fame.
PENELOPE to ULYSSES.
Paraphrased from OVID.
THESE Lines I send, impatient of your Stay,
To you, my Lord, who kill me with Delay;
Yet crave not any Answer back, beside
Yourself, the best of Answers to your Bride.
Sure Troy, so hateful to the Grecian Dames,
Is ruined now, with dire, consuming Flames;
Though scarcely Troy, nor all her King could boast,
Was worth the Trouble, which her Ruin cost.
O! had lewd PARIS sunk beneath the Tide,
When, over the Seas, he sought the Spartan Bride;
I had not then accused the lingering Day,
Nor weaved, to charm the tedious Night away;
Nor in the Bed, deserted and forlorn,
Lain weeping, cold and comfortless, till Morn.
WHENEVER of Dangers in your Camp I heard,
Those Dangers threatened you, I always feared:
For Love, like mine, no cold Indiff'rence bears;
It feeds on timorous Thoughts, and anxious Cares.
I fansy'd, furious Trojans round thee came;
And trembling, ever dreaded HECTOR's Name:
If any said, ANTILOCHUS was slain,
ANTILOCHUS was he who caused my Pain:
Or, if in borrowed Arms PATROCLUS bled,
I wept, because his Craft no better sped:
When Rhodian Blood had bathed the Lycian Spear,
The Rhodian Tlepolemus.
Youth again renewed my Care:
In fine, whatever Grecian Chief was killed,
My fearful Heart, like srigid Ice, was chilled;
Lest flattering Fame my doubtful Ears should cheat,
And, for my Lord's, proclaim another's Fate:
But Heaven, propitious to my chaste Desire,
Preserved you safe, and Troy consumed with Fire.
BUT now the other Grecian Chiefs return,
And on their smoking Altars Offerings burn;
Their useless Arms they consecrate to Peace,
And Trojan Spoils the Grecian Temples grace:
Each youthful Bride some pleasing Gift affords,
To welcome home their safe-returning Lords;
Their safe-returning Lords, in Songs of Joy,
Resound the vanquished Fates of ruined Troy:
The wondering Sages crowd around to hear,
The trembling Girls admire the Tales of War:
The Wives stand listening, while their Husbands tell,
How Greece had conquered, and how Ilion fell:
One stains a Table with the purple Draught,
And shows the furious Battles, which you fought;
Paints, with the Wine, which from the Glass he pours,
Camps, Rivers, Hills, and all the Trojan Towers:
And, This, says he, is the Sigean Plain;
And here the silver Simois rolls his Train;
There stood old PRIAM's stately Palace, here
ACHILLES pitched his Tent, ULYSSES there:
Here mangled HECTOR, dreadful in his Fall,
Affrights the Steeds, that drag him round the Wall.
Your Son, who sent by me to NESTOR's Court,
To seek his Father, brought me this Report
From NESTOR's Mouth, and how the Thracian Lord,
In Sleep, became a Victim to your Sword;
How DOLON fell into your crafty Snare --
But, O! ULYSSES, you too boldly dare;
Too fearless, through the Camp of Foes you rove,
Mindful of Wiles, forgetful of your Love;
Slaying so many in the gloomy Night,
One Friend alone, to aid you in the Fight.
It was not thus you rashly used to go
Among the midnight Terrors of the Foe;
Fondly of me you formerly have thought,
With Prudence acted, and with Caution fought.
Heaven knows, with Fear my trembling Bosom beat,
To hear my Son your daring Deeds relate;
Till told how you victoriously returned,
Safe, to your Camp, with Thracian Spoils adorned.
BUT what avails it me, your Arms have thrown
Troy's stately Walls, and lofty Turrets down?
As when they stood, if I am robbed of thee,
Troy's fallen to others, standing still to me;
To others, who, with captive Oxen, toil
To turn the Glebe, and till the Trojan Soil;
And while, with crooked Ploughs, they discompose
Th'ill-bury'd Ashes of their slaughtered Foes;
While Phrygian Fields, grown fat with native Blood,
Bear fruitful Crops, where stately Ilion stood;
While verdant Harvests hide their ruined Wall,
I mourn my absent Lord, who wrought its Fall;
Nor can I know the Land, where you reside,
Nor who, nor what detains you from your Bride.
WHATEVER Sailers on our Coast appear,
(Hopeful to find some Tidings of my Dear)
I fly to them, and ask 'em over and over,
If ever they saw you on some foreign Shore?
Then to their Hands a Letter I impart,
To give it you, the Partner of my Heart;
If Chance, or Destiny should ever prove
So kind to lead them to my absent Love.
WE sought for you at ancient NESTOR's Court;
But sought in vain, we heard no true Report:
We sent to ask the Spartans too; but they
Knew not the Climate, where you, lingering, stay.
O! had APOLLO saved his sacred Town --
Ye Gods! why did I ever wish it down?
If that were standing, and ULYSSES there,
I nothing, but the Chance of War, should fear:
I should not then be singly cursed to cry;
Others would fear the War, no less than I.
But now a thousand Whimsies feed my Care,
Nor know I what to hope, or what to fear;
Yet fearing all, that Fancy can suggest,
Unnumber'd Troubles rack my anxious Breast:
Upon the Land whatever Dangers reign,
I fear those Dangers make you there remain;
Upon the Seas whatever Storms increase,
I fear those Storms detain you on the Seas.
While thus my foolish Thoughts uncertain rove,
Perhaps you revel with a foreign Love;
Perhaps you ridicule your Bride at home,
Tell how she spins, or drudges in the Loom:
Suspicious Thoughts! that vex my jealous Mind,
Begone, and vanish into empty Wind!
If cruel Fate did not obstruct the Way,
My Lord would never make so long Delay.
Your long Delay my Father often blames,
And often chides me for my constant Flames:
My constant Flames shall ever true remain;
Let Fathers chide, and Suitors court in vain.
At length my Sire, who finds he cannot remove
My Faith from you, nor shake my settled Love,
Remits his Anger, softened with my Prayers;
Yet still a Crowd of Suitors teaze my Ears;
From various Realms they come to seek your Crown,
And feast, and reign securely in your Throne:
'Twould tire me even to count their Number over,
MEDON, PISANDER, and a hundred more!
All bent on Love, and Robbers of the State,
And All, by your pernicious Absence, great!
To crown your Shame, the Beggar IRUS preys
Upon your Sheep, and all the fattest slays:
And even your Shepherd, faithless to his Lord,
Slaughters your Lambs, to grace the Suiter's Board:
Nor have we Strength, their Rapine to oppose;
For how can Three resist so many Foes?
Your feeble Wife, your Father worn with Age,
Your tender Son, too weak to check their Rage;
For whom they lately crafty Ambush laid,
And menaced Death on his devoted Head;
When, mocking all their Stratagems, he crossed
The Seas, to seek you on the Pylian Coast.
O! may the Gods extend his vital Date,
And guard his Life, till ours submit to Fate:
So may he close our Eyes with decent Care;
Such is your Servant's, such his Nurse's Prayer.
SINCE then your aged Father, feeble grown,
Amidst your Foes, cannot defend your Crown;
Your Wife, too weak to chase the Foes away,
Your Son, too young to bear the Regal Sway;
Haste, haste, ULYSSES, to your Royal Seat;
For you alone can cure our troubled State:
Think of your Son, who wants you to inspire
His Soul with all the Virtues of his Sire:
Think, on the Brink of Fate your Father lies:
Return, my Lord, return and close his Eyes:
Think of your faithful Wife, whose youthful Face,
At your Departure, blushed with blooming Grace:
But now I blush with blooming Grace no more;
Tears, for your Absence, cloud my Beauty over.
O! may you soon return, before I prove
An ancient Dame, unworthy of your Love.
An EPIGRAM.
Words are but Wind. Tale of a Tub.
IF Words are Wind, as some allow,
No Promises can bind;
Since breaking of the strictest Vow,
Is only breaking Wind.
A Poem on Her MAJESTY's Birthday.
O You, the MONARCH's Bliss, the Muse's Friend!
Accept the Tribute Duty bids me send:
It Is what the Bard should long before have paid;
But fearful to aspire, has long delayed.
PHOEBUS alone can PHOEBUS' Chariot guide;
The Youth who dared to drive it, daring, died.
My humble Muse can humble Subjects treat;
But trembles to attempt a Theme so great:
Yet, warm with Gratitude, would fain display
Her Zeal to You, on this auspicious Day.
To You! whose gracious Goodness plumes her Wings,
By whom she lives, by whom inspired, she sings:
Long may she celebrate your sacred BIRTH;
Long may You stay from Heaven, to bless the Earth;
To cheer the Royal Sovereign of our ISLE;
Increase his Joys, or soften all his Toil;
Who now, while Death in purple Triumph reigns,
And sanguine Floods pollute the distant Plains;
Watchful over Britain's Fate, employs his Care,
Or wisely to avert, or bravely meet the War.
O glorious QUEEN! by Nature formed to bring
The sweetest Comfort to the justest KING!
Let proud Oppressors, who abuse their Power,
Hear groaning Subjects curse their natal Hour:
You, on that happy Hour, may justly feast
Your Soul with Thoughts of making Thousands blessed;
Whose godlike Bounties, to the Wretched, show,
You're only powerful to relieve their Woe.
WHAT though the Muse old Annals should explore,
Mark all our Queens, and trace their Virtues over?
Where could she find so much exalted Sense,
Nobly employed, like yours, in Truth's Defense?
You strive to make the Seeds of Virtue grow,
To spread the Light, which Heaven revealed below:
Yet, free from superstitious Zeal, incline
To make the Rays of Moral Goodness shine;
Supporting those, who, firm to Truth, defend
That first fixed Law, on which all Laws depend.
BENEATH your Influence, Art and Science rear
Their sacred Heads, and flourish by your Care:
This Truth let Oxford's pompous Dome proclaim,
Which boasts the Honor of a Queen's College.
Royal Name.
Lately your Bard surveyed the graceful Scene,
Rising with Bounties of a generous QUEEN!
O! had the Muse there fledged her infant Wing,
And early tasted of that learned Spring;
She then had soared in more heroic Lays,
In more majestic Numbers sung your Praise;
But fearful now, must quit the glorious Theme,
Must leave the Architect to speak your Fame:
His Art shall there another Athens show,
And there another Guardian PALLAS You.
FELIX and CONSTANCE.
A POEM, taken from BOCCACE.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of POMFRET.
BLOWN on the rolling Surface of the Deep,
The mourning Maid at length reclines to Sleep;
While conscious Visions labor in her Breast,
And airy Specter discompose her Rest.
Sometimes she seems upon her native Shore,
Blessed with the beauteous Youth, as heretofore;
Hears him converse, while from his tuneful Tongue
Melodious Sense, in melting Music, rung:
Sometimes she finds, or seems at least to find,
His shattered Vessel forced before the Wind,
With foaming Waves, and furious Tempests tossed,
The Mast, and broken Sails, and Sailers lost:
Sometimes her Dream, in frightful Forms, displayed
A Crowd of Martyrs, cruel Love had made;
Lamenting THISBE's Shade before her stands,
Shows her capacious Wound, and purple Hands;
Now Lyric SAPPHO in the Tide expires,
Now faithful PORCIA eats the living Fires.
At length, awaking from her Dream, she hears
A Latian Voice, which thus salutes her Ears:
UNHAPPY Christian Maid! (for such, at least,
You, by your decent Habit, seem expressed)
Say whence you came, and hither how conveyed,
Exposed to Sea, without the Seaman's Aid?
SOON as the Nymph her native Language hears,
Her frighted Soul was filled with Doubts and Fears:
She thought, the adverse Wind, or refluent Main,
Had forced her back to Liparis again;
Till, starting up, a spacious Land she spies;
Barbarian Caves and Cots her Sight surprise:
She sees a Matron on the neighboring Strand;
Nor knows the Matron, nor the neighboring Land.
O! whither, whither am I blown? she cries;
What Dens and Caves appear before my Eyes?
And who inhabit 'em? or Beasts of Prey,
Or Men, less kind, and crueller than they?
To whom the Matron: Fly, nor dare to trust.
The faithless People of this hated Coast:
Here Sailers often their hapless Fate deplore;
Who escape the Seas, are wrecked upon the Shore:
For, when the forceful Wind, and foaming Deep,
To this inhuman Coast impel the Ship;
Around the Beach the rude Barbarians stray,
Destroy the Mariners, and seize their Prey;
By others Death, they keep themselves alive,
Subsist by Rapine, and by Ruin thrive.
UNHAPPY Fate! the mourning Nymph replied;
O! had I perished in the safer Tide!
For much I fear, the Land I now survey,
Dooms me to greater Evils, than the Sea:
And yet what greater Ills can Fate provide,
Than thus to seek for Death, and be denied?
Not so my FELIX escaped the raging Waves;
Him NEPTUNE sunk, and me unkindly saves;
Saves, only to increase my former Woes;
To fall, perhaps, by more ungen'rous Foes;
Or to indulge some lustful Tyrant's Will:
But, O ye Heavens! avert the fatal Ill;
Protect my Honor in this foreign Coast,
The only Blessing which I have not lost!
THE listening Matron wonders with Surprise;
Nor hears, unmoved, the weeping Damsel's Cries:
But leads her to her neighboring Cottage, where
She chears her fainting Soul with homely Fare;
Condoles her Grief, and begs her to disclose
Her Country, Cares, and Cause of all her Woes.
Excited by her Words, the pensive Maid
Preludes with Sighs, and thus, reluctant, said:
O hospitable Dame! why would you move
A Wretch to tell a Tale of hapless Love?
Which, in relating, must renew my Grief;
Nor can I hope, nor you bestow, Relief:
Yet, since you seem a Partner of my Care,
It Is just a Partner know the Weight I bear.
NOT far from Aetna's flaming Mount I came,
From Liparis, and CONSTANCE is my Name:
Great Honors and Estates my Sire possessed,
And, O! too much to make his Daughter blessed.
I once with Fame and Fortune was supplied,
Nor envied Empresses their Pomp and Pride;
Now, like a Meteor, fallen from its Height,
My Glory's vanished, and extinct my Light --
Full twenty Years in Happiness I passed,
And every Year was happier than the last.
Young FELIX then his Love began to show;
(Young FELIX was the Cause of all my Woe)
A beauteous Youth, endowed with manly Grace;
But far his noble Soul excelled his Face:
And, though his niggard Fate had Wealth denied,
The Want of Wealth by Virtue was supplied.
Two Years to win my doubtful Heart he strove,
Two Years my doubtful Heart declined his Love:
Yet still he pressed me with his amorous Tale,
Nor found at length, 'twas fruitless to assail:
For, by degrees, insensibly I came
To first approve, and then indulge, his Flame;
Nor could his Suit, nor would his Vows reprove;
I heard with Joy, nor thought it Sin to love;
Till in my Breast imperious CUPID reigned:
Alas! how easy Love a Conquest gained!
And now my Reason checked my Will no more;
But fed the Flame, it strove to quench before:
Yet durst not an immodest Thought approve;
Love ruled my Heart, but Honor ruled my Love:
I scorned to stain my Virtue with a King;
As much my Lover scorned so mean a thing.
What could we do? What cannot Love inspire?
The Youth reveals his Passion to my Sire;
And in such melting Accents made it known,
As might have moved all Fathers, but my own:
But proudly he my Lover's Suit repelled;
And, frowning, thus our mutual Ruin sealed:
No more, presumptuous Youth! thy Passion name;
Suppress the Sparks, before they rise to Flame.
How dare thou, vulgar Wretch, ignobly born,
My Daughter's Scandal, and her Father's Scorn!
Aspire to wed so far above thy Fate?
He sternly said, and forced him from his Gate.
O Avarice! what Evils do thou cause,
Breaking the Bands of Love, and Nature's Laws?
Go, hungry God! and rule the Narrow-soul'd;
Collect, and guard their cursed, bewitching Gold;
Fit Province for thy Reign! too mean to prove
The Charms of Nuptial Life, and Joys of Love!
Ah! what avails to gain a pompous Name,
With boasted Titles of paternal Fame,
Derived from Ancestors of noble Blood?
Things common to the Vicious, and the Proud!
Refulgent Equipage, and gaudy Shows,
Fictitious Ornaments of real Woes!
If Love be absent, Pomp and worldly Gain
But gild our Cares, and varnish over our Pain.
O! had my cruel Father thought like me,
I never had proved the Dangers of the Sea,
Nor ever wandered here a banished Maid;
And, O dear FELIX! thou had not been dead! --
So speaks the trembling Nymph; and, while she speaks,
The pearly Torrents stream adown her Cheeks;
Cold clammy Sweats, and throbbing Sighs arise,
Slow moves the Blood, and dizzy roll her Eyes;
So much affected with her Lover's Fate,
She struggled, groaned, and fainted from her Seat.
Her Hostess straight a grateful Cordial sought,
And to her Lips applies the cheerful Draught,
Washing her Temples with reviving Oil;
The vital Spirits answer to her Toil;
The purple Tide begins to roll again,
Again diffuses Life through every Vein:
And now she sighing, raised her drooping Head;
And, Is my Death, she cries, again delayed?
Why did you check me on the Brink of Fate?
Better the Soul had fled her loathsome Seat.
Death is the only Good I wish to know,
End of my Pain, and Period of my Woe.
To whom replies the Dame: Unhappy Fair!
Rely on Heaven, nor let your Soul despair:
Teach me to give your troubled Heart Relief;
Or teach me how, at least, to share your Grief:
Your mournful Story much affects my Mind;
Yet something seems remaining still behind.
O! much, CONSTANTIA says, remains to come,
The fatal Part, that finishes my Doom:
For, when my FELIX, (FELIX now no more!)
Was banished from my haughty Father's Door,
Not able to obtain me for his Bride,
Nor willing to resign me, though denied;
Hope, from Despair, his daring Soul conceives;
A Bark he builds, to plough the briny Waves:
Then called a few Domestics to his Aid,
Embraced me in his Arms, and sighing, said:
O Thou, for ever dear, for ever blessed,
At once the Joy, and Trouble of my Breast!
Since Poverty expels me from thy Arms,
Since Wealth alone is worthy of thy Charms;
I swear by all the mighty Powers above,
(Sad Fate, that drives me from the Nymph I love!)
To try my Fortune on remoter Shores,
And seek the Gold, thy Sire so much adores.
Perhaps the Planets, unpropitious here,
In other Climes may kinder Aspects wear;
May lead me where the rocky Di'monds lie,
Or where the golden Mines may Wealth supply;
If not, the last sad Pleasure is to die.
SUCH was the fatal Vow he rashly made;
O fatal Vow, and fatally obeyed!
Struck dumb, my Tears the want of Words supplied;
His, mixed with mine, increased the pearly Tide:
Yet, lest I should his Resolution shake,
He rushed away, and mounted on the Deck:
His hasty Crew expand the swelling Sails,
Strong rolls the Sea before impulsive Gales;
The crooked Keel the frothy Flood divides,
Swift flies the Ship, and rushes through the Tides.
MY Lover long my gazing Eyes pursue;
As long my Lover kept me in his View:
Reluctant so, departing Souls prepare
To wing their doubtful Flight, they know not where;
Reluctant so, expiring Bodies lie,
Nor willing these to stay, nor those to fly.
TWICE twenty Days I spent in fruitless Tears,
Before the fatal Tidings reached my Ears;
How FELIX, sailing over the watery Way,
Was wrecked on Rocks, and perished in the Sea.
O! then what Trouble, Grief, and anxious Care,
Confused my Soul, and bent it to Despair!
I cursed the Cause, that forced him to expire;
O Heaven! forgive me, if I cursed my Sire:
I fled his House, and sought the lonely Grove,
(The gloomy Witness of my former Love!)
Where, once resolved to seek the Shades below,
I drew the Knife, to strike the mortal Blow;
Till Piety the cruel Thought suppressed,
And checked the Roman Courage of my Breast:
I trembling saw two doubtful Paths; nor knew,
Which Path was best to shun, or which pursue;
Opposing Passions in my Bosom strove,
And Conscience now prevailed, and now my Love.
As when the Wind and Tide a Contest make,
The Sailer, trembling, sees his Vessel shake;
This way, and that, and both, by turns reclined,
As swells the Surge, or blows the furious Wind:
So was my Soul with different Notions swayed,
Of this, of that, of both, and all, afraid.
Ah! why should Mortals of their Reason boast,
Which most deserts 'em, when they want it most?
For, when the troubled Mind's confused with Pain,
It Is but an Ignis-fatuus of the Brain;
Which, if our wandering Souls from Virtue stray,
But leads us more and more from Virtue's Way:
So led it me to stem the devious Tide,
And seek for Death, where wretched FELIX died.
NOT distant far, a fishing Vessel stood,
Nor wholly on the Land, nor in the Flood:
Arrived to this, I rowed it from the Shore;
And, bent on Death, the Tide I now explore;
Expecting, soon, the friendly-furious Wave
Would give my Troubles and myself a Grave.
But, when I saw the Billows round me flow,
The boundless Skies above, and Seas below;
Scared with the Terrors of the watery Space,
I wrapped my Mantle round my timorous Face:
Then lay me down, to all the Dangers blind;
Chance was my Compass, and my Pilot, Wind.
Blown here and there, I floated on the Deep,
Which rocked my Eyes, but not my Fears, asleep:
For now my dreaming Soul, in Fancy's Maze,
A thousand tragic airy Ghosts surveys;
Which fluttered round me, and reproaching, said;
Die, Coward! follow FELIX to the Shade:
Why would thou wish to live, now he is dead?
But when, at length, your friendly Voice I heard,
My Vision ceased, the Specter disappeared.
Thus have I told, but cannot dispel my Care;
For who can conquer Love, or cure Despair?
THUS she; and thus CAPRESA spoke again:
(So was she called, who waked her on the Main)
Unhappy Nymph! compose your troubled Mind,
Nor doubt the gracious Guide of human Kind:
That GOD, who saved you from the foamy Wave,
Will doubtless guard the Life, he deigned to save.
Vouchsafe to take the Counsel I can lend:
At Susa Heaven has blessed me with a Friend,
Much famed for Wealth, for pious Actions more;
No Husband, and no Children, but the Poor:
Let me conduct you to her friendly Gate;
(Too small my Cottage for a Guest so great)
She will protect you from Barbarian Foes,
With prudent Counsel mitigate your Woes,
And charm your ruffled Soul to soft Repose.
BLESSED Partner of my Grief! the Damsel said,
Some Angel surely sent you to my Aid;
For now some dawning Rays of Hope appear,
That chase away the Clouds of dark Despair.
This Pause of Pain, and Interval of Grace,
Shall be employed in Search of future Peace.
Then guide, and guard me to your noble Friend;
So may you never want this Aid you lend!
And, as we travel, deign to let me know,
To whom so many Thanks I justly owe;
What hapless Fortune cast you on this Land,
What Occupation here employs your Hand.
Sweet Conversation may suspend my Care,
Dispel my Grief, or make it less severe:
So shall I easier reach the neighboring Town;
And, listening to your Fate, forget my own.
THUS she; and thus the pensive Dame replies:
(With briny Drops distilling from her Eyes)
Fain would I, lovely Nymph! suspend your Care,
Dispel your Grief, or make it less severe:
But, were I all my Fortune to explain,
'Twould not alleviate, but increase your Pain;
For in your Soul such Sparks of Nature glow,
As make you share your Neighbor's Joy or Woe.
The Christian Faith I secretly embrace,
Though doomed to dwell among a Pagan Race:
Trepanum wasted all my Bloom of Life,
Where long I lived, a Farmer's happy Wife:
My careful, loving Husband tilled the Soil,
Nor was the Field ungrateful to his Toil:
For, every Summer, CERES crowned the Plain;
Each Autumn, filled the Barn with golden Grain:
So thick the verdant Harvest yearly stood,
The Meadows seemed to groan beneath their Load.
Our fleecy Flocks were fruitful of their Young,
Hail were our Oxen, and our Horses strong;
Nor did our Kine of milky Produce fail,
But with distended Udders filled the Pail.
'Twas then, alas! how often have I cried,
I would not wish to be a Monarch's Bride!
When all around my little Infants came,
Hung on my Knees, and lisp'd their Mama's Name;
Or met their Father with the Evening Ray,
Embraced his Neck, and kissed his Cares away.
Soon as their riper Age could Labor bear,
We sent 'em forth to feed the fleecy Care;
Where often have we spent the Summer's Day,
Charmed to behold the wanton Cattle's Play.
What Pleasure 'twas to see the skipping Lambs?
What Music, when they bleated for their Dams?
We thought our Joys could never be increased;
Love, Peace, and Plenty joined to make us blessed.
But see how Fortune holds her fickle Reign!
She raises up, to tumble down again:
For now our Thread of Happiness was spun;
The Gains of twenty Years were lost in one.
'Twas in the Season, when the verdant Mead
Begins to ask the Mower's crooked Blade;
Before the Wheat receives the yellow Stain,
Or milky Juice is hardened into Grain;
A Gale of Poison baleful EURUS cast;
The vernal Product sicken'd with the Blast;
Our Meadows straight a saffron Scene disclose,
Our infant Apples quit the blighted Boughs;
Pease, Wheat, and Barley, withered in the Fields,
And Nature one abortive Harvest yields:
Nor stopped it here; the flying Plague began
To spread the Bane in Beasts, and thence to Man:
First died our Sheep upon the russet Plain,
Next swelled our Oxen with a fatal Blain;
Here tumbles, over her Meat, the moping Cow;
There drops the panting Horse before the Plough:
At length the dire Contagion spread so wide,
My Virgin Children made the Tomb their Bride.
This Nature bore -- But when our Landlord sent
His Officers, to seize my Lord for Rent;
And he, to shun the Prison, flies the Shore;
Lists on the Sea, to tug the laboring Oar;
I wept, I raved, I cursed the baleful Air;
And fled my native Land, but not my Care.
Thus, banished here, a Widow, and a Wife,
Condemned to suffer, not enjoy a Life,
I toil for those, who catch the finny Prey;
The Toils are great, but very small the Pay!
Their scaly Fry to Market often I bear,
Often in the Ocean wash their thready Snare;
And then was washing, when, with great Surprise,
You, and your floating Vessel, met my Eyes.
NOW Heaven defend us both! the Nymph replied;
And can such Rage in Christian Minds reside?
What, could the cursed, inhuman Tyrant wrest
Thy tender Husband from thy loving Breast,
When all thy Wealth was lost, thy Children dead?
O Virtue! Virtue! whither art thou fled?
Why must such Evils on the Guiltless flow?
Ye Heavens! is Innocence rewarded so?
SO spoke the Nymph; her Friend no more replies;
For now PRISCILLA's Dome attracts their Eyes:
Approaching to her friendly Gate, they found
The generous Lady dealing Alms around
To needy Souls, a hapless, helpless Crowd,
Who daily blessed her Hand for daily Food!
When thus CAPRESA: Hail, for ever blessed!
It Is Godlike thus to succor the Distressed:
Yet none of these, who claim your Christian Aid,
Deserves it more than this unhappy Maid;
Who once was blessed with Fame and Riches too,
Though fickle Fortune now is turned her Foe;
Unlike the Mendicants, who daily share
Your friendly Bounty, and maternal Care.
TO whom the Lady, with a gracious Look,
That seemed to breathe Compassion, while she spoke:
Sure Decency forbids, a Guest so great
Should, undistinguished, with the Vulgar eat.
No; deck my Table with the choicest Fare;
The Nymph, with me, a kind Repast shall share;
For, by her Looks if Truth may be divined,
That lovely Body clothes a lovely Mind.
SHE said, and CONSTANCE low Obeisance made;
Then gladly followed, where PRISCILLA led.
Within the Gate a spacious Room she found,
Whose Walls were beautified with Tap'stry round;
Where pious Tales appeared, so lively wrought,
The Work seemed vital, and the Figures Thought:
Here, in the Shade, the Jewish Patriarch stood,
Feasting the Sons of Heaven with earthly Food;
While, there, the good Samaritan confessed
His Kindness, and reproached the cruel Priest;
With many more, a charitable Band,
The skilful Labor of PRISCILLA's Hand.
HITHER the Dame conveyed a sweet Repast;
Rich Meats, and rosy Wines the Table graced:
They eat, they drank, in pleasing Converse joined;
And cheered at once the Body and the Mind.
The Call of Nature being soon suppressed,
Thus spoke the Lady to her youthful Guest:
SAY, lovely Stranger! (for I long to know;
So may propitious Heaven remove thy Woe!)
Whence thus reduced? By Famine, Sword, or Fire?
What Sire thy Beauty boasts, what Land thy Sire?
Perhaps some Princess, banished from her Home,
Thus condescends to grace my rustic Dome:
If so, I greatly fear, my homely Feast
Has been unworthy of my Royal Guest.
SHE said, the Nymph unfolds her Tale again;
The prudent Dame attempts to sooth her Pain,
And thus replied: Though weighty are your Woes,
The weightiest Ill, with Patience, lighter grows:
Then bear with Patience all that Heaven designed,
Whose Ways are just, though difficult to find,
Planned for the general Good of Human Kind.
God's Paths in winding Mazes often lie,
Too intricate for feeble Reason's Eye;
Most regular, when in Confusion lost;
Most constant, when they seem to vary most.
Perhaps his Mercy forced you thus to roam,
To shun a more unhappy Fate at home;
For with one Evil he removes a worse,
And blesses often with what we think a Curse.
Then let your Soul at Fortune not repine;
But trust in Heaven's Protection, next, in mine:
In me you still shall find a faithful Friend,
With whom, in time, your Troubles all may end:
But, since you now are harassed out with Woes,
Refresh your weary Soul with sweet Repose;
And when you wake, at Morning, may you find
Heaven's balmy Comfort heal your wounded Mind!
THUS cheered, the Nymph obsequiously withdrew,
And bathed her Cares in Sleep's refreshing Dew;
Till PHOEBUS, rising from the Shades of Night,
With rosy Keys unlocked the Gates of Light:
Bright as his Beams, arose the beauteous Maid;
And, to her Patroness returning, said:
WHAT Thanks, propitious Lady! shall I give
For all the Godlike Bounties I receive?
O! let my Silence thank you; for I know,
Words cannot express the Gratitude I owe.
To whom replies the venerable Dame:
No other Thanks, but Gratitude, I claim:
The Terms of Charity are never hard,
Love and Compassion are their own Reward:
A Soul, that succors Virtue, when distressed,
Can with Reflection make a noble Feast;
Which nourishes the Mind, and overpays
A generous Deed with self-approving Praise.
SUCH was their Converse, till domestic Care
Invites PRISCILLA from the youthful Fair;
Who sat in pensive Solitude, and strove
To soften, or suspend the Pains of Love.
At length the Linen on her Knee she spread,
And with her Needle worked the docile Thread.
Young THISBE's Fate she first began to frame;
But soon commits her Labor to the Flame:
Next drew she HERO sinking in the Main;
Then razed the finished Image out again:
Both these displeased her, though judicious Art,
And Rays of Nature shone in every Part.
At length her own unhappy Tale she chose,
And lively paints the Scene of all her Woes:
Her charming FELIX first the Linen graced;
By whom her Father, frowning stern, she placed:
Her Lover's Parting next to these appears;
(But, weeping here, she soiled her Work with Tears)
Next, on the Seas, she drew her floating Ship;
Next, her own Boat, slow-wand'ring over the Deep:
By these she fixed CAPRESA on the Strand,
Who waked her first, and welcomed her to Land:
The good PRISCILLA last employed her Art,
Whose Aspect spoke the Bounty of her Heart;
Her friendly Roof, a Refuge for the Poor,
The Horn of Plenty, pendent over the Door,
Diffusing Blessings still, and still increasing more.
All these confessed such Beauty, Skill, and Care,
Not HELEN better wove the Trojan War,
While HECTOR, PARIS, and their Martial Train,
With Grecian Heroes battled on the Plain.
HERE let us leave the lovely Nymph awhile,
To pass her tedious Hours in pleasing Toil:
Her absent Lover now my Song pursues,
Whose valiant Deeds require a nobler Muse.
SWIFT-PINION'D FAME, which often babbling flies,
To bear unwelcome Truths, and oft'ner Lies,
Had spread the ductile Error far and wide,
How wandering FELIX perished in the Tide.
But FELIX safely reached the Thunic Port,
And soon arrived to Honors in the Court:
His Wisdom there the wisest Peers excelled;
His Valor more surpassed 'em in the Field.
When first he to the Royal Palace came,
An Accident occurred to raise his Fame:
A noble Lord there was, of great Renown,
Rebelled against the King, and claimed his Crown:
Great Preparations made he for the Fight;
Nor less the Monarch, to defend his Right;
But summoned all, to meet the daring Foe,
Whose Strength could wield a Sword, or bend a Bow;
And promised to reward their Martial Care,
With Honors equal to their Deeds in War.
Now rings the Region with the Foe's Alarms,
Terrific shines the Field with burnished Arms;
The Martial Trumpet, sounding from afar,
With dreadful Notes, proclaims approaching War.
The Royal Army valiant FELIX joined;
Intrepid Courage animates his Mind:
Fixed in the Front, the Foe he bravely dares,
Like PALLAS prudent, and as bold as MARS.
Say, Muse, What Goddess, that tremendous Hour,
Aided the Youth with such unusual Power?
Bright VENUS, conscious of the Lover's Smart,
Sharpened his Sword, and pointed every Dart:
Fierce, as a Lion, through the Lines he sprung;
And forced his Foes, like trembling Stags, along.
As when resistless Winds rush over the Deep,
And from its Anchor force the driving Ship,
Or furiously against the Woodland roar;
The leafy Harvest, tumbling, flies before:
So rushed the Hero on the adverse Band,
So fled the Legions from his powerful Hand;
Till soon the rebel Lord he Prisoner made,
And to the King his captive Prize conveyed
Now reaps the Youth the Glory of his Toil;
To him the Monarch gives the Martial Spoil,
Rewards his Valor with a noble Post,
And makes him First Commander of his Host.
Thus, quickly FELIX gained a deathless Name;
Thus, was his Labor crowned with Wealth and Fame:
But Wealth and Fame insipid Things appear;
To give them Taste, he wants the lovely Fair;
The lovely Fair, oppressed with equal Grief,
To make her happy, wants the glorious Chief.
HIS Fame, which soon at Susa was revealed,
(Heroic Actions seldom lie concealed)
With pleasing Wonder struck CONSTANTIA's Ears,
And filled her doubtful Soul with Hopes and Fears:
For, though the wise PRISCILLA often strove
With prudent Counsel to suppress her Love;
Her Love was only lessened, not suppressed;
But glows again, again distracts her Breast.
AS when, in rural Cots, the Flames aspire,
And laboring Peasants quench the mounting Fire:
If chance a latent Spark remain behind,
In heapy Ashes, fanned with ambient Wind;
The Fires again, with former Fury, rise,
Flame through the Roof, and flash into the Skies:
So in her Bosom glows the amorous Fire,
And fills her tender Soul with soft Desire.
And is my FELIX yet alive? she says;
And is he crowned with Wealth, and deathless Praise?
No, no; I fear the flattering Tale deceives;
Methinks I see him plunging in the Waves.
Ah! why, ye Heavens, are feeble Mortals cursed,
In Things uncertain, to believe the worst?
No; rather let me seek the Thunic Court;
There, with my Eyes, confirm the blessed Report:
Hope flies before, and points the pleasing Way;
Love urges on, and Love I must obey.
SO saying, to PRISCILLA straight she came,
And with her Thoughts acquaints the pious Dame;
The pious Dame, with tender Pity swayed,
Approves the Passion of the loving Maid;
And, with CAPRESA, guards her to the Place,
Resolved herself to view the Hero's Face.
The Hero meets 'em at the Regal Gate,
Arrayed in Armor, formidably great;
For on that Morning, by the King's Command,
The Chief was to review the Martial Band:
His studded Chariot darted Splendour round,
His stately Coursers, neighing, paw'd the Ground;
The nodding Plumes around his Temples wave,
With awful Grace, and beautifully brave.
He knew the approaching Nymph; but, in Surprise,
The joyous Stream descended from his Eyes:
The Nymph beheld the weeping Chief; nor knew,
For what he wept, nor whom she came to view:
His Martial Dress, bespangled over with Gold,
The dreadful Warrior, not the Lover, told:
But, when he cast the Helmet from his Head,
And through the Gates the blushing Damsel led;
She knew her Lover, clasped him to her Breast,
While silent Eloquence her Joy confessed:
The conscious Pains an absent Lover bears,
Despair, fallacious Hope, and anxious Fears,
For want of Words, were painted with their Tears.
And when, at length, their crystal Sluices ceased,
The joyful Hero thus the Nymph addressed:
YE Gods! and have I then my Charmer found?
And are my Labors thus completely crowned!
Yes! let me clasp thee to my longing Arms,
Drink in thy Breath, and feed upon thy Charms.
As widowed Turtles, roving round the Fields,
Through all the fruitful Stores, which Nature yields,
Cursed in the midst of Plenty, cannot eat;
But starve, lamenting for their absent Mate:
Thus have I been with Fame and Riches graced;
Yet wanted thee, to give my Riches Taste.
But say, how came this Wealth I wanted most?
What brought my Love to this Barbarian Coast?
HE said; and now the joyful Damsel spoke
The Dangers which she suffered for his sake;
Shows him the Dame, who found her on the Tide;
PRISCILLA too, who all her Wants supplied:
Then, prostrate, on her Knees before him bends,
And begs him to reward her faithful Friends.
The grateful Chief, by native Goodness swayed,
Embraced 'em both, and soon the Nymph obeyed;
But first before his Royal Master came,
And begs he may resign his Post of Fame:
At which the Monarch frowns with awful Eyes,
Till FELIX straight, who saw his Passion rise,
Falls on the Ground, and to his Master shows
The various Scene of all his amorous Woes.
This heard, the King resumes his former Grace;
Love tuned his Soul, and smoothed his ruffled Face:
He raised the Hero, bids the Nymph appear;
The Nymph approached him with a modest Fear;
Before his awful Throne, submiss, she fell,
And to him straight unfolds th'amazing Tale.
Mute, on the Ground awhile he fixed his Eyes;
Then, Is the Force of Love so great? he cries:
We falsely Man the World's Commander call;
Thou, mightier Monarch, Love! command All:
Young AMMON's Self could not thy Power confine;
The World his Subject was, but He was thine.
THEN, smiling, thus he cheered the trembling Fair:
Henceforward, lovely Nymph, dismiss thy Care;
For, since thy Love has conquered Wind and Sea,
Cursed be the King, that is crueller than they!
Let HYMEN straight confirm the Marriage Ties;
Thou justly have deserved the Nuptial Prize.
THUS said, he crowned the Hero's Martial Care,
With Riches far superior to the Fair:
Due Thanks returned, they to PRISCILLA came,
Bestowing Gifts and Honors on the Dame:
CAPRESA next, with Age and Labor worn,
In comely Robes the grateful Pair adorn;
With ample Wealth her former Bliss restored,
And from the Seas redeemed her Nuptial Lord;
Her Nuptial Lord again enjoys his Wife,
Again delightful Freedom crowns his Life;
Till Nature calls him to resign his Breath,
In honorable Age, and peaceful Death.
THIS done, the loving Couple quit the Shore,
And joyfully the destined Port explore;
While sportive NEREIDS round their Vessel play,
And wanton CUPIDS hail 'em on their Way;
Rough THETIS' Self assumes a pleasing Smile,
Glad to return 'em to their native Soil;
Where sacred HYMEN joined their mutual Hands,
And Heaven, indulgent, blessed their Nuptial Bands.
Ad JOANNEM MILTONUM.
CEDE, Meles; cedat depressa Mincius urna;
Sebetus TASSUM desinat usque loqui:
At Thamesis victor cunctis ferat altior undas;
Nam per te, MILTO, par tribus unus erit.
Epigramma JOANNIS SALSILLI Romani. Thus Imitated.
LET Mincio now in humble Waves subside;
The Mantuan Swan no more supports his Pride;
No more let Meles boast of HOMER's Lays;
No more Sebetus murmur TASSO's Praise:
Since Thames can glory in our MILTON's Name,
Thames shall be equal to them all in Fame.
An Imitation of the Tenth Ode of the Second Book of HORACE.
Rectius vives, LICINI, neque altum
Semper urgendo, etc.

To the Right Hon. the Lord Viscount PALMERSTON.
IF we, my Lord, with easy Strife,
Would pass this fickle Tide of Life;
We must not always rashly sail
With every light, inconstant Gale;
Nor yet, at every Surge that roars,
Too timorous, seek the craggy Shores.
The Man who keeps the Golden Mean,
Where raging Storms are seldom seen,
Avoids the dangerous Rocks and Pools,
That fright the Wise, and swallow Fools:
He Is never despised among the Crowd,
Nor envied in the Court;
But steers between the Base and Proud,
To gain the peaceful Port.
While lofty Spires and Cedars fall,
Storm-beaten, to the Plain,
The lowly Shrub, and humble Wall,
Are Proof to Wind and Rain;
And Lightnings guiltless over the Cottage fly;
But smite the ambitious Hills, that, towering, threat the Sky.
THE steady Mind, that is truly great,
Surveys, unmoved, the Turns of Fate:
If Wealth and Fame his Pride increase,
His Fears their Force control;
If adverse Fortune would depress,
Hope elevates his Soul:
Because he knows, the Power who brings
The Winter with its dreary Wings,
Can make the vernal Beauties grow,
And turn our Woe to Bliss, or Bliss to Woe.
If now on anxious Cares you feed,
A Feast of Joy may soon succeed,
To cheer your pensive Mind.
With Times, our Tempers vary round,
Nothing immutable is found,
But all to Change inclined.
Though POPE with Illness often complains,
POPE is not always racked with Pains;
But, warmed with PHOEBUS' Fire,
Sometimes he wakes the sleeping String,
Or bids the silent Muses sing,
And charms us with his Lyre.
OUR Life's, at best, a checkered Scene
Of Health and Sickness, Mirth and Spleen:
Yet, since we all must stem this Sea,
Where Calm and Tempest dwell;
Grieve not to steer the destined Way,
But strive to pass it well:
If adverse Storms begin to rave,
Serenely view the foamy Wave,
Collected in yourself, and resolutely brave.
Or, if you find indulgent Gales
Impel the Bark too fast,
Wisely contract the swelling Sails,
And check their rapid Haste;
Lest, in your swift Career, the Ship
Split on a Rock, and sink beneath the Deep.
An IMITATION Of the Sixteenth Ode Of the Second Book of HORACE.
Otium Divos rogat in patenti
Prensus Aegeo, etc.

I.
THE trembling Merchant begs for Ease,
When tossed upon the foaming Seas;
When frowning Clouds obscure the Skies,
And dreadful Thunder roars, and Lightning flies.
II.
FOR Ease the proud Iberians pray,
When Martial Engines round 'em play;
The mighty Turk, and Persians too,
Beg Heaven for Ease, which Riches cannot bestow.
III.
NOT silver Mines, nor shining Gold,
Nor all the Gems the Indies hold,
Nor purple Robes, nor pompous State,
Can cure the fluttering Cares, which vex the Great.
IV.
HAPPY the Man, whose frugal Board
Supplies the Wishes of its Lord;
No Fears torment his quiet Breast,
No sordid Avarice breaks his grateful Rest.
V.
WHY should we so much Wealth desire,
When Life so little will require?
Why should we rove from Zone to Zone,
And for another Climate change our own?
VI.
NOT those, who fly from Pole to Pole,
Can fly the Cares, which rack the Soul;
But, in remotest Regions, find,
They leave their Country, not themselves, behind.
VII.
FOR, though we cross the briny Deep,
Corroding Care pursues the Ship;
It hunts the Horseman close behind,
More swift than Mountain Roes, or rapid Wind.
VIII.
THE Man, contented with his State,
Anticipates no evil Fate;
Though Fortune is inconstant still,
With what is good, he sweetens what is ill.
IX.
THE Draught of Life is mixed, at best;
There Is none can be completely blessed:
Some overlive their Pleasures here;
Some die, before they taste what Pleasures are.
X.
AGE, Wars, and Tumults, factious Hate,
Made See CLARENDON's History, Lib. 13.
COTTINGTON desire his Fate;
While tender Late Duke of Buckingham.
SHEFFIELD meets his Doom
Just in the Flower of Life, and youthful Bloom.
XI.
ALL make their Exit soon or late;
And, if the Gods contract thy Date,
The vital Hour, denied to thee,
Their more indulgent Hand may give to me.
XII.
WHAT though thy fruitful Pastures keep
A hundred Flocks of bleating Sheep?
What though thy proud, exulting Mares
Neigh, foam, and fly before thy gilded Cars?
XIII.
THY Board though twenty Dishes grace?
Thy Coat as many Yards of Lace?
I envy not the purple Dye,
Nor all thy gaudy Pomp of Luxury.
XIV.
I share some Sparks of PHOEBUS' Fire,
To warm my Breast, if not inspire;
Too little Wealth to make me proud,
And Sense enough to scorn the envious Crowd.
An Imitation of the Sixteenth Ode of the Third Book of HORACE.
Inclusam DANAEN turris ahenea,
Robustaeque fores, etc.

To the Reverend Mr. STANLEY.
BELIEVE me, Sir, your Cost and Cares,
Your Dogs and Locks, your Bolts and Bars,
Your Palisades, and Walls of Brass,
Are all too weak, when Gold attacks the Place.
A brazen Tower ACRISIUS reared;
A brazen Tower, he thought, would guard
His Daughter from the leach'rous Arms
Of those who nightly sought her Charms;
While surly Mastiffs watched the Dame,
And thundering, told if Lovers came:
These kept the Nymph from Gods and Men,
Not JOVE himself could enter in;
Till VENUS (wondrous to behold!)
Transformed his Godship into Gold.
O STANLEY, STANLEY! Gold has Power
The sternest Heart to move,
To burst the Wall, or pierce the Tower,
Impervious even to JOVE.
Gold can the subtlest Head deceive,
Or Peace, or War can bring,
Buy Votes, raise Gallic Arms, and give
The Polanders a King.
APOLLO knew the Force of Gold,
When PHILIP's Martial Fate he thus foretold:
" The sharpest Lance of Steel may err,
" So may the surest Bow;
" But know, O King, the Golden Spear
" Will vanquish every Foe."
The God's Advice the Prince pursued;
He fought with Gold, and Gold subdued:
Whence some Historians say, 'twas this,
And not young AMMON's Father, conquered Greece.
Gold has an absolute Command;
It rules at Sea, as well as Land:
For, when two adverse Fleets engage,
And fiery Tubes displode their Rage;
A Bribe can make their Thunder cease,
And hush the watery World to Peace.
Yet, notwithstanding all its Force,
It often brings the greatest Curse.
Vexatious Cares and Discontents
Increasing Gold attend;
Desires enlarge, as Wealth augments;
For Avarice knows no End.
We labor up the golden Hill with Pain;
But never surmount the towering Alps of Gain.
O STANLEY, Honor of my Muse!
I fear, and justly fear,
To steer the Course Ambition shows,
Or soar beyond my Sphere.
He Is poor, who always after Wealth aspires;
He Is rich, who always curbs his own Desires.
I more admire an humble Seat,
Than all the Pomps, which vex the Great;
And from their gilded Roofs retire,
On Isis' Banks to tune my Lyre.
In this Retreat I Am nobler blessed,
Than CROESUS ever could be,
Than if (like Misers) I possessed
A wealthy Poverty.
While favored by the Best of Queens,
Who all my Wants supplies;
While fragrant Groves, and flowery Scenes,
Delight my Muse's Eyes;
My Fate a far superior Blessing brings,
Than all the Pageantry of Eastern Kings.
What though no Flocks, on Richmond Plain,
With Fleeces deck my Pride?
What though I seldom drink Champagne,
Or quaff the purple Tide?
If these I wanted, were your Bard to ask,
I know, your generous Soul would send a Cask.
I make my Wants and Wealth agree;
I pay my Debts no worse than he,
Who over the Seas extends his Reign,
And adds all Sicily to Spain.
Who covets most, is most in Need,
And always rides a restless Steed,
Which foams, and flies without Control,
Still seeks, but never obtains the Goal.
Then happy those, whom Heaven has blessed,
With what may Life sustain;
Nor are with pinching Want depressed,
Nor cursed with too much Gain:
For boundless Wealth never fills a boundless Mind;
The Man who still pursues, is still behind.
Felix, qui patriis aevum transegit in agris,
Ipsa domus puerum quem videt, ipsa senem, etc.

Imitated from CLAUDIAN.
I.
HOW blessed the Swain of Bethnal-green,
Who never a Court beheld,
Nor ever roved beyond the Scene
Of his paternal Field!
II.
BUT, where he proved the Go-cart's Aid,
He proved the Crutch's too;
One only House his Mansion made,
Till Life (though late) withdrew.
III.
FALSE Fortune never, with Smile or Frown,
Or raised him, or deprest;
Her Frowns and Smiles were both unknown
To his contented Breast.
IV.
THE Chance of Stocks he never tried,
Nor knew to buy or sell;
So escaped the dreadful golden Tide,
Where South Sea Merchants fell.
V.
SKILLED in no Business but his own,
He shunned the noisy Bar;
Nor ever proved the smoky Town,
But breathed a purer Air.
VI.
NOR by Lord Mayor's Day he knew
The rolling Year to bound;
Nor kept an Almanac, to show
How Seasons varied round.
VII.
HE Summer knew by Heat extreme,
The Winter by its Cold;
POMONA showed when Autumn came,
When Spring, gay FLORA told.
VIII.
HE planted once an Acorn small,
And lived to see it rise
A mighty Oak, so wondrous tall,
It seemed to prop the Skies.
IX.
AND, by the Shade its Branches cast,
Could he much truer know,
What Hour, and how his Moments past,
Than by the Clock of Bow.
X.
THOUGH London stood so near his Cot,
He never marked the Dome;
But thought St. Paul's as far remote,
As Peter's Church at Rome.
XI.
OF Isis he was only told,
But never beheld her Streams;
Nor knew, but that the Ganges rolled
Near as the neighboring Thames.
XII.
OF Jellies, Creams, Ragous, and Tarts,
His Stomach never thought;
A perfect Stranger to the Arts,
Luxurious Cooks have taught!
XIII.
YET, with a simple Food supplied,
His Health was so entire,
That when hsi ancient Children died,
They left a youthful Sire.
XIV.
LET others search for golden Bliss
On India's wealthy Shore;
Their Joys of Life are less than his,
Their Labors ten times more.
Of FRIENDSHIP. To CELIA.
OCELIA! You, whose Rays of friendly Fire,
Constant as those of Nature, never expire;
If in your Breast no weighty Cares you find,
Nor better Thoughts employ your generous Mind;
Vouchsafe an Ear: These Numbers are your Due;
I sing of Friendship, and I sing to You:
Friendship! a Theme, which all Mankind profess,
No Virtue more admire, none practice less;
For most have learned the Grecian BIAS in CICERO de Amic. 16.
Sage's Text,
"To love one Day, as if to hate the next."
They change, forsake, as serves their selfish Ends,
Nor are their Dresses varied more than Friends.
YOU therefore, who are worthy Friendship's Name,
And cherish in your Breast the genuine Flame,
Attend to what a faithful Muse imparts,
A Muse unpracticed in fallacious Arts:
Though young in Life, that Life has made her know,
A friendly Aspect often conceals a Foe;
That, though so many seeming Friends abound,
For one that is true, a thousand false are found.
WHEN first you strive a faithful Friend to find,
Explore the secret Motives of his Mind;
Nor, rashly credulous, his Friendship trust,
Before you know, what Passion rules him most:
But, as a Horseman checks the Courser's Speed,
Till he has tried the Temper of his Steed;
So check the Reins of Friendship, till you prove,
What sways the Person, Interest, or Love.
AVOID the Fop impertinently vain,
And shun the Slave, who flatters you for Gain;
Beware of him, who sells you for a Jest;
But, most of all, beware the leaky Breast:
(Who hopes to keep his Wine the Season round,
Must first be sure his Cask is sweet and sound)
Nor should a formal Fool your Friendship claim,
Though Wealth and Honors dignify his Name.
Let Knaves and Fools in kindred Vices join;
Choose you a Friend, where Sense and Virtue shine;
Whose Passions move by Reason's Rule alone,
Much better, if agreeing with your own.
The Heart and Lion at a Distance keep;
Wolves company with Wolves, and Sheep with Sheep:
So we, by Nature's sympathetic Powers,
Most love those Tempers, that resemble ours.
YET, if it be too difficult to find
A Friend so justly molded to your Mind,
Among the virtuous Few select the best;
And such is he, whose Failings are the least:
Let him a modest Freedom always claim,
To praise your Virtues, or your Vices blame;
Nor be displeased his mild Reproof to hear;
For Friends may often kindly be severe;
The Best sometimes each other may control,
Yet not destroy the Harmony of Soul.
Rough Notes in Music never should be found,
Except adapted to improve the Sound.
WHEN mutual Faith the friendly Knot has tied,
And when that mutual Faith is truly tried,
Prey not upon yourself; nor be oppressed
With conscious Pains, that struggle in your Breast:
For, as the Flames, in Aetna closely pent,
Convulse the Mountain, laboring for a Vent;
Thus in the Soul uneasy Thoughts confined,
For want of Passage, rack the suffering Mind.
Unveil your Bosom to your other Part;
Your Friend shall share the Burden of your Heart,
Alleviate every Ill your Soul sustains,
Double your Pleasures, and divide your Pains.
BE zealous for your Friends, whenever you know
Their Reputation censured by a Foe;
Nor with a faint Excuse degrade your Friends;
The Man, who coldly praises, discommends.
Or are they justly censured for a Crime?
Reprove them mildly at some proper Time:
In private chide all Failings which you find,
In public praise the Beauties of their Mind;
Place all their Virtues in the clearest Light,
Omit their Faults, or touch them very slight;
As Painters, when they draw a beauteous Face,
Contract a Blemish, heighten every Grace.
NEITHER let Passion, Pride, or private Ends,
Or changing Fortune, make you change your Friends.
Who varies often, a faithless Temper shows,
Or, at the best, ill Judgment, when he chose.
Some Persons with themselves so disagree,
They Are fixed to nothing but Inconstancy;
With each new Day, new Resolutions come,
Expel the former, and usurp their Room:
Succeeding Billows thus the foremost throng,
Tides roll on Tides, and Waves urge Waves along.
Not but we may with a new Friend engage,
Before we see an old one quit the Stage;
Yet should not think the new our old exceeds,
As Ut equis vetulis teneros anteponere solemus -- Veterrima quaeque (ut ea
vina, quae vetustatem ferunt) esse debent suavissima. Cic. de Amic. 19.
Jockeys value most their youngest Steeds.
One Maxim will in Wine and Friendship hold,
Alike the better both for being old.
BUT must we then be bound in deathless Bands,
And still obey whatever a Friend commands?
Aid him to gain what he unjustly craves?
No -- Leave the Man, who Truth and Virtue leaves.
Should furious CATILINE some Plot devise,
To ruin Thousands, that himself might rise;
The Laws of Honor, Truth, and Conscience show,
It Is Friendship to the World to be his Foe.
Or, should a Friend basely betray his Trust,
To pardon him were to yourself unjust:
For, -- Neque amissos colores
Lana refert medicata fuco;
Nec vera virtus, cum semel excidit,
Curat reponi deterioribus.
Hor. Ode 5. Lib. III.
as the Wool, with Crimson colored over,
Never acquires its native Whiteness more;
So he who breaks his Faith, will never obtain
Your Credit, nor his Innocence again.
If otherwise he disoblige his Friends,
(For where is the perfect Man, who never offends?)
Try if his Ear will kind Reproof endure;
And, if the Balm of Counsel work a Cure,
O'erlook the Failure: All offend, that live;
Let Foes resent a Trespass, Friends forgive.
Yet let the pardoned Friend not, many times,
Proceed in Folly, and repeat his Crimes.
Though purest Gold a vast Extent will bear,
Yet purest Gold will break, if stretched too far:
And Friends may bear some Slips from Wisdom's Rule;
But who can pardon the persisting Fool?
Pestem enim majorem esse nullam in amicitiis, quam in plerisque pecuniae
cupiditatem, in optimis quibusque honoris certamen and gloriae, ex quo
inimicilias maximas saepe inter amicissimos extitisse. Cic. de Amic. 10.
AMONG the various Causes, that conspire
To cool our Love, and quench the friendly Fire,
Vile Avarice assumes the greatest Power,
A God which base ignoble Souls adore:
To pleasure him, a Tide of broken Vows
(Needful Libations!) on his Altar flows:
Yet, never satisfied, he craves for more;
And keeps his Votaries, in Plenty, poor:
Who worships him, will break the friendly Bands,
Whenever the sordid, selfish God commands.
OTHERS there are, induced by Thirst of Praise,
(And even the greatest Men this Passion sways)
Who quit their Friends for Honors of the State,
And turn their Love into the rankest Hate.
Nor is it wonder these desert their Friends,
Since all are Foes, who will not serve their Ends:
For wild Ambition like a Torrent roars,
Which, when obstructed, climbs th'opposing Shores;
Till to the Top the laboring Flood attains,
Swells over the Banks, and foams along the Plains.
Not but we may an honest Fame embrace;
Nay, Friends should aid us in the glorious Chase.
Man has some Principle of heavenly Fire,
That warms his Breast, and prompts him to aspire;
Wakes him to Actions of superior Kind,
And keeps alive the Faculties of Mind;
For Sloth begets a Lethargy of Soul,
As want of Motion taints the clearest Pool:
Yet, if, too fond and covetous of Fame,
We blow that native Spark into a Flame,
It quickly rises to a fiery Storm,
And burns the Fabric 'twas designed to warm.
What Bands of Nature can restrain its Course?
What friendly Offices suppress its Force?
See how its Rage the young JUOURTHA.
Numidian fires,
The worst of Children to the best of Sires!
Deep, through his Brothers Blood, he wades his Way,
And leaps over Gratitude to Regal Sway.
Young CAESAR's Tutor by his Pupil dies,
While TULLY falls by him he helped to rise;
Friends, Fathers, Brothers, Uncles, yield to Fate,
To make three Tyrants infamously great!
O! grant me, gracious Heaven, wherever I go,
To be a faithful Friend, or generous Foe;
Nor let me pant so much for empty Praise,
As to obtain it by dishonest Ways;
Nor wrong my Friend, though 'twere to gain a Throne;
Nor ruin others Fame, to raise my own.
HE who is only learned in Books, will find
A harder Lesson, when he learns Mankind;
A Volume gilded over with smiling Art,
Where few can read the Meaning of the Heart.
We often take our Flatterers for Friends;
One would suspect the Man who still commends,
Who, like the Sharper in the Roman Play,
Or right or wrong, assents to all you say;
Bends here or there, which way his Lord's inclined,
As Reeds submit to every different Wind.
Nor is it strange such Parasites prevail,
When greedy Ears devour their flattering Tale:
While THRASO loves to hear his Praises told,
GNATHO will give him Praise, and take his Gold.
But you, who walk by Wisdom's safer Rules,
(For 'twere but Labor lost to counsel Fools)
Detest the Wretch, who never can Courage find
To speak the genuine Dictates of his Mind;
But, like the Sirens sweet, pernicious Song,
At once would charm and ruin with his Tongue.
YET some there are, in social Bands allied,
Who, with blunt Truths, err on the other Side;
Void of Goodnature, and Good-breeding too,
They sourly censure every thing you do.
O! never flatter even a Monarch's Pride,
Nor, with the Sternness of a Cynic, chide;
But, when you would an erring Friend reprove,
Let gentle Cautions show, the Motive's Love:
Do not begin with Rashness to exclaim;
But rather hint the Fault, before you blame.
It Is not enough your Admonition's just;
Prudence must guide it, or the Labor's lost:
Friends should allure, and charm us into Sense;
Harsh Counsels not reform, but give Offense.
Nature, impatient of severe Reproof,
Loves mild Instruction, but abhors the rough:
As Fruits and Flowers improve with gentle Rain;
But fade, if rapid Storms overflow the Plain.
SOME Men are Friends, when Fortune fills the Sails,
And wafts you on with favorable Gales;
But quit the tottering Ship, and make to Shore,
When Storms descend, and adverse Surges roar.
Long as in Credit, Power, or Place you stand,
Their fawning, formal Friendship you command:
With twenty Squeezes, and a hundred Bows,
As many Compliments, as many Vows,
They swear your Interest shall be their own,
And wish the Time to make it better known;
Like false hot Coursers, waiting for the Chase,
Which foam, and neigh, and proudly spurn the Grass,
Intent to run; but droop their jaded Crest,
And fail you most, when most you want their Haste.
WE make a Prostitute of Friendship's Name,
If only Complaisance supports our Claim.
And yet there are, of this polite Degree,
Who treat you still with forced Civility;
In each obliging Art so well refined,
Though ever false, they never seem unkind.
Not that my Muse would Decency offend;
For it is Good-breeding polishes a Friend:
Nor shines it less, with Truth and Virtue joined,
Than comely Features with a noble Mind:
But those, whose Friendships most in Speeches dwell,
Neglect the Fruit, and trifle with the Shell.
True Friendship more intrinsic Worth affords,
Defined by Actions better than by Words;
A warm Affection, that can never cool,
Concord of Mind, and Music of the Soul;
Which tunes the jarring Strings of Life to Love,
Shows Men below, how Angels live above.
There are in Friendship such attractive Charms,
It draws Esteem from those it never warms.
See how Qui clamores tota cavea nuper in hospitis and amici mci M. Pacuvii
nova sabula, cum, ignorante rege, uter eorum esset Orestes, Pylades Orestem se
esse diceret, ut pro illo necaretur; Orestes autem, ita ut erat, Orestem se
esse perseveraret? Stantes plaudebant in re sicta: quid arbitramur in vera
fuisse facturos? Cic. de Amic. 7.
PACUVIUS' tragic Scenes could move
The People's Praises with fictitious Love!
When on the Stage two doubtful Princes strive,
Each seeking Death, to keep his Friend alive:
Now PYLADES deceives the Monarch's Eye;
Faithful, yet fraudulent, resolves to die:
ORESTES now displays the friendly Cheat,
Invites the threatening Sword, and courts his Fate.
Moved with their generous Love, the Audience rose;
With social Flame each changing Bosom glows;
All feel the sacred Power of Friendship's Laws,
And the Stage rocks, and thunders with Applause.
I know the Muse may give to some Offense,
(Though rather Men of Wit, than Men of Sense)
Whose Counsel is; "Be not engaged too far;
" The greatest Friendship brings the greatest Care:
" Our own Concerns have Plagues enough in Store;
" Who joins in Friendship, only makes 'em more:
" The Cares and Troubles, which your Friend endures,
" Are all by Sympathy adopted yours."
WHAT base, ungen'rous, selfish Souls are these?
Mere Quacks, who turn even Health into Disease;
And but the darkest Side of Friendship find,
To all its radiant Beams and Beauties blind.
Two faithful Friends, in any State, may gain
Comfort to heighten Joy, or lessen Pain:
If weighty Cares the pensive Mind invade,
They make the Burden light with mutual Aid;
If Profit, or if Pleasure chears the Soul,
The Blessing's common, each enjoys the whole:
If Business calls them to some distant Place,
Swift-pinion'd Love contracts the lengthened Space;
Each keeps the other's Image in his Breast,
As Wax preserves the Form a Seal impressed.
HAIL, sacred Friendship! by whose chearing Ray
All Joys increase, without it fade away:
Even HYMEN's Torch, though burning ever so bright,
Aided by Friendship, shines with double Light.
This you, OCELIA! by Experience find,
Whose nuptial Friend lives always in your Mind:
No Length of Time, no Distance, ever rased
His loved Idea from your tender Breast:
Your friendly Flame admits of no Decays;
But glows, unclouded, with augmented Rays,
And makes your bridal Lamp much brighter blaze.
That faint, pale, languid Lamp, in Age, expires,
Except it is fed with Friendship's constant Fires:
These to the Winter of our Years extend;
And, when the Lover cools, they warm the Friend.
When all the transient Joys of Youth are over,
When all the Charms of Beauty charm no more;
Surviving Friendship gives us fresh Supplies
Of lasting Bliss, and more substantial Joys;
Which sweeten all the Troubles Age has brought,
And make the Dregs of Life a cordial Draught.
FINIS.
The following was written since the preceding Pages were printed off.
An ODE, presented to their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of WALES,
in Richmond Gardens, on Thursday, May 6. 1736.
YE Muses, hail the Royal Dame,
Whose Charms Report excel;
Charms! brighter far than sounding Fame,
With all her Tongues, could tell.
O glorious PRINCE! Britannia's Pride,
Welcome to Richmond Seats,
Where Nature, proud to please your BRIDE,
Displays her choicest Sweets.
See! fragrant Beauties deck the Green,
The Branches bloom Delight;
Gay FLORA paints the verdant Scene,
To charm your CONSORT's Sight.
Hear! how the feathered warbling Throng
Congratulate your FAIR!
Not more melodious was their Song
To the first wedded Pair.
That Pair, in Eden, never reposed,
Where Groves more lovely grew;
Those Groves, in Eden, never enclosed
A lovelier PAIR, than YOU.
YOU! happier than the former Two,
Have nobler Tasks assigned:
'Twas Theirs to curse the World; but YOU
Were born to bless Mankind.

