Oculus Britanniae: AN Her^^-Panegyrical POEM ON THE University of OXFORD.

Illustrated with diverse beautiful Similes, and useful Digressions.

-- Juvat antiquos exquirere fontes.

LONDON: Printed for R. FRANCKLIN, under Tom's-Coffee-H^^se, Covent Garden.
1724. [Price One-Shilling*

TO THOMAS P -- R -- T, Esquire Doctor of civil Law and Fellow of St. J -- 's C --
e in O -- d.
SIR,
I believe you are a gentleman, who is not unwilling that his actions should be
faithfully transmitted to posterity; and as nobody can have a more sensible
regard for your great virtues and abilities than my self, I beg leave to make
the world acquainted with them in the following dedication.

YOU came into the world, sir, under the influence of a lucky planet, being
born of an ancient and worthy family, to a plentiful fortune, as well as great
natural endowments and hereditary virtues; all which you have since improved by
a liberal education, under the care of one of the ablest pillars of our church,
and (as his ingenious friend Mr. MIST emphatically styles him) the brightest
ornament of the brightest body in the world; by his precepts and example you
have finished in your self one of the finest gentlemen and greatest scholars of
our age.

Transplanting, one by one, into your life
His bright perfections, till you shine like him.
IT is impossible that one thus richly endowed by nature and improved by art,
should not make a very extraordinary figure. You discovered the earliest marks
of a great genius, and at an age when we say of others that they are promising
youths, you were arrived at the highest perfection and maturity of manhood. You
brought with you from school a thorough knowledge of the classical writers and
the learned languages, so that you had nothing to interrupt your stricter
academical studies; by which means and a close application, you soon became a
deep logician, a profound philosopher, and an excellent mathematician. In
short, you grew a complete master of most arts and sciences (particularly
necromancy and metaphysics) and no part of learning has entirely escaped your
knowledge.

NOR have you cultivated your Head only, (which in this age is the least part
of a liberal character) but even your heels, sir, discover the marks of an
academical education; that pretty flutter in your gait, that careless swing of
your arms, and that polite turn of your head may, to some people, seem only to
be the natural effect of well proportioned limbs and a regular body; but, to a
nice observer, every motion will appear syllogistical, and strictly conformable
to Mode and Figure: How often have I seen you come into a room in Barbara and
salute the company in Darii? how often do you pay your devotions in Ferio, and
dance in Baralipton? as this is an art perhaps peculiar to yourself and the
author of Mathematical rules for Dancing, it is no wonder that you have gained
the character of the politest gentleman in the university and triumphed over
all your rivals in the affections of the ladies.

BUT I must not dwell too long upon one of your most trifling qualifications,
considering how many there are still behind, and how narrow a compass my
bookseller has prescribed me to celebrate them in.

GIVE me leave therefore, learned sir, in a cursory manner to mention your
humanity, candor, and public spirit; your acute wit, unbiased judgment, and
penetrating understanding; your nice sense of honor, magnanimity, and intrepid
courage; your chastity, sobriety, and unspotted virtue; but above all, your
unshaken loyalty (in the true sense of the word) your invincible orthodoxy and
strict adherence to the catholic church.

YOUR intimate acquaintance with the modern Languages and your profound skill
in modern History are so well known, that it would be matter of great
astonishment to me, how you could escape being nominated to a certain Prof --
ip lately established, if I did not consider how some people -- I can hardly
keep it in, notwithstanding all their pains and penalties; but we were pretty
even with them at last; and I am sure it is no disappointment to you, who
choose to do good and propagate knowledge, without any Reward.

WITH all these shining accomplishments (however you may be despised elsewhere)
you could not fail of acquiring a very popular reputation in the famous
university of OXFORD, which, amidst the general depravity of mankind, and the
lamentable increase of fanaticism both in church and state, has maintained its
ancient purity in the worst of times, even (as our ingenious professor of
poetry once observed) whilst armed Forces were within our Walls. Accordingly
you have proceeded in the regular method prescribed by our statutes (too slow
indeed for your aspiring merit) to the highest degree which our university can
confer, and whenever you shall please to oblige the world with any of those
valuable manuscripts which enrich your cabinet, you may dignify the title page
with Fellow of a College and Doctor of civil Law.

HAVING said thus much (which is much too little) of you, my present most
honored Patron; give me leave, Sir, (with the imputation of as little vanity
as possible) to say something of my self and my following performance.

YOU must know, Sir, that I have been several years a matriculated son of this
ancient university; and though, for want of the same natural talents, and the
same application, I have not done the good old lady half the honor which you
have done, nor received half so many honors from her hands; yet I shall never
forget the obligations which I lie under to her, for that small portion of
learning which I possess, and that little figure which I make in the world. A
due sense of these obligations joined with a violent indignation to see her
traduced and vilified by some persons, who ought to know and practice better,
has occasioned the following sheets; in which I have endeavored to perpetuate
her name, and to raise up a column of my own gratitude, that it may not be said
of me in future ages (as I fear it will be of too many) that I would not look
to the rock from whence I was hewn, nor to the pit from whence I was dug.

I cannot, in this place, forbear assuring you, that when I first resolved upon
this undertaking, you jumped immediately into my head, as the fittest person to
patronize it; and I have not been able, with all my deliberation, to alter my
opinion ever since: so that, you see, it was by a sort of inspiration that I
desire your protection of this Work.

I know the conclusion of my POEM, where I presage my own future glory, will be
particulary cavil'd at, and I shall be called a vain conceited coxcomb for my
pains; but in answer to this, without insisting on the examples of Horace and
Ovid in the same case, I say that it is an intolerable grievance upon modern
authors to be restrained from commending their own works. No body expects that
the good wives of I^^lingsgate should cry stinking fish, or that any vintner in
town should tell you that his wine is sour: nay, every surly rascal of a
shoemaker shall take the liberty to look you saucily in the face, when he puts
you to execrable torture with a pair of new shoes, and swear that they sit as
easy as your mistress's gloves; whereas it is expected of an author that he
should cry down his own ware, and though he publishes a better poem than ever
Homer or Virgil did, should make a thousand excuses for troubling the world
with such indifferent stuff, as he is obliged to call it, to the manifest
hinderance of his market, and against the fullest conviction of his own mind. I
think therefore every manufacturer of the brain ought to rise up against this
growing evil, and assert the same right, with all other tradesmen and
artificers, to warrant his goods, and thereby promote the sale of them as much
as he can.

FOR my part (though I do not think my self vainer than other men) I will
venture to affirm (in defiance of all the critics and ignorant carping rascals
in England) that the following poem is a perfect finished piece, according to
the strictest rules of Aristotle and Longinus, whom (I will be again bold to
say) no body has studied more, or understands better than my self; I maintain,
that the model is just and regular, the diction truly sublime, and the
panegyric well hit off: if it be objected, that I have now and then introduced
little sarcasms and strokes of satire, I have Virgil, Horace, and all the best
authors, both ancient and modern, to justify me in such occasional deviations.

I have also their authority (as I could easily prove from a multitude of
instances) to apologize for the many beautiful similes and useful digressions,
with which I have thought fit to illustrate and diversify the whole: they are
all on my side, and so I have no apprehensions from them; but I am terribly
afraid of a certain merry gentleman in this town, who frequently says, that
there is nothing in the world so unlike as similes: he might with the same
reason add, and I hope he will do it, that nothing is so pertinent as
digressions; this will make us some amends, and give us with one hand, what he
takes away with the other.

As for my self I have labored to make my similes as like, and my digressions
as pertinent as possibly I could; I am sure it has cost me a great deal of
pains (as, I doubt not, it has most authors) to bring them in and make them
look pat to the purpose; nay, I could not with all my pains, lug in some, which
I was not a little fond of, and particularly the following distich.

So barren chalk, which no production yields,
Burnt into lime, manures the neighboring fields.
YOU must allow, sir, that this is a very pretty simile, and if it could but be
handsomely applied, would make a good figure in my poem; but after the
strictest examination, I could not hedge it in any where in the following
pages, and being loath that so uncommon a thought should be lost, I have
inserted it in this place, making it my request, that if you, or any of my
candid readers can think of any method to introduce it properly into the body
of my work, you will oblige me with the hint, and the favor shall be
gratefully acknowledged in the second edition.

I had also a mind to foist in a digression against the late bills for
inspecting drugs, medicines, etc. and for excising of tea, coffee, and
chocolate; but not being able to discover any relation which they have to the
university of Oxford, I was obliged to reserve it for a more proper occasion.

SIR, I was going on to acquaint you with some more of my projects; but my
bookseller is just come in, and tells me, that I must break off immediately,
and that he cannot afford a line more for a shilling, which is the price we
have agreed to fix upon this summer-piece of entertainment for gentlemen and
ladies: what therefore I have farther to say to you, upon this and all other
occasions, must be deferred till another opportunity, which, you may depend
upon, shall not be neglected by

Learned sir, your unknown admirer and devoted Servant, PHILO-MUSUS.
OXFORD, July 22. 1724.
OCULUS BRITANNIAE, etc.
MATRON of arts, and to the british youth
Thou shining pillar of religious truth,
Sprung from primaeval kings and saints divine,
Thy sacred ear, illustrious dame! incline,
Whilst filial duty wings my youthful lays,
And prompts me forward, studious of thy praise.
BUT how shall I the mighty theme sustain
Of ALMA'S glories in an equal strain?
Unskilled in verse, and to the muses young,
What God, what angel, will inform my tongue?
Aid me, DELAUNE; instruct me, reverend sire,
With thy own sacred heat my breast inspire:
O! touch my lips with thy celestial art,
And with the same devotion fire my heart.
ENOUGH, enough! -- through every kindling vein
Thy god-like fury shoots and fires my brain;
The same strong impulse and religious flame,
Which in the pulpit shakes thy goodly frame:
And which sometimes provokes thy righteous heel
To kick obdurate whigs, in rampant zeal:
Like yours, methinks, my eyes in lightning roll,
Like yours, tumultuous raptures lift my soul;
Inspired I soar beyond my common flight,
And I am either fit to rhyme or fight.
IN this divine delirium, to my eyes
Abstracted forms, and fancied objects rise;
Whilst the pleased muse in thoughtful silence roves
Through the cool shades, and academick groves,
In the clear fountains, and the silvan springs
Sees the young cygnets dip their snowy wings;
Observes the streams of science roll along,
Here floats a syllogism, there a song;
Here unborn poems tune the warbling tide,
And problems there, instead of gudgeons, glide.
THROUGH these religious valleys as I stray,
What crowds of ancient worthies throng the way?
The ghosts of old philosophers appear,
That once adorned the place and flourished here:
Muse, tune thy voice, in homage bend thy head,
And pay just honors to the learned dead.
SEE! that lean spectre! horrible and wan,
Whose meagre looks declare the quondam man.
Hail mighty SCOTUS! hail unrivaled sage!
The pride and glory of the monkish age!
Reverse of bookworm! which on books is fed*
For books devoured thee up, and wore thee dead
How did thou toil and labor for mankind,
Who twenty folio tomes have left behind!
Unlike the modern writers of our land,
Whom every shallow wit can understand,
So deep your logic flows and so profound,
No common plummet can the bottom sound.
Thy pride it was to sift the darkest themes,
To hood-wink truth and reconcile extremes,
Self-contradicting tenets to maintain,
And prove by reason, that all reason's vain.
HIM BACON follows, whose illustrious name
Lives in the annals of recording fame,
That ancient monk, renowned in every part,
For his wise Brazen-Head and magic art;
Of late indeed more famous and renowned,
Since conjurers here are now so rarely found.
But see! another reverend form appears,
Whose headless trunk provokes my flowing tears;
The sacred lawn his gushing blood distains;
And with religious horror chills my veins:
Much-injur'd LAUD, religion's boldest chief,
A while, great shade, indulge the muse's grief;
O prelate, greatly for the church distressed,
What zeal, what fury could inflame thy breast,
The rage of british senates to withstand,
And stem the torrent of a factious land?
Yet shall thou not repent the pious deed,
Though destined by the traytor's ax to bleed:
With BECKET in religious mischief bold,
A rubric martyr shall thou stand enrolled;
His annual debt thy The reverend and learned Dr. Delaune, President of St.
John's college, who has instituted a public oration to the memory of
archbishop Laud, who was formerly president of the same college, on the 10th
of January, being the anniversary of his martyrdom.
successor shall pay,
And crown with solemn woe the woeful day.
HERE the famed King and confessor was born,
Whose godly reign celestial gifts adorn,
That royal saint, whose salutiferous hand,
First from the noisome Evil purged the land.
Stupendous art! to pious kings revealed,
And witnessed by the crowds that have been healed;
Such EDWARD was, by gracious heaven designed,
From scabs and ulcers to relieve mankind,
Of so abstemious, continent a life,
He shunned the enjoyment of his lawful wife.
From age to age this wondrous art prevailed,
(When the whole boasted strength of medicine failed)
Through a long race of monarchs, all divine,
'Till but of late it ceased with STUART'S line,
Unless, adhering to some good old wives,
In STUART'S lineal race it still survives.
HERE then, O JAMES! let the long contest end,
And on this issue let thy birth depend;
In the wide forum of imperial ROME,
Build a large stage and bid the lazars come,
By this grand secret prove the STUART line,
And let thy cures confirm thy right divine:
If at thy touch the ulcers dye away,
The sores heal up, and all the scabs decay,
In spite of BURNET'S tales, and Britain's scorn,
Will own thee most miraculously born.
HAIL sacred art! the priesthood's darling theme,
Unlike our late inoculating scheme,
That strange inverted Science, rash and blind,
Which plants diseases, and infects mankind,
Of cruel Turks and infidels the boast,
And first devised on hell's infernal coast;
For so the Sea MASSEY'S sermon against inoculation.
priest aver'd, in holy satire,
And proved old Nick the first inoculator.
BUT who is that in robes of purple dressed,
Who drops with sullen pride his mitred crest!
Mark! how he bears resentment in his eye,
And damns his sovereign, as he passes by!
Some minion of the court, from favor thrown!
And lo! his form bespeaks the butcher's son!
In every look great WOLSEY stands confessed;
See how the rising passion heaves his breast!
See! how his eyes with reddening vengeance glow,
And how with hasty strides he spurns the sand below!
FALL down, ye sons of Christ-church, at his feet,
And gratefully your benefactor greet;
For o! remember to his bounteous hand
How much indebted, and obliged you stand.
He first with large endowments did intail
Your loins of mutton, and your butts of ale;
To him you owe the soft engaging art
Of pretty songs and epigrams so smart:
'Twas he that took you from the rural plains,
And made you scholards, who had else been swains;
Instead of jolly canons, you had now
Perhaps some livery worn, or followed plow,
Perhaps some painful servile life have led,
Or in the shambles, like himself, been bred.
MALICIOUS tongues indeed with censures loud
Style him imperious, turbulent and proud,
Revengeful, cruel, of a ruthless mind,
To persecution, and to rage inclined;
In whoredom and pollution uncontrolled,
And to a proverb arrogantly bold;
A public drunkard, and a college thief,
In act a brute, an atheist in belief:
To lust, they say, he sacrificed his breath,
And perished of the foul, venereal death.
SUCH heavy loads of infamy and shame
Our bold reformers charge on WOLSEY'S Name;
Proud of their northern heresies deride
His priestly grandeur and religious pride,
Hand down his vices to succeeding times,
And make his function aggravate his Crimes.
BUT FIDDES, by sublimer views inspired,
And with a church-man's indignation fired,
Lists in this great, unhappy prelate's cause,
And by more candid rules his picture draws;
Solves all objections which historians make,
And screens his failings for his function's sake.
BEHOLD him now, by FIDDES varnished over,
Unlike the monstrous fiend you shunned before,
His magic pages wipe off every taint,
The atheist and the brute becomes a saint;
His drunkenness is only nature's slip,
(For who alas! can from temptation keep?)
His impudence, in courtly language dressed,
The Sea his life of WOLSEY. p. 11, 12.
great ascendant happily expressed;
His rage is only zeal for romish laws,
And persecution is the church's cause;
Revenge is taking God almighty's part,
And pride the token of a noble heart.
His whoredom and pollution who can blame,
Since Solomon was guilty of the same?
His college-frauds, it must be understood,
Were well designed, and for the public good,
To finish towers, old steeples to repair,
And build religious castles in the air:
Nor is he last of all that godly crowd,
To whom this candid plea has been allowed.
That of the pox he died, and such like stuff,
Great FIDDES says it is false, and that is enough.
SO LAUD by HEYLIN filled and polished bright,
Shines forth an angel of unspotted light;
Shakes off the rust of threescore gloomy Years,
And in his volume like a god appears.
ONE pious work, o! FIDDES, still remains,
A theme well worthy your immortal pains;
And since in vindications you abound,
As WOLSEY and his GRACE See his vindication of a late epitaph.
have lately found,
To one great churchman more your aid afford,
And let unhappy JUDAS be the third,
In his defense at least it may be said,
That what he did alas! he did for bread,
And erred poor man! as modern swearers cant,
To save a numerous family from want:
Doctor, 'twill do; the pious task begin,
Clear up his case, and prove the kiss no sin;
This will for ever all our foes defeat,
And thy divine APOLOGIES complete.
TO these a various gowned tribe succeeds,
Famed for their learning, or illustrious deeds;
Physicians, lawyers, and a medly throng
Of preaching clerks and poets that have sung,
Logicians that have foiled the states-man's schemes,
And prophets that saved nations by their dreams;
Casuists and school-divines, whose mystic skill
Could alter vice and virtue at their will,
Of right divine prove persecuting rage,
And tyranny the blessing of an age,
Turn pure religion into mortal sin,
And make the devil to the saints akin.
BUT shall the dead alone engross my lays?
O, no; the living shall partake my praise;
Muse prune thy pinions for a second flight,
For living heroes claim an equal height.
BUT where, encompassed with a mingled blaze
Of doughty sculls, shall I begin to praise?
Wherever around I cast my wondering eyes,
Heroic bards and shining beaux arise;
In the same jovial common room I see
The prim canonic bob and smart tupee;
Grave critics here on modern authors prey,
And deep logicians puzzle sense away;
Pert crambo-wags with subtle schoolmen joke,
And punsters and divines in consort smoke.
IN this illustrious crowd, so learned and wise,
BRAZEN, the college tyrant, charms my eyes;
Great must his merits be, his virtues choice,
Which five successive years gained ARRAN'S voice:
In him at least some excellence is shown,
Famed for his brother's parts, if not his own;
His brother's virtues, all divinely bright,
Reflect on him a pale inferior light:
What for the cause his patriot-brother bears,
The learned Head in A meeting of the heads of colleges so called.
ordinance declares;
His shrewd harangues in senate he repeats,
With the same zealous pangs his bosom beats;
Often in his veins he boasts true-british blood,
And raves devoutly for his country's good;
Of naughty statesmen echoes dismal tales,
And against WALPOLE, over his bottle, rails.
SO the pale moon is not without her praise,
Though from the sun she borrows all her rays.
NEXT, to DELAUNE, as next to Brazen's heart,
Muse touch the string, and prove thy utmost art:
O! for a pinion from the mantuan swan,
To reach the mighty theme, and sing the man
Who more than forty years, a shining space,
Has graced these walls, and still vouchsafes to grace:
With various honors crowned for various arts,
(All far unequal to his great deserts)
Who wants no virtue, by no vice defaced,
Wise, learned, pious, sober, humble, chaste,
So strictly honest, so severely just,
And rigidly tenacious of his trust,
That his integrity surmounts my song,
And even to name it, is to do him wrong.
FROM such proud heights, o! muse presumptous bend,
And to his private qualities descend;
Say how his soul in conversation shines,
Oe'r the third bottle how his wit refines,
How in smart jests his sacred lips excel,
What mirth they start, and jocund fables tell,
How grave his looks, how orthodox his dress,
Even stubborn AMHURST will these truths confess.
SO Lucifer, when fallen, was forced to own
The bright superior power, that hurled him down.
HOW for his college he employs his care,
How helpless orphans his protection share,
H -- DW -- TH and W -- S, shall solemnly declare,
And if superior evidence we need,
H -- ES on the gospel shall attest the deed;
SM -- TH shall confirm his oath, if that avail,
And O -- N stand his sacramental bail.
BENEATH his care great CLARENDON appeared,
From all surmises of corruption cleared;
He to the press the deathless work conveyed,
By no base bribes, nor partial motives swayed;
He scorned to vary from the written tale,
Nor could the hopes of bishoprics prevail:
Yet if the foe will still insult thy name,
And with black scandal strive to taint thy fame,
Soon shall he blush; for HIDE'S impartial ghost
Shall visit earth, to this defamer's cost,
And purge thy virtue, though the copy's lost.
FAIN would the muse, inflamed with pious zeal,
Millions of other graces still reveal,
All cent'ring in this man, to bless the age,
His equal mind and temper void of rage,
His energy in prayer, his faith sublime,
His meekness, love and candor to a crime;
But conscious of her weakness she declines,
And to some college-bard the glorious theme resigns.
NOR shall that hoary seer remain unsung,
To whom the reins of Exeter belong,
That learned doctor, and that frugal Head,
Who grudges even himself his daily bread,
Of so penurious, provident a sense,
He curses human life for its expense,
And often wishes he was under ground,
Rather than lose a penny in the pound.
Candles are dear, and therefore he thinks best
Still with the setting sun to go to rest,
Unless, to finish something for his shop,
FLETCHER will pay him well for sitting up:
Yet few, I fear, will think it worth their while,
So languid is his matter and his style,
To publish all the volumes he could write;
Poor WH-ST-R was alas! half ruined by it.
WITH half a fowl, and half a penny small
He makes a sober dinner in the hall,
(Such slender meals suffice his famished nerves,)
And the minced fragment for his supper serves.
STOOPING with age, he dodders as he goes,
From his red eyes a rheumy torrent flows,
Like winter fruit, his yellow rivel'd skin
Dams up the little blood that creeps within,
Threescore and ten have quenched his vital heat,
And his decaying pulses scarcely beat;
Yet thus disabled, for the longing dame
he feels the pangs of love, though not the flame;
Fair RAGGABEL, that near his college-gate
Fine china sells, and tea, and chocolate,
Or mends old tattered gowns with matchless art,
Shines in his eye, and triumphs in his heart;
Often to her shop the feeble lecher strays,
Toys with her hand, or with her bubbies plays;
On her dear face he rolls his doting eyes,
As she weighs coffee, or the needle plies;
One evening, prostrate on his tottering knees,
The sapless dotard spoke in words like these;
BEHOLD, o! fairest of those gentle maids,
Who with their beauty grace these learned shades,
Behold! what conquests thy perfections gain,
A reverend, aged doctor wears thy chain,
Me whom a college for its Head obeys,
To whom each fellow servile homage pays,
Thy beauty captivates, thy charms inthral,
Even at these years a slave to love I fall.
And o! my dearest RAGGY, do not quite
Break my old heart, or judge my torments slight,
Unlike raw boys who tell you fulsome lies,
Adore this moment, and the next despise,
Ripened with age my passion cannot change,
Nor will my years permit my heart to range;
Smile on me then, and with thy blooming charms
Bless my desiring, my impatient arms,
One evening at my lodgings let me prove
With how much truth and constancy I love.
THE damsel, though with wit not over-stock'd,
With this severe reply his reverence shocked;
What pity is it that desire should last,
And the good will to sin, when youth is past?
Thy passions still remain, thrice holy drone,
And ah! I grieve to think the sting is gone:
Yes, I behold thee with a pitying eye,
And for my sake, good man! thou shall not dye;
Since at your lodgings you request my sight,
I Will wait upon you there to morrow night;
Safe in thy hands my virtue I will trust,
And do, dear doctor, do thy very worst.
BE not so mighty smart the don replied,
Nor judge so rashly, ever my strength is tried,
In me the emblem of a leek is seen,
White though my head be turned, my tail is green.
BUT whither does the muse erroneous stray,
By tales of love diverted from her way?
GARDENER upbraids my ears with cold neglect,
And from the muse demands his due respect.
FORBEAR, great man, restrain thy flowing gall,
Wherefore on me do all these censures fall?
Why should thou hope for honor from my lays,
When thy own YOUNG forgets to sing thy praise?
WHAT shall a patriot lose his due reward,
Because ill used by one ungrateful bard?
Your pardon, sir; the reasoning I allow,
And with these honors deck your lofty brow
IF size and stature raise a deathless name,
How vast your praise, how bulky is your fame!
Without a rival, sir, the streets you tread,
Thou greatest, wittiest man, now TADLOE'S dead;
Since that huge atlas fell, you reap alone
The thanks of all the Alluding to the following epigram, When TADLOE walks the
streets, the paviers cry
God bless you, sir; and throw their rammers by.

paviers in the town.
NOR must thy praise o! TAFFY, be forgot,
Another college prince, and tyrant sot,
To G -- D -- R next in learning and in size,
Somewhat more honest, and almost as wise;
His sanguine cheeks with deep vermilion glow,
With antient-british blood his veins overflow,
His country's native ire inflames his breast,
And hostile leeks nod dreadful on his crest,
Like proud Plinlimmon's height he seems to move,
And his broad shoulders prop the clouds above.
HEAVEN to this man unusual vigor gave,
To rule a college obstinately brave,
Youths all endued with more than vulgar flame,
And stubborn as the rocks, from whence they came;
Hard to restrain, by nature prone to rage,
No common arm their fury can assuage,
So much with sparks of vengeance they abound,
They knock opposing barge-men to the ground,
And like a tempest hurl destruction round.
FAIN would I next great D -- SON rehearse,
And greet him with new honors in my verse;
O! might I call him by that awful name,
Which his soul covets, and his merits claim!
How would it touch the cockles of my heart
In ordinance to see him bear his part,
Against upstart masters wage confederate war,
And A place so called, where the sculls of colleges meet about business.
GOLGOTHA receive another star.
FULL well he knows this office to acquit,
And must be owned for college business fit,
Oe'r passive fellows skilled to domineer,
And grant to few the favor of his ear.
From BRAZEN and D -- E he learnt the arts
To pick their pockets, while he gains their hearts
To be adored for breaking all their laws,
And tyrannize with safety and applause.
SO romish priests esteem and reverence gain,
By bidding penance, and imposing pain;
The well-flogg'd Zealots bless their Father's voice,
And in raw backs and aching bones rejoice.
BUT ah! within our walls dissension reigns,
And modern feuds disturb the laureled plains,
Pert upstart patriots with rebellious pride,
Spurn at their Heads, and GOLGOTHA deride,
In bold confederate clubs and plots engage,
And youthful whims oppose to thoughtful age;
Each day the hoary sages sink in power,
And Presidents and Provosts sway no more;
With grumbling tories factious whigs combine,
And against D -- N -- N perversely join,
Resolved to baulk him of the darling power,
And ancient rights of CHARLOT'S successor.
WHO after these shall animate the lyre?
M -- TH -- R The present worthy V -- C -- R of Oxford.
do thou my flagging verse inspire,
Instruct the muse thy praises to rehearse,
And with thy shining deeds adorn my verse:
Do thou; for surely none besides can tell,
No mortal knows thy merits half so well.
BUT I perceive, you frown upon my lays,
And sullenly reject the proffered praise,
Content to wither in obscure retreat,
And unobserved, in plenty drink and eat,
Over awkward college pedants to preside,
With private grandeur and monastic pride,
In indolence and ease to live unknown,
And nod, like eastern tyrants on their throne.
NOR do thou only choose this mongrel Life,
Blessed with collegiate honors and -- no wife;
Sundry besides, thy brethren of the gown,
Like thee, despising fame and wide renown,
Preferring stated meals and frequent prayers
To worldly bustles, and domestic cares,
Within their humble cells indulge the spleen,
Men never talked of, and but rarely seen,
With their obsequious fellows they debate,
In their own cloisters, all affairs of state,
Con over MIST, and SHATTER once a week,
And by their love of kings and statesmen speak,
In the same tract of commonplace they move,
And learn from them to censure and approve.
OTHERS there are -- but studious of her fame,
Fain would the muse conceal her mother's shame,
Sore loath I am to speak the mournful truth,
That modern Heads corrupt the lettered youth,
That bold fanatics, full of sturdy zeal
For BRUNSWICK'S house, disturb our commonweal,
Grave loyal wretches, of their monarch proud,
To college-pow'r advanced, infect the crowd,
Through these unhappy walls their poison spread,
And strike even GOLGOTHA it self with dread.
SINCE first our Grannum cropped the fatal tree,
No spot of earth is from pollution free,
Briers and thorns infest the richest ground,
And tares amongst the choicest wheat are found;
The fruitful Nile destructive monsters breeds,
And even An ancient name of Oxford, and the country which surrounds it.
Bellositum pruduces weeds.
YET bring them forth, my muse, to public shame,
And in thy numbers brand each hated name,
Each bold apostate son, who durst disgrace
With heterogeneous thoughts his venerable race.
HERE WICKLIFF first the northern errors framed,
And CRANMER, ever with abhorrence named;
Here LATIMER his novel doctrines taught,
And RIDLEY here for gospel license fought:
Presumptuous prelates! could they hope to live,
And over the ruins of the church survive?
How could they dare oppose such mighty odds,
And rashly strive with Rome's unnumber'd Gods?
Within these walls a sacrifice they fell,
And in their death forestalled the pains of hell.
FROM hence, degenerate from the common throng,
Even men of sense and probity have sprung;
Here LOCK, the second Stagyrite, was bred,
Of modern reasoning whigs the boasted head;
Here HALES of ever-memorable fame,
And CHILLINGWORTH acquired a deathless name;
Here KENNET first disclosed his god-like soul,
And HOUGH a tyrant's pleasure did control;
MARSHAM from hence his piercing genius drew,
And LLOYD in these abodes immortal grew.
HERE GUIBBONS late, with Aesculapian skill,
Preserved more lives, than modern empericks kill,
Friend to mankind; and to his healing art
Joined candor and benevolence of heart,
On health and learning still vouchsafes to smile,
And shines the great Machaon of our isle.
HERE OLDHAM tag'd his rough, licentious rhimes,
And STEEL with whiggish wit profaned the times;
Here TICKEL sung the charms of opening peace,
And YOUNG explored the mines of Rome and Greece;
PHILIPS and SMITH the Christ-church wits disgrace,
And ADDISON pollutes the Maudlin race.
FROM our old track whole colleges depart,
And preach new doctrines with Hoadleian art,
Long since the Merton Lollards The followers of WICKLIFF, who were the first
reformers in this island.
went astray,
And Wadham's sons to Oriel led the way,
Exeter followed; and in some degree,
Scarce is a college from infection free.
TO propagate this rank contagious weed,
Even BRUNSWICK joins, and sows the pregnant seed,
With ill-timed gifts, maliciously divine,
Shakes our aversion to his German line,
Shows that his breast with love of science burns,
Smiles on our hate, and good for ill returns.
FROM such ungrateful topics, gentle muse,
Divert thy song, and nobler objects choose:
With more exalted themes thy numbers grace,
In more exalted numbers sing the place,
Where G -- L with unspotted virtue shines,
And AT -- RY formed his great designs.
O! prelate, of the church thou burning light,
Through all thy sufferings eminently bright,
In vain ill-fortune strives to make thee less,
Great in thy self, but greater in distress;
Transfused into thy soul by power divine,
LAUD'S active zeal and WOLSEY'S spirit shine,
Like them pursued by a corrupted age,
And sacrificed to wild, fanatic rage,
Ordained a living martyrdom to feel,
And in exotic climates broach thy zeal;
How in thy praise could I dilate my song!
But fate and rigid laws restrain my tongue.
OUR stately rising buildings set to view,
Say how we furbish old and model new,
Our theaters, musaeums, printing domes,
And libraries replete with folio tomes,
Our greasy kitchens and large halls extol,
And vaulted cellars stored with double College ale.
Coll,
Our towering steeples, painful to behold,
Our roaring bells, and altars daubed with gold;
Say how our stables charm the jocky's eyes,
And bog-houses like palaces arise.
SAY farther how the cause of faction thrives,
For JAMES how ready to devote our lives;
Our hierogliphick almanacks describe,
Our His excellency EDWARD WH -- T -- R, Esquire Envoy extraordinary from the un --
ty of O -- d.
Envoy-beadle and addressing tribe;
How treason gives pretensions to a place,
And loyalty escapes by It is well known that the reverend Mr. MEADOWCOURT,
fellow of Merton college, was obliged to plead his majesty's Act of Grace, for
drinking his majesty's health.
Acts of Grace;
How FIDDES for the church fatigues his quill,
And how the devil looks over Lincoln still.
RELIGION smiles, while POTTER The bishop of Oxford, regius professor of
divinity.
fills the chair,
And learning triumphs under MATHER'S care:
From M -- LEY'S hideous looks, by day and night,
Lewd strumpets fly, and chasten in his sight,
Shocked at his form, they curb their itching blood,
And naughty children promise to be good;
Awed with his cloven feet and scarecrow face,
The athiest shudders, and grows rich in grace,
No more his dreadful execrations vents,
But owns there is a devil and repents.
NEXT to our Oxford laureats touch the string,
And their great names in mighty numbers sing;
For sure no bards abound with thoughts so bright,
Nor with the genius of our poets write.
TO prove this truth, seraphick STERNHOLD read,
And WITHERS, both the right Oxonian breed,
On SHERLEY'S comic pages cast your eyes,
And hear how SETTLE'S lofty strains surprise;
Our modern wits with equal luster shine,
Angelick COTES and CATCOT the divine,
RICH, CATHERAL, TRISTRAM, AMHURST, WILKES and names
Which rhyme and equal-measur'd verse disclaims,
What numbers would such rugged sounds compose,
Which even offend the ear, pronounced in prose?
With the same ease I could, in verse sublime,
Make a Welsh pedigree harmonious chime,
Or put the Russian army into rhyme.
UNHAPPY bards! but others may be found,
Whose gentle names in verse melodious sound,
BACON in easy numbers glides along,
And TRAP and WHARTON melt upon the tongue,
Egregious wits! and critics both sublime,
Whose kindred talents so exactly chime,
That hard it is to say, in verse or prose
Which happy genius more divinely flows;
In this alone the former does excel,
That TRAP writes most, but WHARTON writes as well.
BUT above all, record the female race,
The reigning Toasts and beauties of the place,
Whether in The Drury Lane of Oxford.
Bullock's-lane they choose to rove,
Or A public house near Oxford, dedicated to love.
Kidney-hall, the soft retreat of love,
Their shining virtues and their charms rehearse,
And vindicate their names from A scandalous libel upon the Oxford toasts.
STREPHON'S verse.
IN love too often interest sways the mind
And sordid riches our affections blind,
Some squeamish fops, fantastically nice,
For virtue sigh and puke at modish vice;
Others for titles languish and would scorn
Even beauty's goddess, if obscurely born.
BY no such borrowed charms, nor spurious arts,
Our Oxford ladies reign over youthful hearts;
In their own native, naked charms they shine,
Smug chamber-maids and sempstresses divine,
Smart laundresses on Saturdays so clean,
And bed-makers on every day between,
The beggar's offspring to the parish left,
And college bastards of their sires bereft,
Nymphs without smocks our tender hearts surprise,
And deities in rags attract our eyes.
UNHAPPY COBURNE! lately laid in dust,
How to thy ashes shall the muse be just?
For to what member of APOLLO'S race
Did ever she deny the soft embrace?
What slighted lover or despairing swain
Can of her wrongs or cruelty complain?
No jilting tricks nor coying arts she knew,
But to the amorous kind was ever true,
To every sighing youth resigned her charms,
And blessed, at easy rates, his longing arms.
MOURN, all ye sons of learning, SABY'S fate,
In verse and prose the mighty loss relate:
With tropes and figures, Our most ingenious professor of Oratory.
COTES, embalm her name,
Our inimitable professor of Poetry.
WHARTON, in grateful meter chaunt her fame,
Let each surviving Toast her garland bring,
And lavish over her grave the flowery spring;
In streams of blood let conscious Isis flow,
Let Charwell swell the sympathetick woe,
Let Christ-church Tom her loss vociferous roar,
Tom, who never mourned for aught but kings before;
In hymns of woe let every college join,
In social grief let every voice combine,
Let every heart with bursting sighs approve
Our sorrow as diffusive as her love.
WHILE she survived, indulgent to our cause,
We bilk'd our founders and defied their laws,
Those grave old blockheads, whose religious pride
Would quench love's flame and check old nature's tide,
Assuage hot blood, explode the genial taste,
And make mankind unnaturally chaste.
Relieved by her from these imperious chains,
We knew the sweets of love, without the pains,
Clasped to her bosom, every college round
The joys of marriage, without marriage, found;
Spite of their musty statutes all the night
We rolled in bliss and revel'd in delight.
AMIDST these transports, to our joys a slave,
Death praematurely snatched her to the grave;
That rank disease that fierce corroding flame,
Which takes from Venus its venereal name,
Siez'd on her bloom, polluted all her charms,
And with contagion filled her circling arms,
Through every vein the spreading poison raged,
And with her life could only be asswag'd.
DREAD foe to love! of human ills the worst!
Thou sorest plague, with which mankind is cursed,
In distant climes, amongst the savage kind,
O! had thou ever, ever been confined,
Content the wild Barbarian to defile,
Nor with thy breath profaned the British isle.
SAY, muse, in strains of elegiack woe,
What dire effects from such disasters flow,
That the precaution'd reader may beware,
And, conscious of the mischiefs, shun the snare.
SOON as it pierces with its subtle dart,
The coast of love, that weak unguarded part,
In doleful sounds the wounded youth complains
Of pungent sores, and sharp nocturnal pains,
His nerves are all relaxed, his eyes grow dim,
And rigid aches torture every limb,
His hot envenomed blood corrupts within,
And loathsome ulcers stain his fading skin;
At length his nose dismantled sinks away,
His flesh turns rotten and his bones decay;
Too late repentance comes! and pills too late!
Nor can even MISAUBIN reverse his fate;
Living, his wholesome friends avoid his sight,
And dying he pollutes the realms of night.
AGAINST this ill (to vary from my tale)
But two specific remedies prevail;
Virtue is one and purity of heart;
But if the flesh subdues the better part,
Another still remains, the famed machine
(No doubt the reader guesses what I mean)
That modern rare device, whose injured name
Is grown opprobrious, though it covers shame;
Without this guard, if my advice prevail,
On venal joys you never will regale;
Then against fireships you may stand the test,
And trust the warmest nymph -- probatum est.
SO ancient warriors, buckled up in steel,
Laughed at the drubbings, which they could not feel.
POOR COBURNE'S fate these sad reflections drew,
O! most unhappy, hapless nymph, adieu.
Tormenting loss! too grievous for the mind!
If gentle DUTTON were not left behind;
In her surviving charms we find relief,
On her soft bosom intermit our grief,
The painful hours in soft endearments waste,
And in our present joys forget the past.
HAIL charming fair! O! may thou ever prove
Free from the bane and pestilence of love;
Long may thou live, a soft luxurious life,
By turns of twenty colleges the wife,
With charms unfading glut the studious swains,
The favorite Toast of all our Oxford plains.
ON this delighful subject, big with praise,
How could the muse prolong her wanton lays?
Unnumber'd beauties, equally divine,
Attract her eyes, and in her fancy shine.
SALACIOUS CHILD the neighboring dons embrace,
And SHEPHARD blesses all the Cambrian race;
CRASSA with luscious beauties charms the sight,
And melts in greasy volumes of delight;
In TATHAM'S kitchen as she basts the meat,
The Maudlin smarts their tender vows repeat;
Often as she plies the sauce-pan in her hand,
The Lincoln wits in silent rapture stand;
Often as with whirling arms she winds the jack,
They suck the dewy moisture from her neck,
The savoury odors from her lips they kiss,
And wallow in a dripping-pan of bliss.
FORGIVE me fair ones, who remain unsung,
Sound and unsound, ye tribe of old and young;
To praise you all who swarm in every plain,
Would swell my verse beyond an epick strain;
Each college stew a volume would require,
And BL -- RE in the tedious task would tire.
HENCEFORTH, ye sons of Came, presumptuous race,
No more with us contend for age or place;
At length confuted, quit the learned field,
And to your rival the precedence yield.
In times remote, before the Came was known,
Our Isis reared her head and gained renown;
Arts now forgot her temples did adorn,
And flourished ever the Stagyrite was born;
Compared with her, the Grecian state gives way,
And Athens was a school of yesterday.
HENCEFORTH in arts and knowledge vye no more
But with you sister the dispute give over,
Let CLARKE to learning all pretensions quit,
And captious BENTLEY to DELAUNE submit,
No more let NEWTON his discoveries boast,
But own himself in greater SHIPPEN lost,
Let HOADLEY to SACHEVEREL yield the prize,
Nor against POTTER in contension rise.
HAIL, honored madam! hail for arts renowned,
Through every age with ivy garlands crowned,
Who from a thousand bubbies, never dry,
Do with pure milk a thousand babes supply,
Great Britain's mother-nurse! accept these lays,
Which an adopted son in duty pays;
Who often has heard, with conscious grief and shame,
Licentious wits insult thy reverend name,
Who often has seen them, with indignant rage,
Laugh at thy silver hairs and wrinkled age;
Urged by these wrongs, in her dear mother's cause,
Weak as she is, the muse officious draws,
And in these grateful lines attempts to show
What public honors to her name are due;
Resolved at least on daring wings to play,
And to some greater genius point the way.
MEAN while this verse shall consecrate my name,
And even with Blackmore's ALFRED vye for fame,
The present age my labors shall reward,
And Britain style me the religious Bard;
The future age a sumptuous pile shall raise,
And crowd the wall with monumental praise;
Erect above shall stand the marble bust,
Beneath, the sacred urn shall hold my dust,
FAME on the right her constant watch shall keep,
And ALMA on the left dejected weep,
Wreaths and festoons the labored stone shall grace,
And this inscription fill the middle space.
" Reared at the public cost, this stately shrine
" Does the choice ashes of a bard confine,
" Who, in the first prevailing GEORGE'S days,
" Tuned his old British harp to ALMA'S praise,
" And, in a course of bold scholastic rhimes,
" Dared all the insults of those factious times.
" While marble can endure, this hallowed stone
" Shall guard his dust and make his virtues known;
" When that decays, his fame shall still survive,
" And in the duteous work for ages live;
" When that work dies, let hardened sinners fear,
" For then the world's eternal doom is near.
" Reader, from OXFORD if you chance to "come,
" Shed a few tears over his selected tomb,
" Nor ask his name, but be content to know,
" That for a pious wit your grateful sorrows "flow.
POSTSCRIPT. The following Verses having been transmitted to me, I hope it will
not be thought improper to annex them to the preceding POEM.
A LETTER of THANKS FROM THE University of CRACOW, To their SOVEREIGN.
WE of CRACOW the Chancellor and his Vice-Can,
With the Doctors and Masters, all to a Man,
Assembled in form, have sent trusty Ned Whist,
(The last enrolled slave in our See the Cracow-Almanack for 1724.
Almanack-List)
With orders to give you, sir, to understand
That a letter signed G -- ge is safe come to hand,
Which having been over and over perused,
Your present was near upon being refused;
But after a grave and maturer debate,
We, moved thereunto by reasons of State,
Came at length to agree one and all, 'twou'd be better
To take it, and seem thus to thank you by letter.
This done, sir, we hope you are herewith content,
Since farther than this, nothing by us is meant.
We scorn to profess the least loyal affection
To one, who against our will gives us protection;
Neither wish we, nor pray we for Princes at home,
Having sent all our prayers, and our wishes to ROME.
Assure yourself therefore, you always shall find
We ever shall hate you, be you ever so kind;
In token hereof our names we conceal,
But send you these presents under our SEAL.
Sealed in the convocation-house, with the common seal of the university, this
19th day of May, 1724.
FINIS.

