NATURE in PERFECTION; OR, The MOTHER unveiled: BEING A Congratulatory POEM to
Mrs. BRET, upon his MAJESTY's most gracious Pardon granted to Mr. RICHARD
SAVAGE, Son of the late Earl RIVERS.

Matter ait, tacta est dea Nomine Matris.
Ovid. -- Utinam modo dicere Possem
Carmina digna dea, certe est dea carmine digna.
Virg. LONDON: Printed for T. GREEN, near Charing Cross, and Sold by J. ROBERTS
at the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCCXXVIII. (Price Sixpence.)

NATURE in PERFECTION; OR, The MOTHER unveiled.
LET hireling Poets ply their venal Lays,
The Great, the Powerful, and the Rich, to praise;
Let Malcontents with Satire tickled be,
And Lovesick Coxcombs sink in Simile:
A different Theme my Verses shall employ,
A Mother's Anguish, and a Mother's Joy.
And thou, O Bret! the softest of thy Kind,
Accept this Picture of a Parent's Mind;
If ever amorous Plaint your Ear could please,
Or Love, or Pity, on your Bosom seize,
With favoring Smiles a well-meant Song regard,
And, Oh, forgive an unexperienced Bard,
If faintly he describe the Bliss, or Woe,
Which only you, who feel it, truly know.
From that sad Hour, when your unhappy Son
Struck through the Life that forfeited his own,
What Doubts, what Fears, your anxious Soul possessed,
And tore the soft Asylum of your Breast?
Oh, where for Shelter shall the Afflicted fly?
Or where expect a sweeter Sanctuary?
Accused, forlorn, the much-loved Youth behold,
Deprived of Freedom, destitute of Gold;
Gold, that, from Dungeons, Criminals can free,
And even in Newgate offers Liberty:
Prophets of Fate, where ravenous Vulturs plied,
Cruel as Death, as Death unsatisfied;
Where Felons, Murd'rers, Traitors are secured,
And, if not guiltless, uncondemn'd immured;
Where thick built Walls the imprisoned Wretch deprive
Almost of vital Air, while yet alive;
A Place, which scarce the Grave to which it leads,
In Damps, in Darkness, or in Stench exceeds.
How did your Kindness ease this Lot severe,
Your Fondness tend him, and your Bounty cheer?
No Glympse of Joy your Pleasures then conveyed,
Nor Midnight Ball, nor Morning Masquerade.
In vain to crowded Drawing Rooms you run:
The Court a Desert seems without your Son.
If sportive Youth with sparkling Vigor come,
You see with secret Pain their opening Bloom.
Why was my Son (thus to yourself you say)
As young, and not so fortunate as they?
Nor sight of Age your Passion can endure:
-- And must my Son then leave me immature?
Still others' Joys you viewed, and tasted none,
Still others' Griefs were lighter than your own;
And still whatever you hear, whatever you see,
Is cause for Plaint, and Food for Misery.
Your soft Distress, your Tenderness of Pain,
Can never be described, or felt by Man;
Your Anna dear, taught by your matchless Mind,
Copies that glorious Frailty of her kind;
The Sister's Love, in Time of Danger shown,
Can only be transcended by your own.
In his Defense moved your persuasive Tongue,
Excused the Rash, and pleaded for the Young.
You, Heaven, and Earth solicit on his Side,
No Friend unspoke to, and no Art untried.
Your Art, your Importunity is weak,
You move resistless, if the Mother speak.
How vainly I recall my numerous Fears,
The Pains he cost me in his Infant Years!
Was it for this I bore him on my Knees?
Was all my Foresight, were my Throes for this?
Each pleasing Hope, that with his Life began,
All dashed, preserved the Boy, but lost the Man.
Strike me, and spare my Child! Oh, let me save
The Life by Friendship, I by Nature gave!
So Birds, by Instinct taught, supply with Food,
And cheer, with genial Warmth, their callow Brood,
And often their kind, maternal Breasts expose,
To guard their helpless Young from threatening Foes,
Fearless, and fierce, unequal Fight maintain,
And dye themselves, ever see their Offspring slain.
The Doom once past over his devoted Head,
The Sword hangs, threatening, by a single Thread.
While, bent with Chains, the Weight he scarcely bore,
Which galled the Wearer much, the Mother more,
Who can the Tortures of your Soul declare,
Your Noontide Labors, and your Midnight Prayer?
Let meaner Friends to view the Prisoner go,
Whose slighter Love can bear that Sight of Woe;
A Sight too shocking for a Mother's Eye,
Which yet your utmost Caution cannot fly:
Still to your Mind the darling Youth appears,
And racks your Bosom with tormenting Fears!
Present, wherever you move, the Phantom seems,
And haunts, with ghastly Shapes, your Morning Dreams!
The Scene of Justice, to your sleeping Eyes,
Stands terribly displayed -- and now he dies!
Thick to your Heart the vital Currents run,
You start, and waking cry -- My Son! My Son!
Let none object you no Concern revealed,
Fire often glows fiercest, that is most concealed:
Great Griefs are speechless, petty Sorrow speaks,
The Heart, which vents its Anguish never breaks;
Your Woes the old poetic Tales revive,
And Credit to their wildest Fables give.
So Niobe, when, in her Presence fell
The boasted Offspring she had loved too well,
Through Horror stiff, beheld, with stupid Eye,
The last fair Rival of the Immortals die;
While mightier Grief, than ever by Words was shown,
Transformed the silent Mourner to a Stone.
By Nature touched, his Pardon all desire,
And imitate the Virtue they admire,
Unite, his dire Misfortune to bemoan,
And join in Crowds to supplicate the Throne;
Who ever the Mother viewed, her Offspring loved,
His Hundreds He, but She her Thousands moved;
From Breast to Breast contagious Mercy crept,
And Fops and Statesmen wondered why they wept!
Hearts hard before, unwonted Yearning know,
Even Jaylers melted at a Mother's Woe.
But see! he lives, whose Death you late deplored!
And angry Justice sheaths her awful Sword;
Unhop'd-for Joy the Imperial Mercy brings,
Mercy, the best Prerogative of Kings.
With Triumph now you see the Tempest over,
With Raptures mighty, as your Grief before.
Not so TYRCONNEL welcomed the Relief,
Inferior in his Joy, as in his Grief;
Stranger to Motions of a Mother's Mind,
In Manners different, as in Kindred joined.
Since for your Seed such Kindness you express,
Oh, may each Child give equal Happiness!
With boundless Gratitude your Bosom burns,
Your Taste for Pleasures, and for Court returns!
To Minds transported every Thing is gay,
And January's self appears like May,
Each Change of Time in Extacy is lost,
Nor Age feels Winter, nor December Frost.
Of bright, now brighter shine your lovely Eyes,
And, winged with Joy, the exalted Spirits rise;
New Warmth, new Vigor to your Veins impart,
And dance tumultuous to your beating Heart.
But Oh, beware, and curb the overflowing Tide,
For often the Over-fortunate have died,
Whom Grief, in vain, had labored to destroy,
Surprised, unequal to Excess of Joy.
And ah! too far the unwieldy Joy prevails,
For Life, itself, may sink when Reason fails!
Since often so high your Extacies have grown,
You seemed the Ties of Nature to disown;
Lost for a While to Memory, you disclaim
A Child so dearly loved, and Mother's Name!
What dangerous Transport parent Hearts may feel,
Let Ovid soft, the Lady's Poet, tell.
Thus old Agave, mad, denies her Boy,
Possessed with frantic, Bacchanalian Joy,
Knows not his Form, but with distracted Roar,
Mistakes her Offspring for a Forest-Boar,
Runs to complete his Death, exulting on,
And slays a Monster, while She kills her Son.
Soon as the short Delirium past you find,
And Sense regains it is Empire over the Mind,
You bless the Hand that eased your anxious Cares,
And pour for Brunswick's House incessant Prayers!
Let the King live! (thus speaks your ardent Zeal!)
Long live, a Parent's Happiness to feel
May Peace for ever bless the sacred Line,
That every Son may live, as well as mine!
Not equal Gladness over your Bosom spread;
When first the Infant blessed your genial Bed.
Not half the Mother's Transport did you find,
For what is Body's Ease to Ease of Mind?
Nor when his Prattling did your Ears engage,
And promised Wonders in his riper Age;
Nor when the Race of Youth he gayly ran,
And rose through various Hazards up to Man,
As when Great Caesar spoke the Royal Word,
Which him to Life, and you to Peace restored,
Both by their Sov'reign's Favor born anew,
He twice a Son, and twice a Mother you.
FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by THOMAS GREEN, Bookseller, at Charing Cross.
HISTORY of the Antiquities of Canterbury, with curious Cuts. By the Rev. Mr.
Dart. Price Bound 1 l. 5 s. N.B. There is a small Number printed on large Paper
at 2 l. 10 s. A curious Collection of EMBLEMS, for the Entertainment and
Improvement of Youth. Containing Hieroglyphical and Aenigmatical Devices
relating to all Parts and Stations of Life together, with Explanations and
Proverbs in French, Spanish, Italian, and Latin, alluding to them, and
translated into English. The whole curiously engraven on 62 Copper Plates.
MOSES's PRINCIPIA. Part I. Of the invisible Parts of Matter; Of Motion: Of
visible Forms; and of their Dissolution and Reformation, with Notes. Part II.
Of the Circulation of the Heavens: Of the Cause of the Motion and Course of the
Earth, Moon, etc. Of the Religion, Philosophy, and Emblems of the Heathens
before Moses writ, and of the Jews after. An ESSAY toward a NATURAL HISTORY of
the BIBLE, especially of some Parts which relate to the Occasion of revealing
MOSES's PRINCIPIA. By J. H. Mr. COOKE's Translation of HESIOD. In Two Volumes,
Quarto, with Copper Plates. The First Volume contains Two Discourses on the
Life and Writings of HESIOD, the Works and Days, in Three Books, with Notes to
each Book, Observations on the ancient Greek Month, and a View of the Works and
Days. The Second Volume contains the Theogony or Generation of the Gods, with
Notes, a Discourse on the Theology and Mythology of the Ancients, and a
Genelogical Table to the Theogony. PHILADORE and PLACENTIA, a curious Novel.
Two Parts. By Mrs. Haywood.

