COOKE's EDITION OF SELECT POETS.

(...)

GRAY.


(...)

THE POETICAL WORKS OF THOMAS GRAY.

WITH THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

Cooke's Edition.

Thy form benign, oh, Goddess! wear,
Thy milder influence impart,
To soften, not to wound my heart:
The generous spark extinct revive,
Teach me to love and to forgive;
Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are to feel, and know myself a man.
Ode to Adversity. Too poor for a bribe, and too proud to importune,
He had not the method of making a fortune;
Could love and could hate, so was thought somewhat odd;
No very great wit; he believed in a God:
A post or a pension he did not desire.
But left church and state to Charles Townshend and Squire
Gray of Himself. EMBELLISHED WITH SUPERB ENGRAVINGS.

London: Printed for C. COOK, No. 17, Paternoster-Row; And sold by all the
Booksellers in Great Britain and Ireland.

THE POETICAL WORKS OF THOMAS GRAY. CONTAINING HIS ODES, MISCELLANIES, etc.
etc. etc.

Hark! the Fatal Sisters join --
Hail, ye Midnight Sisters! hail --
Over the glory of the land,
O'r the innocent and gay,
Over the Muses' tuneful band,
Weave the funeral web of Gray.
It Is dune -- it is done --
He sinks, he groans, he falls, a lifeless corse --
Over his green grave, in Contemplation's guise,
Often let the pilgrim drop a silent tear,
Often let the shepherd's tender accents rise,
Big with the sweets of each revolving year,
Till prostrate Time adere his deathless name,
Fixed on the solid base of adamantine fame.
J. T. to Mem. of Gray. London: PRINTED AND EMBELLISHED Under the Direction of
C. COOK.

THE LIFE OF THOMAS GRAY.
THOMAS GRAY was born in Cornhill, in the city of London, on the 26th of
December, 1716. His father, Philip Gray, was a money-scrivener; but being of an
indolent and profuse disposition, he rather diminished than improved his
paternal fortune. Our Author received his classical education at Eton school,
under Mr. Antrobus, his mother's brother, a man of sound learning and refined
taste, who directed his nephew to those pursuits which laid the foundation of
his future literary fame.

During his continuance at Eton, he contracted a friendship with Mr. Horace
Walpole, well known for his knowledge in the fine arts; and Mr. Richard West,
son of the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, a youth of very promising talents.

When he left Eton school in 1734, he went to Cambridge, and entered a
pensioner at Peterhouse, at the recommendation of his uncle Antrobus, who had
been a fellow of that college. It is said that, from his effeminacy and fair
complexion, he acquired, among his fellow students, the appellation of Miss
Gray, to which the delicacy of his manners seems not a little to have
contributed. Mr. Walpole was at that time a fellow-commoner of King's College,
in the same University; a fortunate circumstance, which afforded Gray frequent
opportunities of intercourse with his Honorable Friend.

Mr. West went from Eton to Christ Church. Oxford; and in this state of
separation, these two votaries of the Muses, whose dispositions were congenial,
commenced an epistolary correspondence, part of which is published by Mr.
Mason, a gentleman whose character stands high in the republic of letters.

Gray, having imbibed a taste for poetry, did not relish those abstruse studies
which generally occupy the minds of students at College; and therefore, as he
found very little gratification from academical pursuits, he left Cambridge in
1738, and returned to London, intending to apply himself to the study of the
law: but this intention was soon laid aside, upon an invitation given him by
Mr. Walpole, to accompany him in his travels abroad; a situation highly
preferable, in Gray's opinion, to the dry study of the law.

They set out together for France, and visited most of the places worthy of
notice in that country: from thence they proceeded to Italy, where an
unfortunate dispute taking place between them, a separation ensued upon their
arrival at Florence. Mr. Walpole afterward, with great candor and liberality,
took upon himself the blame of the quarrel; though, if we consider the matter
coolly and impartially, we may be induced to conclude that Gray, from a
conscious superiority of ability, might have claimed a deference to his opinion
and judgment, which his Honorable Friend was not at that time disposed to
admit: the rupture, however, was very unpleasant to both parties.

Gray pursued his journey to Venice on an economic plan, suitable to the
circumscribed state of his finances; and having continued there some weeks,
returned to England in September, 1741. He appears, from his letters, published
by Mr. Mason, to have paid the minutest attention to every object worthy of
notice throughout the course of his travels. His descriptions are lively and
picturesque, and bear particular marks of his genius and disposition. We admire
the sublimity of his ideas when he ascends the stupendous heights of the Alps,
and are charmed with his display of nature, decked in all the beauties of
vegetation. Indeed, abundant information, as well as entertainment, may be
derived from his casual letters.

In about two months after his arrival in England, he lost his father, who, by
an indiscreet profusion, had so impaired his fortune, as not to admit of his
son's prosecuting the study of the law with that degree of respectability which
the nature of the profession requires, without becoming burdensome to his
mother and aunt. To obviate, therefore, their importunities on the subject, he
went to Cambridge, and took his bachelor's degree in civil law.

But the inconveniences and distress attached to a scanty fortune were not the
only ills our Poet had to encounter at this time: he had not only lost the
friendship of Mr. Walpole abroad, but poor West, the partner of his heart, fell
a victim to complicated maladies, brought on by family misfortunes, on the 1st
of June, 1742, at Popes, a village, in Hertfordshire, where he went for the
benefit of the air.

The excessive degree in which his mind was agitated for the loss of his
friend, will best appear from the following beautiful little sonnet: " In vain
to me the smiling mornings shine,
" And redd'ning Poebus lifts his go^den fire:
" The birds in ^ain their amorous descant join,
" Or cheerful fields resume their green attire:
" These ears, alas! for other notes repine;
" A different object do these eyes require;
" My lonely anguish melts no heart but mine,
" And in my breast the imperfect joys expire;
" Yet morning smiles the busy race to cheer,
" And newborn pleasure brings to happier men;
" The fields to all their wonted tribute bear;
" To warn their little loves the birds comp^ain:
" I fruitless mourn to him that cannot hear;
" And weep the more, because I weep in vain.'


Mr. Gray now seems to have applied his mind very sedulously to poetical
composition: his Ode to Spring was written early in June, to his friend Mr.
West, before he received the melancholy news of his death: how our Poet's
susceptible mind was affected by that melancholy incident, is evidently
demonstrated by the lines quoted above; the impression, indeed, appears to have
been too deep to be soon effaced; and the tenor of the subjects which called
for the exertions of his poetical talents subsequent to the production of this
Ode, corroborates that observation; these were his Prospect of Eton, and his
Ode to Adversity. It is also supposed, and with great probability, that he
began his Elegy in a Country Church Yard about the same time. He passed some
weeks at Stoke, near Windsor, where his mother and aunt resided, and in that
pleasing retirement finished several of his most celebrated Poems.

From thence he returned to Cambridge, which, from this period, was his chief
residence during the remainder of his life. The conveniences with which a
college life was attended, to a person of his narrow fortune, and studious turn
of mind, were more than a compensation for the dislike which, for several
reasons, he bore to the place: but he was perfectly reconciled to his
situation, on Mr. Mason's being elected a fellow of Pembroke-Hall; a
circumstance which brought him a companion, who, during life, retained for him
the highest degree of friendship and esteem.

In 1742 he was admittted to the degree of Bachelor in the Civil Law, as
appears from a letter written to his particular friend Dr. Wharton, of Old
Park, near Durham, formerly fellow of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, in which he
ridicules, with much point and humor, the ^^^lies and foibles, and the
dullness and formality, which prevailed in the University.

In order to enrich his mind with the ideas of others, he devoted a
considerable portion of his time to the study of the best Greek authors; so
that, in the course or six years, there were hardly any writers of eminence in
that language whose works he had not only read, but thoroughly digested.

His attention, however, to the Greek classics, did not wholly engross his
time; for he found leisure to advert, in a new sarcastical manner, to the
ignorance and dullness with which he was surrounded, though situated in the
center of learning. There is only a fragment remaining of what he had written
on this subject, from which it may be inferred, that it was intended as an Hymn
to Ignorance. The fragment is wholly introductory; yet many of the lines are so
pointed in signification, and harmonious in versification, that they will be
admitted, by the admirers of verse, to display his poetical talents with more
brilliancy than appears in many of his lyric productions.

Hail, horrors, hail! ye ever gloomy bowers,
Ye Gothic fanes, and antiquated towers!
Where rushy Camus' slowly-winding flood
Perpetual draws his humid train of mud:
Glad I revisit thy neglected reign:
Oh, take me to thy peaceful shade again:
But chiefly thee, whose influence, breathed from high,
Augments the native darkness of the sky.
Ah, Ignorance! soft, salutary power!
Prostrate with filial reverence I adore.
Thrice has Hyperion rolled his annual race,
Since weeping I forsook thy fond embrace.
Oh, say, successful do thou still oppose,
Thy leaden Aegis against our ancient foes?
Still stretch, tenacious of thy right divine,
The massy scepter over thy slumbering line?
And dews Lethean through the land dispense,
To steep in slumbers each benighted sense?
If any spark of wit's delusive ray
Break out, and flash a momentary day,
With damp, cold touch forbid it to aspire,
And huddle up in fogs the dangerous fire.
Oh, say -- She hears me not, but, careless grown,
Lethargic nods upon her ebon throne.
Goddess! awake, arise; alas! my fears;
Can powers immortal feel the force of years?
Not thus of old, with ensigns wide unfurled,
She rode triumphant over the vanquished world:
Fierce nations owned her unresisted might;
And all was ignorance, and all was night;
Oh sacred age! Oh times for ever lost!
(The schoolman's glory, and the churchman's boast,)
For ever gone -- yet still to fancy new,
Her rapid wings the transient scene pursue,
And bring the buried ages back to view.
High on her car, behold the grandam ride,
Like old Sefostris with barbaric pride;
***** a team of harnessed monarchs' bend
*****
In 1744 he seems to have given up his attention to the Muses. Mr. Walpole,
desirous of preserving what he had already written, as well as perpetuating the
merit of their deceased friend, West, endeavored to prevail with Gray, to whom
he had previously become reconciled, to publish his own Poems, together with
those of West; but Gray declined it, conceiving their productions united would
not suffice to fill even a small volume.

In 1747 Gray became acquainted with Mr. Mason, then a scholar of St. John's
College, and afterward Fellow of Pembroke Hall. Mr. Mason, who was a man of
great learning and ingenuity, had written, the year before, his "Monody on the
Death of Pope," and his "II Bellicoso," and "Il Pacifico;" and Gray revised
these pieces at the request of a friend. This laid the foundation of a
friendship that terminated but with life: and Mr. Mason, after the death of
Gray, testified his regard for him, by superintending the publication of his
works.

The same year he wrote a little Ode on the Death of a favorite Cat of Mr.
Walpole's, in which humor and instruction are happily blended: but the
following year he produced an effort of much more importance; the Fragment of
an Essay on the Alliance of Education and Government. Its tendency was to
demonstrate the necessary concurrence of both to form great and useful Men. It
opens with the two following similies. The exordium is rather uncommon; but he
seems to have adopted it as a kind of clue to the subject he meant to pursue in
the subsequent part of the Poem.

As sickly plants betray a niggard earth,
Whose barren bosom starves her generous birth,
Nor genial warmth nor genial juice retains,
Their roots to feed and fill their verdant veins;
And as in climes, where Winter holds his reign,
The soil, though fertile, will not teem in vain,
Forbids her gems to swell, her shades to rise,
Nor trusts her blossoms to the charlish skies;
So draw mankind in vain the vital airs,
Unformed, unfriended, by those kindly cares
That health and vigor to the soul impart,
Spread the young thought, and warm the opening heart;
so fond instruction on the growing powers
Of Nature idly lavishes her stores,
If equal Justice, with unclouded face,
Smile not indulgent on the rising race,
And scatter with a free, though frugal hand,
Light golden showers of plenty over the land:
But Tyranny has fixed her empire there,
To check their tender hopes with chilling fear,
And blast the blooming promise of the year.
This spacious animated scene survey,
From where the rolling orb, that gives the day,
His sable sons with nearer course surrounds
To either pole and life's remotest bounds;
How rude soever the exterior form we find,
However opinion tinge the varied mind,
Alike to all the kind impartial Heaven
The sparks of truth and happiness has given;
With sense to feel, with memory to retain,
They follow pleasure and they fly from pain;
Their judgment mends the plan their fancy draws,
The event presages and explores the cause:
The soft returns of gratitude they know,
By fraud elude, by force repel, the foe;
While mutual wishes mutual woes endear,
The social smile and sympathetic tear.
Say, then, through ages by what fate confined
To different climes seem different souls assigned;
Here measured laws and philosophic ease
Fix and improve the polished arts of peace;
There Industry and Gain their vigils keep,
Command the winds and tame the unwilling deep:
Here force and hardy deeds of blood prevail,
There languid Pleasure sighs in every gale.
Often over the trembling nations from afar
Has Scythia breathed the living cloud of war;
And where the deluge burst with sweepy sway,
Their arms, their kings, their gods, were rolled away:
As often have issued, host impelling host,
The blue-ey'd myriads from the Baltic coast;
The prostrate South to the destroyer yields
Her boasted titles and her golden fields:
With grim delight the brood of Winter view
A brighter day, and heavens of azure hue,
Scent the new fragrance of the breathing rose,
And quaff the pendent vintage as it grows.
Proud of the yoke, and pliant to the rod,
Why yet does Asia dread a monarch's nod,
While European freedom still withstands
The encreaching tide that drowns her lessening lands,
And sees far off, with an indignant groan,
Her native plains and empires once her own?
Can op'ner skies, and sons of fiercer flame,
O'erpower the fire that animates our frame;
As lamps, that shed at eve a cheerful ray,
Fade and expire beneath the eye of day?
Need we the influence of the northern star
To string our nerves and steel our hearts to war?
And where the face of Nature laughs around,
Must sickening Virtue fly the tainted ground?
Unmanly thought! what seasons can control,
What fancied zone can circumscribe, the soul,
Who, conscious of the source from whence she springs,
By Reason's light, on Resolution's wings,
Spite of her frail companion, dauntless goes
Over Lybia's deserts and through Zembla's snows?
She bids each slumbering energy awake,
Another touch another temper take,
Suspends the inferior laws that rule our clay;
The stubborn elements confess her sway;
Their little wants their low desires refine,
And raise the mortal to a height divine.
Not but the human fabric from the birth
Imbibes a flavor of its parent earth;
As various tracts enforce a various toil,
The manners speak the idiom of their soil.
An iron race the mountain-cliffs maintain,
Foes to the gentler genius of the plain;
For where unwearied sinews must be found
With side-long plough to quell the flinty ground,
To turn the torrent's swift-descending flood,
To brave the savage rushing from the wood,
What wonder if, to patient valor trained,
They guard with spirit what by strength they gained?
And while their rocky ramparts round they see,
The rough abode of Want and Liberty,
(As lawless force from confidence will grow)
Insult the plenty of the vales below?
What wonder in the sultry climes, that spread
Where Nile, redundant over his summer-bed,
From his broad bosom life and verdure flings,
And broods over Egypt, with his watery wings,
If, with adventurous oar and ready sail,
The dusky people drive before the gale,
Or on frail floats to neighboring cities ride,
That rise and glitter over the ambient tide?
It is much to be lamented that our Author did not finish what was so
successfully begun, as the Fragment is deemed superior to every thing in the
same style of writing which our language can boast.

In 1750 he put his finishing stroke to his Elegy written in a Country
Churchyard, which was communicated first to his friend Mr. Walpole, and by him
to many persons of rank and distinction. This beautiful production introduced
the author to the favor of Lady Cobham, and gave occasion to a singular
composition, called, A Long Story; in which various effusions of wit and humor
are very happily interspersed.

The Elegy having found its way into the "Magazine of Magazines," the Author
wrote to Mr. Walpole, requesting he would put it into the hands of Mr. Dodsley,
and order him to print it immediately, in order to rescue it from the disgrace
it might have incurred by its appearance in a Magazine. The Elegy was the most
popular of all our Author's productions; it ran through eleven editions, and
was translated into Latin by Anstey and Roberts; and in the same year a version
of it was published by Lloyd. Mr. Bentley, an eminent Artist of that time,
wishing to decorate this elegant composition with every ornament of which it is
so highly deserving, drew for it a set of designs, as he also did for the rest
of Gray's productions, for which the artist was liberally repaid by the Author
in some beautiful Stanzas, but unfortunately no perfect copy of them remains.
The following, however, are given as a specimen: " In silent gaze the tuneful
choir among,
" Half pleased, half blushing, let the muse admire,
" While Bentley leads her sister art along,
" And bids the pencil answer to the lyre.
" See, in their course, each transitory thought,
" Fixed by his touch, a lasting essence take;
" Each dream, in fancy's airy coloring wrought,
" To local symmetry and life awake!
" The tardy rhymes, that used to linger on,
" To censure cold, and negligent or fame;
" In swifter measures animated run,
" And catch a luster from his genuine flame.
" Ah! could they catch his strength, his easy grace,
" His quick creation, his unerring line;
" The energy of Pope they might efface,
" And Dryden's harmony submit to mine.
" But not to one in this benighted age
" Is that diviner inspiration given,
" That burns in Shakesocar's or in Milton's page,
" The pomp and prod^gality of heaven.
" As when conspiring in the di'mond's blaze,
" The meaner gems, that singly charm the sight,
" Together dart their intermingled rays,
" And dazzle with a luxury of light.
" Enough for me, if to some feeling breast
" My lines a secret sympathy impart,
" And, as their pleasing influence flows confessed,
" A sigh of soft reflection heave the heart."


It appears, by a letter to Dr. Wharton, that Gray finished his Ode on the
Progress of Poetry early in 1755. The Bard also was begun about the same time;
and the following beautiful Fragment on the Pleasure arising from Vicissitude
the next year. The merit of the two former pieces was not immediately
perceived, nor generally acknowledged. Garrick wrote a few lines in their
praise. Lloyd and Colman wrote, in concert, two Odes to "Oblivion" and
"Obscurity," in which they were ridiculed with much ingenuity.

" Now the golden morn aloft
" Waves her dew-bespangled wing,
" With vermil cheek, and whisper soft,
" She wooes the tardy spring;
" Till April starts, and calls around
" The sleeping fragrance from the ground,
" And lightly over the living scene
" Scatters his freshest, tenderest green.
" New born flocks, in rustic dance,
" Frisking ply their feeble feet;
" Forgetful of their wint'ry trance,
" The birds his presence greet:
" But chief the skylark warb^es high
" His trembling, thrilling extacy;
" And, lessening from the dazzled sight,
" Melts into air and liquid light.
" Yesterday the sullen year
" Saw the snowy whirlwind fly;
" Mute was the music of the air,
" The herd stood drooping by:
" Their raptures now, that wildly flow,
" No yesterday nor morrow know;
" It Is man alone that joy descries
" With forward and reverted eyes.
" Smiles on past misfortune's brow
" Soft reflection's hand can trace,
" And over the check of sorrow throw
" A melancholy grace:
" While hope prolongs our happier hour;
" Or deepest shades, that dimly lower,
" And blacken round our weary way,
" Gilds with a gleam of distant day.
" Still where rosy pleasure leads,
" See a kindred grief pursue,
" Behind the steps that misery treads
" Approaching comfort view:
" The hues of bliss more brightly glow,
" Chastised by sabler tints of woe;
" And blended form, with artf^l strife,
" The strength and harmony of life.
" See the wretch, that long has tossed
" On the thorny bed of Pain,
" At length repair his vigor lost,
" And breathe and walk again.
" The meanest flow'ret of the vale,
" The simplest note that swells the gale,
" The common sun, the air, the skies,
" To him are opening Paradise."
Our Author's reputation, as a Poet, was so high, that, on the death of Colley
Cibber, in 1757, he had the honor of refusing the office of Poet-Laureat, to
which he was probably induced by the disgrace brought upon it through the
inability of some who had filled it.

His curiosity some time after drew him away from Cambridge to a lodging near
the British Museum, where he resided near three years, reading and transcribing.

In 1762, on the death of Mr. Turner, Professor of Modern Languages and History
at Cambridge, he was, according to his own expression, "cockered and spirited
up" to apply to Lord Bute for the succession. His Lordship refused him with all
the politeness of a courtier, the office having been previously promised to Mr.
Brocket, the tutor of Sir James Lowther.

His health being on the decline, in 1765 he undertook a journey to Scotland,
conceiving he should derive benefit from exercise and change of situation. His
account of that country, as far as it extends, is curious and elegant; for as
his mind was comprehensive, it was employed in the contemplation of all the
works of art, all the appearances of nature, and all the monuments of past
events.

During his stay in Scotland, he contracted a friendship with Dr. Beattie, in
whom he found, as he himself expresses it, a poet, a philosopher, and a good
man. Through the intervention of his friend the Doctor, the Marischal College
at Aberdeen offered him the degree of Doctor of Laws, which he thought it
decent to decline, having omitted to take it at Cambridge.

In December, 1767, Dr. Beattie, still desirous that his country should leave a
memento of its regard to the merit of our Poet, solicited his permission to
print, at the University of Glasgow, an elegant edition of his works. Gray
could not comply with his friend's request, as he had given his promise to Mr.
Dodsley. However, as a compliment to them both, he presented them with a copy,
containing a few notes, and the imitations of the old Norwegian poetry,
intended to supplant the Long Story, which was printed at first to illustrate
Mr. Bentley's designs.

In 1768 our Author obtained that office without solicitation, for which he had
before applied without effect. The Professorship of Languages and History again
became vacant, and he received an offer of it from the Duke of Grafton, who had
succeeded Lord Bute in office. The place was valuable in itself, the salary
being 400l. a year; but it was rendered peculiarly acceptable to Mr. Gray, as
he obtained it without solicitation.

Soon after he succeeded to this office, the impaired state of his health
rendered another journey necessary; and he visited, in 1769, the counties of
Westmoreland and Cumberland. His remarks on the wonderful scenery which these
northern regions display, he transmitted in epistolary journals to his friend,
Dr. Wharton, which abound, according to Mr. Mason's elegant diction, with all
the wildness of Salvator, and the softness of Claude.

He appears to have been much affected by the anxiety he felt at holding a
place without discharging the duties annexed to it. He had always designed
reading lectures, but never put it in practice; and a consciousness of this
neglect contributed not a little to increase the malady under which he had long
labored: nay, the office at length became so irksome, that he seriously
proposed to resign it.

Toward the close of May, 1771, he removed from Cambridge to London, after
having suffered violent attacks of an hereditary gout, to which he had long
been subject, notwithstanding he had observed the most rigid abstemiousness
throughout the whole course of his life. By the advice of his physicians, he
removed from London to Kensington; the air of which place proved so salutary,
that he was soon enabled to return to Cambridge, whence he designed to make a
visit to his friend Dr. Wharton, at Old Park, near Durham; indulging a fond
hope that the excursion would tend to the re-establishment of his health: but,
alas! that hope proved delusive. On the 24th of July he was seized, while at
dinner in the College hall, with a sudden nausea, which obliged him to retire
to his chamber. The gout had fixed on his stomach in such a degree as to resist
all the powers of medicine. On the 29th he was attacked with a strong
convulsion, which returned with increased violence the ensuing day; and on the
evening of the ^^st of May, 177^, he departed this life in the 55th year of his
age.

From the narrative of his friend, Mr. Mason, it appears, that Gray was
actuated by motives of self improvement, and self gratification, in his
application to the Muses, rather than any view to pecuniary emolument. His
pursuits were in general disinterested; and as he was free from avarice on the
one hand, so was he from extravagance on the other; being one of those few
characters in the annals of literature, especially in the poetical class, who
are devoid of self interest, and at the same time attentive to economy; but Mr.
Mason adds, that he was induced to decline taking any advantage of his literary
productions by a degree of pride, which influenced him to disdain the idea of
being thought an author by profession.

It appears, from the same narrative, that Gray made considerable progress in
the study of architecture, particularly the gothic. He endeavored to trace
this branch of the science, from the period of its commencement, through its
various changes, till it arrived at its perfection in the time of Henry VIII.
He applied himself also to the study of heraldry, of which he obtained a very
competent knowledge, as appears from his Remarks on Saxon Churches, in the
introduction to Mr. Bentham's History of Ely.

But the favorite study of Gray, for the last two years of his life, was
natural history, which he rather resumed than began, as he had acquired some
knowledge of botany in early life, while he was under the tuition of his uncle
Antrobus. He wrote copious marginal notes to the works of Linnaeus, and other
writers in the three kingdoms of nature: and Mr. Mason further observes, that,
excepting pure mathematics, and the studies dependent on that science, there
was hardly any part of human learning in which he had not acquired a competent
skill; in most of them a consummate mastery.

Mr. Mason has declined drawing any formal character of him; but has adopted
one from a letter to James Boswell, Esquire. by the Rev. Mr. Temple, Rector of St.
Gluvias, in Cornwall, first printed anonymously in the London Magazine, which,
as we conceive authentic, from the sanction of Mr. Mason, we shall therefore
transcribe.

Perhaps he was the most learned man in Europe. He was equally acquainted with
the elegant and profound parts of science, and that not superficially, but
thoroughly. He knew every branch of history, both natural and civil; had read
all the original historians of England, France, and Italy; and was a great
antiquarian. Criticism, metaphysics, morals, and politics, made a principal
part of his study; voyages and travels of all sorts were his favorite
amusements; and he had a fine taste in painting, prints, architecture, and
gardening. With such a fund of knowledge, his conversation must have been
equally instructive and entertaining; but he was also a good man, a man of
virtue and humanity. There is no character without some speck, some
imperfection; and I think the greatest defect in his was an affectation in
delicacy, or rather effeminacy, and a visible fastidiousness, or contempt and
disdain of his inferiors in science. He also had, in some degree, that weakness
which disgusted Voltaire so much in Mr. Congreve: though he seemed to value
others chiefly according to the progress they had made in knowledge, yet he
could not bear to be considered himself merely as a man of letters; and though
without birth, or fortune, or station, his desire was to be looked upon as a
private independent gentleman, who read for his amusement. Perhaps it may be
said, What signifies so much knowledge, when it produced so little? Is it worth
taking so much pains to leave no memorial but a few Poems? But let it be
considered that Mr. Gray was, to others, at least innocently employed; to
himself, certainly beneficially. His time passed agreeably; he was every day
making some new acquisition in science; his mind was enlarged, his heart
softened, his virtue strengthened; the world and mankind were shown to him
without a mask; and he was taught to consider every thing as trifling, and
unworthy of the attention of a wise man, except the pursuit of knowledge and
practice of virtue, in that state wherein God has placed us.

In addition to this character, Mr. Mason has remarked, that Gray's effeminacy
was affected most before those whom he did not wish to please; and that he is
unjustly charged with making knowledge his sole reason of preference, as he
paid his esteem to none whom he did not likewise believe to be good.

Dr. Johnson makes the following observations: -- What has occurred to me, from
the slight inspection of his letters, in which my undertaking has engaged me,
is, that his mind had a large grasp; that his curiosity was unlimited, and his
judgment cultivated; that he was a man likely to love much where he loved at
all, but that he was fastidious, and hard to please. His contempt, however, is
often employed, where I hope it will be approved, upon skepticism and
insidelity. His short account of Shaftesbury I will insert.

You say you cannot conceive how lord Shastesbury came to be a philosopher in
vogue; I will tell you: first, he was a lord; secondly, he was as vain as any
of his readers; thirdly, men are very prone to believe what they do not
understand; fourthly, they will believe any thing at all, provided they are
under no obligation to believe it; fifthly, they love to take a new road, even
when that road leads no where; sixthly, he was reckoned a fine writer, and
seems always to mean more than he said. Would you have any more reasons? An
interval of above forty years has pretty well destroyed the charm. A dead lord
ranks with commoners: vanity is no longer interested in the matter; for a new
road is become an old one.

As a writer he had this peculiarity, that he did not write his pieces first
rudely, and then correct them, but labored every line as it arose in the train
of composition; and he had a notion not very peculiar, that he could not write
but at certain times, or at happy moments; a fantastic foppery, to which our
kindness for a man of learning and of virtue wishes him to have been superior.

As a Poet he stands high in the estimation of the candid and judicious. His
works are not numerous; but they bear the marks of intense application, and
careful revision. The Elegy in the Churchyard is deemed his masterpiece; the
subject is interesting, the sentiment simple and pathetic, and the
versification charmingly melodious. This beautiful composition has been often
selected by orators for the display of their rhetorical talents. But as the
most finished productions of the human mind have not escaped censure, the works
of our Author have undergone illiberal comments. His Elegy has been supposed
defective in want of plan. Dr. Knox, in his Essays, has observed, that it is
thought by some to be no more than a confused heap of splendid ideas, thrown
together without order and without proportion. Some passages have been censured
by Kelly in the Babbler; and imitations of different authors have been pointed
out by other critics. But these imitations cannot be ascertained, as there are
numberless instances of coincidence of ideas; so that it is difficult to say,
with precision, what is or is not a designed or accidental imitation.

Gray, in his Elegy in the Churchyard, has great merit in adverting to the
most interesting passions of the human mind; yet his genius is not marked alone
by the tender sensibility so conspicuous in that elegant piece; but there is a
sublimity which gives it an equal claim to universal admiration.

His Odes on The Progress of Poetry, and of The Bard, according to Mr. Mason's
account, breathe the high spirit of lyric enthusiasm. The transitions are
sudden and impetuous; the language full of fire and force; and the imagery
carried, without impropriety, to the most daring height. They have been accused
of obscurity: but the one can be obscure to those only who have not read
Pindar; and the other only to those who are unacquainted with the history of
our own nation.

Of his other lyric pieces, Mr. Wakefield, a learned and ingenious commentator,
observes, that, though, like all other human productions, they are not without
their defects, yet the spirit of poetry, and exquisite charms of the verse, are
more then a compensation for those defects. The Ode on Eton College abounds
with sentiments natural, and consonant to the feelings of humanity, exhibited
with perspicuity of method, and in elegant, intelligible, and expressive
language. The Sonnet on the Death of West, and the Epitaph on Sir William
Williams, are as perfect compositions of the kind as any in our language.

Dr. Johnson was confessedly a man of great genius; but the partial and
uncandid mode of criticism he has adopted in his remarks on the writings of
Gray, has given to liberal minds great and just offense. According to Mr.
Mason's account, he has subjected Gray's poetry to the most rigorous
examination. Declining all consideration of the general plan and conduct of the
pieces, he has confined himself solely to strictures on words and forms of
expression; and Mr. Mason very pertinently adds, that verbal criticism is an
ordeal which the most perfect composition cannot pass without injury.

He has also fallen under Mr. Wakefield's severest censure. This commentator
affirms, that he thinks a refutation of his strictures upon Gray a necessary
service to the public, without which they might operate with a malignant
influence upon the national taste. His censure, however, is too general, and
expressed with too much vehemence; and his remarks betray, upon the whole, an
unreasonable fastidiousness of taste, and an unbecoming illiberality of spirit.
He appears to have turned an unwilling eye upon the beauties of Gray, because
his jealousy would not suffer him to see such superlative merit in a
cotemporary. These remarks of Mr. Wakefield appear to be well founded; and it
has been observed, by another writer, that Dr. Johnson, being strongly
influenced by his political and religious principles, was inclined to treat
with the utmost severity some of the productions of our best writers; to which
may be imputed that severity with which he censures the lyric performances of
Gray. It is highly probable that no one poetical reader will universally
subscribe to his decisions, though all may admire his vast intuitive knowledge,
and power of discrimination.

In the first copy of this exquisite Poem, Mr. Mason observes, the conclusion
was different from that which the Author afterward composed; and though his
after-thought was unquestionably the best, yet there is a pathetic melancholy
in the four stanzas that were rejected, following, "With incense kindled at the
Muses' flame," which highly claim preservation.

The thoughtless wor'd to Majesty may bow,
Exalt the brave, and idolize success;
But more to innocence their safety owe,
Than power or genius ever conspired to bless.
And thou who, mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Dust in the^e notes their artless tale relate,
By night and lonely contemplation led,
To wander in the gloomy walks of fate,
Hark! how the sacred calm, that breathes around,
Bids every fierce tumultuous passion. cease;
In still small accents whispering from the ground,
A grateful earnest of eternal peace.
No more, with reason and thyself at strife,
Give a^xious cares and endless wishes room;
But, throu^h the cool sequestered vale of life,
Pursue the silent tenor or thy doom.
In one instance, the Doctor's inconsistency, and deviation from his general
character, does him honor. After having commented with the most rigid severity
on the poetical works of Gray, as it conscious of the injustice done him, he
seems to apologize by the following declaration, which concludes his Criticism,
and shall conclude the Memoirs of our Author.

In the character of his Elegy (says Johnson) I rejoice and concur with the
common reader; for, by the common sense of readers, uncorrupted with literary
prejudices, after all the refinements of subtilty, and the dogmatism of
learning, must be finally decided all claim to poetical honors. The
Churchyard abounds with images which find a mirror in every mind, and with
sentiments to which every bosom returns an echo. The four stanzas beginning,
Yet even these bones are to me original; I have never seen the notions in any
other place; yet he that reads them here, persuades himself that he has always
felt them. Had Gray written often thus, it had been vain to blame, and useless
to praise him.

THE TEARS OF GENIUS, AN ODE, TO THE MEMORY OF MR. GRAY.
(By J. T -- -- -- -.)
ON Cham's fair banks, where Learning's hallowed fane
Majestic rises on the astonished sight,
Where often the Muse has led the favorite swain,
And warmed his foul with heaven's inspiring sight;
Beneath the covert of the sylvan shade,
Where deadly cypress, mixed with mournful yew,
Far over the vale a gloomy stillness spread,
Celestial Genius burst upon the view.
The bloom of youth, the majesty of years.
The softened aspect, innocent and kind,
The sigh of sorrow, and the streaming tears,
Resistless all, their various power combined.
In her fair hand a silver harp she bore,
Whose magic notes, soft warbling from the string,
Give tranquil joys the breast never knew before,
Or raise the soul on rapture's airy wing.
By grief impelled, I heard her heave a sigh,
While thus the rapid strain resoanded through the sky:
Haste ye sister powers of Song!
Hasten from the shady grove,
Where the river ro^^^ along
Sweetly to the voice of love;
Where, indulging mirthful pleasures,
Light you press the flowery green,
And from Flora's blooming treasures
Call the wreath for Fancy's queen;
Where your gently-flowing numbers,
Floating on the fragrant breeze,
Sink the soul in pleasing slumbers
On the downy bed (...),
For graver strains prepare the plaintive lyre,
That wakes the softest feelings of the soul;
Let lonely grief the melting verse inspire,
Let deep'ning sorrow's solemn accents roll.
Racked by the hand of rude Disease,
Behold our favorite Poet lies!
While every object formed to please
Far from his couch ungrateful flies.
The blissful Muse, whose favoring smile
So lately warmed his peaceful breast,
Diffusing heavenly joys the while,
In Transport's radiant garments dressed,
With darksome grandeur, and enfeebled blaze,
Sinks in the shades to night, and shuns his eager gaze.
The gaudy train who wait on Spring, Ode on Spring.

Tinged with the pomp of vernal pride,
The youth, who mount on pleasure's wing, Ode on the Prospect of Eton College.

And idly sport on Thames's side,
With cool regard their various arts employ,
Nor rouse the drooping mind, nor give the pause of joy.
Ha! what forms, with port sublime, Bard, an Ode.

Glide along in sullen mood,
Scorning all the threats of time,
High above misfortune's flood!
They seize their harps, they strike the lyre,
With rapid hand, with freedom's fire;
Obedient Nature hears the lofty sound,
And Snowdon's airy cliffs the heavenly strains resound.
In pomp of ^^ate behold they wait,
With arms outstretch'd and aspects kind,
To snatch on high to yonder sky
The child of Fancy left behind;
Forgot the woes of Camoria's fatal day,
By rapture's blaze impelled, they swell the artless lay.
But, ah! in vain they strive to sooth
With gentle arts the torturing hours.
Adversity Ode to Adversity.
with rankl^ng tooth
Her baleful gifts profusely pours.
Behold she comes! the fiend forlorn,
Arrayed in Horrour's settled gloom;
She strews the brier and prickly thorn,
And triumphs in the infernal doom;
With frantic fury, and insatiate rage,
She gnaws the throbbing breast, and blasts the gl^^^^g page.
No more the soft ^olian flute The Progress of Poetry.

Breathes through the ^eart the melting strain,
The powers of Harmony are mute,
And leave the once-delightful plain;
With heavy wing I see them beat the air,
Damped by the Laden hand of com^^^^^^ Despair.
Yet stay. O stay! celestial Powers!
And with a hand of kind regard
Dispel the boisterous storm that lours
Destructive on the favorite bard;
O watch with me his last expiring breath,
And snatch him from the arms of dark oblivious Death!
Hark! the Fatal Sisters The Fatal Sisters, an Ode.
join,
And, with horrour's mutt'ring sounds,
Weave the tissue of his line,
While the dreadful spell resounds,
" Hail, ye midnight Sisters! hail!
" Drive the shuttle swift along,
" Let our secret charms prevail
" Over the valiant and the strong;
" Over the glory of the land,
" Over the innocent and gay,
" Over the Muses' tuneful band,
" Weave the sun'ral web of Gray."
It Is done, it is done -- the iron hand of Pain,
With ruthless fury and corrosive force,
Racks every joint, and seizes every vein:
He sinks, he groans, he (...), a lifeless corse!
Thus fades the flower, nipp'd by the frozen gale,
Though once so sweet, so lovely to the eye;
Thus the tail oaks, when boisterous storms assail,
Torn from the earth, a mighty ruin lie.
Ye sacred Sisters of the plaintive verse,
Now let the stream of fond affection flow;
O pay your tribute over the slow-drawn hearse
With all the manly dignity of woe!
Often when the curfew tells its parting kne^^,
With solemn pause yon' Churchyard's gl^^^ survey,
While sorrow's sighs and tears of pity ^ell
How just the moral of the poet's lay. Elegy in a Country Churchyard.

Over his green grave, in Contemplation's guise,
Often let the pilgrim drop a silent tear,
Often let the shepherd's tender accents rise,
Big with the sweets of each revolving year,
Till prostrate Time adore his deathless name,
Fixed on the solid base of adamantine fame.
ODES.
ODE I. ON THE SPRING.
LO! where the rosy-bosom'd hours,
Fair Venus' train, appear,
Disclose the long-expecting flowers,
And wake the purple year,
The attic warbler pours her throat
Responsive to the cuckoo's note,
The untaught harmony of spring,
While, whispering pleasure as they fly,
Cool zephyrs through the clear blue sky
Their gathered fragrance fling.
Wherever the oak's thick branches stretch
A broader, browner shade,
Wherever the rude and moss-grown beech
O'er-canopies the glade, -- a bank
O'er-canopy'd with lucious woodbine.
Shakesp. Mid. Night's Dream.

Beside some water's rushy brink
With me the Muse shall sit, and think
(At ease reclined in rustic state)
How vain the ardour of the crowd,
How low, how little, are the proud,
How indigent the great!
Still is the toiling hand of Care,
The panting herds repose,
Yet hark! how through the peopled air
The busy murmur glows!
The insect youth are on the wing,
Eager to taste the honey'd spring,
And float amid the liquid noon; Nare per aestatem liquidam. Virg. Georg. lib. 4

Some lightly over the current skim,
Some show their gayly-gilded trim,
Quick-glancing to the sun. -- sporting with quick giance,
Show to the sun their waved coats dropped with gold.
Milton's Paradise Lost, b. 7.

To contemplation's sober eye, While insects from the threshold preach, etc.
Mr. Green in the Grotto. Dodsley's Miscellantes, vol. v. p. 161.

Such is the race of man,
And they that creep, and they that fly,
Shall end where they began.
Alike the busy and the gay
But flutter through life's little day,
In Fortune's varying colors dressed;
Brushed by the hand of rough Mischance,
Or chilled by Age, their airy dance
They leave, in dust to rest.
Methinks I hear, in accents low,
The sportive kind reply,
Poor Moralist! and what art thou?
A solitary fly!
Thy joys no glittering female meets,
No hive have thou of hoarded sweets,
No painted plumage to display;
On hasty wings thy youth is flown,
Thy sun is set, thy spring is gone --
We frolic while it is May.
ODE II. ON THE DEATH OF A FAVORITE CAT, Drowned in a Tub of Gold Fishes.
'TWAS on a lofty vase's side,
Where China's gayest art had died
The azure flowers that blow,
Demurest of the tabby kind,
The pensive Selima, reclined,
Gazed on the lake below.
Her conscious tail her joy declared;
The fair round face, the snowy beard,
The velvet or her paws,
Her coat that with the tortoise vies,
Her ears of jet, and em'rald eyes,
She saw, and purr'd applause.
Still had she gazed, but, 'midst the tide,
Two angel forms were seen to glide,
The Genii of the stream;
Their scaly armour's Tyrian hue,
Through richest purple, to the view
Betrayed a golden gleam.
The hapless nymph with wonder saw:
A whisker first, and then a claw,
With many an ardent wish,
She stretched in vain to reach the prize:
What female heart can gold despise?
What Cat's averse to fish?
Presumpt'ous maid! with looks intent,
Again she stretched, again she bent,
Nor knew the gulf between:
(Malignant Fate sat by and smiled.)
The slippery verge her feet beguiled;
She tumbled headlong in.
Eight times emerging from the flood,
She mewed to every watery god
Some speedy aid to send.
No Dolphin came, no Nereid stirred,
Nor cruel Tom or Susan heard:
A favorite has no friend!
From hence, ye Beauties! undeceived,
Know one false step is never retrieved,
And be with caution bold:
Not all that tempts your wandering eyes,
And heedless hearts, is lawful prize,
Nor all that glisters gold.
ODE III. ON A DISTANT PROSPECT OF ETON COLLEGE.
(...)
Menander.
YE distant Spires! ye antique Towers!
That crown the watery glade
Where grateful Science still adores
Her Henry's King Henry VI. founder of the College.
holy shade;
And ye that from the stately brow
Of Windsor's heights the expanse below
Of grove, of lawn, of mead, survey,
Whose turf, whose shade, whose flowers, among
Wanders the hoary Thames along
His silver-winding way:
Ah happy hills! ah pleasing shade!
Ah fields beloved in vain!
Where once my careless childhood strayed,
A stranger yet to pain!
I feel the gales that from ye blow
A momentary bilss bestow,
As waving fresh their gladsome wing
My weary soul they seem to sooth,
And, redolent And bees their honey redolent of spring.
Dryden's Fable on the Pythag. System.
of joy and youth,
To breathe a second spring.
Say, father Thames! for thou have seen
Full many a sprightly race,
Disporting on thy margent green,
The paths of pleasure trace,
Who foremost now delight to cleave
With pliant arm thy glassy wave?
The captive linnet which enthral?
What idle progeny succeed
To chase the rolling circle's speed,
Or urge the flying ball?
While some, on earnest business bent,
Their murmuring labors ply
Against graver hours, that bring constraint,
To sweeten liberty;
Some bold adventurers disdain
The limits of their little reign,
And unknown regions dare descry;
Still as they run they look behind,
They hear a voice in every wind,
And snatch a fearful joy.
Gay hope is theirs, by fancy fed,
Less pleasing when possessed;
The tear forgot as soon as shed,
The sunshine of the breast;
Theirs buxom health of rosy hue,
Wild wit, invention ever new,
And lively cheer of vigor born;
The thoughtless day, the easy night,
The spirits pure, the slumbers light,
That fly the approach of morn.
Alas! regardless of their doom,
The little victims play!
No sense have they of ills to come,
Nor care beyond to day:
Yet see how all around 'em wait
The ministers of human fate,
And black Misfortune's baleful train!
Ah! show them where in ambush stand,
To seize their prey, the murderous band!
Ah! tell them they are men.
These shall the fury Passions tear,
The vultures of the mind,
Disdainful Anger, pallid Fear,
And Shame that sculks behind;
Or pining Love shall waste their youth,
Or Jealousy, with rankling tooth,
That inly gnaws the secret heart;
And Envy wan, and faded Care,
Grim-visag'd, comfortless Despair,
And Sorrow's piercing dart.
Ambition this shall tempt to rise,
Then whirl the wretch from high,
To bitter Scorn a sacrifice,
And grinning Infamy:
The stings of Falsehood those shall try,
And hard Unkindness' altered eye,
That mocks the tear it forced to flow;
And keen Remorse, with blood defiled,
And moody Madness And Madness laughing in his ireful mood.
Dryden's Fable of Palamon and Arcite.
laughing wild
Amid severest woe.
Lo! in the vale of years beneath
A grisly troop are seen,
The painful family of Death,
More hideous than their queen:
This racks the joints, this fires the veins,
That every laboring sinew strains,
Those in the deeper vitals rage;
Lo! Poverty, to fill the band,
That numbs the soul with icy hand,
And slow-consuming Age.
To each his sufferings; all are men
Condemned al^ke to groan;
The tender for another's pain,
The unfeeling for his own.
Yet ah! why should they know their fate,
Since sorrow never comes too late,
And happiness too swiftly flies?
Thought would destroy their paradise.
No more; where ignorance is bliss
It Is folly to be wise.
ODE IV. TO ADVERSITY.
-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Aeschylus in Agamemnone.
DAUGHTER of Jove, relentless power,
Thou tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge and torturing hour
The bad affright, afflict the best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain,
The proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple tyrants vainly groan
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone.
When first thy sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling child, designed,
To thee he gave the heavenly birth,
And bad to form her infant mind;
Stern rugged nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore;
What sorrow was thou bad'st her know,
And from her own she learned to melt at others' woe.
Scared at thy frown terrific fly
Self-pleasing Folly's idle brood,
Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy,
And leave us leisure to be good.
Light they disperse; and with them go
The summer friend, the flattering foe;
By vain Prosperity received,
To her they vow their truth, and are again believed.
Wisdom, in sable garb arrayed,
Immersed in rapturous thought profound,
And Melancholy, silent maid,
With leaden eye, that loves the ground,
Still on thy solemn steps attend;
Warm Charity, the general friend,
With Justice, to herself severe,
And Pity, dropping soft the sadly-pleasing tear.
Oh! gently on thy suppliant's head,
Dread goddess! lay thy chast'ning hand,
Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad,
Nor circled with the vengeful band:
(As by the impious thou art seen,)
With thundering voice and threatening mien,
With screaming Horrour's funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, and ghastly Poverty.
Thy form benign, O Goddess! wear,
Thy milder influence impart,
Thy philosophic train be there,
To soften, not to wound, my heart:
The generous spark extinct revive;
Teach me to love and to forgive;
Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are to feel, and know myself a man.
ODE V. THE PROGRESS OF POESY. PINDARICK.
Advertisement.
WHEN the Author first published this and the following Ode, he was advised,
even by his Friends, to subjoin some few explanatory Notes, but had too much
respect for the Understanding of his Readers to take that Liberty.

(...)
(...)
(...) --
Pindar, Olymp. ii.
I. 1.
AWAKE, Aeolian lyre! awake, Awake, my glory! awake, lute and harp.
David's Psalms. Pindar styles his own poetry. with its musical accompaniments,
(...), Aeolian song, Aeolian strings, the breath of the Aeolian flute. The
subject and simile as usual with Pindar, are here united. The various sources
of poetry, which gives life and luster to all it touches, are here described,
as well in its quiet majestic progress, enriching every subject (otherwise dry
and barren) with all the pomp of diction and luxuriant harmony of numbers, as
in its more rapid and irresistible course, when swollen and hurried away by the
conflict of tumultuous passions.

And give to rapture all thy trembling strings;
From Helicon's harmonious springs
A thousand rills their mazy progress take;
The laughing flowers, that round them blow,
Drink life and fragrance as they flow.
Now the rich stream of music winds along
Deep, majestic, smooth, and strong,
Through verdant vales and Ceres' golden reign;
Now rolling down the steep amain,
Headlong, impetuous, see it pour;
The rocks and nodding groves rebellow to the roar.
I. 2.
Oh! Sovereign Power of harmony to calm the turbulent passions of the soul. The
thoughts are borrowed from the first Pythian of Pindar.
of the willing soul,
Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs,
Enchanting shell! the sullen Cares
And frantic Passions hear thy soft control.
On Thracia's hills the Lord of War
Has curbed the fury of his car,
And dropped his thirsty lance at thy command:
Perching on the sceptred hand This is a weak imitation of some beautiful lines
in the same ode.

Of Jove, thy magic lulls the feathered king
With ruffled plumes and flagging wing;
Quenched in dark clouds of slumber lie
The terror of his beak and lightnings of his eye.
I. 3.
Thee Power of harmony to produce all the graces of motion in the body.
the voice, the dance obey,
Tempered to thy warbled lay:
Over Idalia's velvet green
The rosy-crowned Loves are seen,
On Cytherea's day,
With antic Sports and blue-ey'd Pleasures
Frisking light in frolic measures:
Now pursuing, now retreating,
Now in circling troops they meet;
To brisk notes in cadence beating,
Gla^^e their many-twinkling feet. (...)
Homer, Od. O.

Slow-melting strains their queen's approach declare;
Wherever she turns the Graces homage pay;
With arms sublime, that float upon the air,
In gliding state she wins her easy way:
Over her warm cheek and rising bosom move
The bloom of young desire and purple light of love. (...)
(...)
Phrynithus apud Athenaeum.

II. 1.
Man's feeble race what ills await! To compensate the real or imaginary ills of
Life, the Muse was given to mankind by the same Providence that sends the day
by its cheerful presence to dispel the gloom and terrors of the night.

Labor and Penury, the racks of Pain,
Disease, and Sorrow's weeping train,
And Death, sad refuge from the storms of Fate!
The fond complaint, my Song! disprove,
And justify the laws of Jove.
Say, has he given in vain the heavenly Muse?
Night and all her sickly dews,
Her specter wan, and birds of boding cry,
He gives to range the dreary sky,
Till down the eastern cliffs afar Or seen the morning's well-appointed star
Come marching up the (...)
Cowley.

Hyperion's march they spy and glittering shafts of war.
II. 2.
In climes Extensive influence of (...) the remotest and (...), and the virtues
that (...) Welsh Fragments, the Lapland and (...)
beyond the Solar Road, ^ Virgil.
^ Petrarch. Canz. 2


Where shaggy forms over ice-built mountains roam,
The Muse has broke the twilight-gloom
To cheer the shivering native's dull abode:
And often beneath the odorous shade
Of Chili's boundless forests laid,
She deigns to hear the savage youth repeat,
In loose numbers, wildly sweet,
Their feather-cinctur'd chiefs and dusky loves.
Her track, wherever the goddess roves,
Glory pursue, and generous shame,
The uconquerable mind and needom's holy flame.
II. 3.
Woods that wave over Delphia's steep, Progress of Poetry from Greece to Italy,
and from Italy to England. Chaucer was not unacquainted with the writings of
Dante or of Petrarch. The (...) and Sir Thomas Wyatt had traveled in Italy,
and (...). Milton improved on them: but (...).

Isles that crown the Aegian deep,
Fields that cool Ilissus laves,
Or where Maeander's amber waves
In lingering lab'rmths creep,
How do your tuneful echoes languish,
Mute but to the voice of Anguish?
Where each old poetic mountain
Inspiration breathed around,
Every shade and hallowed fountain
Murmured deep a solemn sound,
Till the sad Nine, in Greece's evil hour,
Left their Parnassus for the Latian plains:
Alike they scorn the pomp of tyrant Power
And coward Vice, that revels in her chains.
When Latium had her lofty spirit lost,
They sought, oh Albion! next thy sea-encircled coast.
III. 1.
Far from the sun and summer-gale,
In thy green lap was Nature's darling Shakespeare.
laid,
What time, where lucid Avon strayed,
To him the mighty Mother did unveil
Her awful face: the dauntless child
Stretched forth his little arms, and smiled.
This pencil take (she said) whose colors clear
Richly paint the vernal year;
Thine too these golden keys, immortal boy!
This can unlock the gates of Joy,
Of Horror that, and thrilling Fears,
Or open the sacred source of sympathetic Tears.
III. 2.
Nor second he Milton.
that rode sublime
Upon the seraph-wings of Ecstacy,
The secrets of the abyss to spy,
He passed the flaming bounds of place and time: -- flammantia moenia mundi.
Lucretius.

The living throne, the sapphire-blaze, For the spirit of the living creature
was in the wheel. And above the firmament, that was over their heads, was the
likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone. -- This was the
appearance of the glory of the Lord.
Ezekiel i. 20, 26, 28.

Where angels tremble while they gaze,
GRAYS' POESIS

Approach, and read (for thou can read) the lay
Engraved on the stone beneath yon' aged thorn
^

Drawn by (...) January ^ 1799.


He saw, but, blasted with excess of light,
Closed his eyes in endless night. (...)
Homer^^ Odessey.

Behold where Dryden's less presumptuous car
Wide over the fields of glory bear
Two coursers of ethereal race, Meant to express the stately march and sounding
energy of Dryden's rhymes.

With necks in thunder clothed Have thou clothed his neck with thunder! Job.
and long-resounding pace.
III. 3.
Hark! his hands the lyre explore!
Bright-ey'd Fancy, hovering over,
Scatters from her pictured urn
Thoughts that breathe and words that burn; Words that weep and tears that
speak. Cowley.

But ah! it is heard no more We have had in our language no other odes of the
sublime kind than that of Dryden on St. Cecilia's day; for Cowley, who had his
merit, yet wanted judgment, style, and harmony, for such a task. That of Pope
is not worthy of so great a man. Mr. Mason, indeed, of late days, has touched
the true chords, and, with a masterly hand, in some of his chorusses -- above
all, in the last of Charactacus; Hark! heard ye not yon footstep dread? etc.
--
Oh, lyre divine! what dying spirit
Wakes thee now? though he inherit
Nor the pride nor ample pinion
That the Theban eagle bear, (...)
Olymp. ii. Pindar compares himself to that bird, and his enemies to ravens
that croak and clamor in vain below, while it pursues its sight regardless of
their noise.

Sailing with supreme dominion
Through the azure deep of air,
Yet often before his infant eyes would run
Such forms as glitter in the Muse's ray
With orient hues, unborrow'd of the sun;
Yet shall he mount, and keep his distant way
Beyond the limits of a vulgar fate,
Beneath the good how far -- but far above the great.
ODE VI. THE BARD. PINDARICK.
Advertisement.
THE following Ode is founded on a Tradition current in Wales, that Edward 1.
when he completed the Conquest or that Country, ordered all the Bards that fell
into his Hands to be put to Death.

I. 1.
' RUIN seize thee, ruthless King!
' Confusion on thy banners wait;
' Though fanned by Conquest's crimson wing,
' They mock, the air with idle state. Mocking the air with colors idly spread.
Shakesp. King John.

' Helm nor hauberk's The hauberk was a texture of steel ringlets or rings
interwoven, forming a coat of mail that sat close to the body, and adapted
itself to every motion.
twisted mail,
' Nor even thy virtues, tyrant! shall avail
' To save thy secret soul from nightly fears;
' From Cambria's curse, from Cambria's tears!'
Such were the sounds that over the crested pride The crested adder's pride.
Dryden's Indian Queen.

Of the first Edward scattered wild dismay,
As down the steep of Snowdon's shaggy side Snowdon was a name given by the
Saxons to that mountainous track which the Welsh themselves call
Craigian-cryri: it included all the highlands of Caernarvonshire and
Merionethshire, as far east as the river Conway. R. Hygden, speaking of the
Castle of Conway, built by King Edward I. says, Ad ortum amnis Conway ad clivum
montis Erery: and Matthew of Westminster, ( ad an. 1283) Apud Aberconway ad
pedes montis Snowdoniae fecit erigi castrum forte.

He wound with toilsome march his long array:
Stout Glo'ster Gilbert de Clare, surnamed the Red, Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford, son-in-law to King Edward.
stood aghast in speechless trance:
To arms! cried Mortimer, Edmond de Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore. They both were
Lords Marchers, whose lands lay on the borders of Wales, and probably
accompanied the King in this expedition.
and couched his quivering lance.
I. 2.
On a rock, whose haughty brow
Frowns over old Conway's foaming flood,
Robbed in the sable garb of woe,
With haggard eyes the poet stood;
(Loose his beard, and hoary hair The image was taken from a well-known picture
of Raphael, representing the Supreme Being in the vision of Ezekiel. There are
two of these paintings, both believed original; one at Florence, the other at
Paris.

Streamed like a meteor to the troubled air, Shone like a meteor streaming to
the wind.
Milton's Paradise Lost.
)
And with a master's hand and prophet's fire
Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre.
' Hark how each giant oak and desert cave
' Sighs to the torrent's awful voice beneath!
' Over thee, oh King! their hundred arms they wave,
' Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breathe;
' Vocal no more, since Cambria's fatal day,
' To highborn Hoel's harp, or soft Llewellyn's lay.
I. 3.
' Cold is Cadwallo's tongue,
' That hushed the stormy main;
' Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy bed:
' Mountains! ye moan in vain
' Modrid, whose magic song
' Made huge Plinlimmon bow his cloud-topp'd head.
' On dreary Arvon's The shores of Caernarvonshire, opposite to the isle of
Anglesey.
shore they lie,
' Smeared with gore and ghastly pale;
' Far, far aloof the affrighted ravens fail,
' The famished eagle Camden and others observe, that eagles used annually to
build their aerie among the rocks of Snowdon, which from thence (as some think)
were named by the Wealth, Craigian-eryri, or the Crags of the Eagles. At this
day (I am told) the highest point of Snowdon is called The Eagle's Nest. That
bird is certainly no stranger to this island, as the Scots, and the people of
Cumberland, Westmereland, etc. can testify: it even has built its nest in the
Peak of Derbyshire. [See Willoughby's Ornithol. published by Ray.]
screams and passes by.
' Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
' Dear As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart --
Shakesp. Julius Caesar.
as the light that visits these sad eyes,
' Dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
' Ye died amidst your dying country's cries --
' No more I weep. They do not sleep:
' On yonder cliffs, a grisly band,
' I see them sit; they linger yet,
' Avengers of their native land;
' With me in dreadful harmony they join,
' And weave See the Norwegian Ode that follows.
with bloody hands the tissue of thy line.'
II. 1.
" Weave the warp and weave the woof,
" The winding sheet of Edward's race;
" Give ample room and verge enough
" The characters of hell to trace.
" Mark the year and mark the night
" When Severn shall re-echo with affright
" The shrieks of death through Berkley's roofs that ring,
" Shrieks of an agonizing king! Edward 11. cruelly butchered in Berkley Castle.

" She-wolf of France, Isabel of France, Edward II s adulterous queen.
with unrelenting fangs
" That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled mate,
" From thee Triumphs of Edward III. In France.
be born who over thy country hangs
" The scourge of Heaven. What terrors round him wait!
" Amazement in his van, with Flight combined,
" And Sorrow's faded form, and Solitude behind.
II. 2.
" Mighty victor, mighty lord,
" Low on his funeral couch he lies! Death of that king, abandoned by his
children, and even robbed in his last moments by his courtiers and his mistress.

" No pitying heart, no eye, afford
" A tear to grace his obsequies!
" Is the sable warrior Edward the Black Prince, dead some time before his
father.
fled?
" Thy son is gone; he rests among the dead.
" The swarm that in thy noontide beam were born,
" Gone to salute the rising morn:
" Fair laughs the morn, Magnificence of Richard II's. reign. See Froissard,
and other cotemporary writers.
and soft the zephyr blows,
" While proudly riding over the azure realm,
" In gallant trim the gilded vessel goes,
" Youth on the prow and Pleasure at the helm,
" Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind's sway,
" That hushed in grim repose expects his evening prey.
II. 3.
" Fill high the sparkling bowl, Richard II. (as we are told by Archbishop
Scroop, and the confederate Lords, in their manifesto, by Thomas of Walsingham,
and all the order writers) was starved to death. The story of his assassination
by Sir Piers of Exon is of much later date.

" The rich repast prepare;
" Rest of a crown, he yet may share the feast.
" Close by the regal chair
" Fell Thirst and Famine scowl
" A baleful smile upon the baffled guest.
" Heard ye the din of battle bray, Ruinous civil wars of York and Lancaster.

" Lance to lance and horse to horse?
" Long years of havoc urge their destined course,
" And through the kindred squadrons mow their way.
" Ye Towers of Julius! Henry VI. George Duke of Clarence, Edward V. Richard
Duke of York, etc. believed to be murdered secretly in the Tower of London. The
oldest part of that structure is vulgarly attributed to Julius Caesar.
London's lasting shame,
" With many a foul and midnight murder fed,
" Revere his consort's Margaret of Anjou, a woman of heroic spirit, who
struggled hard to save her husband and her crown.
faith, his father's Henry V.
fame,
" And spare the meek, usurper's Henry VI. very near being canonized. The line
of Lancaster had no right of inheritance to the crown.
holy head.
" Above, below, the Rose of snow, The white and red Roses, devices of York and
Lancaster.

" Twined with her blushing foe, we spread;
" The bristled Boar The silver Boar was the badge of Richard III. whence he
was usually known in his own time by the name of The Boar.
in infant gore
" Wallows beneath the thorny shade.
" Now, Brothers'! bending over the accursed loom,
" Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom.
III. 1.
" Edward, lo! to sudden fate
" (Weave we the woof; the thread is spun:)
" Half of thy heart Eleanor of Castile died a few years after the conquest of
Wales. The heroic proof she gave of her affection for her lord is well known.
The monuments of his regret and sorrow for the loss of her are still to be seen
at Northampton, Gaddington, Waltham, and other places.
we consecrate;
" (The web is wove; the work is done.")
' Stay, oh stay! nor thus forlorn
' Leave me unblessed, unpitied, here to mourn.
' In yon' bright track, that fires the western skies,
' They melt, they vanish from my eyes.
' But oh! what solemn scenes on Snowdon's height,
' Descending flow, their glittering skirts unroll!
' Visions of glory! spare my aching sight,
' Ye unborn ages crowd not on my soul!
' No more our long-lost Arthur It was the common belief of the Welsh nation,
that King Arthur was still alive in Fairyland, and should return again to reign
over Britain.
we bewail:
' All hail, ye genuine Kings; Both Merlin and Taliessin had prophesied that
the Welsh should regain their sovereignty over this Island, which seemed to be
accomplished in the House of Tudor.
Britannia's issue, hail!
III. 2.
' Girt with many a baron bold
' Sublime their starry fronts they rear,
' And gorgeous dames and statesmen old
' In bearded majesty appear;
' In the midst a form divine,
' Her eye proclaims her of the Briton-line,
' Her lion-port, her awe-commanding face, Speed, relating an audience given by
Queen Elizabeth to Paul Dzialinski, ambassador of Poland, says, And thus she,
lion-like rising, daunted the malapert orator no less with her stately port and
majestical deporture, than with the tartness of her princely cheeks.

' Attemper'd sweet to virgin-grace.
' What strings symphonious tremble in the air!
' What strains of vocal transport round her play!
' Hear from the grave, great Taliessin! Taliessin, chief of the Bards,
flourished in the 6th century. His works are still preserved, and his memory
held in high veneration, among his countrymen.
hear!
' They breathe a soul to animate thy clay.
' Bright Rapture calls, and, soaring as she sings,
' Waves in the eye of heaven her many-colour'd wings.
III. 3.
' The verse adorn again
' Fierce War, and faithful Love, Fierce wars and faithful loves shall moralize
my song.
Spencer's Poem to The Fairy Queen.

' And Truth severe, by Fairy Fiction dressed.
' In buskined measures move Shakespeare.

' Pale Grief, and pleasing Pain,
' With Horror, tyrant of the throbbing breast.
' A voice Milton.
as of the cherub-choir
' Gales from blooming Eden bear,
' And distant warblings The succession of Poets after Milton's time.
lessen on my ear,
' That lost in long futurity expire.
' Fond impious man! think thou yon' sanguine cloud,
' Raised by thy breath, has quenched the orb of day?
' Tomorrow he repairs the golden flood,
' And warms the nations with redoubled ray.
' Enough for me: with joy I see
' The different doom our Fates assign:
' Be thine despair and sceptred care;
' To triumph and to die are mine.'
He spoke, and headlong from the mountain's height,
Deep in the roaring tide, he plunged to endless night.
Advertisement.
THE Author once had Thoughts (in concert with a Friend) of giving a History of
English Poetry. In the Introduction to it he meant to have produced some
Specimens of the Style that reigned in ancient Times among the neighboring
Nations, or those who had subdued the greater Part of this Island, and were our
Progenitors: the following three Imitations made a Part of them. He afterward
dropped his Design; especially after he had head that it was already in the
Hands of a Person well qualified to do it Justice both by his Taste and his
Researches into Antiquity.

ODE VII. THE FATAL SISTERS. Note -- The Valkyriur were female divinities,
servants of Odin (or Woden) in the Gothic mythology. Their name signifies
chusers of the Slain. They were mounted on swift horses, with drawn swords in
their hands, and in the throng of battle selected such as were destined to
slaughter, and conducted them to Valkalla, (the Hall of Odin, or Paradise of
the Brave,) where they attended the banquet, and served the departed heroes
with horns of mead and ale.
FROM THE NORSE TONGUE.
To be found in the Orcades of Thermodus Torfaeus, Hafniae, 1679, Folio; and
also in Bartholinus.
Vitt er oprit fyrir Valfalli, etc.
PREFACE.
IN the 11th Century, Sigurd, Earl of the Orkney Islands, went with a Fleet of
Ships and a considerable Body of Troops, into Ireland, to the Assistance of
Sigtryg with the silken Beard, who was then making War on his Father-in Law,
Brian, King of Dublin. The Earl and all his Forces were cut to Pieces, and
Sigtryg was in Danger of a total Defeat; but the Enemy had a greater Loss by
the Death of Brian, their King, who fell in the Action. On Christmas Day (the
Day of the Battle) a Native of Caithness in Scotland, saw, at a Distance, a
Number of Persons on Horseback riding full speed toward a Hill, and ^eeming to
enter into it. Curiosity led him to follow them, till, looking through an
opening in the Rocks, he saw Twelve gigantic Figures, resembling Women: they
were all employed about a Loom; and as they wove they sung the following
dreadful Song, which, when they had finished, they tore the Web into twelve
Pieces, and each taking her Portion, gallopped six to the North, and as many to
the South.

NOW the storm begins to lower,
(Haste, the loom of hell prepare,)
Iron-sleet of arrowy shower How quick they wheeled, and flying, behind them,
shot
Sharp sleet of arrowy shower --
Milt. Par. Reg. The noise of battle hurtled in the air.
Shak. Jul Caes.

Hurtles in the darkened air.
Glittering lances are the loom
Where the dusky warp we strain,
Weaving many a soldier's doom,
Orkney's woe and Randver's bane.
See the grisly texture grow,
('It Is of human entrails made,)
And the weights that play below
Each a gasping warrior's head.
Shafts for shuttles, dipped in gore,
Shoot the trembling cords along:
Sword, that once a monarch bore,
Keep the tissue close and strong.
Mista, black terrific maid!
Sangrida and Hilda see,
Join the wayward work to aid;
It Is the woof of victory.
Ere the ruddy sun be set
Pikes must shiver, jav'lins sing,
Blade with clatt'ring buckler meet,
Hauberk crash, and helmet ring.
(Weave the crimson web of war)
Let us go, and let us fly,
Where our friends the conflict share,
Where they triumph, where they die.
As the paths of Fate we tread,
Wading through the ensanguin'd field,
Gondula and Geira spread
Over the youthful king your shield.
We the reins to slaughter give,
Ours to kill and ours to spare:
Spite of danger he shall live;
(Weave the crimson web of war.)
They whom once the desert beach
Pent within its bleak domain,
Soon their ample sway shall stretch
Over the plenty of the plain.
Low the dauntless earl is laid,
Gored with many a gaping wound:
Fate demands a nobler head;
Soon a king shall bite the ground.
Long his loss shall Eirin Ireland.
weep,
Never again his likeness see;
Long her strains in sorrow steep,
Strains of immortality!
Horror covers all the heath,
Clouds of carnage blot the sun:
Sisters! weave the web of death:
Sisters! cease; the work is done.
Hail the task and hail the hands!
Songs of joy and triumph sing;
Joy to the victorious bands,
Triumph to the younger king.
Mortal! thou that hear'st the tale,
Learn the tenor of our song;
Scotland! through each winding vale
Far and wide the notes prolong.
Sisters! hence with spurs of speed;
Each her thundering falchion wield;
Each bestride her sable steed:
Hurry, hurry, to the field.
ODE VIII. THE DESCENT OF ODIN. FROM THE NORSE TONGUE.
To be found in Bartholinus, de causis contemnendae mortis; Hafniae, 1689,
Quarto.
Upreis Odinn allda gauir, etc.
UPROSE the king of Men with speed,
And saddled straight his cole-black steed;
Down the yawning steep he rode
That, leads to Hela's Niflheimr, the hell of the Gothic nations, consisted of
nine worlds, to which were devoten all such as died of sickness, old age, or by
any other means man in battle: over it presided Hela, the goddess of Death.
drear abode.
Him the Dog of Darkness spied;
His shaggy throat he opened wide,
While from his jaws, with carnage filled,
Foam and human gore distilled,:
Hoarse he bays with hideous din,
Eyes that glow and fangs that grin,
And long pursues with fruitless yell
The father of the powerful spell.
Onward still his way he takes,
(The groaning earth beneath him shakes,)
Till full before his fearless eyes
The portals nine of hell arise.
Right against the eastern gate,
By the moss grown pile he late,
Where long of yore to sleep was laid
The dust of the prophetic maid.
Facing to the northen clime,
Thrice he traced the Runic rhyme,
Thrice pronounced, in accents dread,
The thrilling verse that wakes the dead,
Till from out the hollow ground
Slowly breathed a sullen sound.
PROPH. What call unknown, what charms presume
To break the quiet of the tomb?
Who thus afflicts my troubled sprite,
And drags me from the realms of Night?
Long on these mouldering bones have beat
The winter's snow, the summer's heat,
The drenching dews and driving rain!
Let me, let me sleep again.
Who is he, with voice unblest,
That calls me from the bed of rest?
ODIN. A traveller, to thee unknown,
Is he that calls, a warrior's son.
Thou the deeds of light shall know;
Tell me what is done below,
For whom yon' glittering board is spread,
Dressed for whom yon' golden bed?
PROPH. Mantling in the goblet see
The pure bev'rage of the be,
Over it hangs the shield of gold;
It Is the drink of Balder bold:
Balder's head to death is given;
Pain can reach the sons of Heaven!
Unwilling I my lips unclose;
Leave me, leave me to repose.
ODIN. Once again my call obey:
Prophetess! arise, and say,
What dangers Odin's child await,
Who the author of his fate?
PROPH. In Hoder's hand the hero's doom;
His brother sends him to the tomb.
Now my weary lips I close;
Leave me, leave me to repose.
ODIN. Prophetess! my spell obey;
Once again arise, and say,
Who the avenger of his guilt,
By whom shall Hoder's blood be spilt?
PROPH. In the caverns of the west,
By Odin's fierce embrace comprest,
A wondrous boy shall Rinda bear,
Who never shall comb his raven-hair,
Nor wash his visage in the stream,
Nor see the sun's departing beam,
Till he on Hoder's corse shall smile
Flaming on the funeral pile.
Now my weary lips I clos;e;
Leave me, leave me to repos;e.
ODIN. Yet a while my call obey:
Prophetess! awake, and say,
What virgins these, in speechless woe,
That bend to earth their solemn brow,
That their flaxen tresses tear,
And snowy veils that float in air?
Tell me whence their sorrows ros;e,
Then I leave thee to repos;e.
PROPH. Ha! no traveller art thou;
King of Men, I know thee now;
Mightiest of a mighty line --
ODIN. NO boding maid of skill divine
Art thou, no prophetess of good,
But mother of the giant-brood!
PROPH. Hie the hence, and boast at home.
That never shall enquirer come
To break my iron-sleep again
Till Lok Lok is the evil being, who continues in chains till the twilight of
the gods approaches, when he shall break his bones; the human-race, the stars
and sun, shall disappear, the earth sink in the seas and fire consume the
skies: even Odin himself and his kindred deities shall perish. For a farther
explanation of this mythology, see Introduction a l' Histoire de Danemarc, par
Mons. Maliat, 1775. 4to; or rather a translation of it published in 1770, and
entitled Northern Antiquities, in which some mistakes in the original are
judiciously corrected.
has burst his tenfold chain;
Never till substantial Night
Has re-assum'd her ancient right,
Till, wrapped in flames, in ruin hurled,
Sinks the fabric of the world.
ODE IX. THE DEATH OF HOEL. From the Welsh of Aneurim, styled THE MONARCH OF
THE BARDS.
He flourished about the Time of Taliessin, A. D. 570. This Ode is extracted
from the Gododin. [See Mr. Evans's Specimens, p. 71, 73.]

HAD I but the torrent's might,
With headlong rage, and wild affright,
Upon Deira's squadrons hurled,
To rush and sweep them from the world!
Too, too secure in youthful pride,
By them my friend, my Hoel, died,
Great Cian's son; of Madoc old,
He asked no heaps of hoarded gold;
Alone in Nature's wealth arrayed,
He asked and had the lovely maid.
To Cattraeth's vale, in glittering row,
Twice two hundred warriors go;
Every warriour's manly neck
Chains of regal honor deck,
Wreathed in many a golden link:
From the golden cup they drink
Nectar that the bees produce,
Or the grape's ecstatic juice.
Flushed with mirth and hope they burn,
But none from Cattraeth's vale return,
Save Aeron brave and Conan strong,
(Bursting through the bloody throng,)
And I, the meanest of them all,
That live to weep and sing their fall.
ODE X. THE TRIUMPH OF OWEN. A FRAGMENT.
From Mr. Evans's Specimen of the Welsh Poetry, London, 1764, Quarto.

Advertisement.
OWEN succeeded his father Griffin in the Principality of North Wales, A. D.
1120: this battle was near forty years afterward.

OWEN's praise demands my song,
Owen swift and Owen strong,
Fairest flower of Rod'rick's stem,
Gwyneth's North Wales.
shield and Britain's gem.
He nor heaps his brooded stores,
Nor on all profusely pours;
Lord of every regal art,
Liberal hand and open heart.
Big with hosts of mighty name,
Squadrons three against him came;
This the force of Eirin hiding;
Side by side as proudly riding
On her shadow long and gay
Lochlin Denmark.
plows the watery way;
There the Norman sails afar,
Catch the winds and join the war;
Black and huge along they sweep,
Burdens of the angry deep.
Dauntless on his native sands
The Dragon son The red Dragon is the device of Cadwalladar which all
descendants bore on their banners.
of Mona stands;
In glittering arms and glory dressed,
High he rears his ruby crest;
There the thundering strokes begin,
There the press and there the din:
Talymalfra's rocky shore
Echoing to the battle's roar.
Checked by the torrent-tide of blood,
Backward Meinai rolls his flood,
While, heaped his master's feet around,
Prostrate warriors gnaw the ground.
Where his glowing eye balls turn
Thousand banners round him burn;
Where he points his purple spear
Hasty, hasty rout is there;
Marking, with indignant eye,
Fear to stop and Shame to fly:
There Confusion, Terrour's child,
Conflict fierce and Ruin wild,
Agony, that pants for breath,
Despair and Honorable Death.
ODE XI. FOR MUSIC.
Performed in the Senate House, Cambridge, July, 1, 1769, at the Installation
of his Grace Augusius-Henry-Fitzroy) Duke of Grasten, Chancellor of the
university.
I.
" Hence, avaunt! ('it is holy ground,)
" Comus and his midnight crew,
" And Ignorance with looks profound,
" And dreaming Sloth of pallid hue,
" Mad Sedition's cry profane,
" Servitude that hugs her chain,
" Nor in these consecrated bowers,
" Let painted Flattery hide her serpent train in flowers;
" Nor Envy base, nor creeping Gain,
" Dare the Muse's walk to stain,
" While bright-ey'd Science watches round:
" Hence, away!. it is holy ground."
II.
From yonder realms of empyrean day
Bursts on my ear the indignant lay;
There fits the sainted sage, the bard divine,
The few whom Genius gave to shine
Through every unborn age and undiscovered clime.
Rapt in celestial transport they,
Yet hither often a glance from high
They send of tender sympathy,
To bless the place where on their opening soul
First the genuine ardour stole.
'Twas Milton struck the deep-ton'd shell,
And, as the choral warblings round him swell,
Meek. Newton's self bends from his state sublime,
And nods his hoary head, and listens to the rhyme.
III.
" Ye brown o'er-arching groves!
" That contemplation loves,
" Where willowy Camus lingers with delight,
" Often at the blush of dawn
" I trod your level lawn,
" Often wooed the gleam of Cynthia silver-bright
" In cloisters dim, far from the haunts of Folly,
" With Freedom by my side and soft-ey'd Melancholy."
IV.
But hark! the portals sound, and pacing forth,
With solemn steps and slow,
High potentates, and dames of royal birth,
And mitred fathers, in long order go:
Great Edward, with the Lilies on his brow Edward III. who added the Flour de
lie of France to the arms of England. He founded Trinity-college.

From haughty Gallia torn,
And sad Chatillon, Mary de Valentia, Countess of Pembroke, daughter of Gay de
Chatillon, Comte de St. Paul in France, of whom tradition says, that her
husband, Audemarde de Valentie, Earl of Pembroke, was slain at a tournament on
the day of him nuptials. She was the foundress of Pembroke College or Hall,
under the name of A^^^ M^^iae de Valentia.
on her bridal morn,
That wept her bleeding love, and princely Clare, Elizabeth de Burg, Countless
of Clare, was wife of John de Burg, son and heir of the Earl of Ulster, and
daughter of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, by John of Acres, daughter of
Edward I. hence the (...) gives her the epithet of princely. She founded
Clare-hall.

And Anjou's Heroine, Margaret of Anjou, wife of Henry VI. foundress of Queen's
College. The Poet has celebrated her conjugal fidelity in a former ode.
and the paler Rose, Elizabeth Widville, wife of Henry IV. (hence called the
paler Rose, as being of the house of York.) She added to the foundation of
Margaret of Anjou.

The rival of her crown, and of her woes,
And either Henry Henry VI. and VII. the former the founder of King's, the
latter the greatest benefactor to Trinity-college.
there,
The murdered saint, and the majestic lord,
That broke the bonds of Rome.
(The tears, their little triumphs over,
Their human passions now no more,
Save charity, that glows beyond the tomb,)
All that on Granta's fruitful plain
Rich streams of regal bounty poured,
And bad those awful fanes and turrets rise
To hail their Fitzroy's festal morning come;
And thus they speak in soft accord
The liquid language of the skies:
V.
" What is grandeur, what is power?
" Heavier toil, superior pain,
" What the bright reward we gain?
" The grateful memory of the good.
" Sweet is the breath of vernal shower,
" The bee's collected treasures sweet,
" Sweet Music's melting fall, but sweeter yet
" The still small voice of Gratitude."
VI.
Foremost, and leaning from her golden cloud,
The venerable Marg'ret Countess of Richmond and Derby, the mother of Henry
VII. foundress of St. John's and Christ's Colleges.
see!
" Welcome, my noble son!" she cries aloud,
" To this thy kindred train and me:
" Pleased in thy lineaments we trace
" A Tudor's The Countess was a Beaufort, and married to a Tudor; hence the
application of this line to the Duke of Grafton, who claims descent from both
these families
fire, a Beaufort's grace.
" Thy liberal heart, thy judging eye,
" The flower unheeded shall descry,
" And bid it round heaven's altars shed
" The fragrance of its blushing head;
" Shali raise from earth the latent gem
" To glitter on the diadem.
VII.
" Lo! Granta waits to lead her blooming band;
" Not obvious, not obtrusive, she
" No vulgar praise no venal incense flings,
" Nor dares with courtly tongue refined
" Profane thy inborne royalty of mind:
" She reveres herself and thee.
" With modest pride to grace thy youthful brow
" The laureate wreath Lord Teasurer Burleigh was Chancellor of the University
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
that Cecil wore she brings,
" And to thy just thy gentle hand
" Submits the fasces of her sway;
" While spirits blessed above, and men below,
" Join with glad voice the loud symphonious lay.
VIII.
" Through the wild waves, as they roar,
" With watchful eye, and dauntless mien,
" Thy steady course of honor keep,
" Nor fear the rock nor seek the shore:
" The star of Brunswick smiles serene,
" And gilds the horrors of the deep."
MISCELLANIES.
A LONG STORY.
Advertisement.
MR. GRAY'S Elegy, previous to its publication, was handed about in MS and had,
amongst other admirers, the Lady Cobham, who resided in the mansionhouse at
Stoke-Pogeis. The performance inducing her to with far the Author'
acquaintance, Lady Schaub and Miss speed, then at her house, undertook to
introduce her to it. These two ladies waited upon the Author at his aunt's
solitary habitation, where he at that time resided, and not finding him at
home, they left a card behind them. Mr. Gray, surprised at such a compliment,
returned the visit; and as the beginning of this intercourse bore some
appearance of romance, he gave the humorous and lively account of it which the
Long story contains.

IN Britain's isle, no matter where,
An ancient pile of building stands; The mansion house at Stoke-Pogeis, then in
the possession of Vifcountess Cobham. The style of building which we now call
Queen Elizabeth's, is here admirably described, both with regard to its
beauties and defects; and the third and fourth stanzas delineate the fantastic
manners of her time with equal truth and humor. The house formerly belonged to
the Earls of Huntingdon and the family of Hatton.

The Huntingdons and Hattons there
Employed the power of Fairy hands.
To raise the ceiling's fretted height,
Each panel in achievements clothing,
Rich windows that exclude the light,
And passages that lead to nothing.
Full often within the spacious walls,
When he had fifty winters over him,
My grave Lord Keeper Sir Christopher Hatton, promoted by Queen Elizabeth for
his graceful person and fine dancing. -- Brawls were a sort of a figure-dance
then in vogue, and probably deemed as elegant as our modern cotillons, or still
more modern quadrilles.
led the brawls:
The seal and maces danced before him.
His bushy beard and shoe-strings green,
His high-crown'd hat and satin doublet,
Moved the stout heart of England's queen,
Though Pope and Spaniard could not trouble it.
What, in the very first beginning?
Shame of the versifying tribe!
Your history whither are you spinning?
Can you do nothing but describe?
A house there is (and that is enough)
From whence one fatal morning issues
A brace of warriors, The reader is already apprized who these ladies were; the
two descriptions are prettily contrasted; and nothing can be more happily
turned than the compliment to Lady Cobham in the eighth stanza.
not in buff,
But rustling in their silks and tissues.
The first came cap-a-pee from France,
Her conquering destiny fulfilling,
Whom meaner beauties eye askance,
And vainly ape her art of killing.
The other Amazon kind Heaven
Had armed with spirit, wit, and satire;
But Cobham had the polish given,
And tipp'd her arrows with goodnature.
To celebrate her eyes, her air --
Coarse panegyrics would but tease her?
Melissa is her nom de guerre;
Alas! who would not wish to please her?
With bonnet blue and capuchine,
And aprons long, they hid their armor,
And veiled their weapons bright and keen
In pity to the country farmer.
Fame, in the shape of Mr. P^t. I have been told that this gentleman, a
neighbor and acquaintance of Mr. Gray's in he country, was much displeased at
the liberty here taken with his name, yet surely without any great reason.

(By this time all the parish know it)
Had told that thereabouts there lurked
A wicked imp they call a Poet,
Who prowl'd the country far and near,
Bewitched the children of the peasants,
Dried up the cows and lamed the deer,
And sucked the eggs and kill the pheasants.
My Lady heard their joint petition,
Swore by her coronet and ermine,
She Would issue out her high commission
To rid the manor of such vermin.
The heroines undertook the task;
Through lanes unknown, over styles they ventured,
Rapp'd at the door, nor stayed to ask,
But bounce into the parlour entered.
The trembling family they daunt;
They flirt, they sing, they laugh, they tattle,
Rummage his mother, pinch his aunt,
And up stairs in a whirlwind rattle.
Each hole and cupboard they explore,
Each creek and cranny of his chamber,
Run hurry scurry round the floor,
And over the bed and tester clamber;
Into the drawers and china pry,
Papers and books, a huge imbroglio!
Under a tea-cup he might lie,
Or creas'd like dog's-ears in a folio.
On the first marching of the troops,
The Muses, hopeless of his pardon,
Conveyed him underneath their hoops
To a small closet in the garden.
So Rumor says; (who will believe?)
But that they lest the door a jar,
Where safe, and laughing in his sleeve,
He heard the distant din of war.
Short was his joy: he little knew
The power of magic was no fable;
Out of the window wisk they flew,
But left a spell upon the table.
The words too eager to unriddle,
The Poet felt a strange disorder;
Transparent birdlime formed the middle,
And chains invisible the border.
So cunning was the apparatus,
The powerful pot-hooks did so move him,
That will-he, nill-he, to the great house
He went as if the devil drove him.
Yet on his way (no sign of grace,
For folks in fear are apt to pray)
To Phoebus he preferred his case,
And begged his aid that dreadful day.
The godhead would have backed his quarrel:
But with a blush, on recollection,
Owned that his quiver and his laurel
Against four such eyes were no protection.
The court was sat, the culprit there;
Forth from their gloomy mansions creeping,
The Lady Janes and Joans repair,
And from the gallery stand peeping:
Such as in silence of the night
Come (sweep) along some winding entry,
(Styack The Housekeeoer.
has often seen the sight)
Or at the chapel-door stand sentry;
In peaked hoods and mantles tarnish'd,
Sour visages enough to scare ye,
High dames of honor once that garnished
The drawing room of fierce Queen Mary!
The peeress comes: the audience stare,
And doff their hats with due submission;
She curt'sies, as she takes her chair,
To all the people of condition.
The Bard with many an artful fib
Had in imagination fenced him,
Disproved the arguments of Squib, The Steward.

And all that Grooms Groom of the chamber.
could urge against him.
But soon his rhetoric forsook him,
When he the solemn hall had seen;
A sudden fit of ague shook him;
He stood as mute as poor Macleane. A famous highwayman, hanged the week before.

Yet something he was heard to mutter,
" How in the park, beneath an old-tree,
" (Without design to hurt the butter,
" Or any malice to the poultry,)
" He once or twice had penned a sonnet;
" Yet hoped that he might save his bacon;
" Numbers would give their oaths upon it,
" He never was for a conj'rer taken."
The ghostly prudes, with hagged Hagged, i. e. the face of a witch or hag. The
epithet ha^ard has been sometimes mistaken as conveying the same idea, but it
means a very different thing, viz. wild and farouche, and is taken from an
(...)reclaimed hawk called an hagard.
face,
Already had condemned the sinner:
My Lady rose, and with a grace --
She smiled, and bid him come to dinner. Here the story finishes; the
exclamation of the ghosts, which follows, is characteristic of the Spanish
manners of the age when they are suposed to have lived; and the 500 stanzas
said to be lost, may be imagined to contain the remainder of their long winded
(...)

" Jesu-Maria! Madam Bridget,
" Why, what can the Viscountess mean!"
Cried the square hoods, in woeful fidget;
" The times are altered quite and clean!
" Decorum's turned to mere civility!
" Her air and all her manners show it;
" Commend me to her affability!
" Speak to a Commoner and Poet!"
[ Here 500 stanzas are lost.]

And so God save our noble king,
And guard us from long-winded lubbers,
That to eternity would sing,
And keep my lady from her rubbers.
ELEGY. WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.
THE curfew tolls -- Iquilla di lontano
Che paia'l giorno pianger, che si muore.
Dante, Pur at. 1. 8.
the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd wind slowly over the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such as, wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care;
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath-their sturdy stroke!
Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth, ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour:
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye Proud! impute to these the fault,
If Memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where, through the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault,
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can Honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flattery sooth the dull cold ear of death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hands that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstacy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of Time, did never unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little tyrant of his fields withstood,
Some mute inglorious Milton, here may rest,
Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their lot forbad; nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind;
The struggling pangs of conscious Truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous Shame,
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife, This part of the Elegy differs
from the first copy. The following stanza was excluded with the other
alterations: Hark! how the sacred calm, that breathes around.
Bids every fierce tumultuous passion cease,
In still small accents whispering from the ground,
A grateful earnest of eternal peace.


Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones, from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered Muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply,
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who to dumb Forgetfulness a prey
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
Even in our ashes Ch'i veggio nel pensier, dolce mio fuoco,
Fredda una lingua, et due begil occhi chiufi
Rimaner croppo noi pien di saville.
Petrarch. Son. 169.
live their wonted fires.
For thee, who, mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Do in those lines their artless tale relate,
If chance, by lonely Contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
" Often have we seen him, at the peep of dawn,
" Brushing with hasty steps the dews away,
" To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
" There, at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
" That wreathes its old fantastic root so high,
" His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
" And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
" Hard by yon' wood, now smiling as in scorn,
" Mutt'ring his wayward fancies, he would rove;
" Now drooping, woeful wan! like one forlorn,
" Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
" One morn I missed him on the custom'd hill,
" Along the heath, Mr. Gray forgot, when he displaced, by the preceding
stanza, his beautiful description of the evening haunt, the reference to it
which he had here left: Him have we seen the greenwood fide along,
While over the heath we hy'd, our labor done,
Of^ as the woodlark pip'd her farewell song,
With wistful eyes pursue the setting sun.

and near his favorite tree;
" Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
" Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood, was he:
" The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
" Slow through the church way-path we saw him borne:
" Approach, and read (for thou can read) the lay
" Engraved on the stone beneath yon' aged thorn:" In the early editions the
following lines were added, but the parenthesis was thougth too long; There
scattered often, the earliest of the year,
By hands unseen, are showers of vi'lets found;
The redbreast loves to build and warble there,
And little footsteps lightly print the ground.


THE EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of Earth,
A youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown;
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere;
Heaven did recompense as largely send:
He gave to misery all he had, a tear;
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No further seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose -- Pavento speme. Petrarch, Son.
114.

The bosom of his Father and his God.
EPITAPH ON MRS. MARY CLARKE This lady, the wise of Dr. Clarke, physician at
Epsom, died April 27th, 1757, and is buried in the church of Eeckenham, Kent.

LO! where this silent marble weeps,
A friend, a wife, a mother, sleeps;
A heart, within whole sacred cell
The peaceful Virtues loved to dwell:
Affection warm, and faith sincere,
And soft humanity were there.
In agony, in death, resigned,
She felt the wound she left behind.
Her infant image here below
Sits smiling on a father's woe,
Whom what awaits while yet he strays
Along the lonely vaie of days?
A pang, to secret sorrow dear,
A sigh, an unavailing tear,
Till time shall every grief remove
With life, with memory, and with love.
STANZAS, SUGGESTED BY A VIEW OF THE SEAT AND RUINS AT KINGSGATE, IN KENT, 1766.
OLD, and abandoned by each venal friend,
Here H^d took, the pious resolution,
To smuggle a few years, and strive to mend
A broken character and constitution.
On this congenial spot he fixed his choice;
Earl Goodwin trembled for his neighboring sand:
Here sea-gulls scream, and cormorants rejoice,
And mariners, though shipwrecked, fear to land.
Here reign the blustering north and blasting east,
No tree is heard to whisper, bird to fing;
Yet nature could not furnish cut the feast,
Art he invokes new terrors still to bring.
Now mouldering fanes and battlements arise,
Turrets and arches nodding to their fall,
Unpeopled monasteries delude our eyes,
And mimic desolation covers all.
" Ah!" said the sighing peer, "had B^te been true,
Nor G^'s, nor B^d's promises been vain,
Far other scenes than this had graced our view,
And realiz'd the horrors which we feign.
" Purged by the sword, and purified by fire,
Then had we seen proud London's hated walls:
Owls should have hooted in St. Peter's choir,
And foxes stunk and litter'd in St. Paul's."
TRANSLATION FROM STATIUS.
THIRD in the labors of the disk came on,
With sturdy step and slow, Hippomedon;
Artful and strong he poised the well known weight,
By Phlegy as warned, and fired by Muestheus' fate,
That to avoid and this to emulate.
His vigorous arm he tried before he flung,
Braced all his nerves and every sinew strung,
Then with a tempest's whirl and wary eye
Pursued his cast, and hurled the orb on high;
The orb on high, tenacious of its course
True to the mighty arm that gave it force,
Far overleaps all bound, and joys to see
Its ancient lord secure of victory:
The theatre's green height and woody wall
Tremble ere it precipitates its fall;
The ponderous mass sinks in the cleaving ground,
While vales and woods and echoing hills rebound.
As when from AEtna's smoking summit broke,
The eyeless Cyclops heaved the craggy rock,
Where Ocean frets beneath the dashing oar,
And parting surges round the vessel roar;
'Twas there he aimed the meditated harm,
And scarce Ulysses 'scap'd his giant arm.
A tiger's pride the victor bore away,
With native spots and artful labor gay,
A shining border round the margin rolled,
And calmed the terrors of his claws in gold.
Cambridge, May 8th, 1736.
GRAY OF HIMSELF.
TOO poor for a bribe, and too proud to importune,
He had not the method of making a fortune;
Could love and could hate, so was thought something odd;
No very great wit, he believed in a God:
A post or a pension he did not desire,
But left church and state to Charles Townshend and Squire.
POEMATA.
ELEGIAC VERSES Occasioned by the Sight of the Plains where the Battle of
Trebiae was fought.
QUA Trebie glaucas falices intersecat unda,
Arvaque Romany nobilitata malis.
Vilus adhuc amnis veteri de clade rubere,
Et suspirantes ducere maestus aquas;
Maurorumque ala, et nigrae increbrescere turmae,
Et pulsa Ausonidum ripa sonare fuga.
DESCRIPTION OF THE Sudden rising of Monte Nuovo, near Puzzoli, and of the
Destruction which attended it. See Sandy's Travels, B. iv. p. 275 -- 278.

NEC procul infelix fe tollit in aethera Gaurus,
Prospiciens vitreum lugenti vertice pontum:
Tristior ille diu, et veteri desuetus oliva
Gaurus, pampineaeque eheu jam nescius umbrae;
Horrendi tam saeva premit vicinia montis,
Attonitumque urget latus, exuritque ferentem.
Nam fama est olim, media, dum rura silebant
Nocte, Deo victa, et molli perfusa quiet,
Infremuisse aequor ponti auditamque per omnes
Late tellurem surdum immugire cavernas:
Quo sonitu nemora aita tremunt; tremit excita tuto
Parthenopaea sinu, flammantisque ora Vesevi.
At subito se aperire solum, vastosque recessus
Tandere sub pedibus, nigraque voragine fauces;
Pum piceas cinerum glomerare sub aethere nubes
Vorticibus rapidis, ardentique imbre procellam.
Praecipites fugere ferae, perque avia long
Sylvarum fugit pastor, juga per deserta,
Ah, miser! increpitans saepe alta voce per umbram
Nequicquam natos, creditque audire fequentes.
Atque ille excelso rupis de vertice solus
Respectans notasque domos, et dulcia regna,
Nil usquam videt infelix praeter mare tristi
Lumine percussum, et pallentes sulphur campos,
Fumumque, flammasque, rotataque turbine saxa.
Quin ubi detonuit fragor, et lux reddita coelo;
Maestos confluere agricolas, passuque videres
Tandem iterum timido deserta requirere tacta:
Sperantes, si forte oculis si forte darentur
Uxorum cineres, miserorum veossa parentum
(Tenuia, sed tanti saltem solatia luctus)
Una colligere et justa componere in urna.
Uxorum nusquam cineres, nusquam ossa parentum
(Spem miseram!) assuetosve Lares, Tautrura videbunt.
Quippe ubi planities campi diffusa jacebat;
Mons novus: ille supercilium, frontemque favilla
Incanum ostentans, ambustis cautibus, aequor
Subjectum, stragemque suam, maesta arva, minaci
Despicit imperio, soloque in littore regnat.
Hinc infame loci nomen, multosque per annos
Immemor antiquae laudis, nescire labores
Vomeris, et nullo tellus revirescere cultu.
Non avium colles, non carmine matutino
Pastorum resonare; adeo undique dirus habebat
Informs late horror agros saltuque vacantes.
Saepius et long detorquens navita proram
Monstrabat digito littus, saevaeque revolvens
Funera narrabat noctis, veteremque ruinam.
Montis adhuc facies manet hirta atque aspera saxis:
Sed furor extinctus jamdudum, et flamma quievit,
Quae nascenti aderat; seu forte bituminis atri
Defluxere olim rivi, atque effoeta lacuna
Pabula sufficere ardori, viresque rerusat;
Sive in visceribus meditans incendia jam nunc
(Horrendum) arcanis glomerat genti esse futurae
Exitio, sparsos tacitusque recolligit ignes.
Raro per clivos haud secius ordine vidi
Canescentem oleam: longum post tempus amicti
Vite virent tumulti; patriamque revisere gaudens
Bacchus in assuetis tenerum caput exerit arvis
Vix tandem, infidoque audet se credere coelo.
A FAREWELL TO FLORENCE.
* * OH Faesula amaena
Frigoribus juga, nec nimium spirantibus auris!
Alma quibus Tusci Pallas decus Apennini
Esse dedit, glaucaque sua canescere sylva!
Non ego vos posthac Arni de valle videbo
Porticibus circum, and candenti cincta corona
Villarum long nitido consurgere dorso,
Antiquamve AEdem, et veteres praeferre Cupressus
Mirabor, tectisque super pendentia tecta.
IMITATION OF AN Italian Sonnet of Signor Abbate Buondelmonte.
SPESSO Amor sotto la forma
D'amista ride, e s'asconde:
Poi (...) mischia, e si confonde
Con lo sdegno, e col rancor.
In pietade ei si transforma;
Par trastullo, e par dispetto;
Ma nel fuo diverso aspetto
Sempr'egi, e l'istesso Amor.
Lusit amicitiae interdam velatus amictu,
Et been composita vest fefellit Amor.
Mox irae assumsit cultus, faciemque minantem,
Inque odium,versus, versus et in lacrymas:
Ludentem suge, nec lacrymanti, aut creed furenti
Idem est dissimili semper in ore Deus.
CONTENTS.
Page Life of the Author, etc. v. Ode to the Memory of Mr. Gray, by J. T. 24
ODES.
Ode I. on the Spring, 27 Ode II. on the Death of a Favorite Cat, 28 Ode III.
on a distant Prospect of Eton College, 30 Ode IV. on Adversity, 33 Ode V. the
Progress of Poesy, 35 Ode VI. the Bard, 40 Ode VII. the Fatal Sisters, 46 Ode
VIII. the Descent of Odin, 49 Ode IX. the Death of Hoel, 52 Ode X. the Triumphs
of Owen, 53 Ode XI. for Music, 54
MISCELLANIES.
A Long Story, 58 Elegy. Written in a Country Churchyard, 62 Epitaph on Mrs.
Clarke, 66 Stanzas, suggested by a View of the Seat and Ruins at Kingsgate, in
Kent, 1766, 67 Translation from Statius, ib. Gray of himself, 68 Elegiac Verses
occasioned by the Sight of the Plains, where the Battles of Trebiae was fought,
69 Description of the sudden rising of Monte Nuovo, near Puzzoli, and of the
Destruction which attended it, ib. A Farewell to Florence, 71 Imitation of an
Italian Sonnet of Signor Abbate Buondelmonte, ib.

THE END.

