Mr. WHISTON's LETTER To the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham,
Concerning the ETERNITY OF THE SON of GOD And of the HOLY SPIRIT.

Est Deus Pater omnium Institutor and Creator, solus originem nesciens,
invisibilis, immensus, immortalis, aeternus, unus Deus: cujus neque
magnitudini, neque majestati, neque virtuti quicquam non dixerim praeferri, sed
nec comparari potest. Ex quo, quando ipse voluit, Sermo Filius natus est. --
Accepit Paracletus a Christo quae nunciet: Major ergo jam Paracleto Christus
est: quoniam nec Paracletus a Christo acciperet, nisi minor Christo esset.

Novatian. de Trin.. 31.24. LONDON: Printed for J. SENEX at the Globe in
Salisbury-Court, and W. TAILOR at the Ship in Paternoster Row. 1719.

Mr. WHISTON's LETTER.
MY LORD,
SINCE your Lordship had so very considerable a Share in the late Debates in
the House of Peers, in Opposition to a Clause for the Toleration of the
Christian Religion itself, or of all that believed the Holy Scriptures and the
Common Creed; which I confess I had a great Hand in preparing and recommending,
could it have been admitted; and in Behalf of a new Athanasian Test to be laid
upon Christians; whereby, with the People called Quakers, they were to profess
Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, his Eternal Son, the True God;
and in the Holy Spirit; One God Blessed for evermore: Since your Lordship had
also the like Share in a late heavy Imputation laid on Dr. C -- in the same
House of Peers, for omitting the Holy Spirit in Doxologies; where yet that
Imputation lay harder on my self, nay indeed on St. Paul and all the Apostles
themselves than on Dr. C --: He having only omitted the Holy Spirit in his
Doxologics sometimes, but I, in Imitation of those Apostles, never making him
the direct Object of any Doxology at all. And since your Lordship's Chaplain,
Mr. Seaton, has lately published an Essay on the Eternity of the Son of God,
addressed to the Laity of this City; and written, I must confess, in a cool and
sober Manner; but as it were in Vindication of such your Lordship's
Proceedings: I think it cannot, on all these Accounts, be improper for me, who
so greatly dissent from your Lordship and your Chaplain in these Matters, to
address this Paper to your Lordship, and therein to lay before you and the
Christian World a fair Collection of the sacred and primitive Testimonies
concerning this important Point; I mean, whether God the Father be the only
Eternal Being, the only Eternal God; or whether the Son and Holy Spirit be also
Eternal Beings, or be Coeternal with the Father, as all the real Trinitarians
assert. I say real Trinitarians only: for as for the nominal or modal
Trinitarians, which also include the Sabellians and Socinians, and are now the
most numerous, who say the Son and Spirit are not really different from, but
are, or make up, together with the Father, the One Eternal God, there is no
room for the Question among them at all: It being the absurdest Thing in the
World to suppose that God is not coeternal to himself, though the Expression be
somewhat extraordinary. Now, in order to satisfy your Lordship and the World in
this Matter, I shall beg Leave at present to wave the common Method of
disputing, and arguing, and pleading, and drawing uncertain Consequences on
either Side, and shall set down, instead thereof, a Collection of those
original Texts and Testimonies which relate to this important Doctrine; that so
every one may, with his own natural common Sense and Judgment, and without Fear
of being imposed upon by modern Inferences, impartially pronounce on which Side
the superior Evidence lies. Your Lordship well knows that Truth is best
discovered by the open, fair, and solemn Way of Proceedings in Courts of
Justice; where the Evidence for Facts is still inquired into and examined from
Eye and Ear-Witnesses, or from the authentic Records themselves produced in
Court; where the Judges determine of those Facts entirely by that original
Evidence; and where all that the Pleaders allege about those Facts goes for
nothing, any farther than it is thus proved. Now, what was the Doctrine of our
Blessed Savior and his Apostles, or what was the Christian Faith in this
Matter, is certainly at this Day an ancient Fact; and no otherwise to be now
known but by ancient Evidence, primitive Witnesses, and original Records still
remaining. To these therefore do I solemnly Appeal in the present Question; and
by these and these only do I resolve to be determined therein. And this Method
is so evidently fair and reasonable, that I cannot but hope that your Lordship
and all equitable Enquirers will also approve of it, and be willing to be
determined by it. Nor do I mean this with Regard to the present Doctrine, or
the real and strict Coeternity of the Son and Holy Spirit to the Father only;
but with Regard to all the like controverted Points in Christianity also: which
can, I think, be no other way so authentickly, so satisfactorily, and so
peaceably determined among Christians as by this Procedure; especially while in
this Method the Meaning of doubtful Words and Phrases are to be stated no
otherwise than by the ancient Use of the same; and no modern Distinctions or
Evasions unsupported by Antiquity, will be admitted: and where no later
Translations will be of Weight, any farther than they are supported by the
primary Sense of the Original, in the Ages wherein the Books themselves were
written.

I therefore, upon this Occasion, in the most, public and open Manner, in the
Behalf of my self and of others of my Opinion, as to the Points now in Dispute
among us, do, before your Lordship, and before the Christian World, invite all
the sober and learned Athanasians to come into this Proposal; I mean, that
omitting all the Passions, the Tricks, the Subtilties, the Distinctions and
Evasions of the Pleaders or Disputers of this World, they will join with us in
a calm, a fair, an authentic, a friendly, and a Christian Examination of these
Points in the Bible and primitive Antiquity; and in drawing up, after such an
Examination, an upright, impartial, and full Collection of all the ancient
Texts and Testimonies, before the Days of Athanasius, which concern the same;
to be by joint Consent laid before the World; with the bare summing up the
Evidence on both Sides, as the Judges themselves do in their Courts, without
any other Comments or Colors of our own whatsoever.

Thus, for Example, the whole Christian Church, My Lord, did ever, and does
still unanimously own, that there is but One, Eternal, Omnipotent, Invisible,
and Almighty God; the original Cause and Creator of all other Beings: While
many of the Trinitarians now affirm, that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
taken together, are that One God; and we, on the other Side, assert that God
the Father, and He alone, is that One God. Here, My Lord, we insist, that the
present Trinitarians may produce all those original Texts of Scripture, all
those ancient Creeds, and all those primitive Testimonies, which affirm the
former: and we will be obliged to produce, in the same Manner, all those
original Texts of Scripture, all those ancient Creeds, and all those primitive
Testimonies which affirm the latter: And this is desired as to both Sides,
without the Admission of any novel Distinctions, Evasions, or Inferences
whatsoever: that so Christian People may have the Cause wholly before them, and
may be enabled to determine sairly and impartially on which Side the superior
Evidence appears to be; by which superior Evidence all certainly ought to be
guided in such Matters. And the like Procedure I would recommend in all
parallel Cases whatsoever.

And indeed, My Lord, this seems to me to be the only honest and Christian
Method of disentangling these and the like Points from the Sophistry of
captious Arguments, Replies, and Rejoinders, with which the Writers of
Controversy do on all Sides, more or less, perplex and puzzle, but not properly
satisfy their Readers. And this Method, I confess, My Lord, I have had
principally in my Eye from the very Beginning of my Concern in the present
Controversy; though the Pamphlets written against me have sometimes turned me
from that my main Design, and, as it were, forced me, in some Degree, to comply
with the common Method. I now therefore, My Lord, intend to reassume what I at
first proposed to my self; and, as I have lately, which Your Lordship will see
by the enclosed, laid the State of the Old Christian Doxologies before the
World, exactly as I found it in the New Testament, and in the most early
Antiquity; without pretending, from any Reasonings of my own, to introduce one
single Form, different from what I there found upon Record; So do I here design
to lay before Your Lordship and the World, with equal Fairness, what I meet
with in the first Ages concerning this important Point of the strict Coeternity
of the Son and Holy Spirit to the Father. I say, the strict Coeternity only;
for as to the Preexistence of our Savior before all Time, and all Ages, even
those the Ancients called Eternal Times, with St. Paul, Tit. I. 2.
or before the World with all its Creatures and Ages began, as our Version well
renders that Passage, this is not the Question. Heb. I. 2.
It being allowed on both Sides that this World, with all its Creatures and
Ages whatsoever, were made, under the Father, by the Son; who must therefore,
of Necessity, be before the same, without the least Consequence to be thence
deduced that he was therefore really eternal, or truly coeternal with his
Father.

N.B. I do not quote the smaller Epistles of Ignatius, nor some pretended
Passages out of Hippolytus, Dionysius Alexandrinus, etc. they being liable to
too many Objections as to their Genuineness, to bear any Weight in this or any
such Controversy whatsoever.

I begin with those Texts of Scripture which Your Lordship's Chaplain, Mr.
Seaton, has cited for the Eternity of the Son: and shall set them down both as
they stand in our English Bible, and as they more authentickly appear in the
Septuagint Version, which alone was made Use of by Christ and his Apostles. To
which I shall add what other Passages occur in the Bible or earliest Antiquity,
that seem most to favor the same Eternity, till the very Days of Athanasius.

Prove. viii 22-25.
The Lord possessed me; [created me, LXXII.] the Beginning of his Ways, before
his Works of Old. I was set up from everlasting; [ from the Age, or, Beginning
of the World. LXXII.] from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was: When there
were no Depths I was brought forth; when there were no Fountains abounding with
Water: Before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills was I brought forth.

See Ps. XC. 1, 2. of the God of Israel. Lord, thou have been our
Dewlling Place in Generation and Generation. Before the Mountains were brought
forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth and the World, even from everlasting
to everlasting, [from the Age to the Age; or from the Beginning of the World to
the End of the World, LXXII.] thou art God.

Is. ix. 6.
The everlasting Father: [the Father of the future Age. LXXII.]

See Dan. vii. 9. of the God of Israel: The Ancient of Days.

Mic. V. 2
His Goings-forth have been from of Old, from the Days of Eternity, [from the
Days of the Age, or of the Beginning of the World. LXXII.]

Joh. I. 12.
In the Beginning was the Word -- The same was in the Beginning with God.

XVII. 5.
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which I
had with thee before the World was.

Col. I. 15, 17.
He is before all Things.

II. 9.
In him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead, [or divine Power, Romans I. 20.]
bodily.

Heb. I. 3.
The Brightness of his Father's Glory; and the express Image of his Person.

XIII. 8.
Jesus Christ, the same Yesterday, and to Day, and for ever.

Apoc. I. 17.
I am the first and the last: I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold I
am alive for evermore.

Apoc. I. 11.
I am Alpha and Omega; the first and the last.

II. 8.11.
These Things says the first and the last; which was dead and is alive.

[See Isaiah xliv. 6. Of the God of Israel: Thus says the Lord, the King of
Israel; and his Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts: I am the first, and I am the last;
and besides me there is no God. xlviii. 12. Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and
Israel, my called, I am He. I am the first, I also am the last. Apoc. xi. 17.
We give Thanks to thee, O Lord God Almighty, which was, and which is, and which
is to come. And so Chap. i. 4.8.]

Heb. VI. 3.
Without Father, without Mother, without Genealogy, having neither Beginning of
Days, nor End of Life; but being made like unto the Son of God, abides a
Priest continually.

1 John i. 1.2.
That which was from the Beginning: -- That eternal Life which was with the
Father.

II. 13.
I write unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the
Beginning. --

v. 14.
I wrote unto you Fathers, because you have known him that is from the
Beginning.

Martyr. Polycarp.. 14.
With the (...) eternal and heavenly Jesus Christ. [In Eusebius's Copy,
confirmed by the old Latin Version, and the parallel Language of Polycarp
elsewhere, by the eternal High Priest, Jesus Christ.]

Recogn. i.. 24.
There ever was, and is, and will be that Being, from which the first begotten
Will derives its Eternity.

. 43.
Who is the eternal Christ.

Just. Dial. p. 323.
Christ is the eternal Priest of God. [(...).]

Iren. ii. 18.
These Heretics transfer the Manner of Emission of the Word of a Man, which he
speaks, unto the eternal Word of God.

43.
Thou art not unmade, O Man; nor did thou always co-exist with God, as did
his own [or his nearest] Word.

55.
The Son, who ever co-existed with the Father, did always, in old Time, and
from the Beginning, reveal his Father.

iii. 20.
Being ever with the Father.

Iren. iv. 37.
His Word and his Wisdom are ever with him, his Son, and his Spirit. -- That
the Word, that is the Son, was always with the Father we have largely
demonstrated.

Clem. Alex. Protrept. p. 74, 75.
If thou will, be thou initiated: And thou shall be of a Chorus with the
Angels, about the unbegotten, and unperishable, and the only true God. While
God the Word joins with us in our Hymns, [or, He joining with us in our Hymns,
who is God the Word.] He is (...) eternal: The One Jesus, the great High Priest
of that One God, who is his Father, prays for Men, and exhorts them.

Hymn. ad Calcem. P^d. iii.
He is the perpetual Word, immense (...) eternal Light.

Council of Antioch. Bibl. P. P. Tom. ii.
We believe the Son, who was ever with the Father, did fulfill his Father's
Will, for the Creation of the Universe.

The singular, and (...) eternal Generation of the only begotten Son.

Eusebius Eccles. Theolog. i. 12. ii. 12.
It Is manifest that the only begotten Son was with God his Father; being
present and together with him always, and at all Times.

Demonst. Evang. iv. 1.
He is elder than all Time, and all Ages.

C. 3.
That the Son was begotten, not as having for certain Times not been, and then
being made; but being before all Ages, and still before them; and being always
present, as a Son with his Father: But not being unbegotten, but begotten of
the unbegotten Father: Being the only begotten, the Word, and God of God.

V. 1.
The Son subsisted from endless Ages, or rather before all Ages; being with,
being always with his Father, as light with the luminous Body.

De laud. Constantin. C. 1.
The Prae-existing only begotten Word, who is over all, and before all, and
after all, the great High Priest of the Great God, the ancientest Being of all
Time, and of all Ages.

C. 2.
The only begotten Word of God, who reigns with his Father, from
beginningless Ages, [from before the Beginning of the World] to endless and
never ceasing Ages.

In Ps. ii. 7.
This Day have I begotten thee.] This is spoken of his temporary Generation;
for as to his beginningless Generation, [his Generation before the Beginning of
the World;] the same David says, I have begotten thee from the Womb, before the
Morning Star.

Presbyters and Deacons of Alexandria. Vid. infra.
God begat his Son before eternal Times.

[ N.B. These Passages of Eusebius, and of the Alexandrian Presbyters and
Deacons, seem, in our modern Language, to bid the fairest for a real Eternity
of the Son, of any in all Christian Antiquity: Yet is it very plain and
evident, from many other Passages, that all of them were utterly against this
proper Co-eternity of the Son with the Father; and even Eusebius only for the
Metaphysick or potential Eternity before the Son's Generation, as we shall see
hereafter.]

The Texts and Testimonies for the original voluntary Generation and Creation
of the Son of God before the World began; and against his Co-eternity with the
Father: Taken chiefly out of my Primitive Christianity Revived. Vol. iv. Artic.
vi.
Solomon.] Prove. viii. 22. etc.
THE Lord created me, the Beginning of his Ways, for his Works: Before the
World he founded me: In the Beginning, before he made the Earth, before the
Fountains of Waters came, before the Mountains were fastened: He begat me
before all the Hills.

Son of Sirach.] Eccl. i. 4.
Wisdom has been created before all Things; and the Understanding of Prudence
from the Beginning of the World. -- The Lord created her, etc.

v. 9.
Then the Creator of all Things gave me a Commandment; and he that created me
caused my Tabernacle to rest. -- He created me before the World began, from the
Beginning; and I shall not fail to the End of the World.

Philo] De temulent. p. 244.
God created me the first of his Works; and before the World began did he found
me. [See what this Philo says of the first begotten Word of God more largely at
the End of my Comment on the three Epistles of St. John.]

Paul.] Col. i. 15.
Who is the Image of the invisible God: The first born of the whole Creation. [
i. e. the first Being which God created: As all the Parallels show. Matthew. i.
25. Luc. ii. 7. Romans viii. 29. Col. i. 18. Heb. i. 6. xi. 28. xii. 23. Apoc. i.
5.]

Heb. iii. 2.
Christ was faithful to him that made him.

John] Apoc. iii. 14.
These Things says the Amen; the faithful and true Witness; the Beginning of
the Creation of God. [With a plain Allusion to Prove. viii. 22. The Lord created
me the Beginning of his Ways. And note that (...), the Beginning, with a
genitive Case, as here, is never used actively in the whole new Testament. See
all the Places, Matthew. xxiv. 8, 21. Mar. i. 1. x. 6. xiii. 8, 19, John ii. 11.
Philip iv. 15. Heb. iii. 14. v. 12. vi. 1. vii. 3. 1 Pet. iii. 4.]

Peter] Praedicat. Petri. ap. Clem. Alex. Strom. VI. p. 635. p. 644.
Peter, in his Preaching, says, Know ye, therefore, that there is one God, who
made the Beginning of all Things; and has the Power over their End. --
Perpetual, incorruptible, unmade; who made all Things by the Word of his Power,
in the mystical Sense, i. e. of his Son. There is one Unbegotten Being, the
Almighty God; and one Being begotten before the rest also; by whom all Things
were made, and without whom was nothing at all made. For there is, in reality,
but One God, who made the Beginning, [or Principle] of all Things, intimating
his firstborn Son. Peter writes like one that perfectly well underctood that
Expression, In the Beginning [or by the Principle] God made the Heaven and the
Earth. Now this Person is called Wisdom by all the Prophets.

Hermas] Simil. V.. 6.
To whom the Messenger replied, Hearken: That Holy Spirit which was first of
all created did God place in a Body, wherein it should inhabit; that is, in a
chosen Body, which pleased him.

ix. 12.
The Son of God is move ancient than any Creature: Insomuch that he was in
Counsel with his Father at the Creation of the Creatures.

Apostles] Constitut. v. 20.
Concerning him also spoke Solomon, as in his Person, The Lord created me the
Beginning of his Ways for his Works: Before the World he founded me; in the
Beginning, before he made the Earth; before the Fountains of Waters came;
before the Mountains were fastened: He begat me before all the Hills.

vi. 10.
Some of the Heretics say that there are three Gods, without Beginning; some,
that there are two unbegotten Gods.

11.
We [the Apostles] who are the Children of God, and the Sons of Peace, do
preach the holy and right Word of Piety; and declare one only God, the Lord of
the Law and of the Prophets, the Maker of the World, the Father of Christ: Not
a Being that caused himself, or begat himself, as the Heretics suppose; but
(...) eternal, and without Original, and inhabiting Light inaccessible: Not
two, or three, or manifold, but (...) eternally one only, [or, the only eternal
Being.] -- The God and Father of the only Begotten, and of the firstborn of
the whole Creation. One God, the Father of one Son, not of many.

vii. 36.
That we might come into the Remembrance of that Wisdom which was created by
thee: How he submitted to be made a Woman upon our Account, etc.

41.
His only begotten Son, the firstborn of the whole Creation; who, before the
Ages, was begotten by the good Pleasure of the Father.

viii. 12.
Thou did beget him before all Ages by thy Will, thy Power, and thy Goodness,
without any Instrument: The only begotten Son; God the Word; the living Wisdom;
the firstborn of the whole Creation.

viii. 12.
He that was begotten before Time, was born in Time. Vide Ignat. ad Polycarp..
3.

41.
Let us dedicate our selves, and one another, (...), to the eternal God,
through that Word which was in the Beginning.

Can. 49.
If any Bishop or Presbyter baptizes into three Beings, without Beginning, --
let him be deprived.

Ignatius] ad Magnes.. 8.
Who is his Word, not pronounced but substantial; for he is not the Voice of
articulate Speech, but a Substance begotten by the divine Power.

Ad Antioch.. 14.
He that is alone Unbegotten preserve you stable in the Spirit, and in the
Flesh; through him who was begotten before the Ages.

Ad Tars.. 6.
And elsewhere [he speaks by Solomon,] the Lord created me the Beginning of his
Ways, for his Works; before the World did he found me, and before all the
Mountains did he beget me.

Author of the Recognitions of Clement] iii.. 8.
He therefore who had no Beginning, that God I have been speaking of, begat the
firstborn of the whole Creation. -- God therefore begat that which we have
learned to call the Workmanship of God; which we may therefore call a Being
begotten, and a Being made, or by the parallel Names. -- And therefore is it
that he is truly and agreeably called a Being begotten, and a Being made, and a
Being created; because his Substance is not any thing Unbegotten.

. 10.
God therefore begat him, without any Change in himself, his Will going before.

. 11.
Whereas therefore there is but one Unbegotten Being, and one Begotten; the
Holy Spirit cannot he called the Son of God, nor his firstborn: For he was
made by a Being which was himself made.

Justin Martyr] Apol. i.. 28.. 31.. 61.. 68.
The Word, which is the first Production of God, without Mixture.

. 31.
Being his Word, and Firstborn, and Power.

. 61.
We have been taught that ^^^ist is the firstborn of God; as we have declared
already.

68.
He is the firstborn to the Unbegotten God.

. 75.
From God the Creator, and his first-begotten Christ.

Apol. ii.. 6.
But his Son, who alone is properly called his Son, the Word, who was with him,
and was begotten by him before the Creatures.

Dialog. cum Tryp. p. 264.
This Christ, the Son of God, who was before the Morning Star, and the Moon.

p. 267.
That this Christ prae-existed, being God before the World began.

p. 276.
Who was God before the World was made.

p. 284, 285.
In the Beginning, before all Creatures, God begat of himself a certain
rational Power, which is called, by the Holy Spirit, the Glory of the Lord;
sometimes the Son, sometimes Wisdom, sometimes an Angel, sometimes God,
sometimes the Lord, and the Word; sometimes he calls himself the General of the
Host, when he appeared in the Form of a Man to Joshua the Son of Nun. And he is
called by all these Names, because of his ministering to his Father's Will; and
because he was begotten voluntarily of the Father. -- But the Production, which
really proceeded from the Father before all Creatures, was with the Father, and
to him did the Father speak, as the Word declares by Solomon: For in the
Beginning, before all Creatures, this very Offspring was produced by God;
which, by Solomon, is styled Wisdom: [alluding to Prove. viii. 22, etc. where
it is said, God created Wisdom, the Beginning (...) his Ways, for his Works.]

p. 287.
Then said Trypho, Let him be owned, by you of the Gentiles, as Lord, and
Christ, and God, as the Scriptures declare; by you, I say, who have all
obtained the Name of Christians from him. But for us, who are the Worshippers
of that God who made him, we stand in no need of such a Confession, nor of such
a Worship.

p. 288.
And that he was before the Sun.

p. 310.
The firstborn of all the Creatures.

p. 323.
He is one that existed before all Things.

p. 326.
Knowing that he is the firstborn of God, and before all Creatures.

p. 327.
When we say he is his Son, we understand that he really existed, and proceeded
from the Father before all Creatures, by his Power and his Will.

p. 354.
He is styled God, because he is the firstborn Son of all creatures.

p. 358.
I said that this Power was begotten of the Father, by his Power and his Will.

p. 359.
The Word declared, that this Production was begotten by the Father absolutely
before all Creatures.

p. 367. Melito]
Christ is the firstborn of the whole Creation.

He was a true God, [or truly God,] before the World began. [ Apud Cave.
Histor. Literar. Part II. p. 33.

N.B. This Melito wrote a Book, now lost, concerning the Creation and
Generation of Christ.

Tatian]. 7.
God was in the Beginning. But we have received this Notion, that this
Beginning was the Power of the Word. For the Lord of the Universe, being he in
from all Things subsist, was alone; if we regard the Creation which was not yet
made: But if we regard this, that all the Power of visible and invisible Beings
subsisted in him, all Things were with him; for with him, in metaphysick
Existence, the Word himself, which was in him, subsisted. Now by his mere Will
the Word came forth. But the Word proceeding from him, who did not thereby
become empty, became the firstborn Work of the Father. Him we know to be the
Beginning of the World.

. 10.
The heavenly Word was made a Spirit by the Father, and the Word from his
rational Power, according to the Image of the Father that begat him.

Theophilus of Antioch] Ad Autolyc. ii. p. 88.
God therefore having his Word inserted in his own Bowels, begat him, with his
Wisdom, by Emission from him, before the Creation of the Universe.

p. 100.
When it pleased God to make whatsoever he had determined, then he begat his
Word, by sending him forth, the firstborn of the whole Creation, etc.

Athenagoras.] Legate.. 38, 39, 40.
If you have a Mind, out of your Depth of Understanding, to consider what this
Son means, I will briefly inform you. He is the first Production of the Father:
Not as a Being made: [out of nothing.] (For God, who from the Beginning was an
eternal Mind, had in himself his Word or Reason, being eternally rational.) But
in such Manner as when all material Beings, of unformed Matter, or Earth, as
their Substratum, had lighter or heavier Parts mixed together, he proceeded out
to them, that they might exist both in Idea and Reality. The prophetic Spirit
also agrees to this account; for, says he, the Lord created me the Beginning of
his Ways, for his Works.

Irenaeus] v. 36.
That his Production, his first-begotten Word, may descend upon his Workmanship.

Tertull.] Adv. Prax.. 5.
They say, indeed, that Genesis, in the Hebrew, begins thus, In the Beginning
God made himself a Son. But suppose that be not certain; yet other Arguments
there are which support my Opinion, taken from the Economy of God, in which he
was before the Constitution of the World, until the Generation of his Son. For
before all Things God was alone, etc.

. 6.
Hearken therefore to Wisdom, as to a second Person created. First, we have
this, The Lord created me the Beginning of his Ways, for his Works; before he
made the Earth, before the Mountains were fastened, nay, he begat me before all
the Hills.

. 7.
This is the complete Nativity of the Word, in his Procession from the Father;
at first created by him, so far as thought, under the Name of Wisdom: The Lord
created me, the Beginning of his Ways.

Adv. Hermog.. 3.
Because God is both a Father and a Judge, yet was he not therefore always a
Father and a Judge, because he was always God. For he could not be a Father,
before he had a Son; nor a Judge, before there was any Sin. Now there was a
Time when there was no Sin, and he had no Son. The former made him a Judge, and
the latter a Father.

Adv. Hermog.. 4.
What other Characteristick is there of God, than Eternity? What other Meaning
is there of Eternity, than to have always been heretofore, and to continue
always in Being hereafter, by that great Privilege of no Beginning and no End?
If this be a Property of God, it must be peculiar to God alone, whose Property
it is. For although there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth;
so far as the Name extends; yet there is but One God the Father, of whom are
all Things, etc.

. 18.
To conclude, As Soon as he perceived Wisdom was necessary for the making of the
World, he presently creates her, and begets her in himself. The Lord says,
Wisdom created me, the Beginning of his Ways, for his Works; before the World
he founded me; before he made the Earth, before the Mountains were fastened: He
begat me before all the Hills.

Clemens Alexan.] ad Gent. p. 52.
Why must I be obliged to declare to you the Mysteries of Wisdom, and the Words
of that wise young Man among the Hebrews. The Lord created me the Beginning of
his Ways for his Works.

Strom. V. p. 591.
They did not perceive that these Things were spoken of the first created
Wisdom of God.

VII. p. 700
Among the Things we know by the Mind is what is ancienter in its Generation,
before Time, and before the Beginning: the Beginning and First Fruits of all
Beings, the Son: from whom we are to learn the supreme Cause, the Father of the
Universe, the most ancient and most beneficent of all Beings, etc.

Ibid. p. 703.
The Son cannot be ever obstructed, as being Lord of all: Especially while he
ministers to the Will of his Good and Almighty Father. Nor can any Envy affect
the Lord, who was, [or was made,] before the Beginning of the World.

Origin.] cont. Cells. p. 238.
They are illuminated by that Wisdom which is the Efflux, or Splendour, of the
eternal Light.

Phot. Bibliothec. Cod. 10. Origen] cont. Cells. V. p. 257.
Clement also in his Hypotyposeis depresses the Son into the Rank of a
Creature, as Photius witnesses.

The Son of God, the Firstborn of the whole Creation, although he seems to have
been incarnate but very lately, yet is he not therefore a late Being: for the
sacred Oracles own him to be the ancientest of all Creatures.

Comment. in Psalm. I. Tom. I. p. 38.
Pray to the Father, the God of the Universe, through our Savior as High
Priest, who is the made God.

In Psalm. I. Edit. Huet. p. 31.
Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee. This is said to the Son by
God; with whom it is always to Day; for there is no Evening with God. I do also
suppose that neither is there any Morning with him: but that a Time coextended
with his unmade and eternal Life, is, if I may so say, that Day, or to Day with
him, in which the Son was made, the Beginning of his Origin being thus not
found, as neither of this Day.

Peri Arch. V. apud Origenian 58.
He is the Firstborn of the whole Creation, a Creature, Wisdom: for Wisdom
herself says, God created me, the Beginning of his own Ways, for his Works.

Ibid.
The Son and Holy Ghost are Creatures.

Cod. p. 42.
Photius assures us, that Origen's Opinion was, that the Son was made by the
Father, and the Spirit by the Son.

Haeres. 64. 4, 5, 8.
Epiphanius says of Origin, that he supposes the Son derived from the Substance
of the Father, but to have been created by him: And again, That it was most
plainly his Doctrine, that the Son of God is a Creature; and that from this
bold Attempt about God it is to be supposed it was, that he declared the Holy
Spirit to be created also: And again, That when Origin says the Son is a made
God, he plainly determines that he is but a Created Being.

Gregory of Neocaes.] Bas. Ep. 64
Basil informs us, that we shall indeed find in Gregory of Naeocaesarea many
Expressions which did then afford the greatest Strength to the Heretics; such
as the Word Creature, and that of a Being, made by God, and the like.

Novatian] de Trin. C. 31.
Before the Son there was nothing but the Father. -- God the Father was
therefore the Ordainer of all Things, and their Creator. He alone is without
original, invisible, immense, immortal, eternal, the One God; to whose
Greatness, or Majesty, or Power, nothing can, I don't say be preferred, but so
much as compared. Of whom, when it pleased the Father, the Word, which is his
Son, was begotten. -- Since therefore he was begotten by the Father, he is
always in the Father: I say always, in such a Sense only, which supposes him
not unbegotten but begotten. But I reckon he who was before all Time, is said
to have been always in the Father; least the Father should not be always a
Father. For the Father is prior to him; since it must needs be, that as he is
his Father, he must be prior to him; because it must needs be, that he who has
no Origin must be before him who has one. -- He proceeded from the Father when
the Father pleased. -- He is certainly before all Things, but after his Father:
making a second Person after his Father, as being his Son.

Cyprian.] Testimon. ad Quirin. I. 1.
In the Proverbs of Solomon, The Lord created me the Beginning of his Ways, for
his Works; before the World he founded me; in the Beginning, before he made the
Earth, and before he appointed the Deeps; before the Mountains were placed; the
Lord begat me before all the Hills. -- Paul also says to the Collossians, Who
is the Image of the invisible God; the Firstborn of the whole Creation.

Dionysius Alexand.] Ep. 41. ad Max.
Basil owns that he had seen a great Number of the Books of Dionysius of
Alexandria, and adds, -- We don't admire every thing he says; nay, some things
we entirely disapprove. For this very Man is the first, as far as we have
discovered, who laid the Seeds of this present noted Impiety of the Anomaeans.
-- He does not only suppose a Difference as to their Subsistences, but a
Diversity of Substance, an Inferiority of Power, and a Difference of Glory.

Athanas. de Senten. Dionysii Tom. 1 4
Athanasius also speaks of the same Person thus: The Arians affirm, that the
Blessed Dionysius said the Son of God was a Creature, and a Being made. Yes; he
did write so: We ourselves also do own that there is such an Epistle of his.

Theognostus.] Phot. Cod. 106.
Photius says Theognostus affirmed that the Father was to have a Son; but that
when he spoke of that Son, he declared that he was a Creature.

Methodius.] de Creat. p. 345.
The Lord created me, the Beginning of his Ways, for his Works: Before the
World he founded me. -- Wherefore He is the the Origin of other Beings, after
the Father; who is his own unoriginated Origin.

Lactantius.] II. 8.
God, -- before he set about the making this World, -- produced a Spirit like
unto himself, who should be endued with the Powers of God the Father. Now after
what Manner he did this, we will endeavor to show in the fourth Book.

IV:. 6.
God therefore, the Contriver and Framer of the World, as we observed in the
second Book, before he set about this great Work of making the World, begat an
holy and incorruptible Spirit, which he called his Son. -- He, I mean, is the
Son of God, who spoke by Solomon, the wisest of Kings, and one full of the
Divine Spirit, as follows: God created me in the Beginning of his Ways, for his
Works; before the World he founded me; in the Beginning, before he made the
Earth, before he appointed the Deeps, before the Fountains of Water came: The
Lord begat me before all the Hills.

Eusebius Caesar] ap. Cave Hist. Literar. P. II. p. 64, 65.
Eusebius had a Chapter concerning God the Word, as concerning that Wisdom
which does substantially subsist, and was created by God before the World
began, etc.

Praep. Ev. XI. 14. v. Hist. Eccl. I. 2.
Solomon, says he elsewhere, gives us the same Sense in other Language; and
using the Name of Wisdom instead of the Word, makes this Declaration, as in her
Person -- Then he subjoins afterward, The Lord created me, the Beginning of
his Ways, for his Works; before the World he founded me; in the Beginning,
before he made the Earth, before the Mountains were fastened: He begat me
before all the Hills.

Demonst. Evang. IV. 3.
The Light does not shine forth by the Will of the luminous Body, but by a
necessary Property of Nature. But the Son, by the Intention and Will of the
Father, received his Subsistence, so as to be the Image of the Father. For by
his Will did God become the Father of his Son, and caused to subsist a second
Light, in all Things like unto himself -- Receiving before all Ages a real
Subsistence, by the inexpressible and inconceivable Will and Power of the
Father. See Dr. Clarke 's Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity, Edit. 2. p. 252,
253, 254.

Hist. Eccl. V. 1.
He is named the Firstborn of the whole Creation; according to that Text, The
Lord created me, the Beginning of his Ways; for his Works.

Ibid.
The Divine Scripture sometimes calls the Son the Firstborn of the whole
Creation; as in his own Person, in that Text; The Lord created me, the
Beginning of his Ways.

Contra Marcell. II. 7.
The same Eusebius, who by Direction from the Council of Constantinople wrote
against Athanasius's great Friend, the Heretic Marcellus, charges his
affirming the Son to be (...), unbegotten, as a grand Branch of his Heresy; and
to be (...), eternal, as another Branch of the same Heresy, and directly
implying the same with unbegotten.

Ibid.
The same Eusebius says: But perhaps thou art afraid that if thou allowest the
Father and Son to be two Substances, thou should introduce two Principles,
and should deny the Divine Monarchy. Learn therefore, that since there is but
one God, without any Origin, and without Generation; and that the Son is
begotten of him; there is but one Principle, and one Monarchy, and one Kingdom:
Since the Son himself reckons the Father to be his Origin. For God is the Head
of Christ, as the Apostle says.

Demonst. Evang. IV 3.
The Father existed before the Son, and had a Subsistence before his
Generation; as being alone unbegotten.

Cap. 15.
God the Word was alone begotten of him, by a Communication from him that begat
him; who was the unbegotten, (...) first, and the greater Being; and he was
declared God of God, and called the Christ and the Anointed.

C. 15.
Therefore, O God, He has anointed thee, who is the supreme, and greater Being,
and also thy God; so that he who anointed is a great deal Prior to him that was
anointed; being the God of the Universe, and especially of him who was
anointed. See Maufaucon Praeliminar. in Psalm. p. 19.

V. 1.
The Son had not a Co-existence with the Father, without Beginning; the one
being unbegotten, the other begotten: And the one being the Father, the other
the Son. And every Body will confess that a Father does pre-exist, and has an
earlier Subsistence than a Son.

Vid. Maufaucon. Praelimin. Eusebius. in Psalm. p. 27.
The Son is the perfect Creature of him that is perfect, the wise Building of
him that is wise.

He is a Being made.

Ap. Epiphan. Haeres. 69.
Arius, in his private Letter to his great Patron Eusebius of Nicomedia, before
the Council of Nice, affirms, that this Eusebius of Caesarea, and Theodosius,
and Paulinus, and Athanasius, and Gregorius, and Aetius, and all the Eastern
Bishops, say, that God existed before his Son; without any Beginning: Excepting
Philogonius, and Hellanicus, and Macarius, who were no better than uncatechiz'd
Heretics.

Athanas.] Orat. II. contr. Arian.
Let them learn to read, after a due Manner also, what is said in the Proverbs,
which it self has a right Meaning: For it is written, The Lord created me, the
Beginning of his Ways, for his Works.

N.B. There is one Record, ancienter than the Council of Nice, so very
remarkable in this Case, that I cannot forbear to set it down entirely: It Is a
public Letter from the Presbyters and Deacons of Alexandria, sent on the
Behalf of the Arians to their Patriarch Alexander, who afterward condemned
them, in these Words;

The Presbyters and Deacons to the Blessed Father, our Bishop Alexander, send
greeting in the Lord.

Apud Athanas. De Synod. Arim and Seleuc. Op. Vol. I. p. 885, 886. and Epiphan.
Haeres. LXIX.. 7. p. 732, 733.
Our Faith, which we have received from our Forefathers, and which, Blessed
Father, we have learned from you also, is this. We own but One God, who is
alone Unbegotten, who is alone Eternal, who is alone without Beginning, who is
alone the true God, who alone has Immortality, who alone is Wise, who alone is
Good, who alone is the Potentate, who is the Judge, the Orderer and Disposer of
all Things: Immutable and Unalterable, Righteous and Good, the God of the Law
and the Prophets, and of the new Covenant; who begat his only begotten Son
before the World began: By whom he made the Ages and the Universe. Begat him,
we mean, not in Appearance only, but Reality; giving him his Subsistence by his
own Will; the Immutable, and Unalterable, and Perfect Creature of God, but not
as one of the ordinary Creatures: A Being begotten by him, but not as one of
the ordinary Beings which were begotten. Not that this Being begotten was an
Emanation, as was the Doctrine of Valentinus; nor, as Manichaeus supposed, is
the Being begotten a Consubstantial Part of the Father: Nor, as Sabellius, who
divided the Unity, and called him both Son and Father: Nor, as Hieraeas, Light
from a Light, or as one Lamp divided into two: Nor, as one that before was, yet
afterward was begotten, or created into a Son. As even you your self, Blessed
Father, in the midst of the Church, and in the Assembly of the Clergy, have
frequently rejected those who introduced these Opinions. But, as we say, that
he was Created by the Will of God before Time, and before the World began; and
that he received his Life, and his Being, and all his Glory from the Father.
For the Father, when he made him Heir of all Things, did not deprive himself of
any Thing which he has in himself, without being begotten. For He is the
Fountain of all Things. Wherefore there are three Substances, and God himself,
who is the Cause of all Things, is alone without Beginning. But the Son being
begotten by the Father before Time, and created and founded before the World
began, was not before he was begotten; but he alone, as begotten before Time by
the Father, did really subsist; for he is not eternal, or coeternal, or
unbegotten as the Father is; nor has he his Existence together with the Father,
as some say; who after a sort introduce two unbegotten Principles; but God is
so before all Things as the only Being, and the Beginning of all Things.
Wherefore he is before his Son, as we have learned from you, when you have
preached in the midst of the Church. In as much, therefore, as he has his
Being, and all his Glory, and his Life from God; and all Things are delivered
to him, thence is God his Origin and Governor; for he governs him as his God,
and as being Prior to him. But if that Expression, From him; and that, From the
Womb; and that, I came out from the Father, and come; are understood as
implying his being a consubstantial Part of him, as an Emanation; the Father is
a compound Being, capable of Division, and Mutable; and, indeed, according to
them, a Body: And so, as far as their Notions extend, the Incorporeal God is
liable to Corporeal Affections.

Hist. Eccl. I. 15.
Sozomen also relates, that when this Dispute was started at Alexandria, this
Alexander knew not, at first, which Side to take; and that it was a good while
before he yielded to those that said our Savior was (...), Consubstantial and
Coeternal with the Father.

Theodor. Hist. Eccl. I. 12.
The Council of Nice it self were so far from denying the Creation of the Son,
that the Words of St. Paul, who styles him the Firstborn of the whole
Creation, were, by Eusebius, at first, inserted into that Creed which he
brought into the Council; and which he informs us the Emperor and the whole
Council agreed to be right; though that Clause was afterward omitted, as not
sufficiently favorable to the Designs against the Arians at that Time. They
were also so far from affirming the real Co-eternity, or proper eternal
Generation of the Son, that they only asserted the metaphysick Existence of the
Word, before his Generation; as Eusebius shows, in the only Original Account we
have of that Matter, in these Words: And farther, says Eusebius there, The
Anathema denounced against such as say, He was not before he was begotten, did
not appear unreasonable; since it is confessed by all that he was the Son of God,
even before his Generation, according to the Flesh. Nay, besides this, our
Emperor, beloved of God, confirmed by Reason, that even as to his Divine
Generation he was before all Ages; seeing that before he was actually begotten,
he was potentially in his Father, when not yet begotten. The Father being
always a Father; as he was always a King, and a Savior, and every Thing
potentially; being always thus invariably and unalterably the same.

These, my Lord, are the principal original Texts and Testimonies which concern
the important Subject before us, till the very Days of Athanasius himself.

And now, to sum up the Evidence on both Sides, with what Clearness I can, the
Evidence for the Co-eternity of the Son to the Father, which has been above
alleged; I mean, if, as we ought to do, we take the Septuagint Version, whence
Christ, and his Apostles, and the ancient Fathers, always quoted the Old
Testament, to be of more Authority than our own, or any modern ones, in such
Matters, comes to no more than this: Viz. That our Savior was created or
begotten by his Father in or before the Beginning of the World; before all the
Ages, Heb. i. 2.
or that first Constitution of Things which was made or ordained by him under
the Father: That he was to be the Father of the future Age, or World to come,
Heb. ii. 5.
which we call the last Age, or Days of the Messiah: That his Origin was of
Old, from the Beginning of the World: That he was in Being, and was with God
his Father in the very Beginning of Things; nay, had Glory with his Father
before the World was: That he was before all Things; that he was the first, and
will be the last: That he was Alpha, and will be Omega: And that some of these
Expressions are the same, or very like to those, by which the absolute Eternity
of the Father is in other Places supposed to be expressed; which last
Observation, however, is only here taken for granted, without Proof: It no Way
appearing that the sacred Writers meddle, beyond our Faculties, with any such
absolute Eternity, either a part ante, or a part post, as the Schoolmen have
since done; and yet without the Proof of that Point all this Evidence is very
inconsiderable.

It must also be remembered, that the ancient Christians ever allowed that the
Expressions in the Old Testament, concerning the invisible Father, whenever
there was a visible Person appeared, were spoken by the Son, as the Image of
that invisible God, or as representing and personating the Father, as his
Minister and Vicegerent among Men: and that they never looked on them as true,
in the highest Sense, of the Son himself, but of the Father only: Nor did they
ever draw such Consequences from those Texts as do the Moderns.

Melchisedek is, indeed, said to have neither Beginning of Days, nor End of
Life, when he is represented as a Type of Christ's earliest Origin and latest
Duration; but this certainly without the least Pretense to any proper Eternity
of his at all. So that the known Books of the Old and New Testament, as
understood before the Days of Athanasius, seem to have no proper Evidence at
all for the real Eternity of the Son of God. As for Polycarp's and Justin's
Expressions of Christ, that he is the (...), the eternal Priest, or High
Priest, no wise Man will thence gather any Thing about the real Eternity of the
Son, before he was an High Priest. The Author of the Recognitions also speaks
of the Eternity of the Son, and calls him the eternal Christ: But then, it is
well known, that he did not thereby mean his real Co-eternity, a part ante,
with his Father: Nay, it has appeared already, that of all the Ancients he is
the most express for his being a Creature; and he therefore hereby rather gives
us a Rule how we ought to explain such Words in other ancient Authors, while
they seldom or never mean, by such Expressions, more than from the Beginning of
the World, or to the End of it. Irenaeus does, indeed, say not only that Christ
was God's eternal Word, but that he was unmade, or, as I suppose he means, not
made out of nothing, as he supposed Men to be; that he did always co-exist with
God, and was ever with him; and avoided saying that God created him, which the
rest used freely to say in those Ages: All this makes it very probable that
this Father did believe the Eternity of the Son, in some Sort or other. But
then, it must not be dissembled, that even Irenaeus, as we have seen, owns him
a derived Being, produced by his Father before all other Beings: Which seems
hardly reconcilable to an absolute Co-eternity: And that this Sort of Eternity
of the Word, which we meet with in some such Philosophers of the second, third,
and fourth Century, is quite another Thing from the real Co-eternity of the Son
under our present Consideration: As is most obvious in the ancient Accounts of
that Matter. Their Notion was plainly this; that all other Beings were made out
of nothing; but that the Son was in a subtle manner in his Father, virtually,
potentially, or, as his internal Word and Wisdom from all Eternity; and that a
little before the Creation, and not sooner, this Word was, in an ineffable
manner, begotten or created, out of his Substance, into a real subsisting
Being, or Person: So that the Testimonies for this Sort of Eternity, which
alone we find even till a good while after the Council of Nice it self, are a
Demonstration that the real Co-eternity of the Son with the Father, or his
proper eternal Generation, was then utterly unknown among Christians. Nor does
even this metaphysick, this virtual, or potential, or internal Eternity of the
Son ever appear in the sacred Writings; in the ancient Creeds or Liturgies; or
in any of the Apostolical Fathers. Whereby it is plain, that it is no Part of
the Sacred, the Apostolical, or the Christian Doctrine; and no more than a
Conjecture or Hypothesis of some ancient Christian Philosopers. Whether Clement
of Alexandria ever believed, even in his younger Years, before he was thoroughly
instructed in Christianity, that Christ was really eternal, it is not certain:
Because the Epithet eternal in the former Passage cited from him does not
always denote a real Eternity, and may belong to the Father and not to the Son;
and if Clement did once call him the eternal Light in a Poem, the Latitude of
such Writings, especially of that romantic Piece ascribed to him, into which
this Phrase is inserted, still more plainly forbids us to draw any such settled
Conclusion from it: Especially when he elsewhere most plainly said, he was the
first created Wisdom of God; and in another Work, directly depressed him into
the Rank of a Creature; as we have already seen. So that unless we believe such
Authors had a Fancy that a common Creature, or the World it self, might be
coeternal to its Creator, we must not quote them for the Son's proper
Co-eternity to his Father. And as to the seemingly most express Testimonies of
Eusebius, who calls the Generation of the Son (...) eternal, and says the Son
was always, and (...) beginningless, and at all Times, with the Father; that he
was elder than all Time, and all Ages; before, and still before all Ages; that
he subsisted from endless Ages, or rather before all Ages; that he was before
all; was the ancientest Being of all Time and of all Ages; that he reigned with
his Father from beginningless Ages; and that of the P^esbyters and Deacons of
Alexandria, that God begat him before eternal Times; they here, according to
the ancient Style, denote no more than that he was before the World began; as
we are fully assured by many other clearer and plainer Passages of the same
Authors, wherein they directly and absolutely deny the Son's Co-eternity with
the Father notwithstanding; as we shall see hereafter.

And as to some other of the Testimonies, omitted in this Sum of the Evidence,
they are so little to the Purpose, that the insisting on them shows how scarce
the Proofs are on that Side.

Vid. Jud. v. 6.
To conclude this Head: As the Greek Language has three Ways of Speaking, which
are sometimes rendered eternal; the first (...), or (...), or (...), or (...)
The second, (...) And the third, (...) The first of which does seldom or never
signify a proper Eternity; the second not always; and the third, and that
alone, always does so; it is very remarkable that the Bible and Apostolical
Fathers never, in this Case of the Antiquity of the Son, use any but the first;
none of those before the Council of Nice more than the first, and very rarely
the second; while Athanasius and his Followers, and none before them, directly
ventured on the third Way of Speaking, and called the Son Coeternal. Which how
it could happen, if the proper Co eternity of the Son to the Father were then
all along the known Doctrine of Christianity, I do by no Means understand.
Briefly, in the fourth Century we find this Co-eternity plainly asserted; we
find obscure Intimations about a subtle Sort of Eternity in the third and
latter Part of the second; but in the former Part of the second, and the first
Century we lose all certain Footsteps of any Eternity whatsoever: Which
Observation renders this Evidence for the Co-eternity, even though we had no
opposite Evidence to weigh on the other Side, exceeding weak and precarious.

But then, as to the original Evidence against this Co-eternity of the Son, and
for his voluntary Generation or Creation by the Power of the Father, before the
World began, the Sum of it is as follows.

That the Son was not an underiv'd, unoriginated, independent and, in that
Sense, an Eternal Being, but truly derived from, and produced, or begotten by
the Father, is the unanimous Voice of all Christian Antiquity, both in and
after the Apostolical Age; and is not directly denied by any Athanasian at this
Day. Now, how a confessedly derived, produced, and begotten Being; an
Only-begotten Son, should be really coeternal with his underiv'd, unbegotten,
and necessarily-existing Author, Producer, and Father, I cannot possibly
understand.

That the Son was also voluntarily begotten by the Power of the Father, we have
the plain and numerous Testimonies of the Apostles themselves in their
Constitutions, of Ignatius, of the Author of the Recognitions of Clement, of
Justin Martyr, of Tatian, of Tertullian, of Novatian, of Lactantius, of
Eusebius, and of the Presbyters and Deacons of Alexandria; without the least
Syllable, that any one Christian thought of his being derived from the Father,
as the Moderns pretend, by Necessity of Nature.

That he was also created by God the Father, is also most evident in all Sacred
and Christian Antiquity. This Doctrine begins from Solomon in the Old
Testament, as explained by the Christian Revelation; and is continued by the
Son of Sirach, and Philo the Jew, to the Writers of the New Testament, Peter,
Paul, John, Hermas; the Apostles in general, in their Constitutions; all these
in the first Century: Thence it passes down to Ignatius, to the Author of the
Recognitions of Clement, to Justin Martyr, Melito, Tatian, and Athenagoras, in
the secon'd Century: And from all these it comes down to Clement of Alexandria,
Tertullian, Origin, Gregory of Neocoesarea, Novatian, Cyprian, Dionysius of
Alexandria, Theognostus, and Methodius, in the 3d Century; to Lactantius and
Eusebius, and to the Alexandrian Presbyters and Deacons, nay, even to
Athanasius himself in the fourth Century; and this, so far as we know, without
any one Person's excepting against the Word Created, as improper, 'till
Athanasius: without any one's asserting that the Son was uncreated, till he did
it: and with the direct Assertion of several, that he was a Creature, a Being
made by the Father; though vastly superior to all other Creatures or Beings made
by him.

That the voluntary Generation or Creation of the Son, (for I take them to mean
the same Thing) was a little before the Creation of the World also, is the only
natural Import of almost all, and the direct Assertion of some of the
Testimonies; without the Contradiction of any one Christian Writer also, that I
know of, till the fourth Century, or the Days of Athanasius.

That the Body of the Church, even in the Beginning of the fourth Century, nay,
even at and some Years after the Council of Nice it self, knew nothing of any
real Eternity of the Son; nor denied that he was a Being begotten or created by
the Will and Power of God, a little before the Beginning of the World, is very
plain from the Testimonies here produced. So that it is hard to say what
original Evidence the real Trinitarians have gone upon, when they have so long
made the World believe that the Son is truly Coeternal with the Father; and
this as a prime Article established at the Council of Nice, nay, as a
fundamental Doctrine of Christianity it self; since, whatever Authority there
may be for the potential or metaphysick, there seems to be directly none at all
for this real Coeternity, or proper eternal Generation, 'till a good while
after the Council of Nice. Nor would the great and learned Eusebius, when he
wrote by the Direction of the Council of Constantinople, and several Years
after that of Nice, have ventured openly to charge Marcellus with Heresy, for
saying that Christ was (...) eternal, if that his Eternity had been the known
Determination of the Council of Nice, or indeed the known Doctrine of the
Church, either in that or in the foregoing Ages of the Gospel.

That this Coeternity of the Son is a very strange Doctrine to such as have the
Unity of God for the Foundation of their Religion; such as all the Patriarchs,
the Jews, and the Christians ever had, will be granted by all. That therefore
there was a great Occasion for a clear and express Declaration of this Eternity
of the Son, if it were true, is very evident: while yet neither the Scriptures,
nor the Apostolical Constitutions, nor any ancient Creeds whatsoever, have any
one such clear Declaration; nay, have many such clear Declarations concerning
One only true or eternal God, Romans I. 20 1 Timothy 1.17.
One only eternal Power and Godhead, One only King of Ages, or eternal,
immortal, invisible, the only wise God, as supposes the contrary; especially
while they add to those Declarations, that this One God is no other than the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus all the old Creeds or Confessions of Faith do begin with this as the
first Doctrine of Christianity, I believe in One God the Father; or as the
Baptismal Creed itself expresses it, Constitut. 7.41.
I believe in One unbegotten Being, the only true God Almighty, the Father of
Christ; while what they say of the Son has not the least Intimation of either
his Coequality or Coeternity, but the contrary; which is particularly the Case
of the original Creed beforementioned, where the Article concerning the Son
begins thus: I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God,
the Firstborn of the whole Creation; who, before the Ages, was begotten by the
good Pleasure of the Father; which seems to me an authentic, a sacred, and an
undeniable Testimony against any real Coeternity of the Son to the Father.

Nor indeed, My Lord, are the Expressions all along used in the foregoing
Collection of Texts and Testimonies capable of any fair Sense, consistent with
this Coeternity, since many of them directly confute the same. Thus the
Apostolical Constitutions affirm, That God the Father is eternally One only;
or, The Only Eternal Being: That those are Heretics who say [as do the
Trinitarians in Effect] that God is three, or manifold; or that there are three
Gods, coeternal with one another. The Apostles Paul and John, by calling Christ
the Firstborn of the whole Creation, and the Beginning of the Creation of God,
do in the most plain, usual, and obvious Sense of the Words, and as they were
understood in the first Ages; [especially, if we consider the Allusion these
Passages bear to the Text in the Proverbs, as then understood by all, The Lord
created me, the Beginning of his Ways] directly affirm that Christ was the
first Being God created. The Author to the Hebrews directly affirms, that God
made Christ; which in the fourth Century was reckoned so heterodox, that this
Epistle was in some Places seldom read in public, and that partly out of the
Dread of such an Expression; as Philastrius assures us. De Haeret. C. 41.


St. Peter is also introduced in that very ancient Book called The Preaching of
Peter, as declaring that God made his firstborn Son. St. Hermas directly
asserts, that the Holy Spirit, which was placed in a Body, or the Word of God
incarnate, was created the first of all Beings. The Apostolical Constitutions
enjoin us to dedicate our selves to the eternal God, not through his coeternal
Word, as the Athanasians would certainly have said; but through that Word which
was in the Beginning; as the greatest Antiquity of the Son then known in the
Church. Ignatius, and the Author of the Recognitions of Clement, assure us,
that the very Substance of our Savior was not the unbegotten Substance of the
Father, but was it self begotten by the Divine Power. The Author of the
Recognitions affirms, that Christ was himself a made Being; and that the Will
of God preceded his Generation. Justin Martyr, who always indeed avoided those
Expressions himself, of a Creature and a made Being, did not yet in the least
find Fault with Trypho the Jew, when he declared that he understood that both
he, and the Scriptures quoted by him, meant that the God of the Jews made our
Lord and God Christ Jesus. Nor does this Justin, among his numerous Expressions
concerning the Son's praeexisting State, of which he is so very full, ever
venture to say any thing that looks like his real Coeternity with the Father.
Tertullian, who yet favored the Son's metapyhysick Eternity as much as any,
directly affirms there was a Time when God was not a Father, and had not a Son.
Clement of Alexandria, whatever he had said in his younger Years, did at last
own that Christ was the first created Wisdom of God; and was to be reckoned as
a Creature. Origin did also plainly and clearly own, that he was one of the
Creatures of God, though the ancientest of 'em all; even so ancient, that he
cared not to assign the Date of his first Generation or Creation; and the
Reason seems to have been, that he had a Fancy that the World it self, though
created by God, might possibly be coeternal with its Creator. Gregory of
Naeocaesarea did also directly profess that Christ was a Creature, or a Being
made by God. Novatian also, or the acute but unknown Author of the Book
concerning the Trinity, affirms that God the Father is the only eternal God, to
whom no other Being can be so much as compared; that the Son was then begotten
when it pleased the Father; who, and who alone, was prior to him; and that as a
necessary Consequence from his being his Father. Dionysius of Alexandria
directly affirms Christ to have been a Creature; and supposes not only a
Difference of the Subsistences of the Father and Son, but a Diversity of
Substance, an Inferiority of Power, and a Difference of Glory; so that he, as
well as many others, seems not to have had so much as a Notion of a metaphysick
Eternity. Theognostus also declared, that the Son was a Creature. Lactantius is
express for the Generation or Creation of the Son, a little before the World
was made.

The great Eusebius, whom the Athanasians used sometimes to hale over to their
Party, as if he believed the Coeternity of the Son, is so fully understood,
since the later Publication of some of his Works long lost, that he is now
generally allowed, as he was in his own Age, to be clearly against it. Nor is
there Room for any Dispute, since he directly says, the Father was prior, nay,
a great deal prior to the Son; and charged Marcellus, as introducing an
Heretical Notion, when he asserted that the Son was (...), Eternal, which
Assertion he directly took to be the same as Unbegotten; of all which Opinions
of Eusebius the very learned Monfaucon has given so full an Account, in his
Preliminaries to Eusebius's Psalms, that I reckon none of the truly Learned
will any more pretend he was an Athanasian. Nor will any one doubt of the
Opinion of many of the Bishops in the East and in Egypt; hardly indeed of
Alexander of Alexandria, and of the Council of Nice's own Opinion against the
proper Coeternity, Collection of ancient Monuments by me.
who carefully peruses the original Records here and elsewhere published
relating to that Age; which yet was generally disposed to advance the Dignity
and Antiquity of the Son as much as possible. I now proceed to the other Point,
the Coeternity of the Holy Spirit.

The Texts and Testimonies which prove that the Holy Spirit was created or
made, under the Father, by the Son, before the World began; and against his
Coeternity.
Paul]
CHRIST, through (...) the eternal [or Holy] Spirit, [so twelve or thirteen of
the Copies read of the Text] offered himself, without Spot, to God.

Peter] 1. Pet. 1.11.
The Spirit of Christ.

Apostles.] Constitut. vi. 11.
One God, the Father of One Son, not of many; the Maker of One Comforter by
Christ.

vii. 41.
I am also to be baptized unto the Holy Ghost, that is the Comforter; who
wrought in all the Saints from the Beginning of the World.

Justin] Apol. i. 46.
The Spirit spoke in the Prophets, as from the Divine Word that moved them.

Ibid.. 77.
Plato read, that it was said by Moses, that the Spirit of God moved on the
Face of the Waters. He assigns the third Place to the Spirit that is said to
have moved on the Water, when he says, But the third Sort of Offices belong to
the third Person.

Athenagoras] Legate.. 6.
All Things are held together by that Spirit, which is derived from him.

Theophilus of Antioch] Ad Antotyc. i. p. 72.
He begat him, together with his Wisdom, and sent him out before the Beginning
of the World. -- This Person then, being the Spirit of God, and the Origin of
Things, and Wisdom, and the Power of the Most High, descended upon the
Prophets, and by them spoke what concerned the making of the World, and all
other Things. For the Prophets were not in Being when the World was made; but
that Wisdom which was in him, which was the Wisdom of God, and his Holy Word,
which is always present with him, etc.

Irenaeus] i. 19.
By his Word and Spirit he makes, and orders, and governs all Things.

iv. 17.
There do minister to the Father his own Offspring, and his own Figuration;
that is, the Son, and Holy Spirit; his Word, and Wisdom.

37.
There are ever present with God his Word and Wisdom, the Son and Spirit; by
whom, and in whom he made all Things, freely and spontaneously; to whom also he
spoke, saying, Let us make Man after our Image, and after our Likeness.

Ibid,
And that Wisdom, which is the Spirit, was with God before the entire
Constitution of Things, he says by Solomon: God, by Wisdom, has founded the
Earth, by Prudence has he prepared the Heaven. By his understanding the
Abysses brake forth, and the Clouds dropped down Dew. And again, the Lord
Created me the Beginning of his Ways, for his Works; before the World he
founded me: In the Beginning, before he made the Earth; before the Fountains of
Waters came, before the Mountains were fastened: He begat me before all the
Hills, etc.

v. 6.
Man was made by the Hands of the Father; i. e. by the Son, and Holy Spirit,
after the Likeness of God.

Author of the Recognations] 1.. 69.
We say the Son of God is the only begotten Being, derived from no other
Origin; but begotten or born of Him after an ineffable Manner. In like Manner
do we speak of the Comforter.

iii. 11.
Whereas then there is one Unbegotten Being, and one Begotten, the Holy Spirit
cannot be called a Son, nor the First-begotten: For he was made by a Being that
was himself made. But he is recounted in Subordination to the Father and the
Son, as the first perfect Effect of the Power of the second Being.

Tertull.] Adv. Prax.
I suppose the Spirit is derived from no other Origin than from the Father, by
the Son.

Origin.] Comment. in Joan. p. 56, 57, 58.
We must enquire whether it follows from this Place, which affirms, that all
Things were made by the Word, that the Holy Spirit was made by him also. For I
suppose he that says, The Holy Spirit is a Being made, and admits of this
Assertion, that all Things were made by the Word, must of Necessity grant, that
the Holy Spirit was made by him; and that, by Consequence, [ N.B.] the Word was
more ancient than he. But he that will not admit that the Holy Spirit was made
by Christ, must, by Consequence, say he is Unbegotten; if he, withal, judges
what is said in the Gospel to be true. -- We who are persuaded that the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit are three Substances, and do believe there is nothing
Unbegotten but the Father, do admit this Notion as most agreeable to Piety and
Truth; that when all Things are said to be made by the Word, the Holy Spirit is
the most honorable, and first in Order of those Beings which the Father made
by Christ, etc.

Eusebius] De Eccles. Theolog. iii. 6.
Now the Son alone is honored with the Paternal Divinity, and has the Power of
making, and creating, all Things that are made, visible and invisible, and even
is the Producer of the Existence of the Spirit, the Comforter himself. For all
Things were made by him; and without him not one Thing was made. And by him
were all Things created, both those in Heaven, and those on Earth; whether they
be visible, or invisible. -- Now the Son is the only begotten God, who is in
the Bosom of the Father. But the Spirit, the Comforter, is neither God, nor the
Son [of God] because he did not receive his Generation from the Father, in the
same Manner as did the Son; but is one of those Beings which were made by the
Son. For all Things were made by him; and without him not one Thing was made.
These are then the Mysteries of the Catholic and Holy Church, delivered by the
Divine Oracles; while Marcelius, confounding all Things, -- introduces one
Substance, with three Persons, and three Names therein; saying, that God, and
the Word, which is in him, and the Holy Spirit are all one.

These, my Lord, are the chief among the Primitive Texts and Testimonies
concerning the Origin of the Holy Spirit, which are so much on one Side, even
till long after the Council of Nice, that I have not found it necessary to
divide them under two Heads, as I did those of the Son. Since the only valuable
Testimony that may seem to favor the real Eternity of the Holy Spirit, which
is that in the Epistle to the Hebrews, of the eternal Spirit, uses only the
Word (...), which seldom or never signifies a proper Eternity; since so many of
the Copies have not there even that Epithet, but the usual one of Holy instead
of Eternal Spirit; and since it is not certain that this Place belongs to the
third Person at all, but perhaps, to the Divine Nature or Word it self in
Christ; Bull. Defens. Fid. Nicaen. Sect. i.. 5.
which Grotius and Bishop Bull have showed several Times to have the Character
of an Holy Spirit. So that I have no Occasion here to sum up the Evidence on
both Sides at all, as to the Co-eternity of the Holy Spirit to the Father, or
even as to his equal Antiquity with the Son; for either of which there is not,
that I know of, one proper or direct Testimony sacred or primitive, now extant,
in the Records of the Christian Church, till long after the Council of Nice, in
the latter Days of Athanasius himself.

And now, My Lord, I beg that your Lordship will please soberly to review the
Evidence that is here produced before you and the World; and will suppose your
self in the High Court of Chancery, in the same Capacity as your Noble Father
formerly presided there; and will put the Case, that your Lordship had an
exactly parallel Cause before you; that the Witnesses were as numerous and as
plain on each Side as these here produced appear to be, and no otherwise; and
that your Lordship were obliged to proceed exactly, secundum allegata and
probata, which is the known Rule of that and all other like Courts of Justice
and Equity among us: And I thereupon Appeal to Your Lordship, supposing you had
no Bias on either Side, as no upright Judge ought to have, whether you could
possibly, with a safe Conscience, determine on the Side representing the
Athanasians? Whether, in a Point where the general Light of Nature and common
Sense is so strong against the Athanasian Doctrine; the Testimonies for it
comparatively so few, and so uncertain; and those against it so very many and
so very pregnant; whether, I say, your Lordship could possibly, with a safe
Conscience, pronounce from this Evidence, that the Son of God and his Holy
Spirit are strictly Coeternal to the Supreme God the Father, as the
Athanasians affirm? Or whether you would not be forced to declare, in Agreement
with the Voice of Natural, the Patriarchal, the Jewish, and the original
Christian Religion, that there is but one eternal Being, one eternal God; and
that he is no other than the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And here, My Lord, give me Leave to wish, heartily to wish, that these ancient
Texts and Testimonies, thus plainly produced before you in this one important
Article, might so far influence Your Lordship, as to engage you to endeavor
that the same Method might be taken in the other Branches of this and all other
the like Controversies among Christians: That Your Lordship, who has had long
so considerable a Hand in the public Management of Affairs, Sacred and
Ecclesiastical, as well as Temporal and Civil, in this Nation; might be a happy
Means of bringing all the Parts of our old genuine Christianity to such a fair,
open, and impartial Examination, as I have here proposed, and endeavored to
exemplify in these Papers; that so, Party, Faction, and Prejudice laid aside,
all honest and sober Christians might, in a peaceable Manner, unite together
into such Societies, for promoting Primitive Christianity, as has been formerly
exemplified at my House; or, however, might jointly prosecute the same pious
Designs for the Discovery and Restoration of the Pure and Holy Religion of our
Savior Christ, as it was once delivered to the Saints, by such other Christian
Methods as they should judge might better tend to the same excellent End.

It has hitherto been Your Lordship's great Glory to have supported and
encouraged that Church of England in which you was educated; and the World has
great Reason to believe, by your daily religious Attendance on the Church's
Liturgy at Home; as well as by your alike devout weekly Attendance on the same
public Service at Church; either of which, in our Age, I am sorry to say it,
is but too uncommon in Persons of your Lordship's Quality; that you are in
earnest in such your Support and Encouragement thereof; or that you do it
because you believe this Church to be truly agreeable to the Primitive State of
the Gospel. Would it not therefore, My Lord, be still more highly honorable
for your Lordship, to be a Means of making a more careful Review of our
Doctrine, Worship, Practice, and Discipline? That so the same Church, which has
long been the Glory and Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, even in it is
present imperfect State, may first of all the rest be exactly conformed to the
Perfection of the Christian Settlement; and so may be the great Exemplar and
Pattern of all the other Churches, as they become gradually sensible of the
Necessity of such a farther Reformation? All the modern Churches, and among
them our own, are, to be sure, very unwilling to allow that they stand in any
great Need of a farther Reformation. But as your Lordship will easily observe,
that the learned Members of every one of these Modern Churches declare such a
farther Reformation to be necessary in all other Churches but their own; so am
I very sure that the truly Learned and Impartial of every one of them, who have
carefully compared the present Settlements with that of the first three
Centuries of Christianity, do privately know, how little soever they may
publicly confess that every one of the present Churches, without Exception, do
stand in no small Need of such a farther Reformation. I beg Leave, my Lord, to
conclude here very nearly in the Words with which I formerly ended my fourth
Volume of Primitive Christianity Revived.

I do here solemnly appeal, as to the Truth and Fairness of my Quotations and
Assertions, here and elsewhere, to Archbishop Wake, Bishop Hooper, Bishop
Smalridge, Bishop Potter, Bishop Chandler, L. C. J. King, Sir Isaac Newton, Dr.
Bentley, Dr. Whitby, Dr. Clarke, Dr. Hare, Dr. Marshal, Dr. Waterland, Mr.
Wall, Mr. Gale, Mr. Reeves, and the other great Masters of Primitive Antiquity;
and claim it as the Right of Truth and Religion, that they speak their Minds
fairly and fully, as they will answer it to our common Lord another Day, when
no political, prudential, or temporal Regards, will be admitted against the
plain Demands of Conscience and Sincerity. And I humbly move those in
Authority, that they procure this whole Matter to be impartially and publicly
examined, as the other Popish Doctrines were at the Beginning of the
Reformation; and, if the common Opinions appear not only destitute of, but
contrary to the Evidence of Scripture and the first Centuries, as I am fully
persuaded they will, that then Care be taken to cast them out of the Church;
and to amend and reform all our public Offices, Creeds, and Articles, and
reduce them all to the Primitive Standards. I also humbly move that, in Order
to these and the like Amendments and Improvements in our Ecclesiastical
Establishment, the Pretensions of that wonderful Book still extant, the
Apostolical Constitutions, be examined, with the like Care, and in the same
public Manner: And, so far as it shall appear to be a genuine, uncorrupted,
Apostolical Work by Clemens Romanus, with the Addition of the most authentic
original Jewish and Gentile public Liturgies; as I am fully persuaded it will;
it may then be allowed its due Weight in the Amendment of the Doctrine,
Discipline, Government, Worship, and Canons of the Church; or rather, that it
may entirely be admitted as an original Rule and Standard in those Matters; as
all Christians, who believe them genuine, and, [for the Main] incorrupt, are
immediately obliged to do: especially since the leaving these Constitutions,
and setting up other Doctrines and Orders in their stead, seem to have been the
very Causes of almost all the Antichristian Corruptions of these last 1200 or
1300 Years together. But if all these my honest and well-meant Endeavors and
Desires be rejected; and instead of any Reformation, I my self be traduced, and
abused, and persecuted, I can only acquiesce in the Sense of having sincerely,
with some Trouble and Hazard to my self in this World, discharged my Duty; and
patiently wait for my Reward in that which is to come. For as to those
Anathema's, or Names of Distinction and Reproach, which in this Case I must
expect, I value them not at all: As having long accustomed my self to govern
both my Belief and my Life by the original Standards of Christianity, without
Regard to the contrary Opinions and Practices of these later and corrupter
Ages: And so, LIBERAVI ANIMAM MEAM.

I am, My Lord, with great Respect,

Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant, Will. Whiston.
July 10, 1719.
BOOKS printed for J. Senex in Salisbury-Court, and W. Tailor at the Ship in
Paternoster Row.
I. AN humble and serious Address to the Princes and States of Europe, to
admit, or at least openly to tolerate the Christian Religion in their
Dominions. Containing, 1. A Demonstration that none of them do, properly
speaking, admit or openly tolerate the Christian Religion in their Dominions at
this Day. 2. The true Occasions why it is not admitted or openly tolerated by
them. 3. Some Reasons why they ought to admit, or at least openly tolerate this
Religion. 4. An earnest Address to the several European Princes and States,
grounded upon the Premises, for the Admission, or at least the open Toleration
of the same Christian Religion in their Dominions. II. A Letter of Thanks to
the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London, for his late Letter to his
Clergy, against the Use of new Forms of Doxology, etc. III. A second Letter to
the Right Reverend the Lord Biship of London, concerning the Pimitive
Doxologies, wherein the Seasonable Review of his Account of them is considered.
IV. Scripture Politics: Or, an impartial Account of the Origin and Measures of
Government Ecclesiastical and Civil; taken out of the Books of the Old and New
Testament: With a Postscript relating to the Report of the Committee of
Convocation, about the Bishop of Bangor's Preservative and Sermon before the
King; to which is subjoined, The Supposal: Or a new Scheme of Government, first
published, A.D. 1712, and now reprinted.
All by the Reverend Mr. William Whiston, M.A. sometime Professor of the
Mathematics in the University of Cambridge.


