ROYAL FABLES.

By FRANCIS GENTLEMAN.

-- prudenti vitam consilio monet.
PHOED. Prol. TU MARCELLUS eris --
VIRG. LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, near Surry-Street, in
the Strand. MDCCLXVI.

To his Royal Highness GEORGE PRINCE of WALES.
SIR!
THE Author of these Fables flatters himself that the Principles of a steadfast
Loyalty, imbided in his earliest days, from the example and instruction of a
Father, who had the Honor to serve your ROYAL HIGHNESS'S illustrious Ancestors
near fifty years in a Military station; Principles ripened and established by a
conviction that the Public welfare depends on the increase and prosperity of
the August House of BRUNSWIC; may claim some indulgence for the many
imperfections of a composition which he thus presumes to lay at your ROYAL
HIGHNESS'S Feet.

If a laudable desire to sow the seeds of moral Truth; if an ardent zeal for
our civil and religious LIBERTIES; if a sincere attachment to his MAJESTY'S
person; whose mild Government preserves to us those invaluable blessings; whose
paternal care and bright example afford us the happy prospect of their being
transmitted to latest posterity -- if motives such as these, shall appear to
have warmed the Author's breast and guided his Pen, in the course of this
production; it will greatly flatter his Honest Pride, whose ambition it is to
approve, and to have the Honor of subscribing himself, with unfeigned zeal and
humility,

Your ROYAL HIGHNESS'S most devoted and most obedient servant, FRANCIS
GENTLEMAN.

CONTENTS.
Fable I. VIRTUE and FAME, Page 1 Fable II. The NILE and the SEA, 7 Fable III.
The JUST LION, 14 Fable IV. The MOUNTAIN and CLOUD, 19 Fable V. The EAGLE and
JAY, 24 Fable VI. The FARMER and SPARROWS, 31 Fable VII. The KNIGHT ERRANT, 34
Fable VIII. The BEAU and BUTTERFLY, 40 Fable IX. SOCRATES and the BEAU, 44
Fable X. The SWALLOW and PIKE, 49 Fable XI. The BIRTH DAY, 55 Fable XII. The
LION and FOX, 61 Fable XIII. The PHILOSOPHER and RATTLE, 69 Fable XIV. The COCK
and POINTER, 75 Fable XV. The CYNIC and FASHION, 78 Fable XVI. The ROYAL DOVE,
85 Fable XVII. The ROMAN and BARBARIAN, Page 89 Fable XVIII. The POLITIC LION,
94 Fable XIX. The CHARIOTEER, 99 Fable XX. The ANGEL and HERMIT, 104 Fable XXI.
The PROUD ASS, 112 Fable XXII. The LAWYER and FOX, 117 Fable XXIII. The
CONQUEROR and CAPTIVE, 124 Fable XXIV. The MAGPYE and LARK, 131 Fable XXV. The
FINE LADY and the SUN, 137 Fable XXVI. The LION, BEAR and APE, 145 Fable XXVII.
The COCK and PEACOCK, 151 Fable XXVIII. The WASP and BEES, 155 Fable XXIX. The
POET and PEN, 163 Fable XXX. The MILK WHITE MOUSE, 170
^. Fitzmaurice inv!

I. Tailor sculp.


ROYAL FABLES.
FABLE I. VIRTUE AND FAME.
SOME ages since, it so fell out,
That meeting at OLYMPIC rout;
(For goddesses have had their day,
To be as modern ladies gay;)
Two females, mostly known by name,
One VIRTUE called -- the other FAME,
Disputed who should lead, or follow,
Into the presence of APOLLO.
The matter, after verbal fight,
Was brought before the God of light;
When FAME, remarked for nimble tongue,
Addressing first, complained of wrong.
Shall I, declaimed the winged fair,
Who boast such eyes, so fine an air;
With almost every beauty graced,
Be thus in competition placed,
With such a formal, homely creature,
Without one fashionable feature?
Shall I, to whom the Great resort,
Whom Monarchs have been proud to court,
Provoking fate, midst War's alarms,
To gain possession of my charms;
Precedence yield to one so mean,
Amongst the great so seldom seen?
Whom rustic cots can better please,
Than dear, enchanting palaces?
The very thought is filled with shame,
And judgment gives in right of FAME.
She paused -- APOLLO then desired
Such answer as the cause required;
Which VIRTUE thus, with modest grace,
An easy shape, and cherub face,
Declared before the court in brief,
Thence justly claiming fit relief.
This girlish female, God of day,
To knaves and fools a frequent prey,
Of high connections boasts in vain,
Light phantoms of her idle brain:
Greatness you will own -- without my care,
A baseless castle in the air;
And rural cots, where I resort,
Much nobler than a vicious court.
It Is true, she posts the world around,
And fills it with a mighty sound;
Over mankind rules in various spheres,
And leads them captive by the ears;
Yet what of this, when often she flies
To propagate the grossest lies,
And wounds, in blackest guilt's defense,
The cause of spotless innocence?
Here then let ill timed difference end,
On worth and justice I depend.
The judge who heard with much respect,
His sentence passed to this effect;
Spoke all his thoughts, without disguise,
The impartial CAMDEN of the skies.
VIRTUE no doubt may justly claim
Precedence from contending FAME;
Though monumental falsehoods pass
With fools, because engraved on brass:
Though villains of gigantic size,
In marble statues vainly rise:
Though titles, coronets, and state,
Like gew-gaws, deck the unworthy great:
Though venal authors gild a name,
Which sacred truth would brand with shame:
A cheated people's loud huzzas,
With all the farce of earthly praise;
By VIRTUE unsupported fail,
And vanish, like the passing gale.
Then, madam FAME, deceitful beauty,
It Is fit that you confess your duty;
For, though exalted by a throne,
You cannot long exist alone;
Virtue, observe, I recommend,
As kindest parent, truest friend:
Beneath whose just, and gentle sway,
You Will live 'till time itself decay.
I look into the womb of time,
And view a yet unnotic'd clime;
By Neptune's azure flood enclosed,
Where harrass'd freedom safe reposed,
Shall gain you with a gracious smile,
To live as friends in BRITAIN'S isle;
To beam your luster round her throne,
And mark her monarch all your own.
FABLE II. THE NILE AND THE SEA.
LIFE a dependant chain appears,
With links to join its several spheres;
Show judging reason when you will,
One placed on high, there is higher still;
'Till strained progression mounts the sky,
And melts in vast infinity.
Pride, like a prism, such tints reveals
As Wisdom's naked eye conceals;
How idly vain then mortal man,
Whose fleeting life is but a span,
Though raised on Fortune's boldest wing,
A rich, a brave, a happy king,
Who thinks, with self-sufficient spirit,
All centers in his boundless merit;
Who, void of gratitude and sense,
Disclaims parental PROVIDENCE;
Whence all above, and all below,
Wealth, happiness, and courage flow?
The king of rivers, sev'n-mouth NILE,
Which yearly floods the neighboring soil;
Which loads with grain the teeming earth,
And gives a thousand harvests birth --
Once, like a human Coxcomb, thought
His power, alone, those blessings wrought --
What is, he cried, the thirsty Sea
In competition set with me?
My springs, my streams support its tide,
Whose mighty gulf must, unsupplied,
Turn to a wild, and barren shore;
The boasting watery world no more.
To scatter blessings round, I reign,
And fertilize a vast domain;
Which wisely annual homage pays,
In fit returns of grateful praise;
While yonder congregated flood
Does none, or very little good --
And yet its haughty billows rise,
As if to brave the unheeding skies.
What stoic here could check a smile,
To hear the SEA compared with NILE?
The self-sufficient river spoke,
In sounds, like clouds of thunder broke,
'Till even its CROCODILES began
To vie with huge LEVIATHAN;
And thought they must in reason be
Of greater size and quality.
Old OCEAN heard, and though disdain
Had best repaid a speech so vain;
He chose, with condescension mild,
Thus to rebuke his eldest child.
Restrain, presuming brook, thy pride;
Though thou, and all thy springs, were dried,
Thy petty tribute hardly missed,
In glory I should still exist.
Who gives the SUN'S exhaling beams
The moisture to supply thy streams?
Who gives the fleecy clouds their rain,
To sprinkle thirsty earth again?
Thou but return'st what I have lent,
To form a fruitful continent.
Raised in thy own opinion high,
Thou think not, that beyond the sky
There dwells a Power, a general source,
Who gave the elements their course;
Who gave the lower world its birth,
Of water framing it, and earth;
Who fixed to each the proper bound,
And mantled them with Ether round;
Who marked the glorious Sun his way,
Who bid it shine, and give the day;
Who spangled over with gems of light,
The mild cerulean robe of night;
Who gave, in his omnipotence,
To beasts their strength, to man his sense;
Who clothed the birds with plumed grace,
Who fishes formed a scaly race;
Who fixed the seasons varying round,
With different fruits, and emblems crowned;
The eye-enliv'ning, pregnant Spring,
With vegetation on its wing;
The bridegroom Summer decked with flowers,
And blooming Nature's strongest powers;
Autumn in golden honors clad,
The peasant's humble hopes to glad;
Hoar Winter, with its chilly train
Of earth-refreshing frosts and rain.
It Is PROVIDENCE which all bestows;
No atom self-existent grows;
'Twas PROVIDENCE created me,
And hence was formed a source for thee;
It Is PROVIDENCE that gives again
Thy borrowed waters to the main;
It Is PROVIDENCE suspends them high,
Condensed in clouds 'twixt earth and sky;
It Is PROVIDENCE, with boundless powers,
That melts them to propitious showers;
From PROVIDENCE all blessings flow,
Which animated beings know;
It Is PROVIDENCE which reigns through all;
Which guides, and shields this earthly ball.
Content with thy exalted state,
Learn wisdom -- and be truly great --
Remember, thy majestic flood
The ETERNAL gave for others good;
Not for thyself alone designed,
But to enrich and bless mankind. --
Perform, on Nature's stage, thy part,
Well satisfied with what thou art;
Wisely support thy rank and spirit,
By aiming at superior merit;
Nor, vainly seeking higher style,
In claiming more, be less than NILE;
Like human fools who with such care
Build baseless castles in the air;
Which rise at magic Folly's call,
And with the breath of Reason fall.
Thus venerable OCEAN said --
And sunk beneath the waves his head.
FABLE III. THE JUST LION.
A FOX impelled by hunger's cries,
Had made a LAMB his sacrifice,
When just as every thing was fit,
To revel on his dainty bit,
A lordly PANTHER, passing by,
Beheld it with voracious eye;
And, being nobly born, of course
The FOX'S dinner seized by force,
With this remark -- Though peasants starve,
PEERS, as they please, should always CARVE.
REYNARD, through fear must needs obey,
So licked his chaps, and slunk away;
Yet still though not in body strong,
His feeling heart would bear no wrong;
To LEO'S court with speed he flew,
There standing in the Monarch's view,
Stated at full the oppressive case,
With simple truth, and piteous face;
Concluding thus, -- My Prince, I know,
Will most impartial justice show;
Wherefore, to his decision, I
Submit my life, and property;
The weak, the nameless, and the poor,
Where VIRTUE reigns, must be secure.
The LION heard with honest wonder,
And cried, If I permit such plunder,
The monarchy of BEASTS will then
Degenerate into that of MEN --
But other views shall guide my sway,
And every rank our laws obey.
Summon LORD PANTHER -- straight he came --
And boldly answered to his name;
Confessed the injured FOX'S charge,
In all its several points at large;
Yet, confidently, seemed to think,
That vulgar creature's meat and drink
Should to indulge his want or whim,
Just as he chose, belong to HIM.
You know, my LIEGE, continues he,
I Am one of noble progeny, --
Who, if occasion urged me, could
Alliance prove to Royal blood --
Shall paltry REYNARD dare complain,
Nor meet, as sure he ought, disdain?
Titles and rank are my defense,
But what can save his insolence?
For my own part, I am content
His crime should be his punishment;
Then let him, gracious LIEGE, I pray,
This once go unchastis'd away.
The LION, worthy of his place,
With sparkling eye, and awful grace,
Spoke thus, and bade his court attend --
This PANTHER, once my valued friend,
Convicted, thus, of proud oppression,
By evidence, and self-confession,
However he thinks the action light,
I banish from my heart, and sight.
Shall Noble Birth from justice save,
Shall titles serve to screen a Knave?
Shall Subjects be afraid to speak,
And shall the strong devour the weak?
The chain of prudent order broke,
Authority becomes a joke;
And thus applied, however sublime,
PRE-EMINENCE becomes a CRIME.
It never shall, my friends, be said,
When dust entombs this Royal Head,
To stain our Name, in future years,
That LEO sheltered lawless PEERS --
Subjects, observe what I decide,
To shame, and sting dishonest pride;
This PANTHER on the FOX shall wait
Six tedious months, in servile state;
And when occasion gives the charge,
Still watch for prey, or hunt at large;
But never presume to taste a bit,
'Till REYNARD graciously thinks fit.
SELF-KNOWLEDGE thus a friend may be,
And blunt the edge of TYRANNY;
May teach him, that the lordly part
Is seated in a noble heart;
Which rather would itself endure
Some pangs of WANT, than rob the POOR.
If ever, to shame our laws, and sense,
I meet again such violence,
Justice shall doom severer fate,
To punish the licentious great;
Nor will I, mark me, Subjects, own
Ought noble, but the Good alone.
FABLE IV. THE MOUNTAIN AND CLOUD.
A Mountain, which might justly vie
With ATLAS to support the sky,
For ages had, with boundless pride,
O'erlook'd the plains on either side;
And thought, from his prodigious birth,
He ought to rule their humbler earth;
Though graced with corn, and fruit, and flocks,
In contrast to his barren rocks,
On which, instead of ought that grows,
Hung tempests dark, and endless snows.
One sullen care -- his folly's doom --
Still rankled in his flinty womb:
That while the radiant source of day,
Beamed over the vales with kindly ray,
An envious cloud, eclipsing light,
Wrapped his majestic head in night.
Impatient of supposed disgrace,
And fond to show his hideous face,
Like some amongst the human kind,
To all their grossest failings blind,
Who self-sufficiently reveal
What prudence wisely would conceal;
He thundered forth his plaint aloud
Against the dark impending cloud.
How long, foul vapor, will thou dare
To shroud my brows, and taint my air?
Shall I, who raging tempests sconr,
Though on the wings of lightning borne;
Shall I, whose strength can never fail,
Though even a deluge should assail,
Be thus obscured? -- vile cloud, away!
And give me to the eye of day.
Stung with this insolent address
The CLOUD replied -- I must confess,
Gigantic neighbor, what you speak,
Declares that you, though great, are weak;
What worth or beauty can thou show,
That Is equal to the plains below?
What laboring oxen till thy soil?
What harvests pay the peasants toil?
What fruits, what herbage grace thy sides?
What useful river over thee glides?
What forests nod upon thy brows,
Never ruffled by industrious ploughs?
Why, steril mass of rugged stone,
With skin of thriftless moss o'ergrown,
Should thou proclaim thy giant size,
As if from thence desert could rise,
Or make objections to my shade,
Suspended over thy towering head,
Without reflecting it is the fate
Attending on superior state,
To have or me, or some such other,
Perhaps a tempest-breeding brother,
Around by way of caution glide,
To check the swell of monst'rous pride?
While humble, and contented plains,
An emblem of their village swains,
With justice claim, in being less,
A larger share of happiness
In their obscure, un-envied station,
Than in thy cloud topt exaltation;
Which, 'spite of all the strength you boast,
In sudden ruin may be lost.
Thus spoke the CLOUD, as if inspired,
And with a passing gale retired;
When straight a subterraneous sound,
Like distant thunder, bellowed round;
The MOUNTAIN felt convulsive pain,
And trembling shook through every vein.
FABLE V. THE EAGLE AND JAY.
AN EAGLE whom we soon might prove
Descended from the bird of JOVE,
Had we or time, or cause to trace
The progress of his royal race;
Diminished fame, and weakened sway,
By placing friendship on a JAY;
A bird who, like dissembling man,
Played well the game of -- Cat in Pan.
Not one of all the feathered kind
So nicely knew the Monarch's mind;
Not one, with such persuasive art,
Could learn the fecrets of his heart;
Nor gain, with much superior sense
And loyalty, such confidence.
This prattling favorite often slew
In quest of news; which false, or true,
He whispered to his master's ear,
Whose greatest weakness was to hear.
The JAY, to serve each selfish end,
Appeared a very sanguine friend;
Would often lament that subject hearts
Were pregnant with destructive arts;
That nothing could, but watchful eyes,
Prevent deep laid conspiracies;
Declared he knew that many birds
Were noted for disloyal words;
Who therefore ought to feel disgrace,
In banishment from court and place;
Urging his Prince, with rig'rous claws,
To put in force Tyrannic laws.
With mischief-working hints like these
He roused such groundless jealousies,
That every night the Eagle's dreams
Were haunted with seditious schemes;
His tortured fancy often viewed,
By different deaths his life pursued;
His scepter broke, his throne o'erturn'd,
His race destroyed, and palace burned;
'Till made by perturbation sour,
He felt each pain of thorny power,
And bowed beneath the cumbrous weight,
Of friendless, solitary state;
With one sole blessing, that the JAY
Paid faithful homage to his sway.
His truest friends perceived him shy,
Suspicion gloom'd his piercing eye;
A speechless, cold, and distant state
Made loyalty and love abate;
Disorder crept throughout his realm,
While he sat trembling at the helm;
Yet none presumed to ask the reason,
Lest Freedom might be construed Treason.
At length the Monarch, wearied out,
Began to entertain some doubt;
Whether his friend might not improve
On trifles, through excessive love;
As apprehension often has made
A giant of an empty shade.
Possessed of this, incog he flew,
And wisely took a general view;
Some plaints he heard, but soon descried
They sprung from his suspicious pride;
And met upon the whole content,
Wherever his pleasing course he bent,
To find himself, through every wood,
On every plain, and every flood,
Though censured in his regal part,
Still monarch of each subject heart.
At length, as with returning night
He homeward winged his rapid flight;
Skirting along a lonely wood,
Near which an ancient castle stood,
From its declining moss-clad wall,
By trembling age prepared to fall,
A well known voice assailed his ear,
He curv'd his course, and drawing near,
Perceived the JAY, in this address,
The deep designing knave confess.
You think me loyal, as I pay
My courtly visits every day;
But penetration never will deem
Us levee-hunters what we seem;
And, on my word, Sir FALCON, know,
My friendship is but outward show;
Were I the honest truth to own,
I wish to see you mount the throne;
Our EAGLE'S but a silly fowl,
Not two degrees above an Owl,
Without the least pretense on earth
To royalty, except his birth;
Then let us find some specious cause,
(Suppose our liberties, and laws)
To seize his crown, and in his stead,
To place it on your abler head.
I have a tongue both quick and loud,
Let me harangue the gaping crowd
With promises -- sure bait for fools --
Who serve as politician's tools,
I Will bring about a revolution,
To mend our shattered constitution.
With honest rage the Eagle warmed,
And with death-dealing talons armed,
Pounc'd unperceived upon the JAY,
And snatched his Felon-life away,
This sacrifice to justice made,
The injured EAGLE wisely said;
I find at length this prudent truth,
That choice of friends to age, or youth,
Is, from the cottage to the court,
A matter of the last import.
From me let future Monarchs learn
By their own senses to discern;
Nor exercise unsafe command,
By KNOWLEDGE gained at SECOND HAND.
FABLE VI. THE FARMER AND SPARROWS.
A FARMER saw, with much regret,
Some SPARROWS in his field of wheat;
And taking up a plundered ear,
Exclaimed in rage, What havock's here!
For this have I manured the soil,
And tilled it with laborious toil?
These feathered Epicures -- a curse
To each industrious Farmer's purse, --
I Will try, without the least delay,
To kill, to maim, or fright away.
The thing no sooner said than done,
He brought with double charge his gun;
Then, Plund'rers, cried, resign your breath
To leaden messengers of Death;
And as his thoughtless rage inspired,
Amongst the corn and birds he fired.
Six victims fell! -- a joyful sight --
He ran, and seized them with delight;
Aha, he cries, at length you are caught,
Your dainties have been dearly bought;
From hence your brother thieves may know,
Justice is sure, though sometimes slow.
One SPARROW, who had yet some breath,
Replied, You triumph in our death;
We lie before your vengeful eyes,
No doubt a pleasing sacrifice;
Yet, foolish mortal, see, and own,
The unthought mischief you have done;
Much more, though rashly meant for good,
Than twenty times our number could;
Besides, surviving friends will more,
Revenging us, invade your store.
What does your reason then avail,
If only weighed in passion's scale?
We lose a doubtful life, it is true,
But certain good is lost to you.
The FARMER looked, when, lo, he saw
Full fourscore yards of earless straw!
For such a tract the shot had made,
He saw with grief, and sighing said;
I am a fool, I own the name,
I doubly feel the loss and shame;
And find the man by passion wrought,
Who turns to action sudden thought,
Instead of profit, or content,
Will find occasion to repent;
Then why should anger reason fetter?
Reflection would have taught me better.
FABLE VII. THE KNIGHT ERRANT.
IN former times (much worse they were,
Than those which give us vital air;
For always be it understood,
The present are both great and good;)
There lived, so says our tale, a wight,
Whom scruples made an ERRANT KNIGHT,
A more romantic headed ass
Than QUIXOTE, CHARLES, or HUDIBRAS,
Who, in his moral feelings nice,
Resolved to quell the monster VICE;
A greater Hydra ten degrees
Than THAT destroyed by HERCULES.
Armed, as he fancied, Cap-a-pie,
With Reason, and Morality;
Stronger, though light, to take the field,
Than AJAX' boasted sev'n-fold shield;
A court he sought, as proper soil
To exercise his pious toil.
SINCERITY, devoid of state,
Conducted to the palace gate,
And seeking entrance, gave her name;
CORRUPTION asked from whom she came;
Which told, he shook his hoary head,
And with a shrug important said,
Admittance there could only be
For those of highest quality:
Yet stretching forth his itching palm,
With features and expression calm,
He hinted favor to the KNIGHT,
If softened by a PERQUISITE.
Our HERO thinking, once let in,
His work of glory might begin,
Straight let some golden logic drop,
That CERBERUS might have a sop;
But ah! in vain, at every door
CORRUPTION met him as before;
Though PROTEUS like, in various guise,
To cheat his unsuspecting eyes;
For none of all the courtly tribe
Would move, he found, without a bribe.
Wearied at length, and what is worse,
Encumbered with an empty purse,
He cried, "Was VIRTUE never here?"
One answered, "Is he, friend, a PEER,
Or COMMONER, of large estate?
We know him not, unless he is great."
DISCRETION strove in vain to assuage
Our Hero, filled with fire-ey'd rage;
Who fiercely swift destruction vowed
To VICE, and all her train, aloud.
His furious speech a lordly wag
Immediately pronounced Scan. Mag.
And threatened, with a special warrant,
The person of our poor KNIGHT ERRANT;
Who, rather dreading such a case,
Resolved to fly the ticklish place.
From COURT he sought a lady's ROUTE,
And conquest hoped beyond a doubt;
He stood, and saw with painful eye
The spotted witches circling fly;
And said, More devastation springs
From four ill painted pasteboard kings,
Than ever was spread over public good,
By any Tyrant, since the flood.
At length a COUNTESS -- nothing new --
Secured a PAM to save her Loo;
Which gave occasion to the KNIGHT
To speak at large against the bite;
When one and all the gamesters said,
He merited a broken head:
But said, Through grace, and he might thank it,
They Would only toss him in a blanket.
Not satisfied, he sought the city,
And said on Change, 'twas wondrous pity
That mankind, for each other made,
Should try to overreach in trade;
That merchandise could only be
A source of sordid usury;
That moral feelings were discarded,
And darling Gain alone regarded;
That as the sage Socrates.
, by Virtue awed,
Called MARKETS once the seat of FRAUD;
So still, he added, to their shame,
They merited the hateful name.
A Broker, of the HEBREW nation,
A knave by nature, and vocation,
Who knew his own defective heart,
Assumed the irritative part;
Declared that man who could defame
And taint the Trader's spotless name,
That others might be kept in awe,
Deserved the sharpest lash of law.
Thus having sounded an alarm,
Each conscious Knave began to warm;
A hum of mischievous intent,
Ran through the sons of Cent. per Cent.
Till once again, our KNIGHT defeated,
Before an host of foes retreated,
And wiser grown than heretofore,
Resolved to combat VICE no more.
The moral hence we hope is plain,
That mankind are so blind, or vain,
So whirled by whim, by passions tossed,
All but the name of Virtue's lost.
That good example's more prevailing
Than all enthusiastic railing;
And that the man's an ERRANT KNIGHT,
Who strives with general VICE to fight.
FABLE VIII. THE BEAU AND BUTTERFLY.
THUS speaks an Adage, somewhat old,
"TRUTH is not to be always told."
What eye but struck with outward show,
Admires the pretty thing, a BEAU?
Which both by Art and Nature made is,
The sport of sense, the toy of ladies.
A mortal of this tiney mold,
In clothes of silk, adorned with gold,
And dressed in every point of sight
To give the world of taste delight,
Prepared to enter his Sedan,
A Birthday picture of a Man,
Cried out in vain soliloquy,
Was ever creature formed like me?
By Art or Nature's nicest care,
Made more complete, and Debonnair?
I see myself, with perfect joy,
Of human kind the Je ne scai quoy;
In every thing I rival FRANCE,
In fashion, wit, and sprightly dance;
So charming are my shape and parts,
I Am formed for captivating hearts;
The proudest toast, when in the vein,
I take at once by Coup de main;
Mort de ma vie, it is magic all,
I look, and vanquished Women fall.
One of the race of BUTTERFLIES,
An insect far more nice than wise,
Who from his sunny couch of glass,
Had listened to the two legged Ass,
With intermeddling zeal replied,
Unequaled folly -- matchless pride!
Shall thou, a patch-work creature, claim
More lovely shape, or greater name,
Than one of us? Assert thy right,
Stand naked in my critic sight.
To parent Earth at once resign
The produce of her golden mine;
Give to the worm her silken store,
The di'mond to GOLCONDA'S shore;
Nor let the many teeth you want,
Be plundered from the Elephant;
Let native locks adorn thy head,
Nor glow thy cheeks with borrowed red;
Give to the OSTRICH back his plume,
Nor rob the CAT of her perfume;
Here to the BEAVER yield at once
His fur which crowns thy empty sconce;
In short, appear through every part,
No more, nor less, than what thou art;
Then little better than an APE,
Will show thy metamorphos'd shape;
While BUTTERFLIES to death retain
The beauties they from Nature gain.
You Will say, perhaps, our sojourn here
Is less by half, than half a year;
That churlish Winter surely brings
Destruction to our painted wings.
I grant the truth -- now answer me --
Can Beaus outlive adversity?
Will Milliners, and Tailors join,
To make a foppish Beggar fine?
It Is certain, No -- of glitter made --
You surely vanish in the shade;
Compared, then, who will dare deny
A BEAU is less than BUTTERFLY?
FABLE IX. SOCRATES AND THE BEAU.
A Grecian Smart, or Buck, or Beau,
(GREECE had her Coxcombs too, we know)
Would needs his puny wit engage
With SOCRATES, the moral SAGE.
This dupe to fashion's flimzy rules,
Like some we know -- existing fools --
RELIGION deemed, and even Sense,
Against POLITENESS an offense --
Despised, as vain, all learned knowledge
Which youth derives from school or college --
And said, Time only flew to waste
Unless with pleasure winged, and taste.
Full of himself, with eager pace,
He sought the Sage's dwelling place;
Which found, like all the forward kind,
He left his complaisance behind;
Pushed boldly in, when lo, his fight
Was struck with unforeseen delight,
To catch the philosophic Ass
Contemplating a looking glass.
Friend SOCRATES, the witling cries,
Good morning -- shall I trust these eyes --
Can gravity, like yours, enjoy
So insignificant a toy?
I thought a mirror only fit
Where beauty holds the place of wit;
A play-thing for the young and gay,
To fool their vacant hours away.
Yet hold -- perhaps unusual graces
The eye of Contemplation traces;
I Will take myself a nicer view,
And give so great a man his due.
He cocked his glass -- for every Beau
Used such two thousand years ago;
Then cried -- Ye Gods, how fine a creature!
What harmony of limb and feature!
What eagle eyes! how grave a beard!
Was ought more perfect ever reared?
Though in the CLOUDS A Comedy of Aristophanes.
you have made me gay,
It Is now but simple truth to say,
For elegance of shape, and clothes,
You're foremost of Athenian Beaus.
Untouched with idle hasty passion,
By this ironic fool of fashion,
(The man can bear all rubs in life,
Who bore like him a scolding wife)
The MORALIST looked up, and smiled;
Then said, I must instruct you, child --
You stare -- nay think me not absurd --
You're but a CHILD, upon my word.
Know, Sir, that years exceeding twenty,
Nor partial fortune shedding plenty,
That titles, person, dress, nor gait,
Can dignify with man's estate;
Beyond all honors, show, or pelf,
Is both to know, and rule thyself.
This Mirror can, if well applied,
Assisting Reason, checking Pride,
Much more instructive lessons teach
Than Folly, and her train can reach --
Deign, sprightly Sir, to take a view;
'Twas chiefly made for such as you --
Soon as it struck Sir FOPLING'S eyes,
Distended features showed surprise;
And well, to own a truth, they might
At such a mortifying sight;
For lo, the glass, beyond a doubt,
Had turned the reptile inside out;
He saw, with pain, his brainless scull
Of gewgaws and of fashions full;
And found that Vice, in every part
Had putrified his wretched heart.
Says SOCRATES, Good friend, what now?
Why sits amazement on your brow?
Had you but striv'n to deck your mind,
Nor all your care to dress confined,
A fairer prospect then had been
In such a kind reflector seen;
Time yet is yours -- employ it better --
Nor be to common sense a debtor.
Let kind reflection justly tell
The happy art of living well;
An art, if I can ought discern,
Fine Gentlemen want much to learn.
The Beau, abashed, retired in haste,
Both disappointed and disgraced.
FABLE X. THE SWALLOW AND PIKE.
IT IS common amongst human kind,
All errors, but our own, to find;
Nay, often we lay severest blame,
When guilty of the very same;
What magic power can dim our sight,
Or make us look through partial light?
SELF-APPROBATION, thee I call,
The dear delusive source of all.
The HYPOCRITE, with sainted face,
Will still hypocrisy disgrace;
Lifts up in prayer his hands and eyes,
Unblushing to the insulted skies;
While earth-incumber'd thought remains
Fast bound below, in worldly chains;
Yet calls devotion impious art,
Which flows not pure, and from the heart.
The GAMESTER cries, that shame should fix
Her brand upon dishonest tricks;
To slip a card, or cog a die,
He calls the blackest infamy;
Yet stake with him, he is nothing loath,
When-e'er he can, to practice both.
The ENVIOUS man affects surprise,
To hear of grudging hearts, or eyes;
Though all he sees another gain,
Infects his worthless mind with pain.
NARCISSA'S husband six weeks dead,
Even widow like she chose to wed;
AMELIA heard, cried Fie for shame!
And, in a fortnight, did the same.
LIBERIA, whose abandoned life,
With modesty holds constant strife,
Exclaims, What shame do those deserve
Who cannot keep a just reserve?
Thus CENSURE, like a shuttle-cock,
Is bandied round the human flock;
And always takes its boldest wing,
From those who best deserve its sting.
The setting SUN, with Eastward beams,
Now lightly sparkled over the streams;
When eager in pursuit of food,
An hungry Swallow skim'd the flood;
Myriads of Flies must death endure,
To gorge the feathered Epicure;
Who, rather sated with his prey,
Turned serious work, to wanton play,
And in his gambols needs must try,
How near the water he could fly.
So near the rash advent'rer went,
To that precarious element,
That from his rush-encircled bed,
A greedy PIKE raised up his head;
And darting as the SWALLOW passed,
Caught his unthinking victim fast;
A pinion broke, then let him float
Within the compass of his throat;
While thousands and ten thousand flies,
Buzzed loud thanksgiving to the skies;
That such an hungry monster's doom
Should be to find a living tomb.
The wounded bird made his defense,
By thus pretending innocence --
What have I done, good lordly PIKE,
To merit thus your dread dislike?
It was beneath your rank to follow,
A poor and inoffensive SWALLOW;
So mild and tender in his nature,
As never to hurt a mortal creature.
Audacious wretch, the PIKE replied,
Of guilt convicted, soon as tried;
How dares thy coward cunning try
To shelter life, with sophistry?
Why over this river did thou skim,
Was it for profit, slave! or whim?
Did thou not dare, before these eyes,
To gorge innumerable Flies?
Insects, whose right to life, though small,
Equals the greatest of us all;
Whose tender fibers crushed retain
As quick and deep a sense of pain;
Besides my darling Fish must be,
Deprived of these, unfit for me;
Like me, thou have no other right,
But greater strength, and appetite;
If I Am a murderer in thy view,
The Flies may call thee murderer too;
Yet still we only follow Man,
To prey on what, and whom we can.
Thus pleading Nature's general law,
He gave the morsel to his maw.
FABLE XI. THE BIRTH DAY.
THE morn was come, the brilliant morn,
On which Fame said, my LORD was born;
The courtly SUN -- who more polite,
Contributed unusual light --
The vegetable world was seen
Exhibiting more vivid green;
The feathered songsters tuned their throats,
To louder and more jocund notes;
All Nature smiled, and looked more gay,
To honor the auspicious day;
Nor could she, reason must confess,
Do for a TITLED mortal, less --
Whom twenty-one indulgent years
Had ripened for the HOUSE of PEERS.
At such an era, custom pays
A world of compliments, and praise;
Mere phantoms of external show,
Which from the lip of interest flow;
For let the self-same wondrous man,
So worshipped by a servile clan,
Be stripped of titles and estate,
He Is then no longer good, nor great.
The BIRTH DAY levee now were come,
And marshalled in the drawing room;
A medly of most curious creatures,
As different in designs as features.
Here fawning Priests, with looks demure,
In hopes to get a better cure,
Appeared to grace the friendly crowd;
And very low -- for livings bowed --
On to other side, the sons of law,
Their reverence make with distant awe;
No counsel, sure, would ever grudge
A scrape or two -- to be a Judge.
Even thy disciples, MARS, beset
The youthful rising coronet.
But where is he the race can shun
When thou, Preferment, bid'st him run?
Thy magic spur can quicken all,
To circle round this earthly ball;
To combat dangers, cares, and strife,
Nay, some to hazard fame with life.
Amongst the rest, one suitor came,
A stranger scarcely known by name,
Who acting on a different plan,
Declared himself, the HONEST MAN.
This rustic blade approached the peer --
I Have reached, he said, my ninetieth year;
Three score of which, young Lord, have I
Been tenant to your family --
Then, let me first with kindness prove
Your patronage, and noble love;
Though plain my coat, my heart, I trust,
Has ever been in action just;
I boldly ask, what these conceal,
And hope to win, what they would steal,
Your favor -- not for selfish end --
But more to show myself your friend.
I ask not wealth, for common sense
Has made me rich in competence;
I ask not titles, they must shame
My humble parts, and humble name;
But ask a boon which you may grant,
Nor for another suit or want;
Age bows my body to the grave,
Remaining time I wish to save,
Thus hasting off this stage of strife,
Will you bestow some years of life?
The youthful Peer, whose heart was good,
And full as noble, as his blood;
In sentiments, as rank sublime;
Perhaps the CARLISLE of his time --
Replied, I understand thee not --
What power have I to change thy lot
Of life or death? -- yet what is mine
I promise freely shall be thine;
I Have heard thy worth, and dare afford
To bind it with my solemn word.
Oh noble youth, returned the fire,
May heaven thy virtuous mind inspire;
Each worthy deed of thine will be
A year of added life to me --
Thus I may ask, without a crime,
To lengthen out with joy my time.
His Lordship heard with smiling face,
Then rushed into a kind embrace;
And cried, Good father, thy request
Shall live for ever in this breast;
And far as mortal frailty reaches,
I Will practice what thy wisdom teaches;
Nor will I specious show regard,
But worth in honest men reward;
And keep my favors there confined,
Where virtues ornament the mind.
He said -- the levee shrunk away --
Like night before the rising day.
FABLE XII. THE LION AND FOX.
A LION, full of youthful blood,
Who ruled at large a spacious wood;
Whom flatterers had often told,
No spear could pierce, no toil could hold;
Like some amongst the human kind,
Was plagued with an ambitious mind;
By birth possessed with ample store,
He sighed, and vainly wished for more;
And restless deemed his royal lot,
Pent up within too small a spot.
Possessed of this, in waking dreams,
He laid ten thousand frantic schemes;
Projected conquests far and wide,
Extended rule on every side;
Saw savage nations fall before him,
And many thousands more adore him;
Nay, saw in his unbounded plan,
His scepter sway the tyrant man.
At length, vouchsafing to impart
The mighty purpose of his heart
A FOX, who many years had been
Chief actor in each busy scene;
And therefore well knew how to fix
The real worth of politics;
Who warmed with patriotic zeal,
Preferred, to gain, the common weal;
Presumed, without disguise, to ask,
That he might share his Prince's task;
Or happily cool, by timely truth,
The ardour of impetuous youth.
Why thus, my friend, the LION cries,
Beyond myself I mean to rise;
And more t'exalt my present state,
Henceforth to be surnamed -- the GREAT.
Thou know the forest which lies south,
Beyond the Golden Valley's mouth;
With awful caves, and choice of sport,
Where TIGER keeps his mimic court;
I Will seize by force the vast domain,
To add new strength, and grace my reign;
From thence, with most resistless force,
March to the sable river's course;
Hurl haughty LEOPARD from his throne,
And make that plenteous realm my own:
Then our victorious banners wave,
'Till ELEPHANT becomes my slave:
Inferior princes at my call,
Must homage pay, and prostrate fall.
Thus, when a world salutes me King,
And boundless nations tribute bring;
I Will turn toward my native soil,
And there enjoy my glorious toil.
The FOX replied, Your royal name,
My Liege, and your immortal fame;
Joined to your happy kingdom's good,
I tender dearly as my blood;
This forces truth upon my tongue,
And pardon claims, should I be wrong.
Look round, and see, with calm content,
The realm you govern by descent;
With Heaven's best gifts supremely blessed,
With plenty crowned, and joy and rest,
See happiness through every part
Diffused to glad your princely heart;
Each beast with pleasure howls your praise,
And views you with admiring gaze;
What then should more a King rejoice,
Than Loyalty's approving voice?
I know, great sir, that young in life,
Unpracticed too, in martial strife;
Ambition cries, Your mighty paw
Should keep the prostrate world in awe;
But let the restless source of care,
Be banished from your bosom far;
That fever of an heated mind,
To yours, and general safety blind.
Suppose, for once, the fairest view
Which FAME and FORTUNE could pursue;
Suppose success with rapid force
Should urge you over a downhill course;
That every wind, and every stream,
Should waft you toward your golden dream;
Nay, grant beyong the utmost scope
Of warmest wish, and boldest hope;
Ten thousand cares, unknown before,
Surrounding, will perplex you more;
Our history, like that of man,
Will contradict your dangerous plan;
For jealous eyes must still pursue,
Your conquests, with malicious view;
Compulsion, sage experience shows,
An origin of restless foes;
And limbs beyond the body grown,
May overweigh, perhaps, your throne.
Next let Reflection's eye advance,
And view with care precarious chance;
The fate of war in balance hung,
May speak with most persuasive tongue;
Let Fancy, like a faithful scout,
Bring to your sight a total rout;
Behold your scattered warriors fly,
Or vanquished in the battle die;
With fell revenge the conqu'rors burn,
To waste your kingdom in return;
On every side your subjects fall;
What power can banished life recall?
See Desolation's dreary face
Glare horrible in every place;
By no restrictive rulers awed,
See Famine, Murder, stalk abroad,
See all, which seen makes Nature shrink,
And learn, my prince, betimes to think.
You judge, perhaps, an active mind,
In peaceful times too much confined;
And think with Glory's dreams possessed,
That all but war is slothful rest;
Yet monarchs in the calmest hour,
May show the brightest beams of power.
To frame new wholesome laws, or give
Due influence to those which live;
To banish vice, and always be
The bounteous friend of industry;
To hold the worthy in regard,
And cherish merit with reward;
Is sure a safer, milder way
To FAME which never can decay;
Than that which martial glory leads,
While wounded Nature groaning bleeds.
This truth, my Royal Lord, receive,
And as you know my love, believe --
War combats Reason, Virtue, Sense,
Unless declared for self-defence;
In such a case the heart must warm,
While Nature bids the weakest arm;
Repelling wrong, protecting right,
Your subjects will with pleasure fight;
And bravely dare Death's darkest frown,
To save their freedom, and your crown.
Then, Sir, to grace your royal blood,
Shine truly GREAT, in being GOOD.
FABLE XIII. THE PHILOSOPHER AND RATTLE.
A Solemn port, a brow austere,
Abstracted pride, and mind severe;
Contempt by looks, and language shown,
For all opinions but its own;
Clothes made to contradict the fashion
Of any age, and every nation;
With conversation most sublime,
Which calls amusement, waste of time;
Have often seemed, yet never could be,
Nature's best guide, Philosophy.
A wight of this sequestered stamp,
Who long had over the midnight lamp,
With less of profit than of pains,
Begloom'd his mind and racked his brains;
Defrauding Nature of her due,
In constant search of something new;
'Till overloaded with the weight
Of knowledge, Reason left her seat:
For as the body, so the head
May possibly be overfed;
And happily wanting proper vent,
May turn to poison, nourishment:
A wight like this, relates our tale,
Who weighed each thought in Logic's scale;
Once met, perchance, a sprightly child,
With youth and pleasure almost wild;
Who shaking his new rattle ran,
And thus addressed this learned man;
As children free from selfish care,
Like those enjoyments best they share.
See here, good Sir, the pretty thing,
Mama has bought her little king;
Come, take it in your hand, and play
As I do -- look you -- here is the way.
So freely spoke the prattling boy,
And thought to give our Stoic joy!
Who took his bauble with a frown,
Then -- From the cottage to the crown
It Is folly all alike, he cries;
How few endeavor to be wise?
Nor is it strange: since youth are taught
An idle vacancy of thought;
By parents giving approbation
To implements of dissipation
Like this; on every slight pretense;
Which, flattering Fancy, murder Sense.
He said; and with contempt profound,
His hand discharged it to the ground.
The boy in simple wonder gazed,
His little heart shrunk back amazed;
A doubtful cloud o'er-hung each eye,
He knew not which, to laugh, or cry;
But soon the RATTLE found a tongue,
To answer such indignant wrong,
For be it known, that injured wood
Can scold, as well as flesh and blood.
Why, how now, whence such surly looks,
Thou overbearing man of books?
I dare assert, and speak with reason,
That all things have their proper season;
And toys, like me, are well designed
To entertain a childish mind:
My name perhaps begets disdain,
In one like you of knowledge vain;
But pause a while -- like PROTEUS -- I
The force of various shapes can try;
And play my parts on Nature's stage,
To please all ranks, and every age.
Sometimes like Glory's brightest gem,
To kings I come a diadem;
Before the Curate's eyes I Am drawn
In form of most attractive lawn;
The Lawyer, with ambition big,
Admires me in a Judge's wig;
The Soldier I can vanquish soon,
In pleasing shape of a battoon;
The Merchant, having bought and sold,
Retiring finds me in his gold;
To Turtle turned -- I still secure
Each gormandizing Epicure;
I hit the Bacchanalian's vein,
In sparkling flasks of brisk champaign;
The Beau I catch, as well as brute,
When changed into a birthday suit;
A A famous race-horse.
GIMCRACK to the racing crew,
I skim the plain, and they pursue;
The ALLEY knaves I catch in flocks,
Transformed to precious rising stocks:
Conveyed in fair CORINNA'S smiles,
My shade her lover's care beguiles.
The ladies too, in every state,
By different forms I captivate;
Sometimes I catch the fair one's view,
With plunder of enchanting loo;
Now changed to di'mond solitaire,
VANINA gives me all her care;
A coronet and equipage,
In me another's heart engage;
A fourth admits me through her eyes,
In form of oaths, and vows, and sighs;
Both young and old, both high and low,
Alike to me attachment show.
Even you, with all your learning, sense,
Against my power have no defense;
For howsoe'er in words you battle,
Your summum bonum's but a RATTLE.
FABLE XIV. THE COCK AND POINTER.
COURAGE, which serves a worthy end,
The virtuous and the wise commend;
Who likewise judge by certain rule,
That headlong rashness marks a fool;
Making such worth as might adorn
The source of perils, pain, and scorn.
A COCK, who often in bloody fray,
Had borne the VICTOR'S prize away;
Though not without indented scars,
Heroic signals of his wars;
By frequent conquests grew so vain,
That glory turned his martial brain;
And made the images of fight,
Haunt all his wishes, day and night;
A feathered QUIXOTE, fit for battle,
With men, with windmills, or with cattle;
For if he might his prowess show,
He valued not what kind of foe.
One day an honest POINTER went,
With humble competence content,
To scrape the dunghill for a bone,
Which, having hid, he thought his own;
The COCK observed with jealous eye,
Crow'd, clapped his wings, and drawing nigh,
Declared, by all the powers of fate,
No thief should plunder his estate.
The DOG, by converse gentle made,
Gave smooth reply, though not afraid;
And said, With different tastes we are born,
I feed on flesh, you relish corn;
What variance then should make us jar,
I hate, I own, the thoughts of war;
And would in social concord rest,
With every kind of bird and beast;
Save when my master's net, or gun
Requires, in search of game, to run.
The COCK replied, A coward still
Can find evasions if he will;
Know that my just resentment soon
Shall teach thee distance, vile poltroon;
No less a Spaniard in thy heart,
Than in thy name, and outward part;
Thus learn -- so saying slapp'd a stroke --
You Will find it, reptile, more than joke.
The DOG, unhurt, kept scratching on,
And only bade the COCK begone;
Who, sure of conquest, struck some blows,
Which wounded PONTO'S tender nose;
Whose patience lost, a single bite
Concluded the unequal fight:
Sir CHANTICLEER scream'd out, and died,
A Martyr to his foolish pride.
FABLE XV. THE CYNIC AND FASHION.
SOME think on every slight pretense,
That snarling shows a fund of sense;
And therefore shrewdly never fail,
Reason, or none, to mouth, and rail;
As if the scope of moral thought,
Lay all comprised in finding fault.
It happened so that one of these,
A thorough bred DIOGENES;
That sprightly damsel FASHION met,
And lectur'd thus the gay Coquette.
It Is true, I know, fantastic madam,
Thou foe to all the race of ADAM;
Thou thing of nothing, gaudy moppet,
No better than a dressed up puppet;
I know thy power, thy matchless pride,
That reason has the weaker side,
Yet dare I speak my thoughts aloud,
Though Fancy sways the senseless crowd;
And show that all thy flimzy rules,
Are cobweb bands to fetter fools.
How dare thou, trifler as thou art,
Presume to rule the human heart?
To captivate the thoughtless eyes,
And warp the nobler faculties?
Degrading sense, and studious care,
With empty taste, and idle air.
Thy proselytes, a coxcomb train,
Of outward show alone are vain;
Who still to real merit blind,
Enslaved by dress, neglect the mind.
Say what avails thy splendid show,
Though colors rival IRIS' bow;
Though jewels from the INDIAN mine,
Arrang'd in nicest order shine;
Though every quarter of the globe,
Should join thy person to enrobe;
Thy proper title still must be,
The Weathercock of Vanity.
FASHION, with sly and gentle look,
Received this cynical rebuke;
Then smiling, shrewdly thus replied,
There are more sorts, than one, of Pride;
A weed so rank -- in every college,
It chokes fair science, learning, knowledge.
Look inward, surly friend, and see,
If such a monster dwells in thee;
Let objects in due form arise,
And sense obey impartial eyes;
While prejudice invades the mind,
It Is ever obstinate, or blind.
Think you, grave Sir, that wisdom shows
With better grace in shapeless clothes?
That Virtue speaks with stronger note,
In longer, or in shorter coat?
That learning dare not show its face,
Beneath a little harmless lace?
Must piety upon her back,
Still wear a formal robe of black?
Can none expire in honor's bed,
But martial spirits bound in red?
It Is all a farce, and none but fools
Would judge by such contracted rules.
You Have boldly charged me home with treason,
Against the sacred power of reason;
But wherefore so? all things on earth
From some good purpose draw their birth;
And rightly managed serve to bless;
Yet when perverted by excess,
Slaves of irrational abuse,
They lose their beauty, worth, and use.
Thus I, by prudence first was made,
A friend to industry and trade;
My purposes will proof endure,
I please the rich, to feed the poor;
I rule the great with my commands,
And set to work unnumber'd hands;
From my inconstant temper springs
To subjects wealth, and power to kings;
Divided between land and sea,
Millions derive support from me.
Indeed when mimic folly breaks
Discretion's bounds, and wildly takes
My shape; I always feel disgrace
With painful blushes tinge my face.
To see, forgetting different spheres,
Mechanics boldly apeing peers;
To see fine ladies Abigails,
Drag silken trains, like Peacocks tails;
To see the wife of homely cit,
Attempt the style of courtly wit;
To see an ALDERMAN advance,
In capers newly brought from FRANCE;
To see a flaunting semstress come
To figure at a lady's drum;
To see a draggled prentice sent
With cards of ill-spelt compliment;
To see, the sordid slave of vice,
A LONDON merchant trade with DICE;
To see all these, and many more,
Which life affords in ample store;
May raise your censure, or compassion,
But call them MADNESS, friend, not FASHION.
FABLE XVI. THE ROYAL DOVE.
EXAMPLE streaming from the great,
Through each department of a state,
Should as untainted snow be fair,
And spread around with virtuous care;
For be it either good or bad,
Most ranks are fashionably mad.
An EAGLE who had seen with pain,
Licentiousness extend its reign;
Whose more than usual patriot eye,
Saw most in birds of quality;
Saw marriage, like compulsive tether,
His lords and ladies link together;
With scarce a spark of love to light
The scanty space of wedding night;
Who saw gallants and mistresses,
The several parties better please;
Who saw destructive cards and dice,
In triumph lead domestic vice;
Who saw a love of foreign fashions
With endless idle dissipations,
Infect bats, owls, and carrion crows,
As well as gaudy well-plum'd beaus,
Who saw discretion yield to pride,
But chiefly on the female side;
Kindly resolved, by wisdom led,
A partner for his royal bed;
That subjects looking to the throne,
From Virtues there might form their own^
The proselyte of prudent love,
He fixed his choice upon a DOVE;
Whom Nature had with partial care
Created good as well as fair.
With open hand Benevolence,
The child of Virtue and of Sense
Dispersed her various bounties round,
With multitudes of blessings crowned;
A constant and engaging mate,
She smoothed her consort's cares of state;
Whose captive heart each coming day,
Owned more and more her gentle sway;
Which never aimed at any power,
But that of sweet'ning every hour.
Mothers from her might fully prove
The raptures of maternal love;
And sure no offspring ever could
Bring more of joy, or public good.
Mild condescension smoothed her brow,
And taught ill judging pride to bow;
Whenever she coo'd, the subjects hung
With rapture on her tuneful tongue;
And those were ever most admired,
Who caught that goodness she inspired.
Each couple, like the ROYAL PAIR,
Still sympathiz'd in joy and care;
Till HYMEN, with peculiar grace,
Was seen to smile in every place;
Even fickle, wanton Sparrows now
Would fashionably keep their vow.
Perfect in every scene of life,
Reviewed as mother, friend, or wife;
The truly ROYAL DOVE was seen,
To act, to coo, to look the QUEEN;
With charming form, and gentle mind,
Almost the CHARLOTTE of her kind.
FABLE XVII. THE ROMAN AND BARBARIAN.
WHEN ROME was in her height of glory,
So find we in historic story;
Struck with her universal fame,
A traveling BARBARIAN came,
Who wished in all her parts to see
That boasted seat of liberty.
A CITIZEN engaged to show
The stranger all he wished to know;
Over all her sev'n proud hills they strayed,
And various observations made;
The ROMAN pointing to his guest,
Those prospects which he fancied best.
There view our CAPITOL, he cries,
Stupendous subject of surprise!
Where sits our SENATE framing law,
To keep the conquered world in awe.
Examine with punctilious care,
This spacious AMPHITHEATRE;
Where thronging nations may find room --
Such is its large, capacious womb.
Behold, with reverence profound!
Our vast PANTHEON'S sacred round!
Where, wisely suited to the place,
Our imag'd Gods give hallowed grace!
Behold this Column towering high,
Which seems to emulate the sky;
Those BATHS superb! -- see -- curious sight!
Are framed for profit and delight.
View hence the sun his luster beam,
To gild majestic TYBER'S stream;
By which our plenteous city gains
The produce of unnumber'd plains.
Look round, in short, on every part,
Then freely speak, and from your heart,
If Art and Nature so combined,
With elegance and grandeur joined,
Ever struck your ravished eyes before
Your footsteps trod the ROMAN shore.
Here the BARBARIAN (for that name
Those proud monopolists of Fame,
The ROMANS, gave with partial sneer,
To all beyond their native sphere;)
Admitted, on a curious view,
The several observations true;
Yet seemed to say that solid sense
Never doated on magnificence.
Did all, says he, this grandeur come
By lawful means, to lordly ROME?
For why should many nations groan,
To deck a city not their own?
Were she by emulative trade,
In wealth, and power, superior made;
Did she not gain her boasted charms,
By rapine, and the force of arms;
Could all her pompous marks of state,
Avert the unerring shafts of fate;
(For, once she must her ruin mourn,
Like other empires in her turn;)
Could power and grandeur time defy,
Nor ROMANS like BARBARIANS die;
Could they procure a better lot,
In future worlds, when here forgot;
Could they, on life's precarious stage,
But add one scene to failing age;
Could they from sickness take its pains,
Or harmonize disordered brains;
Could they with kind instructive art,
Inform the head, and mend the heart;
Could they the hours misspent recall,
And shed Divine Content on all;
The world might then with justice come,
And worship your unrivaled ROME.
But as it is -- (excuse a truth,
Not the less certain, though uncouth;
Since sure it cannot be denied)
They only serve to pamper pride.
FABLE XVIII. THE POLITIC LION.
IN life no error more appears
Than ill adapted characters.
Who would not either laugh, or cry,
The contrast of philosophy,
To see a valiant soldier loll
And slumber in a Prebend's stall,
Devoid of Piety and Knowledge,
Who shames EELIGION, and the COLLEGE;
(His morals naught but outward show,)
And shines a most irrev'rend beau.
What other feelings strike the heart,
To see the grave PHYSICIAN'S part
Disgraced by those, (as often is seen,)
Who good mechanics might have been;
To see a genius, formed for trade,
A blund'ring Pettyfogger made;
To see a farming country Squire,
Sent up a silent Knight of the shire --
To see a Poet, or Musician,
Commencing shallow Politician;
In short, to see, as sense must own,
So many men turned upside down;
And Reason's dictates cast aside,
By Folly, Avarice, or Pride.
When each man in a proper place,
Might act his part with decent grace.
A LION, who with sovereign sway
The forest ruled -- one council day,
Among the subject beasts declared,
That he and they must stand prepared
A most tremendous war to wage,
Demanding wisdom, strength, and rage.
Let all, he cries, take proper spheres,
And all who march, be volunteers --
In every enterprise we find
There Is nothing like a willing mind.
You, BRUIN, whom we henceforth call
Our Muster-master General,
Collect our Warriors with such speed,
As suits a time of pressing need;
For this the wisest means pursue:
Ourself will take the grand review.
His royal Mandate spread about,
All royal beasts began their route;
The HARE and ASS, with others came,
Through Duty, more than love of Fame;
Whom when the cynic Bear beheld,
With savage laugh he shook the field;
Then said, with an ironic sneer,
Oh, welcome, valiant creatures, here --
What Monarchs shrink at war's alarms,
When such as you cry out -- To arms!
Heroes! for boundless conquest made --
Of nothing, but disgrace, afraid.
The bashful couple in dismay,
Held down their heads and slunk away --
Too often modest worth and sense
Give place to hardened impudence.
Just then the LION, passing by,
Beheld them with indulgent eye;
And having kindly asked their cases,
Declared they should be fixed in places, --
Which, certainly, though not so great
As many others in the state,
Had still their worth, and were of use,
Beyond the reach of proud abuse.
Then turning to the BEAR, he cried,
How durst you, Sir, indulge your pride?
If you had been as wise, as strong,
Your sense would then have checked your tongue --
Good subjects must be dear to me,
Whether of high, or low degree.
Indeed should I so grossly err,
Unworthy creatures to prefer;
Should I so far from prudence wander,
To make an ASS or HARE commander;
My subjects might with cause complain,
And stigmatize my simple reign.
But while I, with impartial spirit,
Pay due regard to honest merit;
While just gradation forward leads,
And beasts are valued for their deeds;
They Will well perform their several parts,
And I reign Monarch of their hearts.
Those creatures you so much disdain,
When thus disposed shall credit gain;
The Stentor-ass shall loudly rattle,
And bray, with martial sound -- To battle!
And on occasion help to bear
Provisions -- while this nimble Hare
Shall serve, for which you will all confess
She Is well designed, to go express --
To scout, and watch, with curious eye,
The motions of our enemy.
Thus, or my judgment is outwitted,
Their business, and their powers are fitted.
In movements of a grand machine,
Small wheels, as well as great, are seen --
So may the least in any nation,
Be put into an useful station;
And PUBLIC good will flourish most,
Where each supplies his proper post.
FABLE XIX. THE CHARIOTEER.
A CHARIOTEER; not one of those
Who galloped in OLYMPIC shows;
But one, who on NEWMARKET'S sod,
Was worshipped, as a Demi-God;
Who, out of any thing, could hatch
The praise, or profit of a MATCH;
Inspired with most heroic glee,
High mounted on a VIS A VIS,
Which to a second he could drive,
Or turn, with any man alive;
Was posting on a glowing pace --
For Time and he were matched a race.
His brother CHARIOTEER, the Sun,
His daily course had almost run,
Impatient for an ev'ning's nap,
In gentle THETIS' watery lap;
When driving up a steepy hill,
Which somewhat checked impatient will,
(As horses, be they ever so good,
Are still no more than flesh and blood)
It chanced our rattle-pated wit
O'ertook an easy jogging cit,
Of whom he asked, in modish style,
Damn it, old boy, how many mile
To such a place, and have I power
To reach it -- Gee-up -- in an hour?
An hour! -- old Slow and Sure replies,
It Is near the rate a Pigeon flies;
And though your tits are high bred things,
I cannot yet discern their wings;
Their gaping mouths, with foam overspread,
And stretched out nostrils glowing red,
Their heaving sides, and quivering tails,
Inform me that fatigue prevails --
May I advise, your speed abate,
Or else you will reach your inn too late;
You Will sooner gain -- believe me, friend --
By slower pace, your journey's end.
The mettled blade, of spirit proud,
Disdained advice, and laughed aloud;
Then swore politely, by the Gods,
Old Shaver must have taken the odds --
Exulting thus, whipped sharp his cattle --
Who sprung, and made the carriage rattle.
Scarce had he gone three hundred yards,
Ere adverse fate his course retards;
A failing wheel, with crashing noise,
The speed of sanguine hope destroys;
And on the ground, in full career,
Lays low the astonished CHARIOTEER;
Who cursed the chance, in modish phrase,
And star'd around with stupid gaze.
The sober CIT came jogging on,
And saw dismounted PHAETON;
He saw the prostrate ruin lie,
On which he cast a leering eye;
And thus addressed, with taunting sneer --
I did not think to catch you here;
Though as you drove so very fast,
I thought to overtake at last.
Thus you, young Sir, like many more,
In Fortune rich, in Reason poor,
Drive headlong on, nor ever think
How near you are to danger's brink.
If ever you have been at school
You might have learned this useful rule,
For young or old, for grave or gay,
Wisely to keep the middle way.
A common Proverb has decreed,
The more we haste the worse we speed;
Yet some with prudence still at strife
Post, neck or nothing, on through life.
But soft -- farewell -- for more delay
Will too much check my stinted way;
The sun declining loses light --
I wish you, luckless friend! good night.
FABLE XX. THE ANGEL AND HERMIT.
A STATESMAN who, as records tell,
Could vie in fame with MACHIAVEL,
Had served his country several years
With able head, in different spheres,
And, strange to tell! had played his part,
Even Envy owned, with honest heart;
Though sometimes stung with partial blame
To cramp, if not to taint his fame;
A certain, though a cruel case --
Sad consequence, and tax of place.
At length, impatient of the weight
Which hangs on those who guide a state;
His mind its secret wishes bent
In solitude to seek content.
Soon as Reflection had inspired
The pleasing prospect, he retired;
Fixed on a lonely rural spot,
And changed his palace, for a cot;
His levees for the illustrious dead,
Whom in their living works he read;
All equipage was dropped of course,
Or shrunk into a single horse;
On whom he rode for sake of health,
Which Wisdom owns the richest wealth.
Art had not, with affected grace,
Deformed this native, lovely place;
Where variegated prospects grew
Successively to charm the view;
Where Nature through the landscape smiled,
A picture beautifully wild;
Where Study found a still retreat
And Virtue seemed to fix her seat.
One day reclining in a shade,
By overspreading poplars made,
Disposed, at large, to ruminate,
Our voluntary HERMIT sat,
And safe he thought from listening ear,
Thus praised his calm, contented sphere.
Hail a sequestered state -- all hail --
On wood-crown'd hill, or flowery vale;
Where mind and body both advance
Their faculties, by temperance;
Where smiling Health around us sails,
Enbosom'd in refreshing gales;
Where FACTION with discordant voice,
No more can interrupt my joys;
Where ENVY with her poisonous tongue,
No more can taint my fame with wrong;
Where smiling, fair-fac'd, heartless friends,
No more will haunt for selfish ends;
Where Treach'ry, darkest fiend of Hell,
Will never seek my humble cell;
Thrice happy thou sequestered state;
Who but the frantic would be great?
How mean to be AMBITION'S slave!
Ambition, Virtue's certain grave;
How many years of toilsome life,
Embittered by continual strife,
Though with unbounded honors graced,
Have I, unthinking, run to waste?
Oh welcome then the calmer reign
Of sage reflection; with her train
Of rational, and mild delights;
With healthful days, and peaceful nights;
Which, solitude, thy charms declare,
Untainted by corroding care.
Let vain idolaters of Fame
Pay homage to a sounding name;
Let them enjoy the smiles of things,
With titles, stars, and silken strings;
Let Soldiers tread the martial field,
And teach their vanquished foes to yield;
Let them possess the savage joy,
Like raging tempests, to destroy;
Let Merchants toil from coast to coast,
In search of what they worship most;
And brave all perils of the main,
In search of thee -- most powerful Gain!
Let Lawyers wrangle -- Statesmen scheme,
The fabric of a golden dream;
My part in bustling scenes is over,
And Fortune can afflict no more.
Thrice happy, then, sequestered state,
Who but the frantic would be great?
Here as he ended -- from a cloud,
Which served him for a silver shroud,
A light-encircled ANGEL came,
Who hailed the HERMIT by his name;
Then said; I Have heard thy full pretense
To solitude, and abstract sense;
Which shows no more in Reason's eye,
Than unsubstantial sophistry.
If man is formed of social kind,
The duties of his station bind
To play an active part in life,
However perplexed with cares and strife;
Withdrawing to inglorious rest,
Is indolence, or fear, at best;
A profitless, and mean escape,
Unworthy of the human shape.
It Is owned that crowns are painful things,
That care may haunt the best of Kings;
Yet making many millions blessed,
Must calm the mind, and give it rest;
Can any feel such joy of heart,
As they who act a Patriot part?
There lies the worth of being great,
And true pre-eminence of state.
In solitude you seem to say,
That VIRTUE rules with settled sway;
But know that passions in restraint,
Amidst temptations, form the saint.
A sot, if unsupplied with wine,
Must drunkenness perforce resign;
A thief, by locks and bars shut out,
May boast of honesty, no doubt;
Yet characters like these, I trust,
Are neither sober deemed, nor just.
Suppose your worth, and what more hard,
Had failed to meet a just reward;
That errors of capricious power,
Darkened your well-devoted hour;
Suppose through hate, or want of sense,
Some schemes were crossed, on false pretense;
Should Reason give resentment scope,
Creating thence a misanthrope?
Of every Vice which man has tried,
None's worse than overbearing PRIDE.
Accustomed to direct her helm,
Why should you leave your native realm?
In danger to be tempest-tost,
Perhaps, her pilot wanting, lost.
With love of rural ease inspired,
If like the ROMAN you retired;
Prepared with patriot Love to stand,
The bulwark of your native land;
So far, with Reason on your side,
Retirement might be justified;
Yet those whose talents most excel,
Should study most the public weal:
No meaner wretch can Nature own,
Than he who lives for SELF alone.
FABLE XXI. THE PROUD ASS.
APERT, and self-sufficient ASS,
Not half so wise as BALAAM'S was:
Who passed a round of daily care,
In hawking goods from fair to fair;
Through ervy was so void of sense,
He scorned a decent competence;
For such, though born an abject slave,
His more than tender master gave.
One day a pampered steed passed on,
Decked out in rich caparison;
A mettled creature, full of fire,
And shaped like his ARABIAN sire:
At whom our ASS, with mournful sigh,
Strait cast a tear-encircled eye;
Then turning to his owner said,
How dearly do I earn my bread?
Not that I bear too great a load,
Nor often feel your painful goad;
But then, unkindly, you neglect,
To gain me, as you might, respect.
Pray, what is yon prancer more than me,
To merit so much finery?
Wherever he comes, the Hostler shows
Attention to his gaudy clothes;
The freshest hay supplies his rack,
A curry-comb runs over his back;
And best of wheaten straw is spread
Beneath his hoofs to form a bed;
While I, with paltry pannier clad,
(The very thought would make one mad)
Though doomed to labor still more hard,
Can never meet with just regard.
If beauty be his foremost claim,
I justly may produce the same;
Allowing for these certain words,
That, "feathers fine, make finest birds."
Then, master, if you would have me live,
A saddle-cloth with trimmings give;
Upon this head such bridle place,
As may adorn this comely face;
A net were well, to strike the sight,
No matter, whether green, or white;
Besides, 'twould guard my tender thighs
In summer from perplexing flies;
With ribbands plait my tail and mane;
So let me just importance gain;
Or soon expect, that settled grief
Will weigh me down beyond relief:
For sure no other means can save
Your faithful creature from the grave.
The PEDLAR, foolish as his beast,
Complied with all the fond request;
And decked the ASS with simple care,
Then led him to a crowded FAIR,
Where gazing hundreds stopped his way,
And kept the raree-show at bay.
Our long-ear'd Beau, assuming state,
Would mimic too the managed gait;
While many a rude, and painful thump,
Saluted him from head to rump;
Much laughter and a world of jokes
Accompanied the merry strokes;
Some curses too from either side,
Were vented on his foolish pride;
Till terrified, he brayed aloud
Submission to the shouting crowd;
And promised thenceforth to appear
In trappings suited to his sphere:
A maxim, some of human kind,
Would worthy heir observance find;
For pride betrays each forward fool
To all the stings of ridicule,
FABLE XXII. THE LAWYER AND FOX.
IT happened once, a son of law,
Who kept three market towns in awe;
Who in his most important look,
All LITTLETON conveyed and COOK;
(Though neither had he ever read,
To furnish out a tricking head;
For Nature gave sufficient art
To play the petti-fogging part;)
One Golden Rule who practiced long,
"To do no right -- nor suffer wrong" --
Resolved to war against the FOX,
Who nightly stole his feathered flocks.
Shall REYNARD, cried old Nisi Prius
Not plunder only, but defy us;
Shall such a thief my poultry fleece,
My Ducks, my Turkies, Hens and Geese?
Nay more, last night, his maw to cram,
He robbed me of a fatted Lamb;
I Am now resolved to set a trap,
And should I catch the slippery chap,
With oaken towel first I Will bang him,
And then, upon a gibbet hang him.
The FOX, (so matters came to pass)
Who with strict zeal kept MICHAELMAS,
By eating GOOSE -- upon its Eve
Went slyly laughing in his sleeve,
To pick up one -- oh hardened sinner --
For his, and spouse's annual dinner.
The morning clock with drowsy tone,
Upon its bell had just struck one;
In dreamless balmy slumbers blessed,
Even village curs were lulled to rest;
No longer flowed the murmuring rill,
Which served to work a neighboring mill;
Love, wakeful God, no vigil kept,
And HODGE, forgetting MOPSY, slept;
Silence and darkness most profound
Enwrapp'd the fearless village round;
When REYNARD reached the LAWYER'S yard,
And ran direct (O Fortune hard!)
Where lay the trap; there found, too late,
The iron grasp of cruel fate;
He struggled vainly to get loose,
And cursed his foolish Love of GOOSE.
The morn at length, in saffron robe,
Came gayly smiling over the globe;
Attended by the jocund hours,
And all her vivifying powers;
When from his roost descending low,
Sir CHANTICLEER prepared to crow,
The captive saw; when in dismay
He scream'd, and winged his fearful way --
Dame PARTLETT heard the dire alarm,
Sure signal of approaching harm;
Obeyed the well known, faithful sound,
And like its echo fluttered round:
Ducks, Geese and Turkies joined the cry,
With such prevailing energy,
That from his bed the LAWYER rose,
With haste, which disregarded clothes;
And ran directly to the place,
Where culprit lay, in doleful case;
Whom when he saw with raptured eyes,
I Have caught thee then at last! he cries;
And will myself, both judge and jury,
Let loose upon thee all my fury.
Thou murderous rogue, infernal thief,
Of all consummate villains chief;
For nothing that I know of good,
But basely shedding helpless blood;
A lingering fate shall stop thy breath,
And give thee, inch by inch, to death.
Poor REYNARD heard the dreadful doom,
And wished the LAWYER in his room;
He trembled, yet resolved to die
With most heroic dignity;
And now, beyond the verge of Hope,
He gave his tongue its utmost scope.
Shall I, he cried, sustain abuse,
Nor let, though bound, resentment loose?
Be silent while a monster talks,
Because upon two legs he walks?
And boasts of something, Reason named,
Which all his actions have disclaimed:
A monster, shameful to his kind,
To every honest feeling blind;
With tongue of guile, with heart of flint,
And soul of villainy the mint.
What you, Sir LAWYER, thieving call,
In FOXES is no crime at all;
Impelled by Nature, we pursue
Our destined game with honest view;
To satisfy -- and what more right?
The urgent calls of appetite;
Nor seek with avaricious skill,
For sake of sordid gain to kill:
Besides, no FOX ever robs his brother,
But mankind plunder one another;
And such as you are doubly cursed,
Of all the human robbers worst;
Who find in every case a flaw,
And JUSTICE put to flight, by LAW.
If then of right you make a plea,
For partial sentence passed on me;
Resign at once your ill got pelf,
And much more justly hang yourself.
FABLE XXIII. THE CONQUEROR AND CAPTIVE.
SUCCESS intoxicates the brain,
And sometimes makes the wisest vain.
Who that examines age, or youth,
Can controvert so plain a truth?
That sees false Fame, or solid pelf,
So much increase important self,
That LILLIPUTIAN worth can rise,
A mighty BROBDIGNAG in size;
Thence mild benevolence is lost,
And tyrant pride assumes its post.
It happened once -- suppose the time,
The regal titles, and the clime,
There reigned a Prince of mighty power,
Who having much, still wanted more;
Who, Frenchman like, with envious eye,
Beheld the realms of liberty;
And still for war would frame pretense
Of glory stained, or self defense.
Behold him to the field burst forth!
An emblem of the boisterous North,
When with its most tempestuous gales
It desolates hills, woods and dales.
His often tried martial prowess spread
Through neighboring states a general dread;
An ape of mighty CAESAR'S name,
He went, he saw, and overcame --
Over bulwark'd towns he made his way,
While ravished conquest owned his sway;
One kingdom gained, the next he viewed
With eyes ambitious; and pursued
FORTUNE, that vain capricious dame,
Who eager seemed to urge his fame;
(Like other ladies, then most pleased,
When most solicited and teas'd;)
With partial grace still deigned to bless
His boldest actions with success;
Whose only business was to fight,
Whatever the cause, or wrong, or right;
Till glutted he at length declined
TO indulge the fever of his mind;
Yet fond of pomp, and madly vain,
He brought in his triumphant train
SIX CAPTIVE KINGS! sad spoil of war!
To draw like beasts, his splendid car:
The day was fixed, when such a sight
He thought would give the throng delight;
By various means most subjects strove
To show their loyalty, and love;
Arches were raised, and trophies placed,
In every spot which might be graced;
The VICTOR, almost deified,
By popular applause, and pride,
Could scarce vouchsafe to cast his eye
On any thing beneath the sky;
And silently appeared to say,
All Nature must admit my sway.
At length a downward look he gave,
And chanced to view one ROYAL SLAVE;
Who turning eyed, with thought profound,
The chariot wheel that circled round;
The placid smile which over his face
Had shed a mild peculiar grace;
The easy air and just disdain,
With which he wore his golden chain,
Alarmed the VICTOR; who demanded,
What his attention so commanded.
My mind, the Captive cries, is bent
To calm misfortunes, with content;
As in that circling wheel I see,
Of life the brief epitome:
The part which now is highest, must
One single turn replace in dust;
So thou, though present laurels bloom,
May, ere thy bones shall reach the tomb,
By some inverted stroke of fate,
Have cause to mourn thy fallen state;
Without a friend to sooth thy care;
None follow Tyrants in despair;
While vulture Conscience stings thy mind,
For endless wrongs to human kind.
The greatest Prince should learn this truth,
That sure as age succeeds to youth;
So Time devouring swallows all;
Empires themselves, but rise, to fall,
However glorious, and renowned,
Since life is but a varying round.
Swift as an arrow to the heart,
Conviction sent her pointed dart;
Pride wished indeed to stop its course,
But yielded to resistless force;
And said, that she would taint no more
The bosom of the Conqueror;
Who, from the CAR descending, gave
His hand to every ROYAL SLAVE;
Unloos'd their shackles, and declared
His power should henceforth be their guard;
Should stand a barrier to the weak,
And all oppression's fetters break.
The CAPTIVES struck, due homage paid,
And for their kind deliverer prayed:
More careful now of native blood,
The unshaken friend of peace, he stood;
Disbanded Conquest, with her train,
For virtues of a Patriot reign;
And long the royal pleasure proved,
Of being much less feared, than loved.
FABLE XXIV. THE MAGPYE AND LARK.
A MAGPYE, who with constant rattle,
Could fast as any gossip prattle;
A forward, pert, conceited elf,
Enraptured with delightful self;
Beheld a LARK who sung hard by,
With much contempt and scornful eye.
The songster heard with patient ears,
A multitude of daily sneers;
And bore them all, however absurd,
Nor answered once the coxcomb bird;
But like a wise domestic did
Whatever his tender master bid;
No business minded, but his own,
And studied grateful songs alone.
No SPARTAN in the pilf'ring art
Could play with more success his part,
Than did the MAGPYE: when set free
To bear young master company;
Whatever his bill, and strength could take,
He bore away for mischief's sake;
For things thus lost, if servants fought,
'Twas happiness supreme he thought:
His mistress, too, he told of all
Which in the kitchen could befall;
What sweethearts were admitted there,
How long they staid, and what their fare;
Nor could the maidens undescried,
A secret dish of tea provide;
Nay, rather, tattler like, than fail,
He Would soon invent a curious tale.
One morning, all he thought at rest,
(The greatest knaves are fools at best;)
In triumph, to the LARK he cries,
What ho, you warbler of the skies,
If any spirit fired your heart,
How could you act this hum-drum part;
Thus idly pass an useless age,
Within the limits of your cage,
And only strain with empty note,
Your most unprofitable throat?
While I Am so active in the house,
I scarcely miss a stirring mouse;
I see, I hear, and straight unfold,
Whatever may make our mistress scold;
Who loves, you know, or right or wrong,
To exercise her ceaseless tongue;
And when I Have made a hideous pother,
Flings me some nice tit bit, or other --
Besides, it is my constant plan,
To steal, and hide whatever I can;
Then shrewdly tell the servant's name,
I wish to brand with loss and shame:
Thus, little short, as I can see,
Of human wit and policy;
My happy talents are displayed,
Of nothing, but our CAT, afraid;
While you so little notice claim,
Scarce once a week I hear your name;
And like the wild ones of your breed,
Have no regale, but sod, or seed.
A servant maid, at morning's break,
By Love, or Conscience kept awake;
Heard MAGGY'S tale; when, fired with rage,
She flew directly to his cage;
Then seized him, and with many a thump,
Conveyed him underneath the pump;
Where dous'd and drenched almost to death;
While yet he drew some doubtful breath,
Tattler, LARDELLA cried, take that;
Then threw him to the hungry CAT.
The LARK, who heard but did not see,
This boaster's sad catastrophe,
Reflected thus; designing Knaves,
To sordid, selfish passions slaves;
Assisted by dishonest guile,
It Is true, may shine in life awhile;
But where, at length, is all their gain,
Enjoying sweets to purchase pain?
To boast, I find, with vicious pride,
Of useful talents misapplied;
A knavish heart, and tattling tongue,
From whence arises social wrong,
Will happily bring, or soon, or late,
Repentance, with untimely fate.
On no ambitious purpose bent,
With competence, and ease content;
I envy not the brightest parts,
Devoted to pernicious arts;
Let me enjoy, the songster said,
An honest Heart, and peaceful Head.
FABLE XXV. THE FINE LADY AND THE SUN.
WRETCHES there are, and many too,
Whose wishes only self pursue;
Let partial Fortune deign to grant,
Whatever their whims, or passions want;
They value not, should mankind all
To sure and swift perdition fall.
A female, more than HELEN fair,
Whose beauty was her favorite care;
Assaulted by meridian heat,
Sought out, in vain, a cool retreat;
The glowing air now grown intense,
Through each apartment gave offense;
Which caused her, so relates our tale,
Against the SUN himself to rail.
I wonder, says the dainty dame,
That such a vile obnoxious flame,
So rude to fashionable eyes,
Should every day ascend the skies;
Or quitting of a distant sphere,
Be suffered to approach so near.
Spotless, as new descended snow,
In Winter's happy time, I show;
But when the Summer's heat takes place,
Six horrid FRECKLES shame my face;
Nor dare I paint -- oh dire vexation!
For fear of dreadful perspiration.
I wish, kind heaven, eternal night
Adorned with milder candlelight,
Would rule the world, with kindly sway,
And banish tell-tale, useless day.
Who hears from love so sweet a sound,
As when with friendly darkness crowned?
No needless blushes then disgrace,
With awkward shame, a lady's face;
How often does this Sun advance,
To spoil a game of cards, or dance?
What jewels can so brightly blaze,
Outlust'red by his rival rays?
What charms so faultless can appear,
When his revealing light is near?
Which never suffers friendly art
To play, with kind disguise, its part;
It Is hence that nymphs upon the green
Are to the most advantage seen,
And rural beauties often outvie
A W-ldgr-ve -- or a C-v-nt-y.
Oh that a kind eclipse would take
His power away, for Beauty's sake;
And with a mild nocturnal robe,
Cloth for my life, at least, the Globe;
Or if, ye Gods, he still must rise,
Confine him to mechanic eyes:
What soul of spirit can endure,
To share him with the vulgar poor?
The listening Sun, who heard from high,
Winged on a beam this just reply.
Know, brainless creature, void of sense,
Thy railing cannot give offense;
The course of Nature's perfect frame,
Is proof -- against thy feeble blame;
Yet to chastise thy empty prate,
And end this frothy, pert debate,
Hear then, and own thy vacant heart
Prompts thee to play an idiot part.
Think thou variety is shown,
To please, or profit thee alone?
Think thou the seasons go and come,
Like ladies from or to a drum?
That Earth and Water, Sky and Air,
Are only formed to make thee fair?
Thou say that I am Beauty's foe,
Whence comes the Rose's healthful glow?
Who paints to thy delighted view,
The LILLY white, the VIOLET blue?
Who gives the fragrant PINK perfume,
Who bids the gaudy TULIP bloom?
Whose power the tillage can adorn,
With golden crops of wavy corn?
Who animates each rural scene,
And mantles over the fields with green?
Whatever grows, or walks, or flies,
Without my kind assistance dies;
Even thou, vain child of common clay,
Without my vivifying ray,
Disrobed of all thy trinkets, must
Return with speed to parent dust;
There, by thy modish friends forgot,
Soon as the poorest slave to rot.
Thou little do, who so much swerve
From common sense, advice deserve;
Yet hear, unworthy as thou art,
While I assume the friendly part,
And counsel give, of such a kind,
As may correct thy fickle mind;
May set thy fettered reason loose,
And free thy mind from self-abuse.
Instead of lovers at thy toilet,
Who only beauty praise to spoil it;
Who flutter round like tainting flies,
To make thy rifled sweets their prize;
Give up to some deserving mate,
Thy single, fruitless dangerous state;
Become in time a virtuous wife,
And learn to taste a prudent life:
For time inverted in its flight,
For slothful day, and vicious night;
For rambling visits, cards and dice,
For pleasures bought at VIRTUE'S price;
Let some domestic useful care
Thy well applied attention share;
Yet, think not that I mean to say,
Thou can not be with prudence gay;
For pleasures most sincere we find,
Where prudence is with virtue joined.
Behold thy lisping infants rise,
To fill with joy maternal eyes;
On such the truest bliss depends,
In them see husband, parents, friends;
Behold like tender plants they shoot,
Cherish their blossoms into fruit;
To ripening morals pay regard,
Repress the bad, the good reward;
Join in their sports, and always try
To give a taste of industry;
Let calm correction, wanted, prove
That justice guides parental love;
And rather give thy heart some pain,
Than hold the reins of power in vain.
Blessed in his love, and formed to bless,
Make thine thy husband's happiness;
If any ruffle should arise,
(For storms may gloom the brightest skies)
Smile him with gentle looks to peace,
And bid unruly passions cease;
Last, shunning empty, lavish pride,
Be every day in dress a bride.
These rules pursued, thy sight must be
In proper seasons fond of me;
And night will only then seem best,
When weary Nature calls for rest.
FABLE XXVI. THE LION, BEAR AND APE.
IT happened, as in human kind,
A LION, to his errors blind,
(No more than battle to the strong,
Does wisdom to the great belong)
Admired an APE, a flattering sprite,
Who praised his actions, wrong or right;
Who when it thundered, kindly swore,
'Twas nothing to his Monarch's roar;
When lightning flashed along the sky,
'Twas nothing to his piercing eye;
And vowed that his majestic face,
Put human nature to disgrace;
For which the sycophant, in short,
Was Laureat made, and went to Court;
While haughty distance curbed a BEAR,
Who loved his PRINCE with honest care;
Because the undissembling creature,
As rough in temper, as in feature,
By loyalty, and prudence taught,
Still plainly uttered what he thought;
Some wholesome truths would often advance,
Never found in GALLIC complaisance,
And often, like a Patriot, would
Remind his King of PUBLIC GOOD.
Attended by this contrast pair,
The Lion went to take the air;
When, as along a wood they strayed,
Sir APE fresh protestations made;
Declared his head, his heart, and all,
Were ready at the Monarch's call;
Come Danger from each point, he cries,
That the winds blow, through wintry skies;
Let Fate, with all its terrors crowned,
Spread all her strongest toils around;
Fearless 'twould be my greatest pride,
To shed my blood in crimson tide;
And bravely fall, no more to rise,
Before my Royal Master's eyes.
But wherefore this, since conquests tell,
How much he is invincible?
The whisking of whose dreadful tail,
Can stoutest hearts with fear assail;
Whose mortal fangs and tusks defy
All nature turned his enemy;
Let every beast, then, chorus join,
To hail a MONARCH so divine.
The BEAR heard all, yet nothing said,
But jog'd along, and shook his head.
At length appeared, from neighboring plain,
Of hunters a terrific train!
The startled beasts, who saw too late,
The near approach of frowning fate,
No time had left to shape their course,
Before assailed with hostile force.
At the first glimpse our valiant APE
Up a huge tree made swift escape;
And left, as his securest way,
His Prince, he thought an easy prey.
Cowards, themselves, who cannot fly,
Will rather fight, than tamely die;
No wonder then heroic hearts,
In such a case, should play their parts.
BRUIN, with fatal grasp, displayed
Much merit in the fighting trade;
Pressed out by force the unwilling breath,
Embracing many foes to death.
Impregnable the LION stood,
Till covered with his hunters' blood;
Who hopeless, on the approach of night,
Gave up a long and doubtful fight;
Taught by the royal beast to yield,
And leave him master of the field.
Soon as the APE beheld from high,
A vanquished, harmless enemy,
He reached the ground with nimble pace,
Ten thousand bows, and fawning face;
Gave LEO joy of warlike fame,
Of safety, and a deathless name;
Then wanting words to suit his praise,
Concluded with three loud huzzas.
Lip-love could now deceive no more;
His monarch with tremendous roar,
Full in the BEAR'S delighted view,
The sycophantic coward slew;
Then cried, Henceforth no fawning slave,
No fair-fac'd, flattering, heartless knave,
Shall ever royal favor share --
Henceforth it is thine, -- my trusty BEAR.
The prince, or subject who depends
On flattering, or professing friends,
When Danger with tempestuous gales,
In most tremendous form assails,
Will find the sunshine minions fly
The clouds of dark adversity.
FABLE XXVII. THE COCK AND PEACOCK.
A PEACOCK which, as often you have heard,
In classic times was JUNO'S bird,
Of rich and gaudy plumage proud,
Assumed precedence over the crowd;
And, coxcomb like, not knowing whether
True merit lay in heart, or feather;
He exercised his taunting wit,
On whom, and when he thought most fit.
One luckless day, his spirits high,
As CHANTICLEER was passing by;
An honest bird who never tried,
To fawn and flatter empty pride;
With insolence of word and look,
His haughty, restless mind he broke.
Why how now, GINGER, what is the matter,
That you presumed to make such clatter?
You strut, and crow, and clap your wings,
'Till all our master's courtyard rings;
Such rude behavior, such a noise,
The pleasure of my life destroys.
I seldom raise my tuneful note,
To shame thy most discordant throat,
Else all the birds would soon agree,
To sing my praise, and banish thee.
Besides, you shamefully neglect
To pay my worship due respect --
Be prudent then, nor more provoke
That rage, which yet has turned to joke
Thy crimes; or know, thou will expose
Thy safety to a world of foes.
Though I alone, beyond dissembling,
Can set thy paltry heart a trembling.
He said; and turning with disdain,
Displayed his rich embroidered train;
Which shone an emblem of the skies,
Adorned with ARGUS' hundred eyes.
The COCK, like every bird of sense,
Still slow to give, or take offense;
For some time heard with patience cool,
This gaudy, shallow-pated fool:
The censure on his voice and air,
He rightly judged beneath his care;
But touched upon the master string
Of Courage -- Passion straight took wing;
His feathers rose, and over his head
The crimson tinge of rage was spread.
Shall my fair name receive a blot,
He cries, from such an empty sot?
Shall I, who in the mortal pit,
My blood have shed, to thee submit?
Whatever their show, I like not birds,
Made merely up of looks and words:
Prepare, and stand upon thy guard,
I seldom strike, but always hard.
He flew with such a willing mind,
At once he smote the PEACOCK blind;
Who fell to earth, and prostrate lay,
Of pain, and shame, the hapless prey;
Which seen, the generous victor cried,
Unhappy wretch, I Am satisfied;
Thy eyes have paid the forfeit due;
Henceforth dwell peace 'twixt me and you;
To conquer gratifies the brave,
Whose second pleasure is to save;
For this I Will prove a tender friend,
And sooth the loss I cannot mend:
But let thy fate henceforth advise
The race of FOPLINGS to be wise; --
All, who like thee, in show delight,
Most justly merit loss of sight.
FABLE XXVIII. THE WASPS AND BEES.
A BE, the leader of its hive,
As great as any BE alive;
Of enterprizing disposition,
A warrior, and a politician;
As once he took his humming flight,
Upon a cowship chanced to light;
And while from golden cup he drew
Luxurious draughts of honey dew,
A jealous WASP, with words like these,
Abused in him the race of BEES.
Why, how now, thou maroding elf,
Thou do not surely know thyself;
Else could thou not pretend to range,
From clime to clime in search of change;
And plunder all the fields along,
Wherever thou come, or right or wrong;
But BEES, indeed, both great and small,
Are little less than robbers all;
A poor, dependent set of knaves,
To undeserving mankind slaves;
Who think their citadel of straw
Should keep the INSECT world in awe.
Hence let me warn thee from this spot,
Which Nature has ordained my lot;
Or else, though thousands should protect,
Some dreadful punishment expect;
Annihilation, without trace
Of you, or any of your race --
The BE with sullen wonder heard,
And, fearless, weighed each single word;
Thrice he in vain essayed to speak,
Thrice could not teeming silence break;
Just pride the power of speech restrained;
For though he felt, he still disdained
To enter singly in the lift
With such a vile antagonist;
So spread his pinions, and retreated,
In haste, as if he would been defeated.
Great thoughts, at once, the WASP inspire,
To see his hated foe retire;
His nest he sought with eager haste,
And being in the center placed,
Declared with how much spirit he
Had guarded public property.
When he had told the sanguine tale,
Which pride imagined could not fail
High in the rolls of deathless FAME,
To blazon his immortal name;
Debates, which made no little clatter,
Arose about the important matter.
Some praised, while some expressed dislike;
Worth cannot all opinions strike;
The young and forward wasps agreed,
Some honors should be strait decreed;
For less 'twas thought they could not render,
To such a spirited defender.
One, glibber tongued than all the rest,
Thus plausibly harangued the nest:
I know not why, my valiant friends,
Since justice on ourselves depends,
Maroding BEES uncheck'd should roam,
While fearful we remain at home:
Do we not boast as nimble wings,
As mighty hearts, as deadly stings?
Glory invites, with friendly call,
Shall we not own the summons all?
Forth let us fly, and strait engage
Our mortal foes, with martial rage:
If none of greater merit claim
The foremost post in paths of FAME,
Boldly in front myself I Will place,
And danger's first approaches face;
Live with immortal honor crowned,
Or bravely fall, a WASP renowned.
My friends, replies an aged Sire,
Fools only specious show admire;
Sound policy, and solid sense,
Will ponder still the consequence;
In states we find, as private life,
There Is little got by ill-timed strife.
Perhaps, I may appear too stoic,
To censure measures so heroic;
But know, you will find on coolest thought,
Even HONEY may be dearly bought;
Kind Nature yields sufficient store
To feed us all; what need we more?
We may be happy, if we please,
As peaceful WASPS, or peaceful BEES;
But if we plunge ourselves in war,
We cannot tell the end of care;
Let INSECTS what they have enjoy,
And monster MAN his kind destroy.
This sage advice, however right,
Was treated with a general slight.
Mean while the BEES a message sent,
To know their waspish foes intent;
Whether submission should release,
From threatened war, and give them peace,
Or resolute in bold defiance,
On Fortune they would fix reliance?
Remonstrance to the Quixote train
Of pride-swell'd insects, proved in vain;
They bade the Herald wing his flight,
And say their wishes were to fight;
That blows, that wounds, that death alone,
With horrors and distress unknown,
In that, or any other age,
Their kindled fury could assuage.
The BEES, determined to chastise
This haughty slight of compromize,
A war began; and Fortune sat
Three summer months, in doubtful state,
On which to turn the favoring gale,
Suspending nicely Conquest's scale;
While many stingless champions lay,
To hungry spiders easy prey;
Till both sides wearied, thought it best,
For that campaign, at least, to rest.
Their sufferings in the field were great,
Yet home produced a sharper fate;
For now the flowery time was over,
Designed to furnish Winter's store;
In vain they sought the russet fields,
The year declined no nurture yields;
Pale Famine gave a general shock,
On finding Glory all their stock.
Our warriors wounded to the heart,
Breathed out despair on either part;
Forgot the trivial cause of strife,
So hanging over the verge of life,
Agreed to curse ambitious Pride --
Sad counselor! -- and starving died.
FABLE XXIX. THE POET AND PEN.
WELL sung the BARD, that some "in spite
Of Nature, and their stars, will write;"
Proofs rise on proofs that every age
Mounts DUNCES upon Learning's stage;
Who write, and write, and write away,
For empty fame, or solid pay;
On Deaths, Births, Marriages compose,
Whole reams of flimsy -- Verse or Prose
With self-applause admire their wit,
Whenever the public taste they hit --
Such pinching want too often endure --
What then? MAEONIDES was poor --
Hence comfort springs -- for what was HE,
Each BLOCKHEAD cries, pray, more than ME?
In Grub-street, raised three stories high,
His garret previous to the sky;
One day a luckless son of rhyme,
To sooth his grief, and kill his time,
Thus spoke the anguish of his heart,
Shall I still play the passive part;
When Envy's utmost wrath is hurled
Against me by a thankless world?
When all my genius, all my pains,
Amount to such penurious gains;
Instead of the Falernian flask,
I drain the dregs of small beer cask;
And almost a Chamelion grown,
I Am taught to live on air alone;
The rats and mice may when they please
My cupboard haunt, nor hurt my cheese;
My russet coat, which once was black,
Hangs piecemeal over my shivering baek;
And nightly on too short a bed,
Like Codrus Vid. JUVENAL.
, I recline my head;
All this to thee -- worst plague of men,
I owe, thou most accursed PEN!
Oh that my fingers long ere now,
Instead of THEE, had grasped the PLOW!
Or placed in a contented stall,
Had learned to push the jocund awl;
Intrinsic merit then like mine
Had not as pearl been cast to Swine.
His PEN, which heard, made this reply,
Truth, Scribbler, may thy charge deny;
Convicted folly seeks excuse,
The best of things admit abuse;
And often so against our wills,
Appears the injured race of Quills.
Of men and their caprice the slaves,
We serve the turn of Fools and Knaves;
Fools always think that they command
Our movements with a master's hand;
And Knaves affecting Virtue's cause,
Assail through us her wisest laws.
The Author who would merit fame,
Whose wishes grasp a lasting name,
Distinguished in his works should be
By genius, sense, and honesty;
Without the last, the former two
Are glittering serpents fair to view;
Which flatter with a spangled skin,
While deadliest poison lurks within.
Did I, or any other quill,
Endeavor to mislead thy will;
Had I the power to turn aside
Thy confidence, and forward pride?
It Is true, thou have not wanted care
To make thy labors popular;
And never missed occasion fit,
To show thy politics and wit;
To praise, or censure, ever prone,
Where profit marked a cause thy own;
Thou have not failed to join the cry,
And bawl out -- Wilkes and Liberty!
Yet rated as a babbling hound,
Contempt thy vain endeavors crowned;
You think, you write, you print in vain,
And torture me with fruitless pain:
It Is not each wight who chinks a rhyme,
That shines the CHURCHILL of his time;
Though he -- but hush, the hand of Death
Shuts Censure's lips, and stops her breath.
Could thou with noble heart and mind,
Like LYTTELTON, inform mankind;
From whom with ease and vigor flows,
The elegance of verse and prose.
Could thou on Fancy's rapid wing,
In strains like nervous MASON sing;
Like him range Nature's ample field,
And such enchanting prospects yield.
Could thou with elegiac GRAY,
In slowly, sad funereal lay,
Such passion-quelling truths impart,
As charm at once, and mend the heart.
Or could thou on the comic stage,
Like sprightly COLMAN show the age,
The rustic, fop, and jealous fool,
With justice turned to ridicule;
Then Genius taking proper bent,
Had made thy pen an ornament.
Shall DUNCES blot with Gothic rage,
A Virgil's or a Milton's page --
In mad revenge, for want of toste,
Lay the fair field of Science waste?
Suppress thy self-sufficient spirit,
Allow that others may have Merit;
Your genius suit, whatever it be,
You Will never blame the World, nor ME.
FABLE XXX. THE MILK WHITE MOUSE.
ARE there who own a ray of sense,
Yet controvert a PROVIDENCE?
Who see the glorious Sun arise,
To light our Globe, and gild the skies;
Who view those countless gems which grace
The boundless, blue Ethereal space;
Who hear the Thunder's awful crash,
Who see the Light'ning's fearful flash;
The fleecy clouds, the azure main,
The aspiring hill, and humble plain;
Who ever have seen with curious eye,
The wonders of Anatomy;
Or view in order most correct,
Beyond what mortals could project,
The vegetable world advance,
Yet say that All is born of chance?
Why Skeptics labor to disprove,
Almighty Power, Almighty Love;
And madly shut conviction out,
To entertain the Phantom Doubt;
Say, WALMSLEY Of New Malton, Yorkshire.
-- for to thee is known,
RELIGION placed on REASON'S throne;
And none with fitter head, or heart,
Her balmy precepts can impart;
Remove the veil from darkened eyes,
Bid Truth in all her charms arise;
And pour resistless on the sight,
To show "WHATEVER IS, IS RIGHT;" --
Unless when ignorance or pride,
From Wisdom's precepts turn aside.
Lo! -- formed on Nature's noblest plan,
How discontent, how vain is man?
How groundless in ill placed desires,
As opposite as frosts and fires;
Let Seasons vary as they will,
Some cares, some faults perplex him still:
The scorching Summer burns his ground,
Next Rains descend; and then he is drowned:
His situation always such,
Heaven sends too little, or too much.
WISDOM too often attacks in vain,
Such impious self-created pain;
For Ignorance, a mere BUFFOON,
And Pride, a relative POLTROON,
The blushing Goddess may outface,
With insolent and low grimace;
Yet where her graver axioms fail,
Disguised in ALLEGORIC tale;
Often with success she plays her part,
And, tickling Fancy, steals the heart;
Then let the Muse in masquerade,
Invoke the friendly, blue-ey'd Maid.
Her strains attend, each proud ingrate,
Nor murmur at unerring Fate;
For though portentous clouds should lower,
And tempests shake thy present hour;
The storm may pass, and on its wings
Bear from thy breast ten thousand stings;
And humble Hope, and pious Love,
Draw down protection from above;
Yet howsoe'er thy Fortune sails,
With favoring tides, and prosperous gales,
With caution steer toward thy port,
Nor 'midst surrounding dangers sport.
A MOUSE, whose silky fur could show
Less fair the purest Alpine snow;
Had long a favorite cupboard haunted,
For sustenance which Nature wanted;
Nor ever with voracious mind,
At lack of various food repined;
But blessed with crusts of bread and cheese,
Enjoyed content, and lived at ease.
One night -- one most important night!
Allured by DIAN'S silv'ry light;
The little wanderer ventured out,
And to a neighbor's took its route;
Where soon -- its former haunts forsaken --
Drawn by the scent of toasted bacon,
With headlong speed -- Oh dire mishap!
It rushed into the baited trap;
The dainty seized, and blessed that star,
Which led to such delicious fare;
Admired the thought which taught to roam,
From tasteless, moldy scraps at home,
Then praised, with joy, the happier lot
Of this unknown, luxurious spot.
As fools the present moment prize,
Nor forward deign to cast their eyes;
The little Captive thought no less,
Than lasting, perfect happiness;
And on reflection grew quite vain,
To think its all-sufficient brain
Alone, with matchless sense profound,
This more than golden mine had found;
How blind all other Mice! it cries,
MYSELF, am wisest of the wise.
Now gorged with most delicious cate,
It finds surrounding bars too late;
From top to bottom fear-struck flies,
Attempts to creep, attempts to rise;
But finding it in vain to try,
For home despised and liberty;
To give it is anxious heart relief,
On FORTUNE vents the storm of grief;
Exclaims against her as unkind,
And calls her partial, cruel, blind;
Nor once admits, in distant thought,
SELF, mighty SELF, in any fault.
The favor it had long enjoyed,
This single accident destroyed;
Five minutes unexpected pain,
Now balanced years of blissful gain.
Ungrateful MOUSE! -- nay foolish too,
Extend thy dim, contracted view;
Placed in thy native cupboard see,
That night GRIMALKIN watch for thee;
And had not fortune led from home,
An hungry CAT had been thy doom;
Then yield to patience fretful strife,
Thy FREEDOM lost prolongs thy LIFE.
With morning came WHIMSILLA'S maid,
By whom the lucky trap was laid.
She came -- and seized with strange delight
To see a MOUSE so lovely white,
Straight to her mistress bore in haste,
A gift so suited to her TASTE.
WHIMSILLA views with ravished eyes,
So beautiful, so rich a prize,
And struck with each enchanting feature,
Doats on the dear bewitching creature;
What wonders are by trifles wrought?
The silver cage, the almonds bought,
Away flies every anxious thought --
No vapors now, happen what will;
No though last night she lost -- CODILLE. --
Pampered, caressed on every side,
The captive, too elate with pride,
Grew more distinguishing and nice,
Than any of the tribe of MICE,
Indulged excess, nor ever thought
Of what the pleasing change had wrought;
But like a petted, darling child,
With misapplied indulgence wild,
To beauty gave the total merit,
Of all it did, or could inherit;
And vainly said of every bliss,
My worth deserves much more than this;
For wishes with enjoyment grew,
(Experience proves this maxim true)
'Till fretted Fortune thus pursued,
By folly, and ingratitude,
Resolved in just and settled state,
To show a sad reverse of fate.
Each day WHIMSILLA'S love grew stronger;
Her maid could bear her toil no longer;
Who sorely wearied with attendance,
(The servile curse of her dependence)
Resolved, that slily turned a-drift,
The favorite once more should shift.
This fatal plan no sooner laid,
But when her mistress went to bed,
She quitted her perplexing charge,
And set the prisoner quite at large,
Who by indulgence grown a FOOL,
Ran just beneath a watchful OWL,
Whose crop became a speedy grave,
Whence boasted BEAUTY could not save.
Hence mortals learn -- be timely wise --
Check imperfections as they rise;
And know, in those who vainly boast,
Both charms and virtues all are lost;
That human kind, or rich, or poor,
If proud, ungrateful and secure;
Insulted FORTUNE soon may chouse,
Just as she did the MILK WHITE MOUSE.
FABLE XXXI. THE OLYMPIC COURT.
THE GODS in awful synod met
This lower world to regulate,
Resolved, in gracious mood, to grant
What mortals most might wish or want;
And gave ten thousand blessings birth
To glad unthankful sons of earth;
Who favored with unbounded store,
Prayed -- when they prayed at all -- for more.
JOVE wearied with solicitation
From every rank, of every nation,
Proposed the OLYMPIC council should
Conjoin to form a general good;
Nor longer waste their sacred power
In toys which vanish with the hour.
Why should, says he, a slave of vice
Invoke us to assist his dice?
Shall usurers become so bold
To ask from us fresh heaps of gold?
Dare fleecing lawyers think that we
Hold forth for knaves the quickening fee?
Must we, that PHYSIC'S sons may ride,
Breathe pestilence in airy tide?
That ladies may be wrapped in night,
Ought we to quench celestial light?
To please them all we try in vain,
Do what we can, they will complain:
Then hear, CELESTIALS, what I ask,
Assist me in the glorious task --
Throughout creation's various plan
No work exceeds a virtuous man;
Call every GRACE from every part,
Which best improve the MIND and HEART.
I Will give to BRITISH GEORGE an Heir
Worthy a royal parent's care;
No monarch more deserves regard,
No nation better claims reward;
Then let a PATRIOT PRINCE be born,
Who like his Sire may crowns adorn;
On whom I will myself bestow
Perfections mortals seldom know;
JUSTICE shall all his actions guide,
With Mercy smiling at her side.
When hostile force provokes to war,
You MARS shall guide his rapid car;
And NEPTUNE you shall smooth the tides,
Over which his conquering navy rides;
APOLLO must his councils wait,
Assistant guardian of the state;
And HERMES, giving voice to sense,
Cloth thou his tongue with eloquence.
CHERUBS who heard the thund'rer speak,
Their joy in acclamations break;
While echo winged on spicy gales
Resounded GEORGE -- our -- PRINCE of WALES.
One care remained yet unadjusted,
To whom the Prince might be entrusted;
MINERVA said, for mankind's sake,
She on herself the task would take.
JOVE liked what she proposed, and cried,
We could not wish a better guide;
Go take the style of FINCH, LADY CHARLOTTE.
and prove
The feelings of a mother's love;
With virtues warm, and judgment cool,
Instruct thy infant charge to rule:
The Goddess smiled; and now is seen
Just delegate of BRITAIN'S QUEEN.
FINIS.

