HYMNS FOUNDED ON VARIOUS TEXTS IN THE HOLY SCRIPTURES.

By the late Reverend PHILIP DODDRIDGE, D. D.

Published from the AUTHOR's Manuscript By JOB ORTON.

I esteem Nepos for his Faith and Diligence, his Comments on Scripture, and
many Hymns, with which the Brethren are delighted. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. L. 7. C.
24. SALOP, Printed by J. EDDOWES and J. COTTON: And Sold by J. WAUGH and W.
FENNER, at the Turk's Head in Lombard Street; and J. BUCKLAND, at the Buck in
Paternoster Row, LONDON. M.DCC.LV.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of the following HYMNS, well known to the World by many. excellent
and useful Writings, was much solicited by his Friends to print them in his
Lifetime, from a Hope they might be serviceable to the Interest of Religion by
assisting the Devotion of Christians in their social and secret Worship; and,
had GOD continued his Life till his FAMILY-EXPOSITOR on the Epistles had been
published, it is probable he would have complied with their Request: But this
and many other pious and benevolent Purposes were broken off by his
much-lamented ^^^th. During the last Hour I spent with him, a few Weeks before
that mournful Event, he honored me with some particular Directions about
transcribing and publishing them. I have at length, through the good Hand of my
GOD upon me, finished them, and present them to the World with a cheerful Hope,
that they will promote and diffuse a Spirit of Devotion, and, together with
other Assistances human and divine, prepare many to join with the devout Author
in the nobler and everlasting Anthems of Heaven.

These Hymns being composed to be sung, after the Author had been preaching on
the Texts prefixed to them, it was his Design, that they should bring over
again the leading Thoughts in the Sermon, and naturally express and warmly
enforce those devout Sentiments, which he hoped were then rising in the Minds
of his Hearers, and help to fix them on the Memory and Heart: Accordingly the
attentive Reader will observe, that most of them illustrate such Sentiments, as
a skillful Preacker would principally insist upon, when discoursing from the
Texts on which they are founded. There is a great Variety in the Form of them:
Some are devout Paraphrases on the Texts: others expressive of lively Acts of
Devotion, Faith, and Trust in GOD, Love to Christ, Desire of divine Influences,
and good Resolutions of cultivating the Temper and practicing the Duties
recommended: Others proclaim an humble Joy and Triumph in the gracious Promises
and Encouragements of Scripture, particularly in the Discovery and Prospect of
eternal Life. The Nature of the Subjects will easily account for the Difference
of Composure, why some are more plain and artless, others more lively, sublime,
and full of poetic Fire. If any of them should at first Reading appear flat or
obscure, it may well be supposed they would affect the Mind in a stronger
Manner, when used in a religious Assembly after Sermons upon the Texts, in
which the Context has been considered (if that were necessary), parallel
Places compared the Design of the inspired Writer judiciously opened, and the
Beauty, Propriety, and Emphasis of the several Clauses of the Text illustrated:
They therefore who use them in their devout Retirements should first read and
consider the Texts and Contexts; and if they would consult some Expositor upon
them, particularly the Author's on the Subjects taken from the New Testament,
they will see a Spirit and Elegance in these Composures, which may otherwise be
overlooked, and be more likely to reap real and lasting Advantage by them.

In this Collection there are many Hymns formed upon Passages in the Old
Testament, particularly in the Prophets, directly relating to the Case of the
Israelites, or some particular good Man among them, which the Author has
accommodated to the Circumstances of Christians, where he thought there was a
just and natural Resemblance; and he apprehended, that the Practice of the
inspired Writers of the New Testament warranted such Accommodations Compare
Hebrews xiii. 5, 6. and Family Expositor in Loc. note ( e). There are also some
good Remarks on this Subject in Dr. Watts's Holiness of Times, Places, etc.
Disc. v. especially Prop. 15.
. He experienced this to be a very acceptable and useful Method of preaching on
the Old Testament, and accordingly recommended it to his Pupils, as what would
afford them an Opportunity of explaining the Design of the Prophecies,
displaying the Wisdom, Faithfulness and Grace of GOD, and suggesting many
striking and important Instructions: This Method would at the same Time
occasion an agreeable Variety in their Discourses, prevent their confining
themselves to general or commonplace Subjects, or (in Order to avoid a
frequent Repetition of well-known Arguments) running into dry and abstruse
Speculations, which the Capacities of the Generality of their Hearers could not
comprehend, nor their Hearts relish and feel: A Fashion in Preaching, too
prevalent, and, considering its apparent Unprofitableness, much to be lamented.

Those young Ministers, who are desirous of entering into the Spirit and
Copiousness of Scripture, may find this Work greatly useful to them, by
directing them to many very suitable Texts, and to some natural Thoughts, and
useful Reflections to be insisted upon in discoursing from them.

There are several Hymns in this Collection suited to special and extraordinary
Occasions, for which there was not before a sufficient Provision; such as, for
opening a new Place of Worship, the Vacancy and Settlement of Churches, the
Ordination of Ministers, their Removal from our World, etc. especially for Days
of Fasting and Humiliation on Account of actual or apprehended Calamities, the
Want of which, during the late Rebellion and War, was much regretted by many
Ministers and private Christians.

In these Composures I hope few low or trivial Expressions will be found:
Nothing appears unsuitable to the Gravity and Dignity of a worshipping
Assembly: Nothing likely to darken or damp the Devotion of the humble
Christian, or excite Passions merely sensual. There is nothing that savours of
a Party Spirit, or carries an Appearance of designing to confine their Use to
any of the Sects into which Christians are unhappily divided. The Materials are
divine, and the Author's Soul was never more enlarged, than when he was
promoting a Spirit of Piety and Candor in their just Connection.

I chose to place these Hymns in the Order in which the several Texts lie in
the Bible, as that prevents the Necessity of another Index, and there appeared
no particular Reason for disposing them in any different Order. In a few
Places, where Words occur not sufficiently intelligible to common Readers, I
have added some more plain and familiar ones in the Margin, that they may be
read and sung with Understanding; preferring this Method to that of some
Authors, who have collected and explained them in a particular Index.

As these Hymns were composed during a Series of many Years, amidst an uncommon
Variety and daily Succession of most important Labors, by a Man who had no Ear
for Music, and as they want his retouching Hand, the Reader will be candid to
what Inaccuracies he may discover; particularly the Repetition of the same
Thoughts and Phrases, which in a few Instances will be found: And indeed some
of them could scarcely be avoided on Subjects so nearly resembling, without the
Exclusion of the most suitable and affecting Sentiments or Aspirations, for
which the Introduction of a new or more poetic Thought and Phrase would not
have been an Equivalent. There may perhaps be some Improprieties, owing to my
not being able to read the Author's Manuscript in particular Places, and being
obliged, without a poetic Genius, to supply those Deficiences, whereby the
Beauty of the Stanza may be greatly defaced, though the Sense is preserved.

These Hymns being originally designed for the Use of a Congregation of plain
unlearned Christians, it cannot be expected they should entertain such, who may
peruse them merely for the Sake of the Poetry: Yet I think many of them will
stand the Test of a critical Examination, and appear at least equal to other
Compositions of the like Kind; and I am persuaded they will all be delightful
and beneficial to those, who desire to have their Devotions enlivened, their
Souls filled with divine Love, and who are ambitious to live up to the Rules of
the Gospel; and that they will, through the Influences of the Holy Ghost, spread
a Spirit of fervent Piety in such Congregations where they may be introduced.

I have nothing to add but my earnest Wishes and Prayers, that they may be
subservient to the Glory of GOD, the more delightful Celebration of divine
Ordinances, and the Edification of my Fellow Christians. Amen.

JOB ORTON.
SALOP, Jan. 1. 1755.
A TABLE TO FIND OUT ANY HYMN BY THE FIRST LINE OF IT.
A
ACcept, Great GOD, thy Britain's Song Hymn 46 Alas for Britain, and her Sons
Hymn 186 Alas how fast our Moments fly Hymn 127 All-conqu'ring Faith, how high
it rose Hymn 181 All-glorious God, what Hymns of Praise Hymn 298 All-hail,
mysterious King Hymn 359 All-hail, victorious Savior, hail! Hymn 354 Aloud I
sing the wondrous Grace Hymn 217 Amazing beauteous Change Hymn 100 Amazing
Grace of God on high Hymn 99 Amazing Plan of sovereign Love Hymn 124 And are we
now brought near to God Hymn 288 And art thou with us, gracious Lord Hymn 98
And does the Son of God complain Hymn 104 And is Salvation brought so near Hymn
262 And shall we still be Slaves Hymn 227 And why do our admiring Eyes Hymn 252
And will the great eternal God Hymn 49 And will the Judge descend Hymn 189 And
will the Majesty of Heaven Hymn 144 And will the eternal King Hymn 263 Approach
ye Children of your God Hymn 315 A present God is all our Strength Hymn 18
Arise, my tenderest Thoughts arise Hymn 64 Assist us, Lord, thy Name to praise
Hymn 255 Attend mine Ear, my Heart rejoice Hymn 187 Attend, my Soul, the Voice
divine Hymn 12 Attend, my Soul, with reverend Awe Hymn 159 Awake, my drowsy
Soul, awake Hymn 199 Awake, my Soul, stretch every Nerve Hymn 296 Awake, my
Soul, to meet the Day Hymn 362 Awake, our Souls, and bless his Name Hymn 228
Awake, ye Saints, and raise your Eyes Hymn 264
B
BAcksliding Israel, hear the Voice Hymn 122 Behold God's great incarnate Son
Hymn 337 Behold I come, the Savior cries Hymn 343 Behold I come, the Savior
cries Hymn 361 Behold, O Israel's God Hymn 141 Behold our God, he owns his Name
Hymn 86 Behold the amazing Sight Hymn 233 Behold the bleeding Lamb of God Hymn
242 Behold the Glass the Gospel lends Hymn 327 Behold the gloomy Vale Hymn 32
Behold the great eternal God Hymn 15 Behold the great Physician stands Hymn 223
Behold the Path that Mortals tread Hymn 27 Behold the Son of God appears Hymn
314 Behold the Son of God's Delight Hymn 191 Behold with pleasing Extacy Hymn
121 Beneath thy mighty Hand, O God Hymn 338 Beset with Snares on every Hand
Hymn 207 Blessed be the Lamb whose Blood was spilt Hymn 312 Blessed Jesus, bow
thine Ear Hymn 301 Blessed Jesus, Source of Grace divine Hymn 221 Blessed Men who
stretch their willing Hands Hymn 247 Blessed Savior, to my Heart more dear Hymn
139 Bridegroom of Souls, how rich thy Love Hymn 293 Bright Source of
intellectual Rays Hymn 110
C
CAptives of Israel, hear Hymn 105 Come, our indulgent Savior, come Hymn 245
Come, thou celestial Spirit, come Hymn 285
D
DEscend, immortal Dove Hymn 259 Do not I love thee, O my Lord Hymn 246
E
ENquire, ye Pilgrims, for the Way Hymn 137 Eternal and immortal King Hymn 321
Eternal God, our humbled Souls Hymn 154 Eternal God, our wondering Souls Hymn 1
Eternal King, thy Robes are white Hymn 165 Eternal Source of every Joy Hymn 43
Eternal Source of Life and Thought Hymn 322 Exalted Prince of Life we own Hymn
248
F
FAther divine, the Savior cried Hymn 190 Father divine, thy piercing Eye Hymn
177 Father of Lights, we sing thy Name Hymn 176 Father of Men, thy Care we
bless Hymn 2 Father of Mercies, in thy House Hymn 289 Father of Mercies, send
thy Grace Hymn 205 Father of Peace, and GOD of Love Hymn 325 Father of Spirits,
from thy Hand Hymn 13 Flow on my Tears in rising Streams Hymn 129 Fountain of
Comfort and of Love Hymn 271
G
GOD of Eternity, from thee Hymn 292 God of my Life, through all its Days Hymn 71
God of my Life, thy constant Care Hymn 134 God of Salvation, we adore Hymn 40
God of the Ocean, at whose Voice Hymn 117 Go, says the Lord, proclaim my Grace
Hymn 219 Grace! it is a charming Sound Hymn 286 Great Father of each perfect
Gift Hymn 251 Great Father of Mankind Hymn 113 Great Former of this various
Frame Hymn 54 Great God, did pious Abraham pray Hymn 3 Great God of Heaven and
Nature rise Hymn 368 Great God of Hosts, attend our Prayer Hymn 84 Great God,
we sing that mighty Hand Hymn 257 Great Leader of thine Israel's Host Hymn 306
Great Lord of Angels, we adore Hymn 166 Great Object of thine Israel's Hope
Hymn 131 Great Ruler of all Nature's Frame Hymn 92 Great Sovereign of the human
Heart Hymn 256 Great Source of Being and of Love Hymn 147 Great Source of Life,
our Souls confess Hymn 59 Great Spirit of immortal Love Hymn 331 Great Teacher
of thy Church, we own Hymn 175
H
HAil everlasting Prince of Peace Hymn 282 Hail everlasting Spring Hymn 170
Hail gracious Savior, all divine Hymn 238 Hail Progeny divine Hymn 200 Hail to
Emanuel's ever-honour'd Name Hymn 299 Hail to the Prince of Life and Peace Hymn
351 Hark! for the great Creator speaks Hymn 114 Hark! for it is God's own Son
that calls Hymn 226 Hark! for it is Wisdom's Voice Hymn 73 Hark the glad Sound,
the Savior comes Hymn 203 Hark! it is our heavenly Leader's Voice Hymn 353
Hear, gracious Sovereign from thy Throne Hymn 145 Hearken, ye Children of your
God Hymn 300 Heaven has confirmed the great Decree Hymn 313 He comes, the royal
Conqueror comes Hymn 213 He comes, thy God, O Israel, comes Hymn 156 Henceforth
let each believing Heart Hymn 241 High let us swell our tuneful Notes Hymn 201
House of our God, with cheerful Anthems ring Hymn 67 How free the Fountain
flows Hymn 300 How gentle God's Commands Hymn 340 How glorious, Lord, art thou
Hymn 77 How gracious and how wise Hymn 143 How keen the Tempter's Malice is
Hymn 216 How long shall Dreams of Creature Bliss Hymn 125 How rich thy Bounty,
King of Kings Hymn 275 How rich thy Favors, God of Grace Hymn 341 How swift
the Torrent flows Hymn 164
I
I Am thy God, Jehovah said Hymn 319 Jehovah! it is a glorious Name Hymn 20
Jesus, I love thy charming Name Hymn 335 Jesus, I sing thy matchless Grace Hymn
290 Jesus, mine Advocate above Hymn 345 Jesus, my Lord, how rich thy Grace Hymn
188 Jesus, our Souls delightful Choice Hymn 197 Jesus the Lord, our Souls adore
Hymn 311 Jesus, we own thy saving Power Hymn 204 Jesus, we own thy sovereign
Hand Hymn 234 Immense eternal God Hymn 10 Immortal God, on thee we call Hymn
307 Indulgent God, with pitying Eye Hymn 61 Indulgent Sovereign of the Skies
Hymn 120 In glad Amazement, Lord, I stand Hymn 70 In one harmonious cheerful
Song Hymn 232 In Raptures let our Hearts ascend Hymn 244 Interval of grateful
Shade Hymn 363 In thy Rebukes, all-gracious God Hymn 109 In what Confusion
Earth appears Hymn 212 I own, my God, thy sovereign Grace Hymn 240 Israel, thy
Tribute bring Hymn 357 Is there a Sight in Earth or Heaven Hymn 224 It is my
Father's Voice Hymn 90 It is the Lord of Glory calls Hymn 126
L
LEgions of Foes beset me round Hymn 31 Let Heaven burst forth into a Song Hymn
103 Let Jacob to his Maker-sing Hymn 102 Let Zion's Watchmen all awake Hymn 324
Lift up, ye Saints, your weeping Eyes Hymn 358 Liften ye Hills, ye Mountains,
hear Hymn 158 Look back, my Soul, with grateful Love Hymn 58 Look down, O Lord,
with pitying Eye Hymn 146 Lord, do thou show a Corner Stone Hymn 334 Lord of
the Sabbath, hear our Vows Hymn 310 Lord of the Vineyard, we adore Hymn 237
Lord, we adore thy wondrous Name Hymn 55 Lord, we have broke thy holy Laws Hymn
157 Lord, we have wandered from thy Way Hymn 65 Lord, when Iniquities abound
Hymn 7 Lord, when thine Israel we survey Hymn 83 Lord, when thy Hand is lifted
up Hymn 88 Loud be thy Name adored Hymn 283 Loud let the tuneful Trumpet sound
Hymn 50 Loud to the Prince of Heaven Hymn 41
M
MArk the soft-falling Snow Hymn 111 Mine inward Joys suppressed too long Hymn
330 My God, and is thy Table spread Hymn 171 My God, assist me, while I raise
Hymn 266 My God! how cheerful is the Sound Hymn 297 My God, the Covenant of thy
Love Hymn 21 My God, thy Service well demands Hymn 364 My God, what silken
Cords are thine Hymn 152 My God, whose all-pervading Eye Hymn 45 My gracious
Lord, I own thy Right Hymn 294 My Helper God, I bless his Name Hymn 19 My
Jesus, while in mortal Flesh Hymn 280 My Lord, did thou endure such Smart
Hymn 276 My Savior, did thou die for me Hymn 193 My Savior, I am thine Hymn
267 My Savior, let me hear thy Voice Hymn 179 My Sins, alas! how foul the
Stains Hymn 348 My Soul, review the trembling Days Hymn 68 My Soul, the awful
Hour will come Hymn 39 My Soul triumphant in the Lord Hymn 33 My Soul, with all
thy wakened Powers Hymn 320 My Soul, with Joy attend Hymn 231 My various
Powers, awake Hymn 347 My wakened Soul, extend thy Wings Hymn 342
N
NOw be that Sacrifice surveyed Hymn 291 Now let a true Ambition rise Hymn 178
Now let my Soul with Transport rise Hymn 261 Now let our cheerful Eyes survey
Hymn 8 Now let our mourning Hearts revive Hymn 17 Now let our Songs address the
God of Peace Hymn 367 Now let our Songs proclaim abroad Hymn 318 Now let our
Voices join Hymn 69 Now let the feeble all be strong Hymn 269 Now let the Gates
of Zion sing Hymn 182 Now let the listening World around Hymn 74 Now let the
Sons of Belial hear Hymn 80 Now to that sovereign Grace Hymn 326
O
O God of Jacob, by whose Hand Hymn 4 O happy Christian, who can boast Hymn 349
O happy Day, that fixed my Choice Hymn 23 O injured Majesty of Heaven Hymn 142
O Israel, blessed beyond Compare Hymn 16 O Israel, thou art blessed Hymn 78 O
praise ye the Lord, prepare a new Song Hymn 366 O righteous God, thou Judge
supreme Hymn 140 O Thou that have Redemption wrought Hymn 249 Our Banner is the
eternal God Hymn 6 Our Eyes Salvation see Hymn 202 Our God ascends his lofty
Throne Hymn 82 Our heavenly Father calls Hymn 346 Our Souls with pleasing
Wonder view Hymn 34 Our Souls with Reverence, Lord, bow down Hymn 339 O where
is sovereign Mercy gone Hymn 116 O ye immortal Throng Hymn 304 O Zion, tune thy
Voice Hymn 118
P
PArent of universal Good Hymn 47 Peace, all ye Sorrows of the Heart Hymn 235
Peace, it is the Lord Jehovah's Hand Hymn 42 Perfection! it is an empty Name Hymn
63 Perpetual Source of Light and Grace Hymn 151 Praise to our Shepherd's
gracious Name Hymn 229 Praise to the Lord of boundless Might Hymn 274 Praise to
the Lord on high Hymn 273 Praise to the Lord whose mighty Hand Hymn 272 Praise
to the radiant Source of Bliss Hymn 101 Praise to the Sovereign of the Sky Hymn
162 Praise to thy Name, eternal God Hymn 344
R
RAise, thoughtless Sinner, raise thine Eye Hymn 148 Remark, my Soul, the
narrow Bounds Hymn 52 Repent, the Voice celestial cries Hymn 254 Return, my
roving Heart, return Hymn 29 Return, my Soul, and seek thy Rest Hymn 57
S
SAlvation does to God belong Hymn 369 Salvation! O melodious Sound Hymn 36
Satan the dire Invader came Hymn 308 Savior divine, we know thy Name Hymn 132
Savior of Men and Lord of Love Hymn 184 Searcher of Hearts, before thy Face
Hymn 250 See how the Lord of Mercy spreads Hymn 185 See Israel's gentle
Shepherd stand Hymn 198 See the Destruction is begun Hymn 94 See the fair
Structure Wisdom rears Hymn 76 See the old Dragon from his Throne Hymn 356
Shepherd of Israel, bend thine Ear Hymn 370 Shepherd of Israel, thou do keep
Hymn 123 Shine forth, eternal Source of Light Hymn 150 Shine on our Souls,
eternal God Hymn 53 Shout! for the Battlements are fallen Hymn 278 Sing to the
Lord above Hymn 167 Sing to the Lord a new melodious Song Hymn 220 Sing to the
Lord, who loud proclaims Hymn 30 Sing, ye redeemed of the Lord Hymn 96 So firm
the Saints Foundations stand Hymn 161 Sovereign of all the Worlds on high Hymn
281 Sovereign of Heaven, thine Empire spreads Hymn 180 Sovereign of Life,
before thine Eye Hymn 25 Sovereign of Life, I own thy Hand Hymn 60 Sovereign of
Nature, all is thine Hymn 14 Spring up, my Soul, with ardent Flight Hymn 268
Stupendous Grace! And can it be Hymn 287 Supreme in Mercy, who shall dare Hymn
160 Supreme of Beings, with Delight Hymn 355
T
THe Covenant of a Savior's Love Hymn 236 The Creatures, Lord, confess thy
Hand Hymn 5 The darkened Sky how thick it lours Hymn 66 The Day approaches, O
my Soul Hymn 317 The Deluge at the Almighty's Call Hymn 336 The everliving God
Hymn 89 The glorious Lord, his Israel's Hope Hymn 95 The great Jehovah! who
shall dare Hymn 26 The King of Heaven his Table spreads Hymn 211 The Lord from
his exalted Throne Hymn 28 The Lord! how kind are all his Ways Hymn 149 The
Lord! how rich his Comforts are Hymn 277 The Lord Jehovah calls Hymn 309 The
Lord into his Vineyard comes Hymn 174 The Lord of Glory reigns supremely great
Hymn 44 The Lord of Life exalted stands Hymn 225 The Lord on mortal Worms looks
down Hymn 172 The Lord our Lord! how rich his Grace Hymn 106 The Lord with
Pleasure views his Saints Hymn 37 The Promises I sing Hymn 316 The righteous
Lord supremely great Hymn 128 These mortal Joys! how soon they fade Hymn 209
The Sepulchers how thick they stand Hymn 243 The swift-declining Day Hymn 130
The eternal God, his Name how great Hymn 24 The Vineyard of the Lord how fair
Hymn 81 Thou, Lord, through every changing Scene Hymn 51 Thou, mighty Lord, art
God alone Hymn 253 Thrice happy Souls, who born from Heaven Hymn 79 Thrice
happy State, where Saints shall live Hymn 215 Thus has the Son of Jesse said
Hymn 365 Thus says Jehovah from his Seat Hymn 91 Thy Flock, with what a tender
Care Hymn 230 Thy Judgments cry aloud Hymn 115 Thy piercing Eye, O God, surveys
Hymn 138 Thy Presence, everlasting God Hymn 279 It Is mine, the Covenant of his
Grace Hymn 22 To all his Flock what wondrous Love Hymn 239 Tomorrow, Lord, is
thine Hymn 329 To thee, great Architect on high Hymn 305 To thee, my God, my
Days are known Hymn 38 To thee, O God, we Homage pay Hymn 173 Transporting
Tidings, which we hear Hymn 302 Triumphant, Lord, thy Goodness reigns Hymn 35
Triumphant Zion, lift thy Head Hymn 107
V
VIler than Dust, O Lord, are we Hymn 135 Ungrateful Sinners, whence this Scorn
Hymn 258 Unite, my roving Thoughts, unite Hymn 48
W
WAit on the Lord, ye Heirs of Hope Hymn 93 Weary, and weak, and faint Hymn 87
We bless the eternal Source of Light Hymn 352 We praise the Lord for heavenly
Bread Hymn 222 We sing the deep mysterious Plan Hymn 284 What Bosom moved with
pious Zeal Hymn 9 What doleful Accents do I hear Hymn 192 What haughty Scorner,
says the Lord Hymn 168 What Myst'ries, Lord, in thee combine Hymn 350 What
venerable Sight appears Hymn 214 When at this Distance, Lord, we trace Hymn 183
While on the Verge of Life I stand Hymn 295 Whose Words against the Lord are
stout Hymn 136 Why flow these Torrents of Distress Hymn 196 Why should our
mourning Souls delight Hymn 260 Why will ye lavish out your Years Hymn 206 Wide
over all Worlds the Savior reigns Hymn 195 With Extaey of Joy Hymn 333 With
flowing Eyes, and bleeding Hearts Hymn 270 With humble Pleasure, Lord, we trace
Hymn 11 With Pity, Lord, thy Servant view Hymn 62 With reverend Awe, tremendous
Lord Hymn 133 With Transport, Lord, our Souls proclaim Hymn 323 With what
Delight I raise mine Eyes Hymn 85
Y
YE Armies of the living God Hymn 265 Ye golden Lamps of Heaven, farewell Hymn
119 Ye Hearts with youthful Vigor warm Hymn 75 Ye Heavens, with Sounds of
Triumph ring Hymn 303 Ye humble Souls, rejoice Hymn 72 Ye humble Souls, that
seek the Lord Hymn 194 Ye little Flock, whom Jesus feeds Hymn 208 Ye mourning
Saints, whose streaming Tears Hymn 112 Ye Prisoners, who in Bondage lie Hymn
169 Yes, Britain seemed to Ruin doomed Hymn 155 Ye Servants of the Lord Hymn
210 Ye Sinners, bend your stubborn Necks Hymn 328 Ye Sinners, on Backsliding
bent Hymn 153 Yes, it is sweet to taste his Grace Hymn 332 Ye Sons of Men, with
Joy record Hymn 56 Yes, the Redeemer rose Hymn 218 Yes, it is the Voice of Love
divine Hymn 163 Ye Subjects of the Lord, proclaim Hymn 108 Ye weak Inhabitants
of Clay Hymn 97
HYMNS AND SPIRITUAL SONGS, From PASSAGES in the OLD TESTAMENT.
I. Enoch's Piety and Translation, Genesis V. 24. Hebrews XI. 5.
1
ETERNAL GOD, our wondering Souls
Admire thy matchless Grace;
That thou will walk, that thou will dwell,
With Adam's worthless Race.
2
O lead me to that happy Path,
Where I my GOD may meet;
Though Hosts of Foes begird it round,
Though Briars wound my Feet.
3
Cheered with thy Converse I can trace
The Desert with Delight:
Through all the Gloom one Smile of thine
Can dissipate the Night.
4
Nor shall I through eternal Days
A restless Pilgrim roam:
Thy Hand, that now directs my Course,
Shall soon convey me home.
5
I ask not Enoch's rapturous Flight
To Realms of heavenly Day:
Nor seek Elijah's fiery Steeds,
To bear this Flesh away.
6
Joyful my Spirit will consent
To drop its mortal Load,
And hail salute or welcome.
the sharpest Pangs of Death,
That break its Way to GOD.
II. GOD'S gracious Approbation of a religious Care of our Families, Genesis
xviii. 19.
1
FATHER of Men, thy Care we bless,
Which crowns our Families with Peace:
From thee they sprung, and by thy Hand
Their Root, and Branches are sustained.
2
To GOD, most worthy to be praised,
Be our domestic Altars raised;
Who, Lord of Heaven, scorns not to dwell
With Saints in their obscurest Cell.
3
To thee may each united House
Morning, and Night, present its Vows:
Our Servants there, and rising Race
Be taught thy Precepts, and thy Grace.
4
O may each future Age proclaim
The Honors of thy glorious Name;
While pleased, and thankful, we remove
To join the Family above.
III. ABRAHAM'S Intercession for SODOM. Genesis xviii. 32.
For a Fast Day.
1
GREAT GOD! did pious Abram pray
For Sodom's vile abandoned Race?
And shall not all our Souls be roused
For Britain to implore thy Grace?
2
Base as we are, does not thine Eye
Its chosen Thousands here survey;
Whose Souls, deep humbled, mourn the [Crouds,
Who walk in Sin's destructive Way?
3
O Judge supreme, let not thy Sword
The righteous with the wicked smite:
Nor bury in promiscuous Heaps
Rebels, and Saints thy chief Delight.
4
For these thy Children spare the Land;
Avert the Thunders big with Death;
Nor let the Seeds of latent hidden, secret.
Fire
Be kindled by thy flaming Breath.
5
On! be not angry, mighty GOD,
While Dust and Ashes seek thy Face!
But gently bending from thy Throne,
Renew, and still increase the Grace.
6
JESUS the Intercessor hear,
And for his Sake thy Grace impart,
Which, while it stops the fiery Stream,
Dissolves the most obdurate Heart.
7
Sodom shall change to Zion then,
And heavenly Dews be scattered round,
That Plants of Paradise may spring,
Where baleful destructive.
Poisons cursed the Ground.
IV. JACOB'S Vow. Genesis xxviii. 20.-22.
1
O GOD of Jacob, by whose Hand
Thine Israel still is fed,
Who through this weary Pilgrimage
Have all our Fathers led:
2
To thee our humble Vows we raise,
To thee address our Prayer,
And in thy kind and faithful Breast
Deposite all our Care.
3
If thou through each perplexing Path
Wilt be our constant Guide;
If thou will daily Bread supply,
And Raiment wilt provide;
4
If thou will spread thy Shield around,
Till these our Wand'rings cease,
And at our Father's loved Abode
Our Souls arrive in Peace;
5
To thee, as to our Covenant-GOD,
We'll our whole selves resign;
And count that not our Tenth alone,
But all we have is thine.
V. The Hand of the LORD upon the Cattle. Exodus ix. 3.
1
THE Creatures, LORD, confess thy Hand,
Through Earth and Sky, through Sea and Land;
And all their meanest Orders share
Their Maker's Pity, and his Care.
2
O look from thine exalted Throne,
And hear our panting Cattle moan;
Prone Stretched out on the Ground.
over the untasted Food they lie,
Groan out their Agonies, and dye.
3
What have these harmless Creatures done
To draw this sore Chastisement down?
It Is human Guilt for Vengeance calls,
And heavy on the Herds it falls.
4
From them to us the Stroke might pass,
And mow down Thousands of our Race:
Till Desolation reigned around,
Our Cities void, untilled our Ground.
5
Prevent the Ruin by thy Grace,
And melt our Hearts to seek thy Face:
Blessed Fruit of thy correcting Rod
To lose our Beasts, and find our GOD.
VI. ISRAEL and AMALEK. Exodus xvii. 11.
For a Fast Day.
1
OUR Banner is the Eternal GOD,
Nor will we yield to Fear;
Amidst ten thousand fierce Assaults,
His mighty Aid is near.
2
To him the Hands of Faith we stretch,
And plead experienced Grace;
To him the Voice of Prayer we raise,
Nor will he hide his Face.
3
No more, proud Amalek, thy Boast,
"GOD'S Arm is feeble grown".
His Sword shall lop off every Hand,
That dares insult his Throne.
4
Awake, tremendous Judge, awake,
Our Nation's Cause to plead;
Nor let thine Israel's Foes, and thine
By Wickedness succeed.
5
Our fainting Hands, how soon they droop!
But thou the weak can raise;
And in the Mount of Prayer can leave
An Altar to thy Praise.
VII. Against following a Multitude to do Evil. Exodus XXIII. 2.
1
LORD, when Iniquities abound,
And growing Crimes appear;
We view the Deluge rising round
With Sorrow, and with Fear.
2
Yet when its Waves most fiercely beat,
And spread Destruction wide,
Thy Spirit can a Standard raise
To stem restrain.
the roaring Tide.
3
May thy triumphant Arm awake
Thy sacred Cause to plead;
And let the Multitude confess,
That thou art GOD indeed.
4
Their Hearts shall in a Moment turn,
Like Water by thy Hand;
One Word shall bow their stubborn Necks
To own thy high command.
5
Our feeble Souls at least support,
And there thy Power display;
Then Multitudes shall strive in vain
To draw us from thy Way.
VIII. CHRIST'S Intercession typified by AARON'S Breastplate. Exodus xxviii. 29.
1
NOW let our cheerful Eyes survey
Our great High Priest above,
And celebrate his constant Care,
And sympathetic Love.
2
Though raised to a superior Throne,
Where Angels bow around,
And high over all the shining Train
With matchless Honors crowned;
3
The Names of all his Saints he bears
Deep graven on his Heart;
Nor shall the meanest Christian say,
That he has lost his Part.
4
Those Characters shall fair abide,
Our everlasting Trust,
When Gems, and Monuments, and Crowns
Are moulder'd down to Dust.
5
So, Gracious Savior, on my Breast,
May thy dear Name be worn,
A sacred Ornament and Guard,
To endless Ages borne.
IX. Who is on the Lord's Side? Exodus xxxii. 26.
1
WHAT Bosom moved with pious Zeal
Does for its GOD'S Dishonor feel?
What Heart with generous Ardor glows
To plead his Cause against his Foes?
2
Great GOD, what Bosom can be cold?
What Coward must not here grow bold?
While Honor, Interest, Truth, and Love
Concur our inmost Souls to move?
3
Around thy Standard, Lord, we press,
Thine injured Honor to redress,
And with determined Voice demand
The Signal of thy conquering Hand.
4
Thou shall these sacred Weapons bless,
And lead through War to endless Peace;
Not Death itself our Souls shall dread,
For thine own Arm shall raise the Dead.
X. GOD'S Presence desirable. Exodus xxxiii. 15.
1
IMMENSE, eternal GOD!
How mavelous thy Name!
Thy Presence all abroad
Pervades penetrates through or fills.
all Nature's Frame;
Heaven, Earth, and Air,
And the dark Cell,
Where Devils dwell
In long Despair.
2
Yet thou have chosen Ways
To make thy Presence known,
To Favorites of thy Grace,
To upright Souls alone:
This Glory, LORD,
My Soul would see,
This Grace to me,
My GOD, afford.
3
If thou thy Luster vail
The Charms of Nature fade;
All withered, weak, and pale,
They bow their languid Head:
My Father, shine;
For thou can give
The Dead to live
By Beams divine.
4
Even Eden's blissful Lands
Would in thine Absence mourn;
But thou wild Afric's AFRICA, a Part of the Earth remarkable for sandy barren
Deserts.
Sands
To Paradise can turn.
If GOD be there
The Gloom is bright;
But Noon is Night,
Till thou appear.
5
Come, for my Spirit glows
With infinite Desire!
Strong Love impatient grows,
And sets my Heart on Fire.
My Father, come;
That Presence give
On which I live;
Or call me home.
XI. MOSES'S View of the divine Glory. Exodus xxxiii. 18.
1
WITH humble Pleasure, Lord, we trace
The ancient Records of thy Grace;
And our own Consolation draw
From what thy Servant Moses saw.
2
May we behold thy Glory shine,
With gentle Beams of Love divine;
And hear thy secret Voice proclaim
The various Wonders of thy Name.
3
If feeble Nature faint to endure
A Voice so sweet, a Ray so pure;
Its Dissolution would delight,
While Death would wear a Form so bright.
4
Death shall unvail that World above,
Where the dear Children of thy Love,
Attemper'd fitted and enabled to bear.
all to heavenly Day,
Bear, and reflect the immediate Ray.
XII. The Proclamation of GOD'S Name to Moses, or divine Mercy and Justice.
Exodus xxxiv. 6,-8.
1
ATTEND, my Soul, the Voice divine,
And mark what beaming Glories shine
Around thy condescending GOD!
To us, to us, he still proclaims
His awful, his endearing Names:
Attend, and sound them all abroad.
2
"JEHOVAH I, the sovereign Lord,
"The mighty GOD, by Heaven adored,
"Down to the Earth my Footsteps bend:
"My Heart the tenderest Pity knows,
"Goodness full-streaming overflows,
"And Grace and Truth shall never End.
3
"My Patience long can Crimes endure;
"My pard'ning Love is ever sure,
"When penitential Sorrow mourns;
"To Millions through unnumber'd Years,
"New Hope and new Delight it bears;
"Yet Wrath against the Sinner burns."
4
Make Haste, my Soul, the Vision meet,
All prostrate at thy Sov'reign's Feet,
And drink the tuneful Accents in;
Speak on, my Lord; repeat the Voice;
Diffuse these Heart-expanding Joys,
Till Heaven complete the rapturous Scene.
XIII. The GOD of Spirits sought to supply Vacancies in the Congregations of
his People Numbers xxvii. 15,-17.
1
FATHER of Spirits, from thy Hand
Our Souls immortal came;
And still thine Energy Power.
divine
Supports the ethereal Heavenly.
Flame.
2
By thee our Spirits all are known;
And each remotest Thought
Lies wide expanded to his Eye,
By whom their Powers were wrought.
3
To thee, when mortal Comforts fail,
Thy Flock deserted flies;
And, on the eternal Shepherds Care,
Our cheerful Hope relies.
4
When over thy faithful Servants Dust,
Thy dear Assemblies mourn,
In speedy Tokens of thy Grace,
O Israel's GOD, return.
5
The Powers of Nature all are thine,
And thine the Aids of Grace;
Thine Arm has borne thy Churches up
Through every rising Race.
6
Exert thy sacred Influence here,
And here thy Suppliants bless,
And change, to Strains of cheerful Praise,
Their Accents of Distress.
7
With faithful Heart, with skilful Hand,
May this thy Flock be fed;
And with a steady growing Pace
To Zion's Mountain led.
XIV. The Lord's People his Portion. Deuteron. xxxii. 9.
1
SOVEREIGN of Nature, all is thine,
The Air, the Earth, the Sea:
By thee the Orbs celestial The heavenly Bodies.
shine,
And Cherubs live by thee.
2
Rich in thine own Essential Store,
Thou call'st forth Worlds at Will:
Ten thousand, and ten thousand more
Would hear thy Summons still.
3
What Treasure will thou then confess?
And thine own Portion call?
What by peculiar Right possess,
Imperial Lord of all?
4
Thine Israel thou will stoop to claim,
Wilt mark them out for thine:
Ten thousand Praises to thy Name
For Goodness so divine!
5
That I am thine, my Soul would boast,
And boast its Claim to thee;
Nor shall GOD'S Property be lost
Nor GOD be torn from me.
XV. The Eternal GOD his People's Refuge, and Support. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 27.
1
BEHOLD the great eternal GOD,
Spreads everlasting Arms abroad,
And calls our Souls to shelter there.
Wonders of mingled Power and Grace
To all his Israel he displays,
Guarded from Danger, and from Fear.
2
Thither my feeble Soul shall fly
When Terrors press, and Death is nigh,
And there will I delight to dwell:
On that high Tower I rear my Head
Serene, nor knows my Heart to dread,
Amidst surrounding Hosts of Hell.
3
The Shadow of the Almighty's Wings
Composure unmolested brings,
While threatening Horrors round me crowd;
In vain the Storms of rattling Hail
The Walls of this Retreat assail,
And the wild Tempest roars aloud.
4
In louder Strains my fearless Tongue
Shall warble its victorious Song,
My Father's Graces to proclaim;
He bears his Infant Offspring on
To Glory radiant as his Throne,
And Joys eternal as his Name.
XVI. The Happiness of GOD'S Israel. Deuteronomy, xxxiii. 29.
1
O Israel, blessed beyond Compare!
Unrivaled all thy Glories are:
Jehovah deigns condescends.
to fill thy Throne,
And calls thine Interest all his own.
2
He is thy Savior; He thy Lord;
His Shield is thine; and thine his Sword:
Review in Extacy of Thought
The grand Redemption he has wrought.
3
From Satan's Yoke he sets thee free,
Opens thy Passage through the Sea;
He through the Desert is thy Guide,
And Heaven, for Canaan, will provide.
4
Not Jacob's Sons of old could boast
Such Favors to their chosen Host;
Their Glories, which through Ages shine,
Are but dim Shades, and Types of thine.
5
Celestial Spirit, teach our Tongue
Sublimer Strains than Moses sung,
Proportioned to the sweeter Name
Of GOD the SAVIOR, and the LAMB.
XVII. Support in the gracious Presence of GOD under the Loss of Ministers, and
other useful Friends. Joshua i. 2, 4, 5.
1
NOW let our mourning Hearts revive,
And all our Tears be dry.
Why should those Eyes be drowned in Grief,
Which view a Savior nigh?
2
What though the Arm of conquering Death
Does GOD'S own House invade?
What though the Prophet, and the Priest
Be numbered with the Dead?
3
Though earthly Shepherds dwell in Dust,
The Aged, and the Young,
The watchful Eye in Darkness closed,
And mute the instructive Tongue;
4
The eternal Shepherd still survives
New Comfort to impart;
His Eye still guides us, and his Voice
Still animates our Heart.
5
"Lo, I am with you, says the Lord,
"My Church shall safe abide;
"For I will never forsake my own,
"Whose Souls in me confide."
6
Through every Scene of Life, and Death,
This Promise is our Trust;
And this shall be our Children's Song,
When we are cold in Dust.
XVIII. GOD insensibly withdrawn. Judges xvi. 20.
1
A Present GOD is all our Strength,
And all our Joy and Hope;
When he withdraws, our Comforts dye,
And every Grace must droop.
2
But flattering Trifles charm our Hearts
To court their false Embrace,
Till justly this neglected Friend
Averts his angry Face.
3
He leaves us, and we miss him not;
But go presumptuous on,
Till baffled, wounded, and enslaved,
We learn, that GOD is gone.
4
And what, my Soul, can then remain
One Ray of Light to give?
Severed from him, their better Life,
How can his Children live?
5
Hence all ye painted Forms of Joy,
And leave my Heart to mourn!
I would devote these Eyes to Tears,
Till cheered by his Return.
6
Look back, my Lord, and own the place,
Where once thy Temple stood;
For lo, its Ruins bear the mark
Of rich atoning Blood.
XIX. EBENEZER, or GOD'S helping Hand reviewed and acknowledged. 1 Samuel vii. 12.
For New Years Day.
1
MY helper GOD! I bless his Name:
The same his Power, his Grace the same.
The Tokens of his friendly Care
Open, and crown, and close the Year.
2
I 'midst ten thousand Dangers stand,
Supported by his guardian Hand;
And see, when I survey my Ways,
Ten thousand Monuments of Praise.
3
Thus far his Arm has led me on;
Thus far I make his Mercy known;
And, while I tread this desert Land,
New Mercies shall new Songs demand.
4
My greateful Soul, on Jerdan's Shore,
Shall raise one sacred Pillar more:
Then bear, in his bright Courts above,
Inscriptions of immortal Love.
XX. The Saint encouraging himself in the LORD his GOD. 1 Samuel xxx. 6.
1
JEHOVAH, it is a glorious Name:
Still pregnant with Delight;
It scatters round a cheerful Beam,
To gild the darkest Night.
2
What though our mortal Comforts fade,
And drop like withering Flowers?
Nor Time nor Death can break that Band,
Which makes Jehovah our's.
3
My Cares, I give you to the Wind,
And shake you off like Dust;
Well may I trust my All with him,
With whom my Soul I trust.
XXI. Support in GOD'S Covenant under domestic Troubles. 2 Samuel xxiii. 5.
1
MY GOD, the Covenant of thy Love
Abides for ever sure,
And in its matchless Grace I feel
My Happiness secure.
2
What though my House be not with thee
As Nature could desire?
To nobler Joys, than Nature gives,
Thy Servants all aspire.
3
Since thou, the everlasting GOD,
My Father art become;
Jesus my Guardian, and my Friend,
And Heaven my final Home;
4
I welcome all thy sovereign Will;
For all that Will is Love:
And, when I know not what thou do,
I wait the Light above.
5
Thy Covenant in the darkest Gloom
Shall heavenly Rays impart,
Which, when my Eyelids close in Death,
Shall warm my chilling Heart.
XXII. Support in GOD'S Covenant in the near Views of Death. 2 Samuel xxiii. 1.
and 5. compared.
1
IT IS Mine, the Covenant of his Grace;
And every Promise mine!
All sprung from everlasting Love,
And sealed by Blood divine.
2
On my unworthy favored Head
Its Blessings all unite;
Blessings more numerous than the Stars,
More lasting, and more bright.
3
Death, thou may tear this Rag of Flesh,
And sink my fainting Head,
And lay my Ruins in the Grave,
Among my Kindred Dead:
4
But Death and Hell in vain shall strive
To break that sacred Rest,
Which GOD's expiring Children feel,
While leaning on his Breast.
5
The enlarged Soul thou can not reach,
Nor rend from Christ away;
Though over my mouldering Dust thou boast,
The Triumphs of a Day.
6
The Night is past, my Morning dawns;
My Covenant GOD descends,
And wakes that Dust to join my Soul
In Bliss that never ends.
7
That Covenant the last Accent claims
Of this poor falt'ring Tongue;
And that shall the first Notes employ
Of my celestial Song.
XXIII. Rejoicing in our Covenant Engagements to GOD. 1 Chronicles. xv. 15.
1
O Happy Day, that fixed my Choice
On thee, my Savior, and my GOD!
Well may this glowing Heart rejoice,
And tell its Raptures all abroad.
2
O happy Bond, that seals my Vows
To him who merits all my Love!
Let cheerful Anthems Hymns of Praise.
fill his House,
While to that sacred Shrine Altar or Place of Worship.
I move.
3
It Is done; the great Transaction's done:
I am my Lord's, and he is mine:
He drew me, and I followed on,
Charmed to confess the Voice divine.
4
Now rest my long divided Heart,
Fixed on this blissful Center, rest;
With Ashes who would grudge to part
When called on Angels Bread to feast?
5
High Heaven, that heard the solemn Vow,
That Vow renewed shall daily hear;
Till in Life's latest Hour I bow,
And bless in Death a Bond so dear.
XXIV. GOD'S stirring up the Spirit of CYRUS to redeem ISRAEL. Ezra i. 1.
compared with Isaiah xlv. 1.-4.
1
THE eternal GOD! his Name how great!
How deep his Counsels! how complete!
The Hearts of Kings his Power can sway;
His Word unconscious without intending it. Isa. x. 7.
they obey.
2
Summoned of old in distant Days
To serve his Schemes, and show his Praise,
Cyrus, illustrious Prince, appears,
His People frees, his Temple rears.
3
Through Legions armed he breaks his Way,
And tramples Generals down like Clay;
The Bars of Steel he cuts in twain,
And brazen Gates oppose in vain.
4
But to Jehovah's Accents mild
The Hero pliant as a Child,
Lays the new Cares of Empire by,
Till Zion rise, and shine on high.
5
Thus, mighty GOD, shall every Heart,
(If thou thine Influence there exert)
Throw its own fondest Schemes aside,
And follow where thy Hand shall guide.
6
The foremost Sons of Fame shall boast
To raise thy Temples from their Dust;
Princes shall shout thy Name aloud,
And newborn Priests thine Altars crowd.
XXV. A Glance from GOD bringing us down to the Solitude of the Grave. Job vii.
8.
1
SOVEREIGN of Life, before thine Eye,
Lo! mortal Men by thousands dye!
One Glance from thee at once brings down
The proudest Brow, that wears a Crown.
2
Banished at once from human Sight
To the dark Grave's unchanging Night,
Imprisoned in that dusty Bed,
We hide our solitary Head.
3
The friendly Band Company.
no more shall greet,
Accents familiar once, and sweet:
No more the well-known Features trace,
No more renew the fond Embrace.
4
Yet if my Father's faithful Hand
Conduct me through this gloomy Land,
My Soul with Pleasure shall obey,
And follow, where he leads the Way.
5
He nobler Friends, than here I leave,
In brighter surer Worlds can give;
Or by the Beamings of his Eye
A lost Creation well supply.
XXVI. The Impossibility of Prospering while we harden ourselves against GOD.
Job ix. 4.
1
THE Great Jehovah! who shall dare
With him to tempt unequal War?
What Heart of Steel shall dare to oppose
And league among his hardened Foes?
2
At his Command the Lightnings dart,
And swift transfix pierce through.
the rebel Heart:
Earth trembles at his Look, and cleaves,
And Legions sink in living Graves.
3
Where are the haughty Monarchs now,
Who scorned his Word with lowering Brow?
Where are the Trophies of their Reigns?
Or where their Ruin's last Remains?
4
See Pharaoh sinking in the Tide!
See Babel's Tyrant, mad with Pride,
Graze with the Beasts! hear Herod roar,
While Worms his Deity devour!
5
See from the Turrets of the Skies
Tall Cherubs sink, no more to rise;
And trace their Rank on Thrones of Light
By heavier Chains, and darker Night.
6
Great GOD! and shall this Soul of mine
Presume to challenge Wrath divine?
Trembling I seek thy Mercy-Seat,
And lay my Weapons at thy Feet.
XXVII. The great Journey. Job xvi. 22.
1
BEHOLD the Path that Mortals tread
Down to the Regions of the dead!
Nor will the fleeting Moments stay,
Nor can we measure back our Way.
2
Our Kindred and our Friends are gone;
Know, O my Soul, this Doom thine own;
Feeble as theirs my mortal Frame,
The same my Way, my House the same.
3
From vital Air, from cheerful Light,
To the cold Grave's perpetual Night,
From Scenes of Duty, Means of Grace,
Must I to GOD'S Tribunal pass.
4
Important Journey! awful View!
How great the Change! the Scenes how new
The golden Gates of Heaven displayed,
Or Hell's fierce Flames, and gloomy Shade,
5
Awake, my Soul; thy Way prepare,
And lose in this each mortal Care;
With steady Feet that Path be trod,
Which through the Grave conducts to GOD.
6
Jesus, to thee my ALL I trust:
And if thou call me down to Dust
I know thy Voice, I bless thy Hand,
And dye in Smiles at thy Command.
7
What was my Terror, is my Joy;
These Views my brightest Hopes employ
To go, ever many Years are over,
Secure I shall return no more.
XXVIII. The Penitent brought back from (...) Pit. Job xxxiii. 27. 28.
1
THE LORD from his exalted Throne,
In Majesty arrayed,
Looks with a melting Pity down
On all, that seek his Aid.
2
When, touched with penitent Remorse,
Our Follies past we mourn,
With what a Tenderness of Love
He meets our first Return!
3
From Heaven he sent his only Son
To ransom us with Blood,
To snatch us from the burning Pit,
When on it is Brink we stood.
4
From Death and Hell he leads us up
By a delightful Way;
And the bright Beams of endless Life
Does round our Path display.
5
Great GOD, we wonder, and adore;
And, to exalt such Grace,
We long to learn the Songs of Heaven
Ever yet we reach the Place.
XXIX. Communing with our Hearts. Psalm. iv. 4.
1
RETURN, my roving Heart, return,
And chase these shadowy Forms no more;
Seek out some Solitude to mourn,
And thy forsaken GOD implore.
2
Wisdom and Pleasure dwell at home;
Retired, and silent seek them there:
True Conquest is ourselves to overcome,
True Strength to break the Tempter's Snare.
3
And thou, my GOD, whose piercing Eye
Distinct surveys each deep Recess,
In these abstracted Hours draw nigh,
And with thy Presence fill the Place.
4
Through all the Mazes Windings, Perplexities.
of my Heart
My Search let heavenly Wisdom guide,
And still it is radiant Beams impart,
Till all be searched, and purified.
5
Then with the Visits of thy Love
Vouchsafe my inmost Soul to cheer;
Till every Grace shall join to prove
That GOD has fixed his Dwelling there.
XXX. GOD'S Name the Encouragement of our Faith. Psalm ix. 10.
1
SING to the LORD, who loud proclaims
His various, and his saving Names;
O may they not be heard alone,
But by our sure Experience known!
2
Let great Jehovah be adored,
The Eternal, All-sufficient LORD,
He through the World most high confessed,
By whom 'twas formed, and is possessed.
3
Awake our noblest Powers to bless
The GOD of Abram, GOD of Peace;
Now by a dearer Title known,
Father and GOD of CHRIST his Son.
4
Through every Age his gracious Ear
Is open to his Servants Prayer,
Nor can one humble Soul complain,
That it has sought it is GOD in vain.
5
What unbelieving Heart shall dare
In Whispers to suggest a Fear?
While still he owns his ancient Name,
The same his Power, his Love the same.
6
To thee our Souls in Faith arise,
To thee we lift expecting Eyes;
And boldly through the Desert tread,
For GOD will guard, where GOD shall lead.
XXXI. Triumph in GOD'S Protection. Psalm xviii. 2.
1
LEGIONS of Foes beset me round,
While marching over this dangerous Ground;
Yet in Jehovah's Aid I trust,
And in his Power superior boast.
2
My Buckler he: His Shield is spread
To cover this defenseless Head:
Now let the fiercest Foes assail,
Their Darts, I count, as rattling Hail.
3
He is my Rock, and he my Tower;
The Base Foundation.
how firm! the Walls how sure!
The Battlements how high they rise!
And hide their Summits Top.
in the Skies.
4
Deliv'rances to GOD belong;
He is my Strength, and he my Song;
The Horn of my Salvation he,
And all my Foes dispersed shall flee.
5
Through the long March my Lips shall sing
My great Protector, and my King,
Till Zion's Mount my Feet ascend,
And all my painful Warfare end.
6
Raised on the shining Turrets there
Through all the Prospect wide, and fair,
A Land of Peace his Hosts survey,
And bless the Grace, that led the Way.
XXXII. Support in Death. Psalm xxiii. 4.
1
BEHOLD the gloomy Vale,
Which thou, my Soul, must tread,
Beset with Terrors fierce and pale,
That leads thee to the Dead.
2
Ye pleasing Scenes, Adieu Farewell.
,
Which I so long have known:
My Friends, a long Farewell to you,
For I must pass alone.
3
And thou, beloved Clay,
Long Partner of my Cares,
In this rough Path art torn away
With Agony and Tears.
4
But see a Ray of Light,
With Splendors all divine,
Breaks through these doleful Realms of Night,
And makes it is Horrors shine.
5
Where Death and Darkness reigns,
Jehovah is my Stay:
His Rod my trembling Feet sustains,
His Staff defends my Way.
6
Dear Shepherd, lead me on;
My Soul disdains to fear;
Death's gloomy Phantoms all are flown,
Now Life's great LORD is near.
XXXIII. The Good Man's Prospect for Time and Eternity. Psalm xxiii. 6.
1
MY Soul triumphant in the LORD
Shall tell its Joys abroad;
And march with holy Vigor on,
Supported by it is GOD.
2
Through all the winding Maze Wilderness.
of Life,
His Hand has been my Guide,
And in that long experienced Care
My Heart shall still confide.
3
His Grace through all the Desert flows
An unexhausted Stream:
That Grace on Zion's sacred Mount
Shall be my endless Theme Subject.
.
4
Beyond the choicest Joys of Earth
These distant Courts I love;
But O! I burn with strong Desire
To view thy House above.
5
Mingled with all the shining Band
My Soul would there adore;
A Pillar in thy Temple fixed,
To be removed no more.
XXXIV. The Goodness which GOD has wrought, and laid up for his People. Psalm.
xxxi. 19.
1
OUR Souls with pleasing Wonder view
The Bounties of thy Grace;
How much bestowed; How much reserved
For them that seek thy Face!
2
Thy liberal Hand with worldly Bliss
Often makes their Cup run over;
And in the Covenant of thy Love
They find diviner Store.
3
Here Mercy hides their numerous Sins;
Here Grace their Souls renews;
Here thine own reconciled Face
Does heavenly Beams diffuse.
4
But O! what Treasures yet unknown
Are lodged in Worlds to come?
If these the Enjoyments of the Way,
How happy is their Home?
5
And what shall mortal Worms reply?
Or how such Goodness own?
But it is our Joy that, LORD, to thee
Thy Servants Hearts are known.
6
Thine Eyes shall read those grateful Thoughts,
No Language can express:
Yet when our liv'liest Thanks we pay,
Our Debts do most increase.
7
Since Time's too short, All-gracious GOD,
To utter half thy Praise,
Loud to the Honor of thy Name
Eternal Hymns we'll raise.
XXXV. Relishing the divine Goodness. Psalm xxxiv. 8, 9.
1
TRIUMPHANT, LORD, thy Goodness
Through all the wide celestial Plains; [reigns
And it is full Streams redundant flow
Down to the Abodes of Men below.
2
Through Nature's Works it is Glories shine:
The Cares of Providence are thine:
And Grace erects our ruined Frame
A fairer Temple to thy Name.
3
O give to every human Heart
To taste, and feel how good thou art!
With grateful Love, and reverend Fear,
To know, how blessed thy Children are.
4
Let Nature burst into a Song:
Ye echoing Hills, the Notes prolong:
Earth, Seas, and Stars your Anthems raise,
All vocal sounding, as if endowed with Speech.
with your Maker's Praise.
5
Ye Saints, with Joy the Theme pursue;
Its sweetest Notes belong to you;
Chose by this condescending King
For ever round his Throne to sing.
XXXVI. GOD'S saying to the Soul, that he is its Salvation. Psalm xxxv. 3.
1
SALVATION! O melodious Sound
To wretched dying Men!
Salvation, that from GOD proceeds,
And leads to GOD again.
2
Rescued from Hell's eternal Gloom,
From Fiends evil Spirits.
and Fires, and Chains:
Raised to a Paradise of Bliss,
Where Love and Glory reigns.
3
But O! may a degenerate Soul,
Sinful and weak as mine,
Presume to raise a trembling Eye
To Blessings so divine?
4
The Luster of so bright a Bliss
My feeble Heart o'erbears;
And Unbelief almost perverts
The Promise into Tears.
5
My Savior GOD, no Voice but thine
These dying Hopes can raise:
Speak thy Salvation to my Soul,
And turn its Tears to Praise.
6
My Savior GOD, this broken Voice
Transported shall proclaim,
And call on all the Angelick Harps
To sound so sweet a Name.
XXXVII. GOD'S Complacency in the Prosperity of his Servants. Psalm xxxv. 27.
1
THE LORD with Pleasure views his Saints,
And calls them all his own,
And low he bows to their Complaints,
And pities every Groan.
2
In all the Joys, they here possess,
He takes a tender Part;
And, when they rise to heavenly Bliss,
Complacence fills his Heart.
3
My GOD, are all my Pleasures thine,
My Comforts thy Delight?
O be thy Happiness divine
Most precious in my Sight.
4
They most in all thy Bliss shall share,
Whose Hearts can love thee most;
O could I vie in Ardor there
With all the Angelic Hosts.
XXXVIII. The Days of the Upright known to GOD, and their everlasting
Inheritance. Psalm xxxvii. 18.
1
TO thee, my GOD, my Days are known;
My Soul enjoys the Thought:
My Actions all before thy Face,
Nor are my Faults forgot.
2
Each secret Breath Devotion vents
Is vocal to thine Ear;
And all my Walks of daily Life
Before thine Eye appear.
3
The vacant Hour, the active Scene
Thy Mercy shall approve;
And every Pang of Sympathy,
And every Care of Love.
4
Each golden Hour of beaming Light
Is gilded by thy Rays;
And dark Affliction's midnight Gloom
A present GOD surveys.
5
Full in thy View through Life I pass,
And in thy View I dye;
And, when each mortal Bond is broke,
Shall find my GOD is nigh.
6
Stripped of it is little earthly all
My Soul in Smiles shall go;
And in a heavenly Heritage
It Is Father's Bounty know.
XXXIX. Our Desire and Groaning before GOD, when proceeding from the greatest
Distress. Psalm. xxxviii. 9. 10.
1
MY Soul, the awful Hour will come,
Apace it passes on
To bear this Body to the Tomb,
And thee to Scenes unknown.
2
My Heart, long laboring with its Woes,
Shall pant and sink away;
And you, my Eyelids, soon shall close
On the last glim'ring Ray.
3
Whence in that Hour shall I receive
A Cordial for my Pain,
When, if Earth's Monarchs were my Friends,
Those Friends would weep in vain?
4
Great King of Nature, and of Grace,
To thee my Spirit flies,
And opens all its deep Distress
Before thy pitying Eyes.
5
All its Desires to thee are known,
And every secret Fear,
The Meaning of each broken Groan
Well notic'd by thine Ear.
6
O fix me by that mighty Power,
Which to such Love belongs,
Where Darkness veils the Eye no more,
And Groans are changed to Songs.
XL. GOD magnified by those that love his Salvation. Psalm xl. 16.
1
GOD of Salvation, we adore
Thy saving Love, thy saving Power;
And to our utmost Stretch of Thought
Hail the Redemption thou have wrought.
2
We love the Stroke, that breaks our Chain,
The Sword, by which our Sins are slain;
And, while abas'd in Dust we bow,
We sing the Grace, that lays us low.
3
Perish each Thought of human Pride:
Let GOD alone be magnified:
His Glory let the Heavens resound
Shouted from Earth's remotest Bound.
4
Saints, who his full Salvation know,
Saints, who but taste it here below,
Join every Angel's Voice to raise
Continued never-ending Praise.
XLI. The Triumph of Christ in the Cause of Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness.
Psalm xlv. 3. 4.
1
LOUD to the Prince of Heaven
Your cheerful Voices raise!
To him your Vows be given,
And fill his Courts with Praise.
With conscious Worth
All-clad in Arms,
All-bright in Charms,
He sallies forth.
2
Gird on thy conquering Sword,
Ascend thy shining Car Chariot.
,
And march, Almighty LORD,
To wage thy holy War.
Before his Wheels
In glad Surprise
Ye Valleys, rise,
And sink, ye Hills.
3
Fair Truth, and smiling Love,
And injured Righteousness
In thy Retinue move,
And seek from th^^ Redress:
Thou in their Cause
Shall prosperous ride,
And far and wide
Dispense thy Laws.
4
Before thine awful Face
Millions of Foes shall fall,
The Captives of thy Grace,
That Grace, which conquers all.
The World shall know,
Great King of Kings,
What wondrous Things
Thine Arm can do.
5
Here to my willing Soul
Bend thy triumphant Way;
Here every Foe control,
And all thy Power display.
My Heart, thy Throne,
Blessed Jesus, see
Bows low to thee,
To thee alone.
XLII. Quietness under Affliction a proper Acknowledgment of GOD. Psalm xlvi.
10.
1
PEACE, it is the LORD Jehovah's Hand,
That blasts our Joys in Death;
Changes the Visage once so dear,
And gathers back our Breath.
2
It Is he, the Potentate supreme
Of all the Worlds above,
Whose steady Counsels wisely rule,
Nor from their Purpose move.
3
It Is he, whose Justice might demand
Our Souls a Sacrifice;
Yet scatters with unwearied Hand
A thousand rich Supplies.
4
Our Covenant GOD and FATHER he
In CHRIST our bleeding LORD;
Whose Grace can heal the bursting Heart
With one reviving Word.
5
Fair Garlands of immortal Bliss
He weaves for every Brow;
And shall tumultuous Passions rise,
If he correct us now?
6
Silent I own Jehovah's Name;
I kiss thy scourging Hand;
And yield my Comforts, and my Life
To thy supreme Command.
XLIII. The Year crowned with the divine Goodness. Psalm lxv. 11.
For New Year's Day.
1
ETERNAL Source of every Joy!
Well may thy Praise our Lips employ,
While in thy Temple we appear,
Whose Goodness crowns the circling Year.
2
Wide as the Wheels of Nature roll
Thy Hand supports the steady Pole:
The Sun is taught by thee to rise,
And Darkness when to veil the Skies.
3
The flowery Spring at thy Command
Embalms the Air, and paints the Land;
The Summer Rays with Vigor shine
To raise the Corn, and cheer the Vine.
4
Thy Hand in Autumn richly pours
Through all our Coasts redundant Stores;
And Winters, soft'ned by thy Care,
No more a Face of Horror wear.
5
Seasons, and Months, and Weeks, and Days
Demand successive Songs of Praise;
Still be the cheerful Homage paid
With opening Light, and evening Shade.
6
Here in thy House shall Incense rise,
As circling Sabbaths bless our Eyes;
Still will we make thy Mercies known,
Around thy Board, and round our own.
7
O may our more harmonious Tongues
In Worlds unknown pursue the Songs;
And in those brighter Courts adore,
Where Days and Years revolve no more.
XLIV. Rebels against the supreme Sovereign admonished. Psalm lxvi. 7.
1
THE Lord of Glory reigns supremely great,
And over Heavens Arches builds his royal Seat.
Through Worlds unknown his sovereign Sway extends,
Nor Space nor Time his boundless Empire ends.
His Eye beholds the Affairs of every Nation,
And reads each Thought through his immense Creation.
2
Lightnings, and Storms his mighty Word obey,
And Planets roll, where he has marked their Way:
Unnumber'd Cherubs veiled before him stand,
At his first Signal all their Wings expand;
His Praise gives Harmony to all their Voices,
And every Heart through the full Choir Company of Singers.
rejoices.
3
Rebellious Mortals, cease your Tumults vain,
Nor longer such unequal War maintain:
Let Clay with Fellow-Clay in Combat strive,
But dread to brave the Power, by which you live:
With contrite Hearts fall prostrate and adore him,
For, if he frowns, ye perish all before him.
XLV. GOD the Happiness of his People, and their Support in the extremest
Distress. Psalm lxxiii. 25, 26.
1
MY GOD, whose all-pervading All-seeing.
Eye
Views Earth beneath, and Heaven above,
Witness, if here, or there thou see
An Object of mine equal Love.
2
Not the gay Scenes, where mortal Men
Pursue their Bliss, and find their Woe,
Detain my rising Heart, which springs
The nobler Joys of Heaven to know.
3
Not all the fairest Sons of Light,
That lead the Army round thy Throne,
Can bound its Flight; it presses on,
And seeks it is Rest in GOD alone.
4
Fixed near the immortal Source of Bliss,
Dauntless and joyous it surveys
Each Form of Horror and Distress,
That Earth, combined with Hell, can raise.
5
This feeble Flesh shall faint, and dye;
This Heart renew its Pulse no more;
Even now it views the Moment nigh,
When Life's last Movements all are over.
6
But come, thou vanquished King of Dread,
With thine own Hand thy Power destroy;
It Is thine to bear my Soul to GOD,
My Portion, and eternal Joy.
XLVI. The Rage of Enemies restrained, and overruled to the divine Glory. Psalm
lxxvi. 10.
Thanksgiving for the Suppression of the Rebellion. 1746.
1
ACCEPT, great GOD, thy Britain's Songs,
While grateful Joy unites our Tongues
To own the Work, thy Hand has done:
Thy Hand has crushed our cruel Foes,
When in rebellious Troops they rose,
And swore to tread our Glory down.
2
With Hell confed'rate on their Side,
People and Prince their Rage defied,
And in proud Hope devoured us all:
Thy Hand its Banner has displayed,
Beckoned its Hero to our Aid,
And in one Day their Legions fall.
3
Thus shall thou still maintain thy Throne,
And prove, that thou art GOD alone,
Though Earth, and Hell new Efforts try:
'Midst all the Tumult, they can raise,
Envenomed Wrath exalts thy Praise,
Till hushed at thy Rebuke it dye.
4
So swell the Surges great Waves.
of the Sea,
And roar in their impetuous Way,
As they would deluge Earth again;
So strike they on the unshaken Rock,
Dashed by the Fierceness of their Shock,
And foam to feel their Fury vain.
XLVII. GOD furnishing a Table in the Wilderness. Psalm lxxviii. 19. 20.
1
PARENT of universal Good!
We own thy bounteous Hand,
Which does so rich a Table spread,
Even in this desert Land.
2
Struck by thy Power the flinty Rocks
In gushing Torrents flow;
The feathered Wand'rers of the Air
Thy guiding Instinct know.
3
The pregnant Clouds at thy Command
Rain down delicious Bread;
And by light Drops of pearly Dew
Are numerous Armies fed.
4
Supported thus, thine Israel marched
The promised Land to gain:
And shall thy Children now begin
To seek their GOD in vain?
5
Are all thy Stores exhausted now?
Or does thy Mercy fail?
That Faith should languish in our Breasts
And anxious Cares prevail?
6
Ye base unworthy Fears, be gone,
And wide disperse in Air;
Then may I feel my Father's Rod,
When I suspect his Care.
XLVIII. GOD'S speaking Peace to his People. Psalm lxxxv. 8.
1
UNITE, my roving Thoughts, unite
In Silence soft and sweet:
And thou, my Soul, sit gently down
At thy great Sov'reign's Feet.
2
Jehovah's awful Voice is heard,
Yet gladly I attend;
For lo! the everlasting GOD
Proclaims himself my Friend.
3
Harmonious Accents to my Soul
The Sounds of Peace convey;
The Tempest at his Word subsides,
And Winds, and Seas obey.
4
By all its Joys, I charge my Heart
To grieve his Love no more;
But, charmed by Melody divine,
To give its Follies over.
XLIX. The Church the Birthplace of the Saints, and GOD'S Care of it. Psalm
lxxxvii. 5.
On opening a new Place of Worship.
1
AND will the great Eternal GOD
On Earth establish his Abode?
And will he from his radiant Throne,
Avow our Temples for his own?
2
We bring the Tribute of our Praise,
And sing that condescending Grace,
Which to our Notes will lend an Ear,
And call us sinful Mortals near.
3
Our Father's watchful Care we bless,
Which guards our Synagogues in Peace,
That no tumultuous Foes invade,
To fill our Worshippers with Dread.
4
These Walls we to thy Honor raise;
Long may they echo with thy Praise;
And thou descending fill the Place
With choicest Tokens of thy Grace.
5
Here let the great Redeemer reign
With all the Graces of his Train;
While Power divine his Word attends
To conquer Foes, and cheer his Friends.
6
And in the great decisive Day,
When GOD the Nations shall survey,
May it before the World appear,
That Crowds were born to Glory here.
L. The Gospel Jubilee. Psalm lxxxix. 15. compared with Levit. xxv. and Isa.
lxi. 2.
1
LOUD let the tuneful Trumpet sound,
And spread the joyful Tidings round;
Let every Soul with Transport hear,
And hail the LORD'S accepted Year.
Ye Debtors, whom he gives to know,
That you ten thousand Talents owe,
When humbled at his Feet ye fall,
Your gracious LORD forgives them all.
3
Slaves, that have borne the heavy Chain
Of Sin and Hell's tyrannic Reign,
To Liberty assert your Claim,
And urge the great Redeemer's Name.
4
The rich Inheritance you lost,
Restored, improved, you now may boast;
Fair Salem your Arrival waits,
To golden Streets, and pearly Gates.
5
Her blessed Inhabitants no more
Bondage, and Poverty deplore:
No Debt, but Love immensely great,
Whose Joy still rises with the Debt.
6
O happy Souls that know the Sound!
GOD'S Light shall all their Steps surround;
And show that Jubilee begun,
Which through eternal Years shall run.
LI. GOD the Dewlling Place of his People through all Generations. Psalm xc. 1.
1
THOU, LORD, through every changing Scene
Have to thy Saints a Refuge been:
Through every Age, Eternal GOD,
Their pleasing Home, their safe Abode.
2
In thee our Fathers sought their Rest;
In thee our Fathers still are blessed;
And, while the Tomb confines their Dust,
In thee their Souls abide, and trust.
3
Lo, we are risen, a feeble Race,
A while to fill our Fathers Place;
Our helpless State with Pity view,
And let us share their Refuge too.
4
Through all the thorny Paths we trace
In this uncertain Wilderness,
When Friends desert, and Foes invade,
Revive our Heart, and guard our Head.
5
So when this Pilgrimage is over,
And we must dwell in Flesh no more,
To thee our separate Souls shall come,
And find in thee a surer Home.
6
To thee our Infant Race we leave;
Them may their Father's GOD receive;
That Voices yet unformed may raise
Succeeding Hymns of humble Praise.
LII. Reflections on our Waste of Years. Psalm. xc. 9.
For New Year's Day.
1
REMARK, my Soul, the narrow Bounds
Of the revolving Year!
How swift the Weeks complete their Rounds,
How short the Months appear!
2
So fast Eternity comes on,
And that important Day,
When all that mortal Life has done
GOD'S Judgment shall survey.
3
Yet like an idle Tale we pass
The swift-advancing Year;
And study artful Ways to increase
The Speed of its Career.
4
Waken, O GOD, my trifling Heart
Its great Concern to see;
That I may act the Christian Part,
And give the Year to thee.
5
So shall their Course more grateful roll,
If future Years arise;
Or this shall bear my smiling Soul
To Joy, that never dies.
LIII. Joy and Prosperity from the Presence and Blessing of GOD. Psalm xc. 17.
1
SHINE on our Souls, Eternal GOD,
With Rays of Beauty, shine:
O let thy Favor crown our Days,
And all their Round be thine.
2
Did we not raise our Hands to thee,
Our Hands might toil in vain;
Small Joy Success itself could give,
If thou thy Love restrain.
3
With thee let every Week begin,
With thee each Day be spent,
For thee each fleeting Hour improved,
Since each by thee is lent.
4
Thus cheer us through this desert Road,
Till all our Labors cease;
And Heaven refresh our weary Souls
With everlasting Peace.
LIVE. The Mutability of the Creation, and the Immutability of GOD. Psalm cii.
25-28.
1
GREAT Former of this various Frame!
Our Souls adore thine awful Name;
And bow and tremble while they praise
The Ancient of Eternal Days.
2
Thou, LORD, with unsurpriz'd Survey
Saw Nature rising Yesterday;
And, as Tomorrow, shall thine Eye
See Earth, and Stars in Ruin lie.
3
Beyond an Angel's Vision bright,
Thou dwell'st in self-existent Light;
Which shines with undiminish'd Ray,
While Suns, and Worlds in Smoke decay.
4
Our Days a transient Period run,
And change with every circling Sun;
And in the firmest State we boast
A Moth can crush us into Dust.
5
But let the Creatures fall around:
Let Death consign us to the Ground:
Let the last general Flame arise,
And melt the Arches of the Skies:
6
Calm as the Summer's Ocean, we
Can all the Wreck Destruction.
of Nature see,
While Grace secures us an Abode,
Unshaken as the Throne of GOD.
LV. The Frailty of human Nature, and GOD'S gracious Regard to it. Psalm ciii.
14.
1
LORD, we adore thy wondrous Name,
And make that Name our Trust,
Which raised at first this curious Frame,
From mean, and lifeless Dust.
2
By Dust supported, still it stands,
Wrought up to various Forms,
Prepared by thy creating Hands
To nourish mortal Worms.
3
A while these frail Machines endure,
The Fabric of a Day;
Then know their vital Powers no more,
But moulder back to Clay.
4
Yet, LORD, whatever is felt or feared,
This Thought is our Repose,
That he, by whom this Frame was reared,
Its various Weakness knows.
5
Thou view'st us with a pitying Eye,
While struggling with our Load;
In Pains and Dangers thou art nigh,
Our Father, and our GOD.
6
Gently supported by thy Love,
We tend to Realms of Peace;
Where every Pain shall far remove,
And every Frailty cease.
LVI. GOD adored for his Goodness, and his wonderful Works, to the Children of
Men. Psalm cvii. 31.
1
YE Sons of Men, with Joy record
The various Wonders of the LORD;
And let his Power, and Goodness sound
Through all your Tribes the Earth around.
2
Let the high Heavens your Songs invite,
Those spacious Fields of brilliant Light;
Where Sun, and Moon, and Planets roll,
And Stars, that glow from Pole to Pole.
3
Sing Earth in verdant Robes arrayed,
Its Herbs and Flowers, its Fruit and Shade;
Peopled with Life of various Forms,
Fishes, and Fowl, and Beasts, and Worms.
4
View the broad Sea's majestic Plains,
And think how wide its Maker reigns;
That Band remotest Nations joins,
And on each Wave his Goodness shines.
5
But O! that brighter World above,
Where lives and reigns incarnate Love!
GOD'S only Son in Flesh arrayed,
For Man a bleeding Victim Sacrifice.
made.
6
Thither, my Soul, with Rapture soar;
There in the Land of Praise adore;
This Theme demands an Angel's Lay Song.
,
Demands an undeclining Day.
LVII. The holy Soul returning to its Restin a grateful Sense of divine
Bounties. Psa. cxvi. 7.
1
RETURN my Soul, and seek thy Rest
Upon thy heavenly Father's Breast:
Indulge me, LORD, in that Repose,
The Soul which loves thee only knows.
2
Lodged in thine Arms I fear no more
The Tempest's Howl, the Billows Roar:
Those Storms must shake the Almighty's Seat,
Which violate the Saints Retreat.
3
Thy Bounties, LORD, to me surmount
The Power of Language to recount;
From Morning Dawn, the setting Sun
Sees but my Work of Praise begun.
4
The Mercies, all my Moments bring,
Ask an Eternity to sing;
What Thanks those Mercies can suffice,
Which through Eternity shall rise?
5
Rich in ten thousand Gifts possessed,
In future Hopes more richly blessed,
I Will sit and sing, till Death shall raise
A Note of more proportioned Praise.
LVIII. Deliverance celebrated. Psalm cxvi. 8.
1
LOOK back, my Soul, with grateful Love
On what thy GOD has done;
Praise him for his unnumber'd Gifts,
And praise him for his Son.
2
How often has his indulgent Hand
My flowing Eyelids dried,
And rescued from impending Death,
When I in Danger cried!
3
When on the Bed of Pain I lay,
With Sickness sore oppressed,
How often has he asswag'd my Grief,
And lulled my Eyes to Rest!
4
Back from Destruction's yawning Pit
At his Command I came;
He fed the expiring Lamp anew,
And raised its feeble Flame.
5
My broken Spirit he has cheered,
When torn with inward Grief;
And, when Temptations pressed me sore,
Has brought me swift Relief.
6
My Soul from everlasting Death
Is by his Mercy brought,
To tell in Zion's sacred Gates
The Wonders he has wrought.
7
Still will I walk before his Face,
While he this Life prolongs;
Till Grace shall all its Work complete,
And teach me heavenly Songs.
LIX. Deliverance celebrated, and good Resolutions formed. Psalm cxvi. 8, 9.
1
GREAT Source of Life, our Souls confess
The various Riches of thy Grace;
Crowned with thy Mercy we rejoice,
And in thy Praise exalt our Voice.
2
By thee Heavens shining Arch was spread;
By thee were Earth's Foundations laid,
And all the Charms of Men's Abode
Proclaim the wise, the gracious GOD.
3
Thy tender Hand restores our Breath,
When trembling on the Verge of Death;
Gently it wipes away our Tears,
And lengthens Life to future Years.
4
These Lives are sacred to the LORD;
Kindled by him, by him restored;
And while our Hours renew their Race,
Still would we walk before his Face.
5
So when by him our Souls are led
Through unknown Regions of the Dead,
With Joy triumphant shall they move
To Seats of nobler Life above.
LX. Praise for Recovery from Sickness. Psalm cxviii. 18, 19.
1
SOVEREIGN of Life, I own thy Hand
In every chast'ning Stroke;
And, while I smart beneath thy Rod,
Thy Presence I invoke.
2
To thee in my Distress I cried,
And thou have bowed thine Ear,
Thy powerful Word my Life prolonged,
And brought Salvation near.
3
Unfold, ye Gates of Righteousness,
That, with the pious Throng,
I may record my solemn Vows,
And tune my grateful Song.
4
Praise to the LORD, whose gentle Hand
Renews our laboring Breath:
Praise to the LORD, who makes his Saints
Triumphant even in Death.
5
My GOD, in thine appointed Hour
Those heavenly Gates display,
Where Pain, and Sin, and Fear, and Death
For ever flee away.
6
There, while the Nations of the Blessed
With Raptures bow around,
My Anthems to deliv'ring Grace
In sweeter Strains shall sound.
LXI. Regard to Scripture pressed upon young Persons, that they may cleanse
their Way. Psalm cxix. 9.
1
INDULGENT GOD, with pitying Eye
The Sons of Men survey,
And see how youthful Sinners sport
In a destructive Way.
2
Ten thousand Dangers lurk around
To bear them to the Tomb;
Each in an Hour may plunge them down,
Where Hope can never come.
3
Reduce, O LORD, their wandering Minds,
Amused with airy Dreams,
That heavenly Wisdom may dispell,
Their visionary Schemes.
4
With holy Caution may they walk,
And be thy Word their Guide;
Till each, the Desert safely passed,
On Zion's Hill abide.
LXII. Desires of being quickened by the Word of GOD. Psalm cxix. 25.
1
WITH Pity, LORD, thy Servant view,
As in the Dust I lie,
Nor, while I raise my plaintive mournful.
Voice,
Disdain the broken Cry.
2
Fain would I mount on Eagles Wings,
And view thy lovely Face;
But cumb'rous Burdens drag me down
From thine adored Embrace.
3
Thy quickening Energy diffuse
Over all my inmost Frame;
And animate these languid Lips
To celebrate thy Name.
4
Thy living Word has Wonders wrought,
Those Wonders here renew;
And pour fresh Vigor through my Soul,
While I its Glory view.
5
From thee, Great ever-flowing Spring,
Let vital Streams descend;
And cheer me to begin those Songs,
Which Death shall never end.
LXIII. Human Perfection no where to be found. Psalm cxix. 96.
1
PERFECTION! It Is an empty Name,
Nor can repay our Cares;
And he, that seeks it here below,
Must end the Search with Tears.
2
Great David on his royal Throne,
The beauteous, and the strong,
Rich in the Spoils of conquered Foes,
Amidst the applauding Throng,
3
With all his Mind's capacious Powers,
Persu'd the Shade in vain;
Nor heard it his melodious Voice,
Or Harp's Angelick Strain.
4
From public to domestic Scenes
The impatient Monarch turns;
The Friend, the Husband, and the Sire Father.

In sad Succession mourns.
5
At length thy Law, Eternal GOD,
He through his Tears descrys discerns.
,
And, wrapped amidst those sacred Folds,
He finds the heavenly Prize.
6
There will I seek Perfection too,
Where David's GOD is known:
Nor envy, with this Volume blessed,
His Treasures, and his Throne.
LXIV. Beholding Transgressors with Grief. Psalm cxix. 136, 158.
1
ARISE, my tenderest Thoughts arise;
To Torrents melt my streaming Eyes;
And thou, my Heart, with Anguish feel,
Those Evils, which thou can not heal.
2
See human Nature sunk in Shame;
See Scandals poured on Jesus Name;
The Father wounded through the Son;
The World abused; the Soul undone.
3
See the short Course of vain Delight
Closing in everlasting Night;
In Flames, that no Abatement know,
Though briny Tears for ever flow.
4
My GOD, I feel the mournful Scene;
My Bowels yearn over dying Men;
And fain my Pity would reclaim,
And snatch the Firebrarnds from the Flame.
5
But feeble my Compassion proves,
And can but weep, where most it loves:
Thine own all-saving Arm employ,
And turn these Drops of Grief to Joy.
LXV. The wandering Sheep recovered. Psalm cxix. 176.
1
LORD, we have wandered from thy Way;
Like follish Sheep, have gone astray;
Our pleasant Pastures we have left,
And of their Guard our Souls bereft deprived.
.
2
Exposed to Want, exposed to Harm;
Far from our gentle Shepherd's Arm;
Nor will these fatal Wand'rings cease,
Till thou reveal the Paths of Peace.
3
O seek thy thoughtless Servants, LORD,
Nor let us quite forget thy Word;
Our erring Souls do thou restore,
And keep us, that we stray no more.
LXVI. The weeping Seed-Time, and joyful Harvest. Psalm cxxvi. 5, 6.
1
THE dark'ned Sky! how thick it lowrs!
Troubled with Storms, and big with Showers;
No cheerful Gleam of Light appears,
But Nature pours forth all her Tears.
2
Yet let the Sons of Grace revive;
GOD bids the Soul, that seeks him, live,
And from the gloomiest Shade of Night
Calls forth a Morning of Delight.
3
The Seeds of Extacy unknown
Are in these watered Furrows sown;
See the green Blades how thick they rise,
And with fresh Verdure bless our Eyes.
4
In secret Foldings they contain
Unnumber'd Ears of golden Grain;
And Heaven shall pour its Beams around,
Till the ripe Harvest load the Ground.
5
Then shall the trembling Mourner come,
And find his Sheaves, and bear them home:
The Voice long broke with Sighs shall sing,
Till Heaven with Hallelujahs ring.
LXVII. Thanks to GOD for his ever-enduring Goodness. Psalm cxxxvi. 1.
For New Year's Day.
1
HOUSE of our GOD, with cheerful Anthems ring,
While all our Lips and Hearts his Graces sing;
The opening Year his Graces shall proclaim,
And all its Days be vocal with his Name.
The Lord is good, his Mercy never-ending;
His Blessings in perpetual Showers descending.
2
The Heaven of Heavens he with his Bounty fills:
Ye Seraphs bright on ever-blooming Hills
His Honors sound; you to whom Good alone,
Unmingled, ever-growing has been known.
Through your immortal Life, with Love increasing,
Proclaim your Maker's Goodness never-ceasing.
3
Thou Earth, enlightened by his Rays divine,
Pregnant with Grass, and Corn, and Oil, and Wine,
Crowned with his Goodness, let thy Nations meet,
And lay their Crowns at his paternal Feet:
With grateful Love, that liberal Hand confessing,
Which through each Heart diffuseth every Blessing.
4
Zion enriched with his distinguished Grace,
Blessed with the Rays of thine Emanuel's Face,
Zion, Jehovah's Portion, and Delight,
Grav'n on his Hands, and hourly in his Sight,
In sacred Strains exalt that Grace excelling,
Which makes thy humble Hill his chosen Dwelling.
5
His Mercy never ends; the Dawn, the Shade
Still see new Bounties through new Scenes displayed:
Succeeding Ages bless this sure Abode,
And Children lean upon their Father's GOD.
The deathless Soul through its immense Duration
Drinks from this Source immortal Consolation.
6
Burst into Praise, my Soul; all Nature join;
Angels and Men in Harmony combine:
While human Years are measured by the Sun,
And while Eternity its Course shall run,
His Goodness, in perpetual Showers descending,
Exalt in Songs, and Raptures never-ending.
LXVIII. GOD's strengthening the Souls of his praying People. Psalm cxxxviii. 3.
1
MY Soul, review the trembling Days,
In which my GOD I sought;
I cried aloud for Aid divine,
And Aid divine he brought.
2
Through all my weak and fainting Heart
His secret Strength he spread,
And clasped me in his Arms of Love,
And raised my drooping Head.
3
He called himself my Covenant GOD,
His Promises he showed;
And wide displayed their solemn Seal
In the great Surety's Blood.
4
I heard his People shout around,
And joined their cheerful Song;
And saw from far the shining Seats,
Which to his Saints belong.
5
My GOD, what inward Strength thou giv'st
I to thy Service vow;
And in thy Strength would upward march,
Till at thy Throne I bow.
LXIX. Singing in the Ways of GOD. Psalm cxxxviii. 5.
1
NOW let our Voices join,
To form one pleasant Song:
Ye Pilgrims in Jehovah's Ways,
With Music pass along.
2
How straight the Path appears,
How open, and how fair!
No lurking Gins t'entrap our Feet;
No fierce Destroyer there:
3
But Flowers of Paradise
In rich Profusion spring;
The Sun of Glory gilds the Path,
And dear Companions sing.
4
See Salem's golden Spires
In beauteous Prospect rise;
And brighter Crowns than Mortals wear,
Which sparkle through the Skies.
5
All Honor to his Name,
Who drew the shining Trace;
To him, who leads the Wand'rers on,
And chears them with his Grace.
6
Reduce the Nations, LORD,
Teach all their Kings thy Ways,
That Earth's full Choir the Notes may swell,
And Heaven resound the Praise.
LXX. The innumerable Mercies of GOD thankfully acknowledged. Psalm cxxxix. 17,
18.
1
IN glad Amazement, LORD, I stand
Amidst the Bounties of thy Hand;
How numberless those Bounties are!
How rich, how various, and how fair!
2
But O! what poor Returns I make!
What lifeless Thanks I pay thee back!
LORD, I confess with humble Shame,
My Offerings scarce deserve the Name.
3
Fain would my laboring Heart devise
To bring some nobler Sacrifice:
It sinks beneath the mighty Load.
What shall I render to my GOD?
4
To him I consecrate my Praise,
And vow the Remnant of my Days;
Yet what at best can I pretend,
Worthy such Gifts from such a Friend?
5
In deep Abasement, LORD, I see
My Emptiness and Poverty:
Enrich my Soul with Grace divine,
And make it worthier to be thine.
6
Give me at length an Angel's Tongue,
That Heaven may echo with my Song;
The Theme, too great for Time, shall be
The Joy of long Eternity.
LXXI. Praising GOD through the whole of our Existence. Psalm cxlvi. 2.
1
GOD of my Life, through all its Days
My grateful Powers shall sound thy Praise;
The Song shall wake with opening Light,
And warble to the silent Night.
2
When anxious Cares would break my Rest,
And Griefs would tear my throbbing Breast,
Thy tuneful Praises raised on high
Shall check the Murmur, and the Sigh.
3
When Death over Nature shall prevail,
And all its Powers of Language fail,
Joy through my swimming Eyes shall break,
And mean the Thanks I cannot speak.
4
But O! when that last Conflict's over,
And I am chained to Flesh no more,
With what glad Accents shall I rise
To join the Music of the Skies!
5
Soon shall I learn the exalted Strains,
Which echo over the heavenly Plains;
And emulate with Joy unknown
The glowing Seraphs round thy Throne.
6
The cheerful Tribute will I give,
Long as a deathless Soul can live;
A Work so sweet, a Theme so high
Demands, and crowns Eternity.
LXXII. The Meek beautified with Salvation. Psalm cxlix. 4.
1
YE humble Souls, rejoice,
And cheerful Triumphs sing;
Wake all your Harmony of Voice,
For Jesus is your King.
2
That meek and lowly Lord,
Whom here your Souls have known,
Pledges the Honor of his Word
TO avow you for his own.
3
He brings Salvation near,
For which his Blood was paid:
How beauteous shall your Souls appear
Thus sumptuously arrayed!
4
Sing, for the Day is nigh,
When near your Leader's Seat
The tallest Sons of Pride shall lie,
The Footstool of your Feet.
5
Salvation, Lord, is thine;
And all thy Saints confess
The royal Robes, in which they shine,
Were wrought by sovereign Grace.
LXXIII. The Reproofs of Wisdom mingled with Promises, and Threatenings to
reclaim wandering Sinners. Proverbs i. 23.
1
HARK! for it is Wisdom's Voice,
That breaks in gentle Sound:
Listen, ye Sons of Earth and Sin,
And gather all around.
2
What though she speaks Rebukes,
That pierce the Soul with Smart;
True Love through all her Chast'nings runs
By Pain to mend the Heart.
3
"Ye that have wandered long
"In Sin's destructive Ways,
"Turn, turn the heavenly Charmer cries,
"And seize the offered Grace.
4
"I know your Souls are weak,
"And mortal Efforts vain
"To grapple with the Prince of Hell,
"And break his cursed Chain.
5
"But I Will my Spirit pour
"In Torrents from above,
"To arm you with superior Strength,
"And melt your Hearts in Love.
6
"Come while these Offers last,
"Ye Sinners, and be wise:
"He lives, who hears this friendly Call,
"But he that slights it, dies."
LXXIV. The Voice of CHRIST addressed to the Children of Men. Proverbs viii. 4.
1
NOW let the listening World around
In silent Reverence hear;
While from on high the Savior's Voice
Thus strikes the attentive Ear.
2
"To you, O Sons of Men, I call;
"And from my lofty Throne
"Reclined in gentle Pity bow*
"To bring Salvation down.
3
"Ye thoughtless Sinners, hear my Voice,
"Attend my Words and live;
"My Words conduct to solid Joys,
"And endless Blessings give.
4
"Each faithful Minister is sent
"This Message to proclaim;
"In every various Providence
"The Language is the same.
"And could the pale forgotten Dead,
"Though deep in Dust they lie,
"Arise in visionary Crowds,
"They Would join the solemn Cry.
6
"Forgetful Mortals, yet be wise,
"While over the Grave ye stand;
"Lest long-neglected Love provoke
"The Vengeance of my Hand.
7
"In glad Submission bow ye down,
"Nor steel that stubborn Heart;
"'Till mine inexorable Voice
"Pronounce the Word, Depart."
8
Blessed Jesus, may thy Spirit breathe
On Souls, which else must dye;
For, till thy Grace reflect the Sound,
Thy Word in vain will cry.
LXXV. The Encouragement young Persons have to seek, and love CHRIST. Prove.
viii. 17.
1
YE Hearts with youthful Vigor warm,
In smiling Crowds draw near,
And turn from every mortal Charm,
A Savior's Voice to hear.
2
He, LORD of all the Worlds on high,
Stoops to converse with you;
And lays his radiant Glories by
Your Friendship to pursue.
3
"The Soul that longs to see my Face
"Is sure my Love to gain;
"And those, that early seek my Grace,
"Shall never seek in vain."
4
What Object, LORD, my Soul should move,
If once compared with thee?
What Beauty should command my Love,
Like what in Christ I see?
5
Away, ye false delusive Toys,
Vain Tempters of the Mind!
It Is here I fix my lasting Choice,
And here true Bliss IN find.
LXXVI. The House and Feast of Wisdom. Prove. ix. 1,-6.
1
SEE the fair Structure Wisdom rears,
Her Messengers attend;
And charmed by her persuasive Voice,
To her your Footsteps bend.
2
"Hear me, ye simple ones she cries,
"That lured seduced.
by Folly stray,
"And languish to eternal Death
"In her detested Way.
3
"Enter my hospitable Gate,
"And all my Banquet share;
"For heavenly Wine surrounds my Board,
"And Angels Food is there.
4
"Freely of every Dainty taste,
"Taste, and for ever live;
"And mingle with your Joys the Hopes
"Of all a God can give.
5
"But if seduced by Folly's Arts,
"Ye seek her poisonous Food;
"Know, that the dreadful Moment hasts,
"Which pays the Feast with Blood."
LXXVII. The Excellency of the Righteous, with Regard to their Temper. Prove.
xii. 26. Part 1st.
1
HOW glorious, LORD, art thou!
How bright thy Splendors shine!
Whose Rays reflected gild thy Saints
With Ornaments divine.
2
With Lowliness, and Love,
Wisdom and Courage meet;
The grateful Heart, the cheerful Eye,
How reverend and how sweet!
3
In Beauties such as these,
Thy Children now are dressed;
But brighter Habits shall they wear
In Regions of the Blessed.
4
In Nature's barren Soil,
Who could such Glories raise?
We own, O GOD, the Work is thine,
And thine be all the Praise.
LXXVIII. The Excellency of the Righteous, with Regard to their Relations,
Employments, Pleasures, and Hopes. Prove. xii. 26. Part 2d.
1
O Israel, thou art blessed;
Who may with thee compare!
Thine Excellencies stand confessed;
How bright thy Glories are!
2
O GOD of Israel, hear,
And make this Bliss our own;
Make us the Children of thy Care,
The Members of thy Son.
3
Thus honored, thus employed,
By these great Motives fired,
Be Paradise on Earth enjoyed,
And brighter Hopes inspired.
Thy People, LORD, we love;
Their GOD our Souls embrace;
So may we find in Worlds above
Among thy Saints a Place.
LXXIX. Walking with GOD, or being in his Fear all the Day long. Proverbs
xxiii. 17.
1
THRICE happy Souls, who born from Heaven,
While yet they sojourn here,
Thus all their Days with GOD begin,
And spend them in his Fear!
2
So may our Eyes with holy Zeal
Prevent the dawning Day;
And turn the sacred Pages The holy Scriptures.
over,
And praise thy Name and pray.
3
Midst hourly Cares may Love present
It Is Incense to thy Throne;
And while the World our Hands employs,
Our Hearts be thine alone.
4
As sanctified to noblest Ends
Be each Refreshment sought;
And by each various Providence
Some wise Instruction brought.
5
When to laborious Duties called,
Or by Temptations tried,
We'll seek the Shelter of thy Wings,
And in thy Strength confide.
6
As different Scenes of Life arise,
Our grateful Hearts would be
With thee, amidst the social Band,
In Solitude with thee.
7
At Night we lean our weary Heads
On thy paternal Breast;
And, safely folded in thine Arms,
Resign our Powers to rest.
8
In solid pure Delights, like these,
Let all my Days be past;
Nor shall I then impatient wish,
Nor shall I fear, the last.
LXXX. The obstinate Sinner alarmed. Proverbs xxix. 1.
1
NOW let the Sons of Belial Disobedient rebellious Persons.
hear
The Thunders of the LORD;
Unfold their long rebellious Ear,
And tremble at his Word.
2
Now let the Iron-Sinew bow,
And take his easy Yoke;
Lest sudden Vengeance lay it low,
By one resistless Stroke.
3
Though yet the great Physician wait,
And healing Balm be found;
One Hour may seal their endless Fate,
And fix a deadly Wound.
4
Swift may thy Mercy, LORD, arise,
Ever Justice stop their Breath;
And lighten these deluded Eyes,
That sleep the Sleep of Death.
LXXXI. GOD'S reasonable Expectations from his Vineyard. Isaiah v. 1. 7.
1
THE Vineyard of the LORD how fair!
Planted by his peculiar Care:
Behold its Branches spread, and fill
The Borders of his sacred Hill.
2
His Eye has marked the chosen Ground;
His mighty Hand has fenced it round;
His Servants by his Order wait,
To watch and aid its tender State.
3
But when the Vintage he demands
For all the Labor of their Hands,
What Clusters does his Vine produce?
The Grapes are wild; and sour the Juice.
4
Well might he tear its Fence away,
And leave it to the Beasts of Prey,
Might give it to the Wild again,
And charge his Clouds to cease their Rain.
5
But spare our Land, our Churches spare,
Thy Vengeance long-provok'd forbear;
Let the true Vine its Influence give,
And bid our withering Branches live.
LXXXII. Isaiah's Obedience to the heavenly Vision. Isaiah vi. 8.
1
OUR GOD ascends his lofty Throne,
Arrayed in Majesty unknown;
His Luster all the Temple fills,
And spreads over all the ethereal heavenly.
Hills.
2
The holy, holy, holy LORD,
By all the Seraphim adored,
And, while they stand beneath his Seat,
They veil their Faces, and their Feet.
3
And can a sinful Worm endure
The Presence of a GOD so pure?
Or these polluted Lips proclaim,
The Honors of so grand a Name?
4
O for thine Altar's glowing Coal,
To touch my Lips, to fire my Soul,
To purge the sordid Dross away,
And into Crystal turn my Clay.
5
Then if a Messenger thou ask,
A Lab'rer for the hardest Task,
Through all my Weakness, and my Fear,
Love shall reply, "Thy Servant's here".
6
Nor should my willing Soul complain,
Though all it is Efforts seemed in vain;
It ample Recompense shall be,
But to have wrought, my GOD, for thee.
LXXXIII. The Stupidity of Israel, and of Britain lamented. Isaiah vi. 9-12.
For a Fast Day.
1
LORD, when thine Israel we survey,
We in their Crimes discern our own;
And if thou turn our Prayer away,
Our Misery must, like their's, be known.
2
To us thy Prophets have been sent,
With Words of Terror and of Love;
But nor the Vengeance, nor the Grace
Ten thousand stubborn Hearts will move.
3
Our Eyes are blind, and deaf our Ears;
Our Hearts are hardened into Stone;
As we would bear thy Mercy out,
And leave a Way for Wrath alone.
4
Justly our GOD might give us up
To Plague and Famine and the Sword;
Till Towns and Cities rich and fair
Lay desolate without a Lord.
5
Over bleeding Wounds of slaughtered Friends
Rivers of helpless Grief might flow,
Till the fierce Conqu'ror's haughty Rage
Dragged us to Chains and Slaughter too.
6
But spare a Nation long thine own,
And show new Miracles of Grace;
It Is thine to heal the Deaf and Blind,
And wake the Dead to Life and Praise.
LXXXIV. Confederate Nations defied by those who sanctify GOD. Isaiah viii.
9-14.
For a Fast Day.
1
GREAT GOD of Hosts, attend our Prayer,
And make the British Isles thy Care:
To thee we raise our suppliant Cries,
When angry Nations round us rise.
2
Fain would they tread our Glory down,
And in the Dust defile our Crown,
Deluge our Houses with our Blood,
And burn the Temples of our GOD.
3
But 'midst the Thunder of their Rage,
We thy Protection would engage:
O raise thy saving Arm on high,
And bring renewed Deliverance nigh.
4
May Britain, as one Man, be led
To make the LORD her Fear and Dread;
Our Souls no other Fear shall know,
Though Earth were leagued with Hell below.
5
Give Ear, ye Countries from afar;
Ye proud associate Nations, hear;
While fixed on him, who rules the Sky,
Our Hearts your threatened War defy.
6
Ye People, gird your selves in vain,
Your scattered Force unite again;
Again shall all that Force be broke,
When GOD with us shall deal the Stroke.
7
Now he records our humble Tears,
With ardent Vows for future Years,
And destines for approaching Days
Victorious Shouts, and Songs of Praise.
8
Emanuel's Land shall safe remain,
Blessed with its Savior's gentle Reign;
Till every hostile Rumor cease
In the fair Realms of perfect Peace.
LXXXV. CHRIST the Steward of GOD'S Family. Isaiah xxii. 22-24. compared with
Revel. iii. 7.
1
WITH what Delight I raise mine Eyes,
And view the Courts, where Jesus dwells!
Jesus, who reigns beyond the Skies,
And here below his Grace reveals.
2
Of David's royal House the Key
Is borne by that majestic Hand;
Mansions and Treasures there I see
Subjected all to his Command.
3
He shuts, and Worlds might strive in vain
The mighty Obstacle to move;
He looses all their Bars again,
And who shall shut the Gates of Love?
4
Fixed in Omnipotence he bears
The Glories of his Father's Name,
Sustains his People's weighty Cares,
Through every changing Age the same.
5
My little All I there suspend,
Where the whole Weight of Heaven is hung:
Secure I rest on such a Friend,
And into Raptures wake my Tongue.
LXXXVI. The rich Provision and happy Effects of the Gospel. Isaiah xxv. 6-9.
1
BEHOLD our GOD, he owns his Name;
Jehovah all our Songs proclaim
With Shouts of Wonder and of Joy:
Long have we waited for his Grace,
No longer now his Love delays
For Zion his own Armt' employ.
2
We charge our Souls the Joy to feel:
We charge our Tongues his Praise to tell:
The Almighty Savior! This is he!
He pours his Streams of Grace abroad,
Till all the Earth confess the GOD,
And Lands remote his Glory see.
3
Dainties how rich his Stores afford!
How pure the Wine, that crowns his Board!
While welcome Nations flock around:
He takes the Veil of Grief away;
Through thickest Shades he darts the Day,
And not one weeping Eye is found.
4
All-conqu'ring Death, no longer boast
Over Millions humbled in the Dust;
Our GOD with Scorn thy Triumph sees:
Soon as he aims one Shaft Arrow.
at thee,
Swallowed and lost in Victory,
Thine Empire, and thy Name shall cease.
LXXXVII. The peaceful State of the Soul, that trusts in GOD. Isaiah xxvi. 3.
1
WEARY and weak and faint,
I cast mine Eyes around;
My Joints all tremble, and my Feet
Sink deep in miry Ground.
2
Despairing Help below,
To Heaven I raise my Cries;
GOD hears, and his almighty Arm
Out-stretches from the Skies.
3
I on that Arm repose,
And all my Fears are over;
New Strength diffused through all my Soul
Assists its vital Power.
4
My Mind in perfect Peace
Thy guardian Care shall keep:
I Will yield to gentle Slumbers now,
For thou can never sleep.
5
Happy the Souls alone,
On thee securely stayed!
Nor shall they be in Life alarmed,
Nor be in Death dismayed.
LXXXVIII. Israel's Obstinacy under GOD'S lifted Hand. Isaiah xxvi. 11.
1
LORD, when thy Hand is lifted up,
The wicked will not see;
But they shall see with glowing Shame,
Though they obdurate be.
2
How few the weighty Stroke regard,
And seek their Maker's Face!
In vain may Providence correct,
If not enforced by Grace.
3
Exert thy mighty Influence, LORD,
And melt the stony Breast;
Then shall thy Justice be adored,
Thy Mercy stand confessed.
4
The Scorner then shall mourn in Dust,
And put his Sins away,
No more resist his Maker's Hands,
But lift his own to pray.
LXXXIX. GOD'S quickening the Dead. Isaiah xxvi. 19.
1
THE Ever-living GOD
The expiring Church shall raise;
Our Hearts his Promises receive,
And wake a Shout of Praise.
2
Death shall not always reign,
Where Grace has fixed its Throne;
His soft Compassion views the Dust,
He once has called his own.
3
"Yes," says the GOD of Truth,
"My Dead shall live again;
"The Foe shall see their Leader's Breath
"Reanimate the Slain.
4
"The Dew of Heaven shall fall
"In rich Abundance round,
"And a redundant Harvest rise
"To cloth the teeming Ground.
5
"Now from your Dust awake,
"And burst into a Song;
"Then spurn the Earth, and mount the Skies
"In a triumphant Throng."
6
Thy Zion, LORD, believes
A Promise so divine,
And looks through all her flowing Tears
To see the Glory shine.
XC. The Godly Man's Ark. Isaiah xxvi. 20.
1
IT is my Father's Voice;
And O! how sweet the Sound!
It makes mine inmost Powers rejoice,
My trembling Heart rebound.
2
"Mark, the black Tempest lours,
"And gathers round the Sky;
"Retire and shun the sweeping Showers
"Of Indignation nigh.
3
"Come, my dear Children, come,
"And seek your Father's Arms;
"There is your Shelter, there your Home,
"'Midst all these dire Alarms.
4
"Enter at his Command;
"Close in your Ark remain;
"And wait the Signal of his Hand
"To call you forth again.
5
"The Moments to beguile
"A cheerful Song begin;
"Nor let the roaring Thunders spoil
"The Harmony within.
6
"Ever long the Sky shall clear,
"The Clouds be chased away,
"And Grace shall shine in Radiance fair
"Through an eternal Day."
XCI. Laying hold on GOD'S Strength, that we may be at Peace with him. Isaiah
xxvii. 5.
1
THUS says Jehovah from his Seat,
"Who shall presume my Wrath to meet?
"What Rebel-Men or Angels dare
"To wage with me unequal War?
2
"Close let the Thorns and Briars stand
"In thick Array on either Hand;
"Forth shall my flaming Terrors fly;
"At once they kindle, blaze and dye.
3
"Presumptuous Sinners, yet be wise
"Ever this o'erwhelming Ruin rise;
"Your vain tumultuous Efforts cease,
"And seek in suppliant Crowds for Peace".
4
Great GOD, we bless the gentle Sound,
And bow submissive to the Ground;
Thy prostrate Foes let Pity raise,
And form a People to thy Praise.
5
His thundering Storms are silent now;
Calm are the Terrors of his Brow,
Since Jesus makes the Father known,
Our guardian Shield, our chearing Sun.
XCII. The divine Goodness in moderating Affictions. Isaiah xxvii. 8.
1
GREAT Ruler of all Nature's Frame,
We own thy Power divine:
We hear thy Breath in every Storm,
For all the Winds are thine.
2
Wide as they sweep their sounding Way,
They work thy sovereign Will;
And awed by thy majestic Voice
Confusion shall be still.
3
Thy Mercy tempers moderates.
every Blast
To them that seek thy Face;
And mingles with the Tempest's Roar
The Whispers of thy Grace.
4
Those gentle Whispers let me hear,
Till all the Tumult cease;
And Gales of Paradise shall lull
My weary Soul to Peace.
XCIII. GOD waiting to be gracious. Isaiah xxx. 18.
1
WAIT on the LORD, ye Heirs of Hope,
And let his Word support your Souls:
Well can he bear your Courage up,
And all your Foes and Fears control.
2
He waits his own well-chosen Hour
The intended Mercy to display;
And his paternal Bowels move,
While Wisdom dictates the Delay.
3
With mingled Majesty and Love
At length he rises from his Throne;
And, while Salvation he commands,
He makes his People's Joy his own.
4
Blessed are the humble Souls, that wait
With sweet Submission to his Will;
Harmonious all their Passions move,
And in the midst of Storms are still.
5
Still, till their Father's well-known Voice
Wakens their Silence into Songs:
Then Earth grows vocal with his Praise,
And Heaven the grateful Shout prolongs.
XCIV. The different Views of good and bad Men in Times of public Danger.
Isaiah xxxiii. 14-17.
1
SEE, the Destruction is begun,
And Heaps of Ruin spread the Ground;
With hasty Strides it marches on,
And scatters Consternation round.
2
Sinners in Zion take the Alarm,
The Hypocrites astonished cry,
Who with devouring Flames can dwell?
Who in eternal Burnings lie?
3
GOD'S gracious Voice the Saint revives,
How sweet the heavenly Accents sound!
"Dwell thou on high, my Child," he says,
"Where Rocks shall guard thee all around.
4
"There shall my Hand thy Wants supply,
"Thy Water and thy Bread are sure;
"There shall my Visits make thee glad,
"While these alarming Scenes endure.
5
"Then, led in joyous Triumph forth,
"Thine Eyes the distant Land shall view,
"Shall see thy King in Beauty dressed,
"And share his royal Honors too".
6
My Soul the Oracle receives,
And feels its Energy to cheer;
A promised Heaven, a present GOD
Forbids my Grief, forbids my Fear.
XCV. GOD the Defense of his People from invading Enemies. Isaiah xxxiii. 21-23.
1
THE glorious LORD! his Israel's Hope!
How well he bears their Courage up!
How wide his saving Power extends!
His princely Titles will we sing,
Our Judge, our Lawgiver, our King,
He guards his Subjects as his Friends.
2
Around the Mountain where they dwell,
Lo, at his Word new Waters swell
To deluge the invading Foe!
Opened by him that rules the Skies,
Mark the broad Rivers how they rise,
And with what rapid Strength they flow!
3
To gain the well-defended Shores
In vain the Galley spreads its Oars,
And the proud Ship her Sails displays:
The Sails are rent, the Masts are broke,
The shattered Oars all drop their Stroke,
And Lightnings through the Tacklings blaze.
4
Shout your Hosannas to the LORD:
Thus shall he still his Zion guard,
Till the last Foe be trampled down:
High as the Heavens exalt his Praise;
High as the Heavens his Hand shall raise
The Soul, that here his Grace has known.
XCVI. The Highway to Zion. Isaiah xxxv. 8, 9, 10.
1
SING, ye Redeemed of the LORD,
Your great Deliv'rer sing:
Pilgrims for Zion's City bound,
Be joyful in your King.
2
See the fair Way his Hand has raised;
How holy, and how plain!
Nor shall the simplest Trav'lers err,
Nor ask the Track in vain.
3
No rav'ning Lion shall destroy,
Nor lurking Serpent wound;
Pleasure and Safety, Peace and Praise
Through all the Path are found.
4
A Hand divine shall lead you on
Through all the blissful Road;
Till to the sacred Mount you rise,
And see your smiling GOD.
5
There Garlands of immortal Joy
Shall bloom on every Head,
While Sorrow Sighing and Distress
Like Shadows all are fled.
6
March on in your Redeemer's Strength;
Pursue his Footsteps still;
And let the Prospect cheer your Eye,
While laboring up the Hill.
XCVII. The Greatness and Majesty of GOD, and the Meanness of the Creatures.
Isaiah xl. 15, 16, 17.
1
YE weak Inhabitants of Clay,
Ye trifling Insects of a Day,
Low in your native Dust bow down
Before the Eternal's awful Throne.
2
With trembling Heart, with solemn Eye,
Behold JEHOVAH seated high;
And search, what worthy Sacrifice
Your Hands can give, your Thoughts devise.
3
Let Lebanon her Cedars bring
To blaze before the sovereign King,
And all the Beasts, that on it feed,
As Victims at his Altar bleed.
4
Loud let ten thousand Trumpets sound,
And call remotest Nations round,
Assembled on the crowded Plains,
Princes and People, Kings and Swains.
5
Joined with the Living, let the Dead
Rising the Face of Earth overspread;
And, while his Praise unites their Tongues,
Let Angels echo back the Songs.
6
The Drop, that from the Bucket falls,
The Dust, that hangs upon the Scales,
Is more to Sky and Earth and Sea,
Than all this Pomp, O GOD, to thee.
XCVIII. The timorous Saint encouraged by the Assurance of the divine Presence
and Help. Isaiah xli. 10.
1
AND art thou with us, gracious LORD,
To dissipate our Fear?
Do thou proclaim thyself our GOD,
Our GOD for ever near?
2
Does thy right Hand, which formed the Earth,
And bears up all the Skies,
Stretch from on high its friendly Aid,
When Dangers round us rise?
3
Do thou a Father's Bowels feel
For all thy humble Saints?
And in such tender Accents speak
To soothe their sad Complaints?
4
On this Support my Soul shall lean,
And banish every Care;
The gloomy Vale of Death must smile,
If GOD be with me there.
5
While I his gracious Succor prove
'Midst all my various Ways,
The darkest Shades, through which I pass,
Shall echo with his Praise.
XCIX. The Humiliation and Exaltation of GOD'S Israel. Isaiah xli. 14, 15.
1
AMAZING Grace of GOD on high!
And will the LORD look down
On Sinners, while in Dust they lie,
And dread his awful Frown?
2
Weaker than Worms, O LORD, are we,
And viler far than they;
Yet in these Reptiles creeping Things.
weak and vile
Do thou thy Power display.
3
Jehovah's sovereign Voice is heard,
The Worm lifts up its Head,
And Mountains, that would crush it down,
Before the Worm are fled.
4
Thou holy One, thine Israel's King,
Thou our Redeemer art,
Nor shall the Blessings of thy Hand
From thy Redeemed depart.
5
Thy Love shall its own Work fulfill,
And Grace shall rise on Grace,
Till Worms of Earth around thy Throne
With Angels find a Place.
C. The Wilderness transformed, or the happy Effects of the Gospel. Isaiah xli.
18, 19. compared with xxxv. 1, 2. xi. 6-9. lv. 13, etc.
1
AMAZING beauteous Change!
A World created new!
My Thoughts with Transport range
The lovely Scene to view;
In all I trace,
Savior divine,
The Work is thine,
Be thine the Praise.
2
See Crystal Fountains play
Amidst the burning Sands;
The River's winding Way
Shines through the thirsty Lands:
New Grass is seen,
And over the Meads
Its Carpet spreads
Of living Green.
3
Where pointed Brambles grew,
Entwined with horrid Thorn,
Gay Flowers for ever new
The painted Fields adorn;
The blushing Rose,
And Lilly there,
In Union fair
Their Sweets disclose.
4
Where the bleak Mountain stood
All bare and disarray'd,
See the wide-branching Wood
Diffuse its grateful Shade;
Tall Cedars nod,
And Oaks and Pines
And Elms and Vines
Confess the GOD.
5
The Tyrants of the Plain
Their savage Chase give over,
No more they rend the Slain,
And thirst for Blood no more;
But Infant Hands
Fierce Tigers stroke,
And Lions yoke
In flowery Bands.
6
O when, Almighty LORD,
Shall these glad Scenes arise,
To verify thy Word,
And bless our wondering Eyes!
That Earth may raise,
With all its Tongues,
United Songs
Of ardent Praise.
CI. The Blind and Weak led and supported in GOD'S Ways. Isaiah xlii. 16.
1
PRAISE to the radiant Source of Bliss,
Who gives the Blind their Sight,
And scatters round their wondering Eyes
A Flood of sacred Light.
2
In Paths unknown he leads them on
To his divine Abode,
And shows new Miracles of Grace
Through all the heavenly Road.
3
The Ways all rugged and perplexed
He renders smooth and straight,
And strengthens every feeble Knee
To march to Zion's Gate.
4
Through all the Path I Will sing his Name,
Till I the Mount ascend,
Where Toils and Storms are known no more,
And Anthems never end.
CII. GOD calling his Israel by Name, and leading them through Water and Fire.
Isa. xliii. 1, 2.
1
LET Jacob to his Maker sing,
And praise his great redeeming King;
Called by a new, a gracious Name,
Let Israel loud his GOD proclaim.
2
He knows our Souls in all their Fears,
And gently wipes our falling Tears,
Forms trembling Voices to a Song,
And bids the feeble Heart be strong.
3
Then let the Rivers swell around,
And rising Floods overflow the Ground;
Rivers and Floods and Seas divide,
And Homage pay to Israel's Guide.
4
Then let the Fires their Rage display,
And flaming Terrors bar the Way;
Unburnt, unsing'd he leads them through,
And makes the Flames refreshing too.
5
The Fires but on their Bonds shall prey Allusion to the Story in Dan. iii. 19.
etc.
,
The Floods but wash their Stains away,
And Grace divine new Trophies Monuments of Victory.
raise
Amidst the Deluge, and the Blaze.
CIII. The Riches of pardoning Grace celebrated. Isaiah xliv. 22, 23.
1
LET Heaven burst forth into a Song;
Let Earth reflect the joyful Sound;
Ye Mountains, with the Echo ring,
And shout, ye Forests all around.
2
The LORD his Israel has redeemed,
Has made his mourning People glad,
And the rich Glories of his Name
In their Salvation has displayed.
3
Unnumb'red Sins, like sable Clouds,
Veiled every cheerful Ray of Joy,
And Thunders murmured through the Gloom,
While Lightnings pointed to destroy.
4
He spoke, and all the Clouds dispersed,
And Heaven unveiled its shining Face,
The whole Creation smiled anew,
Decked in the golden Beams of Grace.
5
Israel, return with humble Love,
Return to thy Redeemer's Breast,
And charmed by his melodious Voice,
Compose thy weary Powers to rest.
CIV. The little Success which attended the personal Ministry of CHRIST. Isaiah
xlix. 4.
1
AND does the Son of GOD complain,
"Lo, I have spent my Strength in vain,
And stretched my Hands whole Days and Years
To those, who slight my Words and Tears".
2
O stubborn Hearts, that could withstand
Such Efforts from a Savior's Hand!
O gracious Savior, who would bleed,
When Words and Tears could not succeed!
3
Fall down, my Soul, in humble Woe,
That thou have wronged his Goodness so:
Now let his Grace resistless move
To melt the stubborn Flint to Love.
4
All-glorious LORD, march forth and reign,
And reap the Fruit of all thy Pain;
And, till a nobler Scene appear,
Begin the happy Conquest here.
CV. GOD'S Captives released; applied to spiritual Deliverances. Isaiah li. 14,
15.
1
CAPTIVES of Israel, hear,
Who now as Exiles banished Persons.
mourn;
See your Almighty GOD appear
To hasten your Return.
2
Jehovah is his Name;
LORD of celestial Hosts:
Let Heaven that saving Power proclaim
In which his Israel trusts.
3
Though helpless now ye lie,
As in a Dungeon thrown,
When parched with painful Thirst ye cry,
And when your Bread is gone,
4
Deliverance comes apace;
Ye shall not there expire;
Prepare to sing redeeming Grace
With his triumphant Choir.
5
He smote the raging Sea
'Midst its tumultuous Roar,
And paved his chosen Troops a Way
Safe to its distant Shore.
6
In him let Israel hope,
At whose supreme Command
Graves yield their breathless Captives up,
And Seas become dry Land.
CVI. The Cup of Fury exchanged for the Cup of Blessings. Isaiah li. 22.
1
THE LORD, our LORD, how rich his Grace!
What Stores of sovereign Love
For humble Souls, that seek his Face,
And to his Footstool move!
He pleads the Cause of all his Saints,
When Foes against them rise;
He listens to their sad Complaints,
And wipes their streaming Eyes.
3
He takes away that dreadful Cup
Of Fury and of Plagues,
Which Justice sentenced them to drink,
And wring the bitter Dregs.
4
He gave it to their Savior's Hand,
And filled it to the Brim;
Their Savior drank the liquid Death,
That they might live by him.
5
"Now take the Cup of Life, he cries,
"Where heavenly Blessings flow:
"Drink deep, nor fear to drain the Spring,
"To which the Draught ye owe".
6
We drink, and feel our Life renewed,
And all our Woes forget:
We drink, till that transporting Hour,
When we our Lord shall meet.
CVII. The holy City purified and guarded. Isaiah lii. 1, 2.
1
TRIUMPHANT Zion, lift thy Head
From Dust and Darkness and the Dead;
Though humbled long, awake at length,
And gird thee with thy Savior's Strength.
2
Put all thy beauteous Garments on,
And let thy various Charms be known;
The World thy Glories shall confess,
Decked in the Robes of Righteousness.
3
No more shall Foes unclean invade,
And fill thy hallowed Walls with Dread;
No more shall Hell's insulting Host
Their Victory, and thy Sorrows boast.
4
GOD from on high thy Groans will hear;
His Hand thy Ruins shall repair;
Reared and adorned by Love divine,
Thy Towers and Battlements shall shine.
5
Grace shall dispose my Heart and Voice
To share, and echo back her Joys;
Nor will her watchful Monarch cease
To guard her in eternal Peace.
CVIII. GOD'S Government, Zion's Joy. Isaiah lii.-7.
1
YE Subjects of the LORD, proclaim
The royal Honors of his Name;
Jehovah reigns, be all your Song.
It Is he, thy GOD, O Zion, reigns,
Prepare thy most harmonious Strains
Glad Hallelujahs to prolong.
2
Ye Princes, boast no more your Crowns,
But lay the glittering Trifles down
In lowly Honor at his Feet;
A Span your narrow Empire bounds,
He reigns beyond created Rounds,
In self-sufficient Glory great.
3
Tremble, ye Pageants of a Day,
Formed like your Slaves of brittle Clay,
Down to the Dust your Sceptres bend:
To everlasting Years he reigns,
And undiminish'd Pomp maintains,
When Kings and Suns and Time shall end.
4
So shall his favored Zion live;
In vain confed rate Nations strive
Her sacred Turrets to destroy;
Her Sovereign sits enthroned above,
And endless Power, and endless Love
Ensure her Safety, and her Joy.
CIX. Divine Mercies and Judgments compared. Isaiah live. 7, 8.
1
IN thy Rebukes, All-gracious GOD,
What soft Compassion reigns!
What gentle Accents of thy Voice
Assuage thy Children's Pains!
2
"When I correct my chosen Sons,
"A Father's Bowels move:
"One transient Moment bounds my Wrath,
"But endless is my Love".
3
Our Faith shall look through every Tear,
And view thy smiling Face,
And Hope amidst our Sighs shall tune
An Anthem to thy Grace.
4
Gather at length my weary Soul
To join thy Saints above;
For I would learn a Song of Praise
Eternal as thy Love.
CX. Divine Teachings, and their happy Consequences. Isaiah live. 13.
1
BRIGHT Source of intellectual Rays,
Father of Spirits, and of Grace,
O dart with Energy unknown
Celestial Beamings from thy Throne.
2
Thy sacred Book we would survey,
Enlight'ned with that heavenly Day,
And ask thy Spirit, with the Word,
To teach our Souls to know the LORD.
3
So shall our Children learn the Road
That leads them to their Fathers GOD;
And, formed by Lessons so divine,
Shall Infant Minds with Knowledge shine.
4
So shall the haughtiest Soul submit
With Children placed at Jesus Feet:
The noisy Swell of Pride shall cease,
And thy sweet Voice be heard in Peace.
CXI. Fruitful Showers, Emblems of the salutary Effects of the Gospel. Isaiah
lv. 10, 11, 12.
1
MARK the soft-falling Snow,
And the diffusive Rain;
To Heaven, from whence it fell,
It turns not back again,
But waters Earth
Through every Pore,
And calls forth all
Its secret Store.
2
Arrayed in beauteous Green
The Hills and Valleys shine,
And Man and Beast is fed
By Providence divine;
The Harvest bows
Its golden Ears,
The copious Seed
Of future Years.
3
"So," says the GOD of Grace,
"My Gospel shall descend,
"Almighty to effect
"The Purpose I intend;
"Millions of Souls
"Shall feel its Power,
"And bear it down
"To Millions more.
4
"Joy shall begin your March,
"And Peace protect your Ways,
"While all the Mountains round
"Echo melodious Praise;
"The vocal Groves
"Shall sing the GOD,
"And every Tree
"Consenting nod".
CXII. Comfort for pious Parents, who have been bereaved of their Children.
Isaiah lvi. 4, 5.
1
YE mourning Saints, whose streaming Tears
Flow over your Children dead,
Say not in Transports of Despair,
That all your Hopes are fled.
2
While cleaving to that darling Dust,
In fond Distress ye lie,
Rise, and with Joy and Reverence view
An heavenly Parent nigh.
3
Though, your young Branches torn away,
Like withered Trunks ye stand,
With fairer Verdure shall ye bloom,
Touched by the Almighty's Hand.
4
"I Will give the Mourners, says the LORD,
"In mine own House a Place;
"No Names of Daughters and of Sons
"Could yield so high a Grace.
5
"Transient and vain is every Hope,
"A rising Race can give;
"In endless Honor and Delight
"My Children all shall live."
6
We welcome, LORD, those rising Tears,
Through which thy Face we see,
And bless those Wounds, which through our Heart^
Prepare a Way for Thee.
CXIII. The Stranger entertained in GOD's House of Prayer. Isaiah lvi. 6, 7.
compared with Matt. xxi. 13. and Ephesians. ii. 19.
1
GREAT Father of Mankind,
We bless that wondrous Grace,
Which could for Gentiles find
Within thy Courts a Place.
How kind the Care
Our GOD displays,
For us to raise
An House of Prayer!
2
Though once estranged far,
We now approach the Throne;
For Jesus brings us near,
And makes our Cause his own:
Strangers no more,
To thee we come,
And find our Home,
And rest secure.
3
To thee our Souls we join,
And love thy sacred Name;
No more our own, but thine,
We triumph in thy Claim;
Our Father King,
Thy Cov'nant-Grace
Our Souls embrace,
Thy Titles sing.
4
Here in thy House we feast
On Dainties all divine;
And, while such Sweets we taste,
With Joy our Faces shine.
Incense shall rise
From Flames of Love,
And GOD approve
The Sacrifice.
5
May all the Nations throng
To worship in thy House;
And thou attend the Song,
And smile upon their Vows;
Indulgent still,
Till Earth conspire
To join the Choir
On Zion's Hill.
CXIV. Peace proclaimed, and the Fruit of the Lips created by a gracious GOD.
Isaiah lvii. 19.
1
HARK! for the great Creator speaks;
In Silence let the Earth attend;
And when his Words of Grace are heard,
In grateful Adoration bend.
2
"'It Is I create the Fruit of Praise,
"And give the broken Heart to sing
"Peace, heavenly Peace, my Lips proclaim,
"Pleased with the happy News they bring".
3
Receive the Tidings with Delight,
Ye Gentile Nations from afar;
And you, the Children of his Love,
Whom Grace has brought already near.
4
To these, to those his sovereign Hand
Its healing Energy imparts:
Peace, Peace be echoed from your Tongues,
And echoed from consenting Hearts.
5
Enjoy the Health, which GOD has wrought,
Nor let the daily Tribute cease,
Till changed for more exalted Songs
In Regions of eternal Peace.
CXV. The Duty of remonstrating against Sin, when Judgments are threatened.
Isaiah lviii. 1.
1
THY Judgments cry aloud,
O ever-righteous GOD,
And in the Sight of all our Land
Thou liftest up thy Rod.
2
Aloud thy Servants cry,
Commissioned from thy Throne,
And like a Trumpet raise their Voice
To make thy Judgments known.
3
But who that Cry attends,
And makes his Safety sure?
Rocked by the Tempest, they should flee,
They sleep the more secure.
4
Another Trumpet, LORD,
The stupid Slumb'rers need;
Nor will they hear a feebler Voice
Than that, which wakes the Dead.
CXVI. Unsuccessful Fasts accounted for. Isaiah lviii. 3. compared with v. 4-8.
For a Fast Day.
1
O! Where is sovereign Mercy gone?
Whither is Britain's GOD withdrawn?
That through long Years she should complain,
She fasts, and mourns, and cries in vain?
2
Have thou not seen her suppliant Bands
Through all her Coasts extend their Hands?
Or has their oft-repeated Prayer
Escaped thine ever-list'ning Ear?
3
Thine Ear has heard, thine Eye has seen;
But Guilt has spread a Cloud between;
And rising still before thy Face,
Averts thy long-intreated Grace.
4
Dispel that Cloud by Rays divine,
And cause thy chearing Face to shine;
Our Isle shall shout from Shore to Shore,
And dread encroaching Foes no more.
5
Our Light shall like the Morning spring;
Healing and Joy our GOD shall bring;
Justice shall in our Front appear,
And Glory gather up our Rear.
CXVII. The Standard of the Spirit lifted up. Isaiah lix. 19.
1
GOD of the Ocean, at whose Voice
The threatening Floods are heard no more,
Behold their Madness and their Noise,
And silence the tumultuous Roar.
2
Here Streams of poisonous Error swell;
There rages Vice in every Form;
They join their Tide, led on by Hell,
And Zion trembles at the Storm.
3
Almighty Spirit, raise thine Arm,
And lift the Savior's Standard high;
Thy People's Hearts with Vigor warm,
And call thy chosen Legions nigh.
4
Waked by thy well-known Voice they come,
And round the sacred Banner throng:
Zion, prepare the Conqu'ror Room,
While Triumph bursts into a Song.
5
"The LORD on high, when Billows roar,
"Superior Majesty displays,
"And by one Breath of sovereign Power
"Hushes the Noise of foaming Seas".
CXVIII. The Glory of the Church in the latter Day. Isaiah lx. 1.
1
O Zion, tune thy Voice,
And raise thy Hands on high;
Tell all the Earth thy Joys,
And boast Salvation nigh.
Cheerful in GOD,
Arise and shine,
While Rays divine
Stream all abroad,
2
He gilds thy mourning Face
With Beams that cannot fade;
His all-resplendent Grace
He pours around thy Head;
The Nations round
Thy Form shall view,
With Luster new
Divinely crowned.
3
In Honor to his Name
Reflect that sacred Light;
And loud that Grace proclaim,
Which makes thy Darkness bright:
Pursue his Praise,
Till sovereign Love
In Worlds above
The Glory raise.
4
There on his holy Hill
A brighter Sun shall rise,
And with his Radiance fill
Those fairer purer Skies;
While round his Throne
Ten thousand Stars
In nobler Spheres Orbs or Paths in which the Stars move.

His Influence own.
CXIX. GOD the everlasting Light of the Saints above. Isaiah lx. 20.
1
YE golden Lamps of Heaven The Stars.
, farewell,
With all your feeble Light:
Farewell, thou ever-changing Moon,
Pale Empress of the Night.
2
And thou refulgent Orb of Day The Sun.

In brighter Flames arrayed,
My Soul, that springs beyond thy Sphere,
No more demands thine Aid.
3
Ye Stars are but the shining Dust
Of my divine Abode,
The Pavement of those heavenly Courts,
Where I shall reign with GOD.
4
The Father of eternal Light
Shall there his Beams display;
Nor shall one Moment's Darkness mix
With that unvaried Day.
5
No more the Drops of piercing Grief
Shall swell into mine Eves;
Nor the Meridian Noon Day.
Sun decline
Amidst those brighter Skies.
6
There all the Millions of his Saints
Shall in one Song unite,
And Each the Bliss of all shall view
With infinite Delight.
CXX. GOD entreated for Zion. Isaiah lxii. 6, 7.
For a Fast Day; or A Day of Prayer for the Revival of Religion.
1
INDULGENT Sovereign of the Skies,
And will thou bow thy gracious Ear?
While feeble Mortals raise their Cries,
Will thou, the great Jehovah, hear?
2
How shall thy Servants give thee Rest,
Till Zion's mouldering Walls thou raise?
Till thine own Power shall stand confessed,
And make Jerusalem a Praise?
3
For this, a lowly suppliant Crowd
Here in thy sacred Temple wait:
For this, we lift our Voices loud,
And call, and knock at Mercy's Gate.
4
Look down, O GOD, with pitying Eye,
And view the Desolation round;
See what wide Realms in Darkness lie,
And hurl their Idols to the Ground.
5
Loud let the Gospel-Trumpet blow,
And call the Nations from afar;
Let all the Isles their Savior know,
And Earth's remotest Ends draw near.
6
Let Babylon's proud Altars shake,
And Light invade her darkest Gloom;
The Yoke of Iron-Bondage break,
The Yoke of Satan, and of Rome.
7
With gentle Beams on Britain shine,
And bless her Princes, and her Priests;
And by thine Energy divine
Let sacred Love overflow their Breasts.
8
Triumphant here let Jesus reign,
And on his Vineyard sweetly smile;
While all the Virtues of his Train
Adorn our Church, adorn our Isle.
9
On all our Souls let Grace descend,
Like heavenly Dew in copious Showers,
That we may call our GOD our Friend,
That we may hail Salvation ours.
10
Then shall each Age and Rank agree
United Shouts of Joy to raise;
And Zion, made a Praise by Thee,
To Thee shall render back the Praise.
CXXI. A Nation born in a Day; or The rapid Progress of the Gospel desired.
Isaiah lxvi. 8.
1
BEHOLD with pleasing Extacy
The Gospel-Standard lifted high,
That all the Nations from afar
May in the great Salvation share.
2
Why then, Almighty Savior, why
Do wretched Souls in Millions die?
While wide the infernal Tyrant reigns
Over spacious Realms in ponderous heavy.
Chains.
3
And shall he still go on to boast,
Thy Cross its Energy has lost?
And shall thy Servants still complain,
Their Labors, and their Tears are vain?
4
Awake, all-conqu'ring Arm, awake,
And Hell's extensive Empire shake;
Assert the Honors of thy Throne,
And call this ruined World thine own.
5
Thine all-successful Power display;
Produce a Nation in a Day;
For at thy Word this barren Earth
Shall travail with a general Birth.
6
Swift let thy quickening Spirit breathe
On these Abodes of Sin and Death;
That Breath shall bow ten thousand Minds,
Like waving Corn before the Winds.
7
Scarce can our glowing Hearts endure
A World, where thou art known no more;
Transform it, LORD, by conquering Love,
Or bear us to the Realms above.
CXXII. Backsliding Israel invited to return to GOD. Jerem. iii. 12, 13.
1
BACKSLIDING Israel, hear the Voice
Of thy forgiving GOD,
Nor force such Goodness to exert
The Terrors of the Rod.
2
Thus says the LORD, "My Mercy flows
"An unexhausted Stream,
"And after all its Millions saved,
"Its Sway is still supreme.
3
"One Moment's Wrath with weighty Crush
"Might sink you quick to Hell;
"Yet Mercy points the happy Path,
"Where Life and Glory dwell.
4
"Own but the Follies thou have done,
"And mourn thy Sins in Dust,
"And soon thy trembling Heart shall learn
"To hope and love and trust".
5
All-gracious GOD, thy Voice we own;
And, prostrate at thy Feet,
Our Souls in humble Silence wait
A Pardon there to meet.
CXXIII. The Goodness of GOD acknowledged in giving Pastors after his own
Heart. Jerem. iii. 15.
At the Settlement of a Minister.
1
SHEPHERD of Israel, Thou do keep
With constant Care thy humble Sheep;
By thee inferior Pastors rise
To feed our Souls, and bless our Eyes.
2
To all thy Churches such impart,
Modeled by thine own gracious Heart;
Whose Courage Watchfulness and Love
Men may attest, and GOD approve.
3
Fed by their active tender Care,
Healthful may all thy Sheep appear,
And, by their fair Example led,
The Way to Zion's Pastures tread.
4
Here have thou list'ned to our Vows,
And scattered Blessings on thy House;
Thy Saints are succored, and no more
As Sheep without a Guide deplore.
5
Completely heal each former Stroke,
And bless the Shepherd, and the Flock;
Confirm the Hopes thy Mercies raise,
And own this Tribute of our Praise.
CXXIV. GOD's gracious Methods of adopting Love. Jerem. iii. 19.
1
AMAZING Plan of sovereign Love!
And does our GOD look down
On Rebels, whom his Wrath might doom
To perish at his Frown?
2
Does he project a wondrous Scheme
In such a Way to save,
That Justice, Majesty, and Grace
May one joint Triumph have?
3
One Look the stubborn Hearts subdues,
And at his Feet they fall;
They own their Father with Delight,
And he receives them all.
4
Numbered amongst his dearest Sons,
The pleasant Land they share;
On Earth secured by Power divine,
Till crowned with Glory there.
5
Father, in thine Embraces lodged
Our Heaven begun we feel,
And wait the Hour, which thou shall mark
Thy Counsels to fulfill.
CXXV. Creatures vain, and GOD the Salvation of his People. Jerem. iii. 23.
1
HOW long shall Dreams of Creature-Bliss
Our flattering Hopes employ,
And mock our fond deluded Eyes
With visionary Joy The Appearance of Joy.
?
2
Why from the Mountains and the Hills
Is our Salvation sought,
While our eternal Rock's forsook,
And Israel's GOD forgot?
3
The living Spring neglected flows
Full in our daily View,
Yet we with anxious fruitless Toil
Our broken Cisterns hew.
4
These fatal Errors, Gracious GOD,
With gentle Pity see:
To Thee our roving Eyes direct,
And fix our Souls on Thee.
CXXVI. Invitation to return to the LORD, and put away Abominations. Jerem. iv.
1, 2.
1
IT is the LORD of Glory calls,
O let his Israel hear:
"Stop, ye Revolters, in your Course,
"And hearken, and come near.
2
"What though in Sin's delusive Paths
"Ye from your Youth have strayed;
"What though my Messages of Love
"Have been with Scorn repaid;
3
"At last return, and Grace divine
"Your Wand'rings shall forget?
"If loyal Zeal and Love dethrone
"Each Idol from its Seat.
4
"Return, and dwell secure on Earth,
"As in your LORD's Embrace,
"Till in the Land of perfect Joy
"Ye find a nobler Place".
5
Father of Mercies, lo, we come
Subdued by such a Call:
O let the Hand of Grace divine
Reduce, and bless us all.
6
So will we teach the World that Love,
Which we are made to see,
And Wand'rers shall with us return,
And bless themselves in Thee.
CXXVII. Misimproved Privileges, and disappointed Hopes. Jerem. viii. 20.
1
ALAS, how fast our Moments fly!
How short our Months appear!
How swift through various Seasons hasts
The still revolving Year!
2
Seasons of Grace, and Days of Hope*
While Jesus waiting stands,
And spreads the Blessings of his Love
With wide-extended Hands.
3
But O! how slow our stupid Souls
These Blessings to secure!
Blessings, which through eternal Years
Unwith'ring shall endure.
4
Beneath the Word of Life we die;
We starve amidst our Store;
And what Salvation should impart
Heightens our Ruin more.
5
Pity this Madness, GOD of Love,
And make us truly wise:
So from the pregnant Seeds of Grace
Shall glorious Harvests rise.
CXXVIII. Glorying in GOD alone. Jerem. ix. 23, 24.
1
THE righteous LORD, supremely great,
Maintains his universal State;
Over all the Earth his Power extends;
All Heaven before his Footstool bends.
2
Yet Justice still with Power presides,
And Mercy all his Empire guides;
Such Works are pleasing in his Sight,
And such the Men of his Delight.
3
No more, ye Wise, your Wisdom boast:
No more, ye Strong, your Valor trust:
Nor let the Rich survey his Store,
Elate lifted up.
with Heaps of shining Ore.
4
Glory, my Soul, in this alone,
That GOD, thy GOD, to thee is known,
That thou have owned his sovereign Sway,
That thou have felt his chearing Ray.
5
My Wisdom Wealth and Power I find
In one Jehovah all combined;
On him I fix my roving Eyes,
Till all my Soul in Rapture rise.
6
All else, which I my Treasure call,
May in one fatal Moment fall;
But what his Happiness can move,
Whom GOD the blessed deigns condescends.
to love?
CXXIX. Jeremiah's Tears over the captive Flock. Jerem. xiii. 15-17.
1
FLOW on, my Tears, in rising Streams,
Ye briny Fountains, flow;
While haughty Sinners steel their Hearts,
Nor will Jehovah know.
2
The Flock of GOD is captive led
In Satan's heavy Chains;
Led to the Borders of the Pit,
Where endless Horror reigns.
3
Look back, ye Captives, and invoke
Jehovah's saving Aid;
Give him the Glory of his Name,
Whose Hand your Nature made.
4
O turn, ever yet your erring Feet
On Death's dark Mountain fall;
Cry, and your gentle Shepherd's Ear
Will hearken to your Call.
5
Then shall those Hearts with Pleasure spring*
Which now in Sorrow melt;
And deep Repentance yield a Joy
Proud Guilt has never felt.
6
Almighty Grace, exert thy Power,
And turn these Slaves of Sin;
And, when they bring thy Tribute due,
Shall their own Bliss begin.
CXXX. Giving Glory to GOD, before Darkness comes upon us. Jerem. xiii. 16.
1
THE swift-declining Day,
How fast its Moments fly!
While Ev'ning's broad and gloomy Shade
Gains on the western Sky.
2
Ye Mortals, mark its Pace,
And use the Hours of Light;
And know, its Maker can command
An instantaneous sudden.
Night.
3
His Word blots out the Sun
In its meridian Blaze;
And cuts from smiling vigorous Youth
The Remnant of its Days.
4
On the dark Mountain's Brow
Your Feet shall quickly slide;
And from its airy Summit dash
Your momentary Pride.
5
Give Glory to the LORD,
Who rules the whirling Sphere The Revolutions of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.
;
Submissive at his Footstool bow,
And seek Salvation there.
6
Then shall new Luster break
Through Horror's darkest Gloom,
And lead you to unchanging Light,
In a celestial Home.
CXXXI. The fatal Consequences of forsaking the Hope of Israel. Jerem. xvii.
13, 14.
1
GREAT Object of thine Israel's Hope,
Its Savior, and its Praise,
Attend, while we to thee devote
The Remnant of our Days.
2
How wretched they that leave the LORD,
And from his Word withdraw,
That lose his Gospel from their Sight,
And wander from his Law!
3
O thou eternal Spring of Good,
Whence living Waters flow,
Let not our thirsty erring Souls
To broken Cisterns go.
4
Like Characters inscribed in Dust
Are Sinners borne away;
And all the Treasures, they can boast,
The Portion of a Day.
5
But, LORD, to Thee my Heart shall turn
To heal it, and to save;
The Joys, that from thy Favor flow,
Shall bloom beyond the Grave.
CXXXII. CHRIST, the Lord our Righteousness. Jerem. xxiii. 6.
1
SAVIOR divine, we know thy Name,
And in that Name we trust;
Thou art the LORD our Righteousness,
Thou art thine Israel's Boast.
2
Guilty we plead before thy Throne,
And low in Dust we lie,
Till Jesus stretch his gracious Arm
To bring the guilty nigh.
3
The Sins of one most righteous Day
Might plunge us in Despair;
Yet all the Crimes of numerous Years
Shall our great Surety clear.
4
That spotless Robe, which he has wrought,
Shall deck us all around;
Nor by the piercing Eye of GOD
One Blemish shall be found.
5
Pardon and Peace and lively Hope
To Sinners now are given;
Israel and Judah soon shall change
Their Wilderness for Heaven.
6
With Joy we taste that Manna now,
Thy Mercy scatters down;
We seal our humble Vows to Thee,
And wait the promised Crown.
CXXXIII. The Efficacy of GOD's Word. Jerem. xxiii. 29.
1
WITH reverend Awe, tremendous LORD,
We hear the Thunders of thy Word;
The Pride of Lebanon it breaks:
Swift the celestial Fire descends,
The flinty Rock in Pieces rends,
And Earth to its deep Center shakes.
2
Arrayed in Majesty divine
Here Sanctity, and Justice shine,
And Horror strikes the Rebel through;
While loud this awful Voice makes known
The Wonders, which thy Sword has done,
And what thy Vengeance yet shall do.
3
So spread the Honors of thy Name;
The Terrors of a GOD proclaim;
Thick let the pointed Arrows fly;
Till Sinners, humbled in the Dust,
Shall own the Execution just,
And bless the Hand by which they die.
4
Then clear the dark tempestuous Day,
And radiant Beams of Love display;
Each prostrate Soul let Mercy raise:
So shall the bleeding Captives feel
'Thy Word, which gave the Wound, can heal,
And change their Groans to Songs of Praise.
CXXXIV. The Possibility of dying this Year. Jerem. xxviii. -16-.
For New Year's Day.
1
GOD of my Life, thy constant Care
With Blessings crowns each opening Year;
This guilty Life do thou prolong,
And wake anew mine annual Song.
2
How many precious Souls are fled
To the vast Regions of the Dead,
Since from this Day the changing Sun
Through his last yearly Period run?
3
We yet survive; but who can say
Or through the Year, or Month, or Day,
I will retain this vital Breath;
Thus far at least in League with Death?
4
That Breath is thine, Eternal GOD;
It Is thine to fix my Soul's Abode;
It holds its Life from thee alone,
On Earth, or in the World unknown.
5
To thee our Spirits we resign;
Make them and own them still as thine;
So shall they smile, secure from Fear,
Though Death should blast the rising Year.
6
Thy Children, eager to be gone,
Bid Time's impetuous Tide roll on,
And land them on that blooming Shore,
Where Years and Death are known no more.
CXXXV. GOD's Complacency in his Thoughts of Peace toward his People. Jerem.
xxix. 11.
1
VILER than Dust, O LORD, are we;
And does thine Anger cease?
And does thy gracious Heart overflow
With Purposes of Peace?
2
And do thou with Delight reflect
On what thy Grace shall do?
And with Complacency of Soul
Enjoy the distant View?
3
And can thine often-injur'd Love
So kind a Message send,
That thou to all our lengthened Woes
Wilt give the expected End?
4
Why droop our Hearts? Why flow our Eyes,
While such a Voice we hear?
Why rise our Sorrows and our Fears,
While such a Friend is near?
5
To all thine other Favors add
A Heart to trust thy Word,
And Death itself shall hear us sing,
While resting on the LORD.
CXXXVI. The impudent Rebellion of the Jewish Refugees at Pathros. Jer. xliv.
16, 17, 28.
1
WHOSE Words against the LORD are stout?
Or who presume to say,
"That sovereign Law, which GOD proclaims,
"I dare to disobey"?
2
Ten thousand Actions every where
The impious Language speak;
Yet Power omnipotent stands by,
Nor do its Thunders break.
3
But O! the dreadful Day draws near,
When GOD'S avenging Hand
Shall show, if feeble Mortals Breath,
Or GOD'S own Word shall stand.
4
My Soul, with prostrate Reverence fall
Before the Voice divine;
And all thine Interest, and thy Powers
To its Command resign.
5
Speak, mighty Lord; thy Servant waits
The Purport of thy Will:
My Heart with secret Ardour glows
Its Mandates Commands.
to fulfill.
6
Let the vain Sons of Belial boast,
Their Tongues and Thoughts are free;
My noblest Liberty I own,
When subject most to Thee.
CXXXVII. Asking the Way to Zion, in order to joining in Covenant with GOD.
Jerem. l. 5.
1
ENQUIRE, ye Pilgrims, for the Way,
That leads to Zion's Hill,
And thither set your steady Face
With a determined Will.
2
Invite the Strangers all around
Your pious March to join;
And spread the Sentiments you feel
Of Faith and Love divine.
3
Come, let us to his Temple haste,
And seek his Favor there,
Before his Footstool humbly bow,
And pour our servent Prayer.
4
Come, let us join our Souls to GOD
In everlasting Bands,
And seize the Blessings he bestows
With eager Hearts and Hands.
5
Come, let us seal without Delay
The Covenant of his Grace;
Nor shall the Years of distant Life
Its Memory efface.
6
Thus may our rising Offspring haste
To seek their Fathers GOD,
Nor ever forsake the happy Path
Their youthful Feet have trod.
CXXXVIII. Searching and trying our Ways. Lament. iii. 40.
1
THY piercing Eye, O GOD, surveys
The various Windings of our Ways;
Teach us their Tendency to know,
And judge the Paths in which we go.
2
How wild, how crooked have they been!
A Maze of Foolishness and Sin!
With all the Light we vainly boast,
Leaving our Guide, our Souls are lost.
3
Had not thy Mercy been our Aid
So fatally our Feet had strayed,
Stern Justice had its Prisoners led
Down to the Chambers of the Dead.
4
O turn us back to Thee again,
Or we shall search our Ways in vain;
Shine, and the Path of Life reveal,
And bear us on to Zion's Hill.
5
Roll on, ye swift-revolving Years,
And end this Round of Sins and Cares
No more a Wanderer would I roam,
But near my Father fix at Home.
CXXXIX. The Breath of our Nostrils taken in the Pits of the Enemy, applied to
CHRIST. Lament. iv. 20.
1
BLESSED Savior, to my Heart more dear
Than balmy Gales of vital Air,
Were thy Soul-chearing Presence gone,
What Use of Breath, unless to groan?
2
Thy Father's royal Hand has shed
In rich Profusion on thy Head
Ten thousand Graces; Thou alone
Can share, and can adorn his Throne.
3
But see the Sovereign captive led,
Snared in the Pit, which Traitors made,
Fettered with ignominious Bands,
And murdered by rebellious Hands.
4
Ye Saints, to your expiring King
Your tributary Sorrows bring:
In loyal Crowds assemble round,
And bathe in Tears each precious Wound.
5
But from the Caverns of the Grave
He springs, omnipotent to save;
The captive King ascends and reigns,
And drags his conqu'red Foes in Chains.
6
Beneath his Shade our Souls shall live
In all the Rapture Heaven can give;
Where Zion never shall deplore,
And Heathens vex his Church no more.
CXL. Of lamenting national Sins. Ezekiel. ix. 4-6.
For a Fast Day.
1
O Righteous GOD, thou Judge supreme,
We tremble at thy dreadful Name,
And all our crying Guilt we own
In Dust and Tears before thy Throne.
2
So manifold our Crimes have been,
Such Crimson Tincture dies our Sin,
That, could we all its Horrors know,
Our streaming Eyes with Blood might flow.
3
Britain, the Land thine Arm has saved,
That Arm most impiously has braved defied.
;
Britain, the Isle its GOD has loved,
A Rebel to that Love has proved.
4
Estranged from reverential Awe
We trample on thy sacred Law;
And, though such Wonders Grace has done,
Anew we crucify thy Son.
5
Justly might this polluted Land
Prove all the Vengeance of thy Hand;
And bathed in Heaven thy Sword might come
To drink our Blood, and seal our Doom.
6
Yet have thou not a Remnant here,
Whose Souls are filled with pious Fear?
O bring thy wonted Mercy nigh,
While prostrate at thy Feet they lie.
7
Behold their Tears, attend their Moan,
Nor turn away their secret Groan:
With these we join our humble Prayer;
Our Nation shield, our Country spare.
8
But if the Sentence be decreed,
And our dear native Land must bleed,
By thy sure Mark may we be known,
And save in Life or Death Thine own.
CXLI. The Iniquity of sacrificing GOD's Children; or The Evil of a bad or
neglected Education. Ezekiel. xvi. 20, 21 Alluding to the cruel Custom among some
Heathens of sacrificing their Children to their Gods, to which there are
frequent References in Scripture.
.
1
BEHOLD, O Israel's GOD,
From thine exalted Throne,
And view the desolate Abode,
Thou once have called thine own.
2
The Children of thy Flock,
By early Covenant thine,
See how they pour their bleeding Souls
On every Idol's Shrine Altar.
!
3
To Indolence and Pride
What piteous Victims made!
Crushed in their Parents fond Embrace,
And by their Care betrayed.
4
By Pleasure's polished Dart
What Numbers here are slain!
What Numbers there for Slaughter bound
In Mammon's golden Chain!
5
O let thine Arm awake,
And dash the Idols down!
O call the Captives of their Power
Thy Treasure, and thy Crown.
6
Thee let the Fathers own,
And Thee the Sons adore,
Joined to the Lord by solemn Vows
To be forgot no more.
CXLII. The Humility and Submission of a Penitent. Ezekiel. xvi. 63.
1
O Injured Majesty of Heaven,
Look from thy holy Throne,
While prostrate Rebels own with Grief
What Treasons they have done.
2
Thy Grace, where Sin abounded most,
Reigns with superior Sway;
And Pardons bought with Jesus' Blood
To Rebels does display.
3
While Love its grateful Anthems tunes,
Tears mingle with the Song;
My Heart with tender Anguish bleeds,
That I such Grace should wrong.
4
How shall I lift these guilty Eyes
To mine offended Lord?
Or how, beneath his heaviest Strokes,
Pronounce one murmuring Word?
5
Remorse and Shame my Lips have sealed;
But O! my Father, speak;
And all the Harmony of Heaven
Shall through the Silence break.
CXLIII. GOD bringing his People into the Covenant under the Rod. Ezekiel. xx. 37.
1
HOW gracious and how wise
Is our chastising GOD!
And O! how rich the Blessings are,
Which blossom from his Rod!
2
He lifts it up on high
With Pity in his Heart,
That every Stroke his Children feel
May Grace and Peace impart.
3
Instructed thus they bow,
And own his sovereign Sway;
They turn their erring Foctsteps back
To his forsaken Way.
4
His Cov'nant-Love they seek,
And seek the happy Bands,
That closer still engage their Hearts*
To honor his Commands.
5
Dear Father, we consent
To Discipline divine;
And bless the Pains, that make our Souls
Still more completely thine.
CXLIV. GOD's Condescension in becoming the Shepherd of Men. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 31.
1
AND will the Majesty of Heaven
Accept us for his Sheep?
And with a Shepherd's tender Care
Such worthless Creatures keep?
2
And will he spread his guardian Arms
Round our defenseless Head?
And cause us gently to lie down
In his refreshing Shade?
3
And will he lead our weary Souls
To that delightful Scene,
Where Rivers of Salvation flow
Through Pastures ever green?
4
What Thanks can mortal Men repay
For Favors great as Thine?
Or how can Tongues of feeble Clay
Proclaim such Love divine?
5
Eternal GOD, how mean are we!
How richly gracious Thou!
Our Souls, overwhelmed with humble Joy,
In silent Transports bow.
CXLV. Seeking to GOD for the Communication of his Spirit. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 37.
1
HEar, gracious Sovereign, from thy Throne,
And send thy various Blessings down:
While by thine Israel Thou art sought,
Attend the Prayer thy Word has taught.
2
Come, Sacred Spirit, from above,
And fill the coldest Heart with Love;
Soften to Flesh the rugged Stone,
And let thy godlike Power be known.
3
Speak thou, and from the haughtiest Eyes
Shall Floods of pious Sorrow rise;
While all their glowing Souls are borne
To seek that Grace, which now they scorn:
4
O let a holy Flock await
Numerous around thy Temple-Gate,
Each pressing on with Zeal to be
A living Sacrifice to Thee.
5
In Answer to our servent Cries,
Give us to see thy Church arise;
Or, if that Blessing seem too great,
Give us to mourn its low Estate.
CXLVI. Ezekiel's Vision of the dry Bones, Ezekiel. xxxvii. 3.
1
LOOK down, O LORD, with pitying Eye;
See Adam's Race in Ruin lie;
Sin spreads its Trophies over the Ground,
And scatters slaughtered Heaps around.
2
And can these mouldering Corpses live?
And can these perished Bones revive?
That, Mighty GOD, to Thee is known;
That wondrous Work is all thine own.
3
Thy Ministers are sent in vain
To prophesy upon the Slain;
In vain they call, in vain they cry,
Till thine almighty Aid is nigh.
4
But if thy Spirit deign to breathe,
Life spreads through all the Realms of Death;
Dry Bones obey thy powerful Voice;
They move, they waken, they rejoice.
5
So when thy Trumpet's awful Sound
Shall shake the Heavens, and rend the Ground,
Dead Saints shall from their Tombs arise,
And spring to Life beyond the Skies.
CXLVII. The Waters of the Sanctuary healing the dead Sea The Sea or Lake,
where Sodom, Gomorrah, etc. had stood, which was putrid and poisonous; and
ancient Writers say, that no Fish could live in it.
. Ezekiel. xlvii. 8, 9.
1
GREAT Source of Being and of Love,
Thou wat'rest all the Worlds above,
And all the Joys we Mortals know
From thine exhaustless Fountain flow.
2
A sacred Spring at thy Command
From Zion's Mount, in Canaan's Land,
Beside thy Temple, cleaves the Ground,
And pours its limpid Stream around.
3
The limpid Stream with sudden Force
Swells to a River in its Course;
Through desert Realms its Windings play,
And scatter Blessings all the Way.
4
Close by its Banks in Order fair
The blooming Trees of Life appear;
Their Blossoms fragrant Odours give,
And on their Fruit the Nations live.
5
To the dead Sea the Waters flow,
And carry Healing as they go;
Its poisonous Dregs their Power confess,
And all its Shores the Fountain bless.
6
Flow, wondrous Stream with Glory crowned,
Flow on to Earth's remotest Bound;
And bear us on thy gentle Wave
To him, who all thy Virtues gave.
CXLVIII. TEKEL; or The Sinner weighed in GOD's Balances, and found wanting.
Daniel v. 27.
1
RAISE, thoughtless Sinner, raise thine Eye;
Behold GOD's Balance lifted high;
There shall his Justice be displayed,
And there thy Hope and Life be weighed.
2
See in one Scale his perfect Law;
Mark with what Force its Precepts draw:
Would thou the awful Test sustain,
Thy Works how light! thy Thoughts how vain!
3
Behold the Hand of GOD appears
To trace these dreadful Characters;
" Tekel, thy Soul is wanting found,
"And Wrath shall smite thee to the Ground".
4
Let sudden Fear thy Nerves unbrace;
Let Horror shake thy tottering Knees Compare Verse 6.
;
Through all thy Thoughts let Anguish roll,
And deep Repentance melt thy Soul.
5
One only Hope may yet prevail;
Christ has a Weight to turn the Scale;
Still does the Gospel publish Peace,
And show a Savior's Righteousness.
6
Great GOD, exert thy Power to save;
Deep on the Heart these Truths engrave;
The ponderous Load of Guilt remove,
That trembling Lips may sing thy Love.
CXLIX. The Backslider recollecting himself in his Afflictions. Hosea ii. 6, 7.
1
THE LORD, how kind are all his Ways,
When most they seem severe!
He frowns, and scourges, and rebukes,
That we may learn his Fear.
2
With Thorns he fences up our Path,
And builds a Wall around,
To guard us from the Death, that lurks
In Sin's forbidden Ground.
3
When other Lovers, sought in vain,
Our fond Address despise,
He opens his indulgent Arms
With Pity in his Eyes.
4
Return, ye wandering Souls, return,
And seek his tender Breast;
Call back the Memory of the Days,
When there you found your Rest.
5
Behold, O LORD, we fly to Thee,
Though Blushes veil our Face,
Constrained our last Retreat to seek
In thy much-injur'd Grace.
CL. The Advantages of seeking the Knowledge of GOD. Hosea vi. 3.
1
SHINE forth, Eternal Source Fountain or Original.
of Light,
And make thy Glories known;
Fill our enlarged adoring Sight
With Luster all thine own.
2
Vain are the Charms, and faint the Rays
The brightest Creatures boast;
And all their Grandeur, and their Praise
Is in thy Presence lost.
3
To know the Author of our Frame
Is our sublimest Skill:
True Science is to read thy Name,
True Life to obey thy Will.
4
For this I long, for this I pray,
And foll'wing on pursue,
Till Visions of eternal Day
Fix and complete the View.
CLI. Inconstancy in Religion. Hosea vi. 4.
1
PERPETUAL Source of Light and Grace,
We hail thy sacred Name:
Through every Year's revolving Round
Thy Goodness is the same.
2
On us, all-worthless as we are,
It wondrous Mercy pours;
Sure as the Heavens established Course,
And plenteous as the Showers.
3
Inconstant Service we repay,
And treacherous Vows renew;
False as the Morning's scattering Cloud,
And transient as the Dew.
4
In flowing Tears our Guilt we mourn,
And loud implore thy Grace
To bear our feeble Footsteps on
In all thy righteous Ways.
5
Armed with this Energy divine
Our Souls shall steadfast move,
And with increasing Transport press
On to thy Courts above.
6
So by thy Power the Morning Sun
Persues his radiant Way,
Brightens each Moment in his Race,
And shines to perfect Day.
CLII. Gratitude the Spring of true Religion. Hosea xi. 4.
1
MY GOD, what silken Cords are thine!
How soft, and yet how strong!
While Power and Truth and Love combine
To draw our Souls along.
2
Thou saw us crushed beneath the Yoke
Of Satan and of Sin:
Thy Hand the Iron-Bondage broke
Our worthless Hearts to win.
3
The Guilt of twice ten thousand Sins
One Moment takes away;
And Grace, when first the War begins,
Secures the crowning Day.
4
Comfort through all this Vale of Tears
In rich Profusion flows,
And Glory of unnumber'd Years
Eternity bestows.
5
Drawn by such Cords we onward move,
Till round thy Throne we meet;
And, Captives in the Chains of Love,
Embrace our Conqu'ror's Feet.
CLIII. The Relentings of GOD's Heart over his backsliding People. Hosea xi. 7,
8, 9.
1
YE Sinners on Backsliding bent,
GOD'S gracious Call attend;
Shall not Compassion so divine
Each stubborn Spirit bend?
2
"How shall I give mine Israel up
"To Ruin and Despair?
"How pour down Showers of flaming Wrath,
"And make a Sodom there?
3
"My Bowels strong Relentings feel;
"My Heart is pained within:
"I will not all my Wrath exert,
"Nor visit all their Sin.
4
"The Mercy of a GOD restrains
"The Thunders of his Hand:
"Come, seek Protection from that Power,
"Which you can never withstand'.
5
With trembling Haste, O GOD, to Thee
Let Sinners wing their Flight;
As Doves, when Birds of Prey presue,
Down on their Windows light.
6
Father, we seek thy gracious Arm,
All melted at thy Voice:
O may thy Heart, that feels our Woes,
In our Return rejoice.
CLIV. GOD's Controversy by Fire. Amos iv. 11.
On Occasion of a dreadful Fire.
1
ETERNAL GOD, our humbled Souls
Before thy Presence bow:
With all thy Magazines of Wrath,
How terrible art Thou!
2
Fan'd by thy Breath whole Sheets of Flame
Do like a Deluge pour;
And all our Confidence of Wealth
Lies mould'red in an Hour.
3
Led on by Thee in horrid Pomp
Destruction rears its Head;
And black'ned Walls, and smoking Heaps
Through all the Street are spread.
4
LORD, in the Dust we lay us down,
And mourn thy righteous Ire Anger.
;
Yet bless the Hand of guardian Love,
That snatched us from the Fire.
5
O that the hateful Dregs of Sin
Like Dross had perished there,
That in fair Lines our purged Souls
Might thy bright Image bear.
6
So shall we view with dauntless Eyes
The last tremendous Day,
When Earth and Seas, and Stars and Skies
In Flames shall melt away.
CLV. Britain unreformed by remarkable Deliverances. Amos iv. 11.
For a Fast Day.
1
YES, Britain seemed to Ruin doomed,
Just like a burning Brand;
Till snatched from fierce surrounding Flames
By GOD'S indulgent Hand.
2
"Once more (he says) I will suppress
"The Wrath, that Sin would wake;
"Once more my Patience shall attend,
"And call my Britain back".
3
But who this Clemency reveres?
Or feels this melting Grace?
Who stirs his languid Spirit up
To seek thine awful Face?
4
On Days like these we pour our Cries,
And at thy Feet we mourn;
Then rise to tempt thy Wrath again,
And to our Sins return.
5
Our Nation far from GOD remains,
Far, as in distant Years;
And the small Remnant, that is found,
A dying Aspect wears.
6
Chast'ned and rescued thus in vain,
Thy righteous Hand severe
Into the Flames might hurl us back,
And quite consume us there.
7
So by the Light our Burning gives
Might neighboring Nations read,
How terrible thy Judgments are,
And learn our Guilt to dread.
8
Yet, 'midst the Cry of Sins like ours,
Incline thy gracious Ear;
And thine own Children's feeble Cry
With soft Compassion hear.
9
O by thy sacred Spirit's Breath
Kindle a holy Flame;
Refine the Land, thou might destroy,
And magnify thy Name.
CLVI. Preparing to meet GOD. Amos iv. 12, 13.
1
HE comes, thy GOD, O Israel, comes;
Prepare thy GOD to meet:
Meet him in Battle's Force arrayed,
Or humbled at his Feet.
2
He formed the Mountains by his Strength;
He makes the Winds to blow;
And all the secret Thoughts of Man
Must his Creator know.
3
He shades the Morning's opening Rays;
He shakes the solid World;
And Stars and Angels from their Seats
Are by his Thunder hurled.
4
Eternal Sovereign of the Skies,
And shall thine Israel dare
In mad Rebellion to arise,
And tempt the unequal War?
5
Lo, Nations tremble at thy Frown,
And faint beneath thy Rod;
Crushed by its gentlest Movement down,
They fall, Tremendous GOD.
6
Avert the Terrors of thy Wrath,
And let thy Mercy shine;
While humble Penitence and Prayer
Approve us truly thine.
CLVII. Jonah's Faith recommended. Jonah ii. 4.
1
LORD, we have broke thy holy Laws,
And slighted all thy Grace;
And justly thy vindictive Wrath*
Might cast us from thy Face.
2
Yet while such Precedents appear
Marked in thy sacred Book,
We from these Depths of Guilt and Fear
Will to thy Temple look.
3
To Thee, in our Redeemer's Name,
We raise our humble Cries;
May these our Prayers, perfumed by him,
Like grateful Incense rise.
4
O never may our hopeless Eyes
An absent GOD deplore,
Where the dear Temples of thy Love
Shall stand revealed no more.
5
Far from those Regions of Despair
Appoint our Souls a Place;
Where not a Frown through endless Years
Shall veil thy lovely Face.
CLVIII. GOD's Controversy with Britain stated and pleaded. Micah vi. 1, 2, 3.
For a Fast Day.
1
LISTEN, ye Hills; ye Mountains, hear;
Jehovah vindicates his Laws:
Trembling in Silence at his Bar,
Thou Earth, attend thy Maker's Cause.
2
Israel appear; present thy Plea;
And charge the Almighty to his Face;
Say, if his Rules oppressive be;
Say, if defective be his Grace.
3
Eternal Judge, the Action cease;
Our Lips are sealed in conscious Shame;
It Is ours, in Sackcloth to confess,
And thine, the Sentence to proclaim.
4
Ten thousand Witnesses arise,
Thy Mercies, and our Crimes appear
More than the Stars that deck the Skies,
And all our dreadful Guilt declare.
5
How shall we come before thy Face,
And in thine awful Presence bow?
What Offers can secure thy Grace,
Or calm the Terrors of thy Brow?
6
Thousands of Rams in vain might bleed;
Rivers of Oil might blaze in vain;
Or the First-born's devoted Head
With horrid Gore thine Altar stain.
7
But thine own Lamb, All-gracious GOD,
Whom impious Sinners dared to slay,
Has sovereign Virtue in his Blood
To purge the Nation's Guilt away.
8
With humble Faith to that we fly;
With that be Britain sprinkled o'cr;
Trembling no more in Dust we lie,
And dread thy Hand and Bar no more.
CLIX. Hearing the Voice of GOD's Rod. Micah vi. 9.
1
ATTEND, my Soul, with reverend Awe
The Dictates of thy GOD;
Silent and trembling hear the Voice
Of his appointed Rod.
2
Now let me search and try my Ways,
And prostrate seek his Face,
Conscious of Guilt before his Throne
In Dust my Soul abase.
3
Teach me, my GOD, what is yet unknown,
And all my Crimes forgive;
Those Crimes would I no more repeat,
But to thy Honor live.
4
My withered Joys too plainly show,
That all on Earth is vain;
In GOD my wounded Heart confides
True Rest and Bliss to gain.
5
Father, I wait thy gracious Call,
To leave this mournful Land,
And bathe in Rivers of Delight,
That flow at thy right Hand.
CLX. GOD's incomparable Mercy admired. Micah vii. 18, 19, 20.
1
SUPREME in Mercy, who shall dare
With thy Compassion to compare?
For thine own Sake will thou forgive,
And bid the trembling Sinner live.
2
Millions of our Transgressions past
Cancelled behind thy Back are cast;
Thy Grace, a Sea without a Shore,
Overflows them, and they rise no more.
3
And lest new Legions should invade,
And make the pardoned Soul afraid,
Our inbred Lusts thou will subdue,
And form degenerate Hearts anew.
4
Our Leader GOD, our Songs proclaim;
We lift our Banners in his Name;
With Songs of Triumph forth we go,
And level the gigantick Foe.
5
His Truth to Jacob shall prevail;
His Oath to Abram cannot fail;
The Hope of Saints in ancient Days,
Which Ages yet unborn shall praise.
CLXI. The impoverished Saint rejoicing in GOD. Habakkuk iii. 17, 18.
1
SO firm the Saint's Foundations stand,
Nor can his Hopes remove;
Sustained by GOD'S almighty Hand,
And sheltered in his Love.
2
Fig Trees and Olive-P^^nts may fail,
And Vines their Fruit deny,
Famine through all his Fields prevail,
And Flocks and Herds may die.
3
GOD is the Treasure of his Soul,
A Source of sacred Joy,
Which no Afflictions can control,
Nor Death itself destroy.
4
LORD, may we feel thy chearing Beams,
And taste thy Saints Repose;
We will not mourn the perished Streams,
While such a Fountain flows.
CLXII. GOD's afflicted Poor trusting in his Name. Zephaniah iii. 12.
1
PRAISE to the Sovereign of the Sky,
Who from his lofty Throne
Looks down on all that humble lie,
And calls such Souls his own.
2
The haughty Sinner he disdains,
Though Gems his Temples crown;
And from the Seat of Pomp and Pride
His Vengeance hurls him down.
3
On his afflicted pious Poor
He makes his Face to shine;
He fills their Cottages of Clay
With Luster all divine.
4
Among the meanest of thy Flock
There let my Dwelling be,
Rather than under gilded Roofs,
If absent, LORD, from Thee.
5
Poor and afflicted though we are,
In thy strong Name we trust;
And bless the Hand of sovereign Love,
Which lifts us from the Dust.
CLXIII. GOD comforting and rejoicing over Zion. Zeph. iii. 16, 17.
1
YES, it is the Voice of Love divine!
And O! how sweet the Accents sound!
Afflicted Zion, rise and shine,
Fair Mourner, prostrate on the Ground.
2
The mighty GOD, thy glorious King,
Tender to pity, strong to save,
Has sworn he will Salvation bring,
Though Sorrow press thee to the Grave.
3
He all a Father's Pleasure knows
To fold thee in his dear Embrace;
His Heart with secret Joy overflows,
And cheerful Smiles adorn his Face.
4
At length the inward Extacy
In heavenly Music breaks its Way See the marginal Reading.
;
Jehovah leads the Harmony,
And Angels teach their Harps the Lay Song.
.
5
Fain would my Lips the Chorus Company of Singers.
join,
And tell the listening World my Joys,
But Condescension so divine
In Silence swallows up my Voice.
CLXIV. Practical Reflections on the State of our Fathers. Zechariah i. 5.
1
HOW swift the Torrent rolls,
That bears us to the Sea!
The Tide, that bears our thoughtless Souls
To vast Eternity!
2
Our Fathers, where are they,
With all they called their own?
Their Joys and Griefs, and Hopes and Cares,
And Wealth and Honor gone.
3
But Joy or Grief succeeds
Beyond our mortal Thought,
While the poor Remnant of their Dust
Lies in the Grave forgot.
4
There, where the Fathers lie,
Must all the Children dwell;
Nor other Heritage possess
But such a gloomy Cell.
5
GOD of our Fathers, hear,
Thou everlasting Friend!
While we, as on Life's utmost Verge Edge or Border.
,
Our Souls to Thee commend.
6
Of all the pious Dead
May we the Footsteps trace,
Till with them in the Land of Light
We dwell before thy Face.
CLXV. Joshua the High-Priest's Change of Raiment, applied to Christian
Privileges. Zech. iii. 4.
1
ETERNAL King, thy Robes are white
In spotless Rays of heavenly Light;
Adoring Angels round are seen,
Yet in thy Presence are not clean.
2
When then are we, the Sons of Earth,
That draw Pollution from our Birth?
Our fleshly Garments, LORD, how mean!
Overspread with hateful Spots of Sin.
3
Hail to that condescending Grace,
Which shows a Savior's Righteousness!
Eternal Honors to that Name,
Which covers all our Guilt and Shame!
4
His Blood, an overflowing Sea,
Shall purge our deepest Stains away:
Our Souls, renewed by Grace divine,
Shall in their LORD'S Resemblance shine.
5
Yet, while these Rags of Flesh we wear,
Pollution will again appear.
Come, Death, and ease me of the Load:
Come, Death, and bear my Soul to GOD.
6
The King of Heaven will there bestow
A richer Robe, than Monarchs know,
Dress all his Saints in glittering White;
Not Joshua's Mitre shone so bright.
7
The Grave its Trophies shall resign;
Christ will the mouldering Dust refine;
And Death, the last of Foes, shall be
Swallowed and lost in Victory.
8
My Faith, on towering Pinions borne,
Anticipates that glorious Morn;
And with celestial Raptures strong,
Gives mortal Lips the immortal Song.
CLXVI. Joshua the High-Priest's Zeal and Fidelity rewarded with a Station
among the Angels. Zech. iii. 6, 7.
For the Ordination of a Minister.
1
GREAT LORD of Angels, we adore
The Grace, that builds thy Courts below;
And through ten thousand Sons of Light
Stoops to regard what Mortals do.
2
Amidst the Wastes of Time and Death
Successive Pastors thou do raise
Thy Charge to keep, thy House to guide,
And form a People for thy Praise.
3
The heavenly Natives with Delight
Hover around the sacred Place;
Nor scorn to learn from mortal Tongues
The Wonders of redeeming Grace.
4
At length, dismissed from feeble Clay,
Thy Servants join the angelick Band;
With them through distant Worlds they fly,
With them before thy Presence stand.
5
O glorious Hope! O blessed Employ!
Sweet Lenitive what eases or asswageth.
of Grief and Care!
When shall we reach those radiant Courts,
And all their Joy and Honor share?
6
Yet while these Labors we pursue,
Thus distant from thy heavenly Throne,
Give us a Zeal and Love like their's,
And half their Heaven shall here be known.
CLXVII. The completing of the spiritual Temple. Zech. iv. 7.
1
SING to the LORD above,
Who deigns on Earth to raise
A Temple to his Love,
A Monument of Praise.
Ye Saints around,
Through all its Frame,
Its Builder's Name
Harmonious sound.
2
He formed the glorious Plan,
And its Foundation laid,
That GOD might dwell with Man,
And Mercy be displayed;
His Son he sent,
Who, great and good,
Made his own Blood
The sweet Cement.
3
Beneath his Eye and Care
The Edifice shall rise
Majestic strong and fair,
And shine above the Skies.
There shall he place
The polished Stone,
Ordained to crown
This Work of Grace.
CLXVIII. The Error of despising the Day of small Things. Zech. iv. 10-.
1
"WHat haughty Scorner, says the Lord,
"Shall humble Things despise,
"When he beholds them with Delight,
"Who reigns beyond the Skies?
2
"I from a Chaos dark and wild Genesis i. 2, 3.

"Made Heavens bright Host appear:
"I from the small unnotic'd Seeds
"The loftiest Cedars rear.
3
"From Eden's Dust I Adam formed,
"The noblest human Frame;
"And in his humble Sons display
"The Honors of my Name.
4
"From Fishermen, in Number few,
"In human Arts untaught,
"All the wide Realms, my Church can boast,
"My potent Hand has brought.
5
"The pious Poor, by Men despised,
"In dearest Bonds are mine;
"Once hardly dressed in humble Weeds Garments.
,
"They now like Angels shine".
6
LORD, if such Trophies raised from Dust
Thy sovereign Glory be,
Here in my Heart thy Power may find
Materials fit for Thee.
CLXIX. Prisoners delivered from the Pit by the Blood of the Covenant. Zech.
ix. 11.
1
YE Prisoners, who in Bondage lie,
In Darkness and the Pit,
Behold the Grace that sets us free,
And to that Grace submit.
2
The Tidings of Deliverance hear,
Confess the Covenant good,
And bless the Ransom GOD has found
In our Emanuel's Blood.
3
Justice no more asserts its Claim
Your forseit Lives to take;
But smiling Mercy quick descends
Your heavy Chains to break.
4
We walk at large, and sing the Hand,
To which we Freedom owe;
And drink those Rivers with Delight,
Which through this Desert flow.
5
He, that has Liberty bestowed,
Will give a Kingdom too;
He, that has loosed the Bonds of Death,
The Path of Life will show.
CLXX. The Fountain of Life. Zech. xiii. 1.
1
HAIL, everlasting Spring!
Celestial Fountain, hail!
Thy Streams Salvation bring,
The Waters never fail:
Still they endure,
And still they flow
For all our Woe
A sovereign Cure.
2
Blessed be his wounded Side,
And blessed his bleeding Heart,
Who all in Anguish died
Such Favors to impart.
His sacred Blood
Shall make us clean
From every Sin,
And fit for GOD.
3
To that dear Source of Love
Our Souls this Day would come;
And thither from above,
LORD, call the Nations home;
That Jew and Greek
With rapturous Songs
On all their Tongues
They Praise may speak.
CLXXI. GOD's Name profaned, when his Table is treated with Contempt. Malachi.
i. 12.
Applied to the Lord's Supper.
1
MY GOD, and is thy Table spread?
And does thy Cup with Love overflow?
Thither be all thy Children led
And let them all its Sweetness know.
2
Hail sacred Feast, which Jesus makes!
Rich Banquet of his Flesh and Blood!
Thrice happy he, who here partakes
That sacred Stream, that heavenly Food!
3
Why are its Dainties all in vain
Before unwilling Hearts displayed?
Was not for you the Victim slain?
Are you forbid the Children's Bread?
4
O let thy Table honored be,
And furnished well with joyful Guests;
And may each Soul Salvation see,
That here its sacred Pledges tastes.
5
Let Crowds approach with Hearts prepared;
With Hearts inflamed let all attend;
Nor, when we leave our Father's Board,
The Pleasure, or the Profit end.
6
Revive thy dying Churches, LORD,
And bid our drooping Graces live;
And more that Energy afford,
A Savior's Blood alone can give.
CLXXII. GOD's gracious Regard to active Attempts to revive Religion. Mal. iii.
16, 17.
1
THE LORD on mortal Worms looks down
From his celestial Throne;
And, when the Wicked swarm around,
He well discerns his own.
2
He sees the tender Hearts, that mourn
The Scandals of the Times;
And join their Efforts to oppose
The wide-prevailing Crimes.
3
Low to the social Band he bows
His still-attentive Ear;
And, while his Angels sing around,
Delights their Voice to hear.
4
The Chronicles of Heaven shall keep
Their Words in Transcript fair;
In the Redeemer's Book of Life
Their Names recorded are.
5
"Yes, (says the Lord) the World shall know
"These humble Souls are mine:
"These, when my Jewels I produce,
"Shall in full Luster shine.
6
"When Deluges of fiery Wrath
"My Foes away shall bear,
"That Hand, which strikes the Wicked through,
"Shall all my Children spare".
CLXXIII. CHRIST the Sun of Righteousness. Malachi iv. 2.
1
TO Thee, O GOD, we Homage pay,
Source of the Light that rules the Day;
Who, while he gilds all Nature's Frame,
Reflects thy Rays, and speaks thy Name.
2
In louder Strains we sing that Grace,
Which gives the Sun of Righteousness;
Whose nobler Light Salvation brings,
And scatters Healing from his Wings.
3
Still on our Hearts may Jesus shine
With Beams of Light and Love divine;
Quick'ned by him our Souls shall live,
And cheered by him shall grow and thrive.
4
O may his Glories stand confessed
From North to South, from East to West:
Successful may his Gospel run
Wide as the Circuit of the Sun.
5
When shall that radiant Scene arise,
When, fixed on high in purer Skies,
Christ all his Luster shall display
On all his Saints through endless Day?
HYMNS From PASSAGES in the NEW TESTAMENT.
HYMN CLXXIV. The Ax laid to the Root of unfruitful Trees, Matthew iii. 10.
1
THE LORD into his Vineyard comes
Our various Fruit to see;
His Eye, more piercing than the Light,
Examines every Tree.
2
Tremble, ye Sinners, at his Frown,
If barren still ye stand;
And fear that keenly-wounding Ax,
Which arms his awful Hand.
3
Close to the Root behold it laid
To make Destruction sure:
Who can resist the mighty Stroke?
Or who the Fire endure?
4
LORD, we adore thy sparing Love,
Thy long-expecting Grace;
Else had we low in Ruin fallen,
And known no more our Place.
5
Succeeding Years thy Patience waits;
Nor let it wait in vain;
But form in us abundant Fruit,
And still this Fruit maintain.
CLXXV. The Light of good Examples, the most effectual Way to glorify GOD.
Matt. v. 16.
1
GREAT Teacher of thy Church, we own
Thy Precepts all divinely wise:
O may thy mighty Power be shown
To fix them still before our Eyes.
2
Deep on our Hearts thy Law engrave,
And fill our Breasts with heavenly Zeal,
That, while we trust thy Power to save,
We may that sacred Law fulfill.
3
Adorned with every heavenly Grace
May our Examples brightly shine,
And the sweet Luster of thy Face
Reflected beam from each of Thine.
4
These Lineaments Features.
, divinely fair,
Our heavenly Father shall proclaim;
And Men, that view his Image there,
Shall join to glorify his Name.
CLXXVI. Providential Bounties surveyed and improved. Matthew v. 45.
1
FAther of Lights, we sing thy Name,
Who kindlest up the Lamp of Day the Sun.
;
Wide as he spreads his golden Flame,
His Beams thy Power and Love display.
2
Fountain of Good, from Thee proceed
The copious Drops of genial making fruitful.
Rain;
Which through the Hills, and through the Meads
Revive the Grass, and swell the Grain.
3
Through the wide World thy Bounties spread;
Yet Millions of our guilty Race,
Though by thy daily Bounty fed,
Affront thy Law, and spurn thy Grace.
4
Not so may our forgetful Hearts
O'erlook the Tokens of thy Care;
But what thy liberal Hand imparts
Still own in Praise, still ask in Prayer.
5
So shall our Suns more grateful shine,
And Showers in sweeter Drops shall fall,
When all our Hearts and Lives are Thine,
And Thou, our GOD, enjoyed in all.
6
Jesus, our brighter Sun, arise;
In plenteous Showers thy Spirit send;
Earth then shall grow a Paradise,
And in the heavenly Eden end.
CLXXVII. Secret Prayer. Matthew vi. 6.
1
FATHER divine, thy piercing Eye
Shoots through the darkest Night;
In deep Retirement thou art nigh,
With Heart-discerning Sight.
2
There shall that piercing Eye survey
My duteous Homage paid,
With every Morning's dawning Ray,
And every Ev'ning's Shade.
3
O may thine own celestial Fire
The Incense still inflame;
While my warm Vows to Thee aspire,
Through my Redeemer's Name.
4
So shall the Visits of thy Love
My Soul in secret bless;
So shall thou deign in Worlds above
Thy Suppliant to confess.
CLXXVIII. Seeking first the Kingdom of GOD, etc. Matthew vi. 33.
1
NOW let a true Ambition rise,
And Ardour fire our Breast,
To reign in Worlds above the Skies
In heavenly Glories dressed.
2
Behold Jehovah's royal Hand
A radiant Crown display,
Whose Gems with vivid Luster shine,
While Stars and Suns decay.
3
Away each groveling anxious Care
Beneath a Christian's Thought!
I spring to seize immortal Joys,
Which my Redeemer bought.
4
Ye Hearts with youthful Vigor warm,
The glorious Prize pursue;
Nor shall ye want the Goods of Earth,
While Heaven is kept in View.
CLXXIX. Pardon spoken by CHRIST. Matthew ix. -2.
1
MY Savior, let me hear thy Voice
Pronounce these Words of Peace;
And all my warmest Powers shall join
To celebrate the Grace.
2
With gentle Smiles call me thy Child,
And speak my Sins forgiven;
The Accents mild shall charm mine Ear
All like the Harps of Heaven.
3
Cheerful, wherever thy Hand shall lead,
The darkest Path I Will tread;
Cheerful I Will quit these mortal Shores,
And mingle with the Dead.
4
When dreadful Guilt is done away,
No other Fears we know;
That Hand, which scatters Pardons down,
Shall Crowns of Life bestow.
CLXXX. The relapsing Daemoniack. Matthew xii. 43-45.
1
Sovereign of Heaven, thine Empire spreads
Over all the Worlds on high;
And at thy Frown the infernal Powers
In wild Confusion fly.
2
Like Lightning from his glittering Throne
The great Arch-Traytor fell,
Driven with enormous Ruin down
To Infamy and Hell.
3
Permitted now to range at large,
And traverse wander through.
Earth and Air,
Over captive human Souls he reigns,
And boasts his Kingdom there.
4
Yet thence thy Grace can drive him out
With one almighty Word;
O send thy potent Scepter forth,
And reign victorious, LORD.
5
Let wretched Prisoners be released
The smiling Light to view;
Nor let the vanquished Foe return
Their Bondage to renew.
6
May Grace complete that wondrous Work,
Which thine own Power begun,
And fill from Satan's gloomy Realms,
The Kingdom of thy Son.
CLXXXI. The Faith of the Syrophenician Woman recommended. Matthew xv. 26, 27.
1
ALL-conqu'ring Faith, how high it rose,
When Heaven itself might seem to oppose!
All-gracious Lord, who did appear
Most merciful, when most severe!
2
Thus at thy Feet our Souls would fall,
And loudly thus for Mercy call;
"Thou Son of David, Pity show,
"And save us from the infernal Foe".
3
Though viler than the Brutes we be,
Our longing Eyes would wait on thee,
Who do to Dogs this Grace afford
To taste the Crumbs beneath thy Board.
4
But thou the humble Soul wilt raise,
And all its Sorrows turn to Praise:
Each self-abasing broken Heart
Shall with thy Children share a Part.
CLXXXII. The Church built on a Rock, and secured against the Gates of Hell.
Matt. xvi. 18.
1
NOW let the Gates of Zion sing,
And challenge all her spiteful Foes:
She triumphs in her Savior King,
In him, who from the Dead arose.
2
He is the Rock, on whom we rest,
And firm on that Foundation stand;
Divine Compassion fills his Breast,
His Word is sure, and strong his Hand.
3
Hell and its Host may rage in vain;
Vain are their Counsels, and their Power;
Grim Death may marshall all his Train,
And boast the Conquest of an Hour.
4
Breathless and pale his Servants lie,
And know their former Place no more;
Their Children raise his Praises high,
And over their Fathers Dust adore.
5
Their Fathers Dust the LORD shall raise,
And burst the Barriers of the Grave;
Parents and Children join his Praise,
Who through Eternity can save.
CLXXXIII. CHRIST'S Transfiguration. Matt. xvii. 4-.
1
WHen at this Distance, Lord, we trace
The various Glories of thy Face,
What Transport pours over all our Breast,
And charms our Cares, and Woes to Rest!
2
With Thee in the obscurest Cell
On some bleak Mountain would I dwell,
Rather than pompous Courts behold,
And share their Grandeur and their Gold.
3
Away, ye Dreams of mortal Joy!
Raptures divine my Thoughts employ:
I see the King of Glory shine;
I feel his Love, and call him Mine.
4
On Taber The Mountain on which Christ was transfigured.
thus his Servants viewed
His Luster, when transformed he stood;
And, bidding earthly Scenes farewell,
Cried, "LORD, it is pleasant here to dwell".
5
Yet still our elevated Eyes
To nobler Visions long to rise;
That grand Assembly would we join,
Where all thy Saints around thee shine.
6
That Mount how bright! Those Forms how fair!
It Is good to dwell for ever there.
Come, Death, dear Envoy Messenger or Ambassador.
of my GOD,
And bear me to that blessed Abode.
CLXXXIV. The Grace of CHRIST in ministering to Men, and dying for them. Matt.
xx. 28.
1
SAVIOR of Men, and Lord of Love,
How sweet thy gracious Name!
With Joy that Errand we review,
On which thy Mercy came.
2
While all thine own angelick Bands
Stood waiting on the Wing,
Charmed with the Honor to obey
The Word of such a King;
3
For us mean wretched sinful Men
Thou laid'st that Glory by,
First in our mortal Flesh to serve,
Then in that Flesh to die.
4
Bought with thy Service and thy Blood,
We doubly, LORD, are Thine;
To thee our Lives we would devote,
To thee our Death resign.
5
Blessed Man, who in thy Cause consumes
His vigorous Days with Zeal!
Then with the last slow Ebb of Blood
Is called thy Truth to Seal!
CLXXXV. CHRIST'S compassionate Readiness to gather Souls. Matt. xxiii. 37, 38.
1
SEE how the Lord of Mercy spreads
His gentle Hands abroad;
And warns us of the circling Foes,
That thirst to drink our Blood!
2
"Fly to the Shelter of my Arms,
"And dwell secure from Fear;
"Nor Earth nor Hell shall pluck you thence,
"Or reach, and wound you there".
3
With anxious Heart the Parent-Bird
Thus calls her Offspring round,
When horrid Vulturs beat the Air,
And Slaughter stains the Ground.
4
The trembling Brood, by Nature taught,
Fly to the known Retreat;
Beneath her downy Wings are safe,
And find the Shelter sweet.
5
But Men, alas! more thoughtless Men
Refuse to lend an Ear;
Their only Refuge madly fly,
And rather die, than hear.
6
They spurn the Savior's offered Grace
Till they his Wrath inflame;
Then De^^^^on lays them low
In Agony, and Shame.
CLXXXVI. The Abounding of Iniquity, and Coldness of Christian Love. Matt.
xxiv. 12.
For a Fast Day.
1
ALAS for Britain, and her Sons!
What has she not to fear?
The Sins, that ruined Salem once,
O how triumphant here!
2
Alas the strong overflowing Tide!
How fiercely does it rage!
And each foreboding Symptom joins
In terrible Presage.
3
Yet who has Eyes that can discern?
Or who an Ear to hear?
Whose Heart is trembling for the Ark,
Or for his Country dear?
4
Cold is the Love of christian Breasts,
If christian Breasts remain;
And dying the last Sparks of Zeal,
Or its last Efforts vain.
5
Of Britain, often chastis'd and saved,
What shall the End be found?
Shall not the Sword, that waves so long,
Inflict the deeper Wound?
O stay thine Arm, All-gracious GOD;
Thy Spirit largely pour;
He can the Streams of Guilt restrain,
And dying Love restore.
CLXXXVII. The final Sentence, and Happiness of the Righteous. Matt. xxv. 34.
ATTEND mine Ear; my Heart rejoice;
While Jesus from his Throne,
Begirt with all the angelick Hosts,
Makes his last Sentence known.
When Sinners cursed from his Face
To raging Flames are driven,
His Voice, with Melody divine,
Thus calls his Saints to Heaven.
"Blessed of my Father, all draw near,
"Receive the large Reward;
"And rise with Raptures to possess
"The Kingdom Love prepared.
"Ever Earth's Foundations first were laid,
"This sovereign Purpose wrought,
"And reared those Palaces divine,
"To which you now are brought.
"There shall you reign unnumber'd Years,
"Protected by my Power,
"While Sin and Hell, and Pains and Cares
"Shall vex your Souls no more".
6
Come, dear majestic Savior, come,
This Jubilee proclaim,
And teach us Accents fit to praise
So great, so dear a Name.
CLXXXVIII. Relieving CHRIST in his poor Saints. Matt. xxv. 40.
1
JESUS, my Lord, how rich thy Grace!
Thy Bounties how complete!
How shall I count the matchless Sum?
How pay the mighty Debt?
2
High on a Throne of radiant Light
Do Thou exalted shine;
What can my Poverty bestow,
When all the Worlds are Thine?
3
But thou have Brethren here below,
The Partners of thy Grace,
And wilt confess their humble Names
Before thy Father's Face.
4
In them Thou may be clothed, and fed,
And visited, and cheered,
And in their Accents of Distress
My Savior's Voice is heard.
5
Thy Face with Reverence and with Love
I in thy Poor would see;
O let me rather beg my Bread,
Than hold it back from Thee.
CLXXXIX. The final Sentence, and Misery of the Wicked. Matt. xxv. 41.
1
AND will the Judge descend?
And must the Dead arise?
And not a single Soul escape
His all-discerning Eyes?
2
And from his righteous Lips
Shall such a Sentence sound?
And through the Millions of the Damned
Spread black Despair around?
3
"Depart from me, Accursed,
"To everlasting Flame,
"For rebel Angels first prepared,
"Where Mercy never came".
4
How will my Heart endure
The Terrors of that Day,
When Earth and Heaven before his Face
Astonished shrink away?
5
But ever that Trumpet shakes
The Mansions of the Dead,
Hark from the Gospel's gentle Voice
What joyful Tidings spread!
6
Ye Sinners, seek his Grace,
Whose Wrath ye cannot bear;
Fly to the Shelter of his Cross,
And find Salvation there.
7
So shall that Curse remove,
By which the Savior bled,
And the last awful Day shall pour
His Blessings on your Head.
CXC. CHRIST'S Submission to his Father's Will. Matt. xxvi. 42.
1
"FATHER divine, (the Savior cried,
While Horrors pressed on every Side,
And prostrate on the Ground he lay)
"Remove this bitter Cup away.
2
"But if these Pangs must still be borne,
"Or helpless Man be left forlorn,
"I bow my Soul before thy Throne,
"And say, Thy Will, not mine be done".
3
Thus our submissive Souls would bow,
And, taught by Jesus, lie as low;
Our Hearts, and not our Lips alone,
Would say, Thy Will, not ours be done.
4
Then, though like him in Dust we lie,
We'll view the blissful Moment nigh,
Which, from our Portion in his Pains,
Calls to the Joy in which he reigns.
CXCI. Reflections on the Disciples forsaking CHRIST, when he was betrayed.
Matt. xxvi. -56.
1
BEHOLD the Son of GOD'S Delight;
His Smiles how sweet! His Rays how bright!
A Friend of Tenderness unknown:
To the last Breath he loved his own.
2
But lo! his Friends, his Brethren dear
Fled, when they saw his Danger near;
And not one generous Heart remains
To shield his Life, or share his Pains.
3
So frail is Man; so frail are we,
When unsupported, LORD, by Thee;
Thus shrinks our Faith; thus droops our Love,
And thus our Vows abortive prove.
4
Blessed Jesus, thine own Power impart,
And bind in Cords of Love my Heart:
The Fugitive no more shall flee,
But keep through Death its Hold on Thee.
CXCII. CHRIST'S Complaint of his Father's forsaking him on the Cross. Matt.
xxvii. 46.
1
WHAT doleful Accents do I hear?
What piercing Cry invades mine Ear?
Loaded with Shame, and bathed in Blood,
Who calls to a forsaking GOD?
2
Amazing and Heart-rending Sight!
It Is his own Darling and Delight,
Who once in his Embraces lay,
Dearer than all the Sons of Day!
3
Yet when this Jesus died for me,
Distended on the cursed Tree,
GOD stood afar, nor would afford
One pitying Look, one chearing Word.
4
What then, my Soul, must thou have felt,
If pressed with all thy Load of Guilt,
Beneath whose Weight the Savior cries,
Who formed the Earth, and built the Skies?
5
But in that dark tremendous Hour,
Unconquered Faith exerts its Power;
My GOD, my Father, cried aloud,
And Heaven the endearing Name avowed.
6
From Death, from Earth he raised his Son,
And gave him for his Cross a Throne;
Triumphant there the Suff'rer reigns,
And reaps the Harvest of his Pains.
7
Eternal Raptures there are known;
Nor flows the Joy on him alone,
But for his Sake the LORD has swore,
To leave the meanest Saint no more.
CXCIII. The same. Matt. xxvii. 46.
1
MY Savior, did Thou die for me?
For me send forth that bitter Cry?
With bleeding Heart thy Wounds I see,
Prepared at thy Command to die.
2
By all thine Anguish on the Cross,
When GOD thy Father stood afar,
Rich in thy temporary Loss,
Thy Church is brought for ever near.
3
From far the Beamings of thy Throne
Revived my sympathizing Heart;
Thy Love made Sinners Griefs thine own,
Mine in thy Joys must take its Part.
4
Midst all the Splendours of thy Reign,
Think on the Sorrows thou have felt;
Nor let a Mourner weep in vain,
For whom thy precious Blood was spilt.
5
While through Earth's darkest Gloom I tread,
Dart to my Soul a chearing Ray;
And on the Confines of the Dead
Thy Power, as Lord of Life, display.
CXCIV. The Angel's Reply to the Women, that sought CHRIST. Matt. xxviii. 5, 6.
1
YE humble Souls, that seek the Lord,
Chase all your Fears away;
And bow with Pleasure down to see
The Place where Jesus lay.
2
Thus low the Lord of Life was brought;
Such Wonders Love can do;
Thus cold in Death that Bosom lay,
Which throb'd, and bled for you.
3
A Moment give a Loose to Grief,
Let grateful Sorrows rise,
And wash the bloody Stains away
With Torrents from your Eyes.
4
Then raise your Eyes, and tune your Songs,
The Savior lives again;
Not all the Bolts and Bars of Death
The Conqu'ror could detain.
5
High over the angelick Bands he rears
His once dishonored Head;
And through unnumber'd Years he reigns,
Who dwelt among the Dead.
6
With Joy like his shall every Saint
His empty Tomb survey;
Then rise with his ascending Lord,
Through all his shining Way.
CXCV. CHRIST ever present with his Ministers and Churches. Matt. xxviii. -20.
1
WIDE over all Worlds the Savior reigns;
Unmoved his Power and Love remains;
And on his Arm his Church shall rest.
Fair Zion, joyful in her King,
Through every changing Age shall sing,
With his perpetual Presence blessed.
2
Tyrannick Death, in vain thy Rage,
Thy Triumphs new in every Age
Over the first Heroes of his Host;
Conscious of more than mortal Aid,
Our bleeding Hearts are not dismayed,
But an immortal Leader boast.
3
Though buried deep in Dust they lie,
Whose tuneful Voices raised on high
Led the sweet Anthems to his Name;
The Children learn the Fathers Song,
And unformed Tongues shall still prolong
The ever-present Savior's Fame.
4
The present Savior, He shall give
Millions of future Saints to live,
And crowd the Temples of his Grace:
The present Savior, lo! he comes
To call whole Legions from their Tombs,
And teach their Dust sublimer Praise.
CXCVI. Departed Saints asleep. Mark v. 39.
1
"WHY flow these Torrents of Distress?
(The gentle Savior cries)
"Why are my sleeping Saints surveyed
"With unbelieving Eyes?
2
"Death's feeble Arm shall never boast,
"A Friend of Christ is slain;
"Nor over their meaner Part in Dust
"A lasting Power retain.
3
"I come, on Wings of Love I come,
"The Slumb'rers to awake;
"My Voice shall reach the deepest Tomb,
"And all its Bonds shall break.
4
"Touched by my Hand in Smiles they rise;
"They rise to sleep no more;
"But robbed with Light, and crowned with Joy
"To endless Day they soar".
5
Jesus, our Faith receives thy Word;
And, though fond Nature weep,
Grace learns to hail the pious Dead,
And emulate their Sleep.
6
Our willing Souls thy Summons wait
With them to rest and praise;
So let thy much-loved Presence cheer
These separating Days.
CXCVII. The Struggle between Faith and Unbelief. Mark ix. 24.
1
JESUS, our Souls delightful Choice,
In Thee believing we rejoice;
Yet still our Joy is mixed with Grief,
While Faith contends with Unbelief.
2
Thy Promises our Hearts revive,
And keep our fainting Hopes alive;
But Guilt and Fears and Sorrows rise,
And hide the Promise from our Eyes.
3
O let not Sin and Satan boast,
While Saints lie mourning in the Dust;
Nor see that Faith to Ruin brought,
Which thine own gracious Hand has wrought.
4
Do Thou the dying Spark inflame;
Reveal the Glories of thy Name;
And put all anxious Doubts to Flight,
As Shades dispersed by opening Light.
CXCVIII. CHRIST'S condescending Regard to little Children. Mark x. 14.
1
SEE Israel's gentle Shepherd stand
With all-engaging Charms;
Hark how he calls the tender Lambs,
And folds them in his Arms!
2
"Permit them to approach, (he cries)
"Nor scorn their humble Name;
"For 'twas to bless such Souls as these,
"The Lord of Angels came".
3
We bring them, LORD, in thankful Hands,
And yield them up to Thee;
Joyful, that we ourselves are Thine,
Thine let our Offspring be.
4
Ye little Flock, with Pleasure hear;
Ye Children, seek his Face;
And fly with Transport to receive
The Blessings of his Grace.
5
If Orphans they are left behind,
Thy guardian Care we trust,
That Care shall heal our bleeding Hearts,
While weeping over their Dust.
CXCIX. Christian Watchfulness. Mark xiii. 37.
1
AWAKE, my drowsy Soul, awake,
And view the threatening Scene:
Legions of Foes encamp around,
And Treach'ry lurks within.
2
It Is not this mortal Life alone
These Enemies assail;
All thine eternal Hopes are lost,
If their Attempts prevail.
3
Now to the Work of GOD awake;
Behold thy Master near;
The various, arduous Task pursue
With Vigor and with Fear.
4
The awful Register goes on,
The Account will surely come,
And opening Day, or closing Night
May bear me to my Doom.
5
Tremendous Thought! How deep it strikes!
Yet like a Dream it flies,
Till GOD's own Voice the Slumbers chase
From these deluded Eyes.
CC. The Nativity of Christ. Luke ii. 10-12.
1
HALL Progeny Offspring.
divine!
Hail Virgin's wondrous Son!
Who, for that humble Shrine,
Did quit the Almighty's Throne:
The Infant Lord
Our Voices sing,
And be the King
Of Grace adored.
2
Ye Princes, disappear,
And boast your Crowns no more;
Lay down your Sceptres here,
And in the Dust adore:
Where Jesus dwells,
The Manger bare
In Luster far
Your Pomp excells.
3
With Bethlem's Shepherds mild
The Angels bow their Head;
And round the sacred Child
Their guardian Wings they spread;
They knew, that where
Their Sovereign lies
In low Disguise
Heaven's Court is there.
4
Thither, my Soul, repair,
And early Homage pay
To thy Redeemer fair,
As on his natal Birthday.
Day.
I kiss thy Feet;
And, Lord, would be
A Child like Thee,
Whom thus I greet.
CCI. The Angels Song at Christ's Birth. Luke ii. 13, 14.
1
HIGH let us swell our tuneful Notes,
And join the angelick Throng;
For Angels no such Love have known
TO awake a cheerful Song.
2
Good Will to sinful Men is shown,
And Peace on Earth is given;
For lo! the incarnate Savior comes
With Messages from Heaven.
3
Justice and Grace with sweet Accord
His rising Beams adorn;
Let Heaven and Earth in Consort join,
Now such a Child is born.
4
Glory to GOD in highest Strains
In highest Worlds be paid;
His Glory by our Lips proclaimed,
And by our Lives displayed.
5
When shall we reach those blissful Realms,
Where Christ exalted reigns,
And learn of the celestial Choir
Their own immortal Strains?
CCII. Simeon's Song and Declaration to the Virgin Mary. Luke ii. 30-35.
1
OUR Eyes Salvation see,
Prepared by Grace divine:
How wide its Splendours are diffused!
How bright its Glories shine!
2
Through distant Heathen Lands
It darts a vivid Ray,
And to the Realms, where Saian reigned,
Imparts celestial Day.
3
The Israel of the LORD
In Christ their Glory boast,
And on the Honors of his Name
Their whole Salvation trust.
4
By him shall Millions rise
To an immortal Crown,
And Millions, that his Grace despise,
Shall sink in Ruin down.
5
Our Reckoning is begun,
And on the Account will go,
Till closed in everlasting Joy
Or never-ending Woe.
CCIII. CHRIST's Message. Luke iv. 18, 19.
1
HARK the glad Sound! The Savior comes,
The Savior promised long!
Let every Heart prepare a Throne,
And every Voice a Song.
2
On him the Spirit largely poured
Exerts its sacred Fire;
Wisdom and Might, and Zeal and Love
His holy Breast inspire.
3
He comes the Prisoners to release
In Satan's Bondage held;
The Gates of Brass before him burst,
The Iron Fetters yield.
4
He comes from thickest Films of Vice
To clear the mental Ray,
And on the Eye Balls of the Blind
To pour celestial Day.
5
He comes the broken Heart to bind,
The bleeding Soul to cure,
And with the Treasures of his Grace
TO enrich the humble Poor.
6
His Silver Trumpets publish loud
The Jub'lee of the LORD The acceptable Year of the Lord, i. e. the Year of
Jubilee. Levit. xxv.
;
Our Debts are all remitted now,
Our Heritage restored.
7
Our glad Hosannas, Prince of Peace,
Thy Welcome shall proclaim;
And Heaven's eternal Arches ring
With thy beloved Name.
CCIV. The recovered Daemoniack, an Emblem of a converted Sinner. Luke viii. 35.
1
JESUS, we own thy saving Power,
And thy victorious Hand;
Hell's Legions tremble at thy Feet,
And fly at thy Command.
2
Over Souls, by Passions Uproar filled
With Anarchy Confusion and Disorder.
unknown,
The nob'er Powers, restored by Thee,
Ascend their peaceful Throne.
3
No more they rend their Clothing off;
No more their Wounds repeat;
But gentle and composed they wait
Attentive at thy Feet.
4
Over Thousands more, where Satan rules,
May we such Triumphs see;
And be their rescued Souls and ours
Devoted, LORD, to Thee.
CCV. The good Samaritan. Luke x. 30-37.
1
FATHER of Mercies, send thy Grace
All-pow'rful from above
To form in our obedient Souls
The Image of thy Love.
2
O may our sympathizing Breasts
That generous Pleasure know
Kindly to share in others Joy,
And weep for others Woe!
3
When the most helpless Sons of Grief
In low Distress are laid,
Soft be our Hearts their Pains to feel,
And swift our Hands to aid.
4
So Jesus looked on dying Men,
When throned above the Skies,
And 'midst the Embraces of his GOD
He felt Compassion rise.
5
On Wings of Love the Savior flew
To raise us from the Ground,
And made the richest of his Blood
A Balm for every Wound.
CCVI. The Care of the Soul, the one Thing needful. Luke x. 42-.
1
WHY will ye lavish out your Years
Amidst a thousand trifling Cares?
While in this various Range of Thought
The one Thing needful is forgot?
2
Why will ye chase the fleeting Wind,
And famish an immortal Mind?
While Angels with Regret look down
To see you spurn a heavenly Crown?
3
The Eternal GOD calls from above,
And Jesus pleads his bleeding Love;
Awakened Conscience gives you Pain;
And shall they join their Pleas in vain?
4
Not so your dying Eyes shall view
Those Objects, which ye now pursue;
Not so shall Heaven and Hell appear,
When the decisive Hour is near.
5
Almighty GOD, thy Power impart
To fix Convictions on the Heart;
Thy Power unveils the blindest Eyes,
And makes the haughtiest Scorner wise.
CCVII. Mary's Choice of the better Part. Luke x. -42.
1
BESET with Snares on every Hand,
In Life's uncertain Path I stand:
Savior divine, diffuse thy Light
To guide my doubtful Footsteps right.
2
Engage this roving treacherous Heart
To fix on Mary's better Part;
To scorn the Trifles of a Day
For Joys, that none can take away.
3
Then let the wildest Storms arise;
Let Tempests mingle Earth and Skies;
No fatal Shipwreck shall I fear,
But all my Treasures with me bear.
4
If thou, my Jesus, still be nigh,
Cheerful I live, and joyful die:
Secure, when mortal Comforts flee,
To find ten thousand Worlds in Thee.
CCVIII. CHRIST'S little Flock comforted with the Views of a Kingdom. Luke xii.
32.
1
YE little Flock, whom Jesus feeds,
Dismiss your anxious Cares;
Look to the Shepherd of your Souls,
And smile away your Fears.
2
Though Wolves and Lions prowl around,
His Staff is your Defense:
'Midst Sands and Rocks your Shepherd's Voice
Calls Streams and Pastures thence.
3
Your Father will a Kingdom give,
And give it with Delight;
His feeblest Child his Love shall call
To triumph in his Sight.
4
Ten thousand Praises, LORD, we bring
For sure Supports like these:
And over the pious Dead we sing
Thy living Promises.
5
For all we hope, and they enjoy,
We bless a Savior's Name;
Nor shall that Stroke disturb the Song,
Which breaks this mortal Frame.
CCIX. Providing Bags, that wax not old, etc. Luke xii. 33.
1
THESE mortal Joys, how soon they fade!
How swift they pass away!
The dying Flower reclines its Head,
The Beauty of a Day!
2
The Bags are rent, the Treasures lost,
We fondly called our own:
Scarce could we the Possession boast,
And strait we found it gone.
3
But there are Joys that cannot die,
With GOD laid up in Store;
Treasure beyond the changing Sky,
Brighter than golden Ore.
4
To that my rising Heart aspires,
Secure to find its Rest,
And glories in such wide Desires
Of all their Wish possessed.
5
The Seeds, which Piety and Love
Have scattered here below,
In the fair fertile Fields above
To ample Harvests grow.
6
The Mite my willing Hands can give
At Jesus' Feet I lay;
Grace shall the humble Gift receive,
And Heaven at large repay.
CCX. The active Christian. Luke xii. 35-38.
1
YE Servants of the LORD,
Each in his Office wait,
Observant of his heavenly Word,
And watchful at his Gate.
2
Let all your Lamps be bright,
And trim the golden Flame;
Gird up your Loins, as in his Sight,
For awful is his Name.
3
Watch, it is your Lord's Command;
And while we speak, he is near:
Mark the first Signal of his Hand,
And ready all appear.
4
O happy Servant he
In such a Posture found!
He shall his Lord with Rapture see,
And be with Honor crowned.
5
Christ shall the Banquet spread
With his own royal Hand,
And raise that favorite Servant's Head
Amidst the angelick Band.
CCXI. Room at the Gospel-Feast. Luke xiv. 22.
1
THE King of Heaven his Table spreads,
And Dainties crown the Board;
Not Paradise with all its Joys
Could such Delight afford.
2
Pardon and Peace to dying Men,
And endless Life are given,
And the rich Blood, that Jesus shed
To raise the Soul to Heaven.
3
Ye hungry Poor, that long have strayed
In Sin's dark Mazes, come:
Come from the Hedges and Highways,
And Grace shall find you Room.
4
Millions of Souls in Glory now
Were fed, and feasted here;
And Millions more, still on the Way,
Around the Board appear.
5
Yet is his House and Heart so large,
That Millions more may come;
Nor could the wide assembling World
O'er-fill the spacious Room.
6
All Things are ready; come away,
Nor weak Excuses frame;
Crowd to your Places at the Feast,
And bless the Founder's Name.
CCXII. The present and future State of the Saint and Sinner compared. Luke
xvi. 25.
1
IN what Confusion Earth appears!
GOD's dearest Children bathed in Tears;
While they, who Heaven itself deride,
Riot in Luxury and Pride.
2
But patient let my Soul attend,
And, ever I censure, view the End:
That End how different who can tell?
The wide Extremes of Heaven and Hell.
3
See the red Flames around him twine,
Who did in Gold and Purple shine!
Nor can his Tongue one Drop obtain
TO allay the Scorching of his Pain.
4
While round the Saint, so poor below,
Full Rivers of Salvation flow;
On Abram's Breast he leans his Head,
And banquets on celestial Bread.
5
Jesus, my Savior, let me share
The meanest of thy Servants Fare:
May I at last approach to taste
The Blessings of thy Marriage Feast.
CCXIII. Rebels against CHRIST executed. Luke xix. 27.
1
HE comes; the royal Conqu'ror comes;
His Legions fill the Sky;
Angelick Trumpets rend the Tombs,
And loud proclaim him nigh.
2
Ye rebel Hosts, how vain your Rage
Against this sovereign Lord?
What Madness bears you on to engage
The Terrors of his Sword?
3
"Bring forth (he cries) those Sons of Pride,
"That scorned my gentle Sway,
"To prove the Arm they once defied
"Omnipotent to slay".
4
Tremendous Scene of Wrath divine!
How wide the Vengeance spreads!
His pointed Darts of Lightning shine
Round their defenseless Heads.
5
Now let the Rebels seek that Face,
From which hey cannot flee?
And thou, my Soul, adore the Grace,
That sweetly conquered thee.
CCXIV. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lest Souls. Luke xix. 41, 42.
1
WHAT venerable Sight appears?
The Son of GOD dissolved in Tears!
Trace, O my Soul, with sad Surprise,
The Sorrows of a Savior's Eyes.
2
For whom, blessed Jesus, we would know,
Does such a sacred Torrent flow?
What Brother, or what Friend of thine,
Is graced and mourned with Drops divine?
3
Nor Brother there, nor Friend I see,
But Sons of Pride and Cruelty;
Who like rapacious Tigers stood
Insatiate panting for thy Blood.
4
Dear Lord, and did thy gushing Eyes
Thus stream over dying Enemies?
And can thy Tenderness forget
The Sinner humbled at thy Feet?
5
With deep Remorse our Bowels move,
That we have wronged such matchless Love;
Thy gentle Pity, Lord, display,
And smile these trembling Fears away.
6
Give us to shine before thy Face,
Eternal Trophies of thy Grace;
Where Songs of Praise thy Saints employ,
And mingle with a Savior's Joy.
CCXV. Departed Saints living to GOD. Luke xx. -38.
1
THrice happy State, where Saints shall live
Around their Father's Throne,
In every Joy, that Heaven can give,
And live to GOD alone!
2
Unnumber'd Bands of kindred Minds,
That dwelt in feeble Clay,
Us and our Woes have left behind
To reign in endless Day.
3
Immortal Vigor now they breathe,
And all the Air is Peace;
They chide our Tears, that mourn the Death,
Which brought their Souls Release.
4
Thus shall the Grace of Christ prevail,
Till all his Chosen meet;
And not the meanest Servant fail
His Household to complete.
5
To that blessed Goal The End of a Race, where the Prize was hung.
with ardent Haste
Our active Souls would tend;
Nor feel their Sorrows, as they passed
To such a blissful End.
CCXVI. CHRIST'S Admonition to, and Care of Peter under approaching Trials.
Luke xxii. 31, 32.
1
HOW keen the Tempter's Malice is!
How artful, and how great!
Though not one Grain shall be destroyed,
Yet will he sift the Wheat.
2
But GOD can all his Power control,
And gather-in his Chain;
And, where he seems to triumph most,
The captive Soul regain.
3
There is a Shepherd kind and strong,
Still watchful for his Sheep;
Nor shall the infernal Lion rend,
Whom he vouchsafes to keep.
4
Blessed Jesus, intercede for us,
That we may fall no more;
O raise us, when we prostrate lie,
And Comfort lost restore.
5
Thy secret Energy impart,
That Faith may never fail;
But, 'midst whole Showers of fiery Darts,
That tempered Shield prevail.
6
Secured ourselves by Grace divine,
We'll guard our Brethren too;
And, taught their Frailties by our own,
Our Care of them renew.
CCXVII. CHRIST'S Prayer for his Enemies. Luke xxiii. 34.
1
A LOUD I sing the wondrous Grace,
Christ to his Murd'rers bare;
Which made the torturing Cross its Throne,
And hung its Trophics there.
2
Father, forgive, his Mercy cried
With his expiring Breath,
And drew eternal Blessings down
On those, who wrought his Death.
3
Then may I hope for Pardon too,
Though I have pierced the Lord;
Blessed Jesus, in my Favor speak
That all-prevailing Word.
4
I knew not what my Madness did,
While I remained thy Foe:
Soon as I saw the Wounds were Thine,
My Tears began to flow.
5
Melted by Goodness so divine,
I would its Footsteps trace;
And, while beneath thy Cross I stand,
My fiercest Foes embrace.
CCXVIII. The Resurrection of CHRIST. Luke xxiv. 34.
1
YES, the Redeemer rose;
The Savior left the Dead;
And over our hellish Foes
High raised his conquering Head:
In wild Dismay
The Guards around
Fell to the Ground,
And sunk away.
2
Lo, the angelick Bands
In full Assembly meet,
To wait his high Commands,
And worship at his Feet:
Joyful they come,
And wing their Way
From Realms of Day
To such a Tomb.
3
Then back to Heaven they fly,
And the glad Tidings bear:
Hark! as they soar on high
What Music fills the Air!
Their Anthems say,
" Jesus who bled
"Has left the Dead;
"He rose today".
4
Ye Mortals, catch the Sound,
Redeemed by him from Hell;
And send the Echo round
The Globe on which you dwell:
Transported cry,
" Jesus who bled
"Has left the Dead
"No more to die".
5
All-hail, triumphant Lord,
Who sav'st us with thy Blood!
Wide be thy Name adored,
Thou rising, reigning God!
With Thee we rise,
With Thee we reign,
And Empires gain
Beyond the Skies.
CCXIX. The Gospel first preached at Jerusalem. Luke xxiv.-47.
1
"GO, (says the Lord) proclaim my Grace
"To all the Sons of Adam's Race,
"Pardon for every crimson Sin,
"And at Jerusalem begin.
2
"There, where my Blood, not fully dry,
"Stands warm upon Mount Calvary;
"That Blood shall purge away their Guilt,
"By whom so lately it was spilt.
3
"Now let the daring Rebels turn,
"And over their bleeding Sovereign mourn;
"Their bleeding Sovereign shall forgive,
"And bid the Rebels look and live".
4
Is this thy Voice, All-gracious Lord?
And did the Rebels hear thy Word?
And did they fall beneath thy Feet,
And on their Knees Forgiveness meet?
5
Then may I hope for Mercy too;
Such Love can my hard Heart subdue,
And give this guilty Soul a Place
Among these Captives of thy Grace.
6
Here be it daily mine Employ
To bathe thy Wounds with Tears of Joy,
Till 'midst the new Jerusalem
In one full Choir we sing thy Name.
CCXX. GOD's Love to the World in sending CHRIST for its Redemption. John iii.
16.
1
SING to the LORD a new melodious Song:
Assist the Choir, ye Tribes of every Tongue:
Wide as the World his sovereign Mercy reigns;
Wide as the World resound the rapturous Strains.
Ye Angels, join the joyful Acclamation,
And sing the Love, that brings to Men Salvation.
2
His gracious Eye beheld in full Survey
Where Adam's Race in mingled Ruin lay:
No human Aid the Danger could avert:
No Angel's Hand could soothe the raging Smart:
In his own Breast divine Compassion rises,
And the grand scheme the court of Heaven surprises.
3
GOD's only Son with peerless unequalled.
Glories bright,
His Father's fairest Image and Delight,
Justice and Grace the Victim have decreed,
To wear our Flesh, and in that Flesh to bleed.
Prostrate in Dust, ye Sinners, all adore him,
And tremble, while your Hearts rejoice before him.
4
The wondrous work is done; the covenant stood,
And Jesus expiates human Guilt with Blood;
Nailed to the Tree he bows his sacred Head;
A mangled Corpse he sojourns with the Dead;
Rising, the Gospel sends through every Nation;
Sinners believe, and gain complete Salvation.
5
Father of Grace, accept our humble Praise;
O let it run through everlasting Days!
And Thou, Blessed Savior, spotless Lamb of GOD,
Accept the Souls dear-ransom'd with thy Blood;
And to those Songs, form all our feeble Voices,
In which the choir round thy bright throne rejoices.
CCXXI. The Spirit's Influences compared to living Water. John iv. 10.
1
BLESSED Jesus, Source of Grace divine;
What Soul-refreshing Streams are Thine!
O bring these healing Waters nigh,
Or we must droop, and fall, and die.
2
No Traveller through desert Lands,
'Midst scorching Suns, and burning Sands,
More eager longs for cooling Rain,
Or pants the Current to obtain.
3
Our longing Souls aloud would sing,
Spring up, celestial Fountain, spring;
To a redundant River slow,
And cheer this thirsty Land below.
4
May this blessed Torrent near my Side
Through all the Desert gently glide;
Then in Emanuel's Land above
Spread to a Sea of Joy and Love.
CCXXII. The Christian's secret Feast. John iv. 32.
1
WE praise the LORD for heavenly Bread,
With which immortal Souls are fed:
We praise Thee for that heavenly Feast,
Which Jesus with Delight could taste.
2
He, while he sojourned here below,
Had Meat, which Strangers could not know:
That Meat he to his People gives,
And he that tastes the Banquet lives.
3
So let me live, sustained by Grace,
Regaled with Fruits of Righteousness:
Enter my Heart, All-gracious LORD,
And sup with me, and deck thy Board.
4
Devotion, Faith, and zealous Love,
And Hope, that bears the Soul above,
Be these my Dainties, till I rise,
And taste the Joys of Paradise.
CCXXIII. The Paralytick at Bethesda. John v. 6.
1
BEHOLD the great Physician stands,
Whose Skill is ever sure;
And loud he calls to dying Men,
And free he offers Cure.
2
And will ye hear his gracious Voice,
While sore diseased ye lie?
Or will ye all his Grace despise,
And trifle till ye die?
3
Blessed Jesus, speak the healing Word,
And inward Vigor give;
Then raised by Energy divine
Shall helpless Mortals live.
4
With cheerful Pace our trembling Feet
In thy blessed Paths shall run,
Till Zion's healthful Hill they gain,
Where no Complaint is known.
CCXXIV. GOD's Purposes effectual, and CHRIST's Invitations sincere. John vi.
37.
1
IS there a Sight in Earth or Heaven
Can such Delight impart,
As Jesus' wide-extended Arms,
And softly-melting Heart?
2
"All that my heavenly Father gives
"Shall come (the Savior cries)
"And every weakest Soul, that comes,
"Find Favor in mine Eyes.
3
"I Will not reject him with Disdain,
"Nor hurl him down to Hell;
"But folded in my kind Embrace
"He safe and blessed shall dwell".
4
Hearken, ye dying Sinners all;
All hasten, while ye hear;
For Crowds of wretched Souls at once
May find their Refuge there.
5
I hear thy Voice, and I obey;
Low at thy Feet I fall;
Nor shall the Tempter's Voice prevail
Against the Savior's Call.
CCXXV. CHRIST's Invitation to thirsty Souls John vii. 37.
1
THE Lord of Life exalted stands,
Aloud he cries, and spreads his Hands:
He calls ten thousand Sinners round,
And sends a Voice from every Wound.
2
"Attend, ye thirsty Souls, draw near,
"And satiate all your Wishes here:
"Behold the living Fountain flows
"In Streams as various as your Woes.
3
"An ample Pardon here I give,
"And bid the sentenced Rebel live,
Show him my Father's smiling Face,
And lodge him in his dear Embrace.
4
I purge from Sin's detested Stain,
And make the Crimson white again,
Lead to celestial Joys refined,
And lasting as the deathless Mind.
5
Must I anew my Pity prove?
Witness the Words of melting Love,
The gushing Tear, the laboring Breath,
And all these Scars of bleeding Death".
6
Blessed Savior, I can doubt no more;
I hear, and wonder, and adore:
Panting I seek that Fountainhead,
Whence Waters so divine proceed.
7
Clear Spring of Life, flow on, and roll
With growing Swell from Pole to Pole,
Till Flowers and Fruits of Paradise
Round all the winding Current rise.
8
Still near thy Stream may I be found,
Long as I tread this earthly Ground;
Cheer with thy Wave Death's gloomy Shade,
Then through the Fields of Canaan spread.
CCXXVI. True Liberty given by CHRIST. John viii. 36.
1
HArk! for it is GOD's own Son that calls
To Life and Liberty;
Transported fall before his Feet,
Who makes the Prisoners free.
2
The cursed Bonds of Sin he breaks,
And breaks old Satan's Chain:
Smiling he deals those Pardons round,
Which free from endless Pain.
3
Into the captive Heart he pours
His Spirit from on high;
We lose the Terrors of the Slave,
And Abba, Father, cry.
4
Shake off your Bonds, and sing his Grace;
The Sinner's Friend proclaim;
And call on all around to seek
True Freedom by his Name.
5
Walk on at large, till you attain
Your Father's House above;
There shall you wear immortal Crowns,
And sing redeeming Love.
CCXXVII. The same. John viii. 36.
1
AND shall we still be Slaves,
And in our Fetters lie,
When summoned by a Voice divine
TO assert our Liberty?
2
Did the great Savior bleed
Our Freedom to obtain,
That we should trample on his Blood,
And glory in our Chain?
3
Alas, the sordid Mind!
How all its Powers are broke!
Proud of a Tyrant's haughty Sway,
And practiced to the Yoke!
4
Divine Redeemer, hear,
Thy sovereign Power impart,
And let thy generous Spirit wake
True Ardour in our Heart.
5
Then shall the Sons of Death,
That in the Dungeon lie,
Spring to the Throne of pard'ning Grace,
And Abba, Father, cry.
CCXXVIII. CHRIST the Door. John x. 9.
1
AWAKE our Souls, and bless his Name,
Whose Mercies never fail;
Who opens wide a Door of Hope
In Achor's gloomy Vale Hosea ii. 15.
.
2
Behold the Portal wide displayed,
The Buildings strong and fair;
Within are Pastures fresh and green,
And living Streams are there.
3
Enter, my Soul, with cheerful Haste,
For Jesus is the Door;
Nor fear the Serpent's wily Arts,
Nor fear the Lion's Roar.
4
O may thy Grace the Nations lead,
And Jews and Gentiles come,
All trav'ling through one beauteous Gate
To one eternal Home.
CCXXIX. Abundant Life by CHRIST our Shepherd. John x. -10.
1
PRaise to our Shepherd's gracious Name,
Who on so kind an Errand came;
Came, that by him his Flock might live,
And more abundant Life receive.
2
Hail great Emanuel from above,
High seated on thy Throne of Love!
O pour the vital Torrent down,
Thy People's Joy, their Lord's Renown.
3
Scarce half alive we sigh and cry;
Scarce raise to Thee our languid Eye;
Kind Savior, let our dying State
Compassion in thy Heart create.
4
The Shepherd's Blood the Sheep must heal;
O may we all its Influence feel;
Till inward deep Experience show,
Christ can begin a Heaven below.
CCXXX. CHRIST's Sheep described. John x. 27.
1
THY Flock, with what a tender Care,
Blessed Jesus, do thou keep?
Fain would my weak, my wandering Soul
Be numbered with thy Sheep.
2
Gentle and tractable and plain
My Heart would ever be,
Averse to harm, propense to help,
And faithful still to Thee.
3
The gentle Accents of thy Voice
My listening Soul would hear;
And, by the Signals of thy Will,
I all my Course would steer.
4
I follow where my Shepherd leads,
And mark the Path he drew;
My Shepherd's Feet Mount Zion tread,
And I shall reach it too.
CCXXXI. The Happiness and Security of CHRIST'S Sheep. John x. 28.
1
MY Soul, with Joy attend
While Jesus Silence breaks;
No Angel's Harp such Music yields,
As what my Shepherd speaks.
2
"I know my Sheep, (he cries)
"My Soul approves them well:
"Vain is the treacherous World's Disguise,
"And vain the Rage of Hell.
3
"I freely feed them now
"With Tokens of my Love,
"But richer Pastures I prepare,
"And sweeter Streams above.
4
"Unnumber'd Years of Bliss
"I to my Sheep will give;
"And, while my Throne unshaken stands,
"Shall all my Chosen live.
5
"This tried almighty Hand
"Is raised for their Defense:
"Where is the Power shall reach them there?
"Or what shall force them thence"?
6
Enough, my Gracious Lord,
Let Faith triumphant cry;
My Heart can on this Promise live,
Can on this Promise die.
CCXXXII. CHRIST's Sheep given by the Father, and guarded by Omnipotence. John
x. 29, 30.
1
IN one harmonious cheerful Song,
Ye happy Saints, combine;
Loud let it sound from every Tongue,
The Savior is divine.
2
The least, the feeblest of the Sheep
To him the Father gave;
Kind is his Heart the Charge to keep,
And strong his Arm to save.
3
In Christ the Almighty Father dwells,
And Christ and he are One;
That Rebel-Pow'r, which Christ assails,
Attacks the eternal Throne.
4
That Hand, which Heaven and Earth sustains,
And bars the Gates of Hell,
And rivets Satan down in Chains,
Shall guard his Chosen well.
5
Now let the infernal Lion roar,
How vain his Threats appear!
When he can match Jehovah's Power,
I will begin to fear.
CCXXXIII. The attractive Influence of a crucified Savior. John xii. 32.
1
BEHOLD the amazing Sight,
The Savior lifted high!
Behold the Son of GOD'S Delight
Expire in Agony!
2
For whom, for whom, my Heart,
Were all these Sorrows borne?
Why did he feel that piercing Smart,
And meet that various Scorn?
3
For Love of us he bled,
And all in Torture died:
'Twas Love, that bowed his fainting Head,
And opened his gushing Side.
4
I see, and I adore
In Sympathy of Love:
I feel the strong attractive Power
To lift my Soul above.
5
Drawn by such Cords as these,
Let all the Earth combine
With cheerful Ardour to confess
The Energy divine.
6
In Thee our Hearts unite,
Nor share thy Griefs alone,
But from thy Cross pursue their Flight
To thy triumphant Throne.
CCXXXIV. CHRIST'S mysterious Conduct to be unfolded hereafter. John xiii. 7.
1
JESUS, we own thy sovereign Hand,
Thy faithful Care we own;
Wisdom and Love are all thy Ways,
When most to us unknown.
2
By Thee the Springs of Life were formed,
And by thy Breath are broke,
And good is every awful Word,
Our gracious Lord has spoke.
3
To Thee we yield our Comforts up,
To Thee our Lives resign;
In Straits and Dangers rich and safe,
If we and ours are Thine.
4
Thy Saints in earlier Life removed
In sweeter Accents sing;
And bless the Swiftness of their Flight,
That bore them to their King.
5
The Burdens of a lengthened Day
With Patience we would bear;
Till Ev'ning's welcome Hour shall show,
We were our Master's Care.
CCXXXV. CHRIST'S Pity and Consolation for his troubled Disciples. John xiv.
1-3.
1
PEACE, all ye Sorrows of the Heart,
And all my Tears be dry;
That Christian never can be forlorn,
That views his Jesus nigh.
2
"Let not your Bosoms throb, (he says)
"Nor be your Souls afraid:
"Trust in your GOD'S almighty Name,
"And trust your Savior's Aid.
3
"Fair Mansions in my Father's House
"For all his Children wait;
"And I, your elder Brother, go
"To open wide the Gate.
4
"And if I thither go before
"A Dwelling to prepare,
"I surely shall return again,
"That I may fix you there.
5
"United in eternal Love,
"My Chosen shall remain,
"And with rejoicing Hearts shall share
"The Honors of my Reign".
6
Yes, Lord; thy gracious Words we hear,
And cordial Joys they bring:
Frail Nature may extort a Groan,
But Faith shall learn to sing.
CCXXXVI. The Christian's Life connected with that of CHRIST. John xiv. -19.
1
THE Covenant of a Savior's Love
Shall stand for ever good,
And thus his Life shall guard the Souls,
He purchased with his Blood.
2
"I live for ever, (says the Lord)
"And you shall therefore live;
"Receive with Pleasure every Pledge
"My Power and Love can give".
3
We own the Promise, Prince of Grace,
Though earthly Helpers die;
And animate our fainting Hearts,
While Christ our Friend is nigh.
4
The King of Fears can do no more
Than stop our mortal Breath;
But Jesus gives a nobler Life,
That cannot yield to Death.
CCXXXVII. Abiding in CHRIST necessary to our Fruitfulness. John xv. 4.
1
LORD of the Vineyard, we adore
That Power and Grace divine,
Which plants our wild, our barren Souls
In Christ the living Vine.
2
For ever may they there abide,
And from that vital Root
Be Influence spread through every Branch
To form and feed the Fruit.
3
Shine forth, my GOD, the Clusters warm
With Rays of sacred Love;
Till Eden's Soil, and Zion's Streams
The generous Plant improve.
CCXXXVIII. Our Prayers effectual, when we abide in CHRIST, and his Word
abides in us. John xv. 8.
1
HALL; gracious Savior, All-divine!
Mysterious, ever-living Vine!
To Thee united may we live,
And nourished by thine Influence thrive.
2
Still may our Souls in Thee abide,
Torn by no Tempests from thy Side;
Nor from its Place within our Heart
Thy Promise, or thy Law depart.
3
Then shall our Prayers accepted rise,
Through Thee a grateful Sacrifice;
And all our Sighs before thy Throne
Descend in ample Blessings down.
4
In silent Hope our Souls shall wait
Their Pension from thy Mercy's Gate;
Nor can our Lips or Hearts express
A Wish proportioned to thy Grace.
CCXXXIX. Continuing in CHRIST'S Love. John XV. 9.
1
TO all his Flock, what wondrous Love
Does our kind Shepherd bear?
As he to his great Father's Heart,
So we to his are dear.
2
So sure, so constant, and so strong
Do his Endearments prove:
O may their Energy prevail
To fix us in his Love.
3
No more let my divided Heart
From this blessed Center turn;
But, fired by such all-potent Rays,
With Flames immortal burn.
4
Descend, and all thy Power display,
And all thy Love reveal;
That the warm Streams of Jesus' Blood
This frozen Heart may feel.
CCXL. The Apostles and Christians chosen by CHRIST to bring forth permanent
Fruit. John xv. 16.
1
I Own, my GOD, thy sovereign Grace,
And bring the Praise to Thee;
If Thou my chosen Portion art,
Thou first have chosen me.
2
My gracious Counselor and Guide
Will hear me when I pray;
Nor, while I urge a Savior's Name,
Will frown my Soul away.
3
Blessed Jesus, animate my Heart
With Beams of heavenly Love,
And teach that cold unthankful Soil
The heavenly Seed to improve.
4
In copious Showers thy Spirit send
To water all the Ground;
So to the Honor of thy Name
Shall lasting Fruit be found.
CCXLI. Peace in CHRIST amidst Tribulations. John xvi. 33.
1
HEnceforth let each believing Heart
From anxious Sorrows cease:
Though Storms of Trouble rage around,
In Jesus we have Peace.
2
His Blood from Wrath to come redeems,
And his almighty Grace,
By bitt'rest Draughts of deep Distress,
Its healing Power displays.
3
Jesus, our Captain, marched before
To lead us to the Fight;
And now he reaches out the Crown
With heavenly Glories bright.
4
Lord, it is enough; thy Voice we hear;
That Crown by Faith we see:
No Sorrows shall overwhelm our Souls,
Since none divide from Thee.
CCXLII. CHRIST sanctifying himself, that his People may be sanctified. John
xvii. 19.
1
BEHOLD the bleeding Lamb of GOD,
Our spotless Sacrifice!
By Hands of barbarous Sinners seized,
Nailed to the Cross he dies.
2
Blessed Jesus, whence this streaming Blood,
And whence this foul Disgrace?
Whence all these pointed Thorns, that rend
Thy venerable Face?
3
"I sanctify myself (he cries)
"That thou may holy be;
"Come, trace my Life; come, view my Death,
"And learn to copy Me".
4
Dear Lord, we pant for Holiness,
And inbred Sin we mourn:
To the bright Path of thy Commands
Our wandering Footsteps turn.
5
Not more sincerely would we wish
To climb the heavenly Hill,
Than here with all our utmost Power
Thy Model to fulfill.
CCXLIII. Meditations on the Sepulcher in the Garden. John xix. 41.
1
THE Sepulchers, how thick they stand
Through all the Road on either Hand!
And burst upon the startling Sight
In every Garden of Delight!
2
Thither the winding Alleys tend;
There all the flowery Borders end;
And Forms, that charmed the Eyes before,
Fragrance and Music are no more.
3
Deep in that damp and silent Cell
My Fathers, and my Brethren dwell;
Beneath its broad and gloomy Shade
My Kindred, and my Friends are laid.
4
But, while I tread the solemn Way,
My Faith that Savior would survey,
Who deigned to sojourn in the Tomb,
And left behind a rich Perfume.
5
My Thoughts with Extacy unknown,
While from his Grave they view his Throne,
Through mine own Sepulcher can see
A Paradise reserved for me.
CCXLIV. CHRIST ascending to his Father and GOD, and ours. John xx. 17.
1
IN Raptures let our Hearts ascend
Our heavenly Seats to view,
And grateful trace that shining Path,
Our rising Savior drew.
2
"Up to my Father, and my GOD,
"I go; (the Conqu'ror cries)
"Up to your Father, and your GOD,
"My Brethren, lift your Eyes".
3
And does the Lord of Glory call
Such Worms his Brethren dear?
And does he point to Heaven's high Throne,
And show our Father there?
4
And does he teach my sinful Lips
That tuneful Sound, my GOD?
And breathe his Spirit on my Heart
To shed his Grace abroad?
5
O World, produce a Good like this,
And thou shall have my Love;
Till then, my Father claims it all,
And Christ, who dwells above.
6
Dear Jesus, call this willing Soul,
That struggles with its Clay;
And fain would leave this weary Load
To wing its airy Way.
CCXLV. The Disciples Joy at CHRIST'S Appearance to them after his
Resurrection. John xx. 19, 20.
1
COME, our indulgent Savior, come,
Illustrious Conqu'ror over the Tomb:
Here thine assembled Servants bless,
And fill our Hearts with sacred Peace.
2
O come Thy-self, most gracious Lord,
With all the Joy thy Smiles afford;
Reveal the Luster of thy Face,
And make us feel thy vital Grace.
3
With Rapture kneeling round we greet
Thy pierced Hands, thy wounded Feet;
And from the Scar, that marks thy Side,
We see our Life's warm Torrent glide.
4
Enter our Hearts, Redeemer blessed;
Enter, thou ever-honour'd Guest,
Not for one transient Hour alone,
But there to fix thy lasting Throne.
5
Own this mean Dwelling as Thine own;
And; when our Life's last Hour is come,
Let us but die, as in thy Sight,
And Death shall vanish in Delight.
CCXLVI. Appeal to CHRIST for the Sincerity of Love to him. John xxi. 15.
1
DO not I love Thee, O my Lord?
Behold my Heart and see;
And turn each cursed Idol out,
That dures to rival Thee.
2
Do not I love Thee from my Soul?
Then let me Nothing love:
Dead be my Heart to every Joy,
When Jesus cannot move.
3
Is not thy Name melodious still
To mine attentive Ear?
Does not each Pulse with Pleasure bound
My Savior's Voice to hear?
4
Have Thou a Lamb in all thy Flock,
I would disdain to feed?
Have Thou a Foe, before whose Face
I fear thy Cause to plead?
5
Would not mine ardent Spirit vie endeavor to equal.

With Ange's round the Throne,
To execute thy sacred Will,
And make thy Glory known?
6
Would not my Heart pour forth its Blood
In Honor of thy Name?
And challenge the cold Hand of Death
To damp the immortal Flame?
7
Thou know I love Thee, Dearest Lord:
But O! I long to soar
Far from the Sphere of mortal Joys,
And learn to love Thee more.
CCXLVII. Zeal for the Cause of CHRIST; or Peter and John following their
Master. John xxi. 18-20 See Family Expositor in Loc.
.
1
Blessed Men, who stretch their willing Hands,
Submissive to their Lord's Commands,
And yield their Liberty and Breath
To him, that loved their Souls in Death!
2
Lead me to suffer, and to die,
If Thou, my gracious Lord, art nigh:
One Smile from Thee my Heart shall fire,
And teach me smiling to expire.
3
If Nature at the Trial shake,
And from the Cross or Flames draw back,
Grace can its seeble Courage raise,
And turn its Tremblings into Praise.
4
While scarce I dare, with Peter, say,
"I Will boldly tread the bleeding Way",
Yet in thy Steps, like John, I Would move
With humble Hope, and silent Love.
CCXLVIII. CHRIST exalted to be a Prince and a Savior. Acts v. 31.
1
EXALTED Prince of Life, we own
The royal Honors of thy Throne:
It Is fixed by GOD's Almighty Hand,
And Seraphs bow at thy Command.
2
Exalted Savior, we confess
The sovereign Triumphs of thy Grace;
Where Beams of gentle Radiance shine,
And temper Majesty divine.
3
Wide thy resistless Scepter sway,
Till all thine Enemies obey:
Wide may thy Cross its Virtue prove,
And conquer Millions by its Love.
4
Mighty to vanquish, and forgive!
Thine Israel shall repent and live,
And loud proclaim thy healing Breath,
Which works their Life, who wrought thy Death.
CCXLIX. The Believer committing his departing Spirit to JESUS. Acts vii. 59.
1
O Thou, that have Redemption wrought,
Patron of Souls, thy Blood has bought,
To Thee our Spirits we commit,
Mighty to rescue from the Pit.
2
Millions of blissful Souls above,
In Realms of Purity and Love,
With Songs of endless Praise proclaim
The Honors of thy faithful Name.
3
When all the Powers of Nature failed,
Thine ever-constant Care prevailed;
Courage and Joy thy Friendship spoke,
When every mortal Bond was broke.
4
We on that Friendship, Lord, repose,
The healing Balm of all our Woes;
And we, when sinking in the Grave,
Trust thine Omnipotence to save.
5
O may our Spirits by thy Hand
Be gathered to that happy Band,
Who, 'midst the Blessings of thy Reign,
Lose all Remembrance of their Pain.
6
In Raptures there divinely sweet
Give us our Kindred-Souls to meet,
And wait with them that brighter Day,
Which all thy Triumph shall display.
CCL. PETER's Admonition to SIMON MAGUS. Acts viii. 21-24.
1
SEARCHER of Hearts, before thy Face
I all my Soul display;
And conscious of its innate natural.
Arts
Entreat thy strict Survey.
2
If lurking in its inmost Folds
I any Sin conceal,
O let a Ray of Light divine
The secret Guile reveal.
3
If tinctured with that odious Gall
Unknowing I remain,
Let Grace, like a pure silver Stream,
Wash out the accursed Stain.
4
If in these fatal Fetters bound
A wretched Slave I lie,
Smite off my Chains, and wake my Soul
To Light and Liberty.
5
To humble Penitence and Prayer
Be gentle Pity given,
Speak ample Pardon to my Heart,
And seal its Claim to Heaven.
CCLI. The Descent of the Spirit, or his Influences desired. Acts x. 44.
1
GREAT Father of each perfect Gift,
Behold thy Servants wait;
With longing Eyes, and lifted Hands
We flock around thy Gate.
2
O shed abroad that royal Gift,
Thy Spirit from above,
To bless our Eyes with sacred Light,
And fire our Hearts with Love.
3
With speedy Flight may he descend,
And solid Comsort bring,
And over our languid Souls extend
His all-reviving Wing.
4
Blessed Earnest of eternal Joy,
Declare our Sins forgiven;
And bear with Energy divine
Our raptured Thoughts to Heaven.
5
Diffuse, O GOD, these copious Showers,
That Earth its Fruit may yield,
And change this barren Wilderness
To Carmel's flowery Field Isaiah xxxv. 1. 2.
.
CCLII. The Word of Salvation sent to us. Acts xiii. 26.
1
AND why do our admiring Eyes
These Gospel-Glories see?
And whence, does every Heart reply,
Salvation sent to me?
2
In fatal Shades of Midnight Gloom
Ten thousand Wretches stray;
And Satan blinds ten thousand more
Amidst the Blaze of Day.
3
Millions of raging Souls beneath
In endless Anguish hear
Harmonious Sounds of Grace transformed
To Ecchos of Despair.
4
And do Thou, LORD, subdue my Heart,
And show my Sins forgiven,
And bear thy Witness to my Part
Amongst the Heirs of Heaven?
5
As the Redeemed of the LORD,
We sing the Savior's Name;
And, while the long Salvation lasts,
Its sovereign Grace proclaim.
CCLIII. The Unknown GOD. Acts xvii. 23.
1
THOU, mighty LORD, art GOD alone,
A King of Majesty unknown;
And all thy dazzling Glories rise
Beyond the Reach of Angels Eyes.
2
Yet through this Earth thy Works proclaim
Some Notice of thy reverend Name;
And, where thy gracious Gospel shines,
We read it in the fairest Lines.
3
But O! how few of Adam's Race
Have learned thy Nature and thy Ways!
While thousands, even in Lands of Light,
Are buried in Egyptian Night.
4
They tread thy Courts, thy Word they hear,
And to thy solemn Rites draw near;
Yet, though Salvation seems so nigh,
Because they know not GOD, they die.
5
Send thy victorious Gospel forth
Wide from these Regions of the North;
And through thy Churches Grace impart
To write thy Name on every Heart.
CCLIV. GOD's Command to all Men to repent. Acts xvii. 30.
1
REPENT, the Voice celestial cries,
Nor longer dare delay:
The Wretch that scorns the Mandate Command.
dies,
And meets a fiery Day.
2
No more the sovereign Eye of GOD
O'erlooks the Crimes of Men;
His Heralds are dispatched abroad
To warn the World of Sin.
3
The Summons reach through all the Earth;
Let Earth attend and fear:
Listen, ye Men of royal Birth,
And let their Vassals Subjects and Slaves.
hear.
4
Together in his Presence bow,
And all your Guilt confess;
Accept the offered Savior now,
Nor trifle with the Grace.
5
Bow, ever the awful Trumpet sound,
And call you to his Bar;
For Mercy knows the appointed Bound,
And turns to Vengeance there.
6
Amazing Love, that yet will call,
And yet prolong our Days!
Our Hearts subdued by Goodness fall,
And weep, and love, and praise.
CCLV. Paul's Solicitude to finish his Course with Joy. Acts xx. 24.
1
ASSIST us, LORD, thy Name to praise
For this rich Gospel of thy Grace;
And, that our Hearts may love it more,
Teach them to feel its vital Power.
2
With Joy may we our Course pursue,
And keep the Crown of Life in View;
That Crown, which in one Hour repays
The Labor of ten thousand Days.
3
Should Bonds or Death obstruct our Way,
Unmoved their Terrors we'll survey;
And the last Hour improve for Thee,
The last of Life, or Liberty.
4
Welcome those Bonds, which may unite
Our Souls to their supreme Delight!
Welcome that Death, whose painful Strife
Bears us to Christ our better Life.
CCLVI. Paul preaching and Felix trembling. Acts xxiv. 25.
1
GREAT Sovereign of the human Heart,
Thy mighty Energy impart,
Which darts at once through Breasts of Steel,
And makes the nether Millstone the hardest Hearts, Job xli. 24.
feel.
2
Let Sinners tremble at thy Word,
Struck by the Terrors of the LORD;
And, while they tremble, let them flee,
And seek their Help, their Life from Thee.
3
O let them seize the present Day,
Nor risk Salvation by Delay:
Tomorrow, LORD, to Thee belongs;
This Night may vindicate thy Wrongs.
4
This Night may stop their fleeting Breath,
And seal them to eternal Death,
May veil Redemption from their Sight,
And give them Flames instead of Light.
5
Or should succeeding Years remain,
Years, with their Sabbaths, all in vain
Before their darkened Eyes may roll,
And more obdurate leave the Soul.
6
Great Savior, let thy Pity rise,
And make the wretched Triflers wise;
Lest Pangs and Tremblings felt in vain
Hasten and feed immortal Pain.
CCLVII. Help obtained of GOD. Acts xxvi. 22-.
For New-Year's-Day.
1
GREAT GOD, we sing that mighty Hand,
By which supported still we stand:
The opening Year thy Mercy shows;
That Mercy crowns it, till it close.
2
By Day, by Night, at Home, Abroad,
Still are we guarded by our GOD,
By his incessant Bounty fed,
By his unerring Counsel led.
3
With grateful Hearts the Past we own;
The Future, all to us unknown,
We to thy guardian Care commit,
And peaceful leave before thy Feet.
4
In Scenes exalted or depressed
Thou art our Joy, and Thou our Rest:
Thy Goodness all our Hopes shall raise,
Adored through all our changing Days.
5
When Death shall interrupt these Songs,
And seal in Silence mortal Tongues,
Our Helper GOD, in whom we trust,
In better Worlds our Souls shall boast.
CCLVIII. Treasuring up Wrath by despising Mercy. Romans ii. 4, 5.
1
UNgrateful Sinners, whence this Scorn
Of long-extended Grace?
And whence this Madness, that insults
The Almighty to his Face?
2
Is it because his Patience waits,
And pitying Bowels move,
You multiply audacious Crimes,
And spurn his richest Love?
3
Is all the treasured Wrath so small,
You labor still for more,
Though not eternal rolling Years
Can ever exhaust the Store?
4
Swift does the Day of Vengeance come,
That must your Sentence seal;
And righteous Judgment now unknown
In all its Pomp reveal.
5
Alarmed and melted at thy Voice,
Our conquered Hearts would bow;
And, to escape the Thund'rer then,
Embrace the Savior now.
CCLIX. The Love of GOD shed abroad in the Heart by the Spirit. Romans v. 5.
1
DESCEND, immortal Dove;
Spread thy kind Wings abroad,
And, wrapped in Flames of holy Love,
Bear all my Soul to GOD.
2
Jesus my Lord reveal
In Charms of Grace divine,
And be thyself the sacred Seal,
That Pearl of Price is mine.
3
Behold my Heart expands
To catch the heavenly Fire;
It longs to feel the gentle Bands,
And groans with strong Desire.
4
Thy Love, my GOD, appears,
And brings Salvation down,
My Cordial through this Vale of Tears,
In Paradise my Crown.
CCLX. Christians quickened and raised by the Spirit. Romans viii. 11.
1
WHY should our mourning Thoughts [delight
To grovel in the Dust?
Or why should Streams of Tears unite
Around the expiring Just?
2
Did not the Lord our Savior die,
And triumph over the Grave?
Did not our Lord ascend on high,
And prove his Power to save?
3
Does not the sacred Spirit come,
And dwell in all the Saints?
And should the Temples of his Grace
Resound with long Complaints?
4
Awake, my Soul, and like the Sun
Burst through each sable Cloud;
And thou, my Voice, though broke with Sighs,
Tune forth thy Songs aloud.
5
The Spirit raised my Savior up,
When he had bled for me;
And spite of Death and Hell shall raise
Thy pious Friends and thee.
6
Awake, ye Saints, that dwell in Dust,
Your Hymns of Victory sing;
And let his dying Servants trust
Their ever-living King.
CCLXI. GOD's Readiness to give all Things argued from the Gift of his Son.
Romans viii. 32.
1
NOW let my Soul with Transport rise,
And range through Earth, and mount the skies,
And view each various Form of Good,
Where Angels hold their high Abode.
2
I give my Thoughts unbounded Scope;
On equal Pinions soars my Hope;
My Faith at noblest Objects aims,
And what she sees, she humbly claims.
3
Has not the bounteous King of Heaven
From his Embrace already given
That Son of his eternal Love,
Who filled the brightest Throne above?
4
Behold his Hand on Jesus laid!
Behold that Lamb a Victim made!
And what shall Mercy hold too good
For Sinners, ransomed with his Blood?
5
My Soul, with heavenly Faith embrace
The sacred Covenant of his Grace;
Then in delightful Silence wait
The Issues of a Love so great.
CCLXII. Believing with the Heart, and confessing with the Mouth, necessary to
Salvation. Romans x. 6-10.
1
AND is Salvation brought so near,
Where sinful Men expiring lie?
Triumph, my Soul, the Sound to hear,
And shout it joyous to the Sky.
2
I ask not, who to Heaven shall scale,
That Christ the Savior thence may come;
Or who Earth's inmost Depths assail
To bring him from the dreary Tomb.
3
From Heaven on Wings of Love he flew,
And Conqu'ror from the Tomb he sprung:
My Heart believes the Witness true,
And dictates to my faithful Tongue.
4
I sing Salvation brought so near,
No more on Earth expiring lie;
I teach the World my Joys to hear,
And shout them to the ecchoing Sky.
CCLXIII. The living Sacrifice. Romans xii. 1.
1
AND will the eternal King
So mean a Gift regard?
That Offering, LORD, with Joy we bring,
Which thine own Hand prepared.
2
We own thy various Claim,
And to thine Altar move,
The willing Victims of thy Grace,
And bound with Cords of Love.
3
Descend, celestial Fire,
The Sacrifice inflame;
So shall a grateful Odor rise
Through our Redeemer's Name.
CCLXIV. The near Approach of Salvation, an Engagement to Diligence and Love.
Romans xiii. 11.
1
AWake, ye Saints, and raise your Eyes,
And raise your Voices high;
Awake, and praise that sovereign Love,
That shows Salvation nigh.
2
On all the Wings of Time it flies;
Each Moment brings it near;
Then welcome each declining Day!
Welcome each closing Year!
3
Not many Years their Round shall run,
Nor many Mornings rise,
Ever all its Glories stand revealed
To our admiring Eyes.
4
Ye Wheels of Nature, speed your Course;
Ye mortal Powers, decay;
Fast as ye bring the Night of Death,
Ye bring eternal Day.
CCLXV. The GOD of Peace bruising Satan. Romans xvi. 20-.
1
YE Armies of the living GOD,
In his all-conqu'ring Name,
Lift up your Banners, and aloud
Your Leader's Grace proclaim.
2
What though the Prince of Hell invade
With Showers of fiery Darts,
And join, to the fierce Lion's Roar,
The Serpent's wily Arts?
3
Jesus, who leads his Hosts to War,
Shall tread the Monster down,
And every faithful Soldier share
The Triumph and the Crown.
4
So Israel on the haughty Necks
Of Canaan's Tyrants trod,
And sung their Joshua's conquering Sword,
And sung their faithful GOD Joshua x. 24.
.
CCLXVI. CHRIST our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Corinthians. i. 30, 31.
1
MY GOD, assist me, while I raise
An Anthem of harmonious Praise;
My Heart thy Wonders shall proclaim,
And spread its Banners in thy Name.
2
In Christ I view a Store divine:
My Father, all that Store is Thine;
By Thee prepared, by Thee bestowed;
Hail to the Savior, and the GOD!
3
When gloomy Shades my Soul o'er-spread,
"Let there be Light" the Almighty said;
And Christ, my Sun, his Beams displays,
And scatters round celestial Rays.
4
Condemned thy Criminal I stood,
And awful Justice asked my Blood;
That welcome Savior from thy Throne
Brought Righteousness and Pardon down.
5
My Soul was all o'er-spread with Sin,
And lo! his Grace has made me clean:
He rescues from the infernal Foe,
And full Redemption will bestow.
6
Ye Saints, assist my grateful Tongue:
Ye Angels, warble back my Song:
For Love like this demands the Praise
Of heavenly Harps, and endless Days.
CCLXVII. Being joined to CHRIST, and one Spirit with him. 1. Cor. vi. 17.
1
MY Savior, I am Thine
By everlasting Bands;
My Name, my Heart I would resign,
My Soul is in thy Hands.
2
To Thee I still would cleave
With ever-growing Zeal;
Let Millions tempt me Christ to leave,
They never shall prevail.
3
His Spirit shall unite
My Soul to him, my Head;
Shall from me to his Image bright,
And teach his Path to tread.
4
Death may my Soul divide
From this Abode of Clay;
But Love shall keep me near his Side
Through all the gloomy Way.
5
Since Christ and we are One,
What should remain to fear?
If he in Heaven has fixed his Throne,
He Will fix his Members there.
CCLXVIII. The transitory Nature of the World, an Argument for christian
Moderation. 1 Cor. vii. 29, 30, 31.
1
SPRING up, my Soul, with ardent Flight,
Nor let this Earth delude thy Sight
With glittering Trifles gay and vain:
Wisdom divine directs thy View
To Objects ever grand and new,
And Faith displays the shining Train.
2
Be dead, my Hopes, to all below;
Nor let unbounded Torrents flow,
When mourning over my withered Joys:
So this deceitful World is known;
Possessed I call it not mine own,
Nor glory in its painted Toys.
3
The empty Pageant rolls along;
The giddy unexperienced Throng
Pursue it with enchanted Eyes;
It passes in swift March away,
Still more and more its Charms decay,
Till the last gaudy Color dies Pageants, Images, or emblematical Figures in a
Cavalcade or Procession, continually moving, and quickly gone out of Sight. See
Family Expositor in Loc.
.
4
My GOD, to Thee my Soul shall turn;
For Thee my noblest Passions burn,
And drink in Bliss from Thee alone:
I fix on that unchanging Home,
Where never-fading Pleasures bloom,
Fresh springing round thy radiant Throne.
CCLXIX. GOD's Fidelity in moderating Temptations. 1 Cor. x. 13.
1
NOW let the Feeble all be strong,
And make Jehovah's Arm their Song:
His Shield is spread over every Saint,
And thus supported, who shall faint?
2
What though the Hosts of Hell engage
With mingled Cruelty and Rage?
A faithful GOD restrains their Hands,
And chains them down in Iron Bands.
3
Bound by his Word he will display
A Strength proportioned to our Day;
And, when united Trials meet,
Will show a Path of safe Retreat.
4
Thus far we prove that Promise good,
Which Jesus ratified with Blood:
Still is He gracious, wise, and just,
And still in him let Israel trust.
CCLXX. Bearing the Image of the earthy and the heavenly Adam. 1 Cor. xv. 49.
1
WITH flowing Eyes and bleeding Hearts
A blasted World survey!
See the wide Ruin Sin has wrought
In one unhappy Day!
2
Adam, in GOD's own Image formed,
From GOD and Bliss estranged,
And all the Joys of Paradise
For Guilt and Horror changed!
3
Ages of Labor and of Grief
He mourned his Glory lost;
At length the goodliest Work of Heaven
Sunk down to common Dust.
4
O fatal Heritage bequeathed
To all his helpless Race!
Through the thick Maze of Sin and Woe
Thus to the Grave we pass.
5
But, O my Soul, with Rapture hear
The second Adam's Name;
And the celestial Gifts, he brings
To all his Seed, proclaim.
6
In Holiness and Joy complete
He reigns to endless Years,
And each adopted chosen Child
His splendid Image wears.
7
What though in mortal Life they mourn?
What though by Death they fall?
Jesus in one triumphant Day
Transforms and crowns them all.
8
Praise to his rich mysterious Grace!
Even by our Fall we rise;
And gain, for earthly Eden lost,
A heavenly Paradise.
CCLXXI. Ministers comforted, that they may comfort others. 2 Cor. i. 4.
1
FOUNTAIN of Comfort and of Love,
Thy Streams, how free they flow!
First water all the World above,
Then visit us below!
2
From Christ, the Head, what Grace descends
To cherish every Part!
He shares his Joys with all his Friends,
For all have shared his Heart.
3
What though the Sorrows here they feel
Are manifold and great?
He brings new Consolations still,
As various, and as sweet.
4
He shows our numerous Sins forgiven,
And shows our Cov'nant-GOD;
He witnesses our Right to Heaven,
The Purchase of his Blood.
5
Though Earth and Hell against us join,
In Him we are secure;
Our Diadems shall brighter shine
For all we now endure.
6
On every faithful Shepherd's Breast,
LORD, send these Comforts down;
That they may lead thy Flock to Rest,
Which their own Souls have known.
CCLXXII. GOD's delivering Goodness acknowledged, and trusted. 2 Cor. i. 10.
A Song for the 5th of November.
1
PRAISE to the LORD, whose mighty Hand
So often revealed has saved our Land;
And, when united Nations rose,
Has shamed and scourged our haughtiest Foes.
2
When mighty Navies from afar
To Britain wasted floating War,
His Breath dispersed them all with Ease,
And sunk their Terror in the Seas referring to the Defeat of the Spanish
Armada, 1588.
.
3
While for our Princes they prepare
In Caverns deep a burning Snare;
He shot from Heaven a piercing Ray,
And the dark Treach'ry brought to Day Gun-powder-Plot.
.
4
Princes and Priests again combine
New Chains to forge, new Snares to twine;
Again our gracious GOD appears,
And breaks their Chains, and cuts their Snares.
5
Obedient Winds at his Command
Convey his Hero to our Land;
The Sons of Rome with Terror view,
And speed their Flight, when none pursue Revolution by King William 1688.
.
6
Such great Deliverance GOD has wrought,
And down to us Salvation brought;
And still the Care of Guardian-Heav'n
Secures the Bliss itself has given.
7
In Thee we trust, Almighty LORD,
Continued Rescue to afford:
Still be thy powerful Arm made bare,
For all thy Servants Hopes are there.
CCLXXIII. Ministers a sweet Savor, whether of Life or Death. 2 Cor. ii. 15,
16.
1
PRAISE to the LORD on high,
Who spreads his Triumphs wide!
While Jesus' fragrant Name
Is breathed on every Side:
Balmy and rich
The Odours rise,
And fill the Earth,
And reach the Skies.
2
Ten thousand dying Souls
Its Influence feel and live;
Sweeter than vital Air
The Incense they receive:
They breathe anew,
And rise and sing
Jesus the Lord,
Their conquering King.
3
But Sinners scorn the Grace,
That brings Salvation nigh;
They turn their Face away,
And faint, and fall, and die:
So sad a Doom,
Ye Saints, deplore,
For O! they fall
To rise no more.
4
Yet, wise and mighty GOD,
Shall all thy Servants be,
In those, who live or die,
A Savor sweet to Thee:
Supremely bright
Thy Grace shall shine,
Guarded with Flames
Of Wrath divine.
CCLXXIV. GOD shining into the Heart. 2 Cor. iv. 6.
1
PRAISE to the LORD of boundless Might,
With uncreated Glories bright!
His Presence gilds the Worlds above;
The unchanging Source of Light and Love.
2
Our rising Earth his Eye beheld,
When in substantial Darkness veiled;
The shapeless Chaos, Nature's Womb,
Lay buried in eternal Gloom Genesis i, 2, 3.
.
3
Let there be Light, JEHOVAH said,
And Light over all its Face was spread:
Nature, arrayed in Charms unknown,
Gay with its newborn Luster shone.
4
He sees the Mind, when lost it lies
In Shades of Ignorance and Vice;
And darts from Heaven a vivid lively, sprightly.
Ray,
And changes Midnight into Day.
5
Shine, mighty GOD, with Vigor shine,
On this benighted Heart of mine;
And let thy Glories stand revealed,
As in the Savior's Face beheld.
6
My Soul revived by Heaven-born Day,
Thy radiant Image shall display,
While all my Faculties unite
To praise the LORD, who gives me Light.
CCLXXV. The Gospel Treasure in earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. iv. 7.
1
HOW rich thy Bounty, King of Kings!
Thy Favors how divine!
The Blessings which thy Gospel brings,
How splendidly they shine!
2
Gold is but Dross, and Gems but Toys,
Should Gold and Gems compare;
How mean, when set against those Joys,
Thy poorest Servants share?
3
Yet all these Treasures of thy Grace
Are lodged in Urns Vessels or Jars.
of Clay;
And the weak Sons of mortal Race
The immortal Gifts convey.
4
Feebly they lisp thy Glories forth;
Yet Grace the Victory gives:
Quickly they moulder back to Earth;
Yet still thy Gospel lives.
5
Such Wonders Power divine effects;
Such Trophies Monuments or Tokens of Victory.
GOD can raise;
His Hand from crumbling Dust erects,
Long Monuments of Praise.
CCLXXVI. Living to him, who died for us. 2 Cor. v. 14, 15.
1
MY Lord, did Thou endure such Smart
My Life, when forfeited, to save?
And did Thou bear upon thy Heart
My Name, when rising from the Grave?
2
Am I in thy Remembrance still,
'Midst all the Glories of thy Throne?
To form thy Servant to thy Will,
And fix my Dwelling near thine own?
3
What can a feeble Worm repay
For Love so infinite as Thine?
The Torrent bears my Soul away,
The impetuous Stream of Grace divine referring to the Emphasis of the Original
Word viz. bears us away like a strong Torrent.
.
4
To Thee, my Lord, it bears me on;
Self shall be deify'd made a God of.
no more;
By Self betrayed, by Self undone,
I live by thy recov'ring Power.
5
Accept a Soul so dearly bought,
Bought by thy Life upon the Tree;
A Soul which, by thy Spirit taught,
Knows no Delight, but serving Thee.
CCLXXVII. GOD the Author of Consolation. 2 Cor. vii. 6.
1
THE LORD, how rich his Comforts are!
How wide they spread! How high they rise!
He pours in Balm to bleeding Hearts,
And wipes the Tears from flowing Eyes.
2
I have no Hope, my Spirit cried,
Just trembling on the Brink of Hell;
I am thy Hope, the LORD replied,
My Love secures its Favorites well.
3
My grateful Soul shall speak his Praise,
Who turns its Tremblings into Songs;
And those that mourn shall learn from me,
Salvation to our GOD belongs.
CCLXXVIII. Satan's Strongholds cast down by the Gospel. 2 Cor. x. 4, 5.
1
SHOUT, for the Battlements are fallen,
Which Heaven itself defied!
The aspiring Towers, dismantled demolished, broke down.
all,
Now spread their Ruins wide!
2
Thy wondrous Trumpets, Prince of Peace,
Sent forth their mighty Sound;
The Strength of Jericho was struck,
And tottered to the Ground Joshua vi. 20.
.
3
No more proud Reas'nings shall dispute
What Truth divine declares;
No more Self-Righteousness to plead
Its own Perfection dares.
4
No Strength our ruined Powers can boast
Thy Precepts to fulfill:
No Liberty we ask or wish
For our rebellious Will.
5
The Gates we open to admit
The Savior's gentle Sway:
Blessed Jesus, it is thy Right to reign,
Our Pleasure to obey.
6
Each Thought in sweet Subjection held
Thy sovereign Power shall own;
And every Traitor shall be slain,
That dares dispute the Throne.
CCLXXIX. The Christian Farewell. 2 Cor. xiii. 11.
1
THY Presence, Everlasting GOD,
Wide over all Nature spreads abroad;
Thy watchful Eyes, which cannot sleep,
In every Place thy Children keep.
2
While near each other we remain,
Thou do our Lives and Souls sustain;
When absent, happy if we share
Thy Smiles, thy Counsels, and thy Care.
3
To Thee we all our Ways commit,
And seek our Comforts near thy Feet;
Still on our Souls vouchsafe to shine,
And guard and guide us still as Thine.
4
Give us in thy beloved House
Again to pay our grateful Vows;
Or, if that Joy no more be known,
Give us to meet around thy Throne.
CCLXXX. Living while in the Flesh by Faith in CHRIST, who loved us, etc.
Galat. ii. 20.
1
MY Jesus, while in mortal Flesh
I hold my frail Abode,
Still would my Spirit rest on Thee,
Its Savior, and its God.
2
By hourly Faith in Thee I live
'Midst all my Griefs and Snares;
And Death, encountered in thy Sight,
No Form of Horror wears.
3
Yes, Thou have loved this sinful Worm,
Have given thyself for me,
Have bought me from eternal Death,
Nailed to the bloody Tree.
4
On thy dear Cross I fix mine Eyes,
Then raise them to thy Seat;
Till Love dissolve mine inmost Soul,
At its Redeemer's Feet.
5
Be dead, my Heart, to worldly Charms;
Be dead to every Sin;
And tell the boldest Foes without,
That Jesus reigns within.
6
My Life with his connected stands,
Nor asks a surer Ground;
He keeps me in his gracious Arms,
Where Heaven itself is found.
CCLXXXI. A filial Temper the Work of the Spirit, and a Proof of Adoption.
Galat. iv. 6.
1
SOVEREIGN of all the Worlds on high,
Allow my humble Claim;
Nor, while a Worm would raise its Head,
Disdain a Father's Name.
2
My Father GOD! How sweet the Sound!
How tender, and how dear!
Not all the Melody of Heaven
Could so delight the Ear.
3
Come, sacred Spirit, seal the Name
On mine expanding Heart;
And show, that in Jehovah's Grace
I share a filial Part.
4
Cheered by a Signal so divine,
Unwav'ring I believe;
Thou know I Abba, Father, cry,
Nor can the Sign deceive.
5
On Wings of everlasting Love
The Comforter is come;
All Terrors at his Voice disperse,
And endless Pleasures bloom.
CCLXXXII. Christian Sympathy. Galat. vi. 2.
1
HAIL, everlasting Prince of Peace!
Hail, Governor divine!
How gracious is thy Sceptre's Sway!
What gentle Laws are thine!
2
His tender Heart with Love o'erflow'd,
Love spoke in every Breath;
Vigorous it reigned through all his Life,
And triumphed in his Death.
3
All these united Charms he shows,
Our frozen Souls to move;
This Proof of Love to him demands,
That we each other love.
4
O be the sacred Law fulfilled
In every Act, and Thought;
Each angry Passion far removed,
Each selfish View forgot.
5
Be thou, my Heart, dilated wide
By thy Redeemer's Grace;
And in one Grasp of fervent Love
All Earth and Heaven embrace.
CCLXXXIII. Blessing GOD for spiritual Blessings in CHRIST. Ephesians. i. 3.
1
LOUD be thy Name adored,
Thy Titles spread abroad,
Of Christ our glorious Lord
The Father and the GOD!
Through such a Son,
Thy Churches Head,
Thine Honors spread
Over Worlds unknown.
2
Ten thousand Gifts of Love
From Thee through him descend;
And bear our Souls above
To Joys that never end:
To Heaven they soar,
Sustained by GOD,
And through the Road
His Arm adore.
3
Ten thousand Songs of Praise
Shall by the Savior rise,
And through eternal Days
Shall echo round the Skies.
New Shouts we'll give,
And loud proclaim
The honored Name,
By which we live.
CCLXXXIV. The grand Scheme of the Gospel. Ephesians. i. 9, 10, 11-.
1
WE sing the deep mysterious Plan,
Which GOD devised ever Time began;
At length disclosed in all its Light.
We bless the wondrous Birth of Love,
Which beams around us from above,
With Grace so free, and Hope so bright.
2
Here has the wise eternal Mind
In Christ, their common Head, conjoined
Gentiles and Jews, and Earth and Heaven.
Through him, from the great Father's Throne,
Rivers of Bliss come rolling down,
And endless Peace and Life are given.
3
No more the awful Cherubs guard
The Tree of Life with flaming Sword,
To drive asar Man's trembling Race;
At Salem's pearly Gates they stand,
And smiling wait (a friendly Band!)
To welcome Strangers to the Place.
4
While we expect that glorious Sight,
Love shall our Hearts with theirs unite,
And ardent Hope our Bosoms raise:
From Earth's dark Vale, and Tongues of Clay,
To those resplendent Realms of Day,
We'll try to send the sounding Praise.
CCLXXXV. The heavenly Inheritance made known by the Spirit. Ephesians. i. 18.
1
COME, Thou celestial Spirit, come,
And call my roving Passions home;
To mine enlightened Eyes display
The Heritage of heavenly Day.
2
My GOD, that Heritage is Thine:
How rich, how glorious, how divine!
How far above all mortal Things,
The little Pride of Courts and Kings.
3
Of endless Joy the unbounded Store,
Why is its Luster known no more?
Away, ye Mists of envious Night,
That veil Salvation from my Sight!
4
Shine forth, Almighty Savior, shine;
Show the bright World, and show it mine;
Then Paradise on Earth shall spring,
And mortal Worms like Angels sing.
CCLXXXVI. Salvation by Grace. Ephesians. ii. 5.
1
GRACE! it is a charming Sound,
Harmonious to my Ear!
Heaven with the Echo shall resound,
And all the Earth shall hear.
2
Grace first contrived a Way
To save rebellious Man,
And all the Steps that Grace display,
Which drew the wondrous Plan.
3
Grace taught my wandering Feet
To tread the heavenly Road,
And new Supplies each Hour I meet,
While pressing on to GOD.
4
Grace all the Work shall crown
Through everlasting Days;
It lays in Heaven the topmost Stone,
And well deserves the Praise.
CCLXXXVII. Christians risen and exalted with CHRIST to heavenly Places. Ephesians.
ii. 5, 6.
1
STUPENDOUS Grace! and can it be
Designed for Rebels such as we?
O let our ardent Praises rise,
High as our Hopes beyond the Skies!
2
This Flesh, by righteous Vengeance slain,
Might ever in the Dust remain:
These guilty Spirits sent to dwell
'Midst all the Flames and Fiends evil Spirits.
of Hell.
3
But lo! incarnate Love descends;
Down to the Sepulcher it bends;
Rising, it tears the Bars away,
And springs to its own native Day.
4
Then was our Sepulcher unbar'd;
Then was our Path to Glory cleared;
Then, if that Savior be our own,
Did we ascend a heavenly Throne.
5
A Moment shall our Joy complete,
And fix us in that shining Seat,
Bought by the Pangs our Lord endured,
And by unchanging Truth secured.
6
O may that Love, in Strains sublime,
Be sung to the last Hour of Time!
And let Eternity confess,
Through all its Rounds, the matchless Grace.
CCLXXXVIII. Nearness to GOD through CHRIST. Ephesians. ii. 13.
1
AND are we now brought near to God,
Who once at Distance stood?
And to effect this glorious Change
Did Jesus shed his Blood?
2
O for a Song of ardent Praise
To bear our Souls above!
What should allay our lively Hope,
Or damp our flaming Love?
3
Draw us, O LORD, with quickening Grace,
And bring us yet more near;
Here may we see thy Glories shine,
And taste thy Mercies here.
4
O may that Love, which spread thy Board,
Dispose us for the Feast;
May Faith behold a smiling GOD
Through Jesus' bleeding Breast.
5
Fired with the View, our Souls shall rise
In such a Scene as this,
And view the happy Moment near,
That shall complete our Bliss.
CCLXXXIX. The Institution of a Gospel Ministry from CHRIST. Ephesians. iv. 11, 12.
For an Ordination.
1
FATHER of Mercies, in thine House
Smile on our Homage, and our Vows;
While with a grateful Heart we share
These Pledges of our Savior's Care.
2
The Savior, when to Heaven he rose
In splendid Triumph over his Foes,
Scattered his Gifts on Men below,
And wide his royal Bounties flow.
3
Hence sprung the Apostles honored Name,
Sacred beyond heroic Fame;
Hence dictates the Prophetic Sage;
And hence the Evangelick Page.
4
In lowlier Forms to bless our Eyes
Pastors from hence, and Teachers rise;
Who, though with feebler Rays they shine,
Still gild a long-extended Line.
5
From Christ their varied Gifts derive,
And fed by Christ their Graces live:
While, guarded by his potent Hand,
'Midst all the Rage of Hell they stand.
6
So shall the bright Succession run
Through the last Courses of the Sun;
While unborn Churches by their Care
Shall rise and flourish large and fair.
7
Jesus our Lord their Hearts shall know,
The Spring, whence all these Blessings flow:
Pastors and People shout his Praise
Through the long Round of endless Days.
CCXC. CHRIST the Head of the Church. Ephesians. iv. 15, 16.
1
JESUS, I sing thy matchless Grace,
That calls a Worm thine own;
Gives me among thy Saints a Place
To make thy Glories known.
2
Allied to Thee our vital Head,
We act, and grow, and thrive:
From Thee divided, each is dead,
When most he seems alive.
3
Thy Saints on Earth, and those above
Here join in sweet Accord;
One Body all in mutual Love,
And Thou, our common Lord.
4
O may my Faith each Hour derive
Thy Spirit with Delight;
While Death and Hell in vain shall strive
This Bond to disunite.
5
Thou the whole Body wilt present
Before thy Father's Face;
Nor shall a Wrinkle or a Spot
Its beauteous Form disgrace.
CCXCI. Love to others urged from CHRIST'S Love in giving himself a Sacrifice.
Ephesians. v. 2.
1
NOW be that Sacrifice surveyed,
That Ransom which the Savior paid;
That Sight familiar to my View,
Yet always wondrous, always new.
2
The Lamb of GOD, that groaned and bled,
And gently bowed his dying Head;
While Love to Sinners fired his Heart,
And conquered all the killing Smart.
3
Blessed Jesus, while thy Grace I sing,
What grateful Tribute shall I bring,
That Earth and Heaven and Thou may see
My Love to him, who died for me?
4
That Offering, Lord, thy Word has taught,
Nor be thy new Command forgot,
That, if their Master's Death can move,
Thy Servants should each other love.
5
When to thy sacred Cross we fly,
There let each savage Passion die;
While the warm Streams of Blood divine
Melt our cold Hearts to Love like thine.
CCXCII. The Wisdom of redeeming Time. Ephesians. v. 15, 16.
1
GOD of Eternity, from Thee
Did Infant Time his Being draw;
Moments and Days and Months and Years
Revolve by thine unvaried Law.
2
Silent and slow they glide away;
Steady and strong the Current flows,
Lost in Eternity's wild Sea,
The boundless Gulf, from whence it rose.
3
With it the thoughtless Sons of Men
Before the rapid Stream are borne
On to that everlasting Home,
Whence not one Soul can ever return.
4
Yet while the Shore on either Side
Presents a gaudy flattering Show,
We gaze, in fond Amazement lost,
Nor think to what a World we go.
5
Great Source of Wisdom, teach my Heart
To know the Price of every Hour;
That Time may bear me on to Joys
Beyond its Measure, and its Power.
CCXCIII. CHRIST'S Love to the Church in giving himself for it, etc. Ephesians. v.
25, 26, 27.
1
BRidegroom of Souls, how rich thy Love!
How generous, how divine!
Our inmost Hearts it well may move,
While thus our Voices join.
2
Deformed and wretched once we lay,
Worthy thy Hate and Scorn;
Yet Love like thine could find a Way
To rescue and adorn.
3
Thou art our Ransom; from thy Veins
A wondrous Fountain flows
To wash thy Bride from all her Stains,
And heal our deepest Woes.
4
Transformed by thee, even here below
Thy Church is bright and fair:
But O! how glorious shall she show,
When Jesus shall appear!
5
Thine Eye shall all her Form survey
With infinite Delight,
Confessed, in that illustrious Day,
Unblemished in thy Sight.
CCXCIV. CHRIST'S Service, the Fruit of our Labors on Earth. Phil. i. 22.
1
MY gracious Lord, I own thy Right
To every Service I can pay;
And call it my supreme Delight
To hear thy Dictates and obey.
2
What is my Being, but for Thee,
Its sure Support, its noblest End?
Thine ever-smiling Face to see,
And serve the Cause of such a Friend?
3
I would not breathe for worldly Joy,
Or to increase my worldly Good;
Nor future Days or Powers employ
To spread a sounding Name abroad.
4
It Is to my Savior I would live;
To Him, who for my Ransom died,
Nor could untainted Eden give
Such Bliss, as blossoms at his Side.
5
His Work my hoary Age shall bless,
When youthful Vigor is no more;
And my last Hour of Life confess
His Love has animating Power.
CCXCV. The Happiness of departing, and being with CHRIST. Phil. i. 23.
1
WHILE on the Verge of Life I stand,
And view the Scene on either Hand,
My Spirit struggles with its Clay,
And longs to wing its Flight away.
2
Where Jesus dwells my Soul would be;
It saints my much-loved Lord to see:
Earth, twine no more about my Heart,
For it is far better to depart.
3
Come, ye angelick Envoys Messengers, Ambassadors.
, come,
And lead the willing Pilgrim home:
Ye know the Way to Jesus' Throne,
Source of my Joys, and of your own.
4
That blessed Interview, how sweet!
To fall transported at his Feet!
Raised in his Arms to view his Face,
Through the full Beamings of his Grace!
5
To see Heavens shining Courtiers round,
Each with immortal Glories crowned!
And, while his Form in each I trace,
Beloved, and loving all to embrace!
6
As with a Seraph's Voice to sing!
To fly as on a Cherub's Wing!
Performing with unwearied Hands
A present Savior's high Commands!
7
Yet with these Prospects full in Sight,
I Will wait thy Signal for my Flight;
For, while thy Service I pursue,
I find my Heaven begun below.
CCXCVI. Pressing on in the Christian Race. Phil. iii. 12-14.
1
AWAKE, my Soul, stretch every Nerve,
And press with Vigor on:
A heavenly Race demands thy Zeal,
And an immortal Crown.
2
A Cloud of Witnesses around
Hold thee in full Survey:
Forget the Steps already trod,
And onward urge thy Way.
3
It Is GOD'S all-animating Voice,
That calls thee from on high;
It Is his own Hand presents the Prize
To thine aspiring Eye.
4
That Prize with peerless Glories bright,
Which shall new Luster boast,
When Victors Wreaths Crowns or Garlands given to Conquerors.
and Monarchs Gem.
Shall blend in common Dust.
5
Blessed Savior, introduced by thee
Have I my Race begun;
And crowned with Victory at thy Feet
I Will lay mine Honors down.
CCXCVII. GOD supplying the Necessities of his People. Phil. iv. 19, 20.
1
MY GOD, how cheerful is the Sound,
How pleasant to repeat?
Well may that Heart with Pleasure bound,
Where GOD has fixed his Seat?
2
What Want shall not our GOD supply
From his redundant Stores?
What Streams of Mercy from on high
An Arm almighty pours?
3
From Christ, the ever-living Spring,
These ample Blessings flow:
Prepare, my Lips, his Name to sing,
Whose Heart has loved us so.
4
Now to our Father and our GOD
Be endless Glory given,
Through all the Realms of Man's Abode,
And through the highest Heaven.
CCXCVIII. Thanks for being made meet for the heavenly Inheritance. Coloss. i.
12.
1
ALL-Glorious GOD, what Hymns of Praise
Shall our transported Voices raise?
What flaming Love and Zeal is due,
While Heaven stands open to our View?
2
Once we were fallen, and O how low!
Just on the Brink of endless Woe;
Doomed to a Heritage in Hell,
Where Sinners all in Darkness dwell.
3
But lo, a Ray of cheerful Light
Scatters the horrid Shades of Night!
Lo, what triumphant Grace is shown
To Souls impov'rish'd and undone!
4
Far, far beyond these mortal Shores
A bright Inheritance is ours;
Where Saints in Light our Coming wait
To share their holy blissful State.
5
If ready dressed for Heaven we shine,
Thine are the Robes, the Crown is thine:
May endless Years their Course prolong,
While "Thine the Praise" is all our Song.
CCXCIX. Angels and Christians united in CHRIST as their common Head. Coloss.
ii. 10.
1
HAIL to Emanuel's ever-honour'd Name!
Spread it, ye Angels, through Heaven's sacred Frame.
Ye sceptered Cherubim, before his Throne,
And flaming Seraphim, bow humbly down.
He is your Head; With prostrate Awe adore him,
And lay with Joy your radiant Crowns before him.
2
Arrayed in his refulgent Beams ye shine,
And draw Existence Being, or Life.
from his Source divine;
Grateful ye wait the Signal of his Hand,
Honored too highly by his least Command:
In him the indwelling Deity admiring,
And to his brighter Image still aspiring.
3
Mortals with you in cheerful Homage join,
And bring their Anthems to Emanuel's Shrine;
Mean as we are, with Sins and Griefs beset,
We glory, that in him we are complete.
He is our Head, and we with you adore him,
And pour our wants, our joys, our hearts before him.
4
We sing the Blood, that ransomed us from Hell;
We sing the Graces, that in Jesus dwell;
Led by his Spirit, guarded by his Hand,
Our Hopes anticipate your goodly Land;
Still his incarnate Deity admiring,
And with Heavens Hierarchy the several Orders of Angels.
in Praise conspiring.
CCC. Christians, as risen with CHRIST, exhorted to seek Things above. Coloss.
iii. 1.
1
HEARKEN, ye Children of your GOD;
Ye Heirs of Glory, hear;
For Accents so divine as these
Might charm the dullest Ear.
2
Baptized into your Savior's Death
Your Souls to Sin must die;
With Christ your Lord ye live anew,
With Christ ascend on high.
3
There at his Father's Hand he sits
Enthroned divinely fair;
Yet owns himself your Brother still,
And your Forerunner there.
4
Rise from these earthly Trifles, rise
On Wings of Faith and Love;
Jesus your choicest Treasure lies,
And be your Hearts, above.
5
But Earth and Sin will drag us down,
When we attempt to fly;
LORD, send thy strong attractive Force
To raise and fix us high.
CCCI. The Prosperity of the Church, the Life of a faithful Minister. 1 Thessalonians.
iii. 8.
1
BLESSED Jesus, bow thine Ear,
While we entreat thy Love;
O come, and all our Hearts possess,
And our best Passions move.
2
May we stand fast in Thee,
Though Storms and Tempests beat;
And in thy Guardian Arms obtain
A calm and safe Retreat.
3
Still be thy Truth maintained,
And still thy Word obeyed,
And to the Merits of thy Blood
A constant Homage paid.
4
So shall thy Shepherds live,
And raise their cheerful Head,
And in such Blessings on their Flock
Confess their Toils repaid.
CCCII. Comfort on the Death of pious Friends 1 Thessalonians. iv. 17, 18.
1
TRansporting Tidings which we hear!
What Music to the pious Ear!
Christ loves each humble Saint so well,
He with his Lord shall ever dwell.
2
Blessed Jesus, Source of every Grace,
From far to view thy smiling Face,
While absent thus by Faith we live,
Exceeds all Joys, that Earth can give.
3
But O! what Extacy unknown
Fills the wide Circle round thy Throne,
Where every rapturous Hour appears
Nobler than Millions of our Years!
4
Millions by Millions multiplied
Shall never thy Saints from thee divide;
But the bright Legions live and praise
Through all thine own immortal Days.
5
O happy Dead, in Thee that sleep,
While over their mouldering Dust we weep!
O faithful Savior, who shall come
That Dust to ransom from the Tomb!
6
While thine unerring Word imparts
So rich a Cordial to our Hearts,
Through Tears our Triumphs shall be shown,
Though round their Graves, and near our own.
CCCIII. CHRIST glorified and admired in his Saints at the great Day. 2 Thessalonians.
i. 10.
1
YE Heavens, with Sounds of Triumph ring;
Ye Angels, burst into a Song;
Jesus descends, victorious King,
And leads his shining Train along.
2
Ye Saints that sleep in Dust, arise;
Let Joy re-animate your Clay;
Spring to your Savior through the Skies,
And round his Throne your Homage pay.
3
Then let the Sons of Heaven draw nigh,
While to the astonished Hosts you tell,
How feeble Mortals rose so high
From Graves and Worms, from Sin and Hell.
4
Tell them, in Accents like their own,
What an incarnate God could do;
Then point to Jesus on the Throne,
And boast, that Jesus died for you.
5
Transported, they no more can hear;
Their Voices catch the sacred Name;
Harmonious to his Father's Ear,
Jesus the God, their Harps proclaim.
6
Sin has its dire dreadful.
Incursions made,
That Thou might prove thy Power to save;
And Death its Ensigns wide displayed,
That Thou might triumph over the Grave.
CCCIV. CHRIST seen of Angels. 1 Timothy iii. 16.
1
O Ye immortal Throng
Of Angels round the Throne,
Join with our feeble Song
To make the Savior known:
On Earth ye knew
His wondrous Grace,
His beauteous Face
In Heaven ye view.
2
Ye saw the Heaven-born Child
In human Flesh arrayed,
Benevolent and mild,
While in the Manger laid;
And Praise to GOD,
And Peace on Earth,
For such a Birth,
Proclaimed aloud.
3
Ye in the Wilderness
Beheld the Tempter spoiled,
Well known in every Dress,
In every Combat foiled;
And joy'd to crown
The Victor's Head,
When Satan fled
Before his Frown.
4
Around the bloody Tree
Ye pressed with strong Desire,
That wondrous Sight to see,
The Lord of Life expire;
And, could your Eyes
Have known a Tear,
Had dropped it there
In sad Surprise.
5
Around his sacred Tomb
A willing Watch ye keep;
Till the blessed Moment come
To rouse him from his Sleep:
Then rolled the Stone,
And all adored
Your rising Lord
With Joy unknown.
6
When all arrayed in Light
The shining Conqu'ror rode,
Ye hailed his rapturous Flight
Up to the Throne of GOD;
And waved around
Your golden Wings,
And struck your Strings
Of sweetest Sound.
7
The warbling Notes pursue,
And louder Anthems raise;
While Mortals sing with you
Their own Redeemer's Praise;
And thou, my Heart,
With equal Flame,
And Joy the same,
Perform thy Part.
CCCV. The Stability of the divine Foundation, and its double Inscription. 2 Timothy ii. 19.
1
TO Thee, great Architect on high,
Immortal Thanks be paid,
Who, to support thy sinking Saints,
This firm Foundation laid.
2
Fixed on a Rock thy Gospel stands,
And braves defies.
the Rage of Hell;
And, while the Savior's Hand protects,
His Blood cements it well.
3
Here will I build my final Hope;
Here rest my weaty Soul;
Majestic shall the Fabric Building.
rise,
Till Glory crown the whole.
4
Deep on my Heart, All-gracious LORD,
Engrave its double Seal;
Which, while it speaks thy honored Name,
Its sacred Use may tell.
5
Dear by a thousand tender Bonds
Thy Saints to Thee are known;
And, conscious what a Name they bear,
Iniquity they shun.
CCCVI. Persecution to be expected by every true Christian. 2 Timothy iii. 12.
1
GREAT Leader of thine Israel's Host,
We shout thy conquering Name;
Legions of Foes beset Thee round,
And Legions fled with Shame.
2
A Victory glorious and complete
Thou by thy Death did gain;
So in thy Cause may we contend,
And Death itself sustain.
3
By our illustrious General fired,
We no Extremes would fear;
Prepared to struggle and to bleed,
If thou, our Lord, be near.
4
We'll trace the Footsteps thou have drawn
To Triumph and Renown;
Nor shun thy Combat and thy Cross,
May we but share thy Crown.
CCCVII. The Christian Scheme of Salvation worthy of GOD. Hebrews ii. 10.
1
IMMORTAL GOD, on Thee we call,
The great Original of all;
Through Thee we are, to Thee we tend,
Our sure Support, our glorious End.
2
We praise that wise mysterious Grace,
That pitied our revolted Race,
And Jesus, our victorious Head,
The Captain of Salvation made.
3
He, thine eternal Love decreed,
Should many Sons to Glory lead;
And sinful Worms to him are given,
A Colony to people Heaven.
4
Jesus for us, (O gracious Name!)
Encountered Agony and Shame:
Jesus, the glorious and the great,
Was by dire dreadful.
Sufferings made complete.
5
A Scene of Wonders here we see,
Worthy thy Son, and worthy Thee:
And while this Theme employs our Tongues,
All Heaven unites its sweetest Songs.
CCCVIII. Satan and Death conquered by the Death of CHRIST. Heb. ii. 14, 15.
1
SATAN, the dire Invader, came
Our new-made World t'annoy:
And Death marched dreadful in his Rear
His Captives to destroy.
2
Caught in his Snares our Father sunk;
With him his Children fell;
And Death his fatal Shaft Arrow.
prepared
To smite them down to Hell.
3
Jesus with pitying Eye beheld,
And left his starry Crown;
Turned his own Weapons on the Foe,
And mowed his Legions down.
4
By Death the Savior Death disarmed,
That we in Light may shine;
And fixed this great mysterious Law,
That Dust should Dust refine.
5
No more the pointed Shaft we fear,
Nor dread the Monster's Boast;
No more the pious Dead we mourn,
As Friends for ever lost.
6
Their Tongues, Great Prince of Life, shall join
With our recovered Breath,
And all the immortal Hosts, to ascribe
Our Victory to thy Death.
CCCIX. An immediate Attention to GOD's Voice required. Heb. iii. 15.
1
THE LORD Jehovah calls,
Be every Ear inclined;
May such a Voice awake each Heart,
And captivate the Mind.
2
If He in Thunder speaks,
Earth trembles at his Nod;
But gentle Accents here proclaim
The condescending GOD.
3
O harden not your Hearts,
But hear his Voice Today;
Lest, ever Tomorrow's earliest Dawn,
He call your Souls away.
4
Almighty GOD, pronounce
The Word of conquering Grace;
So shall the Flint dissolve to Tears,
And Scorners seek thy Face.
CCCX. The eternal Sabbath. Heb. iv. 9.
1
LORD of the Sabbath, hear our Vows
On this thy Day, in this thy House;
And own, as grateful Sacrifice,
The Songs, which from the Desert rise.
2
Thine earthly Sabbaths, LORD, we love;
But there is a nobler Rest above;
To that our laboring Souls aspire
With ardent Pangs of strong Desire.
3
No more Fatigue, no more Distress;
Nor Sin nor Hell shall reach the Place;
No Groans to mingle with the Songs,
Which warble from immortal Tongues.
4
No rude Alarms of raging Foes;
No Cares to break the long Repose;
No midnight Shade, no clouded Sun,
But sacred high eternal Noon.
5
O long-expected Day, begin;
Dawn on these Realms of Woe and Sin:
Fain would we leave this weary Road,
And sleep in Death to rest with GOD.
CCCXI. CHRIST our Forerunner, and the Foundation of our Hope. Heb. vi. 19, 20.
1
JESUS the Lord our Souls adore,
A painful Suff'rer now no more;
High on his Father's Throne he reigns
Over Earth, and Heaven's extensive Plains.
2
His Race for ever is complete;
For ever undisturbed his Seat;
Myriads of Angels round him fly,
And sing his well-gain'd Victory.
3
Yet 'midst the Honors of his Throne,
He joys not for himself alone;
His meanest Servants share their Part,
Share in that royal tender Heart.
4
Raise, raise, my Soul, thy raptured Sight
With sacred Wonder and Delight;
Jesus thine own Forerunner see
Entered beyond the Veil for thee.
5
Loud let the howling Tempest yell,
And foaming Waves to Mountains swell,
No Shipwreck can my Vessel fear,
Since Hope has fixed its Anchor here.
CCCXII. The evil Conscience purified by the Blood of JESUS. Heb. ix. 13, 14.
1
Blessed be the Lamb, whose Blood was spilt
To sprinkle Conscience from its Guilt;
To ease its Pains, to calm its Fears,
And purchase Grace for future Years.
2
Cleans'd by this all-atoning Blood
We joy in free Access to GOD,
The living GOD, before whose Face
Sinners in vain shall seek a Place.
3
Rouse thee, my Soul, to serve him still
With cordial Love, with active Zeal:
Serve him, like his own Son divine,
Who made his Life the Price of thine.
4
Blessed Jesus, introduced by Thee,
The Father's smiling Face I see;
And strengthened by thy Grace alone,
These grateful Services are done.
5
Then must my Debt from Day to Day
Grow with each Service that I pay;
So grows my Joy, Dear Lord, to be
Thus more and more in Debt to Thee.
CCCXIII. Death and Judgment appointed to all. Heb. ix. 27.
1
HEAVEN has confirmed the great Decree,
That Adam's Race must die:
One general Ruin sweeps them down,
And low in Dust they lie.
2
Ye living Men, the Tomb survey,
Where you must quickly dwell;
Hark how the awful Summons sounds
In every Funeral Knell!
3
Once you must die, and once for all;
The solemn Purport weigh;
For know, that Heaven and Hell are hung
On that important Day.
4
Those Eyes, so long in Darkness veiled,
Must wake the Judge to see,
And every Word, and every Thought
Must pass his Scrutiny.
5
O may I in the Judge behold
My Savior and my Friend,
And far beyond the Reach of Death
With all his Saints ascend.
CCCXIV. CHRIST'S second Appearance, etc. Heb. ix. 28.
1
BEHOLD the Son of GOD appears,
And in his Flesh our Sins he bears;
The Victim at GOD'S Altar stood
To expiate Guilt by Groans and Blood.
2
But lo, a second Time he comes
To shake the Earth, and rend the Tombs;
These Heavens before him melt away,
And Sun and Stars in Smoke decay.
3
Yet 'midst this general Wreck and Dread,
Ye Saints, with Triumph lift the Head;
With glad Surprise your Savior meet,
Who comes to make your Bliss complete.
4
My Soul, an Happiness so great
With pleasing Expectation wait;
And while I dwell upon the Thought,
Be Earth and all its Toys forgot.
5
My Savior GOD, what Grace is thine,
Which gives a Prospect so divine!
Come, blessed Day, and teach our Tongues
How Angels warble out their Songs.
CCCXV. Liberty to enter through the Veil by the Blood of CHRIST. Heb. x. 19-22.
1
APPROACH, ye Children of your GOD;
Favorites of Heaven, draw near;
Enter the Holiest with Delight,
Though his own Ark be there.
2
Pass through the Veil, the Savior's Flesh,
That new and living Way,
And Majesty enshrined surrounded with and softened by.
in Love
Shall gentle Beams display.
3
Jesus with Sin-atoning Blood
The Throne has sprinkled over;
His fragrant Incense spreads its Cloud,
And Justice flames no more.
4
Approach with Boldness and with Joy,
But spotless all draw near;
Pure be your Lives from every Stain,
And every Conscience clear.
5
So shall the Blessings of his Grace
On all your Souls distill,
Till each a royal Priest appears
On his celestial Hill.
CCCXVI. GOD's Fidelity to his Promises. Heb. x. -23.
1
THE Promises I sing,
Which sovereign Love has spoke;
Nor will the eternal King
His Words of Grace revoke;
They stand secure,
And steadfast still;
Not Zion's Hill
Abides so sure.
2
The Mountains melt away
When once the Judge appears,
And Sun and Moon decay,
That measure Mortals Years;
But still the same
In radiant Lines
The Promise shines
Through all the Flame.
3
Their Harmony shall sound
Through mine attentive Ears,
When Thunders cleave the Ground,
And dissipate the Spheres;
'Midst all the Shock
Of that dread Scene
I stand serene,
Thy Word my Rock.
CCCXVII. The Day approaching, a Motive to Love and Worship. Heb. x. 24. 25.
1
THE Day approaches, O my Soul,
The great decisive Day,
Which from the Verge of mortal Life
Shall bear thee far away.
2
Another Day more awful dawns;
And lo, the Judge appears;
Ye Heavens, retire before his Face,
And sink, ye darkened Stars.
3
Yet does one short preparing Hour,
One precious Hour remain;
Rouse thee, my Soul, with all thy Power,
Nor let it pass in vain.
4
With me my Brethren soon must die,
And at that Bar appear;
Now be our Intercourse improved
To mutual Comfort here.
5
For this, thy Temple, LORD, we throng;
For this, thy Board surround;
Here may our Service be approved,
And in thy Presence crowned.
CCCXVIII. Abraham's Faith in leaving his Country at the divine Command. Heb.
xi. 8.
1
NOW let our Songs proclaim abroad
The unchanging Name of Abram's GOD;
In him let Abram's Children boast,
Their Father's ever-living LORD,
His Shield, his Friend, his great Reward,
Who never can deceive their Trust.
2
Called by thy Voice, with joyful Speed
He went, where thou wast pleased to lead,
Unknowing in the Path he trod;
His Land, his Kindred strove in vain
The pious Pilgrim to detain,
Propt on the Promise of his GOD.
3
So at thy Word the Saint foregoes
Each tender Tie, which Nature knows,
And hears no other Voice but thine;
Marches, where thou shall point the Way,
Where thou shall pitch his Tent, will stay,
And learns his Isaac to resign.
4
At length, still faithful to thine own,
Thou call'st him to a World unknown,
Through Paths untrod by mortal Feet;
Smiling he owns thy Voice in Death,
Gives to the Air his fleeting Breath,
And finds the Road to Abram's Seat.
CCCXIX. The GOD of the Patriarchs preparing them a City. Heb. xi. 16.
1
I Am thy GOD, JEHOVAH said
To Abram, and his chosen Seed;
And still the same Relation owns
To each of Abram's faithful Sons.
2
Sovereign of Heaven, what Works of Love
So grand a Title shall approve?
What splendid Gifts will GOD bestow,
That all its high Import may know?
3
Not the rich Flocks and Herds that feed
Round Abram's Tents in Mamre's Mead,
Not Joseph's Chariot, nor the Throne,
Ivory and Gold of Solomon.
4
Not Canaan's Plains a Lot can prove
Proportioned to Jehovah's Love;
Not Zion's sacred Mountain, where
His Temple glittered like a Star.
5
Over Zion's Mount, over Canaan's Plains,
Oppression now, and Horror reigns;
And where the Throne of David stood,
His ruined Sepulcher is viewed.
6
It Is in the Heaven of Heavens alone
Thou make thy wondrous Friendship known;
A City there thy Hand prepares,
Fixed, as thine own eternal Years.
7
Long as they reign before thy Face,
The blissful Nations shall confess,
Thy sovereign Love has there bestowed
Salvation worthy of a GOD.
CCCXX. Moses's wise Choice. Heb. xi. 26.
1
MY Soul, with all thy wakened Powers
Survey the heavenly Prize;
Nor let these glittering Toys of Earth
Allure thy wandering Eyes.
2
The splendid Crown, which Moses sought,
Still beams around his Brow;
Though soon great Pharoah's sceptered Pride
Was taught by Death to bow.
3
The Joys and Treasures of a Day
I cheerfully resign;
Rich in that large immortal Store,
Secured by Grace divine.
4
Let Fools my wiser Choice deride,
Angels and GOD approve;
Nor Scorn of Men, nor Rage of Hell
My steadfast Soul shall move.
5
With ardent Eye that bright Reward
I daily will survey;
And in the blooming Prospect lose
The Sorrows of the Way.
CCCXXI. Acting, as seeing him, who is Invisible. Heb. xi.-27.
1
ETERNAL, and Immortal King,
Thy peerless unequalled.
Splendors none can bear,
But Darkness veils Seraphick Eyes,
When GOD with all his Lustre's there.
2
Yet Faith can pierce the awful Gloom,
The great Invisible can see;
And with its Tremblings mingle Joy
In fixed Regards, Great GOD, to Thee.
3
Then every tempting Form of Sin,
Shamed in thy Presence, disappears;
And all the glowing raptured Soul
The Likeness it contemplates wears.
4
O Ever-conscious to my Heart,
Witness to its supreme Desire,
Behold it presses on to Thee,
For it has caught the heavenly Fire.
5
This one Petition would it urge,
To bear Thee ever in its Sight;
In Life, in Death, in Worlds unknown,
Its only Portion and Delight.
CCCXXII. Subjection to GOD, the Father of our Spirits. Heb. xii.-9.
1
ETERNAL Source of Life and Thought,
Be all beneath thyself forgot;
Whilst Thee, great Parent-Mind, we own
In prostrate Homage round thy Throne.
2
Whilst in themselves our Souls survey
Of Thee some faint reflected Ray,
They wondering to their Father rise;
His Power how vast! His Thoughts how wise!
3
Behold us as thine Offspring, LORD,
And do not cast us off abhorred;
Nor let thy Hand, so long our Joy,
Be raised in Vengeance to destroy.
4
O may we live before thy Face,
The willing Subjects of thy Grace;
And through each Path of Duty move
With filial Awe, and filial Love.
CCCXXIII. The Immutability of CHRIST* Heb. xiii. 8.
1
WIth Transport, Lord, our Souls proclaim
The immortal Honors of thy Name:
Assembled round our Savior's Throne
We make his ceaseless Glories known.
2
High on his Father's royal Seat
Our Jesus shone divinely great,
Ever Adam's Clay with Life was warmed,
Or Gabriel's nobler Spirit formed.
3
Through all succeeding Ages He
The same has been, the same shall be:
Immortal Radiance gilds his Head,
While Stars and Suns wax old and fade.
4
The same his Power his Flock to guard;
The same his Bounty to reward;
The same his Faithfulness and Love
To Saints on Earth, and Saints above.
5
Let Nature change and sink and die;
Jesus shall raise his Chosen high,
And fix them near his stable Throne
In Glory changeless as his own.
CCCXXIV. Watching for Souls in the View of the great Account. Heb. xiii.-17.
For the Ordination of a Minister.
1
LET Zion's Watchmen all awake,
And take the Alarm they give;
Now let them from the Mouth of GOD
Their solemn Charge receive.
2
It Is not a Cause of small Import
The Pastor's Care demands;
But what might fill an Angel's Heart,
And filled a Savior's Hands.
3
They watch for Souls, for which the Lord
Did heavenly Bliss forego forsake, lay aside.
;
For Souls, which must for ever live
In Raptures, or in Woe.
4
All to the great Tribunal haste,
The Account to render there;
And should thou strictly mark our Faults,
LORD, how should we appear?
5
May they that Jesus, whom they preach,
Their own Redeemer see;
And watch thou daily over their Souls,
That they may watch for Thee.
CCCXXV. The Christian perfected by divine Grace through CHRIST. Heb. xiii. 20,
21.
1
FATHER of Peace, and GOD of Love,
We own thy Power to save;
That Power, by which our Shepherd rose
Victorious over the Grave.
2
We triumph in that Shepherd's Name,
Still watchful for our Good;
Who brought the eternal Covenant down,
And sealed it with his Blood.
3
So may thy Spirit seal my Soul,
And mould it to thy Will;
That my fond Heart no more may stray,
But keep thy Covenant still.
4
Still may we gain superior Strength,
And press with Vigor on,
Till full Perfection crown our Hopes,
And fix us near thy Throne.
CCCXXVI. Christians begotten to GOD as the First Fruits of his Creatures.
James i. 18.
1
NOW to that sovereign Grace,
Whence all our Comforts spring,
Let the whole new-begotten Race
Their cheerful Praises bring.
2
His Will first made the Choice;
His Word the Change has wrought;
In him our Father we rejoice,
Nor be the Name forgot.
3
LORD, for this matchless Love,
Thou make thy Children see,
May we from all thy Creatures prove
As the First Fruits to Thee.
4
Sacred to Thee alone
Be all these Powers of mine,
Then in the noblest Sense mine own,
When most entirely Thine.
CCCXXVII. Looking into the perfect Law of Liberty and continuing in it. James
i. 25.
1
BEHOLD the Glass the Gospel lends,
That Men themselves may view:
How free from Stain its Surface is!
How polished, and how true!
2
Behold that wise, that perfect Law,
Which noblest Freedom gives;
O may it all our Souls refine,
And sanctify our Lives!
3
Not with a transient Glance surveyed,
And in an Hour forgot,
But deep inscribed on every Heart,
To reign over every Thought.
4
Great Author of each perfect Gift,
Thy sovereign Grace display,
That these rebellious roving Powers
May hearken and obey.
5
Inspired by Thee, our feeble Souls
Shall pass victorious on;
As the faint dawning Light improves
To all the Blaze of Noon.
CCCXXVIII. James's Advice to Sinners. James iv. 7, 8.
1
YE Sinners, bend your stubborn Necks
Beneath the Yoke divine;
In low Submission bow ye down
Before his sacred Shrine.
2
In pious Streams your Follies mourn,
And seek his injured Grace;
And wait with broken bleeding Hearts
The Op'nings of his Face.
3
Resist the Tempter's fierce Attacks,
And he shall speed his Flight:
Draw near to GOD, and his Embrace
Shall fold you with Delight.
4
Ye Sinners, cleanse your spotted Hands,
And purge your Hearts from Sin;
Here fix your long-divided Views,
And Peace shall reign within.
5
Blessed Savior, draw us by thy Love,
And fix us by thy Power;
When we have felt these sweet Constraints,
Our Souls shall rove no more.
CCCXXIX. The Vanity of worldly Schemes inferred from the Unceriainty of Life.
James iv. 13, 14, 15.
1
TOMORROW, LORD, is thine,
Lodged in thy sovereign Hand;
And if its Sun arise and shine,
It shines by thy Command.
2
The present Moment flies,
And bears our Life away;
O make thy Servants truly wise,
That they may live today.
3
Since on this winged Hour
Eternity is hung,
Waken by thine Almighty Power
The Aged and the Young.
4
One Thing demands our Care;
O be it still persu'd!
Lest, slighted once, the Season fair
Should never be renewed.
5
To Jesus may we fly
Swift as the Morning-Light,
Lest Life's young golden Beams should die
In sudden endless Night.
CCCXXX. Rejoicing in an unseen Savior. 1 Peter i. 8.
1
MINE inward Joys, suppressed too long,
Extatick burst into a Song:
From Christ, though now unseen, they rise,
And reach his Throne beyond the Skies.
2
His Glories strike the wondering Sight
Of all the firstborn Sons of Light;
Beyond the Seraphim they shine,
Unrivaled all, and all divine.
3
Yet mortal Worms his Friendship boast,
And make his saving Name their Trust:
Jesus, my Lord, I know him well;
He rescued me from Death and Hell.
4
This sinful Heart from GOD estranged
His new-creating Power has changed,
And, mingling with each secret Thought,
Maintains the Work, which first it wrought.
5
He gives to see his Father's Face;
He gives my Soul to thrive in Grace,
And brings the Views of Glory down,
The Beamings of my heavenly Crown.
6
Thus entertained, while here below
Unspeakable my Transports grow;
New Joys in swift Succession roll,
And Glory fills my silent Soul.
CCCXXXI. The Heart purified to Love unfeigned by the Spirit. 1 Peter i. 22.
1
GREAT Spirit of immortal Love,
Vouchsafe our frozen Hearts to move;
With Ardour strong these Breasts inflame
To all that own a Savior's Name.
2
Still let the heavenly Fire endure
Fervent and vigorous, true and pure:
Let every Heart and every Hand
Join in the dear fraternal Band brotherly Union.
.
3
Celestial Dove, descend, and bring
The smiling Blessings on thy Wing;
And make us taste those Sweets below,
Which in the blissfull Mansions grow.
CCCXXXII. Tasting that the Lord is gracious. 1 Pet. ii. 3.
1
YES, it is sweet to taste his Grace,
Who bought us with his Blood;
My Soul prefers the Relish still
To all created Good.
2
O how I love that vital Word,
Which taught me first to live!
Thirst for that uncorrupted Milk,
That I may grow and thrive!
3
All gracious LORD, instruct us more
Thy saving Gifts to know:
And let our inmost Hearts rejoice,
That thou have loved us so.
4
Open thy Stores with liberal Hand,
That we may daily feast;
And let each dying Soul around
The sweet Salvation taste.
CCCXXXIII. Coming to CHRIST as a living Stone. 1 Pet. ii. 4, 5.
WITH Ecstasy of Joy
Extol his glorious Name,
Who raised the spacious Earth,
And raised our ruined Frame;
He built the Church
Who built the Sky,
Shout and exalt
His Honors high.
2
See the Foundation laid
By Power and Love divine;
Jesus, his Firstborn Son,
How bright his Glories shine!
Low he descends,
In Dust he lies,
That from his Tomb
A Church might rise.
3
But he for ever lives;
Nor for himself alone,
Each Saint new Life derives
From this mysterious Stone;
His Influence darts
Through every Soul,
And in one House
Unites the whole.
4
To him with Joy we move;
In him cemented stand;
The living Temple grows,
And owns the Founder's Hand:
That Structure, LORD,
Still higher raise,
Louder to sound
Its Builder's Praise.
5
Descend, and shed abroad
The Tokens of thy Grace,
And with more radiant Beams
Let Glory fill the Place;
Our joyful Souls
Shall prostrate fall,
And own, our GOD
Is All in All.
CCCXXXIV. CHRIST the Cornerstone. 1 Pet. ii. 6. compared with Isaiah xxviii.
16, 17.
1
LORD, do thou show a Cornerstone
For us to build our Hopes upon,
That the fair Edifice may rise
Sublime in Light beyond the Skies?
2
We own the Work of sovereign Love;
Nor Death nor Hell those Hopes shall move,
Which fixed on this Foundation ^^and,
Laid by thine own Almighty Hand.
3
Thy People long this Stone have tried,
And all the Powers of Hell defied;
Floods of Temptation beat in vain;
Well does this Rock the House sustain.
4
When Storms of Wrath around prevail,
Whirlwind and Thunder, Fire and Hail,
It Is here our trembling Souls shall hide,
And here securely they abide.
5
While they that scorn this precious Stone,
Fond of some Quicksand of their own,
Borne down by weighty Vengeance die,
And buried deep in Ruin lie.
CCCXXXV. CHRIST precious to the Believer. 1 Pet. ii. 7-.
1
JESUS, I love thy charming Name;
It Is Music to mine Ear;
Fain would I sound it out so loud,
That Earth and Heav^n should hear.
2
Yes, Thou art precious to my Soul,
My Transport, and my Trust:
Jewels to Thee are gaudy Toys,
And Gold is sordid Dust.
3
All my capacious Powers can wish
In Thee does richly meet:
Nor to mine Eyes is Light so dear,
Nor Friendship half so sweet.
4
Thy Grace still dwells upon my Heart,
And sheds its Fragrance there;
The noblest Balm of all its Wounds,
The Cordial of its Care.
5
I Will speak the Honors of thy Name
With my last laboring Breath;
Then speechless clasp Thee in mine Arms,
The Antidote of Death.
CCCXXXVI. Noah preserved in the Ark, and the Believer in CHRIST. 1 Pet. iii.
20, 21.
1
THE Deluge, at the Almighty's Call,
In what impetuous Streams it fell!
Swallowed the Mountains in its Rage,
And swept a guilty World to Hell.
2
In vain the tallest Sons of Pride
Fled from the close-persuing Wave;
Nor could their mightiest Towers defend,
Nor Swiftness 'scape, nor Courage save.
3
How dire the Wreck! How loud the Roar!
How shrill the universal Cry
Of Millions in the last Despair
Re-eccho'd from the louring Sky!
4
Yet Noah, humble happy Saint,
Surrounded with the chosen Few,
Sat in his Ark, secure from Fear,
And sang the Grace that steered him through.
5
So may I sing, in Jesus safe,
While Storms of Vengeance round me fall,
Conscious how high my Hopes are fixed,
Beyond what shakes this earthly Ball.
6
Enter thine Ark, while Patience waits,
Nor ever quit that sure Retreat:
Then the wide Flood, which buries Earth,
Shall waft thee to a fairer Seat.
7
Nor Wreck nor Ruin there is seen;
There not a Wave of Trouble rolls;
But the bright Rainbow round the Throne Rev. iv. 3.

Seals endless Life to all their Souls.
CCCXXXVII. The ungodly warned of their final Appearance. 1 Pet. iv. -18.
1
BEHOLD GOD'S great incarnate Son
In Majesty comes flying down!
Hark! for his Trumpet's awful Sound
Awakes the Dead, and cleaves the Ground!
2
So solemn shall the Judgment be,
And so severe the Scrutiny,
That, by his Merit tried alone,
The Saint himself would be undone.
3
Where then, ye Sons of Belial rebellious Men.
, where
Will your astonished Souls appear?
How will ye shun his piercing Sight?
Or how resist his matchless Might?
4
Up to the pointed Mountains fly,
And gain the Confines of the Sky;
There shall ye meet celestial Fire,
While Mountains melt before his Ire Anger.
.
5
Call on the rending Earth to save,
And in its Center search a Grave;
The Judge shall well discern thee there,
And drag thee trembling to his Bar.
6
Deck thee around with Fraud and Lies,
And put on every fair Disguise;
Soon shall thy painted Form be known
Amidst ten thousand of his own.
7
Gird thee in Arms his Wrath to oppose,
And league with Millions of his Foes;
Soon would the rebel band expire,
Like crackling Thorns amidst the Fire.
8
One only Way may yet be found;
Submissive bow ye to the Ground;
His Cross a Refuge will afford
From all the Terrors of his Sword.
CCCXXXVIII. Humbling ourselves under GOD's mighty Hand. 1 Pet. v. 6.
1
BENEATH thy mighty Hand, O GOD,
Our Souls we prostrate low;
Shine forth with radiant gentle Beams,
That we thy Name may know.
2
Thy Hand this various Frame produced,
And still supports it well;
That Hand with Justice and with Ease
Might smite our Souls to Hell.
3
Conscious of Meanness and of Guilt,
We in the Dust would lie;
Stretch forth thy condescending Arm,
And lift the humble high.
4
So in the Temples of thy Grace
We'll sovereign Mercy own,
And, when we shine above the Stars,
Extol thy Grace alone.
5
The more thou raise such sinful Dust,
The lower would it fall;
For less than nothing, LORD, are we,
And Thou art All in All.
CCCXXXIX. The same. For a Fast Day.
1
OUr Souls with Reverence, LORD, bow down
Struck by the Splendors of thy Throne;
Humbled, while in thy House we stand,
Beneath thy great tremendous Hand.
2
That Hand, which bears the steady Pole,
While Nature's Wheels unwearied roll;
That Hand, which gives each Creature Food,
And fills the World with various Good:
3
That Hand, which pierced thy darling Son
To expiate Crimes, that we had done:
That Hand, which scatters Grace abroad
To turn thy Foes to Sons of GOD.
4
But O! with what distracted Rage
Have we presumed that Hand to engage!
And, while long Patience has been shown,
Struggled to force thy Vengeance down!
5
Here might thy Wrath begin to flame,
And vindicate thine injured Name:
Till the ^ed Thunders of thy Hand
Had dealt Destruction round our Land.
6
With humble Hearts our GOD we meet:
O raise the Suppliants at thy Feet!
And let that glorious Arm this Day
Embrace the Rebels it might slay.
CCCXL. GOD's Care a Remedy for ours. 1 Pet. v. 7.
1
HOW gentle GOD'S Commands!
How kind his Precepts are!
"Come, cast your Burdens on the LORD,
"And trust his constant Care".
2
While Providence supports,
Let Saints securely dwell;
That Hand, which bears all Nature up,
Shall guide his Children well.
3
Why should this anxious Load
Press down your weary Mind?
Haste to your heavenly Father's Throne,
And sweet Refreshment find.
4
His Goodness stands approved
Down to the present Day;
I Will drop my Burden at his Feet,
And bear a Song away.
CCCXLI. Establishment in Religion from the GOD of Grace, etc. 1 Pet. v. 10, 11.
1
HOW rich thy Favors, GOD of Grace!
How various and divine!
Full as the Ocean they are poured,
And bright as Heaven they shine.
2
He to eternal Glory calls,
And leads the wondrous Way
To his own Palace, where he reigns
In uncreated Day.
3
Jesus, the Herald of his Love,
Displays the radiant Prize,
And shows the Purchase of his Blood
To our admiring Eyes.
4
He perfects what his Hand begins,
And Stone on Stone he lays;
Till firm and fair the Building rise,
A Temple to his Praise.
5
The Songs of everlasting Years
That Mercy shall attend,
Which leads through Sufferings of an Hour
To Joys, that never end.
CCCXLII. The Circumstances of CHRIST'S second Appearing. 2 Pet. iii. 11, 12.
1
MY wakened Soul, extend thy Wings
Beyond the Verge of mortal Things;
See this vain World in Smoke decay,
And Rocks and Mountains melt away.
2
Behold the fiery Deluge roll
Through Heaven's wide Arch from Pole to Pole:
Pale Sun, no more thy Luster boast;
Tremble and fall, ye starry Host.
2
This Wreck of Nature all around,
The Angel's Shout, the Trumpet's Sound
Loud the descending Judge proclaim,
And echo his tremendous Name.
4
Children of Adam, all appear
With Reverence round his awful Bar;
For, as his Lips pronounce, ye go
To endless Bliss, or endless Woe.
5
LORD, to mine Eyes this Scene display
Frequent through each revolving Day,
And let thy Grace my Soul prepare
To meet its full Redemption there.
CCCXLIII. The Importance of being prepared for CHRIST'S second Appearing. 2
Pet. iii. 14.
'BEHOLD I come, (the Savior cries,)
"With winged Speed I come;
"My Voice shall call your Souls away
"To their eternal Home.
2
"Awake, Ye Sons of Sloth, awake;
"Your vain Amusements cease,
"And strive with your united Powers,
"That ye be found in Peace.
3
"Seize the blessed Hour with ardent Haste,
"Nor slight this peaceful Word,
"Lest your affrighted Souls in vain
"Fly from my flaming Sword.
4
"Happy the Man, whose ready Heart
"Obeys the sacred Call;
"And shelters in my Cov'nant-Grace
"His everlasting All".
5
Blessed Jesus, whose All-searching Eye
Mine inmost Powers can see,
Do Thou not know my willing Soul
Has lodged that All with Thee?
6
These eager Eyes thy Signal wait;
My dear Redeemer, come:
I rove a weary Pilgrim here,
And long to be at Home.
CCCXLIV. Growing in Grace, etc. 2 Pet. iii. 18.
1
PRAISE to thy Name, Eternal GOD,
For all the Grace Thou shed'st abroad;
For all thine Influence from above
To warm our Souls with sacred Love.
2
Blessed be thy Hand, which from the Skies
Brought down this Plant of Paradise,
And gave its heavenly Glories Birth,
To deck this Wilderness of Earth.
3
But why does that celestial Flower
Open, and thrive, and shine no more?
Where are its balmy Odours fled?
And why reclines its beauteous Head?
4
Too plain alas! the Languor shows
The unkindly Soil in which it grows;
Where the black Frosts and beating Storm
Wither and rend its tender Form.
5
Unchanging Sun, thy Beams display
To drive the Frosts and Storms away;
Make all thy potent Virtues known
To cheer a Plant, so much thine own.
6
And thou, blessed Spirit, deign to blow
Fresh Gales of Heaven on Shrubs below;
So shall they grow, and breathe abroad
A Fragrance grateful to our GOD.
CCCXLV. Experimental Knowledge communicated. 1 John i. 1-3.
1
JESUS, mine Advocate above,
Let me not hear of Thee alone,
But make the Wonders of thy Love
By deep Experience sweetly known.
2
On Thee my Soul would fix its Eyes;
My Lips would taste thy heavenly Grace;
Then would I raise thine Honors high,
And teach a thousand Tongues thy Praise.
3
The sacred Flame from Heart to Heart
Should with a rapid Progress run;
Till each in GOD could boast his Part,
Through sweet Communion with his Son.
4
Thus may the Servants of the LORD
Feel the Salvation they proclaim;
And thus may Crowds receive the Word,
And echo back the Savior's Name.
CCCXLVI. Communion with GOD and CHRIST. 1 John i. -3.
1
OUR heavenly Father calls,
And Christ invites us near;
With both our Friendship shall be sweet,
And our Communion dear.
2
GOD pities all my Griefs;
He pardons every Day;
Almighty to protect my Soul,
And wise to guide my Way.
3
How large his Bounties are!
What various Stores of Good
Diffused from my Redeemer's Hand,
And purchased with his Blood!
4
Jesus, my living Head,
I bless thy faithful Care;
Mine Advocate before the Throne,
And my Forerunner there.
5
Here fix, my roving Heart;
Here wait, my warmest Love,
Till the Communion be complete
In nobler Scenes above.
CCCXLVII. The Privileges of Saints by the Blood of JESUS. 1 John i. 7.
1
MY various Powers, awake
To sound redeeming Grace;
To him, that washed us in his Blood,
Ascribe eternal Praise.
2
What though our Guilt appears
Died in a Crimson Grain?
The Stream, that flows from Jesus' Side,
Shall purge away the Stain.
3
'Midst all our various Forms
We in this Center meet;
Our Hearts, cemented by his Blood,
Shall taste Communion sweet.
4
Then let us walk in Light,
Like Christ, whose Name we wear;
And, as the Pledge of endless Bliss,
Our Father's Image bear.
CCCXLVIII. The Blood of CHRIST cleansing from all Sin. 1 John i. -7.
1
MY Sins, alas! how foul the Stains!
How deep, and O how wide!
Over my polluted Soul they spread,
In double Crimson died.
2
How shall I stand before that GOD,
In whose All-piercing Sight
Some Shades of Darkness seem to veil
The purest Sons of Light?
3
Where shall I wash these Spots away,
And make my Nature clean?
Since Drops of penitential Grief
Are tinctured still with Sin.
4
Behold a Torrent all divine
Flows from the Savior's Side,
And strangely bears a crystal Stream
Amidst the purple Tide referring to the Blood and Water, that came out of
Christ's wounded Side. John xix. 34.
.
5
Here will I bathe my spotted Soul,
And make it pure and fair;
Till not the Eye of GOD discern
One soul Pollution there.
6
Then, dressed in Robes of snowy White,
I Will join the shining Band,
And learn new Anthems to the Lamb,
While round his Throne we stand.
CCCXLIX. Having the Son, and having Life in him. 1 John v. 12.
1
O Happy Christian, who can boast,
"The Son of GOD is mine"!
Happy, though humbled in the Dust,
Rich in this Gift divine.
2
He lives the Life of Heaven below,
And shall for ever live;
Eternal Streams from Christ shall flow,
And endless Vigor give.
3
That Life we ask with bended Knee,
Nor will the LORD deny;
Nor will celestial Mercy see
Its humble Suppliants die.
4
That Life obtained, for Praise alone
We wish continued Breath;
And taught by blessed Experience own,
That Praise can live in Death.
CCCL. CHRIST the First and the Last, humbled (...) Death, and exalted to an
eternal Triumph over it. Revelation i. 17, 18.
1
WHat Myst'ries, Lord, in thee combine!
Jesus, once mortal, yet divine!
The First, the Last; the End, the Head;
The Source of Life among the Dead.
2
O Love, beyond the Stretch of Thought!
What matchless Wonders has it wrought!
My Faith, while she the Grace declares,
Trembles beneath the Load she bears.
3
Hail, royal Conqu'ror over the Grave,
Tender to pity, strong to save!
For ever live, for ever reign,
And prosperous may thy Throne remain!
4
Thy Saints, obedient to thy Word,
With humble Joy surround thy Board;
And, long as Time persues its Race,
Proclaim thy Death, and shout thy Grace.
5
In the full Choir, where Angels join
Their Harps of Melody divine,
Thy Death inspires a Song of Praise,
New through thy Life's eternal Days.
CCCLI. The Keys of Death and the unseen World in CHRIST'S Hand. Rev. i. 18.
1
HAIL to the Prince of Life and Peace,
Who holds the Keys of Death and Hell!
The spacious World unseen is his,
And sovereign Power becomes him well.
2
In Shame and Torment once he died;
But now he lives for evermore:
Bow down, ye Saints, around his Seat,
And, all ye Angel-Bands, adore.
3
So live for ever, Glorious Lord,
To crush thy Foes, and guard thy Friends;
While all thy chosen Tribes rejoice,
That thy Dominion never ends.
4
Worthy thy Hand to hold the Keys,
Guided by Wisdom, and by Love;
Worthy to rule over mortal Life,
Over Worlds below, and Worlds above.
5
When Death thy Servants shall invade,
When Powers of Hell thy Church annoy,
Controlled by Thee, their Rage shall help
The Cause, they labored to destroy.
6
For ever reign, victorious King:
Wide through the Earth thy Name be known;
And call my longing Soul to sing
Sublimer Anthems near thy Throne.
CCCLII. CHRIST'S Care of Ministers and Churches. Rev. ii. 1.
1
WE bless the eternal Source of Light,
Who makes the Stars to shine;
And, through this dark beclouded World,
Diffuseth Rays divine.
2
We bless the Churches sovereign King,
Whose golden Lamps we are;
Fixed in the Temples of his Love
To shine with Radiance fair.
3
Still be our Purity preserved;
Still fed with Oil the Flame;
And in deep Characters inscribed
Our heavenly Master's Name.
4
Then, while between our Ranks he walks
And all our State surveys,
His Smiles shall with new Luster deck
The People of his Praise.
CCCLIII. The Christian Warrior animated and crowned. Rev. ii. 10.
1
HARK! It Is our heavenly Leader's Voice
From his triumphant Seat:
'Midst all the War's tumultuous Noise,
How powerful, and how sweet!
2
"Fight on, my faithful Band, (he cries)
"Nor fear the mortal Blow:
"Who first in such a Warfare dies
"Shall specdiest Victory know.
3
"I have my Days of Combat known,
"And in the Dust was laid,
"But thence I mounted to my Throne,
"And Glory crowns my Head.
4
"That Throne, that Glory you shall share;
"My Hands the Crown shall give;
"And you the sparkling Honors wear,
"While GOD himself shall live".
5
Lord, it is enough; our Bosoms glow
With Courage, and with Love:
Thine Hand shall bear thy Soldiers through,
And raise their Heads above.
6
My Soul, while Deaths beset me round,
Erects her ardent Eyes,
And longs, through some illustrious Wound,
To rush and seize the Prize.
CCCLIV. The Pillar in GOD's heavenly Temple with its Inseription. Rev. iii. 12.
1
ALL-HAIL, victorious Savior, hail!
I bow to thy Command;
And own, that David's roval Key
Well fits thy sovereign Hand.
2
Open the Treasures of thy Love,
And shed thy Gifts abroad;
Unveil to my rejoicing Eyes
The Temple of my GOD.
3
There as a Pillar let me stand
On an eternal Base Foundation.
;
Uprear'd by thine almighty Hand,
And polished by thy Grace.
4
There deep engraven let me bear
The Title of thy GOD;
And mark the new Jerusalem,
As my secure Abode.
5
In lasting Characters inscribe
Thine own beloved Name,
That endless Ages there may read
The great Emanuel's Claim.
6
Lead on, my General, I desy
What Earth or Hell can do;
Thy Conduct, and this glorious Hope
Shall bear thy Soldier through.
CCCLV. GOD's Covenant unchangeable, or The Rainbow round about the Throne.
Rev. iv.-3. compared with Genesis ix. 13-17.
1
SUPREME of Beings, with Delight
Our Eyes survey this heavenly Sight;
And trace with Admiration sweet
The beaming Splendors of thy Feet.
2
Jasper and Sapphire strive in vain
To paint the Glories of thy Train;
Thy Robes all stream eternal Light,
Too powerful for a Cherub's Sight.
3
Yet round thy Throne the Rainbow shines,
Fair Emblem of thy kind Designs:
Bright Pledge, that speaks thy Covenant sure
Long as thy Kingdom shall endure.
4
No more shall Deluges of Woe
Thy new-created World overflow;
Jesus, our Sun, his Beams displays,
And glids the Clouds with beauteous Rays.
5
No Gems so bright, no Forms so fair;
Mercy and Truth still triumph there:
Thy Saints shall bless the peaceful Sign,
When Stars and Suns forget to shine.
6
Even here, while Storms and gloomy Shade,
And Horrors all the Scene overspread,
Faith views the Throne with piercing Eye,
And boasts, the Rainbow still is nigh.
CCCLVI. Victory over Satan by the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of the
Testimony of his Servants. Rev. xii. 11.
1
SEE the old Dragon from his Throne
Sink with enormous Ruin down!
Banished from Heaven, and doomed to dwell
Deep in the fiery Gloom of Hell!
2
Ye Heavens with all your Hosts, rejoice:
Ye Saints, in Consort lend your Voice:
Approach your Lord's victorious Seat,
And tread the Foe beneath your Feet.
3
But whence a Conquest so divine
Gained by such feeble Hands as mine?
Or whence can sinful Mortals boast
Over Satan and his rebel Host?
4
'Twas from thy Blood, Thou slaughtered Lamb,
That all our Palms and Triumphs came;
Thy Cross, thy Spear inflicts the Stroke,
By which the Monster's Head is broke.
5
Thy faithful Word our Hope maintains
Through all our Combat and our Pains;
The Accents of thy heavenly Breath
Thy Soldiers bear through Wounds and Death.
6
Triumphant Lamb, in Worlds unknown,
With Transport round thy radiant Throne,
Thy happy Legions, all complete,
Shall lay their Laurels at thy Feet.
CCCLVII. The Song of Moses and the Lamb. Rev. xv. 3.
1
ISRAEL, thy Tribute bring
To GOD'S victorious Name;
The Song of Moses sing,
Of Moses and the Lamb:
Improve his Lays Songs of Praise.
;
The Theme exceeds,
And nobler Deeds
Demand our Praise.
2
The Prince of Hell arose
With impious Rage and Pride,
And 'midst our numerous Foes
Our feeble Power defied;
"I will overtake,
"And I destroy,
"My Hand with Joy
"Shall force thee back".
3
Thy Hand, Almighty LORD,
Thy trembling Israel saves;
Thine unresisted Word
Divides the threatening Waves:
Thy Hosts pass over;
The Foe overthrown
Sinks like a Stone
To rise no more.
4
Our Triumphs we prepare,
And cheerful Anthems raise;
Jehovah's Arm made bare
Demands immortal Praise;
And while we sing,
Ye Shores, proclaim
His wondrous Name,
Ye Deserts, ring.
5
Through all the Wilderness
Thy Presence, LORD, shall lead;
And bring us to the Place,
Thy sovereign Love decreed;
Those blissful Plains,
Where all around
Hosannas sound,
And Transport reigns.
CCCLVIII. The Conquest of Death and Grief by Views of the heavenly State. Rev.
xxi. 4.
1
LIFT up, ye Saints, your weeping Eyes,
Suspend your Sorrows and your Sighs;
Turn all your Groans to joyful Songs,
Which Jesus dictates to your Tongues.
2
Thus says the Savior from his Throne,
"Behold all former Things are gone,
"Past like an anxious Dream away,
"Chased by the golden Beams of Day.
3
"See in celestial Pomp arrayed
"A new-created World displayed;
"Mark with what Light its Prospects shine!
"How grand, how various, how divine!
4
"There mine own gentle Hand shall dry
"Each Tear from each overflowing Eye,
"And open wide my friendly Breast
"To lull the weary Soul to Rest.
5
"No more shall Grief assail your Heart,
"No boding Fear, no piercing Smart;
"For ever there my People dwell
"Beyond the Range of Death and Hell".
6
Vain King of Terrors, boast no more
Thine ancient wide-extended Power;
Each Saint in Life with Christ his Head
Shall reign, when thou thyself art dead.
CCCLIX. CHRIST the Root and Offspring of David, and the Morning Star. Rev.
xxii -16.
1
ALL-HAIL, mysterious King!
Hail, David's ancient Root!
Thou righteous Branch, which thence did spring,
To give the Nations Fruit.
2
Our weary Souls shall rest
Beneath thy grateful Shade;
Our thirsting Lips Salvation taste;
Our fainting Hearts are glad.
3
Fair Morning Star, arise,
With living Glories bright,
And pour on these awak'ning Eyes
A Flood of sacred Light.
4
The horrid Gloom is fled,
Pierced by thy beauteous Ray;
Shine, and our wandering Footsteps lead
To everlasting Day.
CCCLX. CHRIST'S Invitations ecchoed back etc. Rev. xxii. 17.
1
HOW free the Fountain flows
Of endless Life and Joy!
That Spring, which no Confinement knows,
Whose Waters never cloy!
2
How sweet the Accents sound
From the Redeemer's Tongue!
"Assemble, all ye Nations round,
"In one obedient Throng.
3
"The Spirit bears the Call
"To all the distant Lands;
"The Church, the Bride reflects it back,
"While Jesus waiting stands.
4
"Ho, every thirsty Soul,
"Approach the sacred Spring;
"Drink, and your fainting Spirits cheer,
"Renew the Draught, and sing.
5
"Let all, that will, approach;
"The Water freely take;
"Free from mine opening Heart it flows,
"Your raging Thirst to slake".
6
With thankful Hearts we come
To taste the offered Grace;
And call on all that hear to join
The Trial, and the Praise.
CCCLXI. The Christian rejoicing in the Views of Death and Judgment. Rev. xxii.
20.
1
"BEHOLD I come, (the Savior cries)
"On Wings of Love I fly"
So come, Dear Lord, (my Soul replies)
And bring Salvation nigh.
2
Come, loose these Bonds of Flesh and Sin;
Come, end my Pains and Cares;
Bear me to thy serene Abode
Beyond the Clouds and Stars.
3
I greet the Messengers of Death,
By which Thou call'st me Home;
But doubly greet that joyful Hour,
When Thou thyself shall come.
4
Come, plead thy Father's injured Cause,
And make thy Glory shine;
Come, rouse thy Servants mouldering Dust,
And their whole Frame refine.
5
O come amidst the Angelick Hosts
Their humble Name to own;
And bear the full Assembly back
To dwell around thy Throne.
6
With winged Speed, Redeemer dear,
Bring on the illustrious Day:
Come, lest our Spirits droop and faint
Beneath thy long Delay.
HYMNS ON PARTICULAR OCCASIONS, AND IN UNCOMMON MEASURES.
HYMN CCCLXII. A Morning HYMN, to be used at awaking and rising.
1
AWAKE, my Soul, to meet the Day;
Unfold thy drowsy Eyes,
And burst the ponderous Chain, that loads
Thine active Faculties.
2
GOD'S guardian Shield was round me spread
In my defenseless Sleep:
Let him have all my waking Hours,
Who does my Slumbers keep.
3
[The Work of each immortal Soul
Attentive Care demands;
Think then what painful Labors wait
The faithful Pastor's Hands.]
4
My Moments fly with winged Pace,
And swift my Hours are hurled;
And Death with rapid March comes on
TO unveil the eternal World.
5
I for this Hour must give Account
Before GOD'S awful Throne;
Let not this Hour neglected pass,
As Thousands more have done.
6
Pardon, O GOD, my former Sloth,
And arm my Soul with Grace;
As, rising now, I seal my Vows
To prosecute thy Ways.
7
Bright Sun of Righteousness, arise;
Thy radiant Beams display,
And guide my dark bewildered Soul
To everlasting Day.
CCCLXIII. An Evening HYMN, to be used when composing oneself to sleep.
I.
INTERVAL of grateful Shade,
Welcome to my weary Head!
Welcome Slumbers to mine Eyes,
Tired with glaring Vanities!
My great Master still allows
Needful Periods of Repose:
By my heavenly Father blessed
Thus I give my Powers to Rest;
Heavenly Father! gracious Name!
Night and Day his Love the same:
Far be each suspicious Thought,
Every anxious Care forgot:
Thou, mine ever-bounteous GOD,
Crown'st my Days with various Good:
Thy kind Eye, that cannot sleep,
These defenseless Hours shall keep:
Blessed Vicissitude to me!
Day and Night I Am still with Thee.
II.
What though downy Slumbers flee,
Strangers to my Couch and me?
Sleepless well I know to rest,
Lodged within my Father's Breast.
While the Empress of the Night
Scatters mild her Silver Light;
While the vivid Planets stray
Various through their mystic Way;
While the Stars unnumber'd roll
Round the ever-constant Pole;
Far above these spangled Skies
All my Soul to GOD shall rise;
'Midst the Silence of the Night
Mingling with those Angels bright,
Whose harmonious Voices raise
Ceaseless Love and ceaseless Praise:
Through the Throng his gentle Ear
Shall my tuneless Accents hear;
From on high does he impart
Secret Comfort to my Heart.
He in these serenest Hours
Guides my intellectual Powers,
And his Spirit does diffuse,
Sweeter far than Midnight Dews,
Lifting all my Thoughts above
On the Wings of Faith and Love.
Blessed Alternative to me,
Thus to sleep, or wake, with Thee!
III.
What if Death my Sleep invade?
Should I be of Death afraid?
Whilst encircled by thine Arm,
Death may strike, but cannot harm.
What if Beams of opening Day
Shine around my breathless Clay?
Brighter Visions from on high
Shall regale my mental Eye.
Tender Friends awhile may mourn
Me from their Embraces torn;
Dearer better Friends I have
In the Realms beyond the Grave.
See the guardian Angels nigh
Wait to waft my Soul on high!
See the golden Gates displayed!
See the Crown to grace my Head!
See a Flood of sacred Light,
Which no more shall yield to Night!
Transitory World, farewell!
Jesus calls with him to dwell.
With thy heavenly Presence blessed,
Death is Life, and Labor Rest.
Welcome Sleep, or Death to me!
Still secure, for still with Thee.
CCCLXIV. On Recovery from Sickness, during which, much of the divine Favor
had been experienced.
1
MY GOD, thy Service well demands
The Remnant of my Days:
Why was this fleeting Breath renewed,
But to renew thy Praise?
2
Thine Arms of everlasting Love
Did this weak Frame sustain,
When Life was hovering over the Grave,
And Nature sunk with Pain.
3
Thou, when the Pains of Death were felt,
Did chase the Fears of Hell,
And teach my pale and quivering Lips
Thy matchless Grace to tell.
4
Calmly I bowed my fainting Head
On thy dear faithful Breast;
Pleased to obey my Father's Call
To his eternal Rest.
5
Into thy Hands, my Savior GOD,
Did I my Soul resign,
In firm Dependence on that Truth,
Which made Salvation mine.
6
Back from the Borders of the Grave,
At thy Command I come:
Nor would I urge a speedier Flight
To my celestial Home.
7
Where Thou determin'st mine Abode,
There would I choose to be;
For in thy Presence Death is Life,
And Earth is Heaven with Thee.
CCCLXV. The last Words of David. 2 Samuel xxiii. 1-8 agreeable to the
ingenious metrical Version of the learned Dr. Richard Gray.

1
THUS has the Son of Jesse said,
When Israel's GOD had raised his Head
To high Imperial Sway:
Struck with his last poetic Fire,
Zion's sweet Psalmist tuned his Lyre
To this harmonious Lay.
2
Thus dictates Israel's sacred Rock:
Thus has the GOD of Jacob spoke
By my responsive Tongue:
Behold the JUST ONE over Men
Commencing his religious Reign!
Great Subject of my Song.
3
So gently shines with genial Ray
The unclouded Lamp of rising Day,
And cheers the tender Flowers,
When Midnight's soft diffusive Rain
Has blessed the Gardens and the Plain
With kind refreshing Showers.
4
Shall not my House this Honor boast?
My Soul the eternal Covenant trust,
Well-ordered still and sure?
There all my Hopes and Wishes meet;
In Death I call its Blessings sweet,
And feel its Bond secure.
5
The Sons of Belial shall not spring,
Who spurn at Heaven's appointed King,
And scorn his high Command:
Though wide the Briars infest the Ground,
And the sharp-pointed Thorns around
Defy a tender Hand;
6
A dreadful Warrior shall appear
With Iron Arms, and massy Spear,
And tear them from their Place:
Touched with the Lightning of his Ire,
At once they kindle into Fire,
And vanish in the Blaze.
CCCLXVI. A MILITARY ODE. PSALM CXLIX.
Probably composed by David to be sung, when his Army was marching out to War
against the Remnant of the devoted Nations of Canaan, and first went up in
solemn Procession to the House of GOD at Jerusalem, there, as it were, to
consecrate the Arms, which he put into their Hands. The Beds referred to ver.
5, were probably the Couches, on which they lay at the Banquet attending their
Sacrifices; which gives a noble Sense to a Passage, on any other Interpretation
hardly intelligible.

1
O Praise ye the LORD, prepare a new Song,
And let all his Saints in full Consort join:
Ye Tribes all assemble the Feast to prolong,
In solemn Procession with Music divine.
2
O Israel, in him that made thee rejoice;
Let all Zion's Sons exult in their King;
While to martial Dances you join a glad Voice,
Your lutes harps and timbrels in harmony bring.
3
The LORD in his Saints still finds his Delight;
Salvation from him the Meek shall adorn;
They well may be joyful, sustained by his Might,
And crowned by his favor may lift up their horn.
4
Let Carpets be spread, and Banquets prepared
Those Altars around, whence Incense ascends;
Whilst Anthems of Glory through Salem are heard,
And GOD, whom we worship, indulgent attends.
5
Then as your Hearts bound with Music and Wine,
Inspired by the GOD, who reigns in the Place;
Unsheath all your Weapons, and bright let them shine,
And brandish your Faulchions, while chaunting his Praise.
6
Then march to the Field; the Heathen defy;
And scatter his Wrath on Nations around:
Like angels of vengeance your swords lift on high
And boast, that Jehovah commissions the wound.
7
Their Generals subdued your triumphs shall grace
And loaded with Chains their Kings shall be brought;
On the Necks shall ye trample of Canaan's proud Race,
And all their last remnant for slaughter be sought.
8
No Rage of your own such Rigor demands;
A Sentence divine your Arms must fulfill:
Of old he this vengeance consigned to your hands,
And in sacred Volumes recorded his Will.
9
This Honor, ye Saints, appointed for you,
All-grateful receive, and faithful obey;
And, while his dread Pleasure resistless ye do,
Still make his high Praises the Song of the Day.
CCCLXVII. For the Thanksgiving-Day for the Peace, April 25, 1749.
1
NOW let our Songs address the GOD of Peace,
Who bids the Tumult of the Battle cease:
The pointed Spears to pruning Hooks he bends,
And the broad Faulchion in the Plow-share ends.
His powerful Word unites contending Nations
In kind Embrace, and friendly Salutations.
2
Britain, adore the Guardian of thy State;
Who, high on his celestial Throne elate,
Still watchful over thy Safety and Repose,
Frowned on the Counsels of thy haughtiest Foes;
Thy Coasts secured from every dire Invasion
Of Fire and Sword and spreading Desolation.
3
When rebel bands with desperate madness joined,
He wafted over Deliverance with his Wind;
Drove back the Tide, that deluged half our Land,
And curbed their Fury with his mightier Hand:
Till dreadful Slaughter, and the last Confusion
Taught those audacious Sinners their Delusion.
4
He gave our Fleets to triumph over the Main,
And scatter Terror 'cross wide Ocean's Plain:
Opposing Leaders trembled at the Sight,
Nor found their Safety in the attempted Flight;
Taught by their Bonds, how vainly they pretended
Those to distress, whom Israel's GOD defended.
5
Fierce Storms were summoned up in Britain's aid,
And meagre Famine hostile Lands overspread;
By Sufferings bowed their Conquests they release,
Nor scorn the Overtures of equal Peace:
Contending Powers congratulate the Blessing,
Joint Hymns of Gratitude to Heaven addressing.
6
While we beneath our Vines and Fig Trees sit,
Or thus within thy sacred Temple meet,
Accept, Great GOD, the Tribute of our Song,
And all the Mercies of this Day prolong.
Then spread thy peaceful Word through every Nation,
That all the Earth may hail thy great Salvation.
CCCLXVIII. An Hymn for a Fast Day in Time of War.
1
GREAT GOD of Heaven and Nature, rise,
And hear our loud united Cries:
See Britain bow before thy Face
Through all her Coasts, and seek thy Grace.
2
No Arm of Flesh we make our Trust;
Nor Sword, nor Horse, nor Ships we boast:
Thine is the Land, and thine the Main,
And human Force and Skill is vain.
3
Our Guilt might draw thy Vengeance down
On every Shore, on every Town;
But view us, LORD, with pitying Eye,
And lay thy lifted Thunder by.
4
Forgive the Follies of our Times;
And purge our Land from all its Crimes;
Reformed and decked with Grace divine,
Let Princes Priests and People shine.
5
O may no GOD-provoking Sin
Through all our Camps and Navies reign;
No foul Reproach, to drive from thence
Our surest Glory and Defense.
6
So shall our GOD delight to bless,
And crown our Arms with wide Success:
Our Foes shall dread JEHOVAH'S Sword,
And conquering Britain shout the LORD.
CCCLXIX. Thanksgiving for National Deliverance, and Improvement of it.
1
SALVATION does to GOD belong;
His Power and Grace shall be our Song;
His Hand has dealt a secret Blow,
And Terror strikes the haughty Foe.
2
Praise to the LORD, who bows his Ear
Propitious to his People's Prayer;
And, though Deliverance long delay,
Answers in his well-chosen Day.
3
O may thy Grace our Land engage,
(Rescued from fierce tyrannic Rage,)
The Tribute of its Love to bring
To Thee, our Savior, and our King!
4
Our Temples, guarded from the Flame,
Shall echo thy triumphant Name;
And every peaceful private Home
To Thee a Temple shall become.
5
Still be it our supreme Delight
To walk as in thy honored Sight:
Still in thy Precepts and thy Fear
To Life's last Hour to persevere.
CCCLXX. A Church seeking Direction from God in the Choice of a Pastor.
1
SHEPHERD of Israel, bend thine Ear,
Thy Servants Groans indulgent hear;
Perplexed, distressed, to Thee we cry,
And seek the Guidance of thine Eye.
2
Thy comprehensive View surveys
Our wandering Paths, our trackless Ways;
Send forth, O LORD, thy Truth and Light,
To guide our doubtful Footsteps right.
3
With longing Eyes, behold, we wait
In suppliant Crowds at Mercy's Gate:
Our drooping Hearts, O GOD, sustain:
Shall Israel seek thy Face in vain?
4
O LORD, in Ways of Peace return,
Nor let thy Flock neglected mourn;
May our blessed Eyes a Shepherd see,
Dear to our Souls, and dear to Thee.
5
Fed by his Care, our Tongues shall raise
A cheerful Tribute to thy Praise;
Our Children learn the grateful Song,
And theirs the cheerful Notes prolong.
THE END.
AN INDEX, OR TABLE to find an HYMN by the TITLE or CONTENTS of it, or an HYMN
suited to PARTICULAR SUBJECTS and OCCASIONS.
N. B. The Figures refer to the Hymns.

A
AARON'S Breastplate 8. Abiding in Christ 237, 238. ABRAHAM'S Care of his
Family 2. Faith in leaving his Country 318. God, his God 319. Intercession for
Sodom 3. Absence of God dreadful 18, 157. Activity in Religion 199, 210.
rewarded 172. ADAM, the First and Second 270. Adopting Love 124, 281.
Afflictions, improved 159. moderated 92. salutary 143. submitted to 42.
succeeded by Joy 66. by Rest and Happiness in Heaven 212, 310, 358. Angels,
Christ seen of them 304. their Head 299. Reply to those who sought Christ 194.
Song at Christ's Birth 200, 201. Appeal to Christ for the Sincerity of Love to
him 246. Ark, the godly Man's 90. Noah saved in it, an Emblem of the Believer's
Safety in Christ 336.
B
BAcksliders, their Ingratitude 191. invited to return 122. God's Pity for them
153. recollecting themselves 149. Blessing of God necessary and desired 53.
Blessings, spiritual acknowledged 283. temporal, God's Readiness to give them
argued 261. Blood of Christ, admitting to the Holiest 315. cleansing from Sin
348. conquering Satan 356. conveying Blessings 347. purifying 312. BRITAIN, God
entreated for it 120. his Controversy with it 158. unreformed by Deliverances
140, 155.
C
CAptives of Sin lamented 129. Care, anxious reproved 20, 47, 340. of the Soul
needful 206, 207. Cattle, the Hand of God upon them 5. Charity to the Poor 188,
205. rewarded 209. Childless Christians comforted 112. Children, Christ's
Regard to them 198. commended to God 51. destroyed 141. instructed 2. of God
281, 326. CHRIST, his Appearance after his Resurrection 245. second Appearance
314, 342. Ascension 244. his Blood, see Blood his Compassion 185, 205, 214,
235. Complaint on the Cross 192, 193. Christians complete in him 299. his
Conquests 41, 356, 357. the Door 228. our Forerunner 311. forsaken by his
Disciples 191. by his Father 192, 193. his Flock comforted 208. humbled and
exalted 139, 350. his Intercession 8. his Invitations 74, 224, 225, 360. living
to him 276. the Lord our Righteousness 132. loving him 239, 246. his Message
203. his Nativity 200, 201. Prayer for his Enemies 217. precious to Believers
335. his Presence with his Churches 195, 352. a Prince and Savior 248.
rejoiced in though unseen 330. his Resurrection 194, 218. Christians risen and
exalted with him 287. Root of David 359. Sanctification by him 242, 266.
Security in him 336. his Sheep 230, 231, 232. Morning Star 359. Steward of
God's Family 85. Stone living and corner 333, 334. his Submission 190. Sun of
Righteousness 173. his Transfiguration 183. his Triumph 41. unchangeable 323.
Union with him 267. our Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. 266. Christians, see
Saints. Church, Birthplace of the Saints 49. Glory in the latter Day 118.
Christ's Presence with it 195. Care of it 352. its Prosperity, a Minister's
Happiness 301. purified and guarded 107. its Security 182. praying for a Pastor
13, 370. Comfort in God 20. to the childless 112. under Death of Friends 236,
260, 302. See Support. Communion with God through Christ 346, 347. Compassion of
God 55, 109. of Christ 185, 205, 214, 219, 235. christian 205, 282. Conduct of
Christ, mysterious 234. Consolation from God 277. from Christ 235. Covenant,
the Blood of it delivering Prisoners 169. Engagements of it desired 137.
rejoiced in 23. supporting under Troubles 21. in Death 22. unchangeable 355.
Courage in Religion 9. in the Cause of Christ 247. Course, the Christian's
finished with Joy 255. Creatures, insufficient 125. mean 97. vain 268. Cross of
Christ, its Influence 233, 276, 280. Cup of Blessings 106. CYRUS' Spirit
stirred up 24.
D
DAemoniack, relapsing 180. recovered 204. DAVID encouraging himself in God 20.
his vain Persuit of Perfection on Earth 63. his last Words 365. Day of small
Things not despised 168. of Grace 127, 256. of Judgment, see Judgment. Dead
quickened 89. pious, living to God 215. Death appointed to all 313. conquered
by Christ 308. under his Control 351. of Friends improved 164. Happiness
beyond it 295. a great Journey 27. none in Heaven 358. prepared for 130, 313.
rejoiced in 361. a Sleep 196. Support in it 22, 32, 45. uncertain Time of it
130, 134, 329. Delaying Sinners admonished 127, 130, 256, 292, 309, 329.
Deliverance celebrated 58, 59, 60, 364. public 272, 369. spiritual 105, 204.
Desires known to God 39. See Prayer. Devil, see Satan. Devotion, daily 79.
secret 177. an Evidence of Adoption 281. See Prayer. Diligence, christian 199,
210, 296.
E
EDucation, good 2. bad 141. Enemies of God destroyed 44. of Christ destroyed
213. his Prayer for them 217. of the Church, restrained 46. Defense against
them 95. Love to them 217. spiritual, see Satan. ENOCH'S Piety and Translation
1. Establishment in Religion 341. Eternity of God 54. of Christ 323. of
heavenly Happiness 187, 302. employed in God's Praise 71. Evening Hymn 363.
Examples, good, useful 175.
F
FAith and Confession 262. Jonah's recommended 157. living by it 280. in God's
Name 30. struggling with Unbelief 197. the Syrophenician Woman's 181.
Faithfulness of God 269, 316, 355. Fall of Adam, Effects of it 270. Family
Religion 2. God's, under Christ's Care 85. Farewell, the christian 279.
Fast-Days, Hymns for 3, 6, 83, 84, 116, 120, 140, 155, 158, 186, 339, 368.
Fasts, unsuccessful, accounted for 116. Fathers, State of them reflected on
164. Fear, unreasonable, restrained 15, 30, 47, 98. Feast of Wisdom 76. of the
Gospel 211. the Christian's secret Feast 222. Fire, God's Controversy by it
154. his Word compared to it 133. everlasting, the Portion of the Wicked 189.
Forgiveness of Enemies 217. divine, see Pardon. Forsaking God, its Evil 131.
the Misery of being forsaken by him 18. Foundation, the divine, firm 305. of
the Church, Christ 333, 334. Frailty of Man, and God's Pity 55. Fruitfulness of
Christians 237, 240. Funeral Hymns 17, 25, 27, 32, 42, 196, 208, 215, 260, 295,
302. See Death, Grave, Resurrection.
G
GEnerations, succeeding, supported by God 51, passing away 164. Gentiles,
Christ the Light of them 202. united to the Church 113, 284. Glory, divine,
Moses' View of it 11. future, see Heaven. Glorying in God alone 128. GOD, his
Blessing desirable 53. his Compassion 55, 109, 153. his Complacency in his
People 38. in their Prosperity 37. in his Thoughts of Peace 135. in the
Salvation of his Church 163. the Dewlling Place of his People 51. his Eternity
54. his Faithfulness 269, 316, 355. the God of the Patriarchs 319. his Goodness
to Saints 34. to all Creatures 56. crowning the Year 43. ever-enduring 67.
relished 35. his Greatness 97. the Happiness of his People 45. his Justice and
Mercy 12. his Knowledge of our Days 38. of our Distress 39. of our Frame 55.
his Love in Christ 220. his pardoning Mercy 28, 50, 103, 160. his Name
proclaimed 12. Trust in it 30. his People his Portion 14. our Portion here and
hereafter 45. his Presence desirable 10. with his Saints 38. our Preserver
102. our Protector 31, 340. his Providence 47. its Bounties 176, 297. the
Salvation of his People 36, 125. our Shepherd 144. shining into the Heart 274.
speaking Peace 48, 109, 114. Support in him 15, 45. unchangeable 54. unknown
253. waiting to be gracious 93. Goodness of God for Time and Eternity 34.
crowning the Year 43. everlasting 67. tasted 35. universal 56. Gospel, its
happy Effects 86, 100, 111. its Feast 211. a Law of Liberty 327. its Progress
desired 120, 121. its grand Scheme 284. its joyful Sound 50. its Treasure in
earthen Vessels 275. Government of God, Zion's Joy 108. of Christ 85, 351. over
Death and the unseen World 351. Grace, growing in it 344. pardoning 103, 160.
perfecting 325. quickening 62. saved by it 286. Gratitude, the Spring of
Religion 152. See Praise. Grave, its Solitude 25, 27. Christ's Triumph over it
194, 350, 351. See Resurrection. Grief at beholding Transgressors 64. moderated
196, 268, 302.
H
HAppiness of God's Israel 16. his Complacency in it 37, 38, 163. only in God
45. Hardening ourselves against God, fatal 26, 256, 309. Head of the Church,
Christ 290. of Angels and Men 299. Health restored 58, 59, 60. spiritual 204,
223. Heaven, its Happiness 295. an Inheritance 285. everlasting Light there
119. made meet for it 298. its Rest 310. Seeing Christ there 295. to be sought
first 178. View of it overcoming Grief and Death 358. Heavenly -mindedness 300.
Help from God 19, 98, 257. sought and obtained 68. House of God above 33, 354.
of Prayer 113. of Wisdom 76. Humiliation, and Exaltation of Israel 99. of
Christ 139, 351. Day of, see Fast. Humility of a Penitent 142. under God's Hand
338, 339. Hymn for Morning 362. for Evening 363. for a Day of Prayer 120. See
Praise. Hypocrisy, dreaded 250.
I
JACOB'S Vow 4. JERUSALEM, Christ's Tears over it 214. his Gospel first
preached there 219. the new 354. Incarnation of Christ 200, 220. Inconstancy in
Religion 151. Inheritance of the Upright 38. of Heaven 285. Iniquity abounding
186. to be avoided 7. Intercession of Christ 8. Invisible God, regarded 321.
Joy, religious 69. in God 161. in Christ 330, 335. ISRAEL and Amalek 6.
backsliding invited to return 122. its Happiness 16. humbled and exalted 99.
its Obstinacy 88. its Stupidity 83. Jubilee, the Gospel 50. Judgment appointed
to all 313. approaching 317. Circumstances of it 342. no escaping it 337.
prepared for 343. desired and rejoiced in 314, 361. happy for the Saints 303.
Judgments and Mercies of God compared 109. Justice and Mercy of God 12.
K
KEY of David in Christ's Hand 85, 350, 351. Kingdom of God to be first sought
178. of Christ 41, 351. of Heaven 187, 208. Knowledge of God sought 150.
experimental 345.
L
LAW of Liberty 327. Liberality, see Charity. Liberty given by Christ 226, 227.
the Law of 327. to enter the Holiest 315. Life, abundant by Christ 229, 349.
the Christian's connected with Christ's 236. the Fountain of it 170. vain 52.
uncertain 130, 134, 329. Light shining into the Heart 274. of the Gentiles,
Christ 202. everlasting from God 119. of good Examples 175. Living to Christ
276, 294. by Faith in him 280. to God hereafter 215. Love of God in sending his
Son 220. in giving all Things with him 261. shed abroad 259. of Christ, in
ministering to Men 184. in giving himself for them 184, 291, 293. to Christ
expressed 335. continued in 239. Appeal to him for its Sincerity 246. to Men
291. unfeigned 331. to Enemies 217.
M
MAjesty of God 97. Man, frail and mortal 270. frail, but God eternal 54.
Marriage, spiritual 293. Meditation and Retirement 29. Meek, their Happiness
72. Mercy, pardoning 103, 160. despised 258. See Compassion. Military Ode 366.
Ministers, under Christ's Care 352. Christ ever with them 195. comforted, that
they may comfort others 271. Comfort on their Death 17, 182, 195, 275.
faithful, promoted to join the Angels 166. frail and weak 275. given by God
123. the Church's Prosperity their Happiness 301. sweet Savor to God 273.
sought from God 13, 370. watching for Souls 324. willing to be employed 82.
die, but the Gospel lives 275. Ministry instituted 289. Christ's unsuccessful
104. Miracles for Israel in the Wilderness 47. Moderation, christian 268.
Morning Hymn 362. Mortality, see Man, Death. MOSES, his wise Choice 320 his
Regard to the invisible God 321. his Song 357. his View of the divine Glory 11.
Mourners comforted 66, 196, 302. See Comfort, Support. Multitude not to be
followed to Evil 7.
N
NAtional Sins lamented 140. Deliverances celebrated 272, 369. Nature frail,
but God compassionate 55. and Scripture 63. Nearness to God through Christ 113,
288. New Year's Day, Hymns for 19, 43, 52, 67, 134, 257. NOAH preserved in the
Ark 336. November the 5 th, Hymns for 108, 272, 369.
O
OBedience to the heavenly Vision 82. to God's Word 136. the Design of national
Deliverances 369. Ordination, Hymns for 82, 123, 166, 275, 289, 324.
P
PArdon of Sin celebrated 103, 153, 160. for the chief of Sinners 219. and
Strength 160. Part, the better chosen 207, 320. Patience under Afflictions 42.
under mysterious Providence 212. in waiting 93, 295. Patriarchs, a City
prepared for them 319. Peace, with God sought 91. obtained 87, 114. rejoiced in
135. improved 48. in Christ amidst Tribulations 241. public celebrated 367.
Perfection, not to be found in Nature 63. in Religion 341. Persecution to be
expected by Christians 306. Perseverance of the Saints 232, 341. Pity, see
Compassion. Poor, trusting in God 162. Charity to them 188, 205, 209. Portion
of God, his People 14. God, ours 45. Power of God 26, 156. the Security of the
Saints 31. 216, 232. Praise to God, everlasting 71. for Christ 201, 220. for
his Goodness 34, 35, 43, 56. his everlasting Goodness 67, 70. for the Hope of
Glory 298. for Liberty of Worship 49. for Ministers 123, 289. for Pardon 160.
for public Peace 367, 369. for Preservation 257. for Protection 31. for
Recovery from Sickness 58, 59, 60, 364. as our Shepherd 144. for spiritual
Blessings 283. for temporal Blessings given with Christ 261. Prayer heard 68.
secret 177. Family 2. for the Spirit 251. for Ministers 13, 370. for the
Revival of Religion 120, 121. House of Prayer 113. Preparation to meet God 156.
for Christ's second Coming 317, 343. Presence of God desirable 10. of Christ
with his Churches 17, 195. Preservation, from God 31, 95, 102, 257. Pride
punished 26. Prisoners, spiritual delivered 105, 169, 203. Privileges
misimproved 127. of Christians by the Blood of Christ 287, 288, 347, 348, 356.
Promises, God's Fidelity to them 316, 355. Prosperity from God 53. not to be
expected by Rebels against him 26. dreadful, if abused 212. Providence 108.
followed 318. its Bounties 176, 297. its Mysteries to be cleared up hereafter
212, 234.
Q
Quickening Grace desired 62. Quietness under Trouble 42.
R
RAce, the Christian 296. Christ our Forerunner in it 311. Raiment, spiritual
132, 165. Rainbow around the Throne 355. Rebels against God warned 44. punished
26, 156. against Christ executed 213. Rebellion, impudent 136. Hymn for
Deliverance from it 46. Recovery from Sickness 58, 59, 60, 364. Redemption by
Christ 170, 226, 227, 266. Rejoicing in God amidst Poverty 161. in Christ though
unseen 330. in our Covenant-Engagements 23. in the Views of Death and Judgment
314, 361. See Joy. Religion revived 146. Activity in it 172. Inconstancy in it
151. Gratitude the Spring of it 152. Repentance commanded to all 254. the Means
of Pardon 28. producing Humility and Submission 142. Resignation, see Patience,
Submission. Rest, the holy Soul's in God 57. remaining for God's People 310.
Resurrection of Christ 194, 218. of Christians 89, 260, 270, 287. by the Spirit
260. Retirement, and Self-Examination 29. Returning to God 122, 126, 149.
Revival of Religion attempted 172. prayed for 120, 121. Riches, their Vanity
63, 212. Desire of them moderated 268. everlasting, obtained by Charity 209.
Righteous Men, see Saints. Righteousness from Christ 132, 165, 266, 274. Rod of
God heard 159. its good Effects 143.
S
SAbbath, the eternal 310. Sacrifice of Christ 220, 291. See Blood. the living
263. Safety in God 31, 90, 95, 98, 102. in the Ways of Religion 96 Saints,
their Excellency 77, 78. their Happiness 16, 38. God's Portion 14. their
Prospects for Time and Eternity 33, 45. their Sentence and final Happiness 187.
Christ glorified in them 303. and Sinners different Views in Time of Danger 94.
different End 212. Salvation approaching 264. beautifying the Meek 72.
everlasting 310, 314. See Heaven. from God 36. God magnified for it 40.
speaking it to his People 36. by Grace 286. the Scheme of it worthy of God 307.
the Word of it sent to us 252. Samaritan, the good 205. Sanctification of
Christ and his Church 242. by Christ 266, 293. Satan, his Captives lamented
129. conquered by Christ 308. by Christians 356. his Head bruised 265. his
Power restrained 216. his strong Holds cast down 278. Scripture, its Excellency
63. See Word. Seasons of the Year 43. Secret Prayer 177. Seeking the Knowledge
of God 150. the Kingdom of God first 178. Things above 300. Christ 75.
Self-Dedication 23, 263. Self-Examination 29, 138. Sepulcher in the Garden 243.
See Grave. Serving Christ 276, 294. with Zeal 210, 247. Settlement of a
Minister, a Hymn for 123. See Ordination, Minister. Sheep, Christ's, their
Character 230. Happiness 231. Security 232. comforted 208. God's Care of them
144. recovered from Wandering 65. Shepherd of Saints is God 144. Sickness,
healed 58, 59, 60, 364. spiritual, healed 204, 223. Silence under Affliction
42. See Submission. SIMEON'S Song and Prophecy 202. Sin, its Captives lamented
129. causing Grief to good Men 64. cleansed by Christ's Blood 312. 348.
pardoned 160, 179. remorstrated against 115. none in Heaven 310. Singing in
God's Ways 69. See Joy, Rejoicing. Sinners alarmed 80. destroyed 26. their Doom
148. exhorted 328. recovered 204. relapsing 180. their final Sentence and
Misery 189. warned of their Appearance at Judgment 337. their vain Refuge 337.
Soldier, the christian, animated and crowned 353, 354. Song of Moses and the
Lamb 357. See Hymn, Praise. Soul, God its Savior 36. its Strength 68. the Care
of it needful 206, 207. Spirit of God, compared to Water 221, 225, 360. his
Influences desired 145, 251, 360. lifting up his Standard 117. the Proof of our
Adoption 281. quickening dead Saints 260. revealing Heaven 285. Spirits of Men
under God's Influence 24. departing committed to Christ 249. Spiritual Enemies,
see Satan. State of the Dead reflected on 164. Stone, the living 333. the
corner 334. Strength from Heaven 15, 68, 98, 269. Subjection to God 322.
Submission to God 42, 190. Success of the Gospel 100, 111, 147, 173. sought
120, 121. Sufferings of Christ 191, 307. and his Successes 41, 139. of
Christians 306. See Grief, Comfort, Support. Sun of Righteousness 173. Supper,
Lord's, Hymns for it 171, 288, 350. Support from God 15. in Death 32, 45. in
the Covenant under Troubles 20, 21. in Death 22. on the Death of faithful
Ministers 17, 182, 195, pious Friends 17, 196, 208, 215, 260, 302. young
Christians 234. Sympathy, christian 205, 282,
T
TAble of the Lord polluted 171. spread, and Invitations sent 211. Tasting
divine Goodness 35. that the Lord is gracious 332. Teachings, divine 110.
Christ's excellent 175. Temple, the spiritual 167, 333. the heavenly and
Christians Pillars in it 33, 354. Temptations moderated 216. overcome 356.
Strength proportioned to them 269. Thankfulness, see Praise. Thanksgiving,
Hymns of 67, 70, 71. for public Mercies 46, 95, 272, 369. Things small, the
Day of, not despised 168. Time, redeemed 130, 292, 317, 329. wasted 52, 127.
Triumph in God's Protection 31. of Christ 41. of the Gospel, see Success.
Trouble, Patience under it 42. Consolation in it 235. in domestic Troubles 21.
See Support. Trust in God 30, 87, 162.
V U
VAcant Congregations seeking God 13, 370. Vanity of Creatures, and God's
Sufficiency 125. of earthly Things 268. of Man 63. of Man and Majesty of God
97. of Riches 212. of worldly Schemes 329. of our Years 52. Victory celebrated
46, 272, 369. spiritual, see Satan. Vine, Christ the true 237. abiding in him
237, 238. Vineyard of God 81. its Unfruitfulness punished 174. Unbelief and
Faith struggling 197. Unchangeableness of God 54. of Christ 323. of the
Covenant 355. Unknown God 253. Voice of Christ calling Men 74. of God to be
immediately heard 309. of the Rod heard 159. Vows, religious encouraged 137.
rejoiced in 23.
W
WAiting for God 93. Walking with God 1, 79. Warfare, spiritual 199, 306, 353,
354. See Satan. Watchfulness, christian 199, 210. Waters, living, an Emblem of
the Spirit 221, 225, 360. of the Sanctuary 147. Ways of God, singing in them
69. Safety in them 96. the blind and weak led in them 101. of the Upright known
to God 38. searching and trying our Ways 138. Wicked, see Sinner. Wilderness,
transformed 100. Miracles in it 47. Wisdom, her House and Feast 76. her
Invitations 76. her Reproofs and Encouragements 73. true 150. Christ our Wisdom
266. Word of God, its Benefit to Youth 61. its Efficacy 133, 356. its
Excellency 63. World, transitory 268. vain 329. destroyed 342. Worship, daily
79. Family 2. secret 177. opening a new Place of Worship 49. Wrath, future 189.
treasured up 258. of Enemies restrained 95. and overruled 46.
Y
YEar, crowned with divine Goodness 43. wasted 52. See New Year's Day. Youth
pressed to regard Scripture 61. to seek Christ 75. to seek Heaven first 178.
Comfort on their Death 234.
Z
ZEal for God 9. for Christ's Cause 246, 247, approved and rewarded 172. ZION,
God comforting it 163. entreated for it 120. its Joy in God's Government 108.
purified and guarded 107. the Highway to it 96. Way to it sought 137. See
Church.
FINIS.
BOOKS published by the late Reverend P. DODDRIDGE, D. D.
And sold by J. WAUGH and W. FENNER, at the Turk's Head in Lombard Street,
LONDON.
I. THE FAMILY-EXPOSITOR. In Three Volumes, 4 to. Vol. I. and II. containing a
Paraphrase and Version of the Four Evangelists, disposed in Order of an
Harmony, with critical Notes, and a practical Improvement of each Section. Vol.
III. contains the Acts of the Apostles, with two Dissertations: 1. On Sir Isaac
Newton's System of the Harmony. 2. On the Inspiration of the New Testament,
with proper Indexes to the whole. Price bound 1 l. 18 s. Vol. III. may be had
separate.

II. The Rise and Progress of RELIGION in the Soul: Illustrated in a Course of
serious and practical Addresses, suited to Persons of every Character and
Circumstance; with a devout Meditation to each Chapter. 8 vo. 5 s. 12 mo. 3 s.

III. Ten Sermons on the Power and Grace of CHRIST, and on the Evidences of his
glorious Gospel. 8 vo. 4 s. 12 mo. 2 s. 6 d. The 3 Sermons on the Evidences,
etc. may be had separate.

IV. Ten Practical Discourses on Regeneration. 2 s. 6 d. bound.

V. Sermons on the Religious Education of Children. 3d Edit. 1 s. bound.

VI. Sermons to Young Persons on several Subjects. 3d Edit. 1 s. 6 d. bound.

Now publishing by Subscription, in Three Volumes,
THE FAMILY-EXPOSITOR on the Epistolary Part of the NEW TESTAMENT, with the
Book of the Revelation, consisting of a large Paraphrase on the whole; in which
a new Translation of the Sacred Text will be inserted in a distinct Character:
To which will be added, Critical Notes, with a practical Improvement of each
Section. The First Volume (containing the Epistles to the Romans and
Corinthians) is already delivered to the Subscribers. The other two Volumes are
in the Press in great Forwardness. The Price to Subscribers is 1 l. 16 s. sewed
in blue Paper. -- Subscriptions are taken in by Mrs. Doddridge at Northampton,
and J. Waugh and W. Fenner, at the Turk's Head in Lombard Street, London: Of
whom may be had all the Author's other Works.

N. B. The Subscribers to those Volumes may be assured the Publication of these
Hymns has not retarded that Work; which will be published with as much
Expedition, as the Nature of such a Work, and the other Engagements of those
Gentlemen, who superintend the Press, will admit.

Lately published
The Christian's Triumph over Death. A Sermon occasioned by the much-lamented
Death of the Rev. Philip Doddridge, D. D. by Job Orton.

BOOKS Printed by J. Cotton and J. Eddowes in SALOP; And Sold by T. and T.
Longman in Paternoster Row, LONDON.
1. A CATECHISM, or Summary of Doctrinal and Practical Religion. Part 1. The
Evidences and Doctrines of Christianity. 2. The Divine Virtues. 3. The Social
Virtues. 4. The Human Virtues. 5. The general Properties and Perfection of
Holiness. 6. Of Repentance. 7. Motives to Religion. 8. General Application to
Youth. With a Preface, showing the Importance and Advantage of a Religious
Education; Recommended to the serious Perusal of all Heads of Families and
Young Persons. 1 s.

II. Reading made more easy. A Spelling-Book for Children, with Variety of
Pictures for their Instruction and Delight. 4th Edit. Corrected and much
enlarged. 4 d.

III. A Call to the Unconverted. By the late Rev'd and pious Mr. Richard
Baxter. To which are added, Directions how to spend every ordinary Day, and
every Lord's Day. Collected from the Works of Mr. Baxter and Dr. Doddridge. 1 s.

IV. A Plain Catechism for Children: To which is added, Another for those who
are to be admitted to the Lord's Supper. 7th Edit. By Matthew Henry.

V. A Compassionate Address to the Christian World. By. J. Reynolds.

N. B. The three last are in the Welsh Language.

Of whom may be had,

Select Portions of the Singing Psalms from the two Versions allowed by
Authority. For the Use of Churches. 6 d. bound.


