THE Amorous Widow: OR, THE WANTON WIFE. A COMEDY. As it is Performed by Her
MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by the late Famous Mr. THOMAS BETTERTON.

Now first Printed from the Original Copy.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1710.

SIR Peter Pride. A great Boaster of his Honor, his Valor, what a noble
Family he is derived from, and of their mighty Courage. Mr. Freeman. Cuningham.
A Gentleman in love with Philadelphia, and is much courted by the Widow. Mr.
Verbruggen. Lovemore. His Friend, in love with Mr. Brittle's Wife, and
endeavors to have an Intrigue with her; but the Widow courts him too. Mr.
Betterton. Barnaby Brittle. An old Citizen that keeps a Glassshop, married to
Sir Peter Pride's Daughter. Mr. Dogget. Jeffrey. Servant to Cuningham, in love
with Prudence. Mr. Fieldhouse. Clodpole. A simple Country Fellow that Lovemore
employs in sending Letters to Mrs. Brittle. Mr. Bright. Merryman. A Falconer to
Cuningham, who takes upon him to represent the Viscount Sans-Terre, that is to
marry the Widow. Mr. Underhill. Lady Laycock. An amorous old Widow, that courts
every one she can for Marriage, sancying her self so engaging, that all that
see her must love her. Mrs. Leigh. Lady Pride. Wife to Sir Peter, a formal old
Lady that boasts much of her Gentility, and of her great Name and Family. Mrs.
Willis. Mrs. Brittle. Their Daughter, Wife to Barnaby Brittle; a Cunning,
Intrieguing Coquet, that always over-reaches her Husband. Mrs. Bracegirdle.
Philadelphia. Niece to the Widow, in love with Cuningham. Mrs. Porter.
Prudence. Maid to the Widow. Mrs. Hunt. Damaris. Maid to Mrs. Brittle, that
assists her in her Intriegues. Mrs. Prince.
THE Amorous Widow: OR, THE WANTON WIFE.
ACT I. SCENE a Room.
Enter Philadelphia with a Letter, followed by Jeffrey. Phil. I Should believe
Mr. Cuningham very constant, if I had Faith enough to credit this Letter,
Jeffry. What Complaints are here? But it is the Style, that all young Lovers
write.


Jeff. Pray, Madam, believe me; you know I am a Man of Integrity: I cannot
dissemble. Let him write what he pleases, If he did not love you, do you think
I Would tell you so?


Phil. When he has Opportunity, I must confess, he says kind things to me.


Jeff. Take my Word, Madam, my Master is not like other Men -- Unless he loves
a Lady, and loves her passionately too, he never troubles himself to compliment
her much.


Phil. Never? Yes, Jeffry; sometimes, you know, he compliments my Aunt.


Jeff. That Is a convincing Proof of his Love to you; you cannot think him
reduced to the Necessity of making Love to an antiquated Piece, with design to
know her otherwise, than to obtain the Happiness of seeing you? But I shall
tell him, Madam --


Phil. Tell him I have received and read his Letter.


Jeff. Is that all, Madam?


Phil. All! Yes. Are you not content with that?


Jeff. Any indifferent Person, that had Hands, and could but read, would have
done, as much, as that.


Phil. Well; Tell him then, in time perhaps I may --


Jeff. My Master, Madam, cannot endure to depend on a perhaps.


Enter Prudence. Pru. Quick, quick, up to your Chamber, Madam.


Phil. What Is the Matter? Is my Aunt coming hither?


Pru. She Is at your Heels. Go up the Back-Stairs quickly.


Phil. Farewell, Jeffry; Commend me to thy Master. Exit Phil.


Jeff. For what, I beseech you? Is not my Master bewitc'd, to court a Lady a
whole Year, and she hardly tell him she loves him yet?


Pru. Alas! She Is but a Novice. Let me alone with her; I Will order the Business
so, that if thy Master be discreet and passionate enough in his Expressions, he
wins her Heart I Will warrant you.


Jeff. He can say nothing to her, but that damned Aunt of hers is harkning to it
still. What Pleasure can she find in Love at Fifty?


Pru. Fie, Jeffry, you must say Five and twenty.


Jeff. I wonder any Woman can have the Impudence to live, and trouble Mankind
after that Age.


Pru. There never was a Woman so old, but she retained a good Opinion of her
self.


Jeff. Then she dresses her self so fantastically, that all may see she strives
to appear Young in defiance of Nature. She is more gaudy in that she calls
Half-Mourning, than a young Bride is on her Wedding-Night. The Devil's in her
if she believes any one can love her: It Is jeering her, but to be commonly
civil to her.


Pru. A little Flattery fires her. She believes all, that is said to her: And
he that does not make love to her, and compliment her, shall not be twice
admitted to her House.


Jeff. O reverend Beauty! on my Conscience, if I would grease her Chops with a
few Compliments, she would mump and smile upon me.


Pru. No doubt on it.


Jeff. When shall my Master have an Opportunity to speak freely to Philadelphia?


Pru. Mr. Lovemore is thy Master's Friend, and is better beloved here, than he
imagines You must persuade him to amuse the Aunt, that Mr. Cuningham may have
Convenience to court the Niece.


Jeff. Mr. Lovemore's tired with playing that part so often; he is cloyed with
the Aunt, and swears he will have no more of her.


Pru. I Am sure her Niece and I endure much more. Tell him, 'twill be Charity in
him to relieve us.


Jeff. 'Twill be hard to persuade him to it.


Pru. This old Lady of mine has languish'd for a young Husband ever since Sir
Oliver Laycock died: She cares not what Estate he has, or what Religion he is
of, so he be but young and lusty. Where is the great Viscount Sans Terre, thy
Master told her of? Methinks he is long a coming.


Jeff. Some cross unlucky Business hinders him.


Pru. She has lately received some Letters, that have given a full Account of
him.


Jeff. So much the worse. What is it?


Pru. They say his Fortune is not very much, but he is greatly born, and very
pleasant; and that he is so great a Lover of Music, he has not a Servant but
can Sing or Dance, or Play upon some Instrument. You may know when he is come by
the Noise; the Fiddlers will welcome him to Town; for all from Westminster to
Wapping pay him Homage.


Jeff. Would he were but married to her, Prudence.


Pru. Whether he marries her or not, is not our Business, Jeffry. Let him but
fool with us till thy Master has gained her Niece, and then our Work is done.


Jeff. Well, we have had enough of thy old Lady Laycock. Let us now talk of our
own Affairs; speak, do thou love me, Prudence?


Pru. A pleasant Question! Do you doubt it now?


Jeff. If you would have me credit you, swear it.


Pru. Sure you are jealous Jeffry?


Jeff. You're somewhat near the Matter. I know your Humor well enough; you
love a bold audacious Fellow, that will say any thing, and such a one we have
come to Town, one Merryman our Falconer; I fear you will like him better than you
do me.


Pru. Oh Fool! why should you think so?


Jeff. I have some Honor in me; but he is a Fellow that has eaten Shame, and
drank after it. He is more impudent than a Court Page, and will take no Denial.


Pru. Hold your Tongue, here is my Lady.


Enter Lady Laycock. Lady. What Business has Jeffry with you?


Pru. His Master sent him to know, whether he might have leave to wait upon
your Ladyship this Morning.


Lady. Yes; Tell him, I expect him.


Jeff. He durst not come, because Mr. Lovemore's with him.


Lady. Go tell 'em, if they please to come, they shall be welcome both.


Jeff. I shall, Madam. (Exit Jeffrey.


Pru. You see what Power your Beauty has. Neither can live a Moment without
seeing you.


Lady. No, they have other Business with me, Prudence; they came from Paris
lately, and brought me a Letter from my Brother; and I believe they come for my
Answer now.


Pru. But does not one of 'em love you, Madam?


Lady. I have some Reason to believe he does; Mr. Lovemore has spared no Pains
to persuade me to quit my Widow-hood.


Pru. I have been told, Madam, that Widow-hood is a Gift, Heaven seldom bestows
but on its Favorites; you are rich, and know how troublesome Marriage is. For
my part, I believe the fairest Hair, the beautiful'st Curls do not become your
Forehead so well as Bando did; but every one, Madam, knows their own
Necessities.


Lady. I confess, Widow-hood has its Conveniences; but if Marriage be a
Trouble to some, it is a Pleasure to others, Prudence.


Pru. You had the Experience of it thirty Years, how did you like it, Madam?
They say, Sir Oliver Laycock loved your Ladyship.


Lady. For all that he was jealous; and, what is worse, was Old.


Pru. Very well; therefore you resolve to have a young One now, Madam?


Lady. You cannot blame me for that? Can you, Prudence?


Pru. Oh no, it is well known Youth is comfortable. But, methinks, you should
take one a little nearer your own Age, Madam. A very young Man may be too
treacherous for you, Madam.


Lady. Why, is my Age so visible?


Pru. No, Madam; with a little Help of Art you have some Remains of Beauty
still. You have something about your Eyes as pleasant now, as others have at
Twenty.


Lady. It Is a very malicious World we live in, Prudence; they are so apt to
censure, and speak of any single Woman, that one ought to marry to avoid that
Scandal.


Pru. Some that are young are forced to marry, to avoid Detraction; others
would rather all that is Ill should be said of them, than to have no Notice
taken of 'em. I knew a young Lady that pined to a Consumption, because she
lived three Years about the Court, and never had the Honor to be lampoon'd.
The Truth is, none that are Beautiful and Young can avoid Envy, but few are so
malicious, to speak against the Old.


Lady. There is no Age exempt from Scandal, Prudence. When we are Young, they
say we sell our selves; when Old, we are forced to hire, to buy our Lovers.


Pru. You know what they say, Madam, of the old Marchioness, your Friend, that
was so admired, so courted in her Youth; who, when she found she was forsook by
all, was forced to hire a Player by the Quarter: How soon the poor Fellow was
tired too! How like a Sheep-biter he looked after the first two Months!


Lady. This London is a very wicked Place, it is impossible to live without
Scandal here.


Pru. I Am afraid they will say as much of you, Madam, if you bargain for a
Husband. To covet one, that is both Young and Rich, is too much in Conscience,
Madam.


Lady. Thou know, Prudence, Wealth is not the thing I seek.


Pru. Then, Madam, the Business is done; the Viscount Sans-Terre shall be your
Husband, Madam.


Lady. Ah Prudence! if he were but as handsome as --


Pru. Ah Madam, that is too much.


Lady. Why may not I wish for it?


Pru. Consider his Quality, Madam, and 'bate him something for that. One thing
I must advise you; be not too prodigal of your Gold at first; to be liberal
sometimes will be convenient, and make him kinder to you.


Lady. For all this, I should think my self very happy, if I were certain of
Mr. Cuningham or Mr. Lovemore.


Pru. A little Jealousy will inflame 'em. They Will be more pressing when the
Viscount comes.


Lady. But yet methinks, Cuningham and my Neice --


Pru. What, Madam?


Lady. Are always whispering.


Pru. He only compliments her, Madam. She Is too young to make Love seriously.


Lady. With your Favor, there is no trusting to that. To my Knowledge, there
are those younger, than she, that understand what Love is but too well.


Pru. That Is true, Madam; but Philadelphia is so innocent, that no Man can make
Love to her, but to divert himself. Here she is, Madam.


Enter Philadelphia. Lady. What does she come for? I Will send her packing
quickly.


Pru. Consider what you do, Madam. How can Mr. Lovemore entertain your
Ladyship, unless his Friend may divert himself the while with rallying with
your Niece.


Lady. For all that I could wish --


Pru. Pray trouble not your self. Trust me, I Will watch her, Madam.


Phil. Will your Ladyship go to Eaton's? The Coach is at the Door.


Lady. No, I Will not go yet.


Phil. If you stay long, Madam, the best Point will be sold before you come.


Lady. No matter. Ha! what ails the Girl! How strangely she looks! Her Eyes are
hardly open yet!


Phil. How, Madam?


Lady. Then her Head's dressed awry. How it disguises her! Lord! how
frightfully it looks!


Phil. Truly, Aunt, it is dressed just as the Fashion is.


Lady. Fetch her Hood, Prudence; I Will have her put it on till it be mended.


Phil. I dressed it to please no body but my self, Madam.


Lady. I Will have you dress your self now to please me: Come, put it on.


Pru. My Lady's in the Right. Never was any thing more ridiculous. Here, put on
the Hood, I am sure this is much handsomer.


Lady. Why don't you put it on?


Phil. I cannot endure it, Madam --


Lady. Do, I say.


Pru. So; Now it is as it should be; all modest Maids should be dressed so: But
here is Mr. Cuningham and Mr. Lovemore.


Enter Cuningham, Lovemore and Jeffry. Love. Your Servant, Madam; you see how
we love your Company, by giving you this Trouble in a Morning.


Cun. It Is a Happiness we are much envied for.


Lady. You are welcome, Gentlemen. Pray command this House as freely as your
own.


Love. Why does this Lady hide her Face? Pray, Madam, let us see you.


Lady. Forbear, Sir, I beseech you: She has had the Toothache lately. If she
takes off her Hood, she will catch cold, and bring the Pain again.


Phil. I thank your Ladyship for your Care of me. But the Pain has been gone so
long, I don't fear it now.


Love. Nay then, we must have it off.


Phil. What say you, Madam, Shall I pull it off?


Lady. Yes, Impertinence; I see you have a Mind to show your self.


Pru. It Is the Nature of all young Girls to do what they are forbidden.


Cun. I come not to trouble your Ladyship for your Letter to my Lawyer; your
countenancing my Business will be of great Advantage to me.


Lady. This, Sir, is what my Brother commands me: You shall see I take delight
to serve his Friends.


Love. Madam, You promised me that Honorable Title.


Lady. Do you pretend to it?


Love. Yes, Madam, more, than any one.


Lady. I have not much Beauty to boast of; but Virtue, Sir, makes some amends
for the Defects of the other.


Love. Defects? (Cuningham Courts Philadelphia. Pray, Madam, wrong not your
self so much.


Lady. There are few but know a little their own Value: And tho a Woman be not
famed for a great Beauty, yet if she be agreeable, there are those, will like
her well enough.


Love. You have that in Perfection, Madam.


Lady. In that, Sir, I know you do not flater.


Phil. --


Phil. Madam.


Cun. Then, Madam, you like my Choice of this Suit.


Phil. Extremely well: Was it your own Fancy, Sir.


Cun. I am not ashamed to own it, since you ask it, Madam.


[They counterfeit to be talking about Fashions, whilst seemingly Lovemore
Courts the Aunt. Pru. I Will listen to 'em --

He talks to her of nothing but new Fashions. [To the Widow. You may, Madam,
venture to discourse without disturbance.


Lady. Pray, Sir, tell me freely; how old do you think I am?


Love. Faith, Madam, if you were not a Widow, I should think you a Girl scarce
Twenty.


Lady. Now, Sir, you flater me: You might have said Thirty. I do not love to
disguise my Age.


Love. How! Thirty, Madam! and look so youthful: I Will not believe it, it is
impossible!


Lady. You do not know what Misery I endured whilst my old Husband lived. The
Griefs I had upon me would have distracted another Woman. Alas! Sir, it is not
Age but Sorrow has broke me.


Love. It makes me sad to hear you tell it, Madam, and vexes me to think, an
old Man should enjoy such Happiness.


Lady. You do not know how many Tears I have shed.


Love. It Is some Comfort, Madam, to remember he did not live long with you.


Lady. Truly, Sir, Fifteen Years.


Pru. Yes, and Fifteen to that. (Aside.


Lady. Having been so unfortunate in a Husband, you may believe I have but
little Encouragement to venture, Sir, again. For I am very happy now I am alone.


Love. You do wisely, Madam; for she deserves not to be pitied, that rashly
runs into the same Misfortune; and therefore you have, Madam --


Lady. Nay, Sir, I have not forsworn Marrying yet.


Love. Pray, Madam, where do you use to walk in the Evening? Into St. James's
Park?


Lady. Not very often, Sir.


Love. Or into the Mulberry Garden?

Is not the Wilderness very pleasant?


Lady. If I like my Company, Sir, I never mislike the Place.


Love. Have you seen the new Paradise, Madam? It Is much superior to the former.


Lady. I have heard as much: But, Sir --


Love. Let me have the Honor to wait upon you thither presently.


Lady. Not yet, Sir; After Dinner, if you please. But tell me, Sir, do you
think me such an Enemy to Marriage, that were I sure a young Gentleman loved
me, and loved me truly, I would be so uncivil to refuse him?


Love. When I consider what you endured in Sir Oliver Laycock's time, I think
you ought to do it, Madam; and that Man's unjust, that urges you to break your
Resolution.


Lady. Pray do not mistake me, Sir; I have made no such Resolution yet.


Love. Nay, Madam, since you are displeased at what I said, we'll change the
Discourse. Pray, Madam, do you think the young Lord Lucky has that Interest at
Court, that Fame reports he has?


Lady. Lord, Sir, this is a strange wild Answer to my Question. Let me tell
you, Sir, if I have any Merit, Wealth or Beauty, there is one in the World
deserves 'em all.


Pru. Good! How she teazes him! (Aside.


Love. But has that one no Fault, Madam?


Lady. You know him very well, Sir.


Love. I know him, Madam!


Lady. Yes, you, Sir. It Is your self.


Love. 'Sdeath! What will become of me now?

(Aside.
Enter a Servant. Serve. Madam --


Lady. What now?


Serve. The Marchioness is come to visit you.


Lady. Troublesome Creature. Go one of you and entertain her quickly.


Pru. Which of us, Madam?


Lady. Go you, Philadelphia, and keep her Company till I come.


Phil. I shall, Madam. (Exit Phil.


Cun. Pray, Madam, what is this Marchioness?


Lady. Oh, Sir! a most eternal Talker: Her Tongue goes like the Larum of a
Clock, as fast, and to the same Tune still. She Is almost Sixty, and yet
pretends to Beauty, and loves Courtship most unreasonably. Say but a kind thing
to her, and you win her Heart. The Truth is, she has not much Reputation; but
the Respect I give her is to her Quality and to her Person. But she is an
Original in her kind, Sir.


Love. Oh blind, blind Creature! she draws her own Picture, and laughs at it.


Cun. Sure, Madam, her Conversation must be very pleasant?


Lady. She has been much courted in her Youth; but 'twould make one die to hear
her boast of her Lovers now. How this Knight sighs, and that Lord dies for her;
when all the while I know what Necessity the poor Creature is reduced to. I
would have brought her hither, but I know we never should have been rid of her.
Excuse me a Moment, I Will send her away, and return presently. Your Servant,
Gentlemen, Exit Lady.


Cun. How now, Friend -- What Is the Matter? Why do look so sullenly?


Love. I play the Ass here any longer! No; if I do, may I turn Pudding to a
Rope-Dancer, and show Tricks next Bartholomew Fair.


Cun. Nay, but Friend, Dear Friend --


Love. Tell not me of Friendship. What Man would endure to be so plagued as I
have been. I have parry'd with my best Skill the dangerous Thrusts that ever
were made at me. To tug at an Oar, or dig in a Mine in Peru, is Recreation to
it. But the first time to offer Marriage to me! I sweat to think on it. It made
me tremble twice, for fear she should have forced my Neck into her muddy Noose
of Matrimony.


Cun. We have no other way to blind her.


Love. It Is all one to me.


Cun. If thou love my Life, Friend, do not forsake me now.


Love. Pray live, if you please, and give me leave to do so too. Should I again
be left alone with her, the best I can hope for is Distraction.


Pru. How do you like the Niece?


Cun. She Is all Perfection.


Pru. How do you thrive? Do you find her kind, Mr. Cuningham?


Cun. She has promised me a Meeting this Afternoon, if thou can but remove
the Aunt from us.


Pru. I Will try what I can do, but Mr. Lovemore is the only Man in her Favor.


Cun. Dear Friend, try but this one.


Love. I Will be hanged, drawn, and quartered for a Traitor first, and have my
Limbs hung up for the Birds to feed upon. No, no, I have my Belly full, I thank
you, and some to spare.


Pru. But now I think on it, where is this Viscount all this while? His Arrival
would be of great use in this Affair.


Love. Prudence advises well: Methinks he is long a coming.


Cun. Why, you must know, there is one Merryman just come up out of the
Country-He is my Falconer upon occasion, the Fellow is bold, and very apt, and
has not been seen much in Town. What think you of him to act awhile, till some
more lucky Occasion present it self?


Love. It Is a lucky Thought, and may be of use. Where is he?


Jeff. In the Pantry, a ramming down a Wedge of Roast-Beef to keep out the Town
Air, and making Sport with a simple Country Fellow he has brought out of the
Country with him to see the Town; one Clodpole, he calls him.


Love. 'Twould not be amiss to examine him, and instruct him how to behave
himself, before he is too much known.


Jeff. No body of the Family has seen him* yet, but the Butler; and he, I know,
will be secret.

I Will step and call him to you, Sir, if you please?


Cun. Do so. (Exit Jeff.

In the mean time, Prudence, there is something to buy thee a Pair of Gloves.
(Gives her Money.


Pru. Oh, dear Sir! how long have I deserved this? Please to command me any
thing within my Power, and conclude it done.


Enter Jeffrey with Merryman dressed like a Falconer. Jeff. Sir, I found him
just passing by the Door, and have told him part of the Business.


Love. Well, Friend, do think thou can act the Part of a Viscount for a
little while?


Merr. What sort of a Lord is he to be?


Cun. Oh! An Amorous Resolute sort of a Person, that is much given to love
Music. You shall have all things that is sitting for a Man of such Quality.


Merr. Well, Sir, let me be once set out with a good Equipage, and leave the
rest to me.


Love. Come with us, Friend, and we'll instruct thee fully in thy Part.


Merr. Well, give me but my Cue of Entrance, and let me alone to act my Part.


Cun. Let Us about it then. (Exit Lovemore, Cuningham and Merryman.


Jeff. Prudence --


Pru. What Is your Will?


Jeff. One Kiss.


Pru. 'Pshaw! Is that all? (He kisses her.


Jeff. All! I say no more, but --

Ah Prudence, Prudence!


Pru. What damnable whining Tone have thou got, ha?


Jeff I am afraid of this Viscount, Prudence.


Pru. Away, you Fool; I have other things to trouble my Head withal -- Farewell.


Jeff. Adieu. (Exeunt severally.


ACT II.
Enter Cuningham and Philadelphia. Cun. WHy, Madam, are you so unwilling to
credit what my constant Passion, so long in vain, has urged? Do you not believe
I love you? Oh! Did you but know what I endure, when you refuse to hear me, you
would in Charity have some Compassion on my wounded Soul.


Phil. I dare not hear this Language from you, Sir.


Cun. What are you afraid of, Madam?


Phil. All Men say the same things, Sir, till they have won our easy Hearts to
pity and believe you; then straight you slight your Conquest, and leave us to
pursue our Ruin.


Cun. Be not so cruel to censure all for those Faults, which some few commit;
for all, I must confess, do not stand excused. But, Madam, you cannot be so
great a Stranger to my Love, as not to think it real; or so great an Enemy to
your own Worth, to believe it has not Power to enslave a Heart, that is guarded
more securely than mine -- But no more -- Your Aunt --


Enter Lady Laycock. Lady. So Niece, I see your squeamish Stomach can digest
all sorts of Diet, tho never so strictly charged to the contrary. Mr.
Cuningham, What Business have you with her? I wonder you are not ashamed to be
always following of her at this rate, and endeavoring to take Advantage of her
foolish Youth; for she is but a Girl yet, and not fit for the Conversation of a
Man, nay, or indeed to be trusted with her self.


Cun. Madam --


Lady. Go, go, indeed you are much to blame* What will the World judge, think
you? Or what Excuse can I make, for suffering such Doings in my House? And you,
Huswife! how dare you disobey my Commands? Is this the Respect you pay to me,
and to my Quality! I believe, in a little time I must make it my whole Employ
to invite home young Gallants, forsooth, to pleasure you, whilst I, as if I
were your Slave, must retire, and wait till you are served first. It Is come to
a fine pass indeed; but I Will put an End to it all, and keep you always locked
up in your Chamber, I will so.


Phil. I told you* Sir, what would be the Event of your Projects, but you would
not be said nay. I must be an Instrument to make your Passion known, and none
so fit to be trusted with such an Affair as I; but henceforward if you cannot
speak for your self, you may hang or drown, as you pretend, for me, for I Will no
more get Anger for you.


Cun. What does she mean?


Lady. What Is that you say?


Phil. Mr. Cuningham here, Madam, is always urging me to tell your Ladyship the
Passion he has for you.


Lady. Saucy Slut!


Phil. As if he could not speak for himself, but must be still plaguing me, and
swearing how long, how well, and how tenderly he loves you; then sighs and
cries, Oh Philadelphia! Can I live without her? But she, cruel as she is* has
vowed to die unmarried.


Cun. Oh the Devil! What will become of me now?


Phil. Then raves worse, than any one in Bedlam, crying, And must I then lose
her so? Oh! Death to all my Hopes! I must not, cannot, will not! and a thousand
such like things, which I Am resolved never to hear again. So, Sir, don't
trouble me any more, but even speak what you have to say to her your self.

(Exit.
Lady. Is this true, Mr. Cuningham? I did not think there was a Man living,
which could love at that rate, and with such Constancy.


Cun. Oh! Madam! what shall I say, since all is still in vain! Your Vow, your
cruel Vow, has vanquished all my Hopes; then where should I seek for Peace, but
in my last Retreat, the Grave. Farewell; I cannot bear to stay, for every Look
adds new Poisons to my Soul. (Is going.


Lady. Stay, Sir -- I have made no such Vow. If your Passion --


Cun. Oh, Madam! forbear. I know your Goodness to be such, that rather, than be
the Instrument of what may happen, you would seemingly comply with any thing I
can ask. Pardon me, Madam, I have been too much deceived already.


Lady. Pray stay, Sir, do not mistake --


Enter Philadelphia with a Piece of Point. Phil. Oh, Madam, here is the finest
Piece of Point I ever saw, and the cheapest; pray, Madam, look at it.


Lady. Saucy Intrusion. How durst you come without being called? How often have
I told you this, you Minx: Be gone, and leave it in the next Room, till I
please to come and look on it.


Phil. Madam, the Woman, that brought it is in haste, she bid me tell your
Ladyship.


Lady. Let her go about her Business, if she cannot wait, for I Will not come yet.
(Exit Philadelphia.

How horribly unlucky was this to disturb me, just as I was going to tell him
of my Intentions, and of my Concern for his Passion. (A side.


Cun. I believe I am troublesome, Madam. (Is going. Farewell.


Lady. No, pray stay, Sir, I have something to say to you, but that young Slut
interrupted me.


Cun. Oh the Devil!


Lady. But as I was going to say, I did indeed resolve not to marry any more;
and when you have heard me out, you will say I had Reason.

You must know, in my Husband Sir Oliver's Days, I had not that Liberty,
perhaps, as other Ladies of Quality took; for, to say Truth, my airy Temper and
my Youth, at that time, made my Husband grows jealous, though without Cause,
Heaven knows.


Cun. That I dare swear, if all were of my Mind.

(Aside.
Lady. Which made him lead me a very uneasy Life: So that it made me resolve on
many things at that time, and one was this, That if ever Sir Oliver should die,
I never would marry again; but I don't remember that I swore to it: Or if I
had, you have such a way with you, 'twould be very hard to deny you any thing,
Mr. Cuningham.


Cun. Oh, Madam! -- Your Charity comes now too late: I am past all Hope.


Lady. Oh, dear Sir, say not so! for since you say your Disease is grown to
that Extremity, that unless your Love meet Reward --


Cun. Talk not of Impossibilities. I know how much you prize your Honor: And
since you have vowed never to marry, I have nothing left to hope for else.


Lady. It Is true, Mr. Cuningham, I would not have my Honor suffer; but what
remains beside that I can do, to save you from what may be dangerous, shall not
be wanting.


Enter Prudence and Philadelphia. Pru. Oh, Madam! Madam! the rarest News -- The
Viscount Sans Terre, whom you have so long expected, is just arrived, and is
coming hither with a huge fine Equipage, Fiddles, and other Instruments.


Lady. Oh dear! how I Am surpised! I would not have him see me thus for all the
World. Prudence, Ser my Curls right, and alter my Knots: Quickly, don't stand
sumbling --

Look if the Paint be sirm.


Pru. It Is pretty well, Madam; There Is here and there a small Crack, but 'twill
not be discerned at distance.


Lady. Quickly, good Prudence: Put me a little better in Order. You Will pardon
me, Sir: You see what a Fright I Am in.


Cun. Pardon, quotha! the Devil take me, if any thing could be more freely
granted. (Aside.


Enter the Viscount Sans Terre, with Music, and a good Equipage; attended by
Lovemore and several Gentlemen. The Viscount sings as he enters. A CATCH.
FRom the North I came,
Where I heard of the Fame
Of the Lady Laycock's Beauty;
I had passed for an Ass,
Had I stayed where I was,
And not done a Viscount's Duty.
Visc. Oh! are these the Ladies?

By your Favor, Sweet Lady. (Kisses Philadelphia.

A delicate Morsel, by this Hand.

Madam, I see that Fame has justly spoke your Praise. You are indeed the Wonder
of all your Sex.

How fair she is!


Lady. What does he mean?


Visc. Pray, Madam, what young Gentlewoman is that, whose matchless Beauty
seems to sill the Place with more, than common Brightness? Sure it is some
Goddess, dropped from Heaven for Men to worship!

Fair Angel, pardon this rude Attempt:

The Honor only of your fair Hand. (Kisses it.

For till I touch it, I cannot think you mortal.


Lady. Oh, dear Sir! You make me blush.


Vis. [To Phil.] Pray, Lady, is this pretty young Gentlewoman your Niece?


Phil. [Aside.] This Fellow must be a Fool, or he could never mistake so grossly.


Pru. [To Phil.] Now we shall have rare Sport. Sure he is blind to mistake you
for your Aunt.


Love. [To Phil.] Pray have a little Patience, Madam, and you will see the Event.


Visc. Lady; I bless those Stars that have directed me to so happy a Choice;
therefore few Words are best. If you like me as well as I do like you, even
send for a Parson -- To Phil.


Lady. Hold, Sir, sure you mistake!


Love. Now -- Now it works. [Aside to Phil.


Visc. What say you, Lady? Shall we -- [To Phil.


Lady. I can hold no longer. [Aside.

Pray, Sir, are not you the Viscount Sans Terre?


Visc. Pretty Creature, I am.


Lady. And come with an Intention --


Visc. To make this Lady, your Aunt, happy in a Husband, if she pleases.


Lady. I tell you, Sir, I am that Lady you speak of; and that is, my Niece
Philadelphia.


Visc. Ha, ha, ha; Your Niece, quotha!

Why sure you think to put some Trick upon me.

This motherly grave Lady your Niece!

No, No; I thank you, Madam, I am not to be persuaded out of my Reason.


Lady. He makes me almost mad. (Aside.

I say again, that I am called the Lady Laycock;

And that pert Minx my Niece; who was left in Charge with me till she be of Age.


Visc. 'Sdheart, it is impossible! You look Twenty Years younger than that Lady
you call your Niece.


Lady. Oh, dear Sir! That indeed may well be: A great many do allow, I appear
to be something younger than I altogether am.


Visc. How could I be so much mistaken!

Sure, Madam, you but jest with me.


Lady. Indeed, Sir, these Gentlemen know I speak Truth.


Cun. It Is very true indeed, my Lord.


Visc. Well, since it happens so, I like it the better; for to say Truth, I had
fixed my Eye on you at my first Entrance.

Ah! would 'twere over once.

Methinks I long to have thee in my Arms.

Oh! How I would employ my Faculties,

And surfeit with delight.

What say you, Lady? Never stand to consider on it, but send for a Parson to say
Grace, that I may fall to. Odds so, I Am very hungry -- Very sharp set;

I long to be doing.


Lady. Pray, my Lord, walk in, and refresh your self after your Journey. I was
unmannerly not to ask you before.

Prudence, Come hither. See that all things are in readiness. Oh, Prudence! I
am impatient to be alone with him. Exit Pru.

My Lord, you will excuse the Disorder you have found me in.


Visc. Never trouble your self about it. Join but your Forces with mine, and
we'll beget a Race of People, that shall be immortal. A Race, that shall create
a second War with Jove, and raise Olympus top equal with the Seat of him, that
hurls the Thunder.


Lady. No more, my Lord. Pray walk in.


Visc. All your Commands are absolute.


[Exit Viscount leading the Widow, who pushes out Phil. Love. Was there ever
such a Piece of Fly-Flesh?


Cun. The Rogue acted it to the Life, and came very seasonably to my Rescue.

Had he staid a Moment longer, I had been forced to have given up the Ghost.


Love. That ever Nature should suffer such a Lump of Rubbish in the World for
Men to stumble over.


Cun. Pox on her old moldy Chops:

She Is for engroising all to her self.

How she thrust her Niece in before her!

I Will in, and try to beckon her into the Garden, if you will interpose, should
the Aunt miss her, and follow us.


Love. 'Sdeath! Would have me run into the Lion's Den, just when I have
escaped his Paw!

No, I have hazarded too much already to venture more, I thank you. I now have
better Game in Chase.

You know pretty Mrs. Brittle, Sir Peter Pride's Daughter?


Cun. What of her?


Love. Oh, it is the sweetest little Creature!

So Fair, so Witty, so Kind, and so Promising!

I Am just now sending this Letter, in order to appoint a Meeting with her. But
her Husband is so jealous (as indeed I hope to give him Cause for it) his Eye is
hardly ever off her. I am thinking what way it can be delivered without
Suspicion. Let me see --

(Studies.
Cun. I Will take my Leave; for I find I interrupt your Meditations.


Love. Farewell, my Friend; and may both our Wishes prosper. (Exit Cuningham.

Jeffrey.


Enter Jeffrey. Jeff. Sir.


Love. Can thou contrive to carry this Letter to a young Gentlewoman, and
bring an Answer, without being suspected? If thou do, Jeffrey, thou shall be
well rewarded for thy Pains.


Jeff. Is she Widow, Wife, or Maid, pray Sir?


Love. Why do thou ask?


Jeff. For a private Reason I have.


Love. Well then, to satisfy thy Curiosity, Jeffrey, know she is a Wife; a
Young, a Handsome, and a Melting one!

I am all Ecstasy, and impatient till I possess her.

Good Jeffrey, look on the Superscription, and about it with all Speed.


Jeff. I dare not touch it:

Don't trust me with it.


Love. Why so, good Jeffrey?


Jeff. I say again, do not trust me.


Love. Your Reason, Jeffrey?


Jeff. I don't care to meddle in a Cause, where there is a Process of Cuckoldom
going forward.


Love. Prithee, why so?


Jeff. Why, Sir, I Will tell you. You must know, Sir, I love Prudence, my Lady
Laycock's Woman, and I believe there is no Love lost between us; nor do I know
how soon we may exchange our Persons for better and for worse. Now, Sir, if I
should be the Instrument (by carrying this Letter) of your making this honest
Man a Cuckold, who knows but, in return of such a monstrous Deed, it may be my
own Case next; therefore, Sir, I don't care to meddle in it.


Love. Give me the Letter again; I did but try thee. Thy Master, indeed, has
often told me, how scrupulous thou were about these Matters, but I never
believed it till now. Stick to thy Principles, and be what thou deserve, thou
may come to Good at last. I have no farther Service at present. Prithee leave
me, I have Business of Moment. (Exit Jeffrey.

I had been finely served if I had sent this conscientious Rogue. What shall I
do? The Viscount brought an ignorant Country Fellow up with him, that will not be
suspected in the least. It Is well thought of; I Will entrust him, and send it
immediately. Soft -- Who comes here? -- Oh! it is the Husband.


Enter Barnaby Brittle. Your Servant, Mr. Brittle; is the Lady Laycock at home,
can you tell?

Brit. Yes, yes, I believe she is.


Love. I have a little Business, and must needs speak with her. Sir, your
Servant.


Britt. A little Business, quotha!

A fine Trade this doting old Widow drives; my House is become as common for
all Comers and Goers, as the Mall or Spring-Garden: But I shall put a stop to
it in a little time, I believe.


Enter Mrs. Brittle in haste, dressed very airy; he stops her. Britt. How now
-- Whither away in such haste?


Mrs. Britt. I Am going abroad, Husband. Good bye.


Britt. Hold, hold, by your Leave, I Will know for what, and whither your sweet
Ladyship is going?


Mrs. Britt. Why, to the Play, sweet Husband.


Brit. Hum! to the Play.


Mrs. Britt. Well, Good bye, Husband -- I shall be too late, and then there'll
be such crowding, I shall not get the first Row in the Box, for it is a new Play;
and I had as lief not go, as sit behind.

(Is going.
Britt. Hold, hold, pray stay, if you please.


Mrs. Britt. Indeed but I cannot.


Britt. Indeed but you must not go, Wife.


Mrs. Britt. Indeed, Husband, but I shall.


Britt. I say again, you must not.


Mrs. Britt. Must not! Who shall hinder me?


Britt. Why, that will I.


Mrs. Britt. I say, No.


Britt. But I say, Yes.


Mrs. Britt. Don't you pretend to it.


Britt. Don't you provoke me, I say. Is this the Trade you always intend to
drive?


Mrs. Britt. Yes indeed is it.


Britt. I say, No.


Mrs. Britt. But I say, Yes. Do you think you shall keep me always stifling
within Doors, where there is no body to be seen but your old fusty self? No,
I Will to the Play, where there is all sorts of Company and Diversion; where the
Actors represent all the Briskness and Gaiety of Life and Pleasure; where one
is entertained with airy Beaux, and fine Gallants, which ogle, sigh, and talk
the prettiest things in the World. Methinks it is rare to hear a young brisk
Fellow court a handsome young Lass, and she all the while making such pretty
dumb Signs: first turns aside to see who observes, then spreads her Fan before
her Face, heaves up her Breasts, and sighs -- at which he still swears he loves
her above all the World -- and presses hard his Suit; tells her, what Force her
Beauty, her Wit, her Shape, her Mien, all joined in one, are of. At which she
blushing courtesies low, and to her self replies, What charming Words he speaks!
his Person's Heavenly, and his Voice Divine. By your Leave, Husband, you make
me stay long.

(Is going.
Britt. Not in the least -- there will be no great miss of you, if you don't
go. And now you talk of Gallants, bless us! -- What a Dress is there! Do you
think that fit for a Tradesman's Wife?


Mrs. Britt. No; -- but I think it fit for Sir Peter Pride's Daughter, such as
I am. I warrant you would have me go abroad like one, thar sells Butter and Eggs --
Or like one that cries, Come buy my dainty fine pickled Cucumbers: No, no, I Am
resolved to dress -- put on all the Airs I can -- go abroad -- see and be seen
-- take my Fill of Pleasure, and not be shut up in a Nunnery, to pine and sigh,
and waste my youthful Days in fruitless Wishes: No, I Am not so weary of my Life
yet, tho* you do all you can to make me so. And I would have you to know, tho
you have forced me to wed my self with old Age and ill Humors, I am not wedded
to my Grave! -- it is time enough forty Years hence to think of that, and I have
a great deal to do before that time comes; therefore I must, and I will go
abroad.


Britt. Stir one Step if you dare (Spits in his Fist. If you go to that, I Will
try who wears the Breeches, you or I. You shall stay at home, and keep me
Company; I Will spoil your going to Plays, your Appointments, and your Intriegues
-- I Will make you know, that I am your Husband, and that you shall do what I
please. Slife, What Is here to do! What, have you forgot your Marriage Vows
already? Pray, who am I? Am I not your Husband? Are you not married to me?


Mrs. Britt. No -- You forced me; I never gave you my Consent in Word or in
Deed. Could you think I was in Love with Avarice, with Age and Impotence?


Britt. Give me Patience! How! How!


Mrs. Britt. No, you basely bought me of my Father and Mother.


Britt. Would I could sell thee again.


Mrs. Britt. Like a Slave you bought me, and so you intend to use me, were I
Fool enough, but I Will see you hanged first.


Britt. Why, what will your sweet Ladyship do? I bought you, you say?


Mrs. Britt. Yes; Had you my Consent? or did you once ask it? Or if you had, my
Affections were placed elsewhere, and so they shall remain.

In spite of all your Threats and boasted Power! I Will not be used at this Rate!


Britt. Good lack!


Mrs. Britt. I that am a Gentlewoman, descended from the worshipful Family of
the Pride's by the Father's side --


Britt. Ay, so it is a sign by your Dress. Pride's, quotha!


Mrs. Britt. And a Gentlewoman descended from the Honorable Family of the
Laycock's by the Mother's side. (She Cries.

And to be used at this Rate by an old nasty Shopkeeper!

I might have married a Merchant, and have kept my Glass Coach, my tall Footmen
in fine Liveries, have gone abroad when I pleased without Control, visited
Quality, nay, took Place of em at the Playhouse, and met with Respect from the
best; and is it come to this? But I Will to my honorable Father and Mother, and
tell 'em all, who, I Am sure, will not suffer their Daughter to be thus abused.
(Cries still.

I cannot, nor will not endure it any longer. (Exit.


Britt. This it is for a Tradesman to marry a Gentlewoman. A Curse on such
Gentility! What shall I do? I shall be damnably plagued with her Father and
Mother. Well, next Month I must take up in Bedlam; a Judgment, which every
Citizen deserves, that marries above his Quality. (Exit.


ACT III.
SCENE, A Street before a Glass-Shop. Enter Brittle Solus. WEll! What a Plague
it is to be married!

I must incorporate with one above my Quality too, and not be content with
something in my own Sphere, like one that had a Mind to live in Peace and
Quietness, but nothing would serve me but a Gentlewoman, although I took her with
never a Tatter to her Back, forsooth; and now, I think, I Am fitted with a
Vengeance. Would I were but fairly rid of her, and her Gentility once, the
Devil should take all such Gentility before I Would ever concern my self with it
again. But who have we here?

Enter Clodpole as out of Brittle's House, looking about him as afraid to be
seen. Clod. Hush! -- Softly! -- Mum -- No body sees -- Ha, ha, ha -- No body
sees! Softly! -- Ods my Life, who is that? -- Mum! -- Not a Word. -- (Is
stealing off.


Britt. Friend, hist -- Friend -- Pray stay a little; What Business might you
have in that House?


Clod. Would you know now? Softly! -- Not a Word. Ha, ha, ha, you understand me.


Britt. But you must know --


Clod. Yes, yes, I do know already, but am not such a Fool to tell you. You
shall not get a Word out of me. You understand me.


Britt. Yes, very well, but --


Clod. Softly! -- not a Word.


Britt. I know that; but who was you to speak with in that House?


Clod. Softly! -- Can no body hear? For you must know, the old Cuckold of that
House, they say, is damnably given to be jealous; I would not for never so much
he should see me.


Britt. No, no, I Will warrant you.


Clod. You must not say any thing --


Britt. No, no, not a Word.


Clod. His Wife's a main pretty smirking Rogue, as a Man would wish to lay his
Leg over.

Softly! -- Is no body coming?


Britt. I Will warrant thee -- Prithee go on.


Clod. What? you want to know all, do you? But I Will not trust you. Mum! not a
Word. You understand me.


Britt. Yes, yes, I understand you well enough -- but you may trust me, I
shall not say a Word.


Clod. Why luck now! -- Ha, ha, ha, Would you, would you? But you shall get
nothing out of me.

I Will warrant you would have me tell you now, that I brought a Letter to the
Gentlewoman of that House --


Britt. Hum!


Clod. And that I delivered it to none but her self -- as I was ordered --


Britt. So.


Clod. You understand me?


Britt. Yes, yes, perfectly well.


Clod. And that I stayed for an Answer --


Britt. Well, and I hope you got one?


Clod. Mum! not a Syllable! no body must know! -- If it should come to the
Knowledge of the Cuckold her Husband, 'twill spoil all.


Britt. Oh never fear.


Clod. You Will say nothing of what I have told you?


Britt. No, no, not a Word.


Clod. For you must know, Mr. Lovemore charged me, when he sent me, to say
never a Word.


Britt. Is the Gentleman's Name Lovemore, say you?


Clod. Why, do you know him?


Britt. Oh, very well; a tall, proper, handsome Man, and always very generous.


Clod. The same, the same.


Britt. And lives just --


Clod. At the lower end of this Street on the other side of the way, over against
the Golden Ball.

I find you do know him.


Britt. Know him! Why he is my very good Friend.

A Pox of all such Friendship. (Aside.


Clod. Odd, he is a fine Gentleman as ever I met with in all my Life.


Brit. Yes, yes, he is a very fine Gentleman indeed.

I would the Devil had him. (Aside.


Clod. He gave me this Piece of Gold to carry a Letter for him, which I
delivered to the Gentlewoman of that House but now.


Britt. Oh, he is a very civil Gentleman; I have been long acquainted with him.

Well, and what Answer did you get

A very pleasing one, I Will warrant you.


Clod. Softly, you must not tell a Syllable of this to the Husband, nor that
she will send my Master an Answer, as soon as ever she can get the Cuckold out of
the way. But no body must know. You understand me.


Britt. Oh, I Will keep your Counsel, never fear.


Clod. She bad me tell him, she would meet him this Evening, if she can.


Britt. Ay.


Clod. And that she is very sensibly ob -- ob -- obliged to him, for his
Kindness to her.


Britt. Ay, no doubt on it.


Clod. And takes it mighty kind of him.


Britt. She does.


Clod. Odd, she is a pretty Bit; and then there is a handsome Maid that waits
upon her, and is Assistant to her in these Matters, one Dam -- Damaris, I think
they call her.


Britt. Ay, like enough.


Clod. And you must know I like her hugely. She gave me Two or Three such
loving Looks, that I am half persuaded she likes me. So that if my Master gets
acquainted with the Mistress, I intend to strike in with her Maid.


Britt. Oh, all but Reason.


Clod. But no body must know of it.

You understand me.

Well, good bye to you. My Master will wonder I stay so long. Be sure you say
nothing now.

You understand me. (Exit.


Britt. Yes, yes, I do so; farewell.

Well, Barnaby Brittle, now thou see what comes of marrying of a
Gentlewoman. I believe thou will be married to something else in a little time,
if thou art not so already. (Points to his Head.


Enter Sir Peter Pride and Lady Pride. Sir Pet. You seem disordered, Son-in-law.


Britt. And I have Reason to be so, if ever any Man had. (Walks to and fro in a
hurry.


Lady. Good lack! And why so short, Son-in-law?


Britt. I shall grow taller in a little time, Good Mother-in-law, if this Trade
holds. (Points to his Head.


Sir Peter. Explain your Meaning, Son-in-law.


Britt. 'Twill explain it self shortly. (Walks up and down.


Lady. What, is that Hat of yours nailed on? Do you know who we are? And the
Respect due to Persons of our Quality, good Son-in-law?


Britt. Ah! would I did not; but now I know to my Sorrow, since you will have
me speak, good Mother-in-law.


Lady. Will you never leave that saucy Word, of calling me Mother-in-law?


Britt. Good Lord! Why what must I call you then?


Lady. You ought to say, Madam and Sir, when you speak to us; or when you speak
of us, you should say, Sir Peter, and her Ladyship: For though you have married
our Daughter, yet there is a great deal of distinction betwixt you and Persons
of our Rank and Quality.


Sir Peter. Go to, it is enough for me to let him know his Duty, without your
Instructions. Sure, I best know my self what to do. Son-in-law, you are an
impudent Fellow to use us at this rate. How often must we put you in mind of
your Duty and Respect, ever you will know it? Hence-forward learn to behave your
self as you ought, or you shall hear on it in other sort of Terms. You must not
think because you have married our Daughter, that we will be satisfied with such
indifferent Ceremonies and Duty you might have paid, had you married one equal
with your self; nor ought you indeed to say, your Wife, when you speak of our
Daughter.


Britt. Good lack! -- Is not your Daughter my Wife?


Sir Peter. She is. -- But you ought not to call her so.


Britt. I know that too well, now it is too late. I Would give a thousand Pounds she
were not my Wife.


Sir Peter. At it again? I tell you, though you have married her, yet as she is
our Daughter, you must not treat her after that familiar way.


Britt. You make me mad -- Is not my Wife my Wife?


Sir Peter. I tell you, though she be your Wife, you must not call her so. When
you speak of her, as being our Daughter, you must say, Madam.


Britt. Well, Madam, then since it must be Madam, I did not care if she were a
Duchess, so I were but fairly rid of her.

Here Is such a stir about your Gentility, and your Honor: But I believe if I
had not married your Daughter, and with my good Money redeemed your Estate,
your Gentility had been left in the Mud -- for all your great Families, and
your nice Honor.


Sir Peter. Then do you think it no Honor to be allied to the Worshipful
Family of the Pride's.


Lady. And to the Honorable Family of the Laycock's? Go, Clown. It Is a Shame
our Daughter should be wedded to such a Brute. We have been told at what a rate
you treat her. What is the Reason of it, Son-in-law?


Britt. Why, you shall know, good Mother-in-law.


Lady. Again at that affronting way!

How often have you been told to say, Madam?


Britt. Well, Madam, then: I always forget these fine Words. But, Madam, if you
would please, Madam, to hear me speak, you shall know, Madam, whether I have
not Cause to wish, I never had seen my Wi -- your Daughter, Madam, if I must
call her nothing else.


Sir Peter. Well, Sir, proceed.


Britt. Why, in the first Place, I am in a fair way to be made a Cuckold, if I
am not one already.


Sir Peter. How, Son-in-law? Have a Care what you say.


Britt. Believe me, what I say, I can make appear.


Sir Peter. Do it then presently.


Britt. Why, she has just now received a Letter from her Gallant, and made an
Appointment to meet him this Evening; and judge how small a time a Pair of
Horns are a grafting.


Sir Peter. How came you to know this, Son-in-law?


Britt. Why, just now -- I caught the Fellow, that brought her the Letter,
coming out of my House, and not knowing who I was, I got out of him all the
Business; and that his Master, Mr. Lovemore --


Sir Peter. Is that the Gentleman's Name?


Britt. Yes, so his Man told me. I have often seen him taking a View about my
House, and looking up to the Windows; and it is plain what his Designs were.


Lady. If this be true, I Will tear her Eyes out.


Sir Peter. Nay, if it be, this good Sword (never yet drawn in vain) shall do
you Right.

Where is she, Son-in-law.


Britt. Within, I Will warrant, studying what Excuse to make, to get abroad, and
meet her Gallant.


Lady. I Will call her to answer for her self.

Be sure you wrong her not, Son-in-law. (Exit Lady.


Britt. Nay, nay, I make no doubt but she is to be believed before me; and she
never wants Cunning to bring her self off, I Will say that for her, though the Case
be never so plain.


Sir Peter. By this good Light, if she dares be false to her Marriage Vows, she
dies; and that base Rifler of her Fame shall bear her Company.


Britt. Oh! Here he comes; that Spoiler of my Honor; that is he.


Enter Lovemore. Sir Peter meets him. They stare each other in the Face. Sir
Peter. Do you know who I am, Sir?


Love. I don't well remember I ever had much Acquaintance with you.


Sir Peter. I am called Sir Peter Pride.


Love. It may be so: I Have heard of you, Sir.


Sir Peter. My Family, Sir, has stood these many Years with unblemished Fame
and Honor.


Love. Very likely, Sir.


Sir Peter. How far you have endeavored to stain that spotless Fame, be judge
your self.


Love. Pray, Sir, explain this Riddle.


Sir Peter. I have a Daughter young, fair, well-bred, has Sense; she is indeed
the Wonder of her Sex, and this Man, whom you see here, has the Honor to be
married to her.


Britt. Ah! It Is an Honor, that I could have spared.

(Aside.
Sir Peter. Now, Sir, I Am told, that you endeavor to corrupt her Honor, and
defile her Marriage Bed. Sir, I have had the Honor to command abroad, and with
Success, both to my King and my Country -- As have also the Chief Part of all
our great Race; even from William the Conqueror, to this present Reign, have
our unquestioned Glories stood a Pattern to our yet rising Fame: And he who
dares presume to rob us of that precious Jewel, Honor, must not think to escape
unpunished, though with the Hazard of the last Drop of Blood, that is lest, to
wash off the Stain. My Daughter's Honor, Sir, is as dear to me, as this vital
Air, by which I breath and live.


Love. Pray Sir, who told you this?


Sir Peter. Believe me, Sir, whatever I say, I can quote my Author for it.


Love. Then who-ever told you is a Rascal; and were he here, I Would ram the Lie
down his Throat, or make him eat a Piece of my Sword.


Sir Peter. Why he told me -- This Man -- Her Husband here justified it to my
Face, and said he had Proof.


Love. How, Sir! Did you frame this abominable Falsehood? It Is well you have the
Honor to be allied to this worthy Knight, Sir Peter Pride, here; or you should
know what it is to father such a Lie upon a Man of my Reputation.


Sir Peter. Oh! Here comes my Daughter.


Enter Lady Pride, Mrs. Brittle, and Damaris. Love. Did you, Madam, tell your
Husband a strange Story, that I should make Love to you, and endeavored to
corrupt your Honor?


Mrs. Britt. I tell him! Why, when did you make Love to me, Sir? I assure you,
had you let me know of your Passion, it should not have gone unrewarded. Pray,
next time you send, let it be one that knows how to take more Care. However,
you have no great Reason to despair; for since he complains without any manner
of Reason, I am resolved he shall have Cause. Therefore if you do love me, Sir,
pray let me know it, and I do assure you, you shall not want Encouragement. He
shall not use me at this rate for nothing.


Love. Madam, believe me, it is all a Riddle to me; for, till this Hour, I never
heard any thing mentioned like it: I am an absolute Stranger to it.


Lady. Do you hear that, you Clown? Are you not ashamed to abuse a Gentlewoman
continually, without any Cause?


Sir Peter. What is the Meaning of this, Son-in-law?


Britt. Pray, do but hear me.


Sir Peter. Troth, Son-in-law, you are a very impudent Fellow.


Britt. Hear me but speak?


Sir Peter. You shall not speak.

We have heard too much already.


Mrs. Britt. I am sure Damaris knows, I never have any body comes near me, but
such as himself; nor ever received any Message, either by Letter, or otherwise
--

I never committed any Crime against him, that I know of, unless sitting by my
self all Day, and poring over two or three good Books be an Offense. Speak,
Damaris, did I ever give him any Cause for these Suspicions, and this Usage?
Thou know all I say or do.


Damaris. Madam, I know no Reason; nor can I bear to see the Hardship you
endure! Like a barbarous Man as he is -- To abuse so good a Lady! so Virtuous,
so Innocent, and so Pious a Lady! I am sure it makes me weep to think on it -- I
am afraid he will break her Heart in a little time, if --

(Weeps.
Britt. Hold your Tongue, you Jade, or I Will make you feel my double Fist. You
are not a Gentlewoman --

I may do what I please with you.


Mrs. Britt. Oh, my dear Father! (Cries.

I am not able to endure this any longer.

Never was any Woman abused as I am.

I beg you will do me Justice, for I can bear it no longer. (Exit crying.


Lady. Damaris, let us follow her, and endeavor to comfort her. Oh, thou Clown,
to use a Gentlewoman with so much Cruelty!


Dam. I fear he will be the Death of her at one time or another. (Exeunt Lady
Pride and Damaris.


Sir Peter. What do you think of all this, Sir?

Are not you a very pretty Fellow?

Come hither, Son-in-law, ask this Gentleman Pardon, for the Affront you have
put upon him in belying of him.


Britt. How! ask his Pardon, that would have made me a Cuckold?


Love. Sir Peter, pray --


Sir Peter. I say no more Words: He has wronged a Gentleman; and the least he
can do, is begging Pardon.


Britt. It Is very well! He offends, and I must ask Pardon.


Sir Peter. No matter for that, you hear he denies it; and it is enough, if a
Gentleman unsays what he has said.


Britt. So that if I catch him making me a Cuckold, and he denies it, I must
not believe it, because a Gentleman said it.


Sir Peter. I say, you shall ask Pardon: Therefore no more Words, but do it.


Britt. I shall run mad.

Well, what must I do?


Sir Peter. Come hither: Take your Hat off -- Kneel down, and say after me.


Britt. Well, since it must be so -- (Kneels.

This it is to be married to a Gentlewoman, forsooth.


Sir Peter. Sir, I ask your Pardon.


Britt. Sir, I ask your Pardon. (In the same Tone*


Sir Peter. For the Affront I have put upon you.


Britt. For the Affront I have put upon you.


Sir Peter. By falsely accusing you --


Britt. How! falsely accusing him!


Sir Peter. I say no more Words. Say after me.


Britt. Say after me.


Sir Peter. Accusing you, of having a Design to corrupt my Wife's Honor.


Britt. Accusing you of Truth -- And having a Design to corrupt my Wife's
Honor.


Sir Peter. For which, knowing my self in the wrong, I do ask your Pardon.


Britt. For which, knowing my self not in the wrong, I Am forced to ask your
Pardon.


Love. Well, Sir, upon Sir Peter Pride's Account* I am content to pass it by
this time: But let me hear no more Complaints. (Brittle rises, and runs off.


Sir Peter. Sir, now all is well, I humbly take my Leave. (Exit Sir Peter.


Love. Was there ever such a lucky Rogue as I? For her to encourage me to make
Love to her before her Husband's Face!

Nay, and before her Father and Mother too!

Oh, I am all on Fire till I have her in my Arms!

But soft! who comes here?


Enter Prudence. Well, my little Scout, what News? How fares my Friend? Is
Philadelphia kind? Where Is thy Lady?

Pru. Where*e'er her Person is, I Am sure her best Thoughts are still employed
on you. And however she may pretend a Passion for Mr. Cuningham, she loves none
but you. Pray, Sir, do but try her.


Love. Oh racking Thought! I Would rather make Love to a Convocation of Cats at a
Witch's Up-sitting, than but speak to her. Where Is my Friend? Oh! here he
comes, and his fair Consort.


Enter Cuningham and Philadelphia. Cun. Be not so cruel to say, you want the
Power: If we neglect this Opportunity, which kindly presents it self, the next
perhaps may not be ours.


Phil. Would you then have me dispose of my self without my Aunt's Consent? Do
not urge me to that, since I have promised not to wed without it.


Cun. I ask not her Consent, but yours: Grant me but that, and leave the rest
to Time and Chance.


Pru. Madam, how can you deny him that, since I know you love him?


Cun. Ha! Oh, the charming Sound!

And will you not consent to make me happy?

Or do you not believe I love you?

By all those Fires that burn within my Soul, I swear --


Pru. Hold! Hold, Sir! You have sworn enough already to corrupt a whole Nunnery
of Sighing, Praying and Wishing young Votaries. Why don't you give him your
Hand, since he has your Heart. I believe you love to hear him swear and -- Give
him your Hand, or, I Will discover all.


Phil. Well, there it is then; (Gives her Hand to Cuningham.

But I promise nothing else. I fear I have given too much already.


Cun. Oh, never! never! I Will pay thee back so vast a store of Love and
Constancy, as shall weary thee with still receiving.


Pru. Madam, Madam, your Aunt's behind you.


Enter Widow. Phil. Ha! My Aunt! What shall I do?


Cun. Fear nothing, Madam, but give me your Hand.

I Will bring all off. (Pretends to tell her Fortune*

This Line seems to Point out some unexpected Cross: And this Line thwarting
the Line of Life, signifies a retired Life; and this joining with it, shows
you will be in Danger of ending the latter part of your Days in a Nunnery. (Widow
behind them.


Widow. How, Mr. Cuningham! Can you tell Fortunes?


Cun. I understand a little Palmistry, Madam, and can give a Ghess at
Physiognomy.


Widow. It Is very well.

When I entered first, I thought you had been making Love to my Neice: I am
glad to find it otherwise. But where is the Viscount?


Pru. In the next Room, Madam.


Love. I Will wait upon him: I Would feign try whether his Inside be answerable to
his outward Appearance.

(Is going.
Cun. Nay, prithee stay; I can assure you, he is not to be equaled either in
Person or Discourse.


Pru. He is indeed a fine proper Man, as one would wish to see.


Widow. Why, really his Lordship has Parts.


Phil. You and Prudence go find him out, and bear him Company awhile; I Will wait
on him immediately, tell him. You, Sir, may go with 'em, if you please. (To
Lovemore.


Love. Madam, most willingly.


Cun. 'Sdeath! You will not leave me? (Aside to Lovemore.


Love. Faith, but I will; do think I Will stay to endure a second Hell? For if
there be one upon Earth, it is being left alone with her.

Madam, Your Ladyship shall ever command me. (To the Widow.

Come, Lady, if you please, the Honor of your fair Hand. (To Phil.

(Exit with Phil. and Pru.
Cun. What will become of me now? (Aside.


Widow. Well, Mr. Cuningham, I have longed for some time to be alone with you,
that I might speak more freely to you.


Cun. Madam, it is too great an Honor.


Widow. I wonder, Sir, you never think of Marrying?


Cun. Madam, as yet I dare not think on it.


Widow. Oh, dear Sir! Pray, why so?


Cun. Because I have not well considered it; and I have been told, it is a
dangerous Undertaking, without having well thought beforehand.


Widow. Pray, Sir, why should you think so?

I Will vow it is an odd Thought, Sir, for one of your Understanding: Why, Sir,
I Will tell you.

I have had Three Husbands, and yet I have no great Reason to complain: Though in
my last Husband's time, I had not altogether that real Satisfaction, as I had
with the other Two; for to deal freely with you, Sir, my Husband Sir Oliver
Laycock, though he was a very well-bred Man, yet he had his Humors sometimes,
and would be a little given to Jealousy, so that I seldom led a quiet Hour when
the Fit was upon him. But in my first Husband's Days, sure never Woman lived so
happy! I would not a-been unmarried to have had all the Riches of the Earth
laid at my Feet: But when I married with Sir Oliver, and had once seen his
Temper, nothing I had in the World but what I would a given to a been free
again; and indeed in my Passion I often vowed never (if please Heaven Sir
Oliver died) to marry any more.


Cun. 'Twas rashly done.

But no doubt, were there that Man fitting to merit your Favor, and equally
deserving your Person and your Estate, and one whom your Ladyship could like,
you might perhaps be persuaded to break your Vow, and venture once again.


Widow. I Will swear I hardly think it, and yet one don't know how one may be
tempted; though if I were to be persuaded, (and I will not forswear any thing) I
know not any one, that can so soon persuade me to it as you, Mr. Cuningham.


Cun. Death and the Devil! What have I brought upon my self! (Aside.

Oh Madam! You make me blush.

But Madam! How could you with Honor put off the Viscount, who you know loves
you, and is come on purpose to marry you?


Wid. Why, I intend him for my Niece you must know, who no doubt will be much
better pleased with the Change. For, to say Truth, Mr. Cuningham, I have always
had more, than a common Esteem for you, and for your Behavior; and have long
since resolved, that if I do alter my Condition, you are the Man alone I have
placed my Thoughts upon.


Cun. You make me blush, Madam.

Would I were a League underground, or in any Hell but this. (Aside.

You cannot sure. (To her.


Wid. I vow it is true, and yet --


Cun. Hear me but speak, Madam?


Wid. It Is odd, that Love should overpower People at so strange a rate.


Cun. But I should be unjust to my Friend, who I know loves you dearer, than
his Life.


Wid. Oh dear! Who Is that I beseech you, Sir?


Cun. Mr. Lovemore, Madam.


Widow. Mr. Lovemore! I Will swear I don't believe it.


Cun. Oh Madam! it is but too true, as will appear I Am afraid, when he knows you
place your Affections on any other Man.


Widow. I Will vow you much surprise me, Mr. Cuningham; but how came you to know
it?


Cun. Often has he begged me to bear him Company in some lonely Place, where he
would sigh, and tell such things of his distressed Passion, as would have moved
the most obdurate Heart; and when I asked him, why he did not acquaint your
Ladyship with his Love, he would sigh, with Arms across, as if his Heart would
force its way through his Breast, and cry, Oh that is my Grief, my Friend, I
cannot -- dare not tell her! for should I attempt it once, and meet her scorn,
(for oh! thou know her Vow) I should be for ever lost.

Then ran over a thousand Tales of Love, so soft, so moving, and how he prized
you, that cannot be expressed by any, except one, who loves like him.


Widow. Truly, Sir, if it be so --


Cun. If it be so! were your Ladyship to observe his distracted Throes, you would
pity him.


Widow. But why should he not declare it to me?


Cun. That Is what I tell him, Madam;

Urging that your Ladyship -- But mum! who have we here?


Euter Viscount, Philadelphia and Prudence. Visc. Ha! Whispering! And so close!

I like it not.


Widow. The Viscount! this is unlucky.

He looks disturbed! Good Sir, some other time we'll end this Discourse. (to
Cuningham.


Visc. Ha! What are you, Sir? that thus dares to encroach upon my Territories,
and invade my Right?


Widow. Nay, pray my Lord, be not displeased. This Gentleman, you must know,
has a Law suit depending, and is come to entreat a Line of Commendation from me
to my Lawyer.


Visc. Enough; I do believe all you can say. Ah! those Eyes of yours! What
Looks are there! they inflame my very Soul.


Widow. Ah, Prudence, how I long to be alone with him.


Visc. I am impatient of this Delay, when shall we be married?


Widow. Pray moderate your Passion, Sir.


Visc. What, you are afraid of that melancholy Gentleman, that stands so
silently there.


Widow. Speak softly, I am afraid he hears you* Sir.


Visc. What care I if he does.


Enter a Servant. Serve. My Lord, the Dancers you spoke for, wait without.


Visc. Let 'em enter. Will you please to sit, Ladies?


A DANCE. Widow. Prudence, go tell Mr. Lovemore, I Would speak with him this
Evening. (Exit Prudence.


Phil. -- you may take a Turn in the Garden. And, Sir, if you think it no
Trouble, you may bear her Company. (To Cuningham.


Cun. Madam, most willingly. (Exit with Phil.


Widow. Why are you so melancholy, my Lord?


Visc. Nothing that is worth the naming. But if you will walk into the next Room,
I Will tell you.


Widow. My Lord, you are a Man of Honor, and I dare trust my self with you.


Visc. Madam, if I deserve it not, may you always keep a Whip and a Bell, to
scourge me from you like a Cur.


ACT IV.
Enter Clodpole and Damaris: He gives her a Letter. Dam. YOU are a fine Spark,
are you not, to discover all the Business, and let it come to my Master's
Hearing?


Clod. Why ay, that is true, as you say; but who would have thought that he
could have known it! But now to our own Business, Damaris --

Do thou not love me, Damaris?

Thou know I love thee with all my Heart.

Good lack! How it beats! -- Odd, you may hear it thump all over the House.

Damaris -- How can thou be so hard-hearted?


Dam. Pshaw! Prithee leave fooling.


Clod. One Kiss, Damaris, to revive me.

(Kisses her.
Dam. Pray, Clodpole, be civil.


Clod. Damaris! -- Can thou not spare a little Bit aforehand?


Dam. Of what, Fool?


Clod. Why, of -- Odd, you know well enough* What, I need not name it to thee.


Dam. I know nothing of the Matter.


Clod. Ay, but you do. Why, I ask but a little tiney, tiney Bit. Do, prithee
now do.


Dam. I Will see you at the Devil first.


Clod. Do, Damaris -- Spare but a Bit now; and bate me as much on the
Wedding-Night.


Dam. No, I thank you, good Clodpole: I have too often been snapt that way
already. (Aside.

But see -- yonder comes my Lady and my Master -- Step with me into the next
Room, he must not see you.


Clod. Ay, any where, any where: Quickly, good Damaris. (Exit.


Enter Barnaby Brittle and Mrs. Brittle. Britt. I tell you again, that Marriage
is a very sacred Thing, and ought not to be profaned at this Rate.


Mrs. Britt. What do you tell me of Marriage, I have other things to mind.


Britt. Truly, I do believe as much; that is the truest Word you ever spoke: But
I think you ought to mind what I say. Am I not your Husband? And are not you
bound in Duty by that Tie, to be obedient and just in all your Ways?


Enter Lovemore on the other side bowing. She sees him, and Courtesies to him.
What Is that for? What, do you banter me?

Mrs. Britt. Keep your Instructions for those that want 'em, my Thoughts are
other ways employed.


(She Courtesies, Lovemore bows. Brittle sees him not, and thinks she does it in
scorn to him. Britt. What, you are practicing your Airs against you meet your
Gallant, are you? And trying how to behave your self to him? But I shall spoil
your Design, I shall. (He Bows, she Courtesies again.

Leave off your Tricks with a Vengeance, and mind what I say to you. (Lovemore
keeps Bowing to her.

Again, don't provoke me; I say, don't; if you do, you may chance to repent it.
I say, that Marriage --


Mrs. Britt. I know it, Dear; you need say no more.


(She takes Brittle round the Neck, and beckons Lovemore, who comes and kisses
her Hand over her Husband's Shoulders all the while. You know I love you
dearly, by this I do. (Kisses him.

Why will you not be satisfied? Had I the World to give, it could not make me
more happy than this Minute. (Lovemore still kisses her Hand.

Britt. Ah dissembling Crocodile?

What, now you think to wheedle me.


Mrs. Britt. Be satisfied with this: Hence forward, if you deserve it, I give
you my Heart for ever, which, till this Minute, I did not think to do.

(She speaks to Lovemore.
Britt. Ah, would 'twere in your Power to keep your Word.


Mrs. Britt. Indeed I will, let that content you* and learn to merit that rich
Jewel, which this Moment I put within your Power.

(Beckons Lovemore, who bows, and Exit.
Britt. If thou would be thus kind always, how happy should I be! But that is
impossible! Would you but think sometimes upon the Vow you made in Church, that
solemn Vow of Marriage, 'twould put you in Mind of your Duty.


Mrs. Britt. How can I think of any thing, when you will not give me leave so
much as to peep abroad for Air? Do you think a Woman can ever be in a good
Humor, that is locked up, and kept from what she likes? But I Am resolved to
bear it no longer.

(She walks backward and forward.
Britt. Good lack! What Is your Mind changed already? I thought 'twas too good
to last long.


Mrs. Britt. But hence-forward you shall not think to make a Fool of me at this
rate. I Will find a way to get out, for all your Spies; and then look to it --
I Will use you as you deserve.


Britt. Tempt me no farther, I beseech you; if you do, I shall use you as you
deserve. Patience! and I have need enough of it at this time.


Mrs. Britt. I Am resolved to encourage every Man, that makes Love to me. I Will
kiss and be wanton, since you provoke me to it. Love, and be beloved -- and not
be subject to the nasty Humors of an old Jealous -- I cannot find a Name bad
enough for thee.

(He spits in his Hand.
Britt. Odd, I Have a great Mind to spoil that handsome Face. The Devil tempts me
strangely: I must be gone; for if I stay, I shall certainly be provoked to do
her a Mischief. (Runs off.


Enter Damaris with a Letter. Dam. I waited till my Master was gone, to deliver
you this Letter; Madam, Mr. Lovemore's Man is within, and waits for an Answer.


Mrs. Britt. Give it me, Damaris, quickly.


Dam. I need not bid you read it, since you know from whom it comes.


Mrs. Britt. Oh! it is extremely pretty, Damaris. I Will in, and write an Answer
presently. (Exit.


Dam. So she has snapt the Bait at the first Angling; how she will get clear of
the Hook, I know not. Ha! he is here himself!


Enter Lovemore and Clodpole. Love. Pretty Mrs. Damaris, I Am glad to see you.
Is your Lady within?


Dam. Yes, Sir, writing an Answer to your Letter, I suppose. You see, I
delivered it with Care.


Love. Oh, I understand you; there is for thy Pains.


(Gives her Money, she puts her Hand behind her, and takes it. Dam. Oh, dear
Sir, by no means. But since you will have it so, pray command me.


Love. Can thou contrive to let me speak with thy Mistress?


Dam. If you please, Sir, I Will show you to her.


Love. Thou will oblige me for ever.

(Exit Love. and Dam.
Clod. Hist! Damaris! -- Odd, I shall have a rare Wife of her, if she gets
Money so fast. Here Is a piece of Gold got without the least Trouble, as they
say. But softly! -- Who have we here?


Enter Brittle. Oh! are you there, Mr. Babbler? You are a pretty Fellow indeed;
you have made fine Work! You cannot be told a Secret, but you must tell the
Husband presently. You understand me.

Britt. Who, I tell the Husband, Friend!


Clod. Yes, you; but I Will see you hanged before you shall get any thing more
out of me. You have made fine Work! All Is discovered! -- The Cuckold, her
Husband, knows all the Business.


Britt. Well, but --


Clod. You may as well hold your Tongue, for you shall not get a Word out of me.

No, no, I have found you out, In Faith.


Britt. This Fellow may be useful to affirm it to her Father and Mother. I Will
try to bribe him. (Aside.

(Puts his Hand in his Pocket to give him Money. Why look you, Friend, I Am
sorry this Matter is --


Clod. Mum! You understand me.

I know what you would say now, but 'twill not do. You Would have me to tell you what I
know, but Mum! -- Softly! -- Not a Word. I Will warrant, you would have me tell you
what Answer she gave to the Letter.


Britt. No, no, Friend; but --


Clod. Softly! -- You shall get nothing out of me. You think I Will tell you now,
that the Wife promised to meet him, and that they are together now in that
Room; but I Am not such a Fool. No, no, you will tell the Husband again; you
cannot be secret, and so good bye to you. You shall get nothing out of me. You
understand me. (Exit.


Britt. I Am sorry I cannot make that use of him as I intended; but however, he
has discovered something to me, that may do as well. He said her Gallant is
with her now; I Will listen. (Goes to the Door. Oh Sadness! it is but too true.
Here Is fine Doings. But I Will send for her Parents. Now they shall see who is in
the wrong, and who is in the right. She cannot escape me now, unless the Devil
assist her; and see where they come in a lucky Hour.


Enter Sir Peter Pride and Lady P. Father-in-law, you're welcome; and you,
Madam. I Am glad you are come, I was just going to send for you.

Sir Peter. Why, what is the Matter, Son-in-law?


Britt. Now you see what a fine Daughter you have.


Sir Peter. What! more Complaints! What is the Reason of all this?


Britt. Do but hear me, and you shall know.

Here has been her Gallant, and --


Sir Peter. Son-in-law, I Will not believe it. Will you never leave this fooling?
We'll hear no more.


Britt. No, no; I knew you would never believe a Word I say; but she can be
credited, because she is a Gentlewoman, forsooth. Now you shall see what a
Gentlewoman I have got for a Wife. I have her fast now, fast in that Room with
her Gallant, and that I hope will convince you.


Lady. It Is false, thou base Villain. I know she scorns to do so base a thing.


Britt. Pray now don't believe me, but walk in: If you find it not true, never
mind any thing I say, as long as I live.


Sir Peter. Lead, Son-in law. If I find 'em together, by this good Sword they
both shall die.


Lady. But if it is not so, which I do believe it is only your Jealousy again,
look to your self, Son-in-law, I Will suffer these Affronts no longer.


Britt. If they are not there now, I am a very Villain.

Come along -- Softly -- (They all go in.


SCENE Changes to a Chamber, and discovers Lovemore, Mrs. Brittle, and Damaris.
Love. You question your own Power, when you mistrust my Honor, Madam. Such
Charms can never want Force to allay all Thoughts of wronging so much Goodness.


Mrs. Britt. Well, Sir, I do believe you to be a Man of Honor, and hope you
will not wrong my good Opinion.


Enter Sir Peter, Lady Pride and Brittle, behind them. They grow enraged to see
'em together, and make Signs of Revenge. Sir Peter lays his Hand upon his
Sword. Therefore meet me this Evening at the Garden-Door about Nine, and there
we'll discourse farther: If I find what you say be real, perhaps I may be
prevailed upon to venture farther.

Love. Madam, you bless me! (Kisses her Hand.


Britt. Have a little Patience --

Let Us draw nearer, and hear what they say.

(They go nearer.
Dam. Oh Madam! Madam! my Master, Sir Peter, and my Lady, are just behind you.


Mrs. Britt. Ha! undone for ever!


Love. What will become of me then?


Mrs. Britt. Let me alone to bring it off.

(To Love. Aside. Be not you surpised at any thing I say, but seem to humor
it.

I Will hear no more. (Seems to be angry with Lovemore. What do you tell me of
your being amazed! Did you ever see any thing in me, that could encourage you
to believe I was that Woman you took me for? I Will warrant you thought, because
I seemed to give you Encouragement before my Husband Yesterday, when he had
enraged me, that I was in earnest?


(They over-hear, seem angry, and to threaten Brittle, who pretends by Signs to
excuse himself. Love. What mean you, Madam? (Confusedly.


Mrs. Britt. But you will find your self deceived: For though my Husband gives me
Provocations to use him at any rate, yet, Sir, I Would have you to know, I scorn
Revenge; and will not be bribed to stain my Honor, though all the Wealth of the
whole World were laid at my Feet.


Lady. Do you hear that, Son-in-law?

They still threaten, he looks sneakingly.
Mrs. Britt. No, Sir, my honorable Parents brought me up with the strictest
Care; taught me the nice Paths that lead to Everlasting Fame and Glory: And he,
who dares attempt to make me lose my Way, deserves to be used thus, thus, and
thus, Sir.


(Gets near Sir Peter, snatches his Cane, and runs at Lovemore, who gets behind
Brittle. She beats Brittle unmercifully, while Lovemore gets off. Britt. Oh,
Hold! Hold! What, will you murder me? (Brittle rubs his Shoulders.


Sir Peter. Troth, Son-in-law, she served you right.


Lady. You have not half what you deserve;

And I could find in my Heart to --


Sir Peter. Let him alone: I Will correct him.

Son-in-law, You are a very impudent Fellow to use your Wife thus. What can you
say for your self? (Feels his Arms and Head.


Britt. Say for my self! Why, I say, it is all a Trick -- And a Contrivance to
blind the Matter.


Sir Peter. Is it not plain, you have wronged her? Do you not see she is a
virtuous and a good Wife?


Lady. Too good for him, a Clown.


Britt. Well, well, I am over-reached, I see.


Sir Peter. Son-in-law, I charge you let me hear no more of this. And instantly
ask your Wife's Pardon.


Britt. How, Sir!


Mrs. Britt. Oh! let him alone; 'twill be to no purpose.

I Am a little out of Order.

Damaris, Lead me to my Chamber.

(Exeunt with Damaris.
Sir Peter. I say follow her, and ask her Pardon.


Britt. If I do, the Curse of Cuckoldom fall upon me. (Runs out another way.


Lady. Ah, graceless Clown.

Come, Sir Peter, let us follow, and see how she does.

(Are going.
Enter Prudence. Pru. Madam, my Lady presents her Service to your Ladyship and
Sir Peter; and would desire your good Company at a Ball the Viscount treats her
with.


Lady. Our humble Thanks to her Ladyship.

We will not fail to wait upon her.

(Exeunt Sir Peter and Lady.
Enter Widow, meeting Lovemore. Widow. Oh, Mr. Lovemore! I have expected you; I
am glad you're come.


Love. Madam, Your Ladyship does me too much Honor.

Pray, Madam, when saw you Mr. Cuningham?


Widow. Oh, Sir! He has told me all.

And now you talk of Mr. Cuningham -- Prudence, go find out my Niece, and have
an Eye over her. (Exit Pru.

Well, Sir, I am sorry you should make your self so great a Stranger to me. In
such Cases I am not ungrateful. And where Love is real, there is a double
Obligation.


Love. Ha! What does she mean by Love and double Obligations? (Aside.


Widow. I see indeed you seem to be in some Disorder, that I should know it;
but had you let me known it sooner, I should perhaps have saved you a great
many Sighs and Heart-Akings, which you Bashfulness has caused.


Love. Sure she is mad! [Aside.] Madam --


Widow. And yet it is never too late to serve a Friend, and one that loves so
dearly: Nor am I yet so far engaged, but I can pity, nay make Return, when Love
is sincere, and so constant.


Love. Madam, you much amaze me!

Nor can I ghess what you drive at!


Widow. Ah, dear Sir! I know you are unwilling to let me know it: But shall I
be sincere in asking you one Question?


Love. Most freely; so it be not any thing that leads me farther into the dark.


Widow. Do you not love me, Sir?


Love. Love you, Madam! Why truly I hate no body.


Widow. Well, but love me so, that it much disturbs you, and that you fear I am
engaged to another.


Love. The Devil take me if I ever loved you, or can think what you would be at.


Widow. Nay, I was told you would deny it,

But pray, Sir, tell me truly; for indeed, Sir, I am sorry you should suffer
for my Sake. And should you do otherwise than well, I vow it would be a Means
of giving me disquiet as long as I live.


Love. Pray, Madam, who told you this?


Widow. Your Friend Mr. Cuningham, who is much concerned for you, Sir. And
since you find it is discovered, you need not be ashamed to own the Truth.


Enters Prudence, and listens. Love. Faith, Madam, to deal freely with you,
yov're abused; for hang me if ever I had a thought that way, nor do I love you,
or ever can.


Widow. You're pleased to be merry, Sir; but I must tell you, I have observed
it in your Looks; and since it is so, own it boldly to the World, and I promise
you, I Will not be ashamed, nor disown mine. Come, come, Mr. Lovemore, you must
not deny me that; for since I dare own it, why should you think it still amiss?


Love. Well! Since all must out, prepare to hear me.

Mr. Cuningham has begun, and I must make an End. You must know, Madam, Mr.
Cuningham loves you to that degree himself, that he is ashamed, knowing how near
akin he is to you, to let you know it, and so has formed this Story upon me,
the better to make for him.


Widow. Mr. Cuningham akin to me, Sir!


Love. Ay, Madam, your Nephew, your Brother's Son, whom he had in Paris by
Madam D'Olone, but for some Reason he since has changed his Name.


Widow. Truly, Sir, you surprise me much! My Brother in Paris I heard had a
Son, but what became of him I know not.


Love. Madam, this Cuningham, my Friend, has the Misfortune (Misfortune I think
it, and he thinks so too, because he loves so dearly) to be related to you.


Widow. I Am sorry, if he does love so well, that he should be so near akin.


Pru. Madam, Mr. Cuningham is just come in.


Love. I Will leave you, Madam, for I have a little Business that I must dispatch
-- Besides, 'twou'd not be convenient for me to interrupt what Disputes you two
may have.


Widow. Sir, your Servant.

(As he goes out, meets Cuningham entering.
Love. Had you no body to put your Tricks on, but me?

But I think I have been even with you. (Exit Love.


Cun. What can he mean?


Widow. Mr. Cuningham, you do not deal like a Friend by me; you might have
trusted me with a Secret of greater weight.


Cun. I do not understand you, Madam!

What has he been saying to her? (Aside.


Widow. You knew one Mrs. D'Olone, I suppose?


Cun. What shall I say now? (Aside.


Pru. Was your Brother then Mrs. D'Olone's Husband, Madam, and Mr. Cuningham's
Father?


Widow. Who bid you speak? Yes he was. What then?


Cun. Oh, I begin to smoke it. (Aside.


Pru. Nothing, Madam, but then Mr. Cuningham is your Nephew.


Widow. Indeed, I wish he were not; but since it is so, we must be satisfied
with our Fate, Mr. Cuningham: Though you are much to blame, Sir, you did not let
me know it sooner before Matters went so far.


Cun. Madam, I confess my Fault, and do ask your Ladyship's Forgiveness.


Enter Philadelphia. Widow. Well, Mr. Cuningham, since you are my Nephew, we
may venture to embrace without a Blush.

(She embraces him.
Phil. Is Mr. Cuningam your Nephew, Madam?


Widow. Yes, Mistress Pert, what then?


Phil. Then he is my Cousin, and I may embrace him too. (Runs and embraces each
other.


Cun. Ay, my dear, dear Cousin.


Widow. Why how now saucy, impertinent Slut. How dare you take this Liberty?


Phil. Why, is there any Harm in embracing one's own Cousin?


Widow. Get you in, Hussy, and dare not to come but when I call you.


Pru. He Is none of your Cousin, Madam.

(Aside to Phil. as she goes out.
Phil. I know it. I met Mr. Lovemore laughing by the way, who told me all.
Adieu, my dear Cousin

(Exit.
Cun. My charming Cousin, farewell.


Widow. I Will swear, Mr. Cuningham, you will spoil that Girl.

Methinks you embraced her something of the hardest. (Seems disturbed.

I call her Girl, and yet she is near five and twenty -- But as I was going to
tell you, Sir, You must know, this Brother was not indeed my own Brother, but
something a kin afar off: He was my first Husband's first Wife's Brother, and
no kin to me. But because my Husband used to call him Brother, I would
sometimes do so too; and by this Means was thought, by those that knew no
other, to be my Brother.


Pru. Then he is not so near akin, but he may marry your Ladyship?


Cun. Oh! -- (Sighs.


Widow. Why, truly, Mr. Cuningham --


Enter Jeffrey in haste. Jeff. Sir, your Lawyer bid me tell you, your Cause is
just now coming on; and if you do not appear, you will be nonsuited.


Widow. Dear Sir, do not neglect your Business, nor let your being akin
trouble you.

When next I see you.


Cun. Oh, Madam! Would I had never seen you, then I Would been happy; but where the
Tie of Blood bars our Hopes, there is nothing but Despair in view. Madam,
farewell.

Find some way to excuse me, you Dog, or I Will cut your Throat. (To Jeffrey as
he goes out.


Jeff. What shall I say? (Aside.

My Master has begun a Lie, and I must end it.


Widow. Come hither, Jeffrey. Do think thy Master loves me so well as he says?


Jeff. Faith, Madam, I believe he loves your Ladyship but too well! But Mr.
Lovemore dies, unless you take pity on him.


Widow. Do think he loves me better, than thy Master?


Jeff. Oh, Madam! They ought not to be named together. Mr. Lovemore, poor
Gentleman, is perfectly beside himself about it.


Widow. Did ever hear 'em talk about me?


Jeff. A thousand times. Mr. Lovemore can talk of nothing else.


Widow. It Is strange he should deny it to me.


Jeff. You must know, Madam, my Master was in Love elsewhere.


Widow. How Jeffrey.


Jeff. If your Ladyship will have Patience to hear me out, you shall know the
whole Story.


Widow. With all my Heart, Jeffrey.


Jeff. Why, you must know, Madam, my Master had the Misfortune to quarrel with
a Gentleman, who urged him to fight; my Master killed him: Upon which he was
forced to change his Habit and his Name -- From Cuningham to Boutefeu. But
thinking it not safe to stay here, fled; and in his Journey happened into a
Viscount's Castle, but the Viscount was gone a Journey. However, this Viscount
had a very beautiful Sister, that had the Command in her Brother's Absence; she
entertained my Master very splendidly: At last he fell in love with her, and
she with him.


Widow. Methinks she was very forward, Jeffrey.


Jeff. She was so indeed, Madam; for before my Master left her, she proved with
Child.


Widow. How! with Child, and not married, Jeffrey!


Jeff. My Master had promised her Marriage, Madam.


Widow. Oh, the impudent Creature! And thy Master was to blame, not to keep his
Word, Jeffrey.


Jeff. Not at all, Madam, when you have heard all. You must know, my Master
grew jealous of one of the Servants, as indeed he had Reason: And one Day
pretended to ride out, and he should not return that Night, but left me to let
him in, when the Servants were all a-bed, which I did. Going up to this Lady's
Bedchamber, and not being expected that Night, found the Servant in Bed with
her.


Widow. Unheard of Impudence!

At first I was going to condemn thy Master, for deceiving a young Creature;
but it is likely he was not the first, that had to do with her.


Jeff. Very likely so, Madam. Next Day my Master was for packing up his Awls,
and for going; she cried, and urged his stay, and his Vows to marry her.


Widow. He had been more to blame to have done that.


Jeff. In the mean time the Viscount returned, found his Sister in Tears, would
know the Reason, was told all. He swore, if ever he could get hold of him, he would
hang him at his Castle Gate, but my Master was got off safe. What it will come
to, it they should ever meet, I know not, but fear the Event.


Pru. A well invented Lie the Rogue has told. (Aside. What was this Viscount's
Name?


Jeff. The Viscount Sans*Terre, I think he was called.


Pru. The Viscount Sans-Terre!


Widow. Why, he is in this House.


Jeff. What, in this very House?


Pru. In this very House; in the next Room.


Jeff. Ah, my poor Master! he is but a dead Man, if he is found; for he will
certainly be hanged.


Pru. Here he comes. Hold your Peace!


Enter Viscount. Widow. My Lord, your Servant. I have a Question to ask of you.


Jeff. What shall I do to make him understand? (Aside.

Humor her in all she says, my Lord.


Visc. Ask what thou will, I Will deny thee nothing.


Widow. You had a Sister.


Visc. I had so. Go on.


Widow. And she was unfortunately wronged by a base Fellow.


Visc. What must I say next?


Pru. 'Twas not well done to debauch her, and then to leave her; but Woe be to
him, if your Lordship catch him.


Visc. If ever I do find the Son of a Whore, I Will hang him at my Castle Gate.


Widow. He was very much to blame indeed; but yet, all things considered, he
was not in all the Blame neither, counting what a Trick she played him. He had
reason to question, whether the Child was his, or not.


Visc. I Am quite at a Loss. Oh! tell me what I must say next? (Faints into
Jeffrey's Arms, who instructs him.


Jeff. Take it in your Ear, my Lord. (Aside.


Widow. Help, Prudence, my Lord faints.


Pru. Pray, Madam, don't come too near, but give him Air. (Prudence and Jeffrey
tell him what to say.


Widow. Oh! he recovers.


Visc. Give me a little Air. I beg your Pardon, I never hear my Sister's Wrongs
mentioned, but it puts me in Disorder; but if ever I do light upon the Villain,
Woe be to him.


Widow. I Will try to get his Pardon. (Aside.

My Lord, methinks her Crime being the greatest, you might pardon him.


Visc. What! Pardon him, that has deflower'd my Sister, got her with Child of a
Bastard, and stained the Honor of our great Family! No, though all the World
should plead for him, I Will not forgive it; he dies.


Widow. Good, my Lord, for my Sake.


Visc. It Is all in vain, Lady. I Am told he is now in this House, and has changed
his Name. But if I find him -- (Draws.


Widow. Oh hold, my Lord, I must save him. (Aside. My Lord, I have but one
Request more.


Visc. 'Twill be in vain: I Will have Revenge.


Pru. Tell him you will marry him, Madam, and try what that will do. (Aside to
the Widow.


Widow. Give me this Gentleman's Life, and I am content to be your Wife;
otherwise --


Visc. It Is a hard Request; but to show how much I love you, upon that
Condition I grant it.

(Puts up his Sword.
Widow. Or, if you think sit, you shall have my Niece Philadelphia, and with
her I Will give you ten thousand Pounds.


Visc. Do you think my Love so poor, that 'twill be bribed? Nay, then I recall
my Promise. He dies this Hour. (Draws and searches about.


Pru. Oh, pray my Lord, forbear; my Lady did it but to try you! See, you fright
her.


Widow. Well, my Lord, since it must be so, my Chaplain is within, I Am
contented he should make us one, make good but your Promise.


Visc. I confirm it here. (Kisses her.


Pru. My Lord, the Dancers are ready to begin, and all the Company stay for you.


Visc. Let 'em enter, and begin when they please.


Enter Sir Peter Pride, Lady Pride, Lovemore, Mrs. Brittle, Cuningham and
Philadelphia. Love. Well, Madam, I rely upon your Promise.

(To Mrs. Brittle.
Visc. Come, Gentlemen and Ladies, pray sit.

(They Sit.
A DANCE. After the Dance, Enter Barnaby Brittle, who runs after his Wife; they
get between, he gets hold of her, and carries her off after Speaking. Britt.
Here Is fine Doings! But I Will spoil your Sport. What! my House is become a
Music-house, is it? But, Gentlewoman, I have something to say to you within.


Omnes. How now! What Is the Meaning of this?


Britt. I say, my Wife --


Omn. What of your Wife?


Britt. Shall keep me Company, if you please.


Omn. You Company!


Cun. What Is the matter with the Fellow? ha!


Britt. Come along, I say. What Is here to do! Is not a Man's Wife his Wife? And
may he not do what he will with her? (Carries her off.


Sir Peter. He Is at his old Tricks again.


Widow. Come, let us in, and endeavor to appease him, and then end our Mirth
with a Banquet.


Cun. We attend your Ladyship.


Widow. Pray, my Lord, do me the favor to lead my Sister in.

Come, Gentlemen.


Visc. Hold there, I will not part with you; I have two Hands, Madam, and can
lead you both.

(Exeunt Omnes.
ACT V.
Enter* Cuningham, Philadelphia and Jeffrey. Jeff. FEar nothing; by what I
could learn, by this time the old Lady is gone to her Chamber, or near being
a*bed.


Cun. Then we may have Time to talk more freely.


Pbil. All is not so safe as you imagine. I fear another Storm before we yet
can land. I know not by what means, but the Viscount is discovered to be a
Counterfeit, which I have all along suspected; but whether it is come to the
Knowledge of my Aunt yet, I know not.


Cun. Therefore let us lose no time, but tie that Knot, which joins our Hearts
and Hands for ever: That once over, we have no farther need of the Viscount.


Enter Lovemore, and the Viscount enraged, with Lights before 'em. Visc. Never
persuade me; I Will not stay to be fooled at this rate any longer. -- Go lead,
Sirrah.

(Exit with Links.
Cun. What Is the Matter now?


Love. Matter! Why there is Matter enough in hand. We are all undone; the Match
is broke off again, and you are like to lose your Mistress. The Widow will not
consent you shall marry her Niece; upon which, the Viscount enraged, (as indeed
he has Cause) is resolved to stay no longer.

What 'twill come to, I know not.


Cun. This is most unlucky. What Is to be thought on next?


Love. I left Prudence reasoning the Case with her; what will be the
Conclusion, is most uncertain. Oh! here she comes.


Enter Prudence. Pru. Oh, Madam! the saddest News!


Phil. Why? What Is the Matter?


Pru. All the Business is over. Poor Mr. Cuningham --


Phil. Ha! What of him? Speak.


Pru. After a thousand Arguments, which I used to persuade her, she has at last
resolved -- I cannot speak it.


Phil. On what? Prithee out with it.


Pru. Why, to marry the Viscount her self, and give you and your ten thousand
Pounds to Mr. Cuningham.


Cun. Oh the blessed News! What say you now, Madam?


Phil. I Will swear I was in a Fright at first.

But art thou sure she will hold in this Mind?


Love. For fear of the worst, get all things ready, and let it be done this
Moment.


Pru. Here she comes. Seem concerned to part with her, Sir, and try how she
stands resolved.


Enter Widow. Cun. And must I then lose her, Prudence!

Oh, the racking Thought! Hard! Hard! Decree of Fate! To part with all I hold
most dear! I cannot bear it. (Walks about.


Widow. Yes, Mr. Cuningham, our Stars will have it so.

It Is hard indeed to part: But since there is no way left to save your Life,
(which more than all the World I prize) but this only, I have at last resolved
(though much against my Will) to give my self to the Viscount.


Cun. Oh! do not name it, Madam, the very Thought is worse, than Death.


Widow. I Am sorry we are so near a kin, but that is not the chief Reason; your
Vow to marry another, and yet when I consider she was false, and had to do with
more, than one, and that the Child might as well not be yours, I think you were
in the right to part: So I am content (since my Hopes are lost) that you should
marry with my Niece. But believe me, you do not know how much I Am troubled* to
see another take what I so much desired. But we must endeavor to be satisfied.


Cun. Never! Never! for since I lose you, farewell to Love and Joy: The rest of
Life I Will waste in Sorrow.


Enter Clodpole, whispers Lovemore. Clod. Softly! Damaris bad me tell you, that
her Mistress stays for you at the Garden Door.


Love. Oh, very well. I Will go this Moment.


Pru. But what will you do to recall the Viscount, Madam, who left the House in
Anger, nor told any one what his Designs were?


Love. I heard him bid the Link-boy lead to the Devil Tavern. If you please,
thither we'll go, and conclude upon the Matter. A Glass or two of Wine may
fetch him about again.


Widow. Truly, Mr. Lovemore, I Am much obliged to you, and shall endeavor to
return your friendly Advice. I hope we shall live as loving Neighbors ought,
but now we lose time. The Viscount may perhaps be gone, should we stay longer.


Love. I Will but give some Directions to my Man, and ^e there almost as soon as
you.


Widow. You will oblige us, Sir.

(Exit all but Love. and Clod.
Clod. It Is main dark, nothing to be seen but the Sky and Stars. What can this
Darkness portend! The Almanicks this Year say, That many things will be huddled
in the dark.


Love. Why, thou art an Astrologer, Clodpole, thou talk so learnedly.


Clod. Why, truly I am but a Piece of one; but had I been a great Schollard, I
believe I should have thought on things, that never had been thought on before.


Love. Very likely, truly. But hark! What Noise is that? There Is Brittle's
House; may be she is coming out.


Enter Mrs. Brittle and Damaris. Mrs. Britt. Softly Damaris, just shut the
Door, we'll not be far from it.


Dam. Is your Husband fast, Madam?


Mrs. Britt. I would not stir till I saw him asleep; he is snoring like one
that is drunk.


Love. That Is her Voice. Madam, where are you?


Dam. There they are, Madam.


Mrs. Britt. You find, Sir, I am as good as my Word. I hope you are a Man of
Honor, as you say; yet were it to do again, I should hardly venture such
another bold Attempt.


Love. Fear nothing, Madam. Your Person and your Honor both are safe, whilst I
am your Guard. Can none over hear us?


Mrs. Britt. All the Family, but Damaris and I, are gone to Bed; nor dare we be
long from thence, lest my Husband should wake, and miss me.


Love. Talk not of parting ever we well are met; that were unkind, Madam.

If you please, Madam, to walk a little farther this way, here is a Place more
private, than the rest, and will best befit our Discourse.


Mrs. Britt. Well, Sir, I Will not question your Honor any more, but trust my
self with you; as you behave your self now, expect a greater Liberty another
time.


Love. I Will warrant you: This way, my Charmer.


(He leads her out; she takes hold of Damaris, who follows. Mrs. Britt. Damaris!


Dam. I Am here, Madam.

(Clodpole feels with his Stick for Damaris.
Clod. Damaris! -- Softly! -- Damaris! -- Damaris!


Enter Brittle, groping in the dark in a Cap and a Nightgown. Britt. Where can
she be gone at this time of Night? I heard her steal down; I Will listen.


Clod. Damaris, Where art thou, Damaris! -- Odd, it is main dark.


Britt. Who have we here? Here Is something more than ordinary. But I Will draw
nearer.

(Goes toward him.
Clod. Damaris, Where art thou?


Britt. Here. (In a low Voice: Clodpole feels him with his Stick, thinks it is
Damaris.


Clod. Oh! art thou there?

Well, Damaris, must not thee and I follow the Example of thy Mistress, and my
Master? I Will warrant they will be hugeous kind to one another; for my Master, you
must know, has a mighty Love for her, and so belike she has for him; or else
she would never a left her Husband a bed to a come to him.


Britt. Oh horrid! it is so. (Aside.


Clod. How he snores now, if a Body were to hear him! Poor Cuckold! He little
dreams what his Wife and my Master are doing. Ha, ha, ha.


Britt. Oh! this is my Country Chap again. (Aside.


Clod. Poor Cuckold, it is good enough for him. For as they say, he uses her
mighty ill. But, Damaris, must thee and I part thus? One little Bit to stay my
Stomach, Damaris: It Is fit, we should follow our Leaders. (Gues to Kiss.


Britt. I can hold no longer. Who goes there?

(Hits him a Box.
Clod. Odd so! Oh! Oh! Who Is that? Oh!


Puts his Stick across, and in running out-stops against the Scenes; at last
gets off. Britt. So -- He Is gone. Here Is a Discovery at last! Here Is a fine
Virtuous Wife for you! But now all will out in spite of her. I Will send
instantly for her Parents; they shall see now who is in the right. Oh bless us!
What, make her Husband a Cuckold! Oh! Monstrous! (Goes to the Door, and calls.

Jeremy! the Varlet's a*sleep, I Will warrant. Jeremy, I say.

(Jer. above) Do you call, Sir?


Britt. Yes, I do call. Come down quickly, I must send you to my
Father-in-law's.


Jer. I come, Sir. (Puts a Rope out, and slides down.


Britt. Make haste, Sirrah. How long you are coming. Ah! Villain!


(Jeremy treads upon his Toes, and gets from him. You have trod upon my Corns,
and lamed me.

Come hither, and be hanged.

Jer. I dare not, Sir; you will beat me.


Britt. Ah! it is well I stand in need of thee.

(Comes to him. Run to my Father and Mother-in-Law, and tell 'em, I entreat to
speak with 'em this Moment; tell 'em I Will never trouble 'em again as long as I
live; beg 'em by all means to come.


Jer. Yes, Sir. (Exit.


Britt. Now they shall see what a Daughter they have.

Now I shall sure convince 'em of their Error!

But I hear some body coming!

May be I shall make a farther Discovery. (Stands aside.


Enter Lovemore, Mrs. Brittle, Damaris, and Clodpole. Mrs. Britt. Nay, Sir,
I Have stayed long enough for one time: Should my Husband wake, and miss me, I
were undone.

I must be gone.


Love. Stay one Minute longer, I beseech you, Madam.

I have not told you yet --


Mrs. Britt. No more, Sir, if you love me. Farewell.


Love. Oh, stay! How can you go, and leave me so soon?

You will have time enough to lie by that dull, stupid Clod, your Husband, ever
the Morning: Methinks I grudge him the least Look of you, since he knows not
how to value so rich a Jewel. Let him live, and pore over his Bags, his Dross,
and worldly Gains, whilst we know better how to waste our youthful Hours in
softest Kisses, and everlasting Joys.


Britt. Oh, blasting Sound! But I have heard enough.

Now to my Post. (Exit.


Mrs. Britt. Good Night, Sir: Now I must be gone.


Love. When shall I be thus blessed again?


Mrs. Britt. To Morrow I Will send for you; and, if possible, appoint another
Meeting.


Love. Till then, ten thousand Angels wait on thee. One Kiss ever we part.
(Kisses her. Oh, I could dwell for ever on thy Lips!

Sure, there is Enchantment on 'em.


Mrs. Britt. Farewell!


Love. Adieu, my lovely Charmer. (Exit with Clod.


Mrs. Britt. Now, Damaris, let us steal in: Softly! Softly!


Dam. O Lord, Madam! We are undone!

The Door is fast since we have been out.

(Pushes against it.
Mrs. Britt. What shall we do now, Damaris?


Dam. I wish my Master has not been down.


Mrs. Britt. Let Us call Jeremy softly.


Both. Jeremy! Jeremy!


(They both call up to the Window in a soft Tone. Brittle at the Window above.
Britt. Jeremy! Jeremy! (In their Tone.


Dam. Oh, Madam, my Master!


Mrs. Britt. Lost! Undone for ever!


Britt. Ah! Ha! my sweet Lady! Have I caught you at last!

Jeremy! Jeremy!

Where has your sweet Ladyship been, I pray, that you are so afraid of being
discovered? Come, I know you have a Lie in readiness: Let Us have it.


Mrs. Britt. No where but just with Damaris, to take a little of the fresh Air;
that is all, indeed, sweet Husband.


Britt. To take the fresh Air, quotha!

Ah, I rather believe 'twas to take a Heat, you Witch you.


Mrs. Britt. Pray, Husband, let the Door be opened?


Britt. No: You shall stay there till your Parents come.

I have sent for them: They shall see what Hours you keep. And know of your
Gallant you just parted from, your vigorous Lover.


Dam. Madam, he overheard all,

And we are undone. (Aside to her.


Britt. What, have you no Excuse ready?

No Invention? You and your wicked Instrument there, that stands like the
Serpent at Eve's Elbow, to tempt her to Sin.

What, is your Prompter to Wickedness dumb?

I Would fain hear how you intend to excuse it.


Mrs. Britt. I don't go about to excuse it, Husband --


Britt. No; That Is because you don't know how.


Mrs. Britt. I do confess, I have been to meet a Gentleman, but not alone;
Damaris was with me. And sure there was no Crime in a little harmless Chat.


Britt. No, no, not in the least; making me a Cuckold is no harm at all.


Mrs. Britt. Pray, Husband, let me in, and I Will never do the like again, as
long as I live; but you shall hence-forward find me the most dutiful Wife, that
you could wish for. Pray, Husband, trust me but this once.


Britt. No.


Mrs. Britt. Do not disgrace me to my Parents, by exposing me at this
unseasonable Hour, in which I do confess I am much to blame --


Britt. Oh! Do you so?


Mrs. Britt. But forgive me now, I Will never do it again.


Britt. Hang them that believes you, I say.


Mrs. Britt. I am sure I never injured you in all my Life; but am as innocent
as the Child unborn, from doing the Ill, which you suspect.


Britt. It may be so: 'Twas not your Fault then.


Mrs. Britt. Pray, dear Husband, believe me, and let me in.


Britt. No.


Mrs. Britt. On my Knees I ask your Pardon, do but open the Door.


Britt. No.


Mrs. Britt. If you let me in this time, 'twill work upon me more, than all the
Liberty in the World could do beside.


Britt. I care not.


Mrs. Britt. Indeed, Husband, I love you dearly, and love you only: How can you
then be so cruel to refuse me?


Britt. Ah, cunning Crocodile?

Now you are caught, it is dear Husband, sweet Husband, it is only you I love:
But at another time, it is good for nothing old Fool. No, no, I know you well
enough, and so shall your Parents now.


Mrs. Britt. Pray, Husband, let the Door be opened*


Britt. No.


Mrs. Britt. Try me but this once.


Britt. I tell you, no.


Mrs. Britt. Not once more?


Britt. No.


Mrs. Britt. If you provoke me, I may despair, grow desperate, and do a Deed,
which you may repent.


Britt. Good lack! What will your sweet Ladyship do?


Mrs. Britt. I Will kill my self with this Knife here.

(Shows her Fan.
Britt. Oh, very well!


Mrs. Britt. Nay, 'twill not be so well as you imagine neither. Every body
knows how ill we have lived, and when I Am dead, People will think you murdered
me.


Britt. Ay!


Mrs. Britt. Therefore I Will kill my self, to have my Death revenged upon you.


Britt. Odd, I Will trust to that.

Besides, killing ones self has been a great while out of fashion. But why
don't you dispatch? Methinks you are long about it.


Mrs. Britt, You may believe me, for I Will certainly do it, if you persist.


Britt. Odd, I Will venture it.


Mrs. Britt. Besides, when I am dead, my Ghost shall haunt you.


Britt. Ah, if I could but once get rid of your Person here, I should not fear
your Ghost hereafter.


Mrs. Britt. Have you no Pity left?

I am just going to do it.


Britt. And yet you are long about it.


Mrs. Britt. Since nothing but my Death can satisfy you --

There and there!


(Pretends to stab her self with her Fan, and salls. Dam. Oh, she has don't!
She has don't!

Oh cruel, barbarous Monster, to make her kill her self!


Mrs. Britt. Now, Damaris, you find too late I did not jest --

I know thou wilt see my Death revenged upon my cruel Husband, who has accused me
falsely; for I affirm with my dying Breath, I never wronged him. Farewell!

Death beckons me into a dark and gloomy Vale, where I must follow.


Dam. She Is gone! She Is gone!

Oh, thou worse than Savage! To murder so sweet a Lady, so innocent and so
good: Nay, I Will swear you did it. (Cries over her.


Britt. I hear no Noise! (Looks frightened. Is It possible the Devil should be
so great with her, that she could kill her self to be revenged on me!

But I Will light a Candle, and go see.

(Goes from the Window.
Mrs. Britt. Now, Damaris, stand close in this Corner:

Close, Close. (They stand aside.


Enter Brittle with a Light; they slip by him, go in, and lock the Door: He
looks about. Britt. Ha, ha, ha! I thought indeed how well she would do it: Here Is
none of her! She made me believe she killed her self, and the mean while ran
away. Well, even let her go; I shall have this Satisfaction, her Parents shall
be Witness of her Hours. I Will in, and wait their coming.


(Goes to the Door, and finds it locked. Knocks. Mrs. Brittle and Damaris above
at the Window, where he was. Mrs. Britt. Away, you idle Sot; is this a time of
Night for an honest Man to come home in?


Dam. Go, go, you may be ashamed!


Britt. Why, have you the Impudence --

(Looks up, and sees 'em above.
Mrs. Britt. How many Nights am I forced to sit up to wait for his coming in?
And he tells the World, it is I am to blame. But now it shall be seen who is to
blame, and who not. My Father and Mother are coming, they shall see what Hours
you keep --


Britt. I confess, I stand amazed at this Impudence.


Mrs. Britt. They shall know all.


Britt. Why, have you the Face to deny --


Mrs. Britt. Go, go, I Will hear none of your impudent Excuses; you are drunk,
you Sot, you Swine. But here comes my honorable Father and Mother.


Enter Sir Peter and Lady Pride. I Am glad you are come to be Witness of what I
still suffer, by this ungrateful Usage of a cruel Husband. You see what Hours
he keeps; every Night at the Tavern roaring with his Companions, whilst I am
forced to sit at home alone, waiting for his coming; and when he does come, he
strait raves and abuses me at such a rate, that I am not able to endure it.

Britt. Why, was there ever such Impudence!

I wish this Candle were in my Belly, if --


Mrs. Britt. I know what he will say now, if you will believe him; he will tell you,
that I am still in the wrong, and it is I that have been out at this late Hour,
and as for his part, he has been within all this Evening, and knows nothing of
all this Matter, not he: But I Will leave your selves to judge, if this is an
Hour for an honest Husband to come home at.


Britt. Why then may I never --


Mrs. Britt. You see he is so drunk, he can hardly stand.


Lady. Faugh! -- I smell him hither.

He stinks of Liquors and Tobacco like a Tarpaulin, that has not been sober
whilst his Twelve-Months Pay would last.


Britt. I tell you, that I am not drunk, nor have I been out of my House.


Sir Peter. Stand farther off, I cannot bear the Scent of a Drunkard.


Mrs. Britt. I told you he would deny it.


Britt. I say, that it is she that has been out just now, and with her Gallant,
and therefore I sent for you; and that I have not been out of my Doors.


Mrs. Britt. Do you hear him? But Damaris can justify, I have not set my Foot
over the Threshold since Daylight.


Dam. If she has, never believe me more.

I can assure your Honors it is true; for I have not been out of her Company
since he went out to the Tavern.


Mrs. Britt. Therefore I do beseech you, good Father and Mother, to revenge my
Cause, for I am not able to endure it any longer: If I do, you will never see me
alive another Week.


Britt. It Is a strange thing, that she must be believed, and I not.

I tell you --


Lady. Stand farther off.

Faugh! What a Smell there is about him.

(She goes cross the Stage.
Britt. Well then; I Will stand farther off, if you will but hear me speak. (Goes
backward. I shall say nothing but the Truth, and what I can prove.


Sir Peter. Again at your Proofs, and your idle Jealousies!

Be dumb, Coxcomb; it were a good deed to break your Head, for sending thus for
us out of our Beds, and making Fools of us still. If you ever dare to do the
like again, we'll find a Means to handle you --

If there be no Law (but cutting of Throats) to revenge these Affronts -- I say
no more -- But remember you are warned.


Britt. If you would but let me tell why I sent for you --


Sir Peter. We have heard and seen too much already.

Therefore dare not to speak a Word more.


Mrs. Britt. And is this all his Punishment?


Sir Peter. No; Come down, and he shall ask your Pardon. It Is the least he can
do.


Mrs. Britt. 'Twill be to no purpose; when your Backs are turned, he will be as
bad again.


Sir Peter. I say no more Disputes, but do as I command. (They come down from
the Window.

Now, Son-in-law, kneel down, and ask your Wife Forgiveness.


Mrs. Britt. Shall I forgive him; no, I desire to be divorced.


Lady. Come, Daughter, I say you must pardon him.


Mrs. Britt. Well, Madam, I Will endeavor to obey you.


Sir Peter. Why don't you kneel, and do as I command?


Britt. Well, I find there is no Remedy, she has over-reached me again, and I
must submit: But I am resolved I Will get rid of this Nooze, though I tuck my self
up in another.

(Sir Peter makes him kneel to his Wife.
Sir Peter. Come, say after me. Madam, I ask your Pardon.


Britt. Madam, I ask your Pardon.


Sir Peter. For the Folly I have committed --


Britt. For the Folly I have committed in marrying you.


Sir Peter. In my wild Suspicions.


Britt. In my wild Suspicions.


Sir Peter. Which I do declare were utterly false.


Britt. Which I do declare were utterly false.


Sir Peter. And that I swear never to do the like again.


Britt. And that I swear never to do the like again, if I were once unmarried.


Mrs. Britt. Here -- Kiss the Book. (Gives her Hand. But if ever you do it again
--

You see it is to no purpose to turn Hagard; if you do, I Will tame you. (Aside to
him.


Lady. Look if the Noise has not brought all the Company hither.


Enter Viscount, Widow, Lovemore, Cuningam, Philadelphia, Prudence, Clodpole,
and Jeffrey, with Lights before 'em. Love. Your Servant, Sir Peter. Sir, I hope
you will not take it ill; we saw a Light in your House, and so made bold: We
are resolved to spend an Hour or two in Mirth, and hope you will all join with
us.

(To Brittle.
Widow. Your Ladyship I know will pardon it upon this Occasion. (To Lady Pride.


Lady Pride. Is your Ladyship married? May we give you Joy?


Widow. My Niece and Mr. Cuningham are.


Mrs. Britt. Give you Joy then.


Cun. and Phil. We thank you, Madam.


Phil. Now, Sir, since our Hands are joined, and all is reconciled, I have a
Boon to ask.


Cun. Whatever it be, conclude it done.


Phil. I have observed some Sparks of Love between Jeffrey and Prudence; and I
believe they would be glad to follow our Example.


Cun. What say thou, Jeffrey? If thou have a Mind to marry, speak freely.


Jeff. Sir, I have debated much about the Matter, and am at last resolved to
venture.


Cun. Then if you, Madam, give your Consent, and Prudence be willing, we'll put
'em together.

(To the Widow.
Widow. With all my Heart; Prudence has been always a good Servant, I Will say
that for her.


Jeff. There Is my Hand then; the rest of my Body shall be forth coming.


Pru. A Match.


Love. Then let me speak. Clodpole loves Damaris, and I believe would be glad
to make up the Chorus; now if Mrs. Brittle please to part with her --


Britt. You shall have my Consent with all my Heart; and I Will give a Sum of
Money to be rid of her.


Love. And I Will give Clodpole something to set him up in a little Farm in the
Country.


Clod. Damaris! -- Do hear that?


Mrs. Britt. What say you, Damaris?


Dam. If I thought he would make a good Husband, and not be jealous --


Love. That I dare answer for him.


Clod. Well, then it is agreed, and there is my Hand.


Dam. For better for worse.


Clod. To have and to hold; a Tenement for Life.


Cun. And now all things being thus happily concluded --


Widow. No, Mr. Cuningham, not while your Friend is unprovided. Methinks 'twere
pity he should be no Actor in this Comedy.


Love. Oh, Madam, my Thoughts are not yet fixed so much upon any Object, but
the next I encounter can retrieve the past.


Cun. My Friend never wants a Mistress (I Will say that for him) in any Place, if
he has but an Opportunity, which he seldom wants. I have often wondered at his
Luck.


Mrs. Britt. Say you so? I find he makes it his Business to ensnare and deceive
Women at this rate.

(Aside. I Am glad I know it in time, whilst I have Power to make my Retreat. I
had like to have been finely caught. Well, Husband, seeing so many joined in
Happiness, if you will promise never to be jealous, I Will promise from this Moment
never to give you Cause, and endeavor to make you as happy as I can.


Britt. Would you would give me Cause once to believe you.


Visc. Well then, if you are all agreed, the Parson that married Mr. Cuningham
is but just by; even send for him, and let him end the Work he has begun.

For my part, I intend to put off mine for some time longer.


Widow. How! My Lord! Have you served me thus? Did I forsake all for you, and
do you pretend to --


Visc. No Words now, 'twill spoil Company; another time we'll discourse it
farther. Come, let us have a Dance, and then to Bed.


Omn. With all our Hearts.


A DANCE. Visc. It Is well: So now, you that are ready to taste the Sweets of
Matrimony, fall to; for my part, I have no great Stomach to it yet.

And none I hope will blame me if I tarry,
Since those that wed in haste, as fast miscarry.
(Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.

