An Account OF THE MECHANISM OF THE EYE.

Wherein its Power of Refracting the Rays of LIGHT, and Causing them to
Converge at the RETINA, is Considered: With an Endeavor to ascertain the true
Place of a CATARACT, and to show the good or ill Consequences of a Judicious or
Injudicious REMOVAL of it.

By John Tailor, Surgeon in Norwich.

Hear him ye Deaf, and all ye Blind behold!
He from thick Films shall purge the Visual Ray,
And on the sightless Eye-Ball four the Day.
NORWICH: Printed by Henry Cross-grove, and Sold by the Booksellers of London
and Norwich, 1727.

TO Mr. WILLIAM CHESELDEN, Surgeon to St. Thomas's Hospital, AND Fellow of the
ROYAL SOCIETY.
SIR,
I Have heard, that the Watchword in the Time of War, is frequently the Name
of One of the Generals; and that he who makes use of it, (upon being Demanded,
Who Goes there?) is allowed, without further Questions, to pass on about his
Business.

This engaged me to ask the Liberty of Prefixing your Name to this Trifle;
which however unworthy it may be of the Honor, will yet derive a double
Advantage from it; first to Itself, then to it is Author: It will Itself, by
this Means, pass unquestioned into the World; and it is Author will have an
Opportunity of paying due Acknowledgments, for the Benefits he has received
from your Industry and Ingenuity. The Success which has so frequently attended
the Use of your Needle in this Delicate Operation, sufficiently shows the
Niceness of your Hand; and the little Damage you have ever done, where
Unavoidable Accidents have conspired to render the Operation unsuccesful, is a
great Evidence of the Accuracy of your Judgment.

The Knowledge I have of this Branch of my Profession, such as it is, I am
wholly indebted to You for; and the Success I have had on a Great Number of
Subjects within these two Years, will I hope prove that I have followed no ill
Director.

If I have in any Degree made it probable, that the Opacity of the Crystalline
Humor is the True CATARACT, I must here own that I had the First Hint of it
from You: And if I have done no Injustice to your Opinion by unworthily
defending it, I hope shortly to see some One of my Brethren, more able than
Myself, take this Method of giving You public Thanks for the Discovery.

I am, Worthy SIR, Your most Obliged and most Obedient Humble Servant, JOHN
TAILOR.

THE PREFACE.
I Think it Necessary for my own Vindication to say Something by Way of
Preface, and I expect to be pardoned for it by all Honest Impartial Men; for
it is to such only I appeal, having already suffered as much as I could suffer,
from Men of a Character quite contrary.

I am sorry I have it to say, That the worst Usage I have met with, has been
from the Gentlemen of my own Profession; and that this Trifle of mine whilst an
Embryo, has been sufficiently ridiculed by them: It Is, perhaps, still shapeless
and unformed; but if there are found in it the Features of a Man, 'twill at
least demand some Regard from all those who would deserve the Character of Men.
I have been driven to such a Dilemma by their Unnatural Treatment, that for
some Time I have suspended the Publication, and was once resolved entirely to
suppress it. This following has been their Way of Arguing, If it is his Own,
'twill not bear the Light; if 'twill bear the Light, it is not his Own; either
Side of this would be equally prejudicial to me: But I shall endeavor to
prove, that if I have not made a very ill Use of my Time and Advantages, it may
bear the Light, and yet be my Own.

When I have done this in the best Manner I am capable, I shall desire this
following Fair Challenge may be annexed to my Account of Myself: That if any of
my Unkind Brethren have any Thing to say, which They think will prove me too
ignorant for my Profession, that they may do it in the same public Manner
which I have made Use of to prove that I am not so.

The Worthy Gentleman to whom I have made an Offer of this Trifle in the
Dedication, will be my Witness of the Truth of the following Particulars: That
I attended the Practice of St. Thomas's Hospital regularly and diligently the
Time I was a PUPIL there, and that it was furnished at that Time with a Set of
the Best and most Rational Practitioners which have been ever known there.

I think according to the Account of the Hospital, that there are very seldom
less than 4 or 5000 Subjects cured of their several Diseases in a Year; and I
believe it will very readily be granted by all unprejudiced People, that where
Accidents are so various and numerous, a young Surgeon may improve himself more
in five or six Months, than he can with the best private Master in the Kingdom
in as many Years: Here moreover a Man has the Opportunity of learning every
Branch of his Profession; and he who does not endeavor to practice it
afterward, as it comes in his Way, ought (I think) to be suspected of great
Negligence in his Observation, or Want of Ability to see into the Reason of the
Practice; either of which will certainly make him fearful of undertaking it,
because the Success will always appear doubtful to him: But when a Man has by
diligent Observation on the Chirurgical Part, and a competent Knowledge of the
Rational, qualified himself to discharge the Duty of his Profession with
Ability and Honesty, I think his endeavoring to do so, should not only not
render him obnoxious to the Gentlemen of his Profession, but even make him
claim some Share of their Regard, and Protection too from the Insults of the
rest of the World: But to come nearer to the Point, and the Occasion of this
Preface.

When I came to practice in this City, full of Expectation of the Usage just
now mentioned, I soon found myself miserably deceived; for instead of That, I
was immediately surrounded with Calumny and Detraction: And from what Quarter?
Why even from those Gentlemen by whom I thought to be Protected: There was
immediately a Party raised against me, who not contented with aspersing my
Abilities, fell foul upon my Manners; and would fain have insinuated, (if they
could have got any Man of Sense to have believed them) that if a Man wore
tolerable good Clothes, and liked the Company of a Friend, 'twas impossible he
could be a good Surgeon: These are a Set of worthy People, who are themselves

-- Dully grave, insipidly serene,
And carry all their Wisdom in their Mien.
And in short, they like Nobody, but such as are like themselves: So that an
Awkard Saint-like Behavior, a Solemn Gait, an Hypocritial Elevation of the
Eye, and an Affected Religious Grimace, is sufficient with them to set a Man at
the Head of his Profession. If a Man is recommended to any of them, the First
Question is, Is he One of Us? If they are answered in the Negative, they
immediately fly; and though they know Nothing of the Man, swear he has no Faith,
no Honor, no Capacity, no Money, nor any Thing else which can render a Man
qualified to be employed in any Thing.

It Is a great Hardship to fall into the Hands of these Gentlemen, and yet to be
quite void of all those valuable Talents which must recommend one to their
Favor. For my Part, if I am called to a Patient, I expect my Business is with
his Body, and not with his Soul: I can Set a Broken Leg, as well as my
Neighbors; but as to Cases of Conscience, I must leave them to be set right by
Gentlemen whose Profession qualifies and authorizes them to do it.

But I am afraid, if we come to examine the Matter a little more closely, we
shall find that this is generally all Stratagem; and that my Worthy Brethren
who make use of it, have an odd Way of imposing upon the World, and giving of
it one Term for another: Their pretended Gravity should be called Natural
Dullness, for it is so in Fact; and where there is Fire, it will show itself:
Their Pretense to Religion, in Opposition to Human Reason, is not because they
have more of the First than their Neighbors, but less of the Latter: Their
Canting Custom of Asking a peculiar Blessing on every Thing they undertake, is
because they know their Skill will stand very much in Need of it: Their
Disaffection to Human Learning is, because they know Nothing more of it than
the Name; and so of every Thing else; In short, I am tired of them; but I Will
beg Leave to say, they are very pretty People to trust Men's Lives and Limbs
with.

I have often wondered, that when the ACT was made for Examining all Surgeons
(before they were admitted to practice in and about London) at Surgeons-Hall,
the same Order did not pass through every County, that the Country might have had
the same Advantage of having a Set of Able Men amongst them as the Town has:
Many and great would have been the Benefits of it, to the Profession in
General, to every Able Professor of it in Particular, and to all those whose
Misfortunes oblige them to have Recourse to It or Them for Assistance. Every
Apprentice would be obliged to be diligently attentive in his Business, in
order to qualify himself to pass his Examination; and this certainly in Time
would be of infinite Advantage to the Profession: Every Able Professor of it
would certainly be known, by that very Examination, to be so; and by this Means
would be placed in his proper Sphere, and fear no Danger from the Canting
Blockheads beneath him. The Benefit of the Patient, is too obvious to be
insisted upon; his Limbs very frequently, and often his Life too would be
preserved by it.

But as a Capacity is not Every Thing which is required of a Surgeon, I wish
there was any Method as certain as this, to try their Honesty: Some I have
known who have wanted Both, others who have had the First and wanted the
Latter; but in order to make a Good Surgeon, it is absolutely necessary that a
Man should want Neither of them. I Will beg the Liberty to relate a Story or Two
of a Gentleman who has been remarkably kind to me, and I am very glad I have
this Opportunity of returning his Civility, and letting the World know that he
is a Man of Real Merit: This Friend of mine was sent for to a Child that had
dislocated its Knee, he carried with him Plasters, Bandage, etc. in order to
reduce it, which he endeavored to do in the best Manner his Capacity would
admit of; after the Business was over, he encouraged the Friends by promising
the greatest Success: Next Day he called to see his little Patient, and found
the Family much pleased at his great Skill, declaring that the Child's
Complaint in that Part was entirely removed: The Doctor finding in this Case
that he had not spent his Skill in vain, began to exert himself upon it, and
undertook a Case of much more Difficulty, (which proved a Dislocation in Fact)
in which he assured them of the like Success, and that he would cure that as
expeditiously as he did the other; which, to prove his Assertions true, he
actually did; by which wonderful Cure he has demonstrated his Genius in a
laudable Manner. Another Brother of mine (some small Distance from this Place)
had the Care of a Gentlewoman, whom he kept in Torment several Years, and left
her at last as Bad or Worse than he found her; she applied herself to a Surgeon
of my Acquaintance, who made a perfect Cure of her in Fourteen Days: This
Wonderful Man was asked some Time after, How it came about that a Man of his
pretended Abilities and long Practice, after a Trial of Years, should miss of
Success in a Case where a Young Fellow just beginning to practice, succeeded to
the Surprise of the whole Town in a few Days? And whether he did not think it
ought to diminish his Character, and add to the Character of the other? He had
a Conflict with himself for some Time whether he should sacrifice his Capacity
or Honesty; at last it went on the Side of Dear Capacity, and answered, She had
Money! But I shall leave him as I found him; and hasten to tell you the Reason
of my publishing the following Account of a CATARACT.

I am more sensible than any other Man can be, of my own Inability to perform
accurately what I have proposed in my Title Page; my Design not being at all to
instruct those whose regular Education in Physic and Mathematics have
qualified them to understand these Things infinitely better than I can pretend
to do: And I declare before I enter upon the Work, that I have no other View in
it than to satisfy the World that I am no Emprick (as I have been vilely and
maliciously represented to be) in my Profession of COUCHING; but that I know as
much of the Nature and Structure of the EYE, as is required of any one who
pretends to the Operation.

The Reason why this nice and necessary Operation is so rarely performed by
Gentlemen regularly bred to the Profession of Surgery, I take to be this; That
it having been a long Time the distinguishing Excellency of several of our
famous Mountebanks, the regular Surgeons, by undertaking it, are under the
dreadful Apprehensions of being ranked with itinerant Operators, commonly known
by the Name of Quacks: The Fault is absolutely their own; for did they not join
with these Empiricks (whom upon every other Account they sufficiently despise)
to oppress every young Fellow who dares attempt a Thing which is not the
general Profession of the whole Fraternity, whatever Pains he has taken, or
whatever Advantages he has had to make himself Master of the Performance; did
they not join to do this, I say, how ineffectual would all the little Malice
and Calumny of these contemptible Wretches be toward ruining the Reputation of
a regular Surgeon! And how easy would it be for us, (for it is We only who can
do it) by making a Collection of the injudicious and barbarous Practices of
those illiterate murdering Raseals, so to destroy their Reputations, (if it is
not a Scandal to the Word Reputation to use it in suck Company) that in a few
Years we might be able to take this and some other Branches of our Profession
Home to ourselves, the Original Proprietors, without any Manner of Danger of
the foregoing Imputation.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Mechanism of the EYE.
AS I have proposed to give some Account of the Mechanism of the EYE, I know no
properer Way of beginning it, than by an Anatomical Dissection of the EYE
Itself; and after I have shown some few general Diseases that the particular
Coats and Humors of the Eye are subject to, I shall proceed to show how the
said Coats and Humors are instrumental to Vision, and then by what particular
Diseases the Eye is rendered Totally Opake: And there I shall endeavor to
ascertain the true Place of a Cataract, and the Consequence of a judicious or
injudicious Removal of It.

The Globe of the Eye is moved by Six Muscles, Four Straight, and Two Oblique,
viz. Elevator; Depressor, Adductor, Abductor, Obliquus Superior, and Inferior:
The First of these arises out of the Bottom of the Orbit, and after it has
ascended and grown tendinous, is inserted into the Upper Part of the Tunica
Sclerotis, near the Cornea. The Depressor arises and is inserted directly
opposite to the Elevator. The Adductor arises from the Bottom of the Orbit, and
is inserted on the Side next the Nose, into the Tunica Sclerotis. The Abductor
arises and is inserted directly opposite to the Adductor. The Superior Oblique
Muscle arises between the Elevator and Adductor, at the Bottom of the Orbit,
thence ascending by the Sutura Transversalis becomes a Round Tendon, which
passes through a little Annular Cartilage called Trochlea, (from its bearing the
Form of a Pully) at the upper and inner Part of the Orbit near its Edge, is
inserted near the Bottom of the Eye. The Inferior Oblique Muscle arises from
the Os Maxillae Superioris, thence passing over the Depressor, is inserted at
the Bottom of the Eye near the Abductor. The Four Straight Muscles are so fixed
to the Sclerotis, that they lift up the Eye, depress it, bring it toward the
Nose or from it, hold it fast, turn it round, just as they act either
separately or conjointly.

The Superior Oblique Muscle moves the Eye round toward the Nose about its
Axis, and pulls it upward and inward, and thereby directs the Pupil outward and
downward; and thus the Eye is disposed to see Things placed near it. The
Inferior Oblique Muscle turns the Eye toward the outward Corner, and also
upwards; if these Two act together, they fix the Eye fierce and protuberant out
of the Orbit: Moreover, another Use of these Muscles is, to suspend the Eye,
and render it very fit to perform the Motions of the other Four. Between these
Muscles Fat is interspersed, which serves to lubricate and facilitate their
Motion.

Next we come to the Coats and Humors of the Eye: The first is the Tunica
Adnata, or Conjunctiva; it makes that which is called the White of the Eye, and
is full of Blood Vessels; which are very visible in an Ophthalmia: The Symptoms
of this Disease are Heat, Pain, Pulsation, and an apparent Distention of these
Blood Vessels; it may be occasioned externally, by any Thing forced against or
coming into the Eye, irritating or compressing the Fibers of this Coat. If this
Inflammation be only external, the Case symptomatical, and the Patient not
worn out by other Diseases, it is easily Curable: On the Contrary, if it
becomes so great as to tumefie the Face, and the Humors very pungent and
corrosive, we judge it difficult to cure. Its Cure depends on Bleeding, lenient
Purgation, Blistring, Cupping, etc. together with the Assistance of a cooling
Diet, topical Application, and proper Collyria.

The next Coat is the Sclerotis: It expandes itself nearly into a Globe,
membranous and hard almost like Leather, and encompasses the whole Eye, growing
gradually thinner, clearer, and prominent in the Forepart, which Part of it is
called Cornea, from its Transparency; they make together one firm Coat, for the
Use of the other Coats and Humors. This Coat is sometimes diseased by a little
White Speck of a Cartilaginous Substance, covering Part of, and sometimes the
whole Pupilla: If this Excrescence is only superficial, it may be removed by an
Operation in Surgery called Leucotomy; but if the Cornea is throly affected, I
believe it incurable. This Operation is performed in the following Manner, viz.
I place the Patient in a proper Position, and fixing the Speculum Oculi
invented for that Purpose in order to keep the Globe without Motion, pare off
the Excrescence with a small curv'd Knife, leaving as few Inequalities as
possible; and having prevented an Inflammation by proper Repellents, I blow a
Powder into the Eye; which, assisted by the Motion of the Eyelid, smooths off
the Inequalities left by the Knife.

Next to this Coat lies the Tunica Choroides: It Is a Membrane of little
Firmness, being much thinner than the former; it is tinged by a dark Liquor
separated from the Blood Vessels, so that it appears of a rusty dark Color;
this Coat has a Perforation in it, called Pupilla: The Part of this Coat which
makes the Circumference of this Hole, and which lies upon the Side of the
Crystalline Humor, is called Uvea, composed of circular and straight Fibers;
it is qualified by this Means to contract and dilate, as Light and Objects make
different Impressions upon it. The Outside of this last Membrane is called
Iris, where appear different Colors: On the Inside of it from its
Circumference arise the Processus Ciliares, made of short Fibers like Lines
drawn from the Circumference to the Center.

The last Coat is the Retina, so called from its Resemblance to a Net; it
covers the whole Fund of the Eye, and is nothing more than a fine Expansion of
the Medullary Fibers of the Optic Nerve, upon which the Rays of Light meeting
in a Point, convey the Images of outward Objects to the Brain. The Disease of
this Coat is called Gutta Serena; the Eye seems clear in Appearance, and there
are no other Signs of Blindness except a preternatural Dilatation of the
Pupilla. I shall have Occasion to speak more largely of this Disease by and by.

Between these Coats are contained Three Humors, the Aqueous, the Crystalline,
and the Vitreous: The First is called Aqueous because it resembles Water, being
a thin transparent Fluid; it serves to extend the Cornea into an equal
Convexity; besides, it serves moreover for the Crystalline Humor to move
forward or backward in, as Occasion requires us to see Objects nearer or
farther from us.

Next is the Crystalline: It Is compounded of numberless spherical Segments,
closely united and transparent; its Shape is a deprest Spheriod, it is enclosed
in a fine Membrane called Aranea, and is much thicker than either the Aqueous
or Vitreous: Its Diseases and Uses I shall speak of in another Place.

The next is the Vitreous: It Is very clear and tenacious, it lies behind the
Crystalline, and fills the greatest Part of the Eye; it is vascular on every
Side, its Foreside concave for the Crystalline Humor to lodge in, and Backside
unequal; it keeps the Retina and Crystalline Humor at a proper Distance: This
Humor is sometimes so vitiated as to hinder or utterly destroy Sight, which
Disease is often mistook for a Gutta Serena.

I shall now proceed to speak of the Parts of the Eye, as they are subservient
to Vision.

The Use of the Muscles in general is to direct the Globe of the Eye, and fix
it in such a Position, as that the Rays of Light reflected from any Object
which we would have visible to us, may pass through the Pupilla and paint the
Image of it on the Retina.

To form the Image of any Object, it is necessary that the Rays of Light coming
from it should converge and meet in a Foous: And we judge of the comparative
Magnitude of all Bodies, by the Angle which is subtended by those Bodies before
the Eye.

To qualify the Eye to perform this, Nature has given it a spherical Form, and
composed it of transparent Goats and Humors; the latter to transmit the Rays
coming from the luminous Points of Objects, and the former to refract them in
such a Degree as to bring them all together in a Point on the Retina.

All unequal diaphanous Bodies refract the Rays of Light by Attraction, and the
Ray bends toward that Part or the Body where there is the greatest Quantity of
Matter; this in unequal Bodies is the Middle.

Therefore all Rays on whatever Parts of such Bodies they fall, are refracted
toward a Line drawn through the Center of those Bodies, and made to converge
behind them at a Distance proportionable to the greater or less Convexity of
the Bodies themselves: Thus when the Eye is too flat, as in old People, (from a
Decay of the Humors, or a Shrinking of the Coats, or both) the converging Rays
do not coalesce at the Retina; but would pass on if suffered, and not come to a
Point but at some Distance beyond it: By this Means Vision becomes weak and
indistinct.

On the contrary, those called Myopes, or Near-sighted People, have their Eyes
too gibbous, and the Convexity of them is so great, that the Rays meet and
cross one another before they arrive at the Retina. The former Eyes are helped
by Convex-Glasses, which put the Rays into a State of easy Refraction before
they fall upon the Eye: The latter are helped by Concave-Glasses, through which
the Rays passing do diverge, and fall upon the Eye in such a Manner, as to
require a greater Degree of Refraction than they would in their natural Course:
In the former Case the Eye is not helped by the Object's appearing bigger, but
more distinct; for very small Objects are rendered distinctly visible to such
an Eye by the Help of a Convex-Glass, whereas very large ones cannot be seen
enough to be distinguished by the Naked Eye.

I don't propose to give any new Theory of Vision, nor to be able to describe
the Manner of it better than it is already done by an eminent Author; for which
Reason I shall make use of his own Words, so far as they are serviceable to my
present Purpose, and conducive to the main End of this Treatise, which is to
ascertain the True PLACE of a Cataract.

All the Rays which come from one Point of an Object, are by the Cornea and
Humors of the Eye united in a Point of the Retina, which is in a straight Line,
drawn from the same Point of the Object, through the Center of the Eye; and
consequently all the Rays, which come from all the Points of an Object, are
united on the Retina, in the same Order and Proportion as the Points of the
Objects are from whence those Rays come.

Therefore the Interposition which these Rays make upon the Retina, must be the
Image of the Object.

And thus Vision in general is performed: But to know what the several Parts of
the Globe contribute hereunto, it is needful to observe that the Cornea is more
unequal than any other Part of it; by which Means all the Rays are gathered to
pass through the Pupilla, and none of them are lost upon the Uvea.

The Aqueous Humor being thinnest, and most liquid, easily changes its Figure,
when either the Ligamentum Ciliare contracts, or both the Oblique Muscles
squeeze the Middle of the Bulb of the Eye, to render it oblong, when Objects
are too near us.

The straight Fibers of the Uvea dilate the Pupilla, when there are but few
Rays of Light; and the circular Fibers contract it, when there are too many.

When the Pupilla is contracted, we see most distinctly; when it is dilated, we
see most clearly.

The Glassy Humor keeps the Crystalline at such a Distance from the Retina, as
is necessary for uniting the Rays, which come from one Point of the Object,
exactly in one Point of the Retina. The Impression of the Object is made upon
the Retina.

The Choroides is tinctured black, that the Rays of Light which pass through the
Retina may not be reflected back again to confuse the Image of the Object.

Being distinct, Vision consists in the Union of all the Rays which come from
one Point of an Object exactly in one Point of the Retina; and that the Rays
which come from Objects at different Distances, are united at different
Distances, behind the Crystalline Humor; they cannot both be exactly united
upon the Retina, therefore the Eye cannot see equally distinct, at the same
Time, Objects at different Distances.

The Optic Nerves pierce the Globe of the Eye, a little on the Inside of the
Optic Axes. Their external Coat, which is a Production of the Dura Matter, is
continued to the Sclerotis, as their internal from the Pia Matter is to the
Choroides; and their medullary Fibers passing through all, are expanded into the
Retina, upon which the Images of Objects are painted.

The Center of this Expansion is insensible, and all Rays which fall upon it
are lost; and consequently that Point of the Object from which those Rays come,
is invisible to the Eye: The Reason of which proceeds probably from the
Blood Vessels, which enter with the Optic Nerve, and cover this Part of the
Retina.

But whatsoever its Cause is, there is a manifest Advantage in the Optic
Nerves being inserted on the Inside of the Optic Axes: For if they had pierced
the Eye in the Axis, then the middle Point of every Object had been invisible;
and where all Things conduce to make us see best, there we had not seen at all.

We must likewise have lost some Part of an Object, if the Optic Nerves had
been placed on the Outside of the Optic Axes: Because an Object may be so
placed, as that all the Rays which come from one Point, may fall upon the
Outside of both Eyes: But it is impossible they should fall upon the Inside of
both Eyes; and therefore that Point which is lost in one Eye, is visible by the
other.

This shall serve for the general Theory of VISION: I shall now come to speak
of a few Diseases of the Eye, by which Vision is rendered incomplete, or
totally destroyed: And first of the CATARACT.

Before I define a Cataract, 'twill be necessary to premise a few Things, in
Order to clear the Way for my Definition: For since the Hypothesis I go upon is
New, and not yet clearly demonstrated, it would be looked upon as a strange
Piece of Presumption to overlook in the Gross all the different Objections
which may be made against it, and satisfy myself with only a few Probabilities
(collected out of my own little Experience and Observation) which may seem to
make for it.

Objection I. It Is Demonstrated by the Mathematicians, that neither Corpuscles
in the Aqueous or Crystalline Humor can be perceived on the Retina; and it is
said by Physicians, that a Beginning of a Cataract is a Suffusion of the Eye,
when little Clouds, Motes, and Flies, seem to float about in the Air: Now if
these Assertions are both true, one would be apt to conclude, that neither the
Aqueous nor Crystalline Humor can be the Seat of a Cataract: The first is
indisputable, but the latter is not always True in Fact.

For I have known a good Number of Subject with real Confirmed Cataracts, who
never remember to have been thus affected at the Beginning of them.

And although some at the Beginning of Cataracts are thus affected, it is no Proof
that the Disease may not be in one or the other of these Humors: For the same
Cause which will produce a Cataract, may at the same Time the Cataract is
forming affect also the Fund of the Eye; and by disordering the Blood Vessels,
here and there stop the Influx of the Animal Spirits into the little Filaments
of the Optic Nerve which help to make the Retina. This will certainly produce
them Clouds, Motes, etc.

And I have the more Reason to believe this, because I have Couched several who
after the Cataract has been well suppressed, have remained blind with a Gutta
Serena; which is, I suppose, a total Stoppage of the Influx of the Animal
Spirits into the nervous Filaments afore-mentioned.

Objection II. It Is supposed, that without the Assistance of the Crystalline
Humor there could be no Vision; that is, except that Humor lay always ready to
receive the Rays and refract them after they had passed the Pupilla, they would
still proceed with so small a Degree of Refraction that their Place of
Converging would be beyond the Retina; and by Consequence Vision would be
rendered very indistinct, or perhaps the Eye would only perceive a confuss'd
Glare of Light; if this Humor was taken away, and this could be demonstrated,
'twould not destroy my Supposition: For I freely acknowledge, that after the
Removal of a Cataract, (or the Crystalline Humor, which as I proceed I shall
use synonymously) Vision is never so perfectly performed as it was before the
Eye was diseased.

And if the Subjects I have hitherto performed the Operation upon were of
Consideration enough to have given me Pains beyond my Needle, I make no Doubt
but I could have fixed them with Glasses which would have still assisted their
Sight, and made them some Amends for the Loss of the aforesaid Humor.

Objection III. If Vision can be performed without this Humor, and the Maxim is
true Quod Natura Nihil agit frustra, Why was it placed in the Eye?

I answer, It Is placed there to enable the Eye to see equally well at different
Distances: For since the Rays proceeding from the luminous Points of nigh
Objects diverge more than those from more remote Objects, the Power of making
them equally converge at the Retina is very probably lodged in the Crystalline
Humor; which, according to the different Distances of Objects, approaches
nigher to, or removes farther from the Retina, and perhaps too assumes a
different Convexity.

And this I look upon to be unquestionable: Because I have made it my constant
Observation, That after a successful Depressure of a Cataract, the Patient sees
best at a Distance something greater than the Eye requires when all its Parts
are in their natural Situation; and that if the Object is placed considerably
further from, or nearer to the Eye, Vision is rendered indistinct or confused.

Objection IV. But if the Crystalline Humor is depressed, what becomes of it
afterward? And how is the Cavity filled up, which the said Humor possessed in
its natural Situation?

Answer. When I pass my Needle into the Eye, I press directly forward to the
Crystalline Humor, and endeavoring to disengage it from the Ligamentum
Ciliare, I depress it to the Bottom of the Vitreous Humor; when the Pupilla
immediately seems clear to me, and such a Torrent of confused Light rushes into
the Eye, as sometimes affrights the Patient even more than the Puncture of the
Needle.

Common Sense tells us, That if a solid Body which is immersed in a Fluid
should be removed from one Part of that Fluid into another, it makes no
Alteration in the Bulk of the Whole; for whatever Place the Solid is removed
to, it fills up but so much Space precisely as it did in the Space which it was
removed from. Immediately upon the Removal of the Crystalline Humor, the
Aqueous turns in and fills up the Cavity.

N. B. From the different Specific Gravity of the Crystalline Humor, which in
all Probability is different in different Stages of the Distemper, we may
account for what is called the Rising again of the Cataract: As to what becomes
of the Crystalline Humor after it is depressed, it is not unlikely that being
broke from the Vessels which nourished it, it shrinks by Degrees, and as it
were melts into the Vitreoeus.

Dr. Turner says, A Cataract is a Disease of the Eye, in which a Film or Skin
growing before the Pupilla, like a Curtain drawn against a Hole letting the
Light into a Room, hinders the Passage of the same, till it is depressed by the
Needle, as in Couching.

There is no one of my Profession who pays a greater Veneration to the
Authority of that worthy, learned, and ingenious Gentleman, than myself; I am
beholden to him that I have a regular, methodical, and I may venture to say a
certain System of Surgery in my Head and Hand; but as he himself (who had
always more Business in other Parts of Surgery than a Man of his studious
Temper could well attend to) very rarely, if ever performed the Operation, I
hope 'twill not be thought Presumption if when I come to speak of the Operation
itself, I should venture to give some Reasons which may seem to thwart his
Opinion, and establish my own.

That there are such Films as the Doctor mentions on this Side the Pupilla, and
in the Aqueous Humor, I can readily grant, having met with several of them in
the little Course of my Practice: These the Practitioners are allowed to call
Suffusions, Films, etc. but not Cataracts; for I am determined to call no
Disease of the Eye by this latter Name, except that particular One which is to
be remedied by the Use of the Needle: But the, Case as mentioned by the Doctor
can receive no Benefit that I know of by the Operation, nor did I ever attempt
to Couch a Patient (though I have had several offered me) when the Circumstances
were as beforementioned: This I shall endeavor to demonstrate, in describing
the Operation itself.

The French Authors, with Vaughion at the Head of them, imagine a Cataract to
be a Film separated from the Crystalline Humor, and floating in tine Aqueous;
that all its Parts are existent in its first Conformation, that it is a Cystis,
and that Cystisses are never formed de novo, but are only Membranes disengaged
from the neighboring Parts, which increasing in Thickness receive Nourishment
from the Parts to which they adhere.

I shall beg Leave to examine this Opinion a little, and however specious and
refined it may seem, I am afraid we shall find as little Reality in it, as
there is in the ordinary Profession of Friendship amongst the Gentlemen of
their Country.

First they say, it is a Membrane disengaged from the Crystalline, and floating
in the Aqueous; the first they don't offer to prove, and the latter is false in
Fact: For if this pretended disengaged Membrane should float in the Aqueous,
the Patient would have at least a Chance of seeing now and then a little, by
its being removed wholly or in part from before the Pupilla; but such a Removal
we find never happens; and that after the Formation of the Cataract, the Eye
continues in a constant equal Blindness, till the Cause is removed by the
Needle: I must beg them then to fix their floating Island, before they pretend
to make a rational Hypothesis of it; and if they do, I hope they will be so kind
as to let us know to what Membranes they will join it, and in what Manner it
receives Nourishment from them, then we'll talk farther with them.

What have led the Frenchmen into the Talk of its being a Cystis, and that no
Cystisses are formed de novo, is the late Discoveries made by the Improvements
of Microscopes. They are wonderfully pleased with and fond of the Opinion, that
every Thing which is proceeds originally from an Egg or Seed; but however true
this may be of perfect Beings, I don't expect that the same will be asserted of
the Fungus's of Trees, and other supernatural Excrescences: I can be very well
content to believe, that Sloughs and Mucus may be detached from several
Membranes in the Body, and may afterward increase by an Addition of the same
Matter, and yet there may be no Cystis; but I shall prove presently, that it is
impossible a Cataract should be in this Part of the Eye; and that will at once
put an End to the Controversy.

What has given me frequent Occsion o^ reflecting lately, has been the odd
Manne^ of our Authors of General Theories; they undertake to describe and
define every particular Disease, with as much Freedom an^ Positiveness, as if
they had been acquainte^ themselves with a good Number of Patient laboring
under such Disease, and had mad^ the Causes, Symptoms, Cure, etc. of it, their
peculiar Study.

How just a Proceeding this is, will appea^ by the following Definition of a
Cataract in a late modern Writer of this Sort.

A Suffusion, says he, is a thick Foulness o^ Excrescence, of the Tunica
Cornea, Adnata or Aqueous Humor, which when confirm'^ makes the Cataract.

According to this Account, any thing which thickens the Cornea, or makes the
Aqueous Humor dark and cloudy, may be termed a Cataract; for he seems to use
the Word Cataract not as any particular Disease, but only as something which
shall darken and obscure the Sight, by hindering the Transmission of the Rays of
Light. Thus the Albugo, Pterygium, Hyopyon, or the Viscidity of the Aqueous
Humor, frequently consequent upon an Ophthalmia, may be justly deemed a
Cataract. But how this squares with the real Notion of this Disease, and its
Cure, I shall leave my Readers after a few Pages to determine.

But passing over all the different Definitions and Surmises of others, I shall
take the Liberty (for Reasons which I shall give afterward) to define it in
the following Manner.

A Cataract is a Disease of the Crystalline Humor, whereby the said Humor is
totally or at least one Side of it rendered opake: The Humor in this diseased
State reflect all or most of the Rays of Light, instead of transmitting them to
the Retina; in Consequence of which, the Humor appears whitish, bluish,
yellowish, etc. and the Eye is blind.

CAUSES.
Any Blow or Shock, which may alter the particular Position of the Particles of
which this Humor is composed: for to make a Body diaphanous, it is not only
necessary that it should be made of such particular Particles, but that those
Particles should be combined and united after a particular Manner. Thus Salts,
wet Paper, or the Oculus Mundi Stone, grow opake by being dried; Horn, by being
scraped; Glass, by being reduced to Powder, or otherwise flaw'd; Turpentine, by
being stirred about with Water till they mix imperfectly.

The Matter which is separated for the natural Nourishment of this Humor from
the Blood, may from the too great Viscidity of the Blood itself, either be
separated in too small a Quantity, (the Glands and Strainers of these Parts
being exceeding fine) and by this Atrophy the Humors may grow dry and opake, as
Paper, Salts, Oculus Mundi Stone, etc. Or otherwise upon a Fever or Ophthalmia,
the Vessels leading to this Humor may be so enlarged, as to admit Particles of
an improper Figure or Magnitude: The Heterogeneous Particles, (if I may so call
them) instead of properly nourishing the Humor, may be lodged irregularly in
its Pores, (as Water and Turpentine as above) and by destroying that Equality
which we are told is necessary to Transparency, render the Humor opake.

It may be caused by violent Grief, which occasions a more than natural
Secretion of Tears from an adjacent Part; this may from a Continuance make so
great a Revulsion, that the Crystalline Humor may probably grow dry, or suffer
Diminution, for Want of its usual Supplies. I have Reasons to imagine this,
because in Eyes thus diseased I have found this Humor much smaller than
ordinary.

It may and often does proceed from an unskillful Treating of the Eye in an
Ophthalmia, whilst there is a more than ordinary Flux of Matter upon the Parts
which seems to entreat a Passage through the Coats: Instead of alluring it
forwards by kind Discutients, I have too frequently known it drove back by cold
Repellents; and by lodging itself in the Coats and Humors of the Eye, at once
deprive it of its Use and Beauty.

Dr. Pitcarn, in speaking of a Cataract, says, Some ascribe it to the thickning
or coagulating of the Aqueous Humor, and others to that of the Crystalline: But
these know Nothing of the Nature of the Eye; for Corpuscles floating in the
Aqueous or Crystalline Humo, cannot be prerceiv'd on the Retina.

For once I Will run the Risque of having my Understanding censured, and venture
to say. That though the Corpuscles themselves are not seen being within the Eye,
yet they can hinder the Eye from discerning every distinct Part of any Object
which is without it: And these little Specks of Darkness, amidst a Glare of
Light, are mistaken by the Patient for Something positive, when they are only
Privations; and the Effect would be the same, if there were any Stoppages in
the small nervous Filaments which compose the Retina.

Thus the Doctor's Philosophy is true, when he says they cannot be seen, etc.
But if he would pretend to infer from thence, that they can be no Causes why
the Eye cannot see other Things, his Consequence is false; and clearly
demonstrated to be so, by Mr. Cheselden at the End of his ANATOMY.

DIAGNOSTICK.
It Is known by a Diminution of Sight in the Patient, and by Something which
appears like a Bluish Cloud behind the Pupilla, though the Color of it often
varies: I do not yet know whether there be any Reason given for the Variety of
Colors, but I have observed that the Green and Yellow are generally in old
Subjects.

PROGNOSTIC.
Not so rnuch the Age of the Person is to be considered, as the Age and
Ripeness of the Cataract: I have seen both very young and very old Subjects
couched with Success, though the best Prognostic is certain to be made in a
middle Age and good Habit.

If a Surgeon understands the Operation, and is at all able to judge when the
Cataract is ripe for it, he has a great deal of Reason to promise Success.

If an uncommon Inflammation supervenes, which he cannot foresee, and sometimes
it is impossible for him to prevent, he is not to be blamed if he misses of
Success, though he had seemed pretty positive in promising it both to his Patient
and himself.

Regimen before the Operation.
In Order to prevent an Ophthalmia, use proper Evacuations, as Bleeding,
Lenient Purgatives, etc. a few Days before the Operation.

OPERATION.
The most temperate Seasons are the best, for which Reason I make Choice of
Spring or Autumn. It Is requisite the Day should be fine and clear, and the
Light well chosen. I oblige the Patient to recline his Head backwards upon a
Pillow, the Pillow is supported by the Back of a Chair of a proper Height;
behind the Patient an Assistant is placed, to keep his Head without Motion;
'twill be necessary too for a Person on each Side, to secure the Hands of the
Patient; for I have seen very ill Consequences attend the Neglect of this:
Having thus prepared the Patient, I place myself on a Stool, raised by Pillows
according to the Height of the Subject, till I have a full Command of the
Patient's EYE; then bidding him turn his Eye toward his Nose, so that the
Tunica Conjunctiva may be sufficiently apparent, I plunge my Needle directly
into the Vitreous Humor, through the Tunica Conjunctiva, about the Distance of
the Tenth Part of an Inch from the Cornea; then thrusting it boldly to the
upper Part of the Crystalline, gently turn the flat Part of my Needle on the
Top of the Cataract; by which Means I have a greater Surface upon it, and the
Cataract consequently less liable to slip from under my Needle: I depress it
very slowly, and place it as I think at the Bottom of the Vitreous Humor; I
don't immediately remove my Needle off it, but continue it depressed for about
Half a Minute, for Reasons which I shall give when I come to speak of the
Causes of a Cataract's rising again: After this, I draw my Needle back about
the Sixth Part of an Inch; and gently raising the Point, take it quite out of
the EYE.

Regimen after the Operation.
Immediately after the Operation I apply a Repellant Compress, and order the
Patient to be put to Bed, raising his Head something higher than usual; and
after suffering of him to remain quiet a few Hours, I renew my dressing, and
begin to treat him with a cool Regimen, proper Diet, etc. as in a symptomatical
Fever: This I do to second the Intention of the former Regimen; notwithstanding
which, an Ophthalmia in Spite of all I can do will sometimes supervene, and
then it must be treated as such.

These Ophthalmia's are sometimes so violent as to become difficult of Cure,
and often produce all the Effects, and perhaps too really bring that Distemper
upon the Eye called Gutta Serena. This last mentioned Disease is seated on the
Retina, and may be brought on by any Thing which will enlarge the Capillary
Arteries of that Membrane; for they lying contiguous to the Nerves, and their
Diameters being increased, the intermediate Nerves are so pressed betwixt them,
that the Influx of the Animal Spirits is entirely prohibited, and all
Commumication is cut off betwixt them and the Original of the Optic Nerves in
the Brain, which is the Commune Sensorium: Thus though the Cataract continues
well depressed, and the Eye in all Appearance perfectly clear, yet the Patient
will remain Blind, and it is too often beyond the Reach of Art to give him any
Assistance.

However, I generally use all the Evacuations proper in a stubborn Ophthalmia,
with Calomel, Purgatives, etc. and keep the Patient to an attenuating Diet;
obliging him to abstain from all viscid Nutriments, and to use much Exercise:
This Method I have known to meet with its desired Success.

There are many other Causes besides this Common One, which may render the
Operation unsuccessful; first, the Rising again of the Cataract.

The Cataract will sometimes rise again, even before the Needle is out of the
Eye: There are many specious Reasons to be assigned for it, though perhaps none
of them true; however I shall mention what I have hitherto imagined, not
without a Promise to correct any Thing I shall here say if I find it
contradicted by future Practice.

The first Reason (which is perhaps more obvious to others than myself) is,
That the Crystalline Humor being diseased, is become specifically lighter than
the Vitreous; and that being disengaged from the Membranes to which it in some
Measure adhered, and depressed to the Bottom of the Vitreous, upon Removal of
the Needle it ascends by its own specific Levity, and places itself at or near
the Place from whence it was removed.

The next is, That consisting of very glutinous Parts, and being joined perhaps
to the Uvea, the Needle only removes the main Body, which still remains
attached to the Uvea by certain small elastick Filaments; which as soon as the
Needle is removed contract themselves, and again lift up the Crystalline Humor
into its natural Position.

If it remains depressed for some Days and afterward rises again, but being a
second or third Time depressed it continues where you would place it, it may
proceed from an increased Viscidity in the Humor itself, or from a Rarefaction
of that Fluid into which it is immersed; both of which will perhaps be
consequent upon an Inflammation, perhaps from an Elasticity in the Cornea,
whereby the Aqueous Humor may be immediately thrust into its Place by Removal
of the Crystalline; which Elasticity and Contraction of the Cornea, may
possibly be too great to be overcome by the diffrent specific Gravity of the
Crystalline.

But I must confess, if I was to give my Opinion of the general Cause of the
Rising again of the Cataract immediately upon its being depressed, I should
imagine it to be the lifting up the Point of the Needle before I withdraw it
very near back again to the Place from whence I removed the Cataract. For I
imagine that the specific Gravity of the Crystalline Humor, (being very little
different if at all from that of the Vitreous) would never be sufficient to
overcome the Resistance of the said Vitreous Humor, which is a very viscid and
tenacious Fluid, unless there was a Passage made for it to rise again by that
Motion of the Needle which I have just now expressed; and therefore hold it
necessary that after the Cataract is depressed, the Needle ought to be kept
some Time upon it, that the Fluid above it may have Time perfectly to reunite;
so as becoming all over equally tenacious, it may be empowered to keep the
Cataract in the Position we would have it.

Another Cause of ill Success is, the wounding the Uvea or Iris; the
Consequence of which will be an irregular Form of the Pupilla, some of which I
have seen entirely closed: However if they are not so, there is always such a
Callosity upon the wounded Membrane, as stops up the Pupilla in one Part, and
leaves such an Opening of it on the other, that by stopping up the Rays where
they should pass, and suffering them to pass where they should not, the Eye is
rendered entirely useless.

These Parts too, when wounded, sometimes ulcerate; by which Ulceration, the
whole Coats and Humors of the Eye become one common Mass of Pus, and the Eye
entirely sinks.

The Reason that a Person is obliged to wound the Uvea and Iris is, when he
would endeavor to remove a Film which lies in the Aqueous Humor, or on this
Side the Pupilla. And this, till I know better, I shall call an Injudicious
Practice.

It often happens that the said Coats are wounded through the Fault of the
Patient, even when the Operation is the most judiciously performed; for he not
havingCourage to keep his Eye in the Position he was directed, and by
endeavoring to fly from the Pain which is given by the first Puncture of the
Needle, which he imagines is only to be done by Motion, and not being able to
move his Eye any farther toward the great Canthus, turns it back against the
Point or Edge of the Needle; and by this Means, in Spite of all the Art or
Address of the Surgeon, will with that Motion wound the Coats abovementioned:
But this last Accident does not happen to a Man who knows what he is doing,
perhaps above Once in Twenty Times.

Another Reason of ill Success is, the Cataract proving Milky: To be able to
determine mine whether it is so or not before I touch it with my Needle I have
not yet learned, and should be glad to be informed by any Body who has.

Another Cause of ill Success, which is also sometimes attributed to the
Surgeon, may be a strange Fondness of Sight, which engages the Patient after
having been couched Three or Four Days to pull off the Dressings in the Absence
of the Surgeon; by which he exposing the Eye to the Assaults of the open Air,
brings on that Ophthalmia which we were endeavoring to prevent: In this Case
he himself is blamable, and not the Surgeon, for all the ill Consequences that
may attend it, one of which I have found often to be the entire Loss of Sight.

Another Misfortune, which too frequently attends the unhappy Patient, is, when
the Cataract is accompanied with a Gutta Serena, perhaps of as long standing as
the Cataract itself; this we find when upon depressing the Cataract, (and
there is no Possibility of judging of it before) and the Pupilla remaining
clear, the Patient notwithstanding continues in total Darkness: This Case is
indeed deplorable. I should be unwilling to think that there was any Part of
Mankind such Strangers to common Sense, as to imagine this to be a Fault of the
Surgeon; but, I myself have more than once been calumniated on this very
Account: I cannot help saying, I have been unfairly dealt with by some of the
Gentlemen of my own Profession, who have misrepresented the Cases, and deluded
the common People, as well as injured me; this was the Case of Three Subjects
that I lately Couched in Yarmouth.

N. B. I have met with the same Treatment on Account of a Subject which I Cut
for the Stone, where I will undertake to demonstrate to any Man in England,
that it was as impossible to meet with Success in that Operation as it was
circumstanc'd, as it is to succeed in the Operation of Couching where the
Cataract is attended with a Gutta Serena; for unless a Man could directly look
into the Body in the one Case, or down to the Bottom of the Eye in the other,
he can be no more able to make a positive Prognostic, than he would be to
alter the Circumstances.

I shall make here another Observation, That where there is a Cataract in one
Eye and the other Eye sound and good, the Patient don't ought to be encouraged
to suffer the diseased Eye to be Couched; because the Symptoms which may
possibly attend it, may be the Occasion of the Loss of both.

I shall take the Liberty of mentioning a Case of my own, wherein I have met
with some of the afore-mentioned Accidents. About Five Months since, a Patient
came to me with a Confirmed Cataract in one Eye, and a Suffusion in the other.
I found the Cataract good, and (after the common Preparations) depressed it
with no apparent ill Accident. The Eye continued clear, and the Patient saw for
some Days: At which Time an Inflammation came on, which equally affected both
Eyes; and, notwithstanding all I could do to abate it, the Coats and Humors
were so thickened by it, that the Eye which had the Suffusion in it became
totally blind: And some Time after, that which I had couched was in like Manner
entirely deprived of Sight; though the Cataract remain depressed, and the Pupilla
perfectly clear.

Observation. It seems pretty plain, That the Suffusion abovementioned was
Nothing more than the Beginning of a Cataract, caused by the Crystalline Humor
growing thick and muddy: And that this Inflammation, by increasing the
Viscidity of the Matter separated for the Nourishment of the said Humor,
increased the Thickness so, as to render the Humor entirely opake; or in other
Terms, ripened the Cataract. The Reason why I did not venture to Couch it
afterward was, an uncommon Dilatation of the Pupilla, which had been from the
Beginning of the Suffusion: The Disease of the other was a direct Gutta Serena,
caused by the Inflammation in the Manner before deserib'd.

The Subject I have been treating of being altogether new, I shall beg Leave to
add the following Queries, to be considered by the Gentlemen of my Profession,
not troubling myself whether they make for or against my Hypothesis.

Query I. Whether the Reason of the Dilaation of the Pupilla in one Eye and not
the her may not be this: That the Crystalline Humor being rendered somewhat
less transparent than formerly, the Patient finds that the Rays of Light do not
strike so clearly and for cibly as they used to do; or in other Words the Eye
is darker than in its natural State To amend which, he naturally and one may
almost say involuntarily dilates the Pupilla in order to receive more Rays of
Light, and recompense the Defect of the diseased Humor?

The same is done whenever we want to see Objects in the Dark; but in this case
the Cause remaining constant, the Dilatation is constant too, till the Pupilla
by the frequent Use of this Motion becomes actually wider than it ought
naturally to be. In such a Dilatation as I here mention, we cannot promise any
great Success from the Use of the Needle: For was the Humor itself perfectly
clear, such a dilated Pupilla would admit such a Glare and Flow of Rays to the
Retina, as would render Vision confused and indistinct; much less can we hope
to have a good Eye, when that Humor so necessary to Vision is entirely removed.

Query II. Whether the Cataract sometimes appearing at first in a white Point,
and afterward spreading itself like a Line drawn from a Center to a
Circumference, is not a Proof that it is a transparent Body already formed,
growing thick and cloudy, rather than the Beginning of a new Membrane?

N. B. The Composition of the Crystalline Humor, in the Anatomy of the Eye.

Query III. Whether Cataracts very old and discolored, declining in the same
Manner, and becoming angulous and uneven, is not a Proof of the same Thing?

Query IV. Whether it would not be worth while to observe after the Couching a
young Subject, if the same Subject is ever troubled with a second Cataract,
properly distinguishing whether it be the same Cataract risen again or not? And
this I think is best to be done, by observing the Interval of Time which passes
between his being Couched and the Appearance of this second Cataract. Whether
if this Observation be just, and a second Cataract be formed in the same Eye,
and in the same Subject, this would not destroy my Hypothesis?

Query V. Whether our not being able to remove a Cataract at its first
Appearance, is not a Proof that it is not the Crystalline Humor? Because for all
what we know certainly, the Crystalline Humor is equally removable at all Times.

Query VI. Whether or no in that Stage of the Disease which we call a Milky
Cataract, there may not be such a Solution of Continuity of the Parts of the
Crystalline Humor, as may suffer the Needle to pass backwards and forwards in
it, without being able to remove it out of its Place?

Query VII. And whether in a farther Stage of this Disease, the Parts may not
again close, and stick together in such a Manner, as that the whole Body of the
Humor may be at once removed, by only pressing upon a particular Part of it?

Query VIII. Whether there may not be a Gradation of Coloring settled from Sir
Isaac Newton's Theory, beginning at a light Blue and ending at a greenish
Yellow; whereby we might be able to determine the exact Age of a Cataract, as
soon as we see it? And whether such a particular Color will or will not
successfully bear the Needle?

Query IX. Whether it is not possible to invent a Speculum Oculi, which may keep
the Globe of the Eye without Motion, and without giving that Pain to the
Patient which too frequently contributes to the bringing on of an Inflammation?
I mention this, because I have seen so many Inconveniences attend the Use of
the Common Speculum Oculi; that, rather than use it myself, I have chose to
have Nothing to assist me, except the Pressure of the Thumb and Finger?

Query X. Whether a Trembling, which I have observed in the Aqueous Humor some
Time after Couching, does not proceed from a Loss of Part of that Humor in
Couching? And whether this Trembling is one Reason why the Rays of Light pass
confused into the Eye?

Query XI. Whether there is Room for the Needle to pass between the Crystalline
Humor and the Uvea, without removing the former so as to spoil the Eye, or
cutting or lacerating the latter?

Query XII. Whether, if this last is practicable, there is not a Possibility of
removing a Film that may be in the Forepart of the Pupilla, notwithstanding the
Needle enters in at the Backpart of it?

Query XIII. Whether there might not be a nice Experiment made, by placing an
Eye like a Lens in the Hole of a dark Chamber? I think (if I remember rightly)
I have met with the following Account in an Author of Experimental Philosophy.
Stripping the Fund of the Eye of its Integuments, he placed it as
abovementioned; and holding a Piece of white Paper within the Room, at a small
Distance from the Eye, he distinctly perceived the Images of all Objects from
without painted upon the Paper; as they would have been upon the Retina, if the
Eye had been in its natural Position.

Had a nice Hand been there who would have gone on the Outside and with a Needle
as in Couching depressed the Crystalline Humor, and if notwithstanding this
Depression the Person within could still perceive the Images as before, it
would be a certain Proof that the Eye might see, notwithstanding the Loss of
the Crystalline Humor.

The Eye should be taken down, and dissected; and by observing in what Part the
Crystalline Humor after its Removal was lodged, we should receive a great Light
into the Theory of Couching, and much Satisfaction, as to the Truth of this
Hypothesis.

I only mention this as it seems to me possible, without being able to
determine whether it is practicable or not.

CONCLUSION.
Before I conclude, I thought it my Duty to mention, (and in the Words of a
Great Man) That as a candid and sincere Behavior ought to be preferred to all
other Considerations, I would not let my Heart reproach me with a Consciousness
of having gained even the Possibility of a Praise, which is not in every
Particular my Right: I therefore thought proper to acknowledge, that I am
obliged to a very ingenious Gentleman (whom I have the Honor to be acquainted
with) for Two or Three Hints that he has given me in the latter Part of this
short Dissertation, which otherwise probably might have been omitted.

N.B. I believe it will be necessary to observe to such Persons as are not
Judges of the Subject I have been treating of, That I have therein demonstrated
the Reason of my not meeting with Success in some Patients that I have Couched,
particularly in Yarmouth.

FINIS.

