THE ATHENAID, A POEM.

VOL. I.



THE ^THENAID, A POEM,

BY THE AUTHOR OF LEONIDAS.

(...)
(...)
AESCHYL. PERSAE. VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND. MDCCLXXXVII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE ATHENAID, written by the late Richard Glover, Esquire was left by him, among
other literary works, to Miss Glover (now Mrs. Halsey) who presents it to the
Public exactly copied from her Father's Manuscript, except what regards the
punctuation, and introduction of now and then a connective word, inserted by
the good offices of a Friend. -- The Poem was not finished early enough before
Mr. Glover's decease for him to revise it, as he intended; yet, incorrect as it
may be for want of such revisal, the Editor flatters herself that it will be
favorably received, as the genuine work of an Author, who was ever
distinguished by public approba^ion. -- An earnest desire of doing honor to the
memory of a deceased Parent, and also of gratifying the literary world with the
Sequel to LEONIDAS, which the present Poem contains, and which together
includes the most brilliant period of the Grecian History, are the motives for
her Publication.

ERRATA.
B. I. l. 390, for Alpheus, read Alphe^us. B. I. l. 520, for Dioneces, read
Dieneces. B. III. l. 324, for ut, read But. B. IV. l. 340, for servants, read
servant's. B. VI. l. 80, after blood place a full stop. B. X. l. 72, for
Erotria, read Eretria. B. X. l. 337, for wait, read waits.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the FIRST.
THE Persians vanquished, Greece from bondage saved,
The death of great Leonidas avenged
By Attic virtue -- celebrate, O Muse!
A burning ray the summer solstice cast,
The Olympiad was proclaimed; when Xerxes poured
His millions through Thermopylae, new-stain'd
With blood. From Athens Aeschylus divine
In genius, arts, and valor, musing deep
On his endangered country's future doom,
Repairs, invited by an evening still,
To clear Ilissus, Attic stream renowned.
Beneath an oak, in solitary state
Apart, itself a wood, the hero's limbs
On tufted moss repose. He grasps the lyre;
Unfolded scrolls voluminous he spreads
Along the ground: high lays repeating thence,
Leonidas the Spartan he extols,
And sweeps the accordant strings. To closing day
He bade farewell, and hailed the ascending stars
In music long continued; till the stream
With drowsy murmur won his eye to sleep,
But left his fancy waking. In a dream
The god of day, with full meridian blaze,
Seemed to assume his function over the skies;
When, lo! the earth divided: through the cleft
A gush of radiance dimmed the noontide sun.
In structure all of diamond, self poised,
Amid redundant light a chariot hung
Triumphal. Twelve transparent horses breathed
Beams from their nostrils, dancing beams of day
Shook from their manes. In lineaments of man,
Changed to immortal, there the mighty soul
Of Sparta's king apparent shone. His wounds
Shot forth a splendor like the clust'ring stars,
Which on Orion's chest and limbs proclaim
Him first of constellations. Round in cars
Of triumph too arrang'd, the stately forms
Of those whom virtue led to share his doom,
And consecrate Thermopylae to fame.
Pines tipp'd with lightning seemed their spears; their shields
Broad like Minerva's aegis: from their helms
An empyreal brightness streamed abroad:
Ineffable felicity their eyes,
Their fronts the majesty of gods displayed.
Erect the glorious shape began to speak
In accents louder than a bursting cloud --
Pentelicus, Hymettus seemed to shake
Through all their quarries, and Ilissus beat
His shudd'ring banks in tumult -- Thou, whose muse
Commands the immortalizing trump of fame,
Go to the sage Hellanodics, the just
Ele^an judges of Olympian palms;
There in thy own celestial strains rehearse,
Before that concourse wide, our deeds and fate.
Let our example general Greece inspire
To face her danger; let the Spartan shield
Protect the Athenians, else I died in vain.
The brilliant vision, now dispersing, leaves
The wondering bard. He, starting, in his ken
Discerns no other than the real scene
Of shadows brown from close embow'ring wood,
Than distant mountains, and the spangled face
Of heaven, reflected from the silver stream.
But pensive, brooding over his country's fate,
His step he turns. Themistocles, who ruled
Athenian councils, instant he accosts
With large recital of his awful dream.
Obey the mandate, cries the chief: alarm
The Olympian concourse: from the Delphian port
Of Cirrha sail for Elis: on thy way
Consult Apollo in the state's behalf,
Which to that function nominates thy worth:
Of Xerxes' march intelligence obtain.
This said, they parted. Aeschylus by dawn
Commenced his progress, joined by numbers armed,
Like him to Pisa's barrier destined all,
Electing him their chief. Five times the sun
Renewed his orbit, five successive nights
The moon enlarged her crescent, ere they reached
Phoebean Delphi, seated on a rock
Abrupt, sublime. Yet thence the curious eye
Must upward look to meet the summits blue
Of double-topp'd Parnassus, where the god
Oracular is worshipped. Here they traced
Barbarian violence profane. Consumed
Were hamlets, temples levelled to the dust,
The statues broken, each religious bower
A burning mass of embers. Wrapped in smoke,
With cinders strewn, so glows the region round
Portentous Aetna, or Vesuvius dire,
Death's flaming cauldrons; when their stony ribs
And min'ral bowels, liquefied by fire,
Overwhelm the fields, by nature left unblessed,
Alone unblessed of all Sicania's bound,
Or lovely-fac'd Hesperia. Dubious here
The Athenians halt, while fierce the sultry noon
Inflames the sky. From Delphi's open gates,
To Attic eyes no stranger, Timon comes,
Sage priest of Phoebus, magistrate unsoil'd,
The public host of Athens, to the plain
Descending swift with followers who bear
His buckler, spear, and armor. On his head
Were ashes sprinkled: rent, his garb presaged
Some black disaster. What malignant dart
Of fortune wounds thee? Aeschylus aloud,
While by the hand Cecropia's host he pressed.
To him the Delphian: From deserted roofs,
Depopulated streets, I come to hail
Thee, bound by hospitable ties my friend,
Thee, dear to Phoebus, by Minerva graced,
Thy country's goddess. Me thou often saw
A parent blessed in Amarantha's bloom,
Yet ripe in virtue. Her, presenting prayer
With votive flowers before Minerva's shrine,
This very hour Barbarians have enthralled,
Borne in my sight precipitate away.
O wife lamented, gathered in thy prime
By ruthless Pluto! in Elysian groves
How shall I meet thee, and the tidings bear
Of thy lost child, to servitude a prey,
To violation doomed? Yet more: the rage
Of these invaders, who have spoiled our fields,
Defaced our temples, driven to sheltering caves,
To pathless cliffs, our populace dismayed,
Is now ascending to insult the fane,
With sacrilegious violence to seize
The accumulated offerings by the great
And good from age to age devoted there.
He scarce had finished, when the earth beneath
Rocked from her center in convulsive throes;
From pole to pole the ethereal concave groaned:
Night from her cavern with gigantic steps
Bestrode the region, lifting high as heaven
Her broad, infernal palm, whose umbrage hides
The throne of light; while, glancing through the rifts
Of her black mande, overlaid with clouds,
Blue vapors trail'd their fires. The double head
Of tall Parnassus reeling, from the crag
Unloos'd two fragments; mountainous in bulk,
They roll to Delphi with a crashing sound,
Like thunder nigh whose burst of ruin strikes
The shattered ear with horror. Thus the bard
Unmoved, while round him every face is pale:
Not on our heads these menaces are thrown
By ireful nature, and portentous heaven;
The unrighteous now, the oppressor of mankind,
The sacrilegious, in this awful hour
Alone should feel dismay. My Delphian host,
Who knows but thundering Jove's prophetic son
Now vindicates his altar; in his name
Now calls the turbid elements to war?
What shrieks of terror fill thy native streets!
The hills with barbarous dissonance of cries,
The caverns howl. Athenians, be prepared,
Best so when armed: then, Timon, case thy limbs;
The season teems with prodigy. Secure
In conscious virtue, let us calmly watch
The mighty birth. By heaven! through yonder gate
The foes are driven; confusion, wild despair,
With panic dread pursue them: friends, embrace
The auspicious moment; lift your pious blades,
Ye chosen men, auxiliars to a god!
He spoke, advancing with his holy friend
To battle. Shivering at their own misdeed,
At heav'n-inflicted punishment, the foes
Unnerv'd, distracted, unresisting, deemed
The warriors two celestials from above,
Cased in Vulcanian panoply, to wage
The war of gods. The whole Athenian train
In equal fervor with Barbarian blood
Distain their weapons. So from forests drear,
When barren winter binds the foodful earth,
Enraged by famine, trooping wolves invade
A helpless village; unwithstood, they range
With greedy fangs, and dye with human gore
The snow-envelop'd ways. The Delphian race,
By fear so lately to the neighboring hills
And caves restrained, forsake their sheltering holds;
In clusters rushing on the foes dismayed,
Accomplish their defeat. The Athenian chief
Triumphant, red with massacre, admits
A Persian youth to mercy, who his shield
And sword surrenders. Persian, do thou hope
Thy flow'ring bloom shall ripen to enjoy
A length of days? (severe his victor spoke)
Then to my questions utter words sincere.
Reveal thy name, thy father's. Where encamps
The host of Xerxes? Whither does he point
His inroad next? To violate this fane
By his appointment was thy youth compelled?
Last, if thou know, what impious savage tore
The Delphian maiden from Minerva's shrine?
The Persian answers with a crimsoned cheek,
With eyes in tears -- Ah! little now avails
The illustrious current of Argestes' blood
To me a captive, less the name I bear
Of Artamanes. By the king's decree
That we were sent, that I unwilling came,
Is truth sincere. Our leader slain, the heaps
Of these disfigured carcases have made
Their last atonement to the insulted god.
The king in rich Orchomenus I left;
Who through Boeotia meditates to march
Against the Athenians. He, alas! who seized
The beauteous virgin at Minerva's shrine,
He is my brother, eldest of the race,
Far hence secure; while captive here I mourn
His heinous outrage, and my own disgrace.
Addressing Timon, here Cecropia's bard:
Preserve this youth a hostage for thy child:
He seems deserving; thee I know humane.
Now to Apollo's temple be my guide.
Still do thou droop? -- O Aeschylus, exclaims
Desponding Timon, from the woes begun
This day in Delphi, I to Athens trace
A series black with evil. Lo! the wise,
The righteous Aristides from your walls
Through jealousy of merit is expelled;
Themistocles the cause. Himself, though great,
Yet envious, and ambitious that his light
May blaze unrivaled, of the Athenian state
Extinguishes the brightest. Sparta shows,
At this dread crisis, how the hearts of men
By selfish ears and falsehood are depraved.
She to the land of Pelops still confines
Her efforts, on the neighboring isthmus rears
A partial bulwark, leaving half the Greeks,
Your noble seat, this oracle, exposed
To devastation: little she regards
Our god profaned, our progeny enslaved;
Her chief Pausanias, arrogant and stern,
O'erlooks my sufferings. Feeling what I fear
For thee and others, I must droop, my friend.
To him the bard, in these sententious strains:
Not endless sunshine is the lot of man,
Nor ever blooming seasons. Night succeeds
The day, as day the night: rude winter frowns,
Fair summer smiles. Thus variable the mind,
Not less than human fortune, feels the strife
Of truth and error, which alternate reign
The arbiters of nature. Dark the deed,
A deed of gloomy night, when envy forced
The best Athenian from his natal roof:
But light will soon return. Though Sparta break
Her promise pledged; though false Boeotia prop
A foreign throne; still Athens will sustain
Herself and Greece, will retribution pay
To Aristides, and her morn dispel
The mist of error with a glorious blaze.
No more -- my duty calls me to the fane.
They move, and passing by Minerva's grove,
Two monuments of terror see. There stopped
The massy fragments, from Parnassus rent:
An act of nature, by some latent cause
Disturbed. Tremendous over Barbarian ranks
The ruins down the sacred way had rolled,
Leaving its surface horrible to sight;
Such as might startle war's remorseless god,
And shake his heart of adamant. Not long
This blood-congealing spectacle detains
The troop, which swiftly to the Pythian dome
Press their ascending steps. The martial bard
First, as enjoined by holy form, to scenes
Far different, sweet Castalia's fount and grove,
Resorts, with pure ablution to redeem
From dust and slaughter his polluted limbs,
To holy eyes obscene. Beside the fane,
Within a flow'ring bosom of the hill,
Through veins of rock beneath embow'ring shade,
The rills divine replenish, as they flow,
A cavity of marble. Over the brim,
In slender sheets of liquid crystal, down
They fall harmonious. Plistus takes below
To his smooth bed their tribute. Plunging there
In deep obscurity of wood, whose roof
With ridgy verdure meets the low-bent eye
From that stupendous cliff, his current winds
Through shade awhile; thence issuing large in view,
Refreshes grateful meads, by mountains edged,
Which terminate on Cirrha, Delphian port.
Beyond her walls blue Neptune spreads his face
Far as Achaia's wide expanse of coast,
With towers and cities crowned. The marble fount
On either side is skirted thick by groves
Of ancient laurel with luxuriant arms,
In glossy green attired. There Phoebus, pride
Of Parian quarries, stands a form divine,
In act to draw an arrow from the case
Loose hanging over his shoulder; and in look
Serene, but stern: his worshippers to guard,
As if the Pythian serpent were in sight,
He meditates the combat. Here disarmed,
His limbs from all the impurities of Mars
The Athenian purges. Menial care supplies
A garment silver-white: an olive branch
His suppliant hand sustains. He seeks the fane;
He mounts the steps magnificent: the gates
On sounding hinges turn their brazen valves.
Across an area vast, with solemn shade
Of massy columns bordered, slow he moves
His manly frame. Procumbent at the mouth
Of that abyss oracular, whose fume
Breathes wild sensation through the Pythian maid,
With hands outstretch'd, he offers up this prayer:
O vanquisher of Python! Seed of Jove,
Whose eleutherian might the tyrant dreads!
Bright power of day, dispenser of that fire
Which kindles genius in the human breast!
God of that light diffusing through the soul
The rays of truth and knowledge! Friend to man,
His monitor prophetic! O admit
Athenians, anxious for their country's weal,
In this her day of peril to consult
Thy wisdom, thy protection to implore!
Her tripod high the prophetess ascends:
Enthusiastic motion strains her form,
In flashes rolls her eyeballs, and bespreads
Her agitated front with floating hair.
Her weight a laurel, planted nigh, upholds,
Which she embraces; her convulsive grasp
Shakes to the root the groaning trunk, the boughs,
The clatt'ring foliage. Forth she bursts in foam.
Fly, wretched men, to earth's extremest bound!
I see, I see the Acropolis in flames,
Your temples crumble, and your turrets nod:
I see the blood run sable through your streets.
All unabash'd, the hero firm replies:
Yet further speak. Though citadel and fanes
Be doomed to ashes, must the nation fall?
If so, instruct thy suppliants how their fall
May prove most glorious in the sight of gods
And men. -- The Pythian answers with a look
Of pity, softening her tempestuous rage:
Ah! still my tongue like adamant is hard.
Minerva's towers must perish: Jove severe
So wills; yet granting, at his daughter's suit,
Her people refuge under walls of wood.
But shun the myriads of terrific horse,
Which on your fields an eastern Mars will range.
She ceased; The Athenian notes her answer down:
To one, the most entrusted of his train,
He gives the tablet. Back to Athens fly,
He said; the son of Neocles alone,
By his unbounded faculties, can pierce
The hidden sense of these mysterious strains;
All which of Xerxes thou have heard, report:
I must depart to Elis. -- Must thou go?
Dejected Timon then: what safety here
For me remains? Barbarians will return;
My countrymen, disheartened as before,
Resort to caverns. Though the god has saved
His shrine, the rest of Phocis lies a prey,
Boeotia, Locris, Doris, to the foe.
Yet what have I, O Aeschylus! to dread?
I have no other child for savage force
To violate: In Amarantha lost,
My joy, my hope are vanished; and the hand,
Which lays me breathless, will befriend me best.
The Athenian here: Unmanly is despair,
A noxious weed, whose growth, my Delphian host,
Let courage wither. Phoebus has denounced
The waste of Athens. Hopeful I forebode,
That prouder walls and battlements will lift
Their heads for ages; and that eye of Greece
With inextinguishable ray surpass
Its former luster. Quit this dangerous place,
With us embarking: borrow help from time,
Safe counselor to wisdom. You, the race
Of holy Delphi, should the foe return,
Again dispersing to your caves, rely
On your protecting god. Not versed alone
In holy rites, in arms and council tried,
A chief like Timon fame forbids to hide
His dignity in caverns. -- Timon here:
Thou shall conduct me, thou my friendly star!
Meantime selected messengers I send
The needful barks at Cirrha to prepare.
Now from the temple under Timon's roof
Admitted, vigorous with refection due
Of rest and food, to Cirrha they proceed
With Artamanes. Ready are the barks,
The gale propitious, calm the watery plain:
When, like the feathered sojourners, who leave
Their late abode on winter's bleak approach,
To wing their flight for climates more benign,
These with extended canvas quit the port,
And, doubling round Achaia, cut the main
To sacred Pisa. On their way the harp
Of Aeschylus, preluding to the strain
Which on his banks Alpheus was to hear,
Relieves the sailor toiling at his oar,
Enchants the wind retentive of the sounds
Which harmonize his breath. If round the keel
Of sweet Arion dolphins ever played,
Or blithsome Nereids to the pleasing mood
Of Orpheus danced, while Argo plough'd the deep;
They now had felt controulment as in bonds,
Not on their pliant, azure-glossy fins
Disporting light, but rigid with amaze
At this majestic muse. Yet sounding verse,
In solemn cadence to the deep-ton'd lyre,
Which could the boisterous mariner subdue,
The ear of Timon, languid by despair,
Rejects, attentive to his grief alone,
Which sighs within. Society is pain,
Even with his friend. A solitary couch
He seeks; recumbent, not reposing, there
Consumes the hours in pertinacious woe,
Which sheds no tear. If wearied nature sinks,
His sleep is troubled; visions of the night
Appal his spirit; starting, he forsakes
A thorny pillow; rushes on the deck
With lamentations to the midnight moon.
Alarmed, the Athenian chief approaching seized
On Timon's hand; with earnest looks inquired
Why thus complaining he disturbs the calm,
From his own pillow chacing due repose?
Ah! I have seen my daughter, he replies,
Have seen her twice! -- Where seen her? all distressed
The Athenian questions. -- On a rock she stood,
A naked rock, the parent wild exclaims;
Unloos'd her zone, dishevelled was her hair;
The ravisher was nigh. On sight of me,
Who no assistance from the shore could reach,
O father, father! I am shamed, deflower'd,
But here will end my sorrows and disgrace;
She said, and plunged precipitate. I saw
Her body swallowed by the greedy surge,
Unwept, deprived of sepulture, to float.
Illusion all! the bard consoling spoke;
The phantom offspring of distempered sleep.
A second time, the frantic fire pursues,
Did Amarantha meet my aching sight;
Then, like an eastern concubine attired,
Her head was blazoned with Barbaric gems;
With golden gloss her wanton garment waved:
With her despoiler hand in hand she walked,
Disclaimed her father, and her father's gods.
Oh then I wished her on the waves again,
To parch in winds, or sat some vulture's beak!
The youthful captive Artamanes, roused,
Stands nigh in generous tears. To him the bard:
Ingenuous Persian, check thy tears, and lend
Thy hand benign: committed to his couch
Him watch and fuccour. -- Hourly was performed
The pious office; noblest Delphians round
Assist in tears; while now the moonlight twice
Danced on the billows. On the second morn
They land in Elis. Fame had gone before,
Promulgating the valor which avenged
The Delphian god, prophetic light to man,
Even more than Jove in Ammon's Libyan shrine
Or Dodonaean groves. A shining car
Waits on the shore; a herald there salutes
The warrior bard. Divine Athenian, hail!
Hail, righteous captain of a righteous band!
These olive crowns to thee and them I bear;
So have the sage Hellanodics ordained,
Who to their just tribunal through my voice
Invite thy presence. Aeschylus receives
The victor's chaplet, and ascends the car.
Along Alphe^us to the Olympian lists
He passes through spectators all arrayed
In garlands too, and numerous like the flowers
Embellishing the river's fragrant sides,
Or like the pebbles in his murmuring bed.
The approach of Aeschylus is known. Between
Two rows of victors in their olive crowns
He over the sanded area greets the thrones,
Where, graced with scepters magisterial, sat
The Ele^an judges. Standing on the car,
To them, uprising from their seats, he spoke:
If to have fought for Delphi and her god
Deserve this chaplet, what superior praise
To him is due, who voluntary died
For Lacedaemon? But he claims no more
Than emulation from the sons of Greece,
Like him to save their countries and their laws.
He has his honors in the blessed abodes;
From him I come deputed; hear in me
Leonidas. A vision, as of gods,
To me, late slumbering on Ilissus, rose;
In semblance rose Leonidas, begirt
With all the virtuous partners in his fate.
Before me earth divided; through the cleft
A gushing radiance dimmed the eye of noon.
In structure all of diamond, self-pois'd,
Amid redundant light, a chariot hung
Triumphal. Twelve transparent horses breathed
Beams from their nostrils, dancing beams of day
Shook from their manes. In lineaments of man,
Changed to immortal, with a shape enlarged,
A stature lengthened, there the mighty soul
Of Sparta's king apparent shone. His wounds
Shot forth a starlike splendor. Round in cars
Triumphal too arrang'd, the stately forms
Of those whom virtue led to share his doom,
And consecrate Thermopylae to fame.
To me these words the glorious shape addressed:
Go to the sage Hellanodics, the just
Ele^an judges of Olympian palms:
In that wide concourse celebrate my death.
Let my example general Greece inspire
To face her danger; let the Spartan shield
Protect the Athenians, else I died in vain.
Attention mute the Hellanodics command:
The thick'ning crowd is hushed. The bard proceeds,
While inspiration swells his copious breast,
Flames in his eye, and thunders from his voice.
Parnassian Phoebus he invoked, the power
Of prophecy and song. His aid is due
In celebration of the man who heard
The oracle from Delphi, and obeyed.
"A king derived from Hercules must die
"For Lacedaemon." Who obedient heard?
Leonidas: he left his household gods,
His wife beloved, his offspring; at the gate
Of Greece, Thermopylae, he fought, he fell:
With him what heroes? Alpheus, Maron bled,
There Agis, there Dioneces, the seer,
Megistias, bold Diomedon, the youth
Of Dithyrambus, Thespia's hoary chief,
Demophilus; for you they all expired:
Rise, Greeks, revenge their fall! in that revenge
Your laws, your manners, and religion save.
You who aspire to these Olympic wreaths,
The brightest guerdon to a Grecian brow,
Yet will you linger, till Barbaric arms
Annihilate the Olympiad? Not to die
Leonidas invites; no, Greeks, to live!
Surmounting foes enervate by the dread
His death impressed, to fill your cup of life
With virtuous glory, to enjoy your hopes
In peace, in years and merit then mature
Be his companions in eternal bliss.
Such was the substance; but in swelling phrase
At large, full tide of poesy and zeal,
Flowed his high-ton'd, enthusiastic song.
End of the First Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the SECOND.
THE inspiring measures close. To arms, to arms,
Innumerable mouths concurrent sound;
To arms, to arms, reply the pillar'd isles
Of Jove's Olympian temple: down his banks
To distant Neptune glad Alphe^us wafts
The glorious clamor. Through the assembly vast
Meantime an elevated form is seen,
With gracious gesture, animating look,
Approaching: now before the Elean thrones
Of solemn judgment he majestic stands,
Known for the man by Themis placed in rank
Above his fellow mortals; archon once
Of Athens, now an exile: him the chief
Among the grave Hellanodics addressed:
Hail, Aristides! On the Olympian games
Thy presence throws new dignity: what crown
Can they provide to equal thy desert?
While others court the prize of strength and skill,
Activity and valor; in the lists
Of virtue only Aristides strives.
With him on earth competitor is none;
Him Jove, sole perfect judge of gods and men,
Can recompense alone. He scornful views
Ambitious heroes, who assume the names
Of thunder-bearers, vanquishers of towns,
And ravagers of kingdoms: vain attempt
In feeble man to imitate in power
The inimitable gods! On thee he casts
An eye delighted; thee, by every tongue
Proclaimed the just; thee, emulating heaven,
Where mortals may, in goodness. Yet our voice
Shall, what we can, decree dispraise to those
Whose envy wronged that sacred head of thine.
Forbear that censure, Aristides spoke:
Though liberty may err through jealous care,
That jealous care far oft'ner saves a state
Than injures private worth. That I forgave
My condemnation, be my witness, Jove!
Whom I, departing from my native soil,
Implored that Athens never might feel the loss
Of Aristides. To confirm that prayer
I have employed my exile; not in quest
Of splendid refuge in the courts of kings,
But through each city with unwearied steps
Have passed, exhorting, stimulating Greece
To bold defense. I gladly am forestalled
Here by a noble countryman, whose arm
At Marathon was famed, whose Attic lays
Immortalize the brave. I now invoke,
Not with less fervor, though in humbler phrase,
The patriots there triumphant even in death,
The manes of Leonidas, of all
Whose generous blood new-spilt in freedom's cause,
Thermopylae beholds, to spread abroad
Their glorious spirit, and exalt your minds
Above the sense of danger. Now the weal
Of general Greece a general effort claims.
March to the plain, ye Doric warriors! mount
Your decks; the Athenians with united arms
Support, no longer in that isthmian fence
Your trust reposing. Were the wall of brass,
Were adamant the rampart, if the power
Of Athens, once extinguished, leave your coasts
Defenseless, soon to Pelops' Isle the foe,
Like death, a thousand avenues will find.
He ceased: A second acclamation rends
The sky; again the Olympian temple groans
In replication, and Alphe^an banks
Reverberate the sound. The Attic bard
Meantime, o'er-spent with labor of the mind
And voice loud straining, to the tranquil porch
Of Jove is lightly borne; nor knows the hands,
Benevolent and pious, which sustain
His languid burden; till these friendly words
In tones remembered dissipate his trance.
Does Aeschylus forget me? O recall
Melissa's brother, and Oileus' son,
Whose Locrian hinds at one auspicious hour
Assisted thy bold mariners to hurl
The Oetaean ruins on Barbarian heads.
See Meliboeus offering to thy lip
The stream's refreshing moisture. -- Soon restored,
The Athenian thus: Illustrious Medon, hail!
How fares Melissa, how thy native land?
She rests, I hope, on Oeta still secure,
Returns the Locrian. When Laconia's king
Was slain, and I, commanded to retreat,
Charged with a solemn notice to her state,
That he expired obedient to the laws;
My life, devoted to avenge his blood,
I saved. O'erpow'ring Xerxes soon reduced
The Locrians, Dorians, every northern Greek.
In time my father's treasure I removed,
Which with a hundred followers I bore
To Lacedaemon. There indiff'rence cold
I found to all except of Pelops' Isle;
Attention sole to build an isthmian wall:
Pausanias, guardian to the minor king,
Son of divine Leonidas, disdains
Our just complaint: The Ephori confine
To this contracted region all their care,
Save Aemnestus. Generous often he mourned;
In vain his torpid colleagues he reproved.
Disgusted there, I joined these solemn games,
Where in contention of the warlike spear
I proved a victor. Olive-bound, my head
On future fields its freedom shall maintain;
Else, with my late preserver's fate in view,
Shall dying roll this chaplet in the dust.
Repair with me to Athens, cries the bard.
Sage is that counsel, Aristides near
Subjoins: time presses; Aeschylus, embark:
Aegina's hospitable round supplies
My place of rest. -- Now swift the Athenian band,
With Medon's, seek their Delphian barks again;
While Aristides holds an inland course,
Still to his country meditating good,
Of his own wrongs forgetful. As he roam'd
From state to state, his eloquence instilled
The love of freedom, horror at her loss,
Unchanging hatred to monarchal sway,
With concord, valor, fortitude, and zeal
For Greece in danger. From his wonted seat
In heaven, so Phoebus, patient and resigned,
An exile wandered on the earth below;
Beneficent and helpful, there diffused
His light of science; with salubrious skill
Imparted health, and taught the varied use
Of lenient roots and plants. The Delphian keels
Meantime are loosened from Ele^an sands,
With sails outstretch'd for Athens. On his couch
Still Timon lies despairing; near him watch
The chiefs humane: in kind officious care
The Persian captive from his forehead wipes
The dews of anguish. With a sudden start
Him now the Delphian, erring, thus bespoke:
Oh Alexander! thou have lost, my son,
Thy dear betrothed, the land of Phocis lost
Her noblest virgin! Reach my arms -- I see
The ravisher before me: though he frowns,
Begirt with savage multitudes, my sword
Shall reach his barbarous heart. Here Medon turns
To Aeschylus: The sight of Delphi's chief,
So nobly excellent, so honored, loved,
By all resorting to consult his god,
A sight once grateful, pierces now my soul
With agony. How often has music soothed
Distempered bosoms! Let thy tuneful chords,
Medicinally sweet, apply their aid.
To him the bard: My harmony his ear
But late rejected. Meliboeus, try
The softer sounds which Pan has taught the swains.
A modulation by Melissa taught
I will essay, the obedient swain replies.
He said, and lightly touched his warbling flute.
Like fountains rilling, or mellifluous notes
Of birds, a soft and lulling flow attun'd
The ambient air. At first the afflicted man
Paused in attention, soon a trickling tear
Bedewed his beard; the remedy was changed
To pain, and thus he recommenc'd his moan.
Thou, Amarantha, too could wake the soul
Of music, melting in thy parent's ear,
Refining joyful seasons, or the hours
Of care beguiling. In a foreign clime
Hang up thy harp, sad captive! Let thy hand
Forget her skill, nor charm Barbarian minds.
But hark! I hear the ruffian. Slave! he calls,
Resume thy harp: Some chosen hymn of Greece,
Such as delighted Phoebus, chaunt to me,
Me now thy god. O Alexander, fly,
Redeem thy love. Apollo, who could hurl
Parnassian summits on a host of foes,
Make me thy instrument of wrath! My nerves
Convert to pierceless adamant; my lance
Point with thy father's lightning! Me thy priest,
Sprung from an old, heroic, sacred line,
Thou should avenge. But vengeance is too late;
My daughter yields: a minstrel to her lord,
To her deflow'rer, with obsequious art
The Grecian chords she prostitutes, and smiles
To see my sufferings! -- During this distress,
With canvas pressed, the squadron bounds along
By Coryphasium, by Messene's gulf
In Nestor's Pylian kingdom, by the peak
Of Taenarus, projecting over a cave,
Night's gloomy chamber, fabled to descend
Low as Plutonian regions. Thrice the morn
Serenely smiled, ere Malea's top their sails
O'ershades, Laconian promontory bleak,
The residence of storms. Five distant masts
Are now descried; when Aeschylus bespake
The Locrian chief: Not friendly are those decks;
Our navy, since Thermopylae was forced,
To Salamis retiring, leaves the foes
At large to range the sea. Thy counsel give;
To some Laconian harbor shall we steer,
Or wait their coming? Here Oileus' son:
Thou art my leader; thee propitious Mars
On land and main with equal powers endues:
How can I counsel, stranger to the waves?
At thy commandment to retreat, or fight,
Behold me ready. -- Then by Mars, replies
The warrior bard, as no resistless force
Bears down against us, yet insulting hoists
A threatening signal, Delphians, rest the oar;
Provide your arms; Athenians, Locrians, arm!
This said, his pinnace, launched in haste, conveyed
His orders round to form the embattled line.
Six were the vessels; Lo! a stately bark
In regal pendants leads the opponent van.
As when a vernal sun's precarious beam
Is intercepted by a sudden cloud,
Whose turgid folds are overcharged with hail;
Some palace, broad, impenetrably roof'd,
Defies the clatt'ring, ineffectual drift,
Which harmless melts away -- so flew a shower
Of missive arms, of arrows, javelins, darts,
With pebbles whirling from the forceful sling,
On Grecian helms and implicated shields;
But innocently fell. Now side to side
The chieftains grappled, and gigantic death
To either deck outstretch'd his purple feet.
Malignant art no engine has devised
To man destructive like his own fell hand
In serried fight. But slaughter now began
To pause in wonder, while the Asian chief,
Whose blazoned armor beamed with gold, engaged
Cecropia's hardy vet'ran foot to foot,
With falchion falchion, shield encount'ring shield.
So, in the season when lascivious heat
Burns in their veins, two branching-headed stags,
Of all the herd competitors for sway,
Long with entangled horns persist in strife,
Nor yield, nor vanquish: stand in gaze the rest,
Expecting which by conquest shall assume
The mastery of all. Now Timon, roused
With Meliboeus, and the captive youth,
Starts from his pillow: they attain the poop,
Which instant boarded from an eastern ship
By hostile arms is held. Brave Medon quits
His former station; Aeschylus he leaves
A firm defender there: his falchion keen
Aloft he waves. As some tremendous shark,
Who with voracious jaws resistless foams
Along the main, and finny tribes devours,
Or drives before him on the sun-bright waves,
Where late secure they wantoned -- Medon's might,
Prevailing thus, the steerage heaps with dead;
Though not in time victorious to retain
Unhappy Timon, Meliboeus good,
And Artamanes, not unwilling borne
With them away to join his friends again.
Two Delphian vessels their auxiliar beaks
Present. More furious had the contest glowed
In every quarter; when over Malean cliffs
The wind began to howl, the troubled sky
To flash sulphurous, menacing a storm,
Such as Saturnia on the Dardan fleet,
Or Neptune's rage for Polyphemus blind
Dashed on Laertes' much enduring son.
The squadrons separate; To the sheltering lee
Of Malea steer the Grecians; while their foes
Expatiate over the roomy sea, to shun
The local tumults of that stormy shore,
And hold a distant course. Over Timon's fate
The Athenian now finds leisure to lament
With Medon, Medon with responsive grief
For Meliboeus. By return of dawn
The waters calmed invite the vigorous oars
To recommence their progress. Coasting down
Laconia's sea-beat verge, they wear the day;
Then resting moor in Cynosura's port.
From Aeschylus in sighs these accents broke:
Here Aesculapius by his powerful art,
Which dared revive departed breath in man,
Offending Pluto, thunder-pierc'd by Jove,
Lodged his own clay in Cynosura's mold.
O now to immortality preferred,
Kind god of medicine! would thou hear my suit,
Thou should restore Leonidas, to warm
Unfeeling Sparta; then thy Delphian sire
The menaced doom of Athens would revoke,
Nor I besprinkle with indignant tears
Laconia's shore. O Locrian guest, I called
Thy welcome feet to Athens: thou may view
(For so the oracle to me denounced)
Her towers in dust. -- Minerva's towers to fall
Has Phoebus doomed? the Locrian chief exclaimed;
I, who have lost my country, yet can find
A tear for Athens: I attest the gods,
As in one vessel, Aeschylus, we steer
Together now, thy fortune I will share;
And down her stream, however the tempest roar,
With thee embarked, will never quit thy side.
The tragic bard unbends his mournful brow,
Thus answ'ring: Generous Medon, I confess,
Approaching nearer to my seat of birth,
I dropped a tear of anguish; nature wept
At sad forebodings of destruction there.
But know, a true Athenian never desponds:
Abandoned by allies, condemned by heaven
To see their city burnt, that gallant race
Will yet assert their liberty; will save
Even faithless Sparta, and thy home redeem.
This said, they slept, till morning gives her sign
To weigh the anchors, and unfurl the sails.
Aurora's third appearance tips with light,
Of roseate tincture, spacious walls and towers
Of no ignoble city, rising clear
From shading mists to view. The poet then:
Lo! Medon, fair Troezene; rich her soil,
Her people generous, to Cecropia's state
Inviolably faithful. See that isle
Which fronts the port; redundant in delights
Of art and nature, though of circuit small,
Calauria shows her verdant round of wood.
Here disembarking, with devotion pure
We must invoke the trident-bearing god.
This isle from Phoebus Neptune in exchange
For Delphi took. Thrice holy is the soil,
Deserving reverence, by that power beloved,
Who shared a third of ancient Saturn's reign,
His son a brother to Olympian Jove.
Here shall we greet some wonder of her sex,
The sacerdotal maid. Troezene's laws
One of her noblest daughters in her bud
Establish here presiding, here confined
To priestly functions, till the genial god
Of marriage hence redeem her, grown mature
For care less rigid, and a tend'rer tie.
The heroes land, where opening to their sight
An elevation of the ground, attired
In flow'r-enamell'd turf, displayed the fane
Of structure vast in marble: brass the gates
Refulgence cast; a peristyle sustained
The massy roof; huge columns on their heads
The crisped foliage of acanthus bore,
And high o'erlook'd the impenetrable shade
Which screen'd the island round. Perennial springs
Supplied melodious currents through the woods,
In artificial beds of pearly conchs
Along the sea-beat margin culled by nymphs,
The temple's chaste attendants. Unrestrained
Here flowed the native waters; there confined
By marble fountains, win the enchanted eye
To shady-skirted lawns, to opening glades,
Or canopies of verdure: all the founts
Were graced by guardian images of gods,
The train of Neptune. -- Lo! the gate is thrown
Abroad; the priestess, lovely in her shape
As virgin Thetis to the nuptial arms
Of Peleus led, more blooming than the flowers
Beneath her decent step, descends the slope:
A matron staid behind her solemn treads;
Close to her side, in radiant arms, a youth
Who like a brother of the Graces moves.
His head, uncas'd, discovers auburn locks
Curled thick, not flowing: his sustaining hand
She, rosy-finger'd, to her own admits.
He seemed Apollo, not with martial fires
Such as on Titan's race he darted keen,
But with the enamored aspect which he wore
When Clymene he won, or Daphne wooed:
She Cynthia, not a huntress, when the chase
Of rugged boars has flushed her eager cheek,
But gently stooping from an argent cloud,
Illumining mount Latmus, while she viewed
Her loved Endymion, by her magic power
Entranced to slumber. -- Aeschylus approached,
To whom the youth: Great bard and warrior, hail!
Whose valiant deeds on Artemisium's flood,
In that first conflict with Barbarian fleets,
I strove to copy: there was all my praise.
Me Troezen's leader, from my post remote,
Thou see: forbear to wonder, and attend.
Thy Athens now is desolate -- relax
That anxious brow -- her constancy, her zeal
For general freedom, elevate her name
Beyond all triumphs. Her discerning chief,
Themistocles, interpreting the words
Of Pythian Phoebus, proved that ships alone,
The fleets of Athens, were the wooden walls
Of refuge. All persuaded, fires and sons,
With mothers, daughters, cheerfully forsook
Their native roofs. Lo! Salamis overflows
With your illustrious people; through her towns
Aegina swarms; to multitudes myself
Have been conductor; in Troezenian homes,
By cordial invitation, they reside.
To each a daily stipend by a law
They find allotted, schools with teachers filled,
That not unlettered from Troezene's walls
The sons of learned Athens may depart,
When victory to come rebuilds her towers.
With thee behold me ready to embark
For Salamis again, where anchored lies
The whole confederated fleet. I leave
My Ariphilia, this my dear betrothed,
To fight my country's battles; but return,
I trust in Mars, more worthy of her love:
To her and Neptune I but now consigned
The most ennobled of Athenian dames.
Ha! see on yonder beach the form divine
Of Aristides, newly wafted over
From Troezen: thither, not unbid, he came
From his late virtuous progress, in our bounds
Through willing minds sage counsel to diffuse,
His own exterminated friends console.
Cleander finished. Soon the arrival known
Of Aristides from the temple called
The Attic dames, from every purlieu near,
Who with their children in assembly throng
Around him. Silent tears confess his loss
To them and Athens. His benignant mold
By sympathy had melted into grief;
If wisdom, ever present in his soul,
Had not his long-tried constancy upheld
To their behoof. Environed by the troop
Of lovely mourners, stood the godlike man
Like some tall cedar, in a garden placed
Where glowing tufts of flowers and florid plants
Once bloomed around; now, seared by scorching blasts,
In faded colors pine. In look, in phrase
Humane he spoke: Be comforted, and hear
My voice applaud Themistocles, my foe,
Whose counsels have preserved you. But what praise
Is yours, O glories of the tender sex!
Who brave the floods, without a murmur leave
Your native, dear abodes for public good!
Ye ornaments of Greece, the pride and boast
Of happy fathers, husbands, brothers, sons!
As yet unseen, Euphemia from the rest
Impatient stepped, his mother. At her sight,
The best, the greatest of mankind inclines
Before the authress of his being, low
As some celestial to the reverend form
Of Cybele, progenitrix of gods.
Her aged arms extending, she began:
Thy moderation aggravates the crime
Of Athens. Son, remember, when thou bad'st
Our household gods farewell, thy parting prayer;
That Athens never might regret the loss
Of Aristides. Righteous man! then first
The righteous powers denied a prayer of thine;
Who with inflicted vengeance for thy wrong
Have sorely taught Athenians to lament
In thee their safety banished. -- Mother, cease,
He quick replied; control presumptuous thoughts;
Let such uncomfortable words no more
Be heard by these already plunged in woe:
It is Laconia, who her aid withholds,
Cecropian tribes afflicts. But, noble dames,
In this asylum sojourning a while,
Trust your own merits, and a guardian god;
The sons of Athens on his own domain
He will exalt by conquest, soon transport
Her daughters back to liberty and peace:
From him that grace continue to deserve,
By resignation to his brother Jove,
Who loves the patient. -- As on lands adust
By hot solstitial rays, when genial clouds,
In season due unbosoming their stores
Of kindly rain, new dress the pasture brown;
Again the flowrets on the meadows spring;
Over meadows, fresh in verdure, youthful steeds,
Led by the parent females, joyous bound,
The heifers gambol, kids and lambkins dance,
The birds in dripping bowers their plumes repair,
And tune their choral, gratulating throats --
So consolation from his blameless mouth,
With looks benevolent, in soothing tones
Relieves dejection. Soft composure smooths
Each matron's forehead; virgins smile around;
With sprightly feet the children beat the turf,
Him as their father hail in shrill delight.
Not so his own two daughters: infants young,
A dying mother's pledge, Euphemia's charge,
His side they leave not, clinging to his knees
Like woodbines sweet about some stately tree:
He kissed, he blessed them, but controlled his tears.
Now toward the bay with Aeschylus he turns;
Cleander follows. Ariphilia mute
Stands fixed in tears; as Niobe, congealed
By grief to marble, through its oozing pores
Distilled sad moisture, trickling down unheard.
On Sipylus the nymphs, by pity called,
The weeping rock environed; so the train,
Who minister in Neptune's sacred dome,
Enclose their priestess, whom her matron sage
Leads from Cleander's often reverted sight.
End of the Second Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the THIRD.
OVER his own squadron soon Troezene's chief
Has reassumed command; the rest embark
Aboard the Delphian. Aeschylus then spoke:
To Salamis we hoist returning sails:
Say, Aristides, shall my voice, of weight
Among the tribes, solicit thy recall?
Our country wants that helpful hand of thine.
No, Aristides answers, this again
Might waken faction; let the monster sleep.
Themistocles directs united minds,
In him confiding: not the stock revived
Of all Cecropia's heroes since her birth,
Could like this union prop the Attic state.
Brave too the son of Neocles, expert,
Cool, politic; his talents will uphold
The public safety for his own renown.
May he enjoy a glory so acquired!
My secret counsels from Aegina's isle
Shall not be wanting: for my country's sake,
Which I forgive, him, author of my wrongs,
My utmost efforts shall advance to fame.
The gulf Saronic now admits their keel.
By Epidaurus coasting, they attain
The cape of high Spiraeum, which o'erlooks
Aegina. Guided by Aurora's light,
The illustrious exile on that isle they land;
Thence veering, steer for Salamis. These words
Now break from Medon; Silent have I gazed
On Aristides, shortly must behold
Themistocles; Athenian friend, explain
Between such men what cause produced their feuds.
Their different merits, Aeschylus replied,
Raised emulation in their younger days.
A soldier's part they gallantly achiev'd
In the same rank at Marathon; I saw,
Admired their valor. For distinction high
In power and fame, Themistocles has used
His numerous virtues; Aristides walked
In virtuous paths, alone by virtue moved;
For him his justice has a title gained
Of JUST. The son of Neocles, inflamed
By envy, stirred the people's jealous fear
Against his rival to assert a law,
Where, by inscription of his name on shells,
A citizen so potent, that his will
Seems only wanting to subvert the state,
Is by concurrence of six thousand hands
Doomed for ten years to absence from their bounds,
Without disgrace or mulct. Among the tribes
Themistocles has since obtained a sway
Which might incur the rigor of that law;
Yet by the gods his influence supreme
He at this crisis gallantly employs
To save the public. -- Lift thy wondering eyes!
The whole confederated fleet of Greece,
Four hundred galleys, bulwark all the round
Of Salamis: one animated mass
That island shows; from swarms of either sex,
And every age, dales, hillocks seem to heave
With undulating motion. -- His discourse
Closed with his voyage: on the furrowed sands
Of Salamis the vessels rest their keels;
Where living waters from a copious spring
Discharge their bubbling current. On a smooth,
But gently-shelving green, pavilions rose;
One from the rest sequestered, under shade
Of oaks above, was neighbor to the fane
Of Telamonian Ajax, hero known
At Troy: the Attic phalanx then he joined,
By Athens honored since with rites divine.
This tent, by ensigns of command in front
Adorned, Themistocles possessed: alone
He now remained; artificer sublime
Of great expedients, in the greatest storms
Which rock a state, he, politic and firm,
In manly strife with fortune when she frowned,
Whenever she smiled her favor to secure --
He now, to feed his enterprising soul,
Successes past enumerating sat,
Thus in a glow of thought: While others dreamed
Of rest and safety permanent in Greece,
I from the day of Marathon presaged
The war begun, not finished; I, in time,
Exhorted Athens to construct her fleet,
A destined refuge; for the sail and oar,
The shrouds and rudder, I her lusty youth
Prepared; ere yet the Hellespont was bridg'd,
I cured intestine feuds distracting Greece;
When fate removed Leonidas from earth,
My penetration, fathoming the depths
Of ocean, like futurity foresaw
Laconia's sloth; yet undismayed I formed
The mighty plan to save the Athenian state
By yielding Athens to Barbarian flames.
That I might plead the mandates of a god,
I won, by secret gifts, the Pythian maid
An oracle to render, which I framed;
The interpretation to enforce, that ships
Were wooden walls, Minerva's priest I gained
Among the people to imprint belief
By feigned portents, and all religion's craft,
That to the sea their deity was fled,
The Acropolis deserting. Thus at will
This restive, fierce democracy I sway
For their salvation, and my own behoof
In power and luster.... Interrupting here
His eagle vanity in lofty soar,
The warrior-poet and Oileus' son
Appear. Serene and vacant he descends
At once to affability and ease;
As from his airy tower the lark, who strikes
Heaven's highest concave with his matin trill,
His pinions shuts, and tranquil drops to earth.
Of Aristides Aeschylus he knew
The friend approved; him courteous he salutes:
Thy eloquence and arms, the generous toils
Of Aristides too, have reached my ear
By late intelligence. Thus far at least
You have prevailed; this navy is enlarged
By squadrons new from various Grecian states.
Is not this Medon? Honored in thy sire,
More in thy own deservings, my embrace
Accept; accept the welcome of this tent.
Myronides now joins him, mighty chief!
The destined scourge of Thebes; Xanthippus, soon
At Mycale to conquer; in his hand
Young Pericles, that future star of Greece;
Then Cimon, fated on the land and main
To gather palms in one triumphant day;
Subaltern warriors to the prudent son
Of Neocles. Saluting these, he spoke:
My gallant fellow-citizens, you come
To learn the issue of this day's debate
In general council. Wisely did we cede
To Spartan Eurybiades command;
The different squadrons to their native ports
Had else deserted. Irksome, I confess,
This acquiescence; but occasion looks
Disdainful back on him who lets her pass;
You have embraced her. Yielding to the Greeks,
You fix their station here, the numerous foe
In narrow streights between Psyttalia's isle
And Salamis to face. Can he possess,
Who sees a treasure scattered on the ground,
Unless he stoop? So prostrate in your sight
Lies Greece, that precious treasure. Can you rule
Before you save? On union safety grows.
Resigning now an empty name of power,
Your moderation, winning grateful states,
Will to your own a real sway procure
Of long duration. Lacedaemon's pride,
Her best allies abandoning -- a force
Of ten weak vessels sparing to a fleet,
Where Attic hands unfurl two hundred sails --
Shall pay hereafter retribution full
To you, Athenians, out of ashes raised
From her to wrest ascendancy in Greece.
Not sweetest music lulls the melting soul
Beyond his artful eloquence, which soothes
Their warm, their injured virtue. They reply:
To thee, not Sparta, cheerful we submit,
Our leader sole; thou judge and act for all.
Now to his frugal Attic meal they sat;
Where Aeschylus and Medon, each in turn
Unfolding amply his adventures, won
Attention: pleasing information charmed
Deluded time, till midnight prompted sleep.
Thus, after labors past, the martial bard
His countrymen rejoined. The hostile ships,
Which gave him battle under Malea's cape,
Veer'd for the streights Euboean, where the fleet
Of Asia moored. Subsiding on their way,
The wind grants leisure for the Persian chief
To view the captives. Artamanes steps
Before the rest: on sight of Caria's queen,
Great Artemisia, who commanded there,
His cheek, with recollection of his sire
To her so late perfidious, reddens warm.
She first to him: Argestes could behold
Me worsted, long resisting adverse fate
On famed Thermopylae's disastrous field;
My danger he enjoyed: his rescued son,
Whose growing merit wins observant eyes,
I see with gladness; welcome to my deck!
But who is he, disconsolate in mien?
O reverend man of sorrows, lift thy head!
From Artemisia no dishonor fear.
He makes no answer -- Artamanes, speak.
The youth replies: His name is Timon, chief
And priest in Delphi; on our inroad there,
My brother, Mithridates, snatched away
From his paternal breast a noble maid,
An only child. His mind is darkened since
By frenzy; my compassion his distress
Has ever tended, fervent now implores
Thou would commit him to my grateful care:
Myself am debtor to indulgent Greeks.
In smiles the princess answered: Generous youth!
Could thou protect him, I would trust thy care;
But those deformed by ignominious deeds
May exercise in malice stronger power
Than thou in goodness: for the present lay
The unhappy Delphian on a bed of rest.
Beside her waits Aronces, high in trust,
A hoary senior, freedman of her sire.
On Meliboeus, on the queen, he fixed
Alternate looks; then earnest him addressed:
O thou of noble frame, in lowly garb,
Speak whence thou come, thy own, thy father's name.
What region gave thee birth? Did nature print,
Or some disaster, on thy cheek that mark?
I am not curious from a slender cause.
The swain replied: From nature I derive
That mark; of parents, of my native seat,
Within this breast no traces now survive;
In childhood stolen by pirates, I was sold
(Heaven there was gracious) to the best of men:
Full thirty annual suns have since elapsed.
He often appris'd me, that my infant lips
In Grecian accents would repeat the names
Of Lygdamis and Dirce; so I styled
My sire and mother. -- O imperial dame,
Thyself the seed of Lygdamis, exclaimed
The ancient man. If circumstance be proof,
He is thy brother, Haliartus, stolen
Within that period from thy father's tower
Washed by the waves, that fair abode retired.
Halicarnassus mourned the dire event.
He is thy likeness. I, preferred to rule
Thy father's household; I, whose faithful arms
So often the infant Haliartus bore,
So often with eyes delighted have perused
That object dear, I never can forget
That signal mark, coeval with his birth,
Distinguishing thy brother. -- Pensive, mute,
Uncertain rests the queen. -- He still proceeds:
Behold thy son, Leander, melts in tears!
It is the touch of nature has unclos'd
That tender spring. -- To him the regal dame:
Old man, thou know I honor, I conside
In thy untainted faith. All strange events,
Dressed in affecting circumstance, excite
These soft emotions; such in every breast
Should rise, but not decide. Pure truth is built
Not on our passions; reason is her base.
Him to accept my brother, needs more proof;
But to his manly and ingenuous looks
I render homage. Let him case his limbs.
In Carian steel, and combat near my side;
Let deeds illustrate an exalted mind;
Then, whether kin or alien to my blood,
He like a brother shall obtain regard
From Artemisia. -- Meliboeus here:
Endeared to heroes of Oilean race,
I claim with none alliance; I have lived
With them in joy, from ignorance been raised
By them to knowledge, from the lowly state
Which heaven's deciding providence ordained,
To their deserved regard, my utmost wish.
To them restore me; I request no more
From deities or mortals. Case my limbs
In Carian armor splendid as thy own,
Never shall thou see me combat near thy side
Against the Grecians. Place of birth, or blood
Of noblest dye in kindred, quite estranged
By time and fortune, I reject for Greece;
Greece, my kind nurse, the guardian of my youth,
Who for my tutors did her heroes lend.
My dear affections all are centered there,
My gratitude, my duty. -- By the hand
She grasps the gallant captive, and proceeds:
Thy sentiments are noble, they bespeak
The care of heroes; thy release my hopes
Forbid, my tenderest wishes; to constrain
Thy presence here, while we assail thy friends,
I scorn. Aronces, launch a nimble skiff;
On him attendant, reach Nicaea's walls,
For him transport a suit of arms compelete;
Nor let unhappy Timon want thy care.
Thee, Greek or Carian, brother, friend, or so,
Whatever thou prov'st hereafter, I will greet
Again, my heart so prompts me; I require
No plighted word, no token; ere we meet
Once more at least, thou will not, I confide,
Thou can not harbor such a thought as flight
From Artemisia. -- Meliboeus looked
Integrity; he felt too full for words,
And sees her thoughtful and perplexed retire.
Aronces now on Artamanes calls;
With him, and either captive, he embarks;
Of Carian arms he lodges on the poop
A rich-emblazon'd suit. The pinnace light
Along the shore, from every foe secure,
Skims over the waters with distended sails,
Swift as a vigorous stag who hears no cry
Of dogs or men, but over the champaign green
Or valley sweeps, to glory in his speed
And branching antlers. On the form and port
Of Meliboeus long Aronces fed
His eager eye, unsated with delight;
At last he spoke: My lord, Nicaea's fort,
A garrison of Xerxes, will afford
A refuge kind, till Caria's queen her sail
Of visitation hoists; the setting sun
Will see my lord safe landed in the cove.
That splendid title thou do ill bestow
On my condition, Meliboeus then.
To whom Aronces: Oh thou art my lord,
Thou art the son of Lygdamis! My heart,
Old as I am, experienced in events,
Without a cause to such excess of joy
Would never mislead me. -- Honest hearts, rejoined
The other, often are credulous, and lead
The mind to error; art thou sure, my friend,
That I am no impostor, who has heard
Of Lygdamis and Dyrce, and apply
Their names to falsehood? -- Haliartus, no!
Exclaims Aronces; I before me see
My noble master, Lygdamis, restored;
Such as he was when thou, his child, was lost.
Oh! lend attention -- lo! the winds are still,
The sea unruffled, while my tongue begins
A tale which once with horror pierced my soul,
ut in thy hearing rapturous I repeat:
Halicarnassus gave thy father birth,
Her most illustrious citizen; with twins
Thy mother's bed was blessed; thy sister one,
That Artemisia, glory of her sex,
Bestowed in marriage on the Carian king;
Thou art the other. Often thy sire abode
Within a tower delightful, but remote,
Washed by the billows; one disastrous day,
As thou wast tripping on the silver sands,
Thy nurse attending with some faithful slaves,
A troop of pirates landed; all thy train
Defending thee were killed, or wounded sunk
Disabled on the beach; with various spoil,
From those unguarded borders, they conveyed
Aboard their vessels thee their richest prize.
Aronces paused. -- From Timon, listing by,
This exclamation broke: My daughter too
May be recovered! -- Artamanes here:
Myself, redeemed from capture, pledge my faith
That I will struggle to restore thy child.
Night dropped her dusky veil; the pinnace gained
Nicaea, Locrian fortress, seated nigh
Thermopylae; ensuing morn proclaims,
By shouts and clangour, an approaching host.
That gate of Greece, by Lacedaemon's king
So well maintained, defenseless now admits
Uncheck'd Barbarian inroads: thus a mound
By art constructed to restrain the sea,
Or some huge river's course, neglected long,
And unsustain'd by vigilance and care,
Affords a passage new to whelming floods,
Whose surface hides fertility in waste;
Till some sagacious architect oppose
To nature's violence a skill divine,
Prescribing where the obedient wave shall flow.
To his companions Artamanes spoke,
As in their sight, extended from a tower,
Thermopylae in torrents from its mouth
Pours mingled nations: See Mardonius there,
The son of Gobryas, author of this war,
The flower of Asia's captains. At the time
We first attacked this pass, with numerous bands,
A distant range of Macedon and Thrace
He was detached to ravage and subdue,
Triumphant now returning. Friends, farewell!
Him I must follow. Timon, may the light
Of Mithra shine propitious on m^ days
As I protect thy daughter, and restore,
If fate so wills, her spotless to thy arms.
These words, relumining with hope, composed
The clouded soul of Timon. Swift the youth,
In vigor issuing through the portal, mixed
Among his native friends: a blithsome steer,
At opening dawn delivered from the stall,
Thus over the flowery pasture bounding, joins
The well-known herd. Mardonius him received,
Foe to Argestes, cordial to his son,
Mardonius all-commanding, all in frame,
In nervous limbs excelling, like that bull
Who stemmed the billows with his brawny chest,
Who on his back of silver whiteness bore
Europa's precious weight to Cretan strands,
Himself a god transformed. New martial powers
Are here from Haemus, from Pangaean snows.
A Greek in lineage, Alexander here,
Young sovereign over Barbarians, leads to war
His Macedonian troops. To Athens bound
By mutual hospitality, he loved
That generous city; now, by force compelled,
He arms against her. But persuasive love,
The charms and virtues of a Grecian fair,
Will wake remembrance of his Grecian race,
To better counsels turn his youthful mind.
That Asia's king was now advanced to Thebes,
Intelligence is brought; this known, a steed
Of swiftest pace Mardonius mounts; command
To Tiridates delegates -- Thy force
Extend over Locris, over the Phocian bounds,
Our conquests new. This given in charge, he speeds,
With no companion but Argestes' son,
Nor other guard than fifty horsemen light,
To greet the king. The second morning shows
Cadmean Thebes, whose citadel was raised
By stones descending from Cithaeron's hill
Spontaneous, feigned in fables to assume
A due arrangement in their mural bed
At sweet Amphion's lute; but truth records,
That savage breasts by eloquence he tamed,
By his instructions humaniz'd, they felt
The harmony of laws and social ties.
To him succeeded stern Agenor's son,
Phoenician Cadmus, he who letters brought
From Tire to Greece; yet ignorance overwhelmed
His generation; barbarous of heart,
Obtuse of mind they grew; the suries there,
There parricide and incest reigned of old,
Impiety and horror: more debased,
They now for gold their liberty exchange;
They court a tyrant, whose Barbaric host
Flames round their bulwarks, harrows up their plain,
Lays waste their plenty, drinks Asopus dry,
Their swift Ismenus, and Dircaean spring.
End of the Third Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the FOURTH.
THE Persian host in readiness was held
Ere dawn; Aurora sees the signal given;
Now trumpets, clarions, timbrels mix their sounds;
Harsh dissonance of accents, in the shouts
Of nations gathered from a hundred realms,
Distract the sky. The king his march renews
In all his state, collected to descend
Precipitate on Athens; like the bird
Of Jove, who rising to the utmost soar
Of his strong pinions, on the prey beneath
Directs his ponderous fall. Five thousand horse,
Caparison'd in streaked or spotted skins
Of tigers, pards, and panthers, formed the van;
In quilted vests of cotton, azure dyed,
With silver spangles decked, the tawny youth
Of Indus rode; white quivers loosely crossed
Their shoulders; not ungraceful in their hands
Were bows of glist'ning cane; the ostrich lent
His snowy plumage to the tissued gold
Which bound their temples. Next a thousand steeds
Of sable hue on argent trappings bore
A thousand Persians, all select; in gold,
Shaped as pomegranates, rose their steely points
Above the truncheons; gilded were the shields,
Of silvered scales the corselets; wrought with gems
Of price, high-plum'd tiaras danced in light.
In equal number, in resembling guise,
A squadron followed; save their mail was gold,
And thick with beryls edged their silver shields.
In order next the Magi solemn trod.
Pre-eminent was Mirzes; snowy white
Their vestments flowed, majestically pure,
Rejecting splendor; hymning as they moved,
They sung of Cyrus, glorious in his rule
Over Sardis rich, and Babylon the proud;
Cambyses victor of Egyptian Nile,
Darius fortune-thron'd; but flattery tuned
Their swelling voice to magnify his son,
The living monarch, whose stupendous piles
Combined the Orient and Hesperian worlds,
Who pierced mount Athos, and o'erpower'd in fight
Leonidas of Sparta. Then succeed
Ten coursers whiter than their native snows
On wintry Media's fields; Nicaean breed,
In shape to want no trappings, none they wore
To veil their beauty; docile they by chords
Of silk were led, the consecrated steeds
Of Horomazes. Sacred too a car,
Constructed new of spoils from Grecian fanes,
In splendor dazzling as the noontide throne
Of cloudless Mithra, followed; linked in reins,
In traces brilliant overlaid with gems,
Eight horses more of that surpassing race
The precious burden drew; the drivers walked,
None might ascend the inviolable seat;
On either side five hundred nobles marched
Uncovered. Now the imperial standard waved;
Of Sanders wood the pedestal, inscribed
With characters of magic, which the charms
Of Indian wizards wrought in orient pearl,
Vain talisman of safety, was upheld
By twelve illustrious youths of Persian blood.
Then came the king; in majesty of form,
In beauty first of men, as first in power,
Contemplating the glory from his throne
Diffused to millions round, himself he deemed
Not less than Mithra who illumes the world.
The sons of satraps with inverted spears
His chariot wheels attend; in state their sires,
The potentates of Asia, rode behind;
Mardonius absent, of the gorgeous train
Argestes tower'd the foremost; following marched
A square battalion of a thousand spears,
By Mithridates led, his eldest born;
Him the lascivious father had deprived
Of Amarantha; dangerous the flames
Of vengeance darted from his youthful eye.
The immortal guard succeeded; in their van
Masistius, paragon of Asia's peers,
In beauteous figure second to the king,
Among the brave pre-eminent, more good
Than brave or beauteous; to Mardonius dear,
His counselor and friend, in Xerxes' court
Left by that general, while in Thrace remote,
To counterpoise Argestes. Tried in arms,
In manners soft, though fearless on the plain,
Of tenderest feelings, Mindarus, to love
A destined captive, near Masistius ranked;
Ariobarzanes next, whose barbarous mien
Exemplified his fierceness. Last of horse,
With Midias, powerful satrap, at their head,
A chosen myriad closed the long array.
From these were kept three hundred paces void;
Promiscuous nations held their distant march
Beyond that limit; numberless they rolled,
In tumult like the fluctuating sands,
Disturbed and buoyant on the whirling breath
Of hurricanes, which rend the Libyan wastes.
To Thebes descending, soon Mardonius learned
That pioneers, with multitudes light-armed,
Detached before the army, bent their course
To Athens. On he speeds, rejecting food,
Disdaining rest; till midnight Cynthia shows
A vaulted hollow in a mountain's side;
There in his clanging arms Mardonius throws
His limbs for slight refreshment; by him lies
Argestes' son; to pasture springing nigh,
The troop dismissed their steeds, and slept around.
To superstition prone from early age
Was Gobryas' son; o'erheated now by toil,
Yet more by thirst unsated of renown,
His soul partakes not with her wearied clay
In sleep repose; the cavern to her view
Appears in vast dimension to enlarge,
The sides retire, the ascending roof expands,
All changed to crystal, where pellucid walls
Expose to sight the universe around.
Thus did a dream invade the mighty breast
Of that long matchless conqueror, who gave
Italia's clime a spoil to Punic Mars,
When on the margin of Iberus lay
The slumbering chief, and eagerly to birth
The vast conception of his pregnant mind
Was struggling. Now Mardonius to himself
Seems roving over the metamorphos'd cave;
Orbicular above, an opening broad
Admits a flood of light, and gentlest breath
Of odorif'rous winds; amid the blaze,
Full on the center of a pavement, spread
Beyond whatever portentous Egypt saw
In Thebes or Memphis, Fame, presiding there,
Gigantic shape, an amethyst entire,
Sits on a throne of adamant. On strength
Of pillars, each a topaz, leans the dome;
The silver pavement's intervening space
Between the circling colonnade and wall
With pedestals of diamond is filled;
The crystal circuit is comparted all
In niches verg'd with rubies. From that scene
The gloom of night for ever to expel,
Imagination's wanton skill in chains
Of pearl throughout the visionary hall
Suspends carbuncles, gems of native light,
Emitting splendor, such as tales portray,
Where Fancy, winning sorceress, deludes
The enchanted mind, rejecting reason's clue,
To wander wild through fiction's pleasing maze.
The oriental hero in his dream
Feels wonder waking; at his presence life
Pervades the statue; Fame, slow-rising, sounds
Her trumpet loud; a hundred golden gates
Spontaneous fly abroad; the shapes divine,
In every age, in every climate sprung,
Of all the worthies since recorded time,
Ascend the lucid hall. Again she sounds
A measure sweeter than the Dorian flute
Of Pan, or lyre of Phoebus; each assumes
His place allotted, there transformed is fixed
An adamantine statue; yet unfill'd
One niche remains. To Asia's gazing chief
The goddess then: That vacancy for thee,
Illustrious son of Gobryas, I reserve.
He thus exults: Bright being, do thou grant
To Persia triumphs through my conquering spear.
He said: that moment through the severed earth
She sinks; the spacious fabric is dissolved;
When he, upstarting in the narrow cave,
Delivers quiek these accents: Be renown
My lot! O Fortune, unconcerned I leave
The rest to thee. Thus dauntless, ere his sleep
Was quite dispersed; but wakened soon he feels
The imperfect vision heavy on his mind
In dubious gloom; then lightly with his foot
Moves Artamanes; up he springs; the troop
Prepare the steeds; all mount; Aurora dawns.
The swift forerunners of the imperial camp
Ere long Mardonius joins, where Athens-lifts
Her towers in prospect. Unexpected seen,
Their mighty chief with general, cordial shouts
They greet; their multitude, their transport, clear
His heart from trouble. Soon Barbarian throngs
With shading standards through Cephissus wade,
Who, had his famed divinity been true,
His shallow stream in torrents would have swollen
A while, to save the capital of Greece,
Superb in structure, long-disputed prize
Between Minerva and the god of seas,
Of eloquence the parent, source of arts,
Fair seat of freedom! Open are the gases,
The dwellings mute, all desolate the streets,
Save that domestic animals forlorn,
In cries awak'ning pity, seem to call
Their masters home; while shrieking beaks of prey,
Or birds obscene of night with heavy wings,
The melancholy solitude affright.
Is this the city whose presumption dared
Invade the lord of Asia? sternly said
Mardonius entering; whither now are fled
The audacious train, whose firebrands Sardis felt?
Wherever you lurk, Athenians, if in sight,
Soon shall you view your citadel in flames;
Or, if retreated to a distant land,
No distant land of refuge shall you find
Against avenging Xerxes: yet I swear
By Horomazes, if thy gallant race
Have sacrificed their country to contend
With mightier efforts on a future day,
Them I will honor, though by honor forced
I must destroy. Companions, now advance;
Unnumber'd hands to overturn these walls
Employ; not Xerxes through a common gate
Shall enter Athens; lay the ruins smooth,
That this offending city may admit,
In all his state, her master with his host
In full array. His order is obeyed.
Through smooth Ismenus, and Asopus clear,
The royal host in slow procession led,
Their first encampment on a district lodge,
Plataea's neighbor; that renowned abode
Of noblest Greeks was desert. In his tent
The king by night requested audience grants
To Leontiades, that colleague base
Of Anaxander, traitor like himself
To Sparta's hero. Xerxes thus he warns:
Now be the king reminded of the rage
Against his father, which Plataea bore
At Marathon; that recently she braved
Himself in Oeta's pass; nor Thespia fought
With less distinguished rancour: be informed,
The first is near, the other not remote;
Thy vengeance both deserve. Destroy their fields,
Consume their dwellings; thy overflowing camp
May spare a large detachment; I will go
Their willing guide. Masistius present spoke:
O monarch, live for ever in the hearts
Of conquered nations, as of subjects born;
Associate clemency with power, and all
Must yield obedience: thou art master here,
Treat thy new vassals kindly. -- In a frown
Argestes: Shall the king with kindness treat
Invet'rate foes and zealous friends alike?
Shall undeserving Thespians, shall the race
Of fell Plataea, unprovoked who stained,
On Attic fields, her spear with Persian blood,
To help detested Athens, shall they share
The clemency of Xerxes, in despite
Of this our Theban host, who faithful gives
Such wholesome counsel? Sovereign, when I brought
Thy condescension late to Sparta's king,
Among the grim assembly in his tent
Diomedon, Demophilus, I saw,
With Dithyrambus, men preferring death
To amity with thee, commanders all
Of these malignant cities. -- Xerxes here:
Approving, Leontiades, thy words
I hear; Masistius, thee my servant loves,
Mardonius, always victor in my name;
Yet learn at last, O satrap! who do wear
The fullest honors, to partake with me,
What I inherit from Darius, hate
Inflexible, inexpiable hate
To Athens, hate to her confed'rates all.
Go, Theban, choose what nations of our host
Thou do prefer; thyself appoint their chief.
I choose the Caspians, Sacians; name for chief
Brave Mithridates, great Argestes' heir,
Rejoins the traitor. These ferocious most
He best approved, and Mithridates chose,
Among the youth most vigorous and fell
In acts of blood. To hear Mardonius praised,
Argestes, dreading his return, conceived
A pain, yet tempered by a secret joy
He felt arise; who, rival of his son,
Long wished him distant from the guarded roof
Where Timon's daughter was confined. Dismissed
To rest, all separate. They renew their march
By dayspring; Leontiades, to wreak
On hapless Thespia and Plataea's walls
The hate implacable of Thebes; the king,
With equal rage, to spoil Minerva's reign.
Her olive groves now Attica disclosed,
The fields where Ceres first her gifts bestowed,
The rocks whose marble crevices the bees
With sweetness stored; unparalled in art
Rose structures, growing on the stranger's eye,
Wherever it roam'd delighted. On like Death,
From his pale courser scattering waste around,
The regal homicide of nations passed,
Unchaining all the furies of revenge
On this devoted country. Near the banks
Of desolate Cephissus halting sat
The king; retarding night's affrighted steeds,
The conflagration wide of crumbling towers,
Of ruined temples, of the crackling groves,
Of villages and towns, he thence enjoyed,
Thence on the manes of Darius called:
Son of Hystaspes! if the dead can hear,
Thou did command thy servants to remind
Thy anger daily of the Athenian race,
Who insolently plough'd the eastern waves,
Thy shores affronted with their hostile beaks,
And burnt thy town of Sardis; at my call,
Ghost of my father! lift thy awful brow;
Rememb'ring now the Athenians, see thy son
On their presumptuous heads retaliate flames:
Deprived of burial, shall their bodies leave
Pale specter here to wail their city fallen,
And wander through its ruins. -- Closing here
His barbarous lips, the tyrant sought his couch.
Thy summits now, Pentelicus, and thine,
Haunt of sonorous bees, Hymettus sweet!
Are tinged with orient light. The Persian host
Renew their progress; Athens soon receives
Their floating banners and extended ranks
Smooth over the fosse, by mural ruins filled.
As from a course of ravage, in her den
Of high Cithaeron plunged the monster Sphinx
Her multifarious form, preparing still
For havoc new her fangs and talons dire;
Till her enigma Laius' son resolved,
Whence desperation cast her headlong down
The rocky steep; so, after thy career
Of devastation, Xerxes, rest awhile
Secure in Athens, meditating there
Fresh woes to men. Than Oedipus more wise,
The interpreter of oracles is nigh;
Soon will the son of Neocles expel
Thee from thy hold, by policy too deep
For thy barbarian council to explore.
Before the Prytanaeum stops the car.
Now savage bands enclose that reverend seat
Of judgment; there Mardonius waits. The king,
Pleased with his care, salutes him: Thou have long
Sweat under harness in the eternal snows
Of Macedon and Thracia, have my name
There dressed in ample trophies; but thy speed,
Preventing my arrival, is unknown
To wings of eagles, or the feet of stags.
Mardonius answers: Ever live the king
To find his servants zeal outstrip in speed
The swiftest eagle, or the fleetest stag!
Descend, thou lord of Athens! destined soon
To universal sway. -- They climb the steps;
Alone Argestes follows. In the hall
These words of high import Mardonius spoke:
My liege, the season calls for quick resolves;
By thee entrusted with supreme command,
When thou art absent, to Phaleron's port,
Late arsenal of Athens, all the ships
I ordered from Euboea; they below
Lie well equipped and sheltered, nor remote
The whole united armament of Greece
At Salamis. With Ariabignes great,
Thy royal brother, and for merit named
Thy ruling admiral, the kings of Tire,
Of Sidon, Caria's princess, and the rest,
I held a council; they concurred to fight,
And by one effort terminate the war,
All but the queen, from whose ingenuous mouth
Will I, though differing, faithfully relate
Each argument, each word -- 'Mardonius, tell
'The king,' she said, 'what peril I foresee
'From this attempt; his ships defeated leave
'His host endangered; ever bold, the Greeks
'Are desperate now; the want of sustenance
'Will soon disperse them to their several homes;
'The sea's entire dominion to the king
'Will then be left; whole armies then embarked
'Through inlets free may pour on Pelops' Isle,
'Whose coast I newly have explored with care.
'Mardonius, thou art eager; do not trust
'In multitude; full many in the fleet
'Are false, are cowards. Let our sovereign shun
'Precipitation; short delay at least
'Is safe; a naval combat lost, is bane.'
A greater bane delay, Argestes here;
Who reading artful in the royal eye
Determination for a naval fight,
His malice thus on Artemisia vents:
My liege forgets that Caria's queen derives
Her blood from Grecian fountains; is it strange
She should confine thy formidable hand,
And so preserve her kindred? -- Stern the king:
Though I reject her counsel to forbear
The fight, none better will that fight sustain
Than she, whose zeal, fidelity approved,
And valor, none can equal but the son
Of Gobryas. Go, Mardonius, see the fleet
Prepared by morning; let Argestes burn
The citadel and temples; I confer
On him that office. -- Utt'ring this, he turned
Apart; forlorn Argestes hence presaged
Decline of regal favor, cent'ring all
In Gobrya's son, who fiercely thus pursued:
Thou hear'st the king; now hear a soldier's tone:
Of old I know thee slanderer of worth;
And I, distinguished by a late success,
To envious eyes no welcome guest return.
Thou can traduce the absent, whom thy tongue
Would flatter present. Not in Sufa's court,
Amid the soft security of peace,
We languish now; great Xerxes on the stage
Of glorious war, amid the din of arms,
Can hear thy coz'ning artifice no more.
Oh that he never had listened! Asia's lord,
When to a Tyrian trafficker demeaned,
He bartered for his glory. By my sword,
Leonidas, preferring fame to sway
Over proffered Greece, was noble! What thy part,
Who tamely proff'ring wast with scorn dismissed?
Go, burn the fanes! Destruction is thy joy.
He said, departing swiftly; on his way
Meets Artamanes, meritorious youth,
Who, not resembling an unworthy sire,
Had fixed the esteem of that illustrious man.
To him Mardonius: Brave Autarctus greet
In words like these -- Exalted to the bed
Of bright Sandauce, sister of thy king,
Now is the season to approve thy worth.
Collect ten thousand warriors on the strand
Which faces Salamis; an island near,
Psyttalia named, possess; ere long the foes
Against her craggy border may be driven;
Let spoils and captives signalize thy zeal.
Thou, Artamanes, must attend him there,
Nor let me want intelligence. Farewell!
This mandate given, the active chief proceeds
With steps impatient to Phaleron's port.
End of the Fourth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the FIFTH.
THE sun was set; Autarctus and his band,
In haste collected, through nocturnal shades
To small Psyttalia passed a narrow frith.
As on a desert forest, where at night
A branching oak some traveller has climbed
To couch securely; if the trunk beset
By famished wolves in herd, who thirst for blood,
Pale morn discovers to his waking sight,
His hair in terror bristles, pants his breast
In doubt of safety; thus Aurora showed
The unexpected gleam of Persian arms,
Which filled Psyttalia, while the Attic strand,
With numbers equal to its sandy stores
Was covered, and Phaleron's road with masts,
A floating forest, crowded like the pines,
Majestic daughters of the Pontic woods.
Fair Athens burned in sight; embodied smoke
Rose mountainous, emitting pillar'd flames,
Whose umber'd light the newly-dawning sun
But half eclipsed. At intervals are heard
The hollow sound of columns prostrate laid,
The crash of levelled walls, of sinking roofs
In massy ruin. Consternation cold
Benumbs the Greek spectators, all aghast
Except the Athenians, whose unshaken minds
To this expected fate resigned their homes
For independence. Gigantean ranged
From ship to ship Despair; she drives ashore
The timid leaders, changing late resolves
For generous combat into base retreat.
To seek the shelter of their native ports
They clamor loud; the admiral convenes
A council; him Themistocles addressed:
Now Eurybiades, to whose command
I voluntary yielded, from thy charge,
Not less for Athens than for general Greece,
I claim a righteous and heroic part,
The promised fight in these auspicious streights,
Which, rend'ring vain the multitude of foes,
Assure success. But separate this fleet,
A hundred openings may Barbarians choose
To Pelops' region; not on every spot
An isthmian wall is placed. Deprived of all,
If to your succor we Athenians lose
All claim, ye Greeks, be valiant for yourselves!
See Attica in flames, the temples razed,
The tombs defaced, the venerable dust
Of our forefathers soatter'd in the wind!
Would you avoid calamities like these,
To sound instruction lean; the almighty gods
Wise counsels bless with prosperous events,
To its own folly wilful blindness leave.
Proud Adimantus, on his birth elate,
The admiral of Corinth, envying long
Cecropia's name and power, arose and spoke:
For public safety when in council meet
Men who have countries, silence best becomes
Him who has none; shall such presume to vote,
Too patient Spartan, nay to dictate here,
Who cannot tell us they possess a home?
For Attica in flames, her temples razed,
Her tombs disfigured, for the ignoble dust
Of thy forefathers scattered in the wind,
Thou low-born son of Neocles, must Greece
Her welfare hazard on a single day,
Which, unsuccessful, endless ruin brings?
Cleander heard, Troezene's youthful chief;
Warm was his bosom, eloquent his tongue,
Strong-nerv'd his limbs, well exercised in arms;
Preventing thus Themistocles, he spoke:
Though blood, Corinthian, be of noblest dye,
Base-born the soul when folly is her sire.
Absurdity and malice no reply
Deserve from thee, Athenian! thee, more wise,
More valiant, more distinguished in thyself,
Than all the vaunted progeny of gods.
Did you not mourn, ye deities, to see
A nation, you created with their soil,
Forsake that ancient land? or not admire
Your greatest work, the conduct of that man,
Who such a race from such endearing homes,
Wives, husbands, elders, infants, maidens, youths,
In generous quest of liberty could lead?
Do you not look indignant down to hear
Such venomous reproaches on his worth,
A wrong to Greece? Her savior him I call,
As yet, I trust, his dictates will prevail.
While he declaimed, Themistocles, who scorned
The insolent Corinthian, sat and scanned
The looks of all; his penetrating fight
Could read the thoughts of men; the major part
He saw averse to battle, Sparta's chief
Uncertain, cold, and slow. Affecting here
Decisive looks, and scorn of more debate,
Thus brief he closed: Athenians still possess
A city buoyant on two hundred keels.
Thou, admiral of Sparta, frame thy choice;
Fight, and Athenians shall thy arm sustain;
Retreat, Athenians shall retreat to shores
Which bid them welcome, to Hesperian shores,
For them by ancient oracles reserved,
Safe from insulting foes, from false allies,
And Eleutherian Jove will bless their flight:
So said your own Leonidas, who died
For public welfare. You that glorious death
May render, Spartans, fruitless to yourselves.
This said, he left the council; not to fly,
But with his wonted policy compel
The Greeks to battle. At a secret cove
He held in constant readiness a skiff,
In Persian colors masked; he there embarked
The most entrusted of his household, charged
With these instructions: Now return my love,
Sicinus, born a Persian, of my house
Not as a slave long habitant, but friend,
My children's tutor, in my trust supreme.
To Xerxes' navy sail; accost her chief
In words like these -- Themistocles, who leads
Athenian squadrons, is the monarch's friend,
Approved by this intelligence; the Greeks
In consternation shortly will resolve
To separate and fly; let Asia's fleet
Her numbers round in diligence extend,
Investing every passage; then, confused,
This whole consederated force of Greece
Will sooner yield than fight, and Xerxes close
At once so perilous a war. -- He ceased.
Meanwhile the council wasted precious hours,
Till Eurybiades at length alarmed
Lest all the Athenians should retreat incensed,
Postpon'd the issue to the ensuing day.
Themistocles, retiring to his tent,
There found his wife; his stratagem on wings
Of execution, left his mind serene;
Relaxed in thought, he trifled with his boy,
Young child, who playful on the mother's lap,
Soon as of Xerxes earnest she inquired,
With frowning graces on his brow of down,
Clench'd fast his infant hands. The dame pursues:
O that the Greeks would emulate this child,
Clench fast their weapons, and confront the foe!
Did we abandon our paternal homes,
Our nuptial chambers, from the cradle snatch
Our helpless babes? Did tender maidens join
Unanimous the cry, 'Embark, embark
'For Salamis and freedom!' to behold
The men debating (so the Attic wives
Are told) uncertain if to fight or serve?
Who are the cowards, rather traitors, say?
We will assail them, as the Trojan dames
Did Polymestor, royal thief, who broke
The holiest ties for gold. -- Take comfort, love;
All shall be well, Themistocles replied.
Yes, I in thee have comfort, she proceeds;
Thou can devise some artifice to urge
Even dastards on; Sicinus thou have sent,
I ask not whither. -- In a smile her lord:
With thy permission, then, the gods remain
My confidents: to ease thee, I proclaim
This boy the first of Greeks; he governs thee,
Thou me, I Athens; who shall govern Greece,
As I am sure to circumvent the foes.
Retiring, seek the town; console the dames;
Thy husband never was so high in hope.
She pleased, departing, spoke: To govern thee
Requires an art which never woman knew,
Nor man; most artful, thou controllest all,
Yet call'st, nay often seem, thyself controlled.
She distant, thus he meditates alone:
True, when I seem controlled by others most,
Then most assured my enterprise succeeds.
O liberal nature! science, arts acquired,
I little value; while thy light supplies
Profuse invention, let capricious chance
With obstacles and dangers gird me round,
I can surmount them all; nor peace, nor war,
Nor all the swift vicissitudes of time,
Ever gave emergency a birth too strong
For me to govern. On this crisis hangs
My future greatness; whether joy or grief
Shall close the term of being, none foreknow;
My penetrating spirit I will trust
Thus far prophetic; for a time, at least,
I will possess authority and power
To fix a name enduring like the sun.
Thus, in his own strong faculties secure,
To rest he tranquil sunk, and slept till dawn;
Then early rose. Advancing from the shore,
A manly figure he observes, the face
Wrapped in a mantle; as dividing clouds
Reveal the unmuffled sun, the mantle cast
Aside discovers the majestic front
Of Aristides, who the silence breaks:
Dissensions past, as puerile and vain,
Now to forget, and nobly strive who best
Shall serve his country, Aristides warns
His ancient foe Themistocles. I hear
Thou giv'st the best of councils, which the Greeks
Reject, through mean solicitude to fly;
Weak men! throughout these narrow seas the foe
Is station'd now, preventing all escape.
Themistocles, though covetous of fame,
Though envying power in others, was not bred
In horrid deserts, not with savage milk
Of tigers nursed, nor bore a ruthless heart.
He thus replied: With gratitude this foe
Accepts thy welcome news, thy proffered aid,
Thy noble challenge; in this glorious race
Be all our strife each other to surpass.
First know my inmost secrets; if the streights
Are all invested with Barbarian ships,
The act is mine; of our intended flight
I through Sicinus have appris'd the foes;
Of his success thee messenger I hail.
The exile then: Such policy denotes
Themistocles; I praise, the Greeks have cause
To bless, thy conduct; teach me now what task
I can achieve; to labor, to advise
With thee commanding, solely to enjoy
The secret pleasure of preserving Greece,
Is my pursuit; the glory all be thine.
Before the council show that honored face,
Rejoins the chief; report thy tidings there.
To preparation for immediate fight
Exhort; such notice they would slight in me,
In thee all men believe. -- This said, they moved.
Them on their way Myronides approached,
Xanthippus, Cimon, Aeschylus, and all
The captains, fixing reverential eyes
On Aristides; this the wary son
Of Neocles remarked; he gains the town
Of Salamis, the council there is met;
To them the illustrious exile he presents,
At whose appearance all the assembly rise,
Save Adimantus; fast by envy bound,
He sits morose; illib'ral then the word,
As Aristides was in act to speak,
Thus takes: Boeotia, Attica reduced,
The Dorians, Locrians, you already know;
To me this morn intelligence arrived,
That Thespia, that Platea were in flames,
All Phocis conquered; thus alone of Greece
The Isle of Pelops unsubdued remains.
For what is lost, ye Grecians, must we face
Such mightier numbers, while barbarian hate
Lurks in Psyttalia, watching for the wrecks
Of our defeated navy? Shall we pause
Now at the Isthmus with united force
To save a precious remnant? Landing there,
Your sailors turn to soldiers, oars to spears;
The only bulwark you have left, defend.
Then Aristides: Ignominious flight
Necessity forbids; Aegina's shore
Last night I left; from knowledge I report.
The hostile navy bars at either mouth
The narrow straight between Psyttalia's Isle
And Salamis, where lie your anchored ships.
But shall the Greeks be terrified? What more
Can they solicit of propitious heaven,
Than such deluded enemies to face,
Who trust in numbers, yet provoke the fight
Where multitude is fruitless? -- Closing here,
The unassuming exile straight retired.
Cleander entering heard; while Corinth's chief,
Blind with malignity and pride, pursued:
Her strength must Greece for Attica destroyed
Waste on the credit of a single tongue,
From Athens banished? Swift Cleander spoke:
Is there in Greece who doubts that righteous tongue,
Save Adimantus? To suspect the truth
Of that illustrious exile, were to prove
Ourselves both false and timid. But enough
Of altercation; from the fleet I come,
The words of Aristides I confirm;
Prepare to fight; no passage have our ships
But through embattled foes. -- The council rose.
In this tremendous season, thronging round
The accomplished son of Neocles, their hopes
In his unerring conduct all repose.
Thus on Olympus round their father Jove
The deities collected, when the war
Of earth's gigantic offspring menaced heaven,
In his omnipotence of arm and mind
Confiding. Eurybiades supreme
In title, every leader speeds to act
What great Themistocles suggests; himself,
In all expedients copious, seeks his wife,
Whom he accosts, encircled where she stood
With Attic dames: Timothea, now rejoice!
The Greeks will fight; tomorrow's sun will give
A glorious day of liberty to Greece.
Assemble thou the women; let the dawn
Behold you spread the Salaminian beach;
In your selected ornaments attired,
As when superb processions to the gods
Your presence graces, with your children stand
Encompassed; cull your fairest daughters, range
Them in the front; alluring be their dress,
Their beauties half discovered, half concealed;
As when you practice on a lover's eye,
Through that soft portal to invade the heart;
So shall the faithful husband from his wife
Catch fire, the father from his blooming race,
The youthful warrior from the maid he loves:
Your looks will sharpen our vindictive swords.
In all the grace of polished Athens thus
His charge pronouncing, with a kind embrace
He quits her bosom, nor the encircling dames
Without respectful admonition leaves
To aid his consort. Grateful in itself
A task she soon begins, which pleases more
As pleasing him. A meadow fresh in green,
Between the sea-beat margin and the walls,
Which bore the island's celebrated name,
Extended large; there often the Attic fair
In bevies met; Themistocles the ground
To them allotted, that communion soft,
Or pastime, sweetly cheating, might relieve
The sad remembrance of their native homes.
Here at Timothea's summons they convened
In multitude beyond the daisies, strewn
Thick over the verdure from the lap of spring,
When most profuse. The wives, the mothers here
Of present heroes, there in bud are seen
The future mothers of immortal sons,
Of Socrates, of Plato, who to birth
Had never sprung if Xerxes had prevailed,
Or would have lived Barbarians. On a mount
Timothea placed, her graceful lips unclos'd:
Ye wives, ye mothers, and ye fair betrothed,
Your husbands, sons, and suitors claim that aid
You have to give, and never can so well.
A signal day of liberty to Greece
Expect tomorrow; of the glorious scene
Become spectators; in a bridal dress,
Ye wives, encompassed with your tender babes,
Ye reverend matrons in your sumptuous robes,
As when superb processions to the gods
Your presence graces; but ye future brides,
Now maids, let all the allurement of attire
Enhance your beauties to the enamored eye:
So from the face he loves shall every youth
Catch fire, with animating passion look
On her, and conquer. Thus Cecropia's maids,
Who left their country rather than abide
Impure compulsion to Barbarian beds,
Or ply the foreign loom with servile hands,
Shall live to see their hymeneal morn;
Blessed in heroic husbands, shall transmit
To late posterity the Attic name.
And you, whose exemplary steps began
Our glorious emigration, you shall see
Your lords, your sons, in triumph to your homes
Return, ye matrons -- Or with them will die,
If fortune frown, Laodice aloud;
For this I hold a poniard; ere endure
A Persian yoke, will pierce this female heart.
Enthusiastic ardour seems to change
Their sex; with manlike firmness all consent
To meet Timothea there by early dawn
In chosen raiment, and with weapons armed,
As chance should furnish. Thus Timothea swayed,
The emulator of her husband's art,
But never beyond immaculate intent;
At her suggestion interposed her friend
Laodice, the consort young and fair
Of bold Aminias, trained by naval Mars,
From the same bed with Aeschylus derived.
Troezene's leader, passing by, admired
The generous flame, but secretly rejoiced
In Ariphilia at Calauria safe;
He to thy tent, Themistocles, was bound.
Thee to Sicinus listening, just returned
From his successful course, Cleander found,
Thee of thy dear Timothea first informed,
While thou did smile applause. The youth pursued:
From Aristides I deputed come;
He will adventure from Psyttalia's isle
This night to chase the foe, if thou concur
In help and counsel: bands of Attic youth,
Superfluous force excluded from the fleet,
With ready arms the enterprise demand;
Them, with his troop, Oilean Medon joins.
A noble Grecian, sage, experienced, brave,
Returns the chief; my answer is concise:
Sicinus, fly! their pinnaces and skiffs
Command the Athenian vessels to supply
At Aristides' call; the attempt is wise,
Becoming such a soldier; thou remain
With him, to bring me tidings of success.
Swift as a stone from Balearic slings,
Sicinus hastens to the Athenian fleet;
Cleander light the important order bears
To Aristides, whose exalted voice
Collects the banding youth. So generous hounds
The huntsman's call obey; with ringing peals
Their throats in tune delight Aurora's ear;
They pant impatient for the scented field,
Devour in thought the victims of their speed,
Nor dread the ravenous wolf, nor tusky boar,
Nor lion, king of beasts. The exile feels
Returning warmth, like some neglected steed
Of noblest temper, from his wonted haunts
Who long has languish'd in the lazy stall;
Called forth, he paws, he snuffs the enlivening air,
His strength he proffers in a cheerful neigh
To scour the vale, to mount the shelving hill,
Or dash from thickets close the sprinkling dew.
He thus to Medon: Of Psyttalia's shore
That eastern flat contains the Persian chief,
Known by his standard; with four thousand youths
Make thy impression there; the western end
Our foes neglect, a high and craggy part;
But nature there through perforated rock
Has left a passage, with its mouth above
Concealed in bushes; this, to me well known,
I will possess; thence rushing, will surround
The unsuspecting Persian. Darkness falls;
Let all embark; at midnight ply the oar.
They hear and march; allotted seats they take
Aboard the skiffs Sicinus had prepared,
Impatient waiting, but impatience keeps
Her peace. The second watch is now elapsed,
That baneful season, marked in legends old,
When death-controlling sorcery compelled
Unwilling spirits back to mortal clay
Entombed, when dire Thessalian charmers called
Down from her orb the pallid queen of night,
And hell's tremendous avenues unclos'd;
To Asia's mothers now of real bane,
Who soon must wail ten thousand slaughtered sons.
The boats in order move; full-fac'd the moon
Extends the shadows of a thousand masts
Across the mirror of cerulean floods,
Which feel no ruffling wind. A western course
With his division Aristides steers,
The Locrian eastward; by whose dashing oars
A guard is roused, not timely to obstruct
His firm descent, yet ready on the strand
To give him battle. Medon's spear by fate
Is wielded; Locrians and Athenians sweep
The foes before them; numbers fresh maintain
Unceasing conflict, till on every side
His reinforcement Aristides pours,
And turns the fight to carnage: by his arm
Before a tent of stately structure sinks
Autarctus brave in death. The twilight breaks
On heaps of slaughter; not a Persian lives
But Artamanes, from whose youthful brow
The beaver severed by the auspicious steel
Of Medon, showed a well-remember'd face;
The Locrian swift embraced him, and began:
Deserve my kindness by some grateful news
Of Meliboeus and the Delphian priest;
Not Aeschylus in pity shall exceed
My care in this thy second captive state.
His grateful news the Persian thus repeats:
Nicaea, fort of Locris, them contains;
Though prisoners, happy in the guardian care
Of Artemisia. What disastrous sight!
Autarctus there lies prostrate in his blood.
Oh, I must throw me at the victor's feet!
He went, by Medon introduced, to kneel;
Forbid by Aristides, he began:
My own compassion to solicit yours,
Without disgrace might bend a satrap's knee;
I have a tale of sorrow to unfold,
Might soften hearts less humaniz'd and just
Than yours, O generous Grecians! In that tent
The widowed wife of this late envied prince,
Young, royal matron -- twenty annual suns
She has not told -- three infants... At these words
The righteous man of Athens stays to hear
No more; he gains the tent, he enters, views
Sandauce, silent in majestic woe,
With her three children in their eastern vests
Of gems and gold; urbanity forbids
To interrupt the silence of her grief;
Sicinus, waiting nigh, he thus enjoins:
Thou, born a Persian, from a ghastly stage
Of massacre and terror these transport
To thy own lord, Themistocles; the spoils
Are his, not mine. Could words of comfort heal
Calamity thus sudden and severe,
I would instruct thy tongue; but mute respect
Is all thy power can give, or she receive.
Apprise the general that Psyttalia's coast
I will maintain with Medon, from the wrecks
To save our friends, our enemies destroy.
He then withdraws; Athenians he commands
Autarctus' body to remove from sight;
When her pavilion now Sandauce leaves,
Preceded by Sicinus. On the ground
She bends her aspect, not a tear she drops
To ease her swelling heart; by eunuchs led,
Her infants follow; while a troop of slaves,
With folded arms across their heaving breasts,
The sad procession close. To Medon here
Spoke Artamanes: O humane! permit
Me to attend this princess, and console
At least, companion of her woes, bewail
A royal woman from Darius sprung.
Him not a moment now his friend detains;
At this affecting season he defers
Enquiry more of Meliboeus, known
Safe in Nicaea; Persia's youth departs;
The mournful train for Salamis embark.
End of the Fifth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the SIXTH.
BRIGHT power, whose presence wakens on the face
Of nature all her beauties, gilds the floods,
The crags and forests, vine-clad hills and fields,
Where Ceres, Pan, and Bacchus in thy beams
Rejoice; O Sun! thou over Athenian towers,
The citadel and fanes in ruin huge,
Do rising now illuminate a scene
More new, more wondrous, to thy piercing eye,
Than ever time disclosed. Phaleron's wave
Presents three thousand barks in pendants rich;
Spectators, clust'ring like Hymettian bees,
Hang on the burdened shrouds, the bending yards,
The reeling masts; the whole Cecropian strand,
Far as Elousis, seat of mystic rites,
Is thronged with millions, male and female race
Of Asia and of Libya, ranked on foot,
On horses, camels, cars. Aegaleos tall,
Half down his long declivity where spreads
A mossy level, on a throne of gold
Displays the king environed by his court
In oriental pomp; the hill behind,
By warriors covered, like some trophy huge
Ascends in varied arms and banners clad;
Below the monarch's feet the immortal guard,
Line under line, erect their gaudy spears;
The arrangement, shelving downward to the beach,
Is edged by chosen horse. With blazing steel
Of Attic arms encircled, from the deep
Psyttalia lifts her surface to the sight,
Like Ariadne's heav'n-bespangling crown,
A wreath of stars; beyond, in dread array,
The Grecian fleet, four hundred galleys, fill
The Salaminian streights; barbarian prows
In two divisions point to either mouth
Six hundred brazen beaks of tow'r-like ships,
Unwieldy bulks; the gently-swelling soil
Of Salamis, rich island, bounds the view.
Along her silver-sanded verge arrayed,
The men at arms exalt their naval spears
Of length terrific. All the tender sex,
Ranked by Timothea, from a green ascent
Look down in beauteous order on their sires,
Their husbands, lovers, brothers, sons, prepared
To mount the rolling deck. The younger dames
In bridal robes are clad; the matrons sage
In solemn raiment, worn on sacred days;
But white in vesture like their maiden breasts,
Where Zephyr plays, uplifting with his breath
The loosely-waving folds, a chosen line
Of Attic graces in the front is placed;
From each fair head the tresses fall, entwined
With newly-gather'd flowrets; chaplets gay
The snowy hand sustains; the native curls,
O'ershading half, augment their powerful charms;
While Venus, tempered by Minerva, fills
Their eyes with ardour, pointing every glance
To animate, not soften. From on high
Her large controlling orbs Timothea rolls,
Supassing all in stature, not unlike
In majesty of shape the wife of Jove,
Presiding over the empyreal fair.
Below, her consort in resplendent arms
Stands near an altar; there the victim bleeds,
The entrails burn; the fervent priest invokes
The Eleutherian powers. Sicinus comes,
Sandauce follows; and in sumptuous vests,
Like infant Castor and his brother fair,
Two boys; a girl like Helen, ere she threw
Delicious poison from her fatal eyes,
But tripp'd in blameless childhood over the meads
Of sweet Amyclae, her maternal seat:
Nor less with beauty was Sandauce graced
Than Helen's mother, Leda, who enthralled
The Olympian god. A starting look the priest
Cast on the children; eager by the hand
Themistocles he grasped, and thus aloud:
Accept this omen! At the auspicious sight
Of these young captives, from the offering burst
Unwonted light; Fate's volume is unroll'd,
Where victory is written in their blood
To Bacchus, styled Devourer, on this isle,
Amid surrounding gloom, a temple hoar
By time remains; to Bacchus I devote
These splendid victims; while his altar smokes,
With added force thy prow shall pierce the foe,
And conquest sit triumphant on thy mast.
So spoke religious lips; the people heard,
Believing heard: -- To Bacchus, Bacchus give
The splendid victims, hoarse acclaim resounds.
Myronides, Xanthippus, Cimon good,
Brave Aeschylus, each leader is unmann'd
By horror, save the cool, sagacious son
Of Neocles; the prophet he accosts:
Wise, Euphrantides, are thy holy words!
To that propitious god these children bear;
Due time apply from each Barbarian stain
To purify their limbs; attentive watch
The signal raised for onset; then employ
Thy pious knife to win the grace of heaven.
The chiefs amazed, the priest applauding looked.
A young, a beauteous mother at this doom
Of her dear babes is present. Not her locks
She tore, nor beat in agony her breast,
Nor shrieked in frenzy; frozen, mute, she stands,
Like Niobe just changing into stone,
Ere yet sad moisture had a passage found
To flow, the emblem of maternal grief:
At length the rigor of her tender limbs
Dissolving, Artamanes bears away
Her fainting burden, while the inhuman seer
To slaughter leads her infants. Every eye
On them is turned. Themistocles, unmarked
By others, beck'ning draws Sicinus nigh,
In secret thus commissioned: Choose a band
From my entrusted menials; swift overtake,
Like an assistant join this holy man;
Not dead, but living, shall these infant heads
Avail the Grecians. When the direful grove,
Impenetrably dark'ning, black with night,
That antiquated seat of horrid rites,
You reach, bid Euphrantides, in my name,
This impious, fruitless homicide forbear;
If he refuse, his savage zeal restrain
By force. -- This said, his disencumber'd thoughts
For instant fight prepare; with matchless art
To rouse the tenderest passions of the soul
In aid of duty, from the altar's height,
His voice persuasive, audible, and smooth,
To battle thus his countrymen inflames:
Ye pious sons of Athens, on that slope
Behold your mothers! husbands, fathers, see
Your wives and race! before such objects dear,
Such precious lives defending, you must wield
The ponderous naval spear; ye gallant youths,
Look on those lovely maids, your destined brides,
Who of their pride have disarray'd the meads
To bind your temples with triumphal wreaths;
Can you do less than conquer in their sight,
Or conquered perish? Women never deserved
So much from men; yet what their present claim?
That by your prowess their maternal seat
They may revisit; that Cecropia's gates
May yield them entrance to their own abodes,
There meritorious to reside in peace,
Who cheerful, who magnanimous, those homes
To hostile flames, their tender limbs resigned
To all the hardships of this crowded spot,
For preservation of the Attic name,
Laws, rites, and manners. Do your women ask
Too much, along their native streets to move
With grateful chaplets for Minerva's shrine,
To view the august acropolis again,
And in procession celebrate your deeds?
Ye men of Athens! shall those blooming buds
Of innocence and beauty, who disclose
Their snowy charms by chastity reserved
For your embraces, shall those spotless maids
Abide compulsion to Barbarian beds?
Their Attic arts and talents be debased
In Persian bondage? Shall Cephissian banks,
Callirhoe's fountain, and Ilissus pure,
Shall sweet Hymettus never hear again
Their graceful step rebounding from the turf,
With you companions in the choral dance,
Enamored youths, who court their nuptial hands?
A general paean intercepts his voice;
On ringing shields the spears in cadence beat;
While notes more soft, but, issued from such lips,
Far more inspiring, to the martial song
Unnumber'd daughters of Cecropia join.
Such interruption pleased the artful chief,
Who said no more. Descending, swift he caught
The favorable moment; he embarked,
All ardent followed; on his deck convened,
Myronides, Xanthippus, Cimon bold,
Aminias, Aeschylus, he thus exhorts:
My brave associates, publish over the fleet,
That I have won the Asian Greeks, whom force
Not choice against us ranges, to retain
Their weapons sheathed, unting'd with kindred blood.
Not less magnanimous, and more inflamed,
Mardonius too ascends the stately deck
Of Ariabignes; there each leader, called
To hear the royal mandate, he addressed:
Behold your king, enclosed by watchful scribes,
Unfolding volumes like the rolls of fate!
The brave, the fearful, charactered will stand
By name, by lineage there; his searching eye
Will note your actions, to dispense rewards
Of wealth and rank, or punishment and shame
Irrevocably doom. But see a spoil
Beyond the power of Xerxes to bestow,
By your own prowess singly to be won,
Those beauteous women; emblems they of Greece,
Show what a country you are come to share.
Can victory be doubtful in this cause?
Who can be slow when riches, honors, fame,
His sov'reign's smile, and beauty, are the prize?
Now lift the signal for immediate fight.
He spoke applauded; in his rapid skiff
Was wafted back to Xerxes, who enthroned
High on Aegaleos anxious sat to view
A scene which nature never yet displayed,
Nor fancy feigned. The theater was Greece,
Mankind spectators; equal to that stage
Themistocles, great actor! by the power
Of fiction present in his teeming soul,
Blends confidence with courage, on the Greeks
Imposing firm belief in heavenly aid.
I see, I see divine Eleusis shoot
A spiry flame auspicious toward the fleet.
I see the blessed Aeacidae; the ghosts
Of Telamon and Peleus, Ajax there,
There bright Achilles buoyant on the gale,
Stretch from Aegina their propitious hands.
I see a woman! It is Pallas! Hark!
She calls! How long, insensate men, your prows
Will you keep back, and victory suspend?
He gives the signal. With impetuous heat
Of zeal and valor, urging sails and oars,
The Athenians dash the waters, which disturbed,
Combine their murmur with unnumber'd shouts;
The galleys rush along like gliding clouds,
That utter hollow thunder as they sweep
A distant ridge of hills. The crowded lines
Of Xerxes' navy, in the streights confused,
Through their own weight and multitude ill steered,
Are pierced by different squadrons, which their chiefs,
Each with his tribe, to dreadful onset led.
The unerring skill of Pallas seemed to form,
Then guide their just arrangement. None surpassed
The effort bold of Aeschylus; two ships
Of large construction, boast of naval Tire,
His well-directed beak, o'erlaid with brass,
Transpierces; Attic Neptune whelms his floods
Over either found'ring bulk. Three more, by flight
Wrecked on Psyttalia, yield their victim crews
To Aristides; vigilant and dire
Against the ravager of Greece he stood,
Like that Hesperian dragon, wakeful guard
To Atlante^an fruit. The intrepid son
Of Neocles, disdaining meaner spoil
Than Asia's king-born admiral, with sails
Outspread to fresh'ning breezes, swiftly steered
By Ariabignes, crashing as he passed
The triple tire of oars; then grappling, poured
His fierce assailants on the splendid poop.
To this attack the gallant prince opposed
His royal person; three Athenians bleed
Beneath him; but Themistocles he meets.
Seed of Darius, Ariabignes falls
In Xerxes' view, by that unrivaled chief
Whose arm, whose conduct, Destiny that day
Obeyed, while fortune steady on her wheel
Looked smiling down. The regal flag descends,
The democratic standard is uprear'd,
Where that proud name of Eleutheria shines
In characters of silver. Xerxes feels
A thrilling horror, such as pierced the soul
Of pale Belshazzar, last on Ninus' throne,
When in the pleasures of his festive board
He saw the hand portentous on the wall
Of Babylon's high palace write his doom,
With great Assyria's downfall. Caria's queen
Not long continues in a distant post,
Where blood-stained billows on her active oars
Dash thick-adhering foam; tremendous sight
To Adimantus, who before her flies
With his dismayed Corinthians! She suspends
Pursuit; her sov'reign's banner to redeem
Advances; furious in her passage sends
Two ships to perish in the green abyss
With all their numbers; this her sovereign sees,
Exclaiming loud, my women fight like men,
The men like women. Fruitless yet her skill,
Her courage vain; Themistocles was there;
Cilicians, Cyprians shunned his towering flag
On Ariabignes' mast. The efforts joint
Of gallant Troezen and Aegina broke
The Egyptian line, whose chief-commanding deck
Presents a warrior to Cleander's eye,
A warrior bright in gold, for valor more
Conspicuous still than radiancy of arms.
Cleander him assails; now front to front,
Each on his grappled gunnel firm maintains
A fight still dubious, when their pointed beaks
Auxiliar Aeschylus and Cimon strike
Deep in the hostile ship, whose found'ring weight,
Swift from her grapples loosened by the shock,
The affrighted master on Psyttalia drives
A prey to Medon. Then the Egyptians fly,
Phoenicians, famed on oriental waves,
Resign the day. Myronides in chase,
Xanthippus, Cimon, bold Aminias gored
The shattered planks; the undefended decks
Ran purple. Boisterous hurricanes, which sweep
In blasts unknown to European climes
The western world remote, had nature called
Their furies hither, so with wrecks and dead
Had strewn the floods, disfigured thus the strands.
Behold Cleander from achievements high
Bears down with all Troezene's conquering line
On Artemisia: yet she stops awhile,
In pious care to save the floating corse
Of Ariabignes; this performed, retreats;
With her last effort whelming, as she steered,
One Grecian more beneath devouring waves,
Retreats illustrious. So in trails of light
To night's embrace departs the golden sun,
Still in remembrance shining; none believe
His rays impaired, none doubt his rise again
In wonted splendor to emblaze the sky.
Laconian Eurybiades engaged
Secure of conquest; his division held
The eastern streights, where loose Pamphylians spread
A timid canvass, Hellespontine Greeks,
Ionians, Dorians, and Aeolians reared
Unwilling standards. A Phoenician crew,
Cast on the strand, approach the imperial throne,
Accusing these of treachery. By chance
A bold Ionian, active in the fight,
To Xerxes true, that moment in his ken
Bears down an Attic ship. -- Aloud the king:
Scribes, write the name of that Ionic chief,
His town, his lineage. Guards, surround these slaves,
Who, fugitive themselves, traduce the brave;
Cut off their heads: the order is performed.
A favored lord, expressing in his look
A sign of pity, to partake their doom
The tyrant wild commands. Argestes' heart
Admits a secret joy at Persia's foil;
He trusts that, blind by fear, the uncertain prince
To him his wonted favor would restore,
Would crush Mardonius, author of the war,
Beneath his royal vengeance; or that chief,
By adverse fate oppressed, his sway resign.
But as the winds or thunders never shook
Deep-rooted Aetna, nor the pregnant clouds
Discharged a flood extinguishing his fires,
Which inexhausted boil the surging mass
Of fumy sulphur; so this grim event
Shook not Mardonius, in whose bosom glowed
His courage still unquench'd, despising chance
With all her band of evils. In himself
Collected, on calamity he founds
A new, heroic structure in his mind,
A plan of glory forms to conquer Greece
By his own prowess, or by death atone
For his unprosp'rous counsels. Xerxes now,
Amid the wrecks and slaughter in his sight,
Distracted vents his disappointed pride:
Have I not severed from the side of Thrace
Mount Athos? bridg'd the Hellespont? Go, fill
Yon sea; construct a causeway broad and firm;
As over a plain my army shall advance
To overwhelm the Athenians in their isle.
He rises; back to Athens he repairs.
Sequestered, languid, him Mardonius finds,
Deliv'ring bold this soliderly address:
Be not discouraged, sovereign of the world!
Not oars, not sails and timber, can decide
Thy enterprise sublime. In shifting strife,
By winds and billows governed, may contend
The sons of traffic; on the solid plain
The generous steed and soldier; they alone
Thy glory must establish, where no swell
Of fickle floods, nor breath of casual gales,
Assist the skilful coward, and control,
By nature's wanton but resistless might,
The brave man's arm. Unaided by her hand,
Not one of these light mariners will face
Thy regal presence at the Isthmian fence
To that small part of yet unconquered Greece
The land of Pelops. Seek the Spartans there;
There let the slain Leonidas revive
With all his warriors whom thy power destroyed;
A second time their generous blood shall dye
The sword of Asia. Sons of those who tore
The Assyrian, Lydian scepters from their kings,
Thy Medes and Persians, whose triumphant arms
From distant shores of Hellespont have tamed
Such martial nations, have thy trophies raised
In Athens, bold aggressor; they shall plant
Before thy sight, on famed Eurota's shore,
The imperial standard, and repair the shame
Of that uncertain fluttering naval flag,
The sport of winds. The monarch's look betrayed
That to expose his person was the least
Of his resolves. Mardonius pierced his thoughts,
And thus in manly policy pursued:
If Susa, long forlorn, at length may claim
The royal presence; if the gracious thought
Of his return inspire my sov'reign's breast
Throughout his empire to rekindle joy;
Let no dishonor on thy Persians fall,
Thy Medes; not they accomplices in flight
With vile Egyptians, with Cilicians base,
Pamphylians, Cyprians. Let not Greece deride
A baffled effort in a gallant race
Who under Cyrus triumphed, whom to fame
Darius led, and thou with recent wreaths,
O conqueror of Athens! have adorned.
Since they are blameless, though thy will decree
Thy own return, and wisely would secure
Superfluous millions in their native homes,
Before chill winter in his barren arms
Constrain the genial earth; yet leave behind
But thirty myriads of selected bands
To my command, I pledge my head that Greece
Shall soon be Persia's vassal. Xerxes pleased,
Concealing yet that pleasure, artful thus:
Deliberation to thy counsel due
Shall be devoted; call the Carian queen.
She then was landed; through Cecropia's streets
A solemn bier she followed, where the corse
Of Ariabignes lay. Mardonius met,
And thus addressed her: Meritorious dame,
Of all the myriads whom retreat has saved,
Hail! crowned with honor! Xerxes through my voice
Requires thy counsel to decide on mine.
I add no more; thy wisdom, candor, faith
I trust; without a murmur will submit
To thy decision, but to thine alone.
My care shall tend that clay, among the dead
Perhaps the only glorious. -- She departs.
He seeks the Magi, greeted in these words:
Receive this body, all which now remains
Of Ariabignes; let no dirge deplore
Him as unhappy; Horomazes smiles
On such a death; your lamentations vent
On human nature, humbled and debased
By cowards, traitors, who survived this day,
Never to outlive their shame. Ye vet'ran bands
Of Medes and Persians, who surround in tears
These honored relics; warriors who subdued
The banks of Nile, where Hyperanthes fought,
And late with me through Macedon and Thrace
Swept like a whirlwind; change your grief to rage,
To confidence that, unresisted still,
You on the plain recov'ring what by sea
Is lost, avenging this illustrious dead,
From this enthralled metropolis of Greece
Shall carry devastation, sword, and flames
To Lacedaemon, now your only foe.
The native Medes and Persians at his words
Are fired, in strength, in courage, not unlike
Their brave commander, who in scorn beheld
The inferior herds of nations. Now the sun
Glows on the ocean. To his tent retires
Mardonius; sternly in his wounded soul
The late disgrace of Xerxes he revolves,
Yet soothes his anguish by enlivening hope
Of glory. Thus the tawny king of beasts
Who over Numidian wastes has lost a day
In fruitless chase, of wonted food deprived,
Growls in his den; but meditates a range,
Enlarged and ceaseless, through unbounded woods,
To glut his empty maw. Her charge performed,
Before him sudden Artemisia stands.
As Cynthia steps unveiled from sable clouds
On some benighted traveller, who beats
A path untried, but persevering firm
With undiminish'd vigor, well deserves
Her succ'ring light, -- the queen in cheering smiles
Accosts the hero: I have seen the king,
Have heard thy counsel, have approved, confirmed.
Thy spirit, son of Gobryas, I applaud.
Thou, not discouraged by our foul defeat,
From this unwieldy multitude the brave
Would separate, and boldly at their head
Thy life adventure. Xerxes may assume
A doubtful aspect. Counsel given by thee,
By me approved, Argestes may oppose
With all his malice. Only thou suppress
The fiery sparks which animate thy blood;
In patience wait; thy dictates will prevail,
Our common vengeance too that traitor feel,
Whom I saw lurking near the king's retreat.
Farewell. -- She leaves him happy in her voice
Of approbation, happier in her eye,
Which spoke for his prosperity a wish;
That eye, enlight'ning her majestic face
With added luster, from his grateful sense
Of her transcendent talents thus applied
To his behoof. His manly bosom feels,
Beyond a veneration of her worth,
Beyond a friendship to her friendship due,
Desire of her society in war,
Perhaps in peace. Participated thoughts
With her, united counsels, he esteems
A gain to both. His high-aspiring soul
Enjoys the thought, nor entertains a shade
Of jealousy or envy at her fame.
He ruminates: Observing her advice,
I shall succeed. Then starting -- Earth and heaven!
Where is Masistius? Oh ungen'rous heart!
Which on the scent of its ambitious chase
Forgot that best of counselors and guides,
Friend of my infant, youthful, manly age!
If he be lost! -- Oh ominous the thought!
Masistius lost! -- My fortune, hopes, and joys,
My virtues are no more! -- He rushes wild
Abroad; commands a general search; himself
Down to the port precipitates his course.
The son of Gobryas and the Carian queen
Were thus removed. Argestes in that hour
Obtained access to Xerxes. Cold with fear,
By fortune tamed, tormented still by pride,
The uncertain king to him their counsel told;
When thus Argestes, feigning wonder, spoke:
Do thou appoint Mardonius king in Greece?
O liberal prince! what servant in thy train
Would not confront all danger to possess
An empire, which the Hellespont alone
Will bound? Already Macedonia's lord,
Young Alexander, all the Thracian chiefs,
Like humble vassals to Mardonius bend.
Why should the king himself not conquer Greece,
Now more than half reduced? Complete the work
Appointed; choke the Salaminian floods;
Overwhelm the Athenians in their isle, and reign
Thyself supreme. The monarch starts, and wild
In look, commands Argestes to pursue
The impracticable toil with all the host;
Then, stretched along, in vain solicits rest.
End of the Sixth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the SEVENTH.
MEANTIME while Venus from her Colian dome,
Which over Phaleron cast a holy shade,
Beheld the shattered fleet of Xerxes driven
To refuge there precarious; from pursuit
Recalled, the Greeks, observant of their laws,
Applied their pious labor to collect
Their floating dead, and send with honors due
Such glorious manes to the blessed abodes.
With artful assiduity remained
Themistocles presiding, so to court
Religion's favor. From the solemn toil,
Accomplished now, to Salaminian strands
He veers; the slain are landed; then his deck
Himself forsakes. As Neptune, when the winds,
His ministers of anger to overwhelm
The pride of daring mortals, have fulfilled
His stern behests, and shook the vast profound,
At length composing his afflicted reign,
Serene from sated vengeance seeks the arms
Of Amphitrite, watching his return
With soft impatience in her placid grot
Amidst encircling Nereids; so the chief
To his Timothea in triumphant pace
Advances. She that day had never left
The beach; surrounded by Athenian fair,
She rushes forward to his wished embrace.
He stops; defiled by slaughter, robs his heart
Of such delights, and elegantly thus:
O all-surpassing woman, do not dye
That lovely bosom in Barbarian gore;
The blood of Ariabignes, not my own,
Encrusts thy husband's cuirass. She replies:
Since not thy own, but hostile crimson stains
Thy manly chest, Timothea will partake
The honorable dye. O man divine!
Thus for the public with a public kiss
Thee I salute, thee savior of all Greece,
Thee scourge of Asia; thus will every wife
Her husband; sisters, daughters thus infold
Their brothers, sires; their tender hands like mine,
Like mine their panting breasts, in transport bear
These glorious marks of victory. Behold
Those damsels pure, whose maidenly reserve
Forbids such rapture; they in smiles, in tears
Of gratitude and gladness, on the heads
Of gallant youths triumphal garlands place.
Laodice is nigh; she quits the embrace
Of her Aminias, and accosts the chief:
Think thou, O son of Neocles, the dames
Of Athens shrink to see Barbarian blood,
Who would have spilt their own, had fortune frowned;
Had you, our slaughtered husbands, left your wives
No other choice than servitude or death?
Fair dame, united to the bravest chief,
In smiles he answers, fortune more benign
Preserved those husbands for the happiest lot,
Society with you. In holy brine
Of Neptune's flood permit them now to lave,
That love in bridal decency may greet
Athenian wives. Ye men of Athens, vote
That every youth and every maid betrothed
Tonight be wedded. This the general voice
Confirms a law. His winning words dispersed
The obedient fair; each warrior in the deep
Immersed his limbs, while Phoebe's argent wheels
Their track pursuing through unclouded skies,
Diffuse around serenity and light.
To his Timothea's mansion soon repaired
Themistocles; Sicinus there he found,
Who earnest thus addressed him: Thrice I hail
My lord victorious; from thy servant's lips
Now hear a tale to melt the stoniest hearts
Of all but Euphrantides, yet with joy
Reward compassion -- To the sable grove,
Where yew and cypress veiled the hoary walls
Of homicidal Bacchus, swift I led
My choice companions; to the seer I told
Thy pleasure; he indignant heard, and forced
The victims forward to the fane abhorred.
I followed careful, still in patient hope
That he, though slow, would uncompell'd submit
To thy commanding will; we entered all;
Sandauce there at length her silence broke,
Whom from her infants none so fell to part.
O house of great Darius! where will end
Thy woes? How many of thy sons are fallen!
Sad Ariana, sacrifice to love!
Thou sleep'st; thy wretched sister lives to see
Her children butchered -- On the pavement damp
She threw her limbs, she clasped her lovely babes;
They shudd'ring view Sandauce in distress;
Too young to know their danger, they bewail
Their mother, not themselves. The captive youth,
Still sedulous and tender, from the spot,
Where as in shackles of despair she lay,
Essayed in vain to raise her. Now the seer,
Who in my look determination saw,
Approached the loathsome idol, foul by age,
In fell presumption utt'ring thus his wrath:
These victims, Bacchus, did my voice devote
To thy neglected altar; of thy spoil
Themistocles defrauds thee; on his head
Let fall thy vengeance, not on mine, stern god!
This heard, the willing captives I removed
From that grim seat of terror to these walls
Of hospitality. Sicinus closed,
When Aristides entered. Hail, he said,
Well have thou done, Themistocles! behold
Me come attendant on illustrious dead,
Whom on Psyttalia cast I bring to share
The public funeral honors. -- I salute
Thee too, the son of Neocles returns;
Our noble strife to serve the public best
We both have well commenced. Prepare thee now
To give thy counsel on my new device
For better service still. Our climate holds
All Asia now, her princes, wealth, and arms;
I can detain her, till consuming time
By famine, sword and pestilence, exhaust
Her strength, and cover Greece with Persian graves.
Too high thy ardour mounts, replies the sage;
Forbear to think of strengthening such a power
By desperation. To the feeble brute
Necessity gives courage. Such a host
Of men and steeds innum'rous on our fields,
By nature's stimulating wants compelled
To fight for life, might blast our budding hopes.
Ah! rather some new stratagem devise
To send the Persians back; let famine, want,
Let pestilence pursue their tedious flight,
Deprived of succor from their vanquished fleet,
Which do thou chase and bury in the waves.
Farewell! my post demands me. Since their foil,
I have observed the enemies employed
In wild attempts to fill the straight profound
Between Psyttalia and the Athenian shore.
He gone, these thoughts Themistocles revolves:
I will adopt his counsel, safe for Greece,
Nor less for me; his banishment prolonged
Will discontent the people, and repealed
Place him commander in the Athenian camp
To rival me. Discouraging the war
By land, confining to the sea our strength,
I shall secure pre-eminence. From thought
To action turned, Sicinus he bespake:
Before my presence all the captives bring.
As Bacchus, not Devourer, in a smile
Of heavenly sweetness, proffered soft relief
To Ariadne, when forlorn she sat,
Her fate deploring on the Naxian rock;
So gracious, so consoling were the looks
Themistocles assumed, in soothing phrase
Accosting thus Sandauce: Thou shall prove,
So shall thy royal house, afflicted fair!
A cordial friend in me. Sicinus, haste;
Equip the bark which eastern colors dress,
That, ere the moon forsake her lucid path,
Thou may transport this princess to the king,
Her infant train, and this ingenuous youth,
With my best greetings. Say, the Athenian chief,
Themistocles, these pledges of his truth
And friendship sends; them rescued I restore,
Him next will save. His Hellespontine bridge
The Greeks vindictive menace to destroy,
An enterprise of horror; this my power,
My dictates singly can and shall impede,
Till he in safety has regained his throne.
Sandauce answers: O thou generous Greek,
To thee, to thine, may fortune never be cold.
But I, partaker of imperial pomp,
In ease, in safety nurtured, who have deemed
My state above the sorrows which torment
Inferior mortals, when my soul reflects
On this new lesson by misfortune taught,
Reflects how lately on a field of blood,
Young as I am, I saw my husband fall,
My children doomed to sacrifice, myself
To endless bondage, had not heaven achiev'd
This marvel of compassion in a foe,
I, (O forgive me!) I suspect the lot
Of all, even thine. O prosperous, godlike man,
May Horomazes from thy head avert
Vicissitudes like mine! may envious fate
Never bring Sandauce's gratitude to proof!
Thou never want the pity thou have shown!
She ceased; she wept. When Artamanes spoke:
Her debt Sandauce can discharge alone
By grateful tears; but I can promise more.
In Persian thraldom lies a beauteous Greek,
Named Amarantha, Delphian Timon's child;
For that bright maid's redemption I am pledged
To her afflicted sire. Thy goodness shower'd
On this excelling princess, shall augment
My zeal the obligation to repay
By Amarantha's freedom; till that hour
Of retribution to thy virtues comes,
We will proclaim them; nations shall admire
Themistocles, and every heart abhor
Inhuman Euphrantides. Now returned
Sicinus; him they followed. On her breast
The lovely mother hushed her female babe;
But cold with horror at remembrance deep
Of her unmatched calamities that day,
She feebly falter'd over the sandy beach;
While Artamanes led in either hand
The tripping boys. Themistocles remained
In these reflections, flowing from this proof
Of fortune's changes: Few in Athens long
Sustain their greatness -- but to muse on ills
Before they come, both time and thought I waste;
Content at present that esteem procured,
By this fair Persian, in her brother's court,
May prove a gain. Timothea now approached;
His hand affectionate she pressed and spoke:
How sudden thou my hospitable cares
Of their endearing object have deprived!
In woe how graceful is that eastern dame!
How young a mother! On a widowed bed
How early cast by fortune! Thou have sent
Sicinus with her; ever-watchful man,
Some new contrivance thou do bring to birth;
Thou smil'st in silence; listen then to me.
Since Aristides on this isle has shown
That face revered, when banished, his recall
The men of Athens, nay the women wish.
This by Aminias to the assembled tribes,
Laodice informs me, will be moved;
In this expect Myronides the brave,
Xanthippus, Cimon, Aeschylus will join. --
So will thy husband, interposed the chief;
I will forestall them, not to others leave
Such merit with our people. -- She rejoined:
All will applaud thee. Now, my anxious lord,
The second watch its measure has consumed;
The moon descends, the sprightly birds are still;
Dead sleep has laid the soldier on his shield;
The active sailor slumbers; all forget
The hardships, rage, and tumult of the day;
All but thyself reposing. Shall that mind
Continue ranging over the field of thought,
In pregnancy exhaustless, till the lark
Salute the dayspring with his early song?
Till thou unresting, unrefresh'd, resume
The statesman's troubles, and the soldier's toils?
Be counseled; often the thunder-bearing god
To Juno listens; thou my voice obey.
He hears; serene conducts her to repose.
As Jove on Ida, by Saturnia charmed,
Confessed a rapture never felt before,
While lucid dew of odours from a cloud
Of gold distilled around him; from the turf
Beneath his feet while hyacinths upsprung,
The unctuous lotos, and the crocus gay,
To grace his secret tabernacle there
Of love celestial; so the Attic chief
To his Timothea, in her chamber pure,
With bridal honors decked, perfumed with flowers,
Whatever the meads of Salamis supplied,
His tender flame in winning language breathed:
Whoever had whispered on our nuptial day
That I should view thee, in a time remote
From that sweet era, with superior joy,
I should have held him ignorant of love.
What is the cause, Timothea, that I feel
My bosom pierced by transport yet unknown?
That eastern fair, delivered from distress,
Appearing then the fairest of her sex,
Thou do exceed. Timothea smiling spoke:
O thou artificer of sweetest wiles,
Would thou seduce me into vain belief,
That I exceed Sandauce's youthful charms?
But would thou know, my husband (solemn here
She modulates her accents), would thou know
Why thou survey'st me with uncommon joy?
It is the conscience of a noble deed,
Of gathered trophies never matched before,
Creates this change. The perils of this day
Were new to Athens, to thy race, and me;
Thy sword has rescued all, increased thy fame,
Thy heart exalted; with increased delight,
Through that bright medium of a happy mind,
Thou look on every object -- sure on me
Not less than others. Artless were these words,
By nature prompted, nature's noblest fire.
They ceased discourse. Her loftiness of mind,
His valor, talents, policy, to love
Subside. Perhaps the first of human pairs,
Who in the blessed Assyrian garden met,
Were not more happy in their first embrace,
Than fair Timothea and her conquering lord!
A pleasing stillness on the water sleeps;
The land is hushed; from either host proceeds
No sound, no murmur. With his precious charge
Embarked, Sicinus gently steers along;
The dip of oars in unison awake
Without alarming silence; while the moon,
From her descending, horizontal car,
Shoots lambent silver on the humid blades
Which cleave the curling slood. On carpets soft
Sandauce's babes devoid of sorrow lie,
In sweet oblivious innocence composed
To smiling slumber. But the mother's breast
Admits no consolation; when they skim
Psyttalia's frith, at memory severe
Of that disast'rous isle, she sudden sinks
A lifeless image in the watchful arms
Of Artamanes, who had studied well
Her sorrows, knew each tender thought and care,
Humanity his tutor. Swift he calls
Sicinus: Friendly pilot, stay thy course;
We must not leave Autarctus in his gore
Behind, lest grief incurable reside
In this fair breast, perhaps eternal shade
In these extinguished eyes. Sicinus feels
A sympathizing pain, of Persian stock
Himself a branch, in Attic soil matur'd;
He stops the bark and lands. The Asian tents
Were still erect, whence Aristides comes
In steel accoutred, to salute the dawn,
Then breaking. Him Sicinus humbly greets,
Requests, obtains the body, which conveyed
On board he careful on the deck bespreads
With canvass new. Impelled by active strokes
Of oars resumed, the bounding vessel gains
Phaleron's haven. Artemisia there,
Whose vigilance, augmented by defeat,
Had kenn'd the bark while distant, now arrests
Her further progress; but no sooner hears
The sad intelligence Sicinus gives,
Than swift descending where Sandauce lay,
That mourning fair in friendly strains accosts:
O lift thy head, thou daughter of a king!
Our sov'reign's sister, sister to the man
My soul revered, to Hyperanthes good,
The flower of Asia's princes! In thy woes
I sharing cordial, cordially rejoice
In thy redemption. Leave this doleful keel;
Think of thy duty to approach the king;
Thy other cares entrust to me. -- She said;
They row to shore. To Xerxes, then retired,
The queen conducts Sandauce and her train.
The princess thus to him amazed began:
A widowed sister, late a wretched slave,
With these three orphans just redeemed from death,
Sandauce greets her brother; but her tongue
Would be disloyal to obtrude her tale,
Her tedious tale of sorrows on his ear.
The preservation of her king demands
His first attention; that attention grant
To him who comes deputed by a Greek,
Thy friend, my guardian, savior of those babes;
Oh listen! thy salvation from his lips
Receive. Fast bound by terror was the mouth
Of Xerxes. -- Then Sicinus: He who ranks
Among the Greeks superior in command,
In talents, prudence, policy, and arms,
Themistocles, these pledges of his truth
And friendship sends; them rescued he restores;
Thee next will save. Thy Hellespontine bridge
The Greeks vindictive menace to destroy;
An enterprise of horror, which his power,
His dictates singly can and will impede,
Till thou in safety have regained thy throne.
All from his presence straight the king commands,
Save Artemisia; her in broken tones
Addresses: Queen of Caria, singly wise
Among my council, pity, not upbraid
Thy master, suffering by his rash neglect
Of thy sage voice unutterable pangs.
He paused in torture. Prudent, she replied:
Without a cause the lord of nations droops;
Mardonius well has counseled thy retreat,
Who undertakes to finish, what his sword
Has well begun through Macedon and Thrace,
This mighty war. Thy servant may succeed;
In whose behalf? His master's: Thou will reap
His fruits of glory; if Mardonius fail,
He the disgrace. Thy march commence by dawn;
Appoint the fleet's departure swift this night,
To guard with force collected and repaired
The Hellespontine bridge; with grace accept
The proffered service of the Athenian chief;
Load his returning messenger with gifts
Of royal price, and, O my gracious lord!
Fraternal kindness on Sandauce shower.
Her gallant lord has perished in thy cause,
Herself been menaced by a barbarous priest
To see her children sacrificed; a doom
Themistocles withstood, and set them free.
As when a timid child perceives a cloud
Obscure the sky, and hears the thunder's peal,
He weeps, he trembles, but the cloud dispersed,
The clamor ceasing, and the sun restored,
His wonted sport resumes, forgetting fear;
So changed the monarch. Artemisia, go,
He said; the satraps instantly convene;
The Athenian messenger, Argestes' son,
Again before us with Sandauce call;
Never will I deviate from thy counsels more.
First to Sicinus entering he began:
Say to thy sender, I accept well pleased
His service passed and proffers; thou return;
To him ten golden talents thou shall bear.
Thee from the depths of sorrow shall the king,
Sandauce, raise; demand a present boon;
Thou can not ask what Xerxes will refuse.
By gratitude surmounting grief inspired,
Moved to retaliate kindness in the shape
Herself had proved, the generous suppliant thus:
In Persian thraldom is a Grecian maid
Of Delphian lineage, Amarantha named;
Her I demand of Xerxes, that my hand
A captive daughter to a tender sire
May render back; from bondage free his head,
Now in Nicaea, and thus far my debt
Of gratitude discharge. In transport here,
Admiring such perfection of the heart,
Spoke Artamanes: Ever live the king!
There is a captive whom the princess named --
Fly thou in search of this requested slave,
Son of Argestes, interrupts the king;
Let none withold her from Sandauce's power.
The female train before the cumb'rous host
Shall move by dawn for Thessaly, there join
The rest of Asia's dames behind us left
On our late march; the guard, ten thousand horse,
Thou, Artamanes, shall command. -- He said;
They all retired. A pensive grief o'ercasts
Sandauce, moving with her children slow,
By slaves attended, to the vacant tent
Autarctus late possessed. Argestes' son
Observes her anguish, penetrates her thoughts,
In guarded words then proffers this relief:
O fairest princess, whose external form
But half displays thy excellence of mind,
Will thou forgive thy servant, if he feels
With thee a present sorrow, which the heart
Fobids the tongue to name? Sandauce, trust
My pious service, and those thoughts compose.
She, weeping, looks assent; he speeds away,
But meets the body of Autarctus borne
By Artemisia's soldiers. She at first,
With care concealed, had ordered from the bark
His precious relics; these the noble youth
With equal care delivers to that skill,
Which with Sabaean gums, and scented growths
Of blessed Arabia, purifies the clay
Deprived of life, and Time's consuming breath
Repels. A regal car he next provides,
In full apparel of funereal pomp.
End of the Seventh Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the EIGHTH.
THE satraps now and leaders, at the call
Of Artemisia, were collected round
Their monarch. Seated on his throne, he spoke:
Ye princes, satraps, heed our fixed decree.
Our native Asia wants her king; by morn
To Susa we return, but leave behind
In Greece Mardonius, and a chosen host
Of thirty myriads. With command supreme,
With our imperial equipage and state,
Him we invest; to him submission pay
As to our presence. Artemisia, bear
Our sovereign pleasure to the naval chiefs,
That all abandon, ever the dawn return,
Phaleron's port, and hoist their sails to guard
The Hellespont. But thou, entrusted queen,
Thy own tried squadron to Spercheos bring;
Whence thou must waft to Ephesus a charge
Of high import, the children of thy king.
He ceased. A stranger, cased in steel, approached,
In look ferocious, limbs and shape robust,
Of stature huge; the satraps looked amazed,
As were the immortals, when, the Olympian steep
Ascending, grim Briareus first produced
His mountain-bulk, and spread his hundred hands,
Auxiliary to Jove. The warrior stood,
Unbending, far as nature would permit,
His rugged brow; when, crouching to the king,
O Xerxes, live for ever, he began:
I am Euboean Demonax, the prince
Of Oreus late, who earth and water sent,
Acknowledging thy empire; from my throne
By cursed Themistocles expelled, I joined
Thy sheltering fleet; at Salamis I fought.
An aid of troops and treasure can replace
Me thy true vassal, who will soon reduce
The granary of Athens to thy sway,
Euboea, fertile, populous, and rich.
The monarch thus: Mardonius, thou have heard;
Begin to use thy plenitude of power;
Reject or favor at thy will this prayer.
Mardonius then: My sovereign liege, the truth
Flows from his lips; twelve thousand of thy host,
With Mindarus commanding, and of gold
A hundred talents, would be well bestowed
On this important Greek. The king assents;
He rises; all disperse. Mardonius now
Accosts the queen, descending to the port:
Alas! how uncontrollable the will
Of Xerxes! must thou leave me? Since the day
Of Salamis, my best beloved of friends,
Masistius, whether by the waves devoured,
Or slain, or captive, to my search is lost.
Foe to inaction, though composed and wise,
Of courage prone to perilous attempts,
He would embark; permitted by the king,
Against my warm remonstrance would partake
The naval conflict. Drooping, while I doubt
His preservation, must I further lose
Thy fellowship, auspicious, generous queen!
Yet stop, a moment listen. On the march
To Athens first, reposing in a cave,
I had a dream, perhaps a vision saw,
To me presaging glory -- but success
Was wrapped in clouded mystery. My heart
Teems with ill-boding thoughts, yet shall not faint;
At least impart thy wishes ere thou sail'st,
Thy last instructions! Fortunate thy voice,
Benign to me; repeat one parting strain!
If I successful to thy presence bring
The palms of conquest, say, accomplished queen,
Thou will accept them with a gracious hand;
If unsuccessful I the forfeit pay
Of this frail being, as becomes the brave,
Say, thou will praise Mardonius. Sage and grave
She answers: First, despair not to regain
The good Masistius; at the worst endure,
That common lot, the death of dearest friends,
With patience; long thy courage I have praised,
Now moderate the flame against a foe
Not less discreet, than disciplined and bold;
Nor let the gloom of superstition awe
Thy noble ardour. On the sharpest sword,
The strongest arm, on prudence, martial skill,
Not dreams and visions, looks the goddess Fame.
If Artemisia's wishes can avail,
Be sure to prosper, prosp'ring here to soar
Above the flight of Cyrus. -- She departs.
Behind her, like the sinking globe of day,
She leaves a trail of radiance on his soul;
But, to protect him from returning shade,
Her light should never forsake him, never set.
Over generous cares not thus Argestes broods;
Within his tent he meditates concealed;
By struggling pride tormented, thus he strives
To sooth her pangs: I see my power eclipsed;
Mardonius governs. Power, thou fleeting gleam,
Thee I possess no longer; why regret,
When Amarantha's beauty can exchange
Thy thorns for lilies? To my own domain
I will transport her; Sipylus has flowers
To drop perfumes in Amarantha's walk;
Pactolus, Hermus, my subjected streams,
Shall furnish gold; her gems shall India send
To deck that form, and I in pleasure's folds
Forget ambition, stranger to the peace
Which honor yields. Libidinous in thought,
The statesman thus would cheat his baffled pride;
Accursed of men! who borrowed from one vice
His medicine for another (both deform
His ravaged bosom in alternate strife)
Flagitious parent! rivalling in love
His eldest born! prepost'rous passion, big
With horror! while the youngest, loved by all,
By Xerxes favored, to Mardonius dear,
He held in detestation for his worth,
Nor knew the comfort of a virtuous child.
With different thoughts that sleepless youth employed
The night, serenely happy in the charge
Humanity imposed. Before the dawn
His band is armed, Sandauce in her car,
Among innumerable fair the chief
In state and woe. Tears trickle at the sight
Of great Autarctus in his funeral pomp
Down every cheek; a solemn sadness reigns;
So often Aurora, sable-suited, leads
A train of clouds, dissolving as they pass
In silent showers. Through Attica's waste fields,
Through half Boeotia, ere his evening closed,
The second sun conducts them to the gates
Of ancient Thebes. They enter; they ascend
The citadel; they find commanding there,
New from the ruins of unpeopled towns,
Fierce Mithridates. With a kind embrace,
To him the gentle Artamanes thus:
Hail! brother: twice a captive since we last
At Delphi parted, I would gladly know
Thy fortune. Tell me, where that beauteous maid,
Whom thou did carry from the Delphian walls?
The grim Barbarian spoiler, quick replied:
Cursed be her name, her beauty, which could melt
A heart like mine! Accursed my father's lust,
Which seized my captive! Guarded by a troop
Of jealous eunuchs, and attendants armed,
Her in this citadel he still detains.
If I refign her, may Plataea's towers,
May Thespia's hostile walls by me overthrown,
A second time to brave me rise from dust.
Oh! unbecoming strife, the brother cried,
Which startles nature! Thanks to Heaven, the king
Has now decided Amarantha's fate;
Her to his royal sister he has given,
A promised boon. Sandauce, by the foe
Restored to freedom, will requite that grace,
By rend'ring up this damsel to her sire,
Himself a prisoner in Nicaea's fort,
Then both release from bondage. Further know,
In Thebes to morrow Xerxes will appear
On his retreat to Susa. I conduct
This train of eastern dames. By rising dawn
To her protection will the princess take
The Delphian maiden, then proceed. These words
Sting Mithridates; an atrocious deed
He meditates, but artful thus conceals:
Not to my father, to the king I yield.
This said, they parted. Mithridates held
The town; his brother's squadrons lay encamped
Without the walls. The citadel contained
A fane of Juno, there Sandauce rests.
To Oedipus devoted was a dome,
Which Artamanes entered, while his heart
Ran cold and shudder'd at a brother fell,
And treacherous sire, competitors in love;
Abominable strife! His eyes he cast
Over all the structure, lighted by the gleams
Of tapers blue attending; he surveys,
Insculptur'd round, the horrors which befell
The house of Laius; there the ill-fated son
His father slays; incestuous there ascends
His mother's chamber; daughters he begets,
His sisters, sons his brothers; blameless he,
A man of virtues by despair oppressed,
Rends forth his eyeballs, on the pavement dashed.
There sev'n dire captains, leagued by horrid oaths
Which startled Heaven, are figured; down to Hell
Amphiara^us on his martial car,
Through earth's dividing entrails, there descends;
Here Capaneus, blaspheming Jove, expires
Amid vindictive lightnings; mangled there,
Eteocles and Polynices fall,
Each other's victim to fraternal hate.
Full of these hideous images the youth
Reclines disturbed, unvisited by sleep,
Till awful midnight; broken slumber, adds
To his disquiet. In a thrilling dream
The eyeless ghost of Oedipus ascends;
The vacant sockets, where the orbs of sight
Once beamed, are bleeding fresh; a Stygian pall
Infolds the withered, pale, sepulchral form;
The arms are stretched abroad: Forever Thebes
Must thou to horror be the guilty stage!
It said, and vanished. By the phantom waked,
Or by a sudden clash of mingling swords,
With skrieks and tumult, Artamanes rose,
Unsheathed his sabre, gripped his target fast,
And issued swift. Before his startled eyes
A beauteous woman, of majestic form,
In garb disordered, and with ringlets fallen,
Sustains aloft a poinard newly drawn
From Mithridates' heart, who, sinking, breathes
His last beneath her feet. So Phoebe pierced
Orion; so the groaning earth received
His giant bulk, which insolently dared
Attempt that child immaculate of Jove
With violence of love. Now spoke the fair:
If to defend her chastity and fame
Becomes a woman, self approved at least
I stand, great Timon's daughter, from a line
Heroic sprung, in holy Delphi born;
If to have slain a ruffian be a crime
Among the Persians, give me instant death,
Such as becomes my dignity and sex.
Her words, her looks, impressed on every heart
Amaze, and tamed the savages combined
With Mithridates in his impious act.
So when, majestic on the choral scene,
Her tragic pomp Melpomene displays,
In awe profound she hushes rudest minds,
While terror humbles tyrants. Gathered round
Were numbers now; a thousand torches blazed;
Sandauce last, environed by her guard,
Approached alarmed. A wounded eunuch stepped
Before the princess; I will cloth in truth
My voice, he said. Argestes to my care
Entrusted Amarantha; from that lord,
Solicitations, threat'nings, gifts she spurned,
While I admired: Sure virtue has a ray
To strike the meanest eye. Tonight his son
Assailed our dwelling; with my fellow slaves,
All butchered, I defended long my charge,
By Mithridates from the mansion forced;
Her chastity the noble maid has saved,
Her poniard stretched the ravisher in blood.
To Artamanes, weeping over the corse,
Sandauce then: To thy consoling words
I often have listened, listen thou to mine;
Forgive the maid; illustrious is her deed
For every maid to imitate. With me,
Come Amarantha; thou art mine; not long
Shall so continue; at Nicaea's fort
I will restore thee to a joyful sire,
And both to freedom. Morning breaks; the cars,
The troops attend; the royal dame renews
Her progress; seated at her footstool weeps,
In speechless gratitude, the Delphian fair.
By public duty Artamanes roused,
Not long remains. This last farewell he sighs:
Oh! early fallen! Oh! cut from proudest hopes!
Thee, Horomazes, may a brother's tears
For him propitiate! he has none to shed.
These silent ruins to our father show,
Thou faithful eunuch. May he feel like me!
His steed he mounts, and rapidly o'ertakes
The squadrons, opening on Cadmean plains.
Now Amarantha lifts her grateful head,
Intent to speak; but, heavy on the front
Of her protectress, heavier in her breast
Sat grief, each sense devouring, and her frame
Enfeebling; which, too delicately wrought,
Endures not even remembrance of distress
So new, so strange in her exalted state,
To youth untried by evils. She forgets
Her late benignant act, till chance directs
Her eye to Amarantha; when her heart,
Soothed by the conscience of a generous deed,
Her faded cheeks relumines with a smile.
Then spoke the prudent virgin: Persian queen,
(Sure such thou art) what mavelous event
Gave thee a knowledge of my sire, his place
Of residence, and my disastrous fate?
Sense of thy goodness, from my breast would chase
The memory of troubles, if alas!
I did not see thy countenance overcast.
If thou repent thee, of thy favor deem
Me undeserving, send me to abide
The punishment ordained by Persian laws;
But if thy sorrows are thy own, unmixed
With my misfortunes, let assiduous zeal,
Let tenderest service of my grateful hand
Strive to relieve the burdens which oppress
My benefactress. In the captive's hand
Sandauce drops her own; in sighs replies:
O! by thy aspect of superior mold
To all I ever beheld of regal race,
Resembling me in fortune, lend an ear;
My soul conceives a melancholy wish
That thou should hear my story, I to thine
Alternate listen. Mournful converse soon
Between these fairest in their native climes
Began, continued; sev'n diurnal rounds
The sun performed, till intercourse of grief,
Communicated sighs, unite their minds
In tender friendship. Different yet their lots;
On Amarantha's cheek the bloom revives;
A joyful sire, perhaps a dear betrothed,
Her fortune promised. In Sandauce's train
A husband followed on his funeral bier;
Her fleeting hue a sickly paleness taints,
Which Artamanes with a sad'ning eye
Observes, portent of malady. Now rose
The eighth sad morn, revealing to their sight
Nicaea's neighboring gate. Sandauce then
To Artamanes: Take this virtuous maid;
To her my promise, to her father thine
Fulfill; conduct her. Amarantha dear,
From thee I part, rejoicing in thy joy;
Amid thy comforts in a sire's embrace,
Or bliss more tender with a destined spouse,
Forget not me. Autarchus near the tomb
Of Ariana by these widowed hands
Deposited -- She stops; the weakened powers
Of health relax, nor furnish sound to grief:
Mute too is Delphi's maid. The Persian youth,
To leave a moment in her sickening state
The princess, feels a struggle, but resolves
In rapid haste her mandate to obey.
Nicaea's gate he enters; Timon soon
He finds: receive thy daughter, swift he spoke;
Receive thy freedom from the bounteous hand
Of Xerxes' sister; but a short farewell
My urgent cares allow; to set thee free
At thy own time I hasten to enjoin
The chief commander here. He said, and turned
Precipitate away, unheard, unmarked
By Timon, who no other voice nor form
Than Amarantha's heeds. In Carian steel
Now Meliboeus from the gymnic school,
Where he was daily exercised in arms,
Approached; to him in transport Timon spoke:
Behold my daughter! -- Instant from the port
Appears Aronces, who proclaims the news
Of Artemisia landed. She had left
Phaleron; station'd in the Malian bay,
She waits the king's arrival, not remote
Now with his army; all advance to meet
The Carian queen; when sudden clouds of dust
The sky envelop; loud the hollow sound
Of trampling hoofs is heard. The portal passed
By Artamanes faced the southern sun;
An entrance eastward rudely is possessed
By Caspian horsemen, in the hairy skins
Of goats all horrid; round their brawny loins
From shaggy belts keen cimeters depend;
Well-furnish'd quivers rattle on their backs.
Now fifty grim-fac'd savages dismount
To seize on Amarantha. Then his arm
New-train'd to battle Meliboeus proves;
With native strength, agility and fire,
He springs, confronts the Caspians; from the first
He lops the ruffian hand; by different wounds
Five more lie prostrate. As a vessel new,
Compact and strong, impetuous from the dock
In her first launch divides the troubled waves,
On either side recoiling, till the weight
Of reuniting waters stops her course,
And beats her lofty ribs; so valor drives
The warrior on, till rallying numbers joined,
Arrest his progress; fearless yet he stands
A while defensive. Timon from the dead
Lifts two forsaken cimeters; both hands
His indignation arms; he sends to hell
Three miscreants gasping at his daughter's feet.
With aiding Thefeus, so Pirithous heaped
With centaurs slain the Lapithaean hall,
When in flagitious tumult they deformed
The nuptial banquet, and his fair espoused
With violation menaced. But the eye
Of Amarantha marked the unequal fight;
Her poniard drawn, the only succor left,
She holds intrepid, resolute on death,
No second thraldom; when the auspicious sight
Of Caria's queen revives her fainting hopes.
Stern Artemisia, rapid on the call
Of vigilant Aronces, now approached
In awful tone the Caspians: Sheath your blades,
Ye fierce in look, not courage, or this arm
(Her falchion here she waves) shall hide these streets
With your vile carrion. Despicable herd
Of rebels, led by what presumptuous fiend
Dare you invade a fortress of your king,
Even in my presence, he perhaps in sight?
They hear; they pause. Enclosed by thick'ning guards,
In multitude confiding, urged by lust,
Which lends a courage new, Argestes fell,
Inciting loud his ruffians to persist,
Strikes her indignant eye. What wrath, what hopes
Of just, of long-sought vengeance swell her breast!
As when the mother of a lion brood,
From wonted chase returning, sees a wolf,
Or treacherous tiger stealing toward her den,
Who in her absence would securely prey
On her defenseless whelps, her eyeballs roll
In fire, she rushes on the insidious foe
With fangs resistless; he contends in vain,
His chest she rends asunder, and his heart
Devours unsated; so incensed the queen,
Begirt by Carians terrible in war,
To each Barbarian terrible who saw
Their high exploits on Salaminian waves,
Rushed on Argestes; Meliboeus brave
Marched by her side a second, whom the god
Of arms might rank among his foremost sons.
The Caspians shrunk; by desperation bold,
The satrap spurred his courser on the queen,
And whirled a javelin shivering on her shield;
She on the forehead smote the restiff horse,
Who, rearing, hurled his rider to the ground,
Then points her dreadful weapon toward the breast
Of her detested foe, intent to pierce
The traitorous heart. This invocation first
She solemn utters: Manes of the brave!
Whom he devoted on the Malian fields
Unpitied victims of his hate to me,
To you, my subjects, this malignant head
I immolate. Hence satrap, once the chief
In power and state, in vice and falsehood chief,
Seek Rhadamanthus; tell him, while he frowns
On his tribunal, Themis to my hand
Her sword resigned to cut thy treason short.
Her vengeance levels now the mortal blow,
When dignity restrains her. Rise, she said,
Thou criminal, unworthy by this arm
To die; preserve him, Carians, to abide
The ignominous lot, by justice doomed
To common villains. Meliboeus, change
Thy name; I clasp thee Haliartus now,
My brother, proved by gallant deeds; at least
No evidence but virtue I require
For nobler union than congenial birth,
By friendship's sacred ties to call thee mine.
She scarce had finished, when a second troop
Of horsemen through the southern portal spread
New terror. In their front a splendid chief,
Who wears a regal circle; round he casts
A searching eye, impatient soon beholds
Bright Amarantha, where she stands beset
By Caspians, strangers to their leader's fate,
Persisting still in pertinacious strife
Against Aronces, and her manly sire;
Then swift as sulfurous either, when its flame
Divides a knotted oak or cleaves a tower,
Flies on the ruffians: Do ye lift, he cries,
Your hands profane against the destined queen
Of Macedon? a carnage wide he spreads
Beneath his trampling steed and ponderous blade.
Dismounting victor, he unclasps his helm,
Her dear betrothed to Amarantha shows
In Alexander, Macedonia's king.
Never yet so comely, so endearing looked
A lover; rescued from Barbarian spoil
She meets his arms, while Timon weeps in joy.
With Meliboeus, from a stage of blood,
The Carian queen approached, while thus the king
His servent soul was opening: Oh! my love,
My Amarantha! my affianc'd love!
I feel, but cannot paint, my sorrows past,
My present joys. The day, the appointed day
To solemnize our nuptial rites was nigh,
I left my kingdom, flew to Delphi's walls;
Thou wast not there. What horror, when I heard
Thou wast a captive! by what barbarous hand
None could inform me; thence from march to march
I track'd the Persians; tidings of thy fate
No tongue could tell; through Attica I ranged,
Boeotia, Phocis, Doris; Locris still
Was left to search. Disconsolate I joined
The royal camp last evening; there I heard
Of Mithridates by thy virtue slain;
At Thebes, of cursed Argestes, who had held
Thee prisoner there; of thy departure thence
With kind Sandauce to Nicaea's fort;
But further told, that base Argestes led
The Caspian horse forerunners of the host,
Alarmed, my troop I gathered, I pursued,
Am come to save thee, nor one hour withhold
The full protection of my nuptial hand.
The illustrious virgin answered in a figh:
O Alexander, I am thine, thou mine
By sacred vows; yet thou a foe to Greece!
Then Artemisia: Noble maid, I praise
That zeal for Greece, thy country; but forbear
At this momentous crisis to combine
Thy preservation with a public care;
Thou need'st protection both of rank and power.
Few can resist the luster of thy form,
Which, left unguarded through the lawless course
Of war, might light, in others less depraved
Than foul Argestes and his barbarous son,
New flames to burst in violence again.
She ceases; Timon ratifies her words.
A mother's office now the queen performs
In preparation for connubial rites;
Nor old Aronces, nor the acknowledged heir
Of Lygdamis are slow. With human blood
Impure, the streets are cleans'd, the slain removed;
Flowers plucked for chaplets, nuptial torches burn,
The altars smoke with odours, sternest hearts
Grow mild, Bellona's furies sleep forgot,
Her fifes and clarions soften to delight
The ear of Hymen; joy concludes the day.
End of the Eighth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the NINTH.
SOFT rose the morn, and still; the azure flood
In gentle volumes, undisturbed with tides,
But heaved by zephyrs, glazed the pebbled shore;
When Caria's princess, visiting the beach
With Haliartus, and her son beloved,
Her bosom thus disclosed: O brother! friend
In danger tried, not yet are Asia's woes
Complete; to Greece new trophies I forbode.
Oh! soon transported over these hostile waves,
May Artemisia rest her wearied head
At length in peace, and thou, so late redeemed,
With her partake the blessing! Ah! thy looks
Reject the proffer -- yet some reverence bear
To Artemisia, some fraternal love.
How shall I plead? will haughty Greece admit
Thee to her honors, thee in humblest state,
Though meriting the highest, known so long?
Halicarnassus, an illustrious town,
Among her noblest citizens will rank
The son avowed of Lygdamis. O cast
A kindred eye on this my orphan boy!
Who must become his guardian, who supply
My care, should fate precipitate my doom?
Tears down the beard of Haliartus flowed,
Afflicted, though determined. On his hand
Leander hung; the captivating mien
Of Meliboeus had at once allured
The tender youth to entertain belief
In old Aronces, when he first proclaimed
The swain true son of Lygdamis. These words
From Haliartus broke: Thy birth, thy name,
Thy virtues, queen, I reverence; of thy blood
Acknowledged, more ennobled in thy praise,
I feel my elevation; but thy ear
Approving lend. Three suns are now elapsed
Since generous Medon, by a faithful mouth,
Conveyed his promise to redeem my head,
Exchanged for splendid captives, by his arm
In fight acquired; I hourly watch to hail
His peaceful mast, perhaps yon distant keel
Contains his person. To forsake this friend,
Whose kindness blessed my former humble state,
Friend of my childhood, youth, and ripened years,
Would be an act, O thou of purest fame,
To plunge thy brother in the lowest depth
Of human baseness, baseness of the mind,
Thy long-lost brother, found too soon a stain
To Lygdamis and thee. Concluding here,
He eyes the vessel bounding to the port,
With branches green of olive on her head,
Her poop, and mast; the Carian sailors hail
The fair, pacific signal. On the beach
The warrior leaps, when Haliartus cries,
I see my patron! with expanded arms
Flies to embrace him. Medon stops, and speaks:
In splendid mail is Meliboeus cased?
Are these not Persian standards flying round?
Art thou enrolled an enemy to Greece?
No, interposed the queen, behold him free,
To thee, to Greece unchanged, in arms my gift;
He is my brother, brother to the queen
Of Caria. Medon here: Immortal powers!
Do I survey the wonder of her sex,
That heroine of Asia, who alone,
While now the fate of empire balanced hangs,
Contributes virtue to the Persian scale?
My friend to such a sister I resign.
Ah! never, never, Haliartus cried,
Shall thou resign me; nor the Oilean house
Will I forsake; in that beloved abode
I was too happy for aspiring thoughts.
First to redeem thy Locris I devote
These arms; will perish there before thy foes,
If such my fate, if victor in thy ranks,
Hang in thy mansion my reposing shield,
There make my home. Yet often will I court
Thy welcome, princess, on the Carian shore
To worship still thy virtue, on thy son
Still pour the blessings of parental love.
The Carian queen subjoins: I must approve,
To such clear honor yield; bring Timon, call
The king; Time presses, we must all depart;
A sacred Delphian too from bondage freed
Thou shall receive, O Medon. Swift the chief
To disembark his captives gave command;
Five was their number; one beyond the rest
In stature tower'd, his armor was unspoil'd,
Though rich in burnished gold, embossed with gems
Of starry light; his dignity and form
The victors rev'renc'd. Medon to the queen:
These Aristides, at my efforts pleased,
Gave to my choice from numbers; an exchange
For Meliboeus and the Delphian priest
These I designed; my friends thy bounty frees;
Take these unransom'd from a grateful hand.
O liberal man! the Carian princess here:
Thou do produce Masistius; virtuous lord!
How will Mardonius in thy sight rejoice,
How lift his hopes! To her Masistius bowed,
To Medon spoke: O Grecian! if a thought
To die thy debtor could debase my soul,
I should deserve till death all human woes.
Demand, obtain; to Asia I am dear,
Loved by Mardonius, honored by the king,
I cannot ask what either would refuse
To him who gave me liberty and life.
Thou can, rejoins the chief, obtain a grace
To me of precious worth, to Xerxes none;
Nor golden stores nor gems attract my eye;
I have a sister, dearer than the mines
Of Ind, or wealth of Susa, who resides
A priestess pure, on that Oetaean ridge
Which overlooks Thermopylae, her name
Melissa; there an ancient fane is placed,
No splendid seat oracular, enriched
By proud donations, but a mossy pile,
Where every Grecian has from age to age
Adored the muses. Lift thy hand to swear,
Thou will implore of Xerxes a decree,
Irrevocable like a Median law,
Forbidding all to climb that holy crag.
To him Masistius: Not the Delian isle,
By Persians held inviolate of old,
Shall boast of safety like Melissa's hill;
For my performance, lo! I lift my hand
To Horomazes. Thou, returned, salute
Athenian Aristides in my name;
From me, his captive in that direful hour
Of carnage round Psyttalia's bloody strand,
Say, that my thankful tongue will never cease
Extolling his beneficence and thine.
To him far more than liberty and life
I owe; in bondage precious were the hours,
With him the hours of converse, who enlarged,
Illum'd my heart and mind; his captive freed,
I go a wiser, and a better man.
Now with his consort Macedonia's king,
And Timon were in sight; a sad'ning look
Fair Amarantha mute on Timon fixed,
On her the father: We must part, he said;
Alas! too many of thy father's days
Captivity has wasted, sorrow more
Deploring thee, my child, while other Greeks,
Erecting brilliant trophies, have obtained
Eternal praise. Thee, Amarantha, found,
Thee wedded, happy in thy choice and mine,
I quit, my tarnish'd honors to retrieve.
She then: In him a husband I avow
Felicity unstained; in him ally
To Persia's tyrant I am left unblessed.
Malignant fortune still pursues thy child;
Before me holds a consort and a sire
In adverse ranks contending. He rejoins:
I know thee, daughter, like the manliest Greek
The wrongs of Greece resenting, but thy heart
Keep in subjection to a tender spouse
Of constancy approved, whose house with mine,
From eldest times, by mutual tokens passed
In sacred hospitality is linked.
Thy power of beauty never for thyself
Employ, be all compliance; use that charm,
As kind occasion whispers, in behalf
Of Greece alone; by counsel sweetly breathed,
Diffuse remembrance of his Grecian blood
Through Alexander's heart. While these converse
Apart, the keels are launched; now all embark;
Aboard his vessel Medon leads the son
Of Lygdamis with Timon; on her own
Imperial deck the attentive queen disposed
The Macedonian with his beauteous bride,
And Persians freed by Medon, chief of these
Masistius merits her peculiar care;
Confined, Argestes trembles at his doom
From Xerxes' ire. Along thy rocky verge,
Thermopylae, with sails and shrouds relaxed,
Smooth glide the Carian galleys through a calm,
Which over the Malian surface sleeps unmoved,
Unless by measured strokes of sounding oars,
Or foam-besilver'd prows. A royal guard,
Preceding Xerxes, through that dreaded pass
Were then advancing, not in ordered pomp,
As on his march to Athens; now behind
The regal chariot panic fear impelled
On its encumbered wheels disordered throngs,
As if Leonidas had risen and shook
The snaky shield of Gorgon, or his sword,
Stained with Psyttalian havoc, over their heads
The living arm of Aristides waved.
On sight of Oeta Carian's queen relates
To her illustrious passengers the deeds
Which signalized that rock, nor leaves untold
The fate of Teribazus, nor the wound
Of Ariana, victims both to love.
Now, where Spercheos from his spumy jaws
A tribute large delivers to the bay,
They land; Mardonius, passing toward a tent
Magnificent, erected for the king,
Arrived but newly, on his way perceives
Masistius; transport locks his tongue; he flies,
Hangs on his friend, unutterable joy
His tears alone discover. More composed,
Though not less cordial, with a close embrace,
First spoke the late redeemed: Receive thy friend,
Whom wrecked and captive on Psyttalia's isle,
An Attic leader, Aristides named,
Restores unspoil'd, unransom'd, undisgrac'd!
Mardonius quick: Thy unexpected sight,
By an Athenian all unsought restored,
Presages all the good my warmest hopes
Could ever suggest; the omen I enjoy;
For this shall Athens, to my friendship won,
Possess her laws, her freedom, with increase
Of rich dominion. Artemisia then:
Behold, the king of Macedon, his wife
In Amarantha. Wondering at her form,
Exclaims the Persian hero; of one crime
I now acquit Argestes and his son;
What ice of virtue could resist that face!
Again the queen: For other crimes my ship
Detains Argestes; him before the king
To charge, immediate audience we demand.
Mardonius guides them to the royal tent.
With half his chiefs the monarch anxious sat,
His swift departure by the break of dawn
Arranging. Amarantha, in her shape
A deity, among them sudden spreads
A blaze of beauty, like the sun at noon
In dazzling state amidst an either blue
Of torrid climates: admiration loud
Wounds her offended ear. She thus began:
What you admire, ye Persians, O that Heaven
Had never conferred! the cause of woe to me,
Of guilt in others; then a maiden hand
Had never been dipped in slaughter, nor these eyes
Surveyed the pavement of Nicaea strewn
With subjects made rebellious by my fate,
Thy subjects, monarch. With a Caspian troop
Argestes forced thy castle me to seize,
The affianc'd bride of Macedonia's king,
Me, to Sandauce given a royal boon,
Me, then in freedom by the gracious will
Of thy imperial sister. Help, unhop'd
From Artemisia, from my husband came;
Me they preserved, Argestes prisoner bring
To undergo thy justice. Caria's queen
With Macedon's indignant prince confirm
This accusation. On his own retreat
Secure to Susa Xerxes all intent,
Turns to Mardonius: thou be judge, he said;
Take to thyself the forfeits of this crime.
The king commands his servant shall be judge,
Mardonius answered; chief among my foes
Has been Argestes, therefore must not die
By my decree. Let Cyra, fort remote
On Iaxartes hide his banished head;
That care to Artemisia I commit;
His satrapy, his treasure and domain
To Artamanes his remaining son,
Thy meritorious vassal, I ordain.
This judgment passed, a murmur nigh the tent,
Denouncing an ambassador, is heard;
Ambassador of Sparta. Soon appears
The manly frame of Aemnestus bold,
Surpassing all his countrymen in arms,
An Ephorus in office, function high;
Whose jealous vigilance imprisoned kings
Unjust, or impious, or assuming power
Unwarranted by laws. No train attends;
He asks for Xerxes, when Mardonius stern:
Before the future sovereign of the world,
With princes round him, single do thou bring
An embassy from Sparta? Spartans hold
One man with one sufficient in discourse,
Cried Aemnestus. Xerxes interposed:
Reveal thy errand, stranger: He replied.
Admonished by an oracle, the state
Of Lacedaemon, and the race divine
There dwelling, sprung from Hercules, demand
Of thee atonement for a slaughtered king,
Leonidas, whom multitude oppressed,
While he defended Greece; whatever thou giv'st
I will accept. The monarch to his cheek
A show of laughter calls; awhile is mute;
Then, breaking silence, to Mardonius points.
They shall receive the atonement they deserve
From him: Thou hear'st, Mardonius. Then, with looks
Of scorn and menace: Yes, the Spartan said,
Thee I accept my victim to appease
Leonidas; disdainful then his foot
He turns away, nor fears the unnumber'd guard.
Meantime the royal progeny is brought
To Artemisia; urgent time requires,
Their Father's fears the embarkation press
For Ephesus that night. Them down the beach
Mardonius follows, and the Carian queen
In secret thus addresses: Did thou mark
That Spartan's threatening words and haughty mien?
An oracle suggested this demand,
Strange and mysterious. On the martial field
Him I can single from Laconian ranks,
Audacious challenger! but something more
Behind the veil of destiny may lurk
Unseen by me. Mardonius, she replied;
Look only where no mystery can lurk,
On every manly duty; nothing dark
O'ershades the track of virtue; plain her path;
But superstition chosen for a guide,
Misleads the best and wisest. Think no more
Of this, an object like that passing cloud
Before the moon, who shortly will unfold
Her wonted brightness. Prudent thy design
To gain the Athenians; to that noble race
Be large in proffers, in performance true;
Purchase but their neutrality, thy sword
Will, in despite of oracles, reduce
The rest of Greece. This uttered, she embarks.
He seeks his tent, and finds Masistius there,
Whose honor, mindful of a promise pledged,
Requests protection for Melissa's fane.
Him in his arms the son of Gobrias clasped,
Thus fervent answ'ring: Xerxes will renew
His rapid march tomorrow; power supreme
He leaves with me, which instant shall be urged
To render firm the promise of my friend.
Now lend thy counsel on the copious roll
Of Asia's host; assist me to select
The thirty myriads given to my command.
They sat till dayspring; then the camp is moved;
Then Amarantha, from her husband's tent
Ascends a car, and traverses the vale,
By fluent crystal of Spercheos lav'd,
To join Sandauce. On her way she meets
Artuchus, guardian of the Persian fair;
The satrap gazes, courtesy entranced
Forgets awhile her function. Thus, at length,
He greets the queen: Fair stranger, who do rise
A second dayspring to the astonished eye,
Accept my service; whither tends thy course?
Whom do thou seek? and gracious tell thy name.
In rosy blushes, like Aurora still,
She graceful thus: Of Macedonia's king
I am the espoused; my patroness I seek,
Sandauce, issue of the imperial house.
Artuchus answered: Yesternoon beheld
Her languid steps approach this vale of woe.
Thou, beauteous princess, to Sandauce known,
Thou must have heard of Ariana's fate;
Sandauce now is mourning at her tomb,
A grave preparing for Autarctus slain.
May thou suspend despair! Not distant flows
The fount of sorrow, so we styled the place,
Frequented often by Ariana's grief;
There often her head disconsolate she hung
To feed incessant anguish, never disclosed
Unless in sighing whispers to the stream;
Her last abode is there. The myrtles shed
Their odours round, the virgin roses bloom;
I there have caused a monument to rise,
That passing strangers may her name revere,
And weep her fortune; from her early grave
May learn, how Heaven is jealous of its boons,
Not long to flourish, where they most excel.
A marble mansion new erected nigh
Her faithful slaves inhabit; who attune
To thrilling lutes a daily funeral song.
He leads, he stops. On gently-moving air
Sweet measures glide; this melancholy dirge,
To melting chords, by sorrow touched, is heard.
Cropp'd is the rose of beauty in her bud,
Bright virtue's purest mansion is defaced;
Like Mithra's beams her silken tresses shone
In luster gentle as a vernal morn;
Her eye revealed the beauties of her mind;
The slave, the captive, in her light rejoiced.
Lament, ye daughters of Choaspes, wail,
Ye Cissian maids, your paragon is lost!
Once like the fresh-blown lily in the vale,
In Susa fair, in radiancy of bloom
Like summer glowing, till consuming love
Deformed her graces; then her hue she changed
To lilies pining in decay, but kept
The smile of kindness on her wasted cheek.
Lament, ye daughters of Choaspes, wail,
Ye Cissian maids, your paragon is lost!
O ray of wisdom, eye of virtue, formed
To spread superior light, the dazzling brand
Of love malign obscured thy eagle sight;
Thy vital flames are vanished, ours remain,
As lamps to endless mourning in thy tomb,
Till we rejoin thee in a land of bliss.
Lament, ye daughters of Choaspes, wail,
Ye Cissian maids, your paragon is lost!
The song concludes. Sandauce from a bank
Of turf uprises, resting on her slaves;
A pallid visage, and a fainting step,
She brings before the sepulcher and spoke:
O Ariana! listen from thy tomb,
To me in woe thy sister, as in blood!
By different fortunes both were doomed to waste
An early bloom in sorrow; O admit
Autarctus first a neighbor to thy clay,
Me next, who feel my vital thread unwind.
O Heaven! my humble spirit would submit
To thy afflicting hand -- but every fount
Of health is dried; my frame enfeebled sinks
Beneath its trial. When the inhuman priest
Condemned my children to his cruel knife,
The freezing sheers of fate that moment cut
My heart strings; never have they healed again;
Decayed and withered in the flower of life,
My strength deserts my patience: tender friends
Provide another grave. -- For whom? bursts forth
Emathia's queen, and threw her clasping arms
Around the princess; whose discolored hue
In warm affection flushes at the sight
Of Amarantha, as a languid rose,
Shrunk by the rigor of nocturnal frosts,
A while reviving at the tepid rays
Of wintry Phoebus, glows. For me, she sighed,
For me, that bed of endless rest is made.
Come thou, neglectful of thy nuptial bliss,
To poor Sandauce's burial! soon the hour,
When of the sun these sickly eyes must take
Their last farewell, may call thy friendly hand
To close their curtains in eternal night!
These words the Grecian fair, in sorrow tried,
In constancy unshaken, swift returned:
Thou shall not die, avoid this mournful spot,
Thou have accomplished all thy duty here;
Let other duties, wak'ning in thy breast,
Strive with despair; transported in my arms,
To Alexander's capital resort.
Thou shall not die; returning health, allured
By Amarantha's love and tender care,
Again shall bless her patroness, renew
Her youth in bloom, in vigor, never to leave
Her infants doubly orphans. At their name
The princess faints, too sensitive a plant,
Which on the lightest touch contracts the leaves,
And seems to wither in the fold of death.
Her lovely weight Artuchus to his tent
Conveys; a litter gentle, as it moves,
Receives her soon; her children by her side,
In Macedonian chariots are disposed,
Her female slaves and eunuchs. Now appears
Emathia's prince to guard his matchless bride;
In arms complete, resembling Mars, he rules
The fiery courser. Artamanes swift
This royal mandate to Artuchus bears:
The king, O satrap, has begun his march;
Delay not thine with all thy precious charge.
To Artamanes then, the Grecian queen:
Let me request thee in Sandauce's name
To visit yonder fount, of sorrow called,
There see the unfinished obsequies performed,
To great Autarctus due. Her languid head
With me a while at Aegae will repose,
My consort's royal seat; and, gentle youth,
If justice whisper to thy feeling heart,
That well I saved my innocence and fame,
Thou will be welcome to the Aegaean hall.
This said, she mounts her chariot; not unpleas'd,
He to accomplish her command proceeds.
Artuchus now conducts the female train,
Unhappy victims of ambition! These,
A prey to famine, to congealing blasts
From cold Olympus, from Bisaltio hills,
And Rhodope, snow-vested, were condemned,
With that innumerable host in flight
Unformed, unfurnished, scattered, to partake
Of miseries surpassing nature's help.
On earth's unwholesome lap their tender limbs
To couch, to feed on grass, on bitter leaves,
On noisome bark of trees, and swell the scene
Between Spercheos and the distant shores
Of Hellespontine Sestos: real scene
Of death, beyond the massacre denounced
By that stern angel in the prophet's dream,
When were assembled every fowl of prey
From all the regions of the peopled air,
At Heavens dread call, to banquet on the flesh
Of princes, captains, and of mighty men.
End of the Eighth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the TENTH.
NOW is the season, when Vertumnus leads
Pomona's glowing charms through ripened groves
Of ruddy fruitage; now the laden vine
Invites the gathering hand, which treasures joy
For hoary winter in his turn to smile.
An eastern course before autumnal gales
To Ephesus the Carian galleys bend;
While Medon coasts by Locris, and deplores
Her state of thraldom. Thrice Aurora shows
Her placid face; devourer of mankind,
The sea, curls lightly in fallacious calms;
To Medon then the wary master thus:
My chief, the dangerous equinox is near
Whose stormy breath each prudent sailor shuns,
Secure in harbor; turbulent these streights
Between Euboea and the Locrian shore;
Fate lurks in eddies, threatens from the rocks;
The continent is hostile; we must stretch
Across the passage to Euboea's isle,
There wait in safety till the season rude
Its wonted violence has spent. The chief
Replies: An island, Atalante named,
Possessed by Locrians, rises in thy view;
There first thy shelter seek; perhaps the foe
Has left that fragment of my native state
Yet undestroy'd. The obedient rudder guides,
The oars impel the well directed keel
Safe through an inlet opening to a cove
Fenced round by rising land. At once the sight,
Caught by a lucid aperture of rock,
Strays up the island; whence a living stream,
Profuse and swift beneath a native arch,
Repels encumb'ring sands. A slender skiff,
Launched from the ship, pervades the sounding vault;
With his companions Medon bounds ashore,
Addressing Timon: Delphian guest, these steps,
Rude hewn, attain the summit of this rock;
Thence over the island may our wary ken,
By some sure sign, discover if we tread
A friendly soil, or hostile. They ascend.
The topmost peak was chisell'd to display
Marine Palaemon, colossean form,
In art not specious. Melicertes once,
Him Ino, flying from the infuriate sword
Of Athamas her husband, down a cliff,
Distracted mother, with herself immersed
In ocean's salt-abyss. Their mortal state
Neptunian pity to immortal changed;
From Ino she became Leucothea, chief
Among the nymphs of Tethys; he that god
Benign, presiding over the tranquil port,
Palaemon, yielding refuge to the toils
Of mariners sea-worn. One mighty palm
Leaned on a rudder, high the other held
A globe of light, far shooting through the dark,
In rays auspicious to nocturnal keels
Which plough the vexed Euripus. Fair below,
Her cap of verdure Atalante spreads,
Small as a region, as a pasture large,
In gentle hollows varied, gentle swells,
All intersected by unnumber'd tufts
Of trees fruit-laden. Bord'ring on the streights,
Rich Locris, wide Boeotia, lift their woods,
Their hills by Ceres loved, and cities famed;
Here Opus, there Tanagra; Delium shows
Her proud Phoebean edifice, her port
Capacious Aulis, whence a thousand barks
With Agamemnon sailed; a lengthened range
Euboea's rival opulence opposed,
Queen of that frith; superb the structures rise
Of Oreus, Chalcis, and the ruins vast
Of sad Erotria, by Darius crushed.
The Locrian chief salutes the figured god:
Still do thou stand, Palaemon, to proclaim
Oilean hospitality of old,
Which carved thee here conspicuous, to befriend
The sailor night-perplex'd? Thou only sign
Left of Oilean greatness! wrapped in woe
Is that distinguished house! Barbarians fill
Her inmost chambers! O propitious god!
If yet some remnant of the Locrian state
Thou do protect on Atalante's shore,
Before I leave her shall thy image smoke
With fattest victims! Timon quick subjoins:
I see no hostile traces; numerous hinds
Along the meadows tend their flocks and herds;
Let us, descending, and the crested helm,
The spear, and shield, committing to our train,
In peaceful guise salute a peaceful land.
They hear, approving; lightly back they speed;
Disarmed, they follow an inviting path,
Which cuts a shelving green. In sportive laugh,
Before the threshold of a dwelling nigh,
Appear young children; quickening then his pace,
O Haliartus, Medon cries, I see
My brother's offspring! They their uncle knew,
Around him flocked, announcing his approach
In screams of joy: Their sire, Leonteus, came.
As Leda's mortal son in Pluto's vale
Received his brother Pollux, who, from Jove
Derived, immortal, left the realms of day,
And half his own divinity resigned,
His dear-lov'd Castor to redeem from death;
So rushed Leonteus into Medon's arms,
Thus utt'ring loud his transport: Do thou come
To me and these a savior! When that cloud
Of dire invasion overcast our land,
For sev'n defenseless infants what remained?
What for a tender mother? Instant flight
Preserved us; still we unmolested breathe
In Atalante; others like ourselves
Resorted hither; barren winter soon
Will blast the scanty produce of this isle,
Pale famine waste our numbers; or, by want
Compelled, this precious remnant of thy friends,
These rising pillars of the Oilean house
Must yield to Xerxes -- but the gods have sent
In thee a guardian. Summon all our friends,
Elated Medon answers; every want
Shall be supplied, their valor in return
Is all I claim. Meantime, like watchful bees
To guard the invaded hive, from every part
The Islanders assemble; but the name
Of Medon, once divulged, suppresses fear,
And wondering gladness to his presence brings
Their numbers. He, rememb'ring such a scene
Late in Calauria, where afflicted throngs
Around his righteous friend of Athens pressed;
Now in that tender circumstance himself
Among his Locrians, conscious too of means
To mitigate their sufferings, melts in tears
Of joy. O countrymen beloved! he cries,
I now applaud my forecast, which secured
The whole Oilean treasures; safe they lie
At Lacedaemon, whence expect relief
In full abundance on your wants to flow.
Amid his country's ruins Medon still
May bless the gods; by your auspicious aid,
Beyond my hopes discovered, I may bring
No feeble standard to the Grecian camp,
When Athens, now triumphant over the waves,
With her deep phalanx in the field completes
The overthrow of Asia, and restores
Dejected Locris. So to Israel's sons,
Their little ones and wives, by deathful thirst
Amid the parching wilderness oppressed,
Their legislator, with his lifted rod,
Consoling spoke, who, Heaven entrusted, knew
One stroke would open watery veins of rock,
And preservation from a flinty bed
Draw copious down. Leonteus lead the way,
Resumed his brother: versed in arms, my youth,
My prime, are strangers to the nuptial tie;
Yet, in thy bliss delighting, I would greet
A sister, auth'ress of this blooming troop.
With all the clust'ring children at his side
He passed the threshold, and their mother hailed.
Now over their heads the equinoctial gusts
Begin to chase the clouds; by tempests torn,
The hoarse Euripus sends a distant sound.
Twelve days are spent in sweet domestic joy;
Serenity returns. The master warns;
Departing Medon reascends the bark,
Whose rudder stems the celebrated frith,
Where twice sev'n times the sun and stars behold
Reciprocating floods. Three days are passed
When Sunium, Attic promontory, shades
The resting sail; Belbina thence they seek
By morn's new glance, and reach at dewy eve.
Athenian too Belbina yields a port
To night-o'ertaken sailors in their course
Between Cecropia and Troezene's walls.
A squadron there is moored; Cleander there,
Now every public duty well discharged
Dismissed him glorious to his native roof,
Was disembark'd. Contemplating in thought
His Ariphilia, for the day's return
He languish'd; every Nereid he invoked
To speed his keel. Him Medon, landing, greets;
To whom Cleander: On Calauria first
We interchang'd embraces; now accept
A salutation doubly warm, O chief!
By Aristides pris'd, his second bold
In high exploits, which signalize an isle
Obscure before, Psyttalia; be my guest
This night at least: He said; they passed aboard
With Haliartus and the Delphian seer.
A generous meal concluded, Medon spoke:
Troezenian chief, now give the mind repast;
I have been absent long; when first the flight
Of Asia's host and shattered fleet was known,
From Salamis I hoisted sail. To hear
Of Aristides and the laurell'd son
Of Neocles, to hear of all the brave,
Whose high achievements consecrate that day,
From thy narration would delight my soul.
Cleander then began: To council called
By Eurybiades, the leading Greeks
A while debated, if their fleet combined
Should sail to break the Hellespontine bridge?
This he opposed; I readily had joined
The Athenian people, eager by themselves
Without auxiliar Grecians, to pursue
The arrogant invader; but the tribes,
In form assembled, with dissuasive words,
Themistocles thus cooled. I often have seen,
Have oftener heard, that vanquished men, constrained
By desperation, have their loss repaired
In fight renewed. Repelling such a cloud
Of enemies from Greece, contented rest;
The power of gods and heroes, not our own,
Achiev'd the deed; pursue not those who fly.
Resort to Athens; in their old abodes
Replace your women, such obsequious wives,
Such daughters; reinstate your native walls,
Rebuild your ruined mansions; sow your fields,
Prevent a dearth; by early spring unfurl
Your active sails, then shake the eastern shores.
He last proposed, that exiles be recalled.
Loud acclamations rose; the honored name
Of Aristides thundered on the beach.
O wise Athenians! Medon cordial here:
O happy man, whose happiness is placed
In virtuous actions! happiest now a scope
Is given unbounded to thy hand and heart!
Proceed Cleander. He his tale renews:
The Athenians launch their galleys, all embark
With Aristides, chosen to that charge.
I set my ready canvass to perform
The last kind office, from Calauria's isle
And Troezen's walls to waft their wives and race,
Left in our trust. Meantime the different chiefs
Meet on the isthmus, summoned to decide
Who best had served the public, who might claim
The highest honors. Every leader names
Himself the first, but all concurrent own
Themistocles the second. Envy still
Prevails; without decision they disperse,
Each to his home. Themistocles incensed,
In eager quest of honors justly due,
Withheld unjustly, not to Athens bends
His hastening step, but Sparta... Medon here:
Not so would Aristides -- but forgive
My interrupting voice. The youth pursues:
In Athens him I joined, a people found,
Whom fortune never by her frown depressed,
Nor satisfied with favor. Active all,
Laborious, cheerful, they persist in toil,
To heave the hills of ruin from their streets,
Without repining at their present loss,
Intent on future greatness, to be raised
On persevering fortitude: The word
Of Aristides guides. Amidst a scene
Of desolation, decency provides
The funeral pomp for those illustrious slain
At Salamis; the insculptur'd tomb I saw
Preparing; they already have ordained
A distant day to solemnize the rites;
The mouth of Aristides they decree
To celebrate the valiant, who have died
For Athens. While Themistocles accepts
A foreign praise in Sparta, olive crowns,
A car selected from the public store,
A guard, three hundred citizens high-rank'd,
Him through their tracts are chosen to attend,
Excess of reverence, by that rigid state
Never shown before. To small Troezene's walls
Tomorrow I return with less renown,
With less desert, perhaps to purer bliss.
My Ariphilia calls her soldier home
To give her nuptial hand. My welcome guest
You I invite; the season rude of Mars
Is closed; new combats will the spring supply;
The autumnal remnant, winter hovering near,
Let us possess in peace. Then Timon spoke:
Young chief, I praise thee; be a husband soon,
Be soon a parent; thou will bear thy shield
With constancy redoubled. If defense
Of our forefathers, sleeping in their tombs,
So often unsheaths our swords, more strongly sure
The endearing, living objects of our love
Must animate the generous, good, and brave.
I am unworthy of that praise, in smiles
Subjoins the Locrian; but thou know, my friend,
I have a brother, of a copious stream
The source, he, called to battle, shall maintain
Oilean fame. Cleander, I am bound
To Lacedaemon; treasure there I left,
Which, well exchanged for nature's foodful gifts,
I would transport to Atalante's shore,
Seat of that brother; who, Leonteus named,
With brave companions there in refuge lies,
A future aid to Greece. A listening ear
Cleander yields, while Medon's lips unwind
The varied series of events befallen
Himself and Timon, Amarantha fair,
The Carian queen, and Meliboeus changed
To Haliartus. By the immortal gods
We will not separate, fervent cries the youth;
My Ariphilia, who is wise and good,
Will entertain society like yours,
As Aethiopia, in Maeonian song,
Receives to pure and hospitable roofs
Her visitants from heaven. Let youth advise,
Not inexperienc'd, but over land and sea
To early action trained; retaining all
Your narrative heart-piercing, I perceive
Your wants, and feel impatience to befriend;
My lightest keel to Salamis shall bear
Thy orders, Timon, for the Delphian barks,
There left behind you, in Troezene's port
To join you straight. His counsel they accept.
The moon is rising, Salamis not far;
The will of Timon to his Delphian train
Is swiftly borne. The squadron next proceeds,
Passing Troezene by, whose generous chief
Accompanies to shore his Locrian guest
At Cynosura. Spartan is this port,
He said; with fifty followers speed thy way;
Commit no treasure to the faithless winds;
By land return to find thy ready barks,
Well-fill'd from Troezen's stores. They part; he sails
To joyful welcome on his native shores.
When now, unveiling slowly, as she rolls,
Her brother's light the moon reflected full,
Auspicious period for connubial rites,
From Lacedaemon hastening, Medon gains
Troezene's ramparts; him Cleander chose
His paranymph to lead the bridal steps
Of Ariphilia. To Calauria's verge
He passed; beneath a nuptial chaplet gay
He wore his crisped hair; of purest white
A tunic wrapped his sinewy chest and loins,
A glowing mantle, new in Tyrian dye,
Fell down his shoulders. Up the shelving lawn
The high Neptunian structure he attains,
Where with her parents Ariphilia waits
Attired in roses like her hue, herself
As Flora fair, or Venus at her birth,
When from the ocean with unrifl'd charms
The virgin goddess sprung. Yet, far unlike
A maid sequestered from the public eye,
She, early trained in dignity and state,
In sanctity of manners to attract
A nation's reverence, to the advancing chief
In sweet composure unreluctant yields
Her bridal hand, who down the vaulted isle,
Where echo joins the hymeneal song,
Conducts the fair; before the costly shrine,
Perfumed with incense, and with garlands decked,
Presents her charms, and thus in manly prayer:
My patron god, from Salamis I come,
One of thy naval sons, erecting there
Thy recent trophies; let me hence convey
With thy concurrent smile this precious prize,
Thy sacerdotal virgin. I return
To thee a pious votary, to her
A constant lover; on thy servants pour
Thy nuptial blessing. Yet, earth-shaking god,
Not bound in sloth thy warrior shall repose,
Nor languishing obscure in sweetest bliss
Desert thy glory. Soon as wintry storms
Thy nod controls, and vernal breezes court
The unfurling canvass, my unwearied helm
Shall cleave thy floods, till each Barbarian coast
Acknowledge thy supremacy, and bow
To Grecian Neptune. Credulous the train,
Surrounding, in religious rapture see
The colossean image of their god
Smile on their hero, meriting the smiles
Of deities and mortals. Fortune adds
Her casual favor; on Cleander's mast
To perch, a pair of turtle doves she sends
From Neptune's temple. To his vessel crowned
With Hymen's wreaths, bestrewn with herbs and flowers,
Exhaling fragrance, down the slope he guides
His Ariphilia, priestess now no more.
So Hermes, guardian of the Graces, leads
Their chief, Aglaia, over the Olympian hall,
Warned by the muses, in preluding strains,
The dance on heaven's bright pavement to begin,
And charm the festive gods. The flood repassed,
They, as Troezenian institutes require,
The fane of young Hippolytus approach,
That victim pure to chastity, who left
Old Theseus childless. From the youthful heads
Of both their hair is severed, on his shrine
Their maiden offering laid. They next ascend
An awful structure, sacred to the Fates,
There grateful own that goodness which decreed
Their happy union. To the Graces last
Their vows are paid, divinities benign,
Whom Ariphilia fervent thus invokes:
O goddesses, who all its sweetness shed
On human life! whatever is beauteous here,
Illustrious, happy, to your favor owes
Its whole endearment; wanting you, our deeds
Are cold and joyless. In my husband's eye
Preserve me lovely, not in form alone,
But that supreme of graces in my sex,
Complacency of love. She prayed; her look
Revealed, that heaven would ratify her prayer.
Now in her father's dwelling they remain
Till dusky evening. On a bridal car,
Constructed rich, the paranymph then seats
The blooming fair; one side Cleander fills,
The other Medon, she between them rides,
By torches clear preceded. Lively sounds
The ceremonial music; soon they reach
The bridegroom's mansion; there a feast receives
Unnumber'd friends; the nuptial dance and song
Are now concluded. To her fragrant couch
A joyful mother lights the blushing bride;
Cleander follows; in the chamber shut,
He leaves the guests exulting to revive
Their song to Hymen, and renew the dance.
Three days succeeding were to gymnic feats
Devoted; Medon's warlike spear obtains
A second chaplet; Haliartus won
The wrestler's prize; to hurl the massy disk
None matched the skill of Timon, still robust,
Though reverend threads of silver had begun
To streak his locks of sable. Southern gales
Now call on Medon's laden fleet to sail,
Ere winter frowns. With Timon at his side,
And Haliartus, in this gentle phrase
His noble host and hostess fair he greets:
May every joy kind wishes can devise,
Or language utter, hospitable pair,
Be yours for ever! may a numerous race
In virtue grow by your parental care! --
With sev'n dear pledges of connubial love
I left a brother, watching my return
In Atalante, small, exhausted isle,
Which needs my instant succor. Generous friend,
To thee I trust my treasure, thou discharge
The claim of Troezen for the abundant stores
Which load our vessels; for a time farewell,
The vernal sun will see our love renewed,
And swords combined against Mardonius bold.
He said: the lovely Ariphilia weeps;
Cleander sighs, but speeds his parting guests.
End of the Tenth Book.

