THE ATHENAID. A POEM.

VOL. II.

THE ATHENAID, A POEM,

BY THE AUTHOR OF LEONIDAS.

VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND. M.DCC.LXXXVII.

THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the ELEVENTH.
THE unloosen'd anchors to the waves resign
The Delphian keels, while Auster's friendly breath,
Their burden lightning, soon to Sunium shows
The spreading sails. Two vessels, riding there,
Receive embarking warriors. On the beach
Looks Medon steadfast: By almighty Jove,
He cries aloud, Themistocles I see!
O Haliartus, O my holy friend,
We must not leave unvisited a shore
Which holds that living trophy to our view,
The victor-chief at Salamis. The skiff
Is launched; they land. Themistocles begins
The salutation: Hail! Oileus' son,
Thou reverend host of Athens, Timon, hail!
Your unexpected presence here excites
A pleasing wonder. Whither do ye steer
These well remembered vessels, which conveyed
Thee, first of Locrians, with our Attic bard,
To Salamis from Delphi? In that course
Was Timon captive made, whom freed at last
My joyful arms embrace. The Locrian here:
To Atalante, in Euboean streights,
We steer; another of Oilean race,
Through bounteous Heaven a refuge there obtains,
My brother, good Leonteus, with a band
Of gallant Locrians, ready at my call
To lift their bucklers in defense of Greece.
But why, remote from Athens, on the strand
Of naked Sunium, do I see the son
Of Neocles, so recently by me
At Sparta left? Themistocles replies:
Forbear enquiry now, O virtuous branch
Of that ennobled stock, the Oilean house!
If ever my conduct merited thy praise,
If thou believ'st me studious of the fame
Which follows manly deeds, forbear to doubt
The unwearied further efforts of my limbs,
My heart, my talents: Secrecy matures,
Time brings the labor of the mind to birth.
Were those first steps revealed, which restless thought,
Constructing some vast enterprise, ascends,
How wild a wanderer, Medon, would appear
The policy of man! But, generous chief,
Whose valor, whose experience might assure
A prosperous issue to a bold exploit,
Say, should I open on some future day
To thy discerning sight the clearest track,
Where to success one glorious stride might reach,
Would thou be ready at my call? He paused.
From such a mouth, such captivating words
Insinuate sweetness through the Locrian's ear,
Who feels the allurement; yet, by prudence ruled,
This answer frames: Through such a glorious track
Whoever guides, may challenge Medon's aid;
Thou prove that guide, my steps shall follow close,
Unless by Aristides called, whose voice
Commands my service. Cool the Athenian hides
The smart his wounded vanity endures,
And manly thus, unchanged in look, rejoins:
I ask no more; I rest my future claim
On Medon's valor, only to support
What Aristides shall approve, farewell.
Avail thee straight of these propitious winds;
In Atalante, known to me of old,
What force thou can, assemble; dread no wants,
I will be watchful to supply them all.
They part. Now Medon, under hoisted sails,
Remarks unwonted transport on the cheek
Of Haliartus. O my peasant weeds,
His joy exclaims, how gratefully you rise
In my remembrance now! From you my hopes
Forebode some benefit to Greece. Dear lord,
Forbear enquiry; by yon hero warned,
In secrecy my thoughts, till formed complete,
Lie deeply buried. Timon smiled, and spoke:
I know, full often enterprises bold
Lie in the womb of mystery concealed;
Thus far the Athenian hero and thyself
Raise expectation; but I further know,
His faculties are matchless, thou art brave,
Unerring Medon like my god is wise;
Thence expectation soars on steady wings.
O light of Greece, Themistocles, exert
Thy boundless powers! mature thy pregnant plan!
Whenever the glorious mystery unveils,
Me and my Delphians thou shall find prepared.
The turbulent Euripus swift they plough
In pleasing converse thus, and clasp, in hope,
Their anxious friends on Atalante's shore.
When every mast was hid by Sunium's cape,
Thus to his faithful minister, the son
Of Neocles: Sicinus, have thou seen
My followers on board? The treasures brought
From Xerxes, those my spoils of war supply,
The arms, the stores, Sicinus, has thy care
Deposited in safety? Yes, replies
The entrusted servant. Now thyself embark,
His lord enjoins, who, musing thus, remains:
If my attempt to further I have won
This gallant Locrian, frankly I confess
My debt to fortune; but this casual boon
I can forego, if wantonly her hand
Resumes; Themistocles alone can trace
A path to glory. Toward the land he turns,
Proceeding thus: Now, Attica, farewell,
A while farewell. To thee, Barbarian gold,
Themistocles resorts; my bosom guest,
Whom Aristides in disdain would spurn,
By thee, O gift of Xerxes, I will raise
The weal of Athens, and a fresh increase
To my own laurels. Uncontrolled, supreme
Is Aristides. He the Attic youth
In phalanx bright to victory may lead;
Minerva's bird Xanthippus may display
To Asia, trembling at their naval flag;
A private man, Themistocles will reach
Your summits, fellow citizens, preferred
To his command. Ye chosen heroes, wait
For breezy spring to wanton in your sails,
Then range your vigorous files, and pampered steeds;
Themistocles, amid septentrion snows,
Shall rouse despair and anguish from their den
Of lamentation; poverty shall blaze
In radiant steel; pale misery shall grasp
A standard. Athens, thy rejected son
Extorted aid from tyranny shall draw
On his own greatness to establish thine.
Swift he embarks, like Neptune when he mounts
His rapid conch to call the tempests forth,
Upturn the floods, and rule them when they rage.
The third clear morning shows Eretria's port,
Among Euboean cities once superb,
Eretria now in ashes. She had joined
The Athenians, bold invaders, who consumed
The capital of Lydia, to revenge
Ionian Greeks enthralled. Eretria paid
Severe atonement to Hystaspes' son,
Incensed Darius. To a Cissian plain,
A central space of his unbounded realm,
Far from their ancient seat, which flames devoured,
He her exterminated race confined,
Sad captives, never to revisit more
Their native isle. A silent wharf admits
Themistocles on shore, a void extent,
Where sons of Neptune heretofore had swarmed.
No mooring vessel in the haven rode,
No footstep marked the ways; sole inmates there,
Calamity and horror, as enthroned,
Sat on o'erwhelming ruins, and forbade
The hero passage, till a seeming track
Presents, half buried in surrounding heaps
Of desolation, what appears a dome,
Raised to some god. Themistocles observes
A shattered porch, whose proud supporters lie
In fragments, save one column, which upholds
Part of a sculptured pediment, where, black
By conflagation, an inscription maimed
Retains these words, "To eleutherian Jove."
The Athenian enters, followed by his train
In arms complete. Excluded was the day
By ruins pil'd externally around,
Unless what broken thinly-scatter'd rays
Shot through the encumbered portal. Soon they stand
Amidst obscuring dusk in silence all,
All motionless in wonder, while a voice,
Distinct in tone, delivers through the void
These solemn accents: Eleutherian god!
Since no redeemer to Eretria fallen
Thy will vouchsafes, why longer do thou keep
Thy aged servant on a stage of woe?
Why not release him? why not close his eyes,
So vainly melting over his country lost?
Ten years are fled; the morning I have hailed
In sighs alone; have laid my head on thorns
Of anguish, nightly visited in dreams
By images of horror, which employ
Each waking moment. To have seen destroyed
From their foundations my paternal streets,
The holy structures burn, a people forced
In climates new and barbarous to dwell,
Was sure enough to suffer -- It is time
To give my patience rest. The plaintive sound
Draws on the Athenian, who perceives a gleam,
Pale-quiv'ring over a solitary lamp;
Perceives a reverend sire, resembling Time,
Down to whose girdle hangs the snowy fleece
Of wintry age. Unawed his lamp he raised;
A dim reflection from the polished arms
Revealed the warrior, whom he thus bespake:
Whatever thou art, if hostile, or a friend,
A god, a mortal, or a phantom vain,
Know, that my state no change can render worse,
All change make better. Father, soft replied
The advancing chief, take comfort, I am come
Thy country's savior; follow, in the day
See who I am. Between the opening band
He leads the senior through the dusky porch,
Whom he accosts before the unclouded sun,
Then vertical: Rest, father, and behold
Themistocles of Athens. While the priest,
So by his fillet sacerdotal known,
In wonder paused, the artificer divine
Of wiles to catch the sudden turns of chance,
Frames in a momentary cast of thought
This bright device of fiction to allure
A holy mind. O worthy of the god!
Thou servant pure of Jupiter! I mourn,
Like thee, Eretria, not like thee despond.
Attend, thou righteous votary to heaven!
I, from the day of Salamis o'ertoil'd,
While courting slumber, in a vision saw
The sapient issue of the almighty sire,
His best beloved Minerva. Still the sound
Of her gorgonian shield my ears retain,
While earnest, striking on its rim her spear,
The virgin warrior spoke: Triumphant son
Of Neocles, remember in thy joy
The miseries of others. Go, redeem
Eretria fallen, whose noble remnant armed
Sev'n ships, exhausting all their slender stores,
To fight for Athens on this glorious day.
As from the sooty gate of direful Dis
Delivered Theseus, when to cheering day
He reascended, on Alcides looked,
Who for his loved companion pierced the gloom
Of Erebus; the Eretrian's grateful eyes
Thus on the son of Neocles were fixed,
In ecstacy of joy. These fervent words
He uttered: Heaven has given thee to destroy
Presumptuous foes, O favored by the gods!
Who give thee now to save despairing friends;
That, all-rejoicing in thy trophies new,
Great as thou art, thy generous soul may prove,
How far beyond the transports conquest yields,
Are those resulting from benignant deeds.
More grateful, chief, is charity's sweet voice,
Than Fame's shrill trumpet, in the ear of Jove,
Who will, on such humanity as thine,
Accumulate his blessings. If my name
Thou never have heard, or, hearing, have forgot,
Know, that from liberal Cleobulus sprung,
I am Tisander. Interrupting swift
The Athenian here: Thy own, thy father's name,
To me, illustrious pontiff, well are known.
My recent banner in the summer's gale
Thou must remember on the Eretrian coast.
Eretrian warriors under Cleon's charge,
In ships by me supplied, undaunted fought
At Artemisium, and an earnest gave
Of their late prowess. From their chief, from all
Thy celebrating countrymen, I heard
Of thee Tisander, and thy name retain;
Proceed. To him the priest: Flow first my tears!
Of that brave band whatever now remains
Have naught but prowess left. Alas! how few
Escaped thy fell, exterminating hand,
When treachery surrendered to thy power,
Darius! Sons of husbandry lay hid
In woods and caverns; of the nobler class
Some on the main were absent. Priest of Jove
I was released; a pious, beardless prince,
Named Hyperanthes, on my rank and years
Looked with compassion; living, I extol,
My dying breath shall bless him. I have dwelt
Within my temple, mourning over this waste.
Here, annually collected (Lo! the day
Of that severe solemnity is nigh)
The unhappy relics of Eretrian blood
Accompany my tears. Thou know, they sailed
At thy appointment, on Athenian decks,
They and the men of Styra from that port
For Salamis. In glory they returned
To want and horror, desert found their land,
Their crops, their future sustenance destroyed,
Their huts consumed, their cattle swept away,
Their progeny, their wives; flagitious act
Of Demonax, in Oreus late replac'd,
Her tyrant foul, a slave to Xerxes' throne,
His scourge in rich Euboea, half-reduc'd
To this dire monster's sway, by royal aid
Of endless treasure, and Barbarian bands.
Such is our state. Too scanty are the means
Of willing Styra to relieve such wants;
Our wealthier neighbors of Carystus vend,
Not give; in hoarded grain, in flocks and herds
Abounding, them a sordid chief controlls,
Nicomachus. An oligarchy rules
Geraestus small, but opulent -- O Jove!
I see brave Cleon yonder; from his head
He rends the hair -- what gestures of distress!
He beats his troubled bosom, wrings his hands!
Not heeding great Themistocles, he points
On me alone a wild distracted look!
Say Cleon... Swift, with shivering lips and pale,
The Eretrian leader, interrupting, vents
His tortured thoughts: Tisander, can thy prayers
Repel grim famine, rushing on the blast
Of barren winter? Three disastrous days
Will lay the combatants for Greece in dust,
Behind them leaving nothing but a name
For Salamis to publish. Lo! they come,
A dying people, suppliant to repose
Within thy fane their flesh-divested bones.
Yet such a tomb, their fainting voices cry,
May those Eretrians envy who are doomed
To lodge their captive limbs in Asia's mold.
He ends in sighs. Behold, a ghastly troop
Slow through the ruins of their native streets
In languid pace advance! So gathering shoals
Of ghosts from hour to hour through endless time,
The unrelenting eye of Charon views,
By sickness, plague and famine, by the sword,
Or heart-corroding sorrow, sent from light
To pass the black irremeable floods
Of Styx. Cecropia's hero cast a look
Like Phoebus heav'nly-gentle, when, atoned,
The infectious air he cleared, awak'ning gales
To breathe salubrious over the enfeebled host
Of Agamemnon, as from death they rose
Yet to assert their glory. Swift the chief
Bespake Sicinus: Haste, unlaid the ships;
Three talents bring; they, Cleon, shall be thine;
Seek those in every part who vend, not give.
The gifts of Ceres in profusion bear,
The gifts of Pan, the grape's reviving juice,
To these, my fellow warriors, who have seen
My banner streaming, twice have lent their aid
To my renown; meantime our naval food
Shall be their portion; vesture now shall cheer
Their limbs. My brave companions, I have brought
The spear and buckler for your manly hands;
Your strength restored shall feel the glorious weight
Of crested helms. Tisander, let them rest
Within thy sheltering temple, not to sink
Beneath distress, but vigorous soon renew
Their practiced race of honor. Pass, my friends,
Be mute; expression of your joy I wave;
Again tomorrow you and I will meet.
Tisander, happy, entertains his guests,
Twelve hundred countrymen, the last remains
Of populous Eretria. Plenty's boon
Alert the Attic mariners diffuse
To all, and cordial tend their wants; discreet
Sicinus curbs excess. The tidings brought
Of his performance from a short repast
Dismissed his lord applauding; who serene,
Stretched on his naval pillow, slept till dawn.
He rose. To him Sicinus: Will my lord
Permit his servant, with an active band
Of sailors, these obstructions to remove,
Or so dispose, that feeblest steps may find
A passage free to good Tisander's fane;
That through its wonted apertures, the round
Of that huge pile, where Jupiter should dwell,
Now dark as Pluto's palace, may admit
The light of heaven? Yet further, we must search
For coverts dry, if such the greedy flames
Have left among these ruins, to secure
The various stores, which Cleon may transport.
To him his lord: Go, monitor expert,
Accomplish what thou counsel'st. Toward the fane
Himself not slow proceeds. Before the front,
On scattered fragments of their ancient homes,
The Eretrians, pale with long-continu'd want,
Are seated. Thick as winter-famish'd birds
Perch on the boughs, which icicles encrust,
Yet chirp and flutter in the attemp'ring sun,
These, at the hero's presence, wave their hands,
Unite their efforts in acclaim not loud,
But cordial, rather in a general sigh
Of gratitude. The charitable care
Of his best warriors, some of noblest birth,
Impart their help, like parents to a race
Of tender infants. Onc f might approved
In battle, hardiest of the naval breed,
The Eretrians, worn by hunger, scarce retain
The slender powers of childhood. One by one
Themistocles consoles them, and devotes
In condescension sedulous the day
To kindness not impolitic. In these
His piercing genius fit materials saw
To build another structure of renown.
Ere he retires, Tisander thus he greets:
Will thou, O father! on my board bestow
An evening hour? My moments all belong
To this yet helpless people, said the priest.
Such pious care through me shall heaven reward,
Exclaims the chief, as round him he remarks
The toiling sailors; soon, thou guardian good
Of wretched men committed to thy charge,
Soon shall thy temple reassume its state.
Prepare an altar; Hecatombs again
Shall smoke ere long, Eretria cast aside
Her widowed garb, and lift her festive palms
To eleutherian Jove. This uttered, swift
He seeks his vessel, while the sun descends.
Calm, as in summer, through an either clear
Aurora leads the day. A cheerful sound
Of Oxen, lowing from the hollow dales
Which toward Carystus wind, of bleeting sheep,
Yet nearer driven across the Eretrian plain,
Awake Themistocles. His couch he leaves,
Revisiting the temple; there enjoys
The general transport. Plenty on the wing
Is nigh, the comforts of her fruitful horn
To pour on desolation. Cleon comes,
Accosting thus Themistocles: My task
Is well accomplished through the liberal zeal
Of Hyacinthus near a youth unlike
His sire Nicomachus. That subtle chief
Of our Carystian neighbors is behind,
Escorting laden carriages of grain,
Thy purchase; naught his sordid hand bestows.
He, curious more than friendly in our need,
Or of thy name respectful, to explore,
Not help or pity, hither bends his course.
Conduct the father to my ship, replied
Themistocles; sure yonder is the son,
Thou have described; ingenuous are his looks.
Like him, whose name he bears, his beauteous form
Might charm the beaming god once more to court
A mortal's friendship; but, dejection pale
O'ercasts his hue; strange melancholy dims
His youthful eye; too modest, or unmann'd
By languor, child of grief, he stops and bows
In distant, seeming awe, which wounds my soul.
I must salute him: Noble youth, receive
My hand; Themistocles of Greece expects
No such obeisance from a fellow Greek.
The majesty of Athens might exact
That conquered tyrants, in my presence brought,
Low as the dust should crouch beneath her chief.
A start of anguish Hyacinthus gave
At these last words, then silent bowed again
His decent brow; not awe, but latent ills
Seemed to control his tongue. The observant chief
Defers enquiry to its season due,
To Cleon's charge consigns him, and retires
To his own galley. Waiting for the sire,
He meditates a moment on the son:
I see advantage in this youth's distress --
My plan is formed. He hastens to unbar
His copious treasure; thence in dazzling show
He spreads four silver talents on his board,
Over them a mantle throws, and brief again
Thus ruminates: Now, Plutus, who can sap
The strong-bas'd tower, and soften rigid hearts,
Smile on this juncture. Aristides scorns
Thy deity, Themistocles invokes
Thy precious succor. From profoundest woe
Disconsolate Eretria thou have raised;
Now by a sordid instrument give life
To dull Carystus. Sudden in his view,
By Cleon brought, who instantly withdraws,
Nicomachus appears, and thus begins:
The Salaminian victor I salute,
Charged by Carystus; happy is my lot
To venerate the chief, and touch the hand
Which humbled Asia. Does Euboea see
Thee visitant illustrious to rebuild
Eretria? then instruct her to confine
That power and pride, her neighbors felt of old.
The Athenian here: Euboea sees me come
Both to upraise, Carystian, and depress;
But to exalt thy state, my friend, I wish,
Wish thy possessions equal to thy worth.
Behold! Uplifting to the greedy eye
Of avarice the mantle, he pursues;
Behold, four silver talents! Them accept,
Which in this casket to thy trusted slaves
I will deliver now; I only ask
Of thy deep-founded influence to warm
Supine Carystus: For thyself and Greece
Unite with mine thy standard. Further note,
If at my summons thou produce in arms
Thy citizens auxiliar, from this hand
Expect four added talents; but the hopes
Of no unpracticed leader, who perceives
His enterprise assured, dare promise more,
A share, Nicomachus, of spoil in war,
To pass thy own belief. By present gain,
By more in promise, not by glory fired,
Nicomachus rejoins: A thousand spears
Shall wait thy earliest notice. While he spoke,
He snatched the casket, shut the treasure close,
Then rushed to seek his confidential slave,
Who takes the precious charge. With placid looks
The cool the politic Athenian sat
Like some experienced pilot, who serene,
In skilful guidance of the steady helm,
Enjoys the favor smooth of gale and tide,
Combined to waft over ocean's fickle breast
His gliding keel, and lodge her costly freight
Secure at length in harbor. Now he spoke
To his re-ent'ring guest: Carystian friend,
Thou have a son, well-disciplin'd to war,
Brave, liberal, wise, I doubt not; will thou trust
To my society a while his youth?
He is the object of my vows to heaven,
Nicomachus exclaims, in passion feigned,
My soul's delight, the rapture of my eye!
If he were absent, every hour my age
Would feel a growing burden. Come, rejoins
The Athenian, him I only would detain
My messenger of order to thy walls;
On him another talent would bestow.
The gymnic school and letters, cries the sire,
He follows, heeds not treasure; by his hand
Send me the talent; never let him know
The charge he bears. This said, he loudly calls
To Hyacinthus, who had gained the deck,
Him entering thus addresses: Son, the chief
Of Athens, great Themistocles, demands
Thee for companion. As a casual gleam
Breaks through the unrav'lling texture of black clouds,
Which long on winter's sullen face have hung;
So darts a ray of gladness through the gloom
Of Hyacinthus, by the Attic chief
Not unobserved. Intent on swift return,
The exulting father bids to both farewell.
Remaining day Themistocles employs
Among his sailors in the Eretrian streets,
Inspects the necessary toil pursued
With unremitted vigor, then retires
To due refection. Cleon is a guest
With Hyacinthus, still by grief devoured
Which all his efforts strive in vain to hide.
Her heavy wing no sooner night outspreads,
Than to Sicinus they are given in charge,
While to his couch Themistocles repairs.
End of the Eleventh Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the TWELFTH.
NOW in the zodiac had the sun o'erpass'd
The tenth fair sign. The new succeeding month,
Though not by Flora, nor Vertumnus decked,
Nor green in hue, though first of winter's train,
Often with unsullied skies irradiate cheers
The prone creation, and delights mankind.
The birds yet warble on the leafless sprays,
The placid surface, glazed by clearest light,
In crystal rivers, and transparent lakes,
Or ocean's smooth cerulean bosom, shows
The finny tribes in play. The active son
Of Neocles uprises, and descries
A dawn which promised purity of air,
Of light and calmness, tempting sloth herself
To action. Thus he roused his native fire:
Of this kind season not a moment lose,
Themistocles. Sicinus ever nigh
He called: Provide two receptacles sure,
Each to contain twelve talents; bring my arms,
Produce a second suit, resembling mine;
Send Hyacinthus; let my chosen band
Of Attic friends, and Sparta's fifty youths,
My followers, be ready for a march.
Soon Hyacinthus enters; still he shows
The perturbation of a mind oppressed
By some concealed misfortune, while, beneath
The shade of sorrow, on his front appeared
Excelling graces. Him the chief bespake,
Gay in his look, and sprightly in his tone:
Her eastern hill, behold, the morning mounts
In radiance, scattered from the liquid gems
On her loose mantle; but the heart of youth
In every season should rejoice, in clouds
Not less than sunshine, whether nature's voice
Be hoarse in storms, or tune to whispering gales
Her vernal music. Sharp some inward grief,
When youth is sad; yet fortune often deceives
The inexperienc'd by imagined ills,
Or light, which counsel of the more mature
Can lightly heal. Unlock thy liberal mind;
To me, a guardian pregnant of relief
Beyond thy father, countrymen, or friends,
Impart thy cares. The sighing guest replied:
To thy control my service I devote,
O scourge of tyrants, but retain my grief!
Which thou, O first of mortals, or the king
Of high Olympus, never can redress.
Sicinus interrupts; his lord's commands
Are all accomplished. Now, Carystian friend,
Resembling me in stature, size and limbs,
The son of Neocles proceeds, accept
That suit of armor; I have tried it well;
Receive a shield familiar to my arm.
He next instructs Sicinus: Thou receive
Twelve talents; hasten to the neighboring walls
Of stately Chalcis, populous and rich,
Queen of Euboean cities, in whose port
The twenty ships of Athens yet remain,
Which Chalcis borrowed, and equipped for war.
Of her bold race four thousand we beheld
Distinguished late in Artemisium's fight,
At Salamis yet later. First approach
The new-made archon in a rev'rent style,
Timoxenus most potent in that state,
A dubious, timid magistrate, unlike
Nearchus. Cordial salutation bear
To him, my brave associate; do not turn
Thy back on Chalcis, till thy prudence brings
Intelligence of weight; the Athenian keels
With grain abundant and materials lade,
That friendly roofs the Eretrians may obtain,
Before grim winter harrow up these streights
Unnavigable soon. This said, he arms;
Begirt by warriors, to the temple speeds,
And greets the priest: In gladsome thought I see
The goddess Health, white-handed, crimson-cheek'd,
As from a silver car in roseate ^uds
Look on thy people; dropping on their lips
Restoring dew, she bids them taste and live.
The convalescent piously employ
In labors, where my naval band shall join,
To free the encumbered temple, to repair,
To cover dwellings, lest the winter bring
New hardships. Martial exercise I leave
To Cleon's care, while ten revolving suns
Of absence I must count. Now, father, take
This hand, a hand which fortune and thy god
Have ever favored, which shall soon convert
The annual day of mourning in thy fane
To festival solemnity of joy.
Blessed by Tisander, rapid he departs.
Young Hyacinthus follows, who in arms,
Once by his patron worn, to every eye
Presents a new Themistocles, but such,
As when the allurement of his early bloom
He, not unconscious of the charm, displayed
To Attic damsels. Cloudless on their march
Apollo shoots a clear and tepid ray;
A scattered village in Carystian bounds
To rural hospitality admits
The wearied warriors. Hyacinthus guides
His great protector to a sheltering fane
Of Juno, styled connubial; stately round
Old beech extend a venerable shade;
Through ages time had witnessed to their growth,
Whose ruddy texture, disarray'd of green,
Glows in the purple of declining day.
They pass the marble threshold, when the youth
With visage pale, in accents broken spoke:
Unequalled man, behold the only place
For thy reception fit; for mine... He paused;
A gushing torrent of impetuous grief
Overwhelmed his cheeks; now starting, on he rushed,
Before the sacred image wrung his hands;
Then sinking down, along the pavement rolled
His body; in distraction would have dashed
His forehead there. Themistocles prevents,
Uplifts, and binds him in a strong embrace;
When thus in eager agony the youth:
Is not thy purpose, godlike man, to crush
The tyrant Demonax, in torture cut
The murderer short, that he may feel the pangs
Of death unnatural? Young man, replies
The Athenian grave, to know my hidden thoughts,
Do thou aspire, retaining still thy own?
Still in my presence thy distemper drinks
The cup of misery concealed, and seems,
Rejecting friendship's salutary hand,
To court the draught which poisons. Can thou hope,
Mysterious youth, my confidence, yet none
Wilt in Themistocles repose? His look,
His tone, in feigned austerity he wrapped,
So Aesculapius bitter juice applied
From helpful plants, his wisdom had explored,
The vehicles of health. In humble tears,
Which melted more than flowed, the mourner thus:
Forgive me, too regardless of thy grace;
Of all forgetful, save itself, my grief
Deserves thy frown, yet less than giddy joy,
Which, grown familiar, wantons in the smile
Of condescension. Ah! that grief will change
Reproof to more than pity; will excite
A thirst for vengeance, when thy justice hears
A tale -- Unfold it, interposed the chief,
To one who knows the various ways of men,
Has studied long their passions and their woes,
Nor less the medicines for a wounded mind.
Then Hyacinthus: Mighty chief, recall
Thy first successes, when Euboea's maids
Saw from her shores Barbarian pendants low'r'd
To thine, and grateful plucked the flowers of May
To dress in chaplets thy victorious deck.
Then, at thy generous instigation fired,
The men of Oreus from their walls expelled
Cursed Demonax, their tyrant. On a day,
Ah! source of short delight, of lasting pain!
I from the labor of a tedious chase,
O'erspent by thirst and heat, a forest gained.
A rill, meandring to a green recess,
I track'd; my wonder saw a damsel there
In sumptuous vesture, couched on fragrant tufts
Of camomile, amid surrounding flowers
Reposing. Tall, erect a figure stern
Was nigh; all sable on his head and brow,
Above his lip, and shadowing his cheeks
The hair was brisled; fierce, but frank his eye
A grim fidelity revealed; his belt
Sustained a sabre; from a quiver full
On sight of me an arrow keen he drew,
A well-strung bow presented, my approach
Forbidding loudly. She, upstarting, waked.
My aspect, surely gentle when I first
Beheld Cleora, more of hope than fear
Inspired; she craved protection -- What, ye fates!
Was my protection -- O superior man,
Can thy sublimity of soul endure
My tedious anguish! Interposing mild
The Athenian here: Take time, give sorrow vent,
My Hyacinthus, I forbid not tears.
He now pursues: her suppliant hands she raised,
To me astonished, hearing from her lips,
That Demonax was author of her days.
Amid the tumult his expulsion caused,
She, from a rural palace, where he stored
Well known to her a treasure, with a slave
In faith approved, with gold and gems of price
Escaped. All night on fleetest steeds they rode,
Nor knew what hospitable roof to seek.
My father's sister, Glauce, close behind
This fane of Juno dwelt, her priestess pure,
My kindest parent. To her roof I brought --
O Glauce what -- O dearest, most revered!
To thee I brougnt Cleora! Horror pale
Now blanched his visage, shook his loos'ning joints,
Congealed his tongue, and raised his rigid hair.
The Athenian calm and silent waits to hear
The reassumed narration. O ye flowers,
How were ye fragrant! forth in transport wild
Bursts Hyacinthus: O embow'ring woods,
How soft your shade's refreshment! Founts and rills
How sweet your cadence, while I won the hand
Of my Cleora to the nuptial tie,
By spotless vows before thy image bound,
O Goddess hymeneal! O what hours
Of happiness untainted, dear espoused,
Did we possess! kind Glauce smiled on both.
The earliest birds of morning to her voice
Of benediction sung; the gracious found
Our evening heard; content our pillow smoothed.
Even Oxus, so Cleora's slave was named,
Of Sacian birth, with grim delight and zeal
Anticipates our will. My nuptials known
Brings down my father, whose resentment warm
The affinity with Demonax reproves,
A helpless vagabond, a hopeless wretch;
For now thy sword at Salamis prevailed.
This storm Cleora calmed; the generous fair
Before my father laid her dazzling gems;
She gave, he took them all; returned content;
Left us too happy in exhaustless stores
Of love for envious fate to leave unspoil'd.
Meantime no rumor pierced our tranquil bower,
That Demonax in Oreus was replac'd;
That he two golden talents to the hand,
Which should restore Cleora, had proclaimed,
To me was all unknown. Two moons complete
Have spent their periods since one evening late
Nicomachus my presence swift required,
A dying mother to embrace. By morn
I gained Carystus; by the close of day
A tender parent on my breast expired.
An agitation unexpected shook
My father's bosom as I took farewell.
On my return -- I can no more -- Yes, yes,
Dwell on each hideous circumstance, my tongue;
With horror tear my heartstrings till they burst:
Poor Hyacinthus has no cure but death.
The sun was broad at noon; my recent loss
Lamenting, yet asswaging by the joy
To see Cleora soon, never left before,
(A tedious interval to me) I reached
My home, the abode of Glauce. Closed, the door
Forbids my passage; to repeated calls
No voice replies; two villagers pass by,
Who at my clamours help to force my way.
I pass one chamber; strangled on the floor,
Two damsel-ministers of Juno lie.
I hurry on; a second, where my wife
Was in my absence to partake the couch
Of Glauce, shows that righteous woman dead.
The dear impression where Cleora's limbs
Sleep had embraced, I saw, the only trace
Of her, the last, these eyes shall ever behold.
Her name my accents strong in frenzy sound:
Cleora makes no answer. Next I fly
From place to place; on Sacian Oxus call:
He is not there. A lethargy benumbs
My languid members. In a neighboring hut,
Lodged by the careful peasants, I awake,
Insensible to knowledge of my state.
The direful tidings from Carystus rouse
My friends; Nicanor to my father's home
Transports me. Lingering, torpid I consumed
Sev'n moons successive; when too vigorous youth
Recalled my strength and memory to curse
Health, sense, and thought. My rashness would have sought
Cleora even in Oreus, there have faced
The homicide her sire; forbid, withheld,
Nicanor I deputed. When I marched
To bid thee welcome, on the way I met
That friend returned -- Persist, my falt'ring tongue,
Rehearse his tidings; pitying Heaven may close
Thy narrative in death -- The Sacian slave
Produced Cleora to her savage sire;
So fame reports, all Oreus so believes.
But this is trivial to the tragic scene
Which all beheld. Her hand the tyrant doomed
To Mindarus, a Persian lord, the chief
Of his auxiliar guard; but she refused,
And owned our union, which her pregnant fruit
Of love too well confirmed. The monster, blind
With mad'ning fury, instantly decreed
That deadliest poison through those beauteous lips
Should choke the springs of life. My weeping friend
Saw her pale relics on the funeral pyre.
I am not mad -- even that relief the gods
Deny me. All my story I have told,
Been accurate on horror to provoke
The stroke of death, yet live... Thou must, exclaims
The chief, humanely artful, thou must live;
Without thy help I never can avenge
On Demonax thy wrongs. Ha! cries the youth,
Art thou resolved to lift thy potent arm
Against the murderer? Yes, the Athenian said,
I will do more, thy virtue will uphold,
Whose perseverance through such floods of woe
Could wade to bid me welcome. Generous youth,
Trust to the man whom myriads never withstood,
Who towns from ruin can to greatness raise,
Can humble fortune, force her fickle hand
To render up the victim she has marked
For shame and sorrow, force her to entwine
With her own finger a triumphant wreath
To deck his brow. Themistocles, who drives
Despair and desolation from the streets
Of fallen Eretria, and from eastern bonds
Afflicted Greece at Salamis preserved;
He will thy genius to his native powers
Restore; will make thee master of revenge
For thy own wrongs; to glorious action guide
Thy manly steps, redressing, as they tread,
The wrongs of others. Not the gracious voice
Of Juno, speaking comfort from her shrine,
Not from his tripod Jove's prophetic seed,
Imparting counsel through his Pythian maid,
Not Jove himself, from Dodonaean groves,
By oracles of promise could have soothed
This young, but most distinguished of mankind
Among the wretched, as the well-wrought strain
Of thy heart-searching policy, expert
Themistocles, like some well-practis'd son
Of learned Machaon, over a patient's wound
Compassionate, but cool, who never permits
His own sensation to control his art.
But, said the Athenian, soldiers must refresh,
As well as fast, nor keep incessant watch.
They quit the temple. In the dwelling nigh
Deep-musing Hyacinthus lightly tastes
The light repast. On matted tufts they stretch
Their wearied limbs. Themistocles had armed
With elevated thoughts his pupil's mind,
Which foils at intervals despair. His eyes
The transient palm of sleep would often seal,
But often in dreams his dear espoused he sees,
A livid spectre; an empoison'd cup
She holds, and weeps -- then vanishes. Revenge,
In bloody sandals and a dusky pall,
Succeeds. Her stature growing, as he gazed,
Reveals a glory, beaming round her head;
A sword she brandishes, the awful sword
Which Nemesis unsheathes on crimes. He sees
Connubial Juno's image from the base
Descend, and, pointing with its marble hand,
Before him glide. A sudden shout of war,
The yell of death, Carystian banners waved,
An apparition of himself in arms,
Stir every sense. The dreadful tumult ends;
The headless trunk of Demonax in gore
He views in transport. Instantly his couch
Shoots forth in laurels, vaulting over his head;
The walls are hung with trophies. Juno comes,
No longer marble, but the queen of heaven,
Clad in resplendency divine. She leads
Cleora, now to perfect bloom restored,
Who, beck'ning, opens to the enraptured eye
Of Hyacinthus, doting on the charm,
Her breast of snow; whence pure ambrosial milk
Allures an infant from an amber cloud,
Who stoops, and round her neck maternal clings.
He to embrace them striving, waked and lost
The endearing picture of illusive air,
But waked composed. His mantle he assumed,
To Juno's statue trod, and thus unlocked
His pious breast: O goddess! though thy smile,
Which I acknowledge for the hours of bliss
I once possessed, a brief, exhausted term,
Could not protect me from malignant fate,
Lo! prostrate fallen before thee, I complain
No more. My soul shall struggle with despair;
Nor shall the furies drag me to the grave.
Thou punishment do threaten to the crime,
Which has defaced my happiness on earth;
Themistocles, my patron, is thy boon,
Who will fulfill thy menace. I believe,
There is a place hereafter to admit
Such purity as hers, whose blissful hand
Thou did bestow -- I lost -- I know my days
With all their evils of duration short;
I am not conscious of a black misdeed,
Which should exclude me from the seat of rest,
And therefore wait in pious hope, that soon
Shall Hyacinthus find his wife and child
With them to dwell forever. He concludes,
Regains the chamber, and Aurora shines.
End of the Twelfth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the THIRTEENTH.
WHEN Hyacinthus first his couch forsook
Themistocles in care had followed close,
But secretly had noted well the prayer
To Juno sent, and part approving, part
Condemning, heard. Accoutr'd now in mail,
The young Carystian, to his listening friend,
Relates the wonders of his recent dream.
The Athenian, while most cordial in the care
Of Hyacinthus, whom his woes endeared,
Still weighed his use. This answer he devised
To ease the grief he pitied, and preserve
The worth essential to his own designs.
What thou have told, Carystian, fires my breast;
It was a signal, by Saturnia held
To animate thy rage, and prompt thy arm
To action. She requires not, goddess wise,
Humiliation, scorns the sluggish mind,
Whose thoughts are creeping to Elysian rest.
They hush no throbs of anguish, while it rends
The mangled heartstrings, no not more than staunch
A bleeding wound, or quench a fever's flame.
We earn Elysium, and our evils here
Surmount, alike by action. Manly toil
Repels despair. Endurance of a storm,
Which rocks the vessel, marches long and swift,
A river passed, while enemies in front
By whirls of javelins chase the rapid ford,
A rampart scaled, the forcing of a camp,
Are cures of sorrow. In her vision clear
So did heaven's empress intimate this morn.
Me too she visited in sleep; her voice
My waking thoughts confirmed; Cleora lives;
Else why the goddess thus: Arise, O son
Of Neocles, of this afflicted youth
Be thou sure guide to rescue his espoused;
The profanation of my rites chastise.
The fiction wraps in credulous delight
The young Carystian's confidence, who feels
Circaean magic from his patron's eye,
His tongue, and gesture. He, quick-sighted, turns
To swift advantage his delusion thus:
Come, let me try thy vigor; I am bound
To neighboring Styra; fly before thy friend;
Among that generous people, who, their all,
Two galleys sent to Salamis, proclaim
Themistocles approaches. Like a dart,
Lanc'd from the sinews of a Parthian's arm,
Without reply the inspired Carystian flew,
Cased as he was in steel. Meantime the chief
Salutes his Attic and Laconian bands;
His captivating presence both enjoy,
Which else no eye most piercing might discern,
Not even the hundred never-sleeping lights,
Which on the margin of her parent flood
Incessant watched the progeny transformed
Of Inachus, the Argive watery god;
Where undistinguished in the grazing herd
His daughter wept, nor he that daughter knew
A speechless suppliant. Recommenc'd, the march
Exhausts the day. Beneath a holy roof,
Which rose to Ceres, they their sheltered limbs
To rest and food resign. There gently swelled
The encircling ground, whence fair the morning smiled
On little Styra, who, no queen superb
Of wide dominion, like a rural nymph
In decency of garb, and native locks,
Her humble circuit not unlovely shows.
She from Athenian boundaries of old
Her first inhabitants derived, and pours
Her sons now forth Themistocles to greet,
Their eldest parent's hero. Lampon bold
Accosts him: Me the weak, but willing hand
Of Styra late enabled to enrol
My name with thine, unconquerable son
Of Neocles. Though feeble is her sword,
Her sinews boast of Attic vigor still.
Oh! that her means were equal to her love,
A liberal welcome thou and these should find;
But yon Geraestian oligarchy, foe
To equity and freedom, from our meads
Have newly swept our plenty. Ardent here,
Themistocles: By heaven, my Styrian host,
Not thrice shall day illuminate your skies,
Ere double measure shall these petty lords
Repay to Styra. I am come to crush
Their usurpation, in Geraestus fix
Her ancient laws, and rouse her martial race
Against the Persian, and the Persian's friends.
Array thy force. Tomorrow's early sun
Shall see us march, and ere his second noon
The bird of Athens shall her talons lift
Against the walls of these presumptuous thieves.
They have no walls, Eudemus takes the word,
A righteous, brave Geraestian, exiled late,
By hospitable Styra late received.
A forest thick surrounds them, which affords
One scanty passage; but the ax and bill,
Applied with vigor, soon will open ways.
Sev'n hundred natives can Geraestus arm,
Who will not fight to rivet on their necks
A galling yoke more fast. The whole defense,
Our oligarchal tyrants have to boast,
Are poor Barbarians, scarce three hundred strong,
Saved from the wrecks of those adventurous ships,
Which round Euboea's rude Capharean cape
Had been detached thy navy to surround
In Artemisium's conflict. Now apart
Themistocles to Hyacinthus spoke,
While in his care he lodged a casket sealed,
Which held the talent promised to his sire:
This for thy father; tell him, I require
The stipulated bands' immediate march;
I wish to see them under thy command.
Thou know Diana's celebrated fane
At Amarynthus; if thou can, young friend,
Be there before me. Pleased, the youth departs.
As in excursion from their waxen homes
A hive's industrious populace obey
The tinkling sound, which summons all to swarm;
So, when the trumpet's well-known voice proclaims
To arms, the Styrians, round the banner'd staff,
Which Lampon raised, are gathered. There enjoined
To reassemble at a stated hour,
Their clinking armor in their homes they cleanse;
They whet their spears and falchions to chastise
Geraestian rapine. Ere the morning breaks,
Four hundred join Themistocles. He bends
To Amarynthus, seat of Dian pure,
His rapid course. Her edifice sublime,
Which overtops her consecrated bower,
The second noon discovers. Just arrived,
Carystian helmets round the temple shine,
By Hyacinthus and Nicanor led,
Joint captains. Staid Nicanor was the friend
Returned from Oreus, who the tidings brought
Of poor Cleora's fate. The Athenian hails
The young commander: Gladly do I find
Thy speed surpassing mine; but swift explain,
Who is the priestess in this pure abode?
Then Hyacinthus: She, Eudora named,
For sanctity of manners, rank and birth,
Through this well-people'd island is renowned;
Authority her handmaid. Her rich fane
With sumptuous offerings shines; the wealthiest towns
Her intercession at the thrones of heaven
Obsequious court, and dread her brow severe.
Of elevated stature, awful port,
She from Briareus, worshipped in our walls,
Proud origin derives. She twangs the bow,
The javelin lances through the tusky boar,
Chased over the temple's wide domain of wood;
Tall nymphs attend her, while the eyes abashed
Of her own vassals shun her stately step.
Ah! could thou win her favor!... Haste, replies
The ready chief, to great Eudora say,
Themistocles of Athens humbly sues
To kiss the border of her hallowed stole.
He calls; the martial harness from his limbs
Attentive slaves unclasp; ablution pure
From limpid streams effaces every stain
Of his laborious march; a chlamys flows
Loose from his shoulders. Casting from his brow
The plumed casque, uncovered he ascends
The massy steps of that stupendous fane.
In admiration of the glories there,
Through cedar valves, on argent hinges poised,
He passes, where his own distinguished form
No ornament excells. In gold the shapes
Of wreaths and garlands, crescents, stars, and suns,
Hung round the columns; on the pavement broad,
Engraven tripods, vases, statues, busts
Of burnished brass and silver were disposed,
In graceful order. Pictures, where the lips
Seem speaking, limbs to act, and looks express
The various passions, which in varying hues
Exalt the human aspect, or degrade,
Enrich the walls. Orion writhes his bulk,
Transfixed by arrows from the insulted queen
Of chastity. Devoured by ravenous hounds,
His own, Actaeon's metamorphos'd head
Reclines in blood his newly-branching horns.
Unbid by Oeneus to the Aetolian feast,
There on her vengeful Calydonian boar
Looks Phoebe down, while red her crescent darts
A flame of anger through disparting clouds.
Compelled to lave her violated limbs,
Disrobed Calisto on the fountain's brink
There weeps in vain her virgin vow profaned.
Here deeds of Mercy smile. Appeased, the queen
Folds in the mantle of a silver mist
Pale Iphigenia, from the holy knife
At Aulis wafts, and substitutes the do
A full-atoning victim. Here she quits
Her Tauric dome, unhospitably stained
With blood of strangers. Over the entrusted keel,
Of sad Orestes, who her image bears,
To chase the Furies from his haunted couch,
A guardian bland she hovers. Through its length
Magnificent the midmost isle conveys
The terminating sight, where deep and wide
A luminous recess, half-circling, shows
Pilasters chisell'd, and a sumptuous freeze.
An elevated pavement, yet below
The sight, whose level skims a surface broad
Of marble green, sustains the goddess form
In Parian whiteness, emblem of her state,
In height five cubits. Purity severe
O'ershades her beauty. Elegantly group'd
Without confusion, dryads, oreads round,
With nymphs of lakes and fountains fill the space.
Lo! not unlike the deity she serves,
Eudora stands before her, and accosts
The advancing hero thus: I trust, thy soul
Some great, some righteous enterprise conceives
Else nothing less might justify the din
Of arms around me, and these banners proud
Fixed in my presence on religious ground
Inviolably sacred. I would know,
Themistocles, thy purpose. He one knee
Obsequious bends; his lips approach the hem
Of her pontific robe, nor she forbids.
He then replied: I should not have besought
Thy condescension, priestess, had my soul
Less than a righteous enterprise conceived,
Deserving sanction from thy holy, pure,
All-influencing wisdom; to thy feet
I bring my standard, and my sword devote
Spontaneous to thy service. While I cast
My wondering eyes on this enriched abode,
On thee, its chief embellishment, and know
That impious neighbors in Geraestus rule,
Foul pillagers and miscreants, horror thrills
Thy soldier's bosom; from a town oppressed
Them to extirpate his vindictive arm
Themistocles exalts. Eudora looked
Applauding: Go, and prosper, she rejoined;
Of this attentive piety, O chief,
Whom glory crowns, thou never shall repent!
Dismissed, he rested; under twilight gray
Renewed his course. Meridian Phoebus viewed
Compact battalions from their shields and helms
Shoot flames of terror on Geraestian woods.
A guard was station'd, where the narrow path
Gave entrance; thither Hyacinthus led
A chosen troop, and fierce in accent spoke:
Trained to an oar, vile remnants of a wreck,
Drop, ye Barbarian vagabonds, those arms
From your ignoble, mercenary hands;
The invincible Themistocles requires
Immediate passage. Dubious paused their chief,
A low Pamphylian rower. In contempt
From his inverted spear a ponderous blow
The youth discharged, removing all suspense.
Prone fell the ruffian, like the victim beast,
Stunned by a brawny sacrificer's blow,
Before an altar's fire. His troop disperse.
The Styrians active, by the prudent son
Of Neocles instructed, beat the wood,
Wielding the bill and ax in wary dread
Of ambush. No resistance checks the march;
The speeding legion penetrates the shades;
Thence rushing dreadful on Geraestus spreads
A blaze of steel. So fiery sparks, concealed
Long in some ancient mansion's girding beam,
There gathering force unseen, a passage break
For conflagration to devour a town.
Eudemus joins Themistocles, and thus:
Behold, our miscreant oligarchy rest
On supplication, now their sole defense;
The injured people follow; hear the cry
Of imprecation. Sev'n flagitious men,
By rapine, lust, and homicide deformed,
Those olive boughs profaning by their touch,
Come to pollute thy presence. They approach,
To whom the Athenian, stern in visage, spoke:
Ye little tyrants, who in crimes aspire
To emulate the greatest, do ye come
To render up your persons? else expect
That populace to seize you, and a pile
Of stones to crush your execrable heads.
He turns away. The fife and trumpet sound;
The sev'n surrender mute; Eudemus glad
Secures them, given to Styra's band in charge.
Revived Geraestus to her public place,
Which heretofore the people wont to fill
In free assembly, as her guardian god
Receives the Attic hero. All the way
He passes, curses on the tyrants heaped
He listening hears, from children for their sires,
From wives for husbands, mothers for their sons,
The various victims of unlawful power.
Dishonored damsels, early robbed of fame,
An orphan train, of heritage despoiled,
Indignant husbands, of their wives deprived,
Their joint upbraidings sound. By all the gods,
The Athenian bitterly sarcastic spoke,
Black spirits, your fertility in vice
Deserves my wonder; in this narrow spot
You are distinguished in the sight of heaven
By multifarious crimes above the king,
Who has all Asia for his ample range.
Be not offended, my Geraestian friends;
Ere I restore your franchise I will try
If chains and dungeons can allay these flames
Of unexampled wickedness. Thou hear'st,
Eudemus. Now, Geraestians, you are free.
Elect Eudemus archon; of the wealth,
Those wretches gathered, part to public use,
To suff'rers part distribute. I demand
But this requital; you have felt the woes
Of tyranny; obtaining from my hand
Redress, that hand enable to preserve
The liberty of others; Greece demands
From you that succor, which this happy day
She has by me imparted. He withdraws
From acclamations and assenting hearts
To give Eudemus counsel. Night is spent.
He swiftly back to Amarynthus flies;
Each tyrant follows; from his dungeon drawn,
The sun, spectator of his chains and shame,
He dreads; in horror, conscious of his guilt,
He shrinks at day like Cerberus, when dragged
By Hercules from hell. The accepted chief,
His captives ranging in Eudora's sight,
Unfolds their dire variety of crimes,
Left to her sentence; awful she decides:
He, who oppresses, who enslaves mankind,
Himself should feel enthralment, shame and stripes.
Let these to some fell traficker in slaves
Be sold, transported in remotest climes
To witness Greek severity on vice;
So by my voice should Xerxes be condemned;
So shall the monster Demonax. The means
I find, Themistocles, in thee. Elate
To hear this great, authoritative dame,
The chief replies: Thy mandate is my law,
Thy equity is mine. Her stately brow
Unbending, she concisely questions thus:
How shall Eudora's favor mark thy worth?
Thy blessing grant, he answers, well appris'd,
That asking little best attains to all.
I may do more, she said; thy ripened thoughts
Impart hereafter; my extent of aid
Diana must determine. Now farewell.
He pressed no further, toward Carystus turned
His march, and reached her portals, while the sun
Wanted three hours to finish his career.
There was a temple to Briareus built,
The son of Titan. In the enormous shrine
His image vast to thirty cubits rose
In darkest marble. Terror, thick with curls
O'erlaid the forehead, thick the engraven beard
The spacious chest o'ershadow'd; fifty shields,
As many maces of refulgent brass
The hundred hands upheld. Broad steps around
The pedestal ascended, that before
The outstretch'd Titanian feet religious fear
Accumulated offerings might dispose,
So to propitiate the tremendous god.
In single state before this image stood
Nicomachus, the archon, to receive
His son triumphant with Cecropia's chief.
They now had passed the expanded gates, and slow
Approached the shrine in military pomp
Along the extensive isle. The walls and dome
Replied to fifes and trumpets, to the clink
Of manacles and fetters, piercing sound,
Which told the wearer's guilt. Till now unmarked,
A figure, grim and ghastly, from the crowd
Darts, and a poniard plunging in the breast
Of old Nicomachus, himself ascends
The pedestal, and lifting his red steel
On high, between the god's gigantic feet
Intrepid takes his station. Terror dims
Each gazing eye; the illusive medium swells
His size; in fancied magnitude he towers
Another son of Titan. As he stands
Intent to speak, Themistocles, alone
Of all the assembly master of himself,
Cool gives a sign, when thus the assassin speaks,
In phrase barbaric, and a softened look:
I am that Oxus, whom suspicion marks
A traitor to Cleora. Mistress dear,
(At this a torrent gushes from his eyes)
Thou knew'st me faithful. Listen, gracious lord,
Thou tenderest consort of the tenderest wife,
O Hyacinthus! listen to my tale,
Thou too wilt own me faithful: On the night,
Thy first of absence from Cleora's bed,
No more thy love to bless, assassins forced
Kind Glauce's dwelling; me they bound; my voice
They barred; the priestess and her blameless maids
They strangled. Mounted on a rapid steed
One bore Cleora; two, robust and fell,
Were my unresting guards. Through trackless woods
Not far we journey'd; Demonax was near,
Just marched to waste Eretria's neighboring land.
Conducting me to loneliest shades, my guides
Remained a while conferring. One, I knew,
Was Dacus, Dacus whom thy sire preferred
In trust to all his menials. Words like these
He uttered: 'Thus Nicomachus enjoined;
'Transporting Oxus to obscurest wilds,
'Destroy, conceal him there. Access by night
'To Demonax obtain; by earnest suit
'From him exact a promise to declare,
'That Oxus brought his daughter, then set free
'Was sent rewarded to his Sacian home.
'Receive the gold proclaimed; depart. Be sure
'No other name, than Oxus, pass your lips.'
This said, they gored me with repeated wounds;
I sunk before them; they believed me dead.
Deep in a pit, o'ergrown with brambles thick,
They left me. Woodmen, happily passing, heard
My piercing groans; in pity to a hut
They bore me; herbs medicinal, and time,
Restored my strength. His garment he unfolds,
The crimson horrors of his numerous scars
To show. Carystians, I my vital breath
Among the Saces on the Caspian drew.
A Genius dwells, a native in the lake,
Who, in his function rising from the deep,
Reveals fou lmurder. Purple are his wings,
His hue is jet, a diamond his eye,
His hair is inextinguishable flame.
Whatever man, his visitation warns,
Neglects to right the dead, he haunts, he drives
To horrid frenzy. On a whirlwind borne,
To me in momentary flight he came,
In terrors clad uncommon; over my couch
His clatt'ring pinions shook. His mandate high
I have obeyed, the soulest murderer slain.
Now, mistress dear, sole object of my zeal,
Wherever thou art, if fleeting on some cloud
A bright aerial spirit; if below
Among the Genii of the earth, or seas,
Do trace the caves, where shine carbuncles pure,
Or pluck the coral in cerulean grots,
Thy faithful slave shall follow, still perform
With his accustomed vigilance thy will.
This said, he struck the poniard through his breast,
The blows repeating till he pierced the heart,
Then on the crimsoned pedestal reclined
His dying limbs, nor groaned. What thoughts were thine,
Nicomachus! To thee are opened wide
Death's portals; cold thy blood begins to flow.
An injured son beside thee strives to doubt
That he, who gave him being, now descends
To sure damnation for so black a crime;
But thou remov'st all doubt. Thy sister's ghost
Before thee seems to glide, and point thy way
To Erebus; Briareus' hundred hands
To brandish serpents, lashing from his fane
A fordid, grovelling parricide to hell.
At length, amid confession of thy guilt,
The furies snatch thee from the light of heaven
To that eternal gloom. The fainting limbs
Of Hyacinthus forth Nicanor bears.
Religious dread beholds the shrine impure
With homicide; nor knows, what man, what god
Must be consulted, or what rite performed
To purge from deeds thus ominous the fane;
Till recollection prompts a sudden hope,
That wise, and great, and favored from above,
Themistocles may succor -- He is gone.
In double consternation all disperse.
Night drops her curtain on the sleepless town.
End of the Thirteenth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the FOURTEENTH.
BRIGHT morning sheds no gladness on the face
Of pale Carystu^, who, in visions framed
By superstitious fear, all night had seen
Briareus lift his hundred hands to crush
His fane polluted, from the base to rend
Each pillar'd mass, and hurl the fragments huge
Against her towers. Anon is terror changed
To wonder, which consoles her. Through her gates,
Amid the luster of meridian day,
In slow procession, solemnly advance
A hundred youths in spotless tunics white,
Sustaining argent wands. A vigorous band
Of sacerdotal servitors succeed,
Who draw by turns the silver-graven shape
Of Dian lofty on a wheeling stage
Of artificial verdure. Virgins tall
A guard surround her, each in flowing snow
Of raiment, gathered in a rosy knot
Above one knee. They tread in sandals white,
O'erlac'd by roseate bands; behind their necks
Of lilly's hue depend their quivers full;
Hands, which can string their tough and ponderous bows,
Eyes, darting beams severe, discover strength
Unbroke by wedlock, hearts by love untamed;
Soft light the silver crescents on their heads
Diffuse. Eudora follows in her car;
Across her shoulders hangs a quiver large;
Full-fac'd, a crystal moon illumes her hair.
Penthesilea's Amazonian arm
Had scarce the nerves to bend Eudora's bow.
Her port, her aspect, fascinate the sight;
Before her, passing, towers and temples seem
To sink below her level; she becomes
The single object eminent; her neck,
Her arms, the vestment shuts from view profane;
Low as her feet descends the sacred stole.
Eight purple-harness'd steeds of milky hue,
Her axle draw. Before her footstool sits
The vanquisher of Xerxes; to the reins
Of argent luster his obsequious hand
Themistocles applies. A hundred guards
In burnished steel, and plumes like ridges new
Of winter's fleeces, not unmartial ranked
Behind her wheels; the city's widest space
They reach. To all the people, swarming round,
In awful state the priestess thus began:
Impiety and parricide, which spilt
In Juno's sight her servant Glauce's blood,
Your god, by double homicide profaned,
May well dismay Carystus. Lo! I come,
Afflicted city, in thy day of woe
Both to propitiate and conciliate heaven.
Learn first, no offering of a hundred bulls,
Not clouds of incense, nor exhausted stores
Of richest wine can moderate his wrath,
Which visits children for the sire's offense,
And desolates whole nations for the crimes
Of kings and chiefs; unless by double zeal,
By violence of virtue man disarm
The jealous thunderer. Happy is your lot;
The capital offender still survives;
On him inflicted vengeance by your hands,
Men of Carystus, will from Jove regain,
And multiply his blessings on yourselves,
Your sons and daughters. Swear then, old and young,
Swear all before the fresh-polluted shrine;
Ere you remove the carnage from that fane,
Unite your valor by a general oath,
That you will strengthen this Athenian's arm,
Whom I from Dian, in the awful name
Of all the gods and goddesses, adjure
To quell the monster Demonax, by heaven,
By earth detested, parricide and scourge
Tyrannic over Euboea. At these words
She fixed an arrow in her mighty bow;
Then rising, said; against an impious head
Incensed Diana thus her war declares.
A cloud, low-hanging, instant by the force
Of springing wind a boreal course began
Toward Oreus; thither bent Eudora's eye.
Swift from her sounding string through folds obscure
Of that thick vapor, as it fleets away,
The arrow imperceptibly descends
To earth. Fortuitous a sulfurous spark
Flashed from the cloud. A prodigy! exclaimed
Themistocles; the holy shaft is changed
To Jove's own bolt, and points the forked flame
On Demonax. Swear, swear, the people shout;
A general exhortation rends the cope
Ethereal. Prompted by the subtle voice
Of her prevailing counselor, again
Eudora solemn: You for once, my friends,
Must supersede the strictness of your laws.
Though Hyacinthus has not reached the date,
Prescribed to those who wield the rule supreme,
Elect him archon. Gallant, injured youth,
Sage, pious, him Diana best approves,
Him her unerring counsels will inspire.
Me too, her priestess, in your need she lends;
I will promulge the sacred oath to all;
I from pollution will your town redeem.
Unanimous consent is heard. Her car
She leaves. Before Briareus, in her words,
Sons, fathers, youth and age, enlist their spears.
Meantime the Athenian to Nicanor's home
Resorts. He passes to the chamber sad,
Whence Hyacinthus utters these complaints:
Do thou, Nicanor, parallel with mine
The Oedipean horrors, or the pangs
Felt by the race of Pelops, and deserved?
Thus would thou waken patience in a breast,
Which feels affliction, far surpassing theirs,
Feels undeserved affliction? Whom, O Jove!
By error, lust, or malice have I wronged?
Cut short my bloom -- torment me here no more.
Let Rhadamanthus instantly decide,
If with Cleora I must taste of bliss,
Or with a father drink eternal woe.
Here for a murdered wife my eyes to stream
Shall never cease; and -- execrable sire!
Not grief, but all which furies can excite,
Rage, detestation, horror I must feel
For thee, my origin of life -- what life!
Yet, O thou spirit damned, the wretch thy son,
The wretch, a father's cruelty has made,
Perhaps might spare a tear -- but Glauce's ghost,
Thy righteous, hallowed sister's ghost, forbids
One drop of pity on thy pains to fall --
She skrieks aloud, curse, curse thy father's dust.
Themistocles now entered. At his look,
Which carried strange ascendancy, a spell
Controlling nature, was the youth abashed;
As if his just sensations were a shame,
Or his complaints to reach that hero's ear
Were criminal. He falt'ring spoke: Thou god
Of Hyacinthus! passion thou do awe;
Thy presence humbles frenzy and despair.
No, thy own manly fortitude alone
Shall chase despair and frenzy from thy breast,
Serene Themistocles replied: Arise,
Thou new-created archon; private cares
To interfere with public, neither men
Nor gods allow, nor justice, nor the sense
Of thy own wrongs. Young friend, the noble toil
Of mind and body in this righteous cause
Will give thee rank with heroes. Thou assist,
Nicanor; share the glory. By the hand
He led the passive youth. The people met
Their young, their honored magistrate in joy;
Eudora blessed them; then in solemn zeal
The purifying rites performed, and left
Revived Carystus. To her holy seat,
While on the way her goddess radiant shone,
Themistocles attended; then by dawn
Back to Eretria swiftly pressed his march.
Not Aeolus, the king of winds, could still
Their gust, nor Neptune smooth his troubled waves,
Nor Jove the raging thunderbolt compose
More, than divine Themistocles had tamed
Oppression, terror, anguish and despair.
This had Geraestus in her evil day,
The panic-aw'd Carystians this had proved,
Not less than sad Eretria. Her he finds
Rejoicing, like some widow late forlorn,
Who in the house of mourning with a train
Of pining orphans ^titute had (...)
But by a hand beneficent uprais'd,
Ungirds the humble sackcloth from her loins,
Nor longer sprinkles ashes on her head,
Amid reviving plenty. Such the change
Among the Eretrians, through the copious aid
Sicinus lent, within Chalcidic walls
Still sedulous abiding. Every face
The gladd'ning touch of rosy-tinctur'd health
Illumines. Now from ruins cleared, the streets
By stable feet of passengers are trod;
The impending season's turbulence to foil,
Works, under Cleon's and Tisander's eye
Begun, the vigorous populace, inspired
By their protector's presence, now pursue
With industry to match the beaver breed
Laborious and sagacious, who construct
By native art their mansions, to repel
Congealing air, and hoary drifts of snow
In winter's harsh domains. From day to day
The toil continued. Early on a morn
A stranger came, in body all deformed,
In look oblique, but keen; an eastern garb
Enwrapp'd his limbs distorted; from his tongue
Fell barbarous accents. He addressed the chief
In Grecian phrase, which falter'd on his tongue:
I am a Tyrian trafficker in slaves;
Returning home from Libya, have been forced
By dangerous winds to this Euboean coast
For shelter. Watching for a friendly gale,
I learned from fame, that, warrior, thou do wield
A sword which prospers, and its captives dooms
To servitude. Themistocles commands
The sev'n Geraestian tyrants from his ship,
Where at the bottom they had gnash'd their teeth
In chains unslacken'd. To the merchant then:
Without a price these miscreants from our climes
Remove, the farthest hence will best repay
The obligation. For a master choose
The most ferocious savage on the wilds
Of horrid Scythia, or the Caspian bound.
Secure conductors he appoints, a band
To chain them fast aboard. Each irksome step
They count in curses. Over Euboea lost,
Not as their native region, but the seat
Of power and crimes triumphantly enjoyed,
They weep, still criminal in tears. But soon,
When from the harbor distance had obscured
The well-row'd bark, the fetters from their limbs
The merchant orders, who, another tone,
Another mien assuming, thus began:
Geraestian lords, redemption you derive
From Demonax of Oreus. Me the first
Among his council, Lamachus by name,
He sent to practice on the wily chief
Of Athens, wiles which undermine his own.
They land at Dium, thence to Oreus march;
Where Demonax admits them, as he sat
In secret council: 'Your disasters known
'Obtain'd our instant succor. What intends
'Themistocles?' This answer is returned.
Not less, great prince, Themistocles intends
Than thy destruction. Of Eretrian blood
All who survive, Geraestus, Styra join
Against thy throne. Carystus from her walls
Will pour battalions, by Eudora fired.
The Amarynthian priestess has declared
War in Diana's name. The laboring hind
Will quit the furrow; shepherds from their flocks,
Youths from their sport, the keeper from his herd
Will run to arms at her commanding voice,
So prevalent the sound. The tyrant turns
To Mindarus the Persian: Let us march
Swift to destroy the serpent in his egg.
To him the Persian: Demonax forgets,
That winter's rigor chills the soldier's blood.
Do thou not hear the tempest, while it howls
Around us? Even Mardonius active, bold,
Now rests in covert of Thessalian roofs,
Nor fights with nature. Shall my general hear
That I conduct the race of hottest climes
In freezing rain and whirlwinds to assail
A strong-wall'd town, protected by a chief
For valor, skill, and stratagem renowned,
With all the unsparing elements his guard?
Again the tyrant: Mindarus, confine
Thy Asiatics, till the roses bud;
While I, in howling storms, in damps, or frost
Will head my own Euboeans. Heaven forbid!
The wary Lamachus subjoins: My lord,
Repose no trust without thy foreign bands
In these new subjects. Gods! the alluring guile
Of that Athenian would dissolve thy ranks,
To his own hostile banner would seduce
Half thy battalions. Demonax again:
Then policy with policy shall war.
Among the Eretrians publish, from their hands
This virulent Athenian I require
Bound and delivered to my will; their wives,
Their children else, late captives of my sword,
Shall from their state of servitude be dragged
To bleed the immediate victims of my wrath.
Then Mindarus: Should great Mardonius hear,
That I such inhumanity permit,
He would exert his full monarchal power,
My guilty limbs condemning to a cross.
In fury foaming, Demonax exclaims:
I am betrayed. Thee, Mindarus, the son
Of that stern prince, who laid Eretria waste,
Thee Xerxes, future sovereign of the world,
Appointed my supporter; in this isle
That I, a branch from his imperial root,
Might grow a splendid vassal of his throne.
My cause, his service, now thy heart disowns,
Perverse thy sword abandons. Of my friends
Thou best requited, most ingrate! Preferred
Once to have been my son, of treasures vast
The destined heir, my successor in sway,
Do thou desert me, and protect my foes?
But to Mardonius, to the mighty king,
I will accuse thee. By the infernal powers
Themistocles has gained thee; or thou fear
To face that captain on the field of war.
His breast the Persian striking, thus in tears:
Do thou recall thy parricide to wound
My inmost bosom? though another held
My dear Cleora by the holiest ties,
I would have struggled with despairing love;
But sink overwhelmed by horror of that deed,
Which, blasting such perfection, calls on heaven
For punishment unbounded. If thou fall'st,
It is the hand of Horomazes weighs
To earth a body overcharged with guilt.
Do thou upbraid me, undeserving man,
Forgetting recent service? Who restored
Thy scepter lost? what captain has reduced
Orobia, Dium, half Euboea's towns,
But Mindarus? He these achievements past
Regrets, but while appointed by his prince
Will urge his duty to accomplish new.
Then come the season for a warrior's toil,
Themistocles shall see my banner guide
Twelve thousand spears; shall see my early sword
To general battle, or to single fight,
Defy the experience of his powerful arm.
He said, and left the council. All withdrew
But Lamachus. The tiger, when escaped,
Or fell hyaena from an eager chase
Of dogs and hunters, feels not more dismay,
Mixed with a thirst insatiate of revenge,
Than shook the monster Demonax, who thus
To Lamachus: Insulted and controlled
By an audacious stranger, do I rule
In Oreus longer? By a poisoned draught,
Or midnight poniard Mindarus shall die.
Ariobarzanes, second in command,
Will serve me best. The counselor subjoins:
If secret poison, or a midnight blow
Would remedy the grievance, I would try
Their instant operation; but reflect,
Twelve thousand warriors, masters of thy fate,
Who love their general living, on his death
Might prove too harsh inquisitors. At least
His courage use once more on open foes;
A valiant leader makes the soldier brave;
So have we found in Mindarus. Reserve
Assassination for a greater mark,
Themistocles. The tyrant quick: Proclaim
Five golden talents on his head the price.
Discreet, though wicked, Lamachus again:
Would thou incense all Greece, whose navy rules
The main? However triumphant in the field,
No timely help Mardonius could extend.
The genius of Themistocles, the nymph
Of Salamis indignant by his side,
Would range from state to state. Their loud alarm
Would send the whole confederated fleet
Before the earliest breezes of the spring
To pour vindictive myriads on our coast.
Then what our doom? No, Demonax, my lord,
These sev'n Geraestians, while thy recent grace
Transports their minds, and blows the embers hot
Of rage at recent insult, let us league
Against this formidable man by oaths
Before the furies in their neighboring cave.
Thyself be present. Yes, the monster said,
I will be present, though Cleora's ghost
Be there, and that vile produce, which disgraced
Her virgin zone! Remembrance of his guilt,
He roused to strengthen fury and revenge.
There was a cavern in the bowels deep
Of naked rock by Oreus, where the stern
Eumenides possessed a dusky shrine,
And frowned in direful idols from the time
That Titan's offspring over Euboea reigned
The enemies of Jove. Around it slept
A stagnant water, overarch'd by yews,
Growth immemorial, which forbade the winds
Ever to disturb the melancholy pool.
To this, the fabled residence abhorred
Of hell-sprung beings, Demonax, himself
Predominating demon of the place,
Conducts the sev'n assassins. There no priest
Officiates; single there, as Charon grim,
A boatman wafts them to the cavern's mouth.
They enter, fenced in armor; down the black
Descent, over moist and lubricated stone,
They tread unstable. Night's impurest birds
With noisome wings each loathing visage beat;
Of each the shudd'ring flesh through plated steel
By slimy efts, and clinging snakes is chilled;
Cold, creeping toads beset the infected way.
Now at the cave's extremity obscene
They reach the sisters three, tremendous forms,
Of huge, misshapen size. Alecto there,
Tisiphone, Megaera, on their fronts
Display their scorpion curls; within their grasp
Their serpents writhed. Before them sulfurous fires
In vases broad, antiquity's rude toil,
To render horror visible, diffused
Such light, as hell affords. Beside a chasm,
Whose bottom blind credulity confined
By Tartarus alone, with trembling feet
Stood Lamachus, the wicked and deformed.
An ewe, in dye like ebony, he gored;
The dark abyss received a purple stream.
Next to the dire conspirators he held
A vessel; over the brim their naked arms
They stretched; he pierced the veins; the envenomed blood,
A fit libation mixed for hell, he poured
Down the deep cleft; then falt'ring, half dismayed
At his own rites, began: Ye injured men,
Of wealth and honors violently spoiled,
Implacably condemned to bonds and rods
By insolent Themistocles, before
These dreadful goddesses you swear; his death
You vow, by every means revenge can prompt,
In secret ambush, or in open fight,
By day, by night, with poison, sword, or fire;
Else on your heads you imprecate the wrath
Of these inexorable powers. They swore.
Meantime the object of their impious oaths,
Whatever his future destiny, enjoyed
The comforts which Eretria now partook
Through him, so justly her preserver styled;
While thus reflection whispered to his heart:
This Aristides would delight to see,
For this commend his rival. Though my soul
Knows that in quest of glory for this port
I spread the adventurous sail, yet sweeter far
She feels that glory, since a gallant race,
Snatched from the gripe of misery and death
By her exalted faculties, become
Her means of power and greatness. I confess,
An act like this my rival would achieve,
Nor other motive seek, than acting well.
Perhaps with more attention to myself,
More sudden, more complete is my success.
Lo! in his view Sicinus, just arrived
From Chalcis. Him his joyful lord thus hailed:
We have been long asunder; welcome thrice,
Thou long expected; on thy brow I see
Intelligence. To whom the faithful man:
One moon I spent in Chalcis; I addressed
Nearchus first, of Chares, slain in fight
At Artemisium, successor approved
To lead his country's banners. He rejoiced
In thy arrival; not so frank in joy
Timoxenus the archon. On the day
Of my return that hesitating chief,
While invitation to his roof he gave,
Was dreading thy acceptance. But supreme
Over him, and all his house, a daughter sways,
In beauty's full meridian left to mourn
The loss of Chares on her widowed bed.
Not thy Timothea, not Cleander's spouse
Traezene's wonder, not Sandauce young,
Not Medon's sister of the Oetaean hill,
Though beauteous like the goddesses she serves,
Exceed Acanthe; she may almost vye
With Amarantha's celebrated form,
The pride of Delphian Timon! To behold
The conqueror of Xerxes is her wish.
The hero thought a moment; soon resolved,
He spoke: The car, the mantle, Sparta's gifts,
The gems from Ariabignes won that day,
When at my feet his proud tiara bowed,
Provide by dawn. Retire we now to rest.
End of the Fourteenth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the FIFTEENTH.
NOW dimmed by vapors, frequent in his track,
The twelfth division of his annual round
The sun is entering. Long has vernal bloom,
Has summer's prime from thy descriptive lays,
O Muse! withdrawn; and now the aged year
Its last remains of beauty has resigned;
Transparent azure of autumnal skies
Is changed to mist, the air serene to storms.
But inspiration from the imagined balm
Of spring, or summer's warmth, enriched by sweets
From flowery beds, and myrtles' fragrant bowers,
Thou do not want; then bid thy numbers roll
In cadence deep to imitate the voice
Of boisterous winter in his mantle hoar.
All night by rude Hippotades the air
Tormented round the foaming harbor wheeled;
Each mast was pliant to the raging gust,
The mooring cable groaned. Long slept the son
Of Neocles, unvisited by care,
Till, as the hours attendant on the morn
Had just unclos'd the orient gate of day,
He starts. Acanthe, who controuls her sire,
His active fancy pictures on his mind
Thus pond'ring: Dear Timothea, yet less dear
Than power and fame acquired by saving Greece,
Without Chalcidic aid thy husband's hope
Is mere abortion. Chalcis must be gained
Best, Aristides, by the purest means,
But well by any. Swift his inner garb
Of softest wool thick-woven he assumes,
Of finer texture then a scarlet vest;
Over these, in dye of violet's deep hue,
His Spartan mantle negligently waves.
A golden tissue with a crimson plume,
To fence his manly temples and adorn,
He wears. His car is ready; ready wait
The Eretrian people, his conducting guard
To Chalcis not remote. The sounding way
Is hard and hoar; crystalline dew congealed
Has tipped the spiry grass; the waters, bound
In sluggish ice, transparency have lost;
No flock is bleating on the rigid lawn,
No rural pipe attunes the inclement air;
No youths and damsels trip the choral round
Beneath bare oaks, whose frost-incrusted boughs
Drop chilling shadows; icicles invest
The banks of rills, which, grating harsh in strife
With winter's fetters, to their dreary sides
No passenger invite. The cautious chief
In sight of Chalcis to their homes dismissed
The whole Eretrian number, but retained
His hundred Attic and Laconian friends:
He passed the gate before expiring day.
Sicinus, staid forerunner, not unknown
By residence in Chalcis, published loud
His lord's approach. The citizens in throngs
Salute the celebrated man. His gates
Timoxenus the archon throws abroad,
And, true to hospitality, prepares
For his distinguished, though unwelcome guest,
Her liberal rites. Themistocles he leads
To share a banquet in a sumptuous hall,
Where stands divine Acanthe. Is there wife,
Or maid, or widowed matron, now in Greece,
Who would not all her ornaments assume
To welcome this known savior of the Greeks
Wherever he passes? As the queen of heaven
In dazzling dress to match her goddess form,
Graced by the zone of Cytherea, met
The Olympian king on Ida; brilliant thus
Acanthe greets Themistocles. Mature
In manhood he, nor bord'ring on decline,
The ornamental covering from his head
Lifts in obeisance; careless curls released,
Thick overshadowing his forehead high,
Present a rival to the Phidian front
Of Jupiter at Pisa. With a look,
Which summoned all his talents, all his mind
To view, he blends a sweetness, nature's gift,
But heightened now by energy of wiles,
Alluring wiles, to melt the proudest fair.
In his approach he moves the genuine sire
Of all the Graces on Acanthe's hand
To print his lips. Invited by that hand,
Close to her lovely side of her alone
He sits observant, while the rich repast
Continued. Soon his vigilance perceived,
That her unsated ear devoured his words,
That from her lip an equal spell enthralled
Her doting father, who adoring viewed
Minerva in Acanthe. Now withdrawn
Was all attendance, when the daughter thus:
O first of men, sole grace of each abode
Where thou art present, fortunate are those
Who saw thy actions, fortunate who hear
The bare narration; happier still those ears,
Which from thy mouth can treasure in the mind
A full impression of the glorious tale!
Forgive a woman, whom thy manners tempt
To sue -- if yet thy gentleness should deem
Too curious, too importunate her suit,
Thy host Timoxenus at least indulge,
That over his festive hall the achievements high,
Which Salamis and Artemisium saw,
Though now but whispered from thy gracious lips,
May sound hereafter loud. The wily chief,
Never disinclin'd to celebrate his deeds,
Now to this lovely auditress, whose aid
His further fame required, a tale began,
Where elegance of thought, and paint of words,
Embellished truth beyond her native guise,
In various lengthened texture of discourse,
A web of pleasing wonders to ensnare
The hearer's heart. Till midnight he pursues
A strain like magic to the listening fair;
Nor yet his thread to Salamis had reached,
Extended fine for many sweet repasts
To her inflamed desire of hearing more.
Timoxenus at length to due repose
Imparts the signal; they disperse. Her guest
Delights Acanthe's pillow; but her sire
In care lies anxious, lest the season rude
Detain that guest, and fatal umbrage give
To Demonax terrific. Morn and eve
Return. Acanthe drinks the pleasing stream
Of eloquence exhaustless in its flow,
Whose draughts repeated but augment her thirst.
Now in description's animating gloss
The various scenes at Salamis exalt
The fair one's mind. The Attic wives and maids
She emulates in wish, and sees in thought
Their beauteous ranks inspiring youth and age
To battle; now the tumult rude of Mars,
The crashing oars, the bloody-streaming decks
Chill her soft bosom; now that snowy seat
Of generous pity heaves; her azure eyes
Melt over Sandauce, in her years of bloom
Disconsolately widowed, and transpierc'd
By death-like horror at her children doomed
To savage Bacchus. Here the artful man
Dwells on his own humanity, but hides
The stratagem, which policy, not dimmed
By his compassion, on compassion built,
When to her freedom he restored the fair,
Who blameless helped his artifice to drive
From Greece her royal brother. To the worth
Of Artamanes tribute just he pays.
His own reception by the Spartan state
He colors high, the public chariot given,
The purple mantle, and the coursers proud,
Derived from those, who won the Olympian wreath
For Demaratus; but omits to speak,
How, while seducing vanity misled
His steps so far from Athens, she conferred
The naval guidance on Xanthippus brave,
And rule supreme on Aristides just.
The ensnaring story, to this period drawn,
While sev'n nocturnal rounds the planets ran,
Possesses all Acanthe, but disturbs
Her timid father, trembling at the power
Of Demonax; yet fondness often would smile
On her delight. The evening which succeeds
Themistocles, in fiction mixed with truth,
Not to Acanthe, but his host, began:
Accompanied from Sparta by the flower
Of her illustrious citizens I gained
Her borders, there indignant was appris'd,
That Demonax, whom heretofore I chased
From Oreus, now by Persian arms restored,
Was trampling on Euboea. Vengeance fired
My spirit; fifty of the Spartan troop
At once became associates of my zeal,
With fifty nobles more of Attic blood.
My full stored vessels at Eretria's port
From Sunium's cape arrived. He now unfolds
The wondrous series of his recent deeds.
What diverse passions, sweet Acanthe, rise
In thy attentive, generous mind? What sighs
Do Hyacinthus and Cleora wake,
What horror black Nicomachus, what joy
Revived Eretria, and Geraestus freed,
What admiration great Eudora's state,
What reverence good Tisander's sacred locks,
What detestation Demonax accursed?
Behold me here, Themistocles concludes,
Who lift in Athens' and Laconia's name,
A guardian shield over Chalcis. But thy sword,
Offensive drawn, shall utterly confound
The homicide thy neighbor. Ah! replies
Timoxenus, alarmed, thou little know
The might of Oreus. Demonax can range
Twelve thousand warriors culled from Asia's host,
Of trained Euboean youth and light-armed slaves
A multitude innum'rous on the plain.
His own exactions, and the Persian's boons,
O'erload his treasure. When the annual sun
In his new course three monthly terms has filled,
Expect Mardonius from Thessalia's bounds
On Greece to pour invasion. Ah! what help,
Should we exchange tranquillity for war,
From her own wants could Attica supply,
What Lacedaemon? -- Cool the Athenian here:
Weigh well the grace your Polyphemus died
In carnage grants, reserving for his last,
Most precious morsel, your Chalcidian wealth.
Shall this rich mansion, casket to a gem
Which none can value (earnest here he caught
Acanthe's earnest look) shall this abode
Feel pillage, insult, which my shudd'ring mind
Scarce dares to think, from that despoiler's hand,
Who, scourging half Euboea, in this hour
Dreads thee, great archon? Murderer, who cut
His own Cleora's thread in early bloom,
He trembles now, Timoxenus, at thee,
O blessed of parents, blessing such a child
As thy Acanthe; he thy vengeance dreads,
O paragon of fathers, dreads thy sword
Unsheathed with mine. Presumption I disclaim,
Or want of def'rence to the wise like thee.
Accept this roll; contemplate there the force
Of Amarynthus, of Carystus large,
Geraestus and Eretria; add the spears
Of Delphian Timon, of that hero famed,
Oilean Medon, who my signal watch
From Atalante's isle. Remote the time
For action; then deliberate. I wait
Without impatience thy resolves mature.
Retired, Acanthe, whose enlightened mind
Was blessed with native talents, as her form
With beauty, strives a while in reason's scale
To weigh the importance of this high attempt
Proposed; when something whispers, can thou doubt
Themistocles a moment? Can his sword
Do less, than conquer? Where the powerful arm,
The valor, where the policy to vie
With him, whose faculties no man can reach,
No god raise higher? These conceptions prove
A guide to fancy half the sleepless night
Through all the enchanting scenery of thought,
Which recollection of his brilliant deeds,
His courage, might, humanity, and grace,
His gentle manners, and majestic frame,
Exhibits lovely, dazzling and sublime
To melt her softness, and her wisdom blind.
Envelop'd now by slumber, in a dream,
Which overleaps all measured time and space,
She sees the laurell'd hero, as returned
From subjugated Oreus. On his spear
The gory head of Demonax he bears.
Her yet untainted purity of heart,
Which in sincerity of grief had mourned
Cleora's fate, applauds the just award
By Nemesis and Themis on the guilt
Of parricide. Her nobleness of soul
Enjoys the blessings which Euboea reaps
From such a conquest; but no vision kind
Would interpose a warning to allay
Excess of transport at the conqu'ror's sight.
From fair Acanthe's own retreat at night
A well-embellish'd gallery's long range
Bounds on the splendid chamber, which admits
Themistocles to rest. Acanthe here,
When magisterial duties from his home
Her father called, had entertained the guest
By morn, and feasted all and every morn
On rich profusion of his Attic words.
The sun was risen, and summoned from her couch
To this accustomed interview the fair.
Not meeting straight the object of her search,
As each preceding morn, she feels a pain,
That he is absent. With a voice though low
His chamber sounds; to listen she disdains,
Back to her own by delicacy led.
In cautious tones Sicinus with his lord
Was thus discoursing: In my wonted walk,
To watch events since thy arrival here,
I met Nearchus. Haste, he said, apprise
Themistocles that long ere opening day
His potent friends Timoxenus convened,
Heads of his faction. They refuse to arm.
Some, I suspect, are tainted by the gold
Of Demonax; the major part in all
Obey the timid archon. I have strength,
Which, when Themistocles commands, shall try
To force compliance from the coward's breast;
But would Acanthe, noble dame, espouse
The glorious cause, her prevalence could guide
His doting fondness, and control his fears.
Enough, replies Themistocles. Again
The learned tutor, fervent and sincere:
If thy persuasive eloquence could win
Her noble spirit to direct her sire,
It would be well. But, O resistless man,
Let thy persuasion moderate its charm;
Let not a generous lady's peace of mind
Become the victim of her winning guest;
The laws of hospitality revere.
Remember too the hymeneal vow,
Remember thy Timothea, fair and kind,
Who bore those children, pupils of my care;
She now in Athens at thy absence pines.
Misjudging friend, Timothea never pines,
When I am urging my career of fame,
Returns the chief. Euboeans must be freed.
She shall know all, and knowing will commend.
Go, charge Nearchus to suppress all thought
Of violence; his valor shall have scope,
Died in Barbarian, not in civil blood.
Thus he, well-caution'd that in Chalcis power
Aristocratic, both in wealth and strength,
Out-weigh'd the people. Then a splendid gem,
Of all his spoils the richest, he selects,
And from his chamber over the sounding plank,
Which floors the echoing gallery, proceeds.
Behold Acanthe; not the orient sky
Forth from its amber gates in summer's prime
The goddess-widow of Tithonus sends
More fragrant, nor in blushes more to charm.
A new emotion heaves her gentle breast
Of swelling snow. The Athenian distant, mute
Remains. To speak, her hesitating lips
A while, though prompted by her heart, delay;
When, shaped by chance, this elegant request
Flows from her unpremeditated thoughts:
So much obliged already, courteous guest,
By thy narration, I have cause to blush
While I solicit a recital new
Of one exploit, distinguished from the rest,
When Ariabignes fell before thy sword
In sight of Greece. Themistocles required
No repetition of the flattering suit,
But in transcendent energy of style,
Impressed the bright achievement on her mind
More deep, than even by novelty before.
Thus he concluded: Doubly now I bless
The auspicious hour when my successful hand
Despoiled the bravest chief in Asia's host
Of this, my humble offering to adorn
The fairest head in Greece. He said, the gem
Presenting graceful, which she turned aside,
Rejecting not the giver, but the gift;
And answered thus: To heaps of richest gems,
To all the tribute poured at Persia's throne,
Thy words alone, thy converse I prefer.
Her look perusing earnest, he proceeds:
Do thou refuse a token of regard
From one, thy hospitable hand has blessed
Beyond the expression of his grateful tongue?
When, at this hour departing, he again
Perhaps may never behold thee -- Ah! depart!
She in unguarded consternation sighs.
The Athenian here in seeming sadness thus:
Alas! thy father, I too surely know,
Will never join my arms; can I remain
Till this fair city, populous and rich,
This mansion, thy inestimable worth.
Become the prey of Demonax -- This heaven
Will never permit, she eagerly replies;
Thou will protect me -- Guardian to distress,
Thou will not hurry to desert a friend,
Whose hospitable kindness thou have praised.
Fill, fill with powerful argument the mouth
Of me thy suppliant for another week;
My words Timoxenus regards... The chief
By interruption sooths her troubled mind:
I came to save thee. If another week
Thou will employ... I will, I will, she said,
Do thou but stay; my father I will bind
To thee, whom victory can never forsake.
They part; his chamber he regains; not long
He meditates. Acanthe grants her aid
Spontaneous. Now to elevate her soul
By dignity of thought, and generous hope
Of glory, purchased by a noble deed,
He thus contrives: On tablets fair and large,
For her deportment toward a doting sire,
His ready style instruction copious draws,
Closed in these words: 'Among the guardians heaven
'To Greece has destined, an exalted mind
'Enrolls Acanthe; let her constant feet
'Pursue her leading genius; grateful flowers
'Before her steps shall freed Euboea strew;
'The brightest laurels shall Minerva choose
'Among the groves of Athens, to entwine
'The first of women with immortal wreaths;
'The Muses all shall triumph in their sex;
'A double rapture Aeschylus shall feel,
'Who, famed in martial action, as in song,
'Shall celebrate Acanthe.' To her hand
This by discreet Sicinus is conveyed.
Day after day the fair-one, as inspired,
Now forcibly persuasive, now in tears
Of importuning tenderness, assails
A parent fond. She penetrates his heart;
His resolution melts; at length his fears
To her superior guidance yield the rein.
Meantime, instructed by their chief, the train
Of Spartans and Athenians, all dispersed
Around the hospitable town, proclaim,
To listening ears, the well-advis'd design
Against the tyrant Demonax. Not long
Acanthe's purpose is unknown, divulged
By vigilant Sicinus; while each mind
Among the applauding populace is warmed,
Who venerate her name. Among the chiefs
The archon's weighty approbation known,
Has banished doubt; in council they decide
To march with great Themistocles. Light fame
Mounts on her wings, and through Euboea sounds
The preparations ardent. Shields and spears,
Swords, corselets, helms new furbish'd, banners old
Produced, which gallant ancestry had waved,
Youth now commences, ripened age renews
The exercise of arms. Nearchus loud
Extols Themistocles. Like glorious Mars
From his first trophies on Phlegraean fields
Among encircling brethren of the sky,
Who from his sword perpetual conquest hoped,
The Salaminian victor is revered
In Chalcis. Daily, hourly he surveys
The martial toil. Acanthe's presence aids;
His prudence leads her through these active scenes;
He talks on military themes alone,
And pictures freedom trampling on the necks
Of tyrants and Barbarians. This at length
Might have abated in a virtuous breast
The flame, his guilty policy had raised;
But fate and black conspiracy forbid.
End of the Fifteenth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the SIXTEENTH.
THAT month severe, unfolding to the sun
A frosty portal, whence his steeds renew
Their yearly round, was closed. Overcome at night
By toil uncommon, lay the Athenian chief
In early sleep profound, which early freed
His eyes again. In suffocating fumes
He wakes. Upstarting, round his limbs he wraps
The external garment, and Sicinus calls,
Who slept not distant. He unbars a door,
Which shows the gallery in flames. Down sinks
The crackling floor. A main sustaining beam
From end to end, transverse another, stands
Yet unconsum'd. Lo! trembling in his view
Acanthe; inextinguishable flames
Between them rage. A moment he devotes
To eye the gulf, which menaces with death
Him and his hopes, in him the Grecian weal.
Would Aristides hesitate thus long
To save the meanest? I before me see
On life's last verge a creature half divine.
Urged by that thought, along the burning beam
He rushes swift. He catches in his arms
The loose-rob'd fair-one, clinging round his neck.
Returning, not like Orpheus, who regained
Eurydice and lost, with matchless strength
He holds his prize above the pointed spires
Of fiery volumes, which on either side
Assail his passing steps. The son of Jove
Not more undaunted through the livid blaze
Of Pluto's mansion bore the victim pure
Of conjugal affection back to life,
Alcestis. Lo! Sicinus stops his feet
In their mid course. Thy chamber flames, he cries;
Speed over this traverse beam; yon open door
Leads to a passage yet unscorch'd. He guides;
The hero follows; danger here augments.
As through a swelling tide he wades through fire,
Which scath'd his brows, his blazing beard and hair,
Nor spared the garments of his precious charge;
Yet her unhurt through that befriending door
His unrelax'd rapidity conveys.
Of pain regardless to the public street
He thence descends; no populace is here;
That front vulcanian fury had not reached;
The other draws the throng; confusion there
Prevails, uproar and terror. On he speeds
Through frozen air, and falling flakes of snow,
Unwearied still his lovely burden holds,
Acanthe fainting; her uncovered breast,
Unless that ringlets of her locks unbound
Let fall at times their loose and silky threads,
Against his cheek with marble coldness pressed.
At last the dwelling of Nearchus nigh
Affords a refuge. On a friendly bed,
But not of rest, Themistocles in pain
Extends his limbs; Acanthe female slaves
Receive and cherish. Absent is their lord,
Who, at the head of military files
In haste collected, early, but in vain
Had issued forth. The palace is consumed.
Timoxenus to shelter he conducts;
The archon, trembling for his daughter's fate,
Beholds her safe, and feels no other loss.
Now all salute Themistocles; but first
Sicinus spoke: Infernal arts have laid
Thy palace waste, Timoxenus. I saw
Sulphurous, glutinous materials blaze
Close to the chamber of my lord's repose.
From lips nigh parched by torture of his pains
Themistocles began: My earthly term
If heaven required me now to close, enough
I have achieved to fill the trump of fame.
To have preserved thy daughter, generous host,
Would crown my glory! Medon is not far;
Well would that chief my vacant post supply,
Were I removed. But, friends, my hurts are light,
Which common succor of Machaon's art
Will soon repair; yet publish you my state
As dangerous; words and looks observe; keen spies
To Oreus send. Thus cautioned, each retired
Except Sicinus, who addressed his lord:
Will thou trust rumor in her flight at large
To sound thy state as dangerous? Shall a tale
To cozen foes, and try thy new allies,
Pass unrefuted to Cecropian shores,
Rive thy Timothea's bosom, grieve thy friends,
Dismay all Athens, and suspend that aid
Which she might lend thee in some adverse hour?
The hero then: O monitor expert!
Thou have forestalled me; instant will I spare
Thee to prevent such fears. Thou can not stem
The vexed Euripus. From Geraestus sail;
To my Timothea fly. Thy looks enquire
How to relate my story: Tell her all;
I have been faithful to my nuptial vow,
Yet have succeeded. Let the Athenians know
My force and destined enterprise; forbear
Of them to crave assistance; let them act
As humor sways. Cleander should thou meet,
In kindest greetings tell him, I should prize
Troezenian succor -- To its healing folds
I am solicited by sleep -- Farewell.
Not so Acanthe's troubles are composed.
When lenient balm of Morpheus steeped the cares
Of other bosoms, in the midnight damps
She quits a thorny pillow. Half arrayed,
With naked feet she roams a spacious floor,
Whence she contemplates that retreat of rest,
Enclosing all her wishes, hapless fair,
Without one hope; there stifling sighs, she melts
In silent tears. The sullen groan of winds,
Which shake the roof, the beating rain she hears
Unmoved, nor heeds stern winter, who benumbs
Her tender beauties in his harsh embrace.
O Love! to vernal sweets, to summer's air,
To bowers, which temper sult'ry suns at noon,
Art thou confined? To rills in lulling flow,
To flowers, which scent thy arbours of recess,
To birds, who sing of youth and soft desire?
All is thy empire, every season thine,
Thou universal origin of things,
Sole ruler, often a tyrant. Stealing steps
Full frequent draw Acanthe to the door
Of her preserver. While he sleeps, and pain
Excites no groan to wound her listening ear,
Anxiety abates; but passion grows.
Then recollecting his intrepid strides
Through fiery surge, devouring, as he passed,
His hair majesty, wreathing round his limbs
In torment, which none else to save her life
Would face, or could endure, unguarded thought
In murmuring transport issues from her lips.
To boundless obligation can I show
Less, than unbounded gratitude -- Base tongue,
Dare thou the name of gratitude profane,
Which is a virtue -- Oh! thou impious flame
Within my breast, not gratitude has blown
Thee from a spark to so intense a heat.
Depraved Acanthe, vagabond impure
Of night, from honor and its laws estranged,
A robber's criminal desire of spoil
Thou feel'st, a rage of sacrilege to force
The sanctuary of Hymen, and that fire,
Which law, religion, men and gods protect,
Quench on his altar by the hand of vice.
She could no more. A parting cloud revealed
The moon. Before the silver light she dropped
On her bare knee, enfeebled by the cold;
There fixed and freezing, from that awful power
Of chastity she seemed invoking help;
When, newly-waken'd by her piercing moan,
With smarting limbs Themistocles had left
His pillow; keener his internal pang,
To see an image of despair, the work
Of his fallacious art. On his approach,
At once the worn remains of spirit fled
From her cold bosom, heaving now no more.
The twilight glimmers on the rear of night;
His painful arms uplift her from the floor,
And to her couch with decency of care
Commit her lifeless charms. To sense restored,
Just as the morn's exploring eye unclos'd,
Acanthe, faint and speechless, by a sign
Forbids his presence; cautious he retires.
Now she indulged her agonies of shame
And self-reproach. With horrid visions teemed
Her agitated brain; black-rob'd despair
Stalked round her curtains, in his double grasp
A bloody poniard, and empoison'd bowl
To her sad choice upholding; but ere long
That thirsty, parching malady, which boils
The putrid blood, and ravages like fire,
Invades her frame. Whole days, whole nights she saw
A tender sire beside her pillow mourn,
Her beauties wasting hourly in his view.
To gentler forms delirium then would change;
The moon, so lately to her aid invoked,
She saw, descending from her lucid sphere,
Assume her shape of goddess, who inspired
A soothing thought to seek for health and peace
At her propitious oracle, not rob
So kind a father of his only joy.
Meantime the tidings vague of Chalcis burned,
And great Themistocles destroyed, had fame
Proclaimed aloud through each Euboean town,
Save where Sicinus, passing to his port
Of embarkation, spreads a milder tale,
Alarming still. Eretria scarce confines
Tisander's falt'ring age; but Cleon thence,
From Styra Lampon hastes; Geraestus sends
Eudemus; Hyacinthus feels no more
His own distress, and rapid, as the bird
Of Jupiter through heaven's aerial way,
Flies to his guardian friend. Eudora, skilled
In healing juices, condescends to mount
Herself the sacred axle, and her state
Displays in Chalcis worshipping her wheels.
The archon waits respectful on her steps,
When she salutes the Athenian, still recluse
From public view, though nigh restored. He bends
The knee before her. Him with stately grace
She raises, then addresses: Glad I see
Thy convalescence; to impart my help
Became a duty. So Diana willed,
By me consulted in her solemn grove
Mysterious; where an impulse warned my soul,
That none, but thou, can set Euboea free,
Protect the temples, and her tyrant quell.
He kissed her sacred vestment, and replied:
I now perceive how powerful are thy prayers.
To them, so favored by the gods, I owe
My preservation, which, O learned and wise,
Forestalls thy skill! Ah! since thy face has deigned
To cheer this city, by a long abode
Complete the blessing. As to ancient Troy
Was that Palladian image sent from heaven,
Be thou to Chalcis. At thy presence known
Pale Demonax will shrink. But first apply
Thy lenient succor to my friend's distress,
Whose daughter pines in sickness, and deserves
Thy full regard, most holy and benign.
To sad Acanthe's couch the archon leads
Eudora. Soon from Oreus tidings stern
Awake the native terrors in his heart;
In haste he greets Themistocles: O guest!
Fierce Demonax assembles all his force,
But first will try an embassy; expect
Within three days the tyrant's fell demands,
Which, not accepted, bring the avenging waste
Of his redoubled fury on our heads.
Is he so poor in counselors, began
The Athenian calm? Amid disabling storms
In this rough season will the insensate brute
Drag to the field his Asiatic host?
He thinks me dead; remember thou, my friend,
Themistocles is living, nor conceive
The rash, disturbed and self-tormenting breast
Of such a tyrant, whom the furies haunt,
Has fortitude and conduct to withstand
Themistocles in arms. Not half-reviv'd
Subjoins the archon: Thou alas! may want
The brave auxiliars promised to thy arms;
To thee alike unfriendly are the storms
Which lock our harbors; not a bark can sail;
Illustrious Medon dares not plough the surge
From Atalante; nor on Attic shores
Of our distress can Aristides hear.
True, answers firm Themistocles, though stung,
Nor shall we want him. Is not Cleon here,
Nearchus, Lampon, sharers of success
In my preceding conflicts? Of no price
Is staid Eudemus, Hyacinthus brave?
Is not Eudora present, sacred dame,
Who will her face majestical unveil
Among confederated ranks to bless
The Eleutherian banner, and inspire
Your populace with all religion's flame?
Yon despicable embassy prepare
To answer nobly, or let me be heard.
Now to this chamber summon all my friends.
Timoxenus convened them. Swift the chief
Dispatched them ardent to their native states,
Thence their collected citizens in arms,
The guardians of Chalcidic walls, to lead.
Three days elapsed; the embassy arrived.
Amid the senate, on his chair of state,
The archon sat. The Athenian's sure support
Behind is planted. Fierce in tone and look
The Ore^an herald represents his lord:
Ye men of Chalcis, Demonax requires
That you acknowledge Xerxes; that your gates
A Persian garrison admit. Be wise;
Refusal draws perdition on your heads.
Timoxenus turns pale; his falt'ring lips
Make no reply. The indignant senate mourn
Their state dishonored by a timid chief,
When timely steps Themistocles in sight;
Whose name is murmured through the applauding court.
As at the aspect of a single cloud,
Known by the trembling seaman to contain
Destructive blasts, the sail he swiftly furls
With anxious wish for shelter in the lee
Of some still shore; the herald thus relaxed
His altered features. Arrogance abashed
Foreboded ruin from that mighty arm,
In vigor braced by unexpected health.
In act to speak, the hero stretched his hand.
To fear and impotent distress he seemed
Extending refuge like a poplar tall,
Whose grateful branches cool the green descent
To some pellucid fountain, where his course
The o'erweary'd passenger suspends to slake
His eager thirst beneath such friendly shade.
Bent to provoke the tyrant, and mislead
His rashness, thus Themistocles -- his look
Transpierc'd the humbled herald while he spoke:
Begone, base Greek, from Chalcis. In her name
Defiance bear to Demonax, whose head
Shall on the gate of Oreus be affixed;
Thine to some trafficker in slaves be sold.
To Oreus back the astonished herald flies,
On whose report his impious lord incensed
Blasphemes the gods. The Furies he invokes,
To them, a human sacrifice, devotes
His first Chalcidian captives. From his host
Two chosen myriads on the plain he pours.
Brave Mindarus, by duty to his king
Compelled to service which his sword abhors,
Ariobarzanes, second in command,
Barbarian homicide, whose joy is blood,
The sev'n Geraestians sworn to deeds of hell,
With Lamachus, of foul misshapen frame,
Attend the tyrant, spreading to rude storms
His banner fell. So Satan from the north
Of heaven, his region once, with Moloc grim,
Beelzebub and Nisroc, led the host
Of impious angels, all the destined prey
Of Tartarus. Meanwhile the Athenian sat
Serene in Chalcis; his auxiliar bands
Successively arrived. Eretria sent
Twelve hundred spears; Carystus doubled those;
Beneath her standard Amarynthus ranged
Eudora's vassals; Styra cased in steel
Five hundred warriors tried; seven hundred more
Geraestus; Chalcis from her loins supplied
Four thousand youths, Nearchus was their chief.
The Athenian's care had traced the region round.
A level champaign toward septentrion skies
Extends; its western border is the frith,
Whose shore is bold, and pressed by waters deep.
A line of anchored vessels, which o'erlook
The land, the chief disposes here; whose crews
Were menials, trained to missile weapons light.
Full opposite, and cross the plain, he marked
A quarry, parent of the domes and towers,
Exalting Chalcis over Euboean towns.
The subterranean passages by all
Inscrutable, but laboring hinds, who cleave
Earth's marble womb, he garrisons with bands
From that rough breed, supported by a force
Of heavy-mail'd Chalcideans, left in charge
To bold Nearchus. So the watchful bees
Within their hive lie dangerous on guard
Against invasion of their precious stores,
Their industry and state. By morn the care
Of active scouts proclaims the adverse host
Not far, though yet unseen. The trumpet sounds
To fight; Eudora mounts her car, and wields
The arms of Dian. Through the spacious streets,
Where under ensigns of their several states
The warriors blaze in steel, from band to band
She, by her prompter well-instructed, towers
Like newborn Pallas from the head of Jove.
Her voice exhorts, her sentiments inspire,
Her majesty commands them; all are fired,
All, but Timoxenus. With armed files
In safe reserve, though destined to remain
Behind the walls, he dreads the important day.
His generous daughter, whose distempered mind
Eudora's converse had begun to calm,
Not so debased her thoughts; her country's cause
She felt; heroic talents she admired;
Him, who possessed them all, her heart recalled,
Though with abated passion. All his tale
Of Salamis, the stratagem derived
From conjugal affection, from the sight
Of forms beloved to animate the brave,
Recurr'd; she summoned to her languid bed
The most distinguished matrons, them besought
To mount the walls, and overlook the fight,
In all its terrors. Imitate, she said,
The Attic dames, that Chalcis may partake
Of Attic glory. They approving went.
O mortals, born to err, when most you smart
With self-reproach on guilty passion's wound,
Attempt one act of virtue! then your breasts
Will, like Acanthe's now, enjoy a calm
In supplication thus her wonder breaks:
Ye lights, who, shining on my darkness, deign
To lift the veil of error from my eyes,
Protecting powers, accept Acanthe's prayer
For this her native city, for a sire
Too kind, for great Themistocles, who draws
The sword of Justice -- Now with purer lips
I sound his name -- And, O illustrious dame!
Of all Athenian excellence the flower,
Blessed in a hero's love, the precious gift
Of hymeneal Juno, could thou know
What I have suffered by an envious flame,
What still I suffer, while remorse awakes
A thought of thee, thy generous soul would melt
In pity, even forgiveness, when I vow
To every chaste divinity invoked,
That I will see Themistocles no more.
This victory accomplished, renders back
Her virtue late a captive, which recalls
Affections pure, and sanctity of mind,
Still thoughts, and hope, restorative of peace.
But on a different victory intent
Themistocles within Chalcidic walls
Contains his ready host; nor means to throw
The portals open, nor display the face
Of battle, till the enemies in sight
Yield full advantage in his choice of time.
So in his deep concealment of green reeds
On Ganges' margin, or the flaggy strand
Of Niger's flood, from Aethiopia rolled,
The alligator vigilant maintains
His fraudful ambush, that unwary steps
May bring the prey to his voracious jaws.
End of the Sixteenth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the SEVENTEENTH.
SICINUS, long by unpropitious winds
Locked in Geraestus, to their fickle breath,
Half-adverse still, impatient spread the sail.
Six revolutions of the sun he spent
To gain Phaleron. To his lord's abode
He swiftly passed, when chance his wondering eyes
On Aristides fixed. An open space
Revealed the hero, issuing sage commands.
The omnipotent artificer of worlds
From chaos seemed with delegated power
To have entrusted that selected man.
From ashes, lo! a city new ascends,
One winter's indefatigable toil
Of citizens, whose spirit unsubdu'd
Subdues calamity. Each visage wears
A cheerful hue, yet solemn. Through the streets
Successive numbers from adjacent fields
Drive odorif'rous loads of plants and flowers,
Which please the manes. Amaranth and rose,
Fresh parsley, myrtle, and whatever the sun,
Now not remote from Aries in his course,
Called from the quick and vegetating womb
Of nature green or florid, from their seats
Of growth are borne for pious hands to weave
In funeral chaplets. From the Grecian states,
To honor Athens, their deputed chiefs,
Cleander foremost, throng the public place;
Whence Aristides with advancing speed
Salutes Sicinus: Welcome is thy face,
Good man, thou know; from Athens long estranged,
Now doubly welcome. In thy looks I read
Important news. Retiring from the crowd,
Swift in discourse, but full, Sicinus ran
Through all the feries of his lord's exploits,
Which drew this question: Has thy patron ought
To ask of Aristides? Silent bowed
Sicinus. Smiling then, the chief pursued:
Do thou attend the ceremonial pomp
Of obsequies to morrow; when the slain
At Salamis receive their just reward
From us, survivors by their glorious fall.
I have detained thee from Timothea long,
The first entitled to thy grateful news.
Now to that matron, whom beyond himself
He prized, Sicinus hastens. At her loom
He finds her placid over a web, whose glow
Of colors rivall'd Iris. where intent
She wove the achievements of her lord. Her skill
Had just portray'd Sandauce in the arms
Of Artamanes, when her children's doom
Congealed her breast. Themistocles in look
Expresses all that subtlety humane,
Which cozened superstition of her prey;
His godlike figure dignifies the work.
Two boys, two lovely little maids, surround
The illustrious artist, while their eyes pursue
Their mother's flying fingers in delight
Attentive. But their tutor once in view,
From absence long regretted, light with joy
To him they bound. Sicinus melts in tears
Of soft affection. They around him lift
Their gratulating voices, on his neck
Cling, and contend for kisses from those lips
Approved in kindness; as a fluttering brood
With chirping fondness, nature's sweetest note,
Enclose their feathered parent, who attunes
Her tender pipe, and spreads endearing plumes.
Sicinus, cries Timothea, thou do bring
Auspicious tidings; from my hero I
Expect no less. Unaided by the state,
A private man, like Hercules he went,
In his own powers confiding, and secure.
Sit down, thou witness of my husband's worth,
Thyself a proof of his discerning choice
In thee, good man, by me and mine revered,
Discreet and faithful. No, Sicinus spoke,
Thou art that proof, most faithful, most discreet,
Most excellent of women. Come, she said,
Suppress my praises; let me hear of none,
But his; and copious let thy story flow.
Glad through his whole heroic theme the sage,
By time to Attic eloquence inured,
Expatiates large; where loftiness of plan
Sustained by counsel, with exhaustless art
Pursued, now brought to valor's final proof,
Must end in sure success. His lord's commands
Observing strict, Acanthe's precious worth,
In talents, form and manners, he describes;
How she the aid of Chalcis had procured,
Her favor how Themistocles had won.
If he pursue to victory his plan,
Timothea said, and borrow from her hand
The means of glory, and the general good,
Tell him, that I can imitate with joy
Andromache, who fostered on her breast
Her Hector's offspring by a stolen embrace.
Not such thy lot, sole mistress of a form
Matched by perfection of the mind alone,
Sicinus cheerful answered. I attest
To this my firm belief the all-ruling sire,
Let Horomazes be his name, or Jove.
Thou giv'st me transport -- Thou have leave to smile,
My good Sicinus, she replies -- But heaven
I too attest, that transport I conceive
Less for my own, than fair Acanthe's sake.
So amiably endowed, so clear in fame,
Her purity resigning, she, alas!
Had proved the only suff'rer. Woman fallen,
The more illustrious once, the more disgraced,
Never can resume her luster. Laurels hide
A hero's wanton lapse. The Greeks would bless
The guile which serves them, but to endless shame
The generous auth'ress of that service doom.
Thou said, my husband from Cleander's sword
Solicits help; Cleander is my guest
With Ariphilia; ready in this port
His squadron lies; he plough'd the seas in quest
Of earliest action for the common cause.
Come, they are waiting for the night's repast.
She rose; Sicinus followed, and renewed
In Ariphilia's and Cleander's ear
The wondrous narrative, but cautious veils
Acanthe's love. Timothea's looks approved.
He then concluded: Thus, to battle roused,
The force of half Euboea cased in steel
Against the tyrant Demonax I left;
But in the chase of that devouring wolf
On thee relies Themistocles for help,
Undaunted chief of Troezen. He replies:
Should I withhold it, by the immortal gods,
The titles both of soldier and of friend
Were mine no longer. Ariphilia then,
Sweet as a vernal flower in early prime,
A Grace in manner, Hebe in her form:
Say, gentle sage, of Delphi's reverend priest,
Of Haliartus, and Oileus' son,
Kind guests of mine, no tidings do thou bear?
He answers: Them in Atalante's isle
The turbulent Euripus yet confines;
They soon, fair matron, to thy lord and mine
Will add their strength and level from its base
The tyrant's hold. Amid this converse sweet
The warrior-poet Aeschylus appears,
A grateful visitant to all. He spoke:
Fair dame, admit me, introducing men
Who saw thy gallant consort yester morn
Erecting trophies; men themselves renowned,
Oilean Medon, and Apollo's priest
Long lost, whom I, unknowing of their fate,
Have clasped in transport, as Laertes' son,
When he reviewed his metamorphos'd friends
In Circe's island to their pristine forms
Uprising by her charms. Timothea glad
Salutes the entering heroes, Medon known
Before, Leonteus, Delphi's holy seer
With Artemisia's brother, strangers all,
But of deportment to command regard.
Then spoke the Locrian: First of matrons, hail!
On Salaminian sands we parted last.
I have been long in Atalante's isle
Sequestered; but, determined to attend
The funeral honors which the morning pays
To brave Athenians slain, an hour serene
To cross the strait Euripus I embraced
For Chalcis. There thy consort fresh I found
In gathered palms from Demonax overthrown
That day in battle. Hear the glorious tale,
Which from Themistocles himself I learned.
He, well-inform'd, the chiefs in either host
Distinctly told, their history, their names,
Their birth and deeds, on Hyacinthus most,
As most esteemed, enlarged. That hapless youth
Was husband to Cleora; daughter she
Of Demonax was poisoned by her sire.
Survey this tablet, which before my sight
Thy hero took, with readiness of skill
Delineating the fight. Show this, he said,
To my Timothea, friendly thou explain.
This part is Chalcis, this a champaign wide;
Here flows the sea, there winds a quarry dark.
Conceive a river by impetuous floods
O'erswol'n, and spread irregular, and wild,
Beyond its bounds; tumultuous thus the foes
At first appeared. Expecting to surprise,
Themselves surprised at unexpected bands,
Through opened portals issuing to the plain,
Are forced, disheartened by a toilsome march,
To range their numbers for immediate fight.
The wary son of Neocles suspends
The attack, till bursting drifts of southern clouds
Beat on the faces of his harrass'd foes
A storm of blinding sleet; then rushes down
In three deep columns. Of the Ore^an line
The right, which Mindarus conducting wheels
Along the sea's flat margin, sore is galled
By unremitted showers from bows and slings
On well-rang'd vessels. Lamachus commands
The left. Nearchus from the quarry pours
An ambush'd force, and breaks the hostile flank.
Compact of vet'rans, culled from every state,
That wedge of war, whose bristly front displayed
Athenian spears and Spartan mingling beams,
(Themistocles the leader) slow but sure
Bears down the center. At a second breach
The line gives way to Cleon, at a third
To swift Carystians. Not a life is spared
By wronged, incensed Eretrians, not a life
By Hyacinthus, boiling with revenge
For his Cleora; while her cruel sire
Exerts a desperate valor to revive
Hope in an army spiritless by toil,
By sudden onset broken, at the name
And sight of thy Themistocles abashed.
The rout is general. In the bloody chase
Five thousand slain the conquerors despoil.
Thy husband, prudent in success, preserves
Two thousand heads, all Persian, to redeem
Eretrian captives from the tyrant's bonds.
He, thus defeated, not subdued, retired
To Oreus. Powerful remnants of his host
He, draws within her circuit; furnished well
From boundless treasure, threatens there to hold
A firm defense, till, summoned by the spring,
Mardonius quit Thessalia, and employ
The whole confederated power of Greece.
That threat Themistocles will render vain,
Exults Timothea; he unfinished leaves
No toil begun. Again the Locrian chief:
Now my first duty is discharged; the next
To Ariphilia from her guest is due.
O soft in virtue, elegantly fair,
Cleander's favored paranymph retains
Thy hospitable kindness ever dear;
Thine too, my gallant host, by Neptune blessed
In his own priestess, and with brightest fame
On his own floods adorned. The pleasing hours
All spend in mutual gratulation sweet,
Till for the morn's solemnity they part.
Below the Aegalean mountain, where the king
Of humbled Asia on his golden throne
Was seated late, spectator of his shame
At Salamis, a level space extends
To Neptune's border. Green Psittalia there
Full opposite exhibits, high and large,
A new erected trophy. Twenty masts
Appear, the tallest of Phoenician pines,
In circular position. Round their base
Are massive anchors, rudders, yards, and oars,
Irregularly pil'd, with beaks of brass,
And naval sculpture from Barbarian sterns,
Stupendous by confusion. Crested helms
Above, bright mail, habergeons scaled in gold,
And figured shields along the spiry wood
Up to the aerial heads in order wind,
Tremendous emblems of gigantic Mars.
Spears, bristling through the intervals, uprear
Their points obliquely; gilded staves project
Embroidered colors; darts and arrows hang
In glittering clusters. On the topmost height
The imperial standard broad, from Asia won,
Blazed in the sun, and floated in the wind.
Of smooth Pentelic marble on the beach,
Where flowed the brine of Salamis, a tomb
Insculptur'd rose. Achievements of that day
When Asia's navy fell, in swelling forms
Filled on three sides the monument. The fourth,
Unfinished, opened to the interior grave.
Now, through Minerva's populace, who kept
Religious silence, first white-vested maids,
Who from the strand of Salamis had seen
The patriots slain, their sepulcher approach
With wreaths and garlands; then of chosen youths
A troop, whose valor had the fight survived.
The younger matrons, husbands ripe in age,
Nor less in fame, succeed. Of either sex
The elders follow. Kindred of the dead
Come next, their wives, their children. Urns, which hold
The sacred ashes, are in open cars
Discovered. One close chariot is reserved
For them, whose bodies fate from search concealed.
Last Aristides, in his civil robe,
Attracts the gazing multitude; his wheels,
Myronides, Xanthippus, Cimon great,
Aminias, Aeschylus, and every chief
For prowess known attend. Around the tomb
Are placed the children; roses in the bud
Entwine their brows; their little grasp upholds
Green sprigs of myrtle; well instructed, all
Refrain from weeping over paternal dust,
Deposited by glory in the grave.
A high tribunal Aristides mounts;
Near him, on every side, are seats assigned
To strangers held in honor. Medon there,
Leonteus, Timon, and the brother known
Of Caria's queen, Cleander, numbers more
From states ennobled in their names are seen.
The godlike man uprises; on the tomb
His eyes he fixes first; their luster mild
He then diffuses over the assembly vast,
Where not a tongue is heard, nor gesture seen.
So through unclouded skies the argent lamp
Of Dian visits with her light benign
A surface broad of water, where no breeze
Excites a swell, nor sighs among the reeds.
Your fathers, wise and liberal, he began,
Appointed public obsequies to all
Who die in battle for the public good,
Ye men of Athens. Not a groan, or tear
Must violate their ashes. These have gained
What all should envy; these, by virtuous death,
The height of human excellence have reached,
Have found the surest path to endless joy
With demigods and heroes in those fields,
Which tyrants never can enter to molest
The blissful region; but are far removed
To realms of horror, and from righteous Jove
Endure the pains they merit from mankind.
There, if retaining, as they surely must,
The memory of things beloved on earth,
It will enhance their happiness to know
Their offspring cherished, and their wives revered
By grateful Athens, whom their glorious fall
Exalts, whose daughters they preserved from shame,
Whose sons from bonds. This bliss benignant Jove,
Who loves the patriot, never can withhold
From them, who little would deserve that name,
Unless those sweetest charities they feel,
Paternal cares, and conjugal esteem,
The props of public and domestic weal.
Them to defend, Athenians, to maintain
Inviolate your altars, tombs and laws,
Let contemplation of the present rites
Give principle new strength. Behold a foe,
Who has profaned your ancestors in dust.
Lo! on a cross Leonidas affixed,
His patriot bones exposed to bleaching winds
By that Barbarian, Xerxes. Kings alone,
Obtuse of mind, illiberal, the brutes
Of human nature, can devise and act
Barbarities like these. But such a foe
Leagues Heaven against him. Nemesis will join
With Grecian Mars, and all her furies plant
His foot on Asia's boundaries, to shake
An impious tyrant on his native throne.
Then of the patriot dead, whose swords prepared
Your way to glory, and achiev'd their own,
This recent tomb, when dressed in eastern spoils,
Will best delight their manes, and proclaim
To Gods and men your gratitude and arms.
He paused. Aegaleos echoed to the sound
Of acclamation; Salamis replied.
But as the sun, when casual clouds before
His intercepted light have passed away,
Renews his splendor, so the righteous man
In eloquence and counsel thus again
Breaks forth: Xanthippus, in the gales of spring,
To brave the coast Barbaric you decree;
While, on Boeotia's plains, your phalanx meets
Mardonian ranks. Now hear of wondrous acts
To you unknown, unpromis'd, just performed
By an Athenian. Winter has not slept
Inactive; your Themistocles has roused
That sluggish season by the clang of war;
A force creating by his matchless art,
He has overthrown fierce Demonax, and cooped
Within his fort. Delib'rate swift, my friends,
How to assist your hero; Justice calls
On every tongue ingenuous so to style
Themistocles; who wants but slender help.
Your skill, Athenians, in surmounting walls
Excels in Greece. Select experienced bands;
An instantaneous effort may overwhelm
Beneath the ruins of his last retreat
Euboea's scourge, whose prevalence might shut
That granary of Athens, and transfer
To Asia's numerous camp your needful stores.
All in applauding admiration hear
Disinterested virtue, which exalts
A rival's merit. But thy generous breast,
To all superior in sensation high
Divine Timothea, entertains a warmth
Of grateful rapture in thy lord's behalf,
Which shines confessed. Sicinus, at her side,
Condemns his lord, who nothing would request
Of Aristides; him, who grants unasked,
His soul adores. Aminias, rising, spoke;
A fearless warrior, brother to the bard,
Like him sincere, less polished, learned and wise,
By right intention more than conduct swayed:
Who can for all deliberate so well,
As Aristides singly? Let us fight;
But with sole power of counsel and command,
Throughout this war's duration, by a law
Invest him uncontrollable. Up starts
The interrupting patriot, nor permits
The people's confidence in him to grow
In wild excess: Never yet the almighty sire
Created man of purity to hold
A trust like this. Athenians, mark my words;
I am your legal military chief;
If your immediate safety should require
An use of power, unwarranted by laws,
I will exert it, not accept as law;
The censure or acquittal of my act
With you shall rest. At present I advise,
That from Phaleron Aeschylus transport
Two thousand skilful vet'rans. Him the seed
Of Neocles approves; not less in arms
Than arts excelling, him your warriors prize.
Them, ere two monthly periods of the sun,
You cannot want. Thick verdure must invest
The meadows, earth her foodful stores mature,
Before Mardonius can his numbers lead
From Thessaly remote. Ere then, my friends,
Themistocles will conquer, and erect
Cecropia's standard on Ore^an walls;
Your timely aid he timely will restore
To fill the army of united Greece.
The general voice assents, and all retire,
While to her home Timothea brings her guests.
To her Sicinus prudent: Not an hour,
Till I rejoin thy consort, should be lost.
She then: Most faithful, from my arm receive
This bracelet rich in gems, Barbaric spoil;
Bear this to Chalcis, to Acanthe give;
Say, how I prize her elevated mind,
Enabling my Themistocles to quell
The hateful breed of tyrants. Further say,
The man engaging her connubial hand
I should esteem the favorite of gods.
Stay; Haliartus shall the present bear.
Thou to my lord a messenger of love
Shall go, Sicinus; words to thee I leave;
My heart thou know. One fervent wish impart,
That he in private, as in public ties,
With Aristides may at last unite.
So spoke the first of women. Troezen's chief
Subjoined: Sicinus, wait till morn; embark
With these our friends of Atalante's isle
Aboard my squadron; soon will southern gales
My succor waft, and jointly we proclaim
Brave Aeschylus to follow. Let us greet
Him, who our valor into action calls
For every chief to envy; him to clasp
My bosom pants, a hero, who surmounts
The sloth of winter while so many brave
Hang up their weapons. Ariphilia heard,
Sat mute and sad. To her Timothea thus:
We, who are wives of soldiers, will remain
Together, cheerful watch for tidings dear
Of their achievements, and rejoice at home.
End of the Seventeenth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the EIGHTEENTH.
THREE days transport Cleander and his friends;
Timoxenus admits such welcome guests,
Who bring new succors. From Chalcidic walls
The Athenian chief was absent. With a pace
Unstable yet, a calm, but languid mien,
To grace her father's board Acanthe leaves
Her chamber; pale, but fragrant as the rose,
Which bears the hue of lilies, she descends.
Her soon the Carian, mindful of his charge,
Thus with Timothea's salutation greets:
A costly bracelet, from her beauteous arm
The espoused of great Themistocles unclasp'd
On my departure, and in words like these,
Of gracious tone, delivered to my care:
"Bear this to Chalcis, to Acanthe give;
"Say how I prize her elevated mind,
"Enabling my Themistocles to quell
"The hateful breed of tyrants. Further say,
"The man engaging her connubial hand
"I should esteem the favorite of gods."
Timoxenus is pleased; Acanthe's cheeks
A burning blush of perturbation feel.
Not soon recov'ring from a start of thought
At the first mention of Timothea's name,
She took, she kissed the present, and disguised
Her conscious trouble under busy care
To fix the bracelet in its lovely seat.
The guests are placed around; her presence charms
The banquet. Though the luster of her eyes
Grief had eclipsed and sickness, though her mouth
Had lost the ruby tinct and pleasing flow,
By melancholy silence long confined,
Her gestures speak the graces of her soul.
Troezene's captain, lively as the lark
Whose trill preludes to nature's various voice,
Begins discourse: Perhaps, accomplished fair,
Thou do not know the messenger, who brought
Timothea's present, Haliartus styled;
He is derived from Lygdamis, a name,
Ionia boasts. His daughter, Caria's queen,
Famed Artemisia, heroine of Mars,
Calls Haliartus brother; but from Greece
Could never alienate his truth. His sword
From violation, in his first essay
Against Barbarian multitudes, preserved
Bright Amarantha, consort to the king
Of Macedon, more noble in her sire,
Who sits beside thee, Timon, Delphi's priest.
Then Medon: How unwilling do I check
Our social converse. Generous host, no tongue
Can duly praise thy hospitable roof;
Yet we must leave its pleasures; Time forbids
Our longer stay. Two thousand Locrian spears,
Three hundred Delphians Atalante holds;
Them Aeschylus arriving will expect
To find in Chalcis. Gladly shall I hail,
Timoxenus rejoins, your quick return,
To guard these walls. Themistocles is marched
To conquer Aegae, rather to redeem
Her state aggrieved, which courts his guardian hand.
Sicinus here: Illustrious men, farewell;
In Aegae soon Themistocles shall know
Of your arrival. Instant he began,
All night pursued his course, and saw the morn
Shine on that city yielded to his lord.
To him Sicinus counts the powerful aids
Expected, large of Aristides speaks,
Large of Timothea; in a rapturous style
Dwells on her wish for amity to bind
The two Cecropian heroes. Glad replies
Themistocles: On every new event
She rises lovelier, more endeared; her worth
Shall meliorate her husband. I obey,
Content on this wide universe to see
Myself the second, Aristides first;
For still he towers above me. Did thou say,
Cleander, Medon, were already come,
That Aeschylus was coming? All their force
I want, Sicinus; listen to my tale.
Last night an ancient personage, unknown,
In length of beard most awful, not unlike
Tisander, asked an audience, and obtained
My private ear. Themistocles, he said,
If I deliver tidings, which import
Thy present safety, and thy future weal,
I shall exact thy promise in the name
Of all the gods and goddesses to wave
Enquiry, whence I come, or who I am.
First know, that Mindarus, the Persian chief
In Oreus, newly for Thessalia's coast
Embarked, whose neighboring Pagasaean cape
Looks on Euboea. He this day returned,
And reinforcement from Mardonius brought,
Ten thousand spears. Thessalia has supplied
Three thousand more. An army huge defends
The Ore^an circuit. Further be informed
That sev'n Geraestian homicides are sworn
To thy destruction. By their secret wiles
The house of rich Timoxenus was fired;
Them in the field hereafter, all combined
Against thy head, their sable arms will show;
The hideous impress on their shields is death.
Farewell, thou hero; if my parting step
Thou trace, farewell for ever; else be sure
Again to see me in thy greatest need.
In mystery, Sicinus, not of heaven,
But human art, immersed is some event,
Which mocks my utmost fathom; but my course
Is plain. In fruitless search I waste no thought,
Who, as my servant, smiling fortune use,
Nor yet am hers, Sicinus, when she frowns.
Now mark: One passage winds among the hills
Encircling Oreus. When the vanquished foe
Her bulwarks sought for shelter, I detached
Eretrian Cleon, Hyacinthus brave,
And with Carystian bands Nicanor staid,
Who unoppos'd the strong defile secured;
There shall my banner, strengthened by the youth
Of Aegae, soon be planted; there shall wait,
Till each auxiliar, thou have named, arrive,
Then pour on Demonax the storm of war.
Let Troezen's squadron and the Athenian ride
Before his port, Cleander have the charge.
Speed back to Chalcis; publish these resolves.
They part. Not long Themistocles delayed
To gain the mountains; nor three days were passed
When brave Nearchus, Haliartus bold,
The illustrious brothers of Oilean race,
Great Aeschylus and Timon, with their bands
Arrived, and joined him at the strong defile
Which now contained his whole collected force.
Thence he descended on a morning fair,
First of that month, which frequent sees the sun
Through vernal showers, distilled from tepid clouds,
Diffuse prolific beams over moistened earth
To dress her lap, exuberant and fresh,
With flowers and verdure. Terrible the bands
Succeeding bands expatiate over the fields.
So when an earthquake rives a mountain's side,
Where stagnant water, gathered and confined
Within a deep vacuity of rock,
For centuries has slept, released, the floods
In roaring cataracts impetuous fall;
They roll before them shepherds and their flocks,
Herds and their keepers; cottage, fold and stall,
Promiscuous ruins floating on the stream,
Are borne to plains remote. Now Oreus lifts
Her stately towers in sight. Three myriads armed
Before the walls has Demonax arrang'd
In proud defiance. So, at first overthrown,
Antaeus huge, uprising in his might
Fresh and redoubled by his parent earth,
Returned to combat with Alcmena's seed.
Wide stretched the Ore^an van; the wary son
Of Neocles to equal that extent
Spread his inferior number. By a front
Not depth of line the tyrant he deceived;
But of Athenian veterans he formed
A square battalion, which the martial bard
Ranged on the sea-beat verge; the other wing
Is Medon's charge, where thirty shields in file
Compose the Locrian column. Ere the word
Is given for onset, thus his wonted guard
Themistocles addresses: If a troop
In sable cuirass, and with shields impressed
By death's grim figure, at my head should aim,
Let them assail me; be it then your care,
Postponing other duty, to surround,
To seize and bear them captives from the fight.
He marched; himself the cent'ral phalanx led;
The floating crimson of his plumage known,
Minerva's bird his crest, whose terrors shook
The bloody field of Chalcis, soon proclaim
Themistocles. Now targets clash with shields;
Barbarian sabres with Cecropian swords,
Euboean spears with spears in sudden shock,
Bellona mingles. Medon first o'erthrew
Thessalia's line, his temperate mind was stung
By indignation; Timon bathed his lance
In their perfidious blood; Leonteus gored
Their dissipated ranks. A chosen troop
To their assistance Lamachus advanced;
Him Haliartus met; his sinewy arm,
Which could have quelled Lycaon, first of wolves,
The Erymanthian, or Aetolian boar,
Smote to the ground the miscreant's bulk deformed,
Whose band, recoiling, leave the victor space
To drag him captive. Rout and carnage sweep
That shattered wing before the Oilean swords;
Not with less vigor Aeschylus o'erturn'd
The other. Mindarus in vain opposed
Undaunted efforts. Pallas seemed to fire
Her own Athenians; Neptune, in the shape
Of Aeschylus, seemed landed from his conch
To war, as once on Troy's Sigaean strand;
Or to have armed the warrior-poet's grasp
With that strong weapon, which can rock the earth.
Not in the center suddenly prevailed
Themistocles; the sev'n Geraestians, leagued
By hell, combining their assassin points
Against the hero, for a while delayed
His progress; firmly their united blows
His shield received. So Hercules endured
The sev'nfold stroke of Hydra; but the zeal
Of Iolaus to assist that god
In his tremendous labor, was surpassed
By each Athenian, each Laconian guard,
Who never left Themistocles. They watched
The favoring moment; with a hundred spears
They hedged the traitors round, forbade escape,
Clasped and conveyed them living from the field.
Still Demonax resists; while near him towers
Ariobarzanes, moving rock of war
In weight and stature. Of Euboeans, forced
By savage power to battle, numbers lower
Surrend'ring banners, some to Cleon, some
To humble Styra's well-conducted sword,
And thine, sad youth, a while by glory taught
To strive with anguish, and suspend despair,
Cleora's husband. Mindarus appears,
Who warns the tyrant timely to retreat,
Ere quite envelop'd by the wheeling files
Of Aeschylus and Medon. Lo! in front,
More dangerous still, amid selected ranks,
Themistocles. The monster gnash'd his teeth;
His impious voice, with execrations hoarse,
Assailed the heavenly thrones; his buckler firm
He grasped, receding to the Ore^an wall;
Where, under vaulted sheets of missive arms
Whirled on his fierce pursuers, through the gates
He rushed to shelter. Thus a mighty boar,
Of Calydonian strength, long held at bay,
The hunter's point evading, and the fangs
Of staunchest hounds, with undiminish'd ire
Red in his eyes, and foaming from his jaws,
Impetuous plunges in accustomed woods.
The Athenian chief, who sees the incessant storms
Of darts and arrows from the rampart's height,
Retreats; but swift his numbers, now enlarged
By yielding thousands of Euboean race,
Distributes round the invested town to guard
Each avenue and station. From the sea
Cleander threatens. In his evening tent
The general views the captives; frowns condemn
The sev'n Geraestians to their former chains.
The hero smiles on Lamachus, the prize
Of Haliartus, and familiar thus:
Again, my Tyrian trafficker in slaves,
I greet thee: Son of Lygdamis, what praise
To thy distinguished efforts is not due?
This precious head to my disposal yield.
He then proceeds to Lamachus apart:
Now take thy freedom, villain; to my use
See thou employ it, else expect to die.
Your land, remember, and your sea are mine;
Soon on the head of Demonax this arm
Shall dash yon bulwarks; what I speak is fate.
Thou have thy option, go. Sicinus, hear;
This man is free; conduct him through the camp.
Now from his friends sequestered, on a couch,
Which never care disturbs, he slept till dawn,
When, roused by heralds from the town, again
The leaders he convened. Before them came
Arbactus, fierce Barbarian, who began:
Themistocles of Athens, in the name
Of Mindarus the Persian, I defy
Thy arm to combat in the listed field;
The same defiance to thy boldest chiefs
Ariobarzanes sends. If you prevail,
The royal host shall quit Euboea's isle,
Which shall submit to Xerxes if you fall.
Up Hyacinthus, Haliartus, start
Indignant. First the young Carystian spoke:
Are they so gross in ignorance to hope,
Themistocles will stoop to single fight
With twice-o'erthrown Barbarians, who, unsafe
Behind a rampart, tremble at his power?
But if the Persian Mindarus would try
A Grecian's single valor, O permit,
Themistocles, thy soldier to assert
The Grecian fame. The friend of Medon next:
The same permission I implore, O chief,
Invincible thyself; that all this host
May witness my fidelity to Greece.
Themistocles subjoins: Barbarian, go,
Provide thy champions; ours thou see prepared
For honor, not decision of the doom
Reserved for Demonax; whose final lot
Lies in my breast alone. The herald back
To Oreus speeds. The prudent chief pursues:
My Hyacinthus, all thy wrongs I feel;
But, if resentment can afford the grace
I ask thee, lend to policy thy arm:
Take Mindarus thy captive. From thy proofs
Of might and firmness, Haliartus brave,
My wish is lifted high in hope to see
Ariobarzanes gasping at thy feet.
He rises. Straight embattled on the plain,
His army shows a formidable gleam
To Demonax. Still numerous for defense
Barbarian warriors, and Thessalian, throng
The battlements of Oreus. Through the gates,
In solemn pace and slow, a herald train
Precede their champions. Heralds from the camp
Produce the illustrious Haliartus clad
In richest arms, the gift of Caria's queen;
A twig of flend'rest laurel, twisted round
A shepherd's crook, in portraiture adorned
His modest buckler. Grim his foe advanced
In mail blood-colour'd, with a targe of gold,
Ariobarzanes. Hyacinthus next
Appears in tried habiliments of war,
Which on his dearest patron Mars had seen
In Marathonian fields. A plumage black,
Denoting grief, he carries; on his shield
A female image, and the form of Death,
Who blasts her graces. Mindarus approached
In armor studded bright with orient gems;
His buckler too a shape of beauty pale,
Stretched on a funeral pyre, exhibits sad;
Of pearl her limbs, of rubies were the flames.
Ere they engage, the Persian warrior thus:
Since my encounter, whether through disdain
Or policy I know not, is refused
By your commander, not through fear I know,
Do thou in courtesy disclose thy name,
Thy rank in Grecian armies. May thou prove
In luster such as Mindarus would choose
To be the opponent of a satrap's arm.
Then tremble, satrap, at my name, the name
Of Hyacinthus, fierce the youth returns;
Cleora's husband, whom thy barbarous love
Has wronged, whom hell-born Demonax has damned
To ever-during torment, shakes this lance,
By vengeance pointed and invet'rate hate.
Young man, rejoins the Persian, on thy grief
I drop a pitying tear, while thou do wrong
Me clear of wrong to thee. No barbarous love
Was mine; unconscious of your nuptial tie,
Till she confessed it to her savage sire,
My flame was holy; not a thought impure
To violate a right could taint my breast.
But that I loved her, Hyacinthus, sure
He, who her dear perfections knew so well,
Must wave his wonder; that her fate o'erwhelms
My spirit, never to revive, I feel;
That my disastrous passion caused her doom,
Blame both our fortunes, not my guiltless heart.
If yet thy anguish can a moment look
Compassionate on me -- but I forgive
Unjust reproaches from a grief like thine,
Which should, which must exceed my own, my own
Exceeding after thine all other woe.
Now Hyacinthus melted, but observed,
That during this sad interview the spear
Of Haliartus at his feet had laid
Ariobarzanes dead. Heart-stung by shame
At his inaction, with so many chiefs,
With such an army, and the godlike son
Of Neocles spectators, he begins
The fight, but recollects that friend's request.
The Persian more effeminate desponds
At past defeats, and present grief renewed,
Whose weight, though lighter, he less firmly bore,
Than did the hardy Greek his heavier share
Of woe. Yet fearless he maintains the strife
With native force devoid of gymnic skill,
In which confiding Hyacinthus often
Inverts his spear, and levels bloodless strokes,
Still vigilant to ward the hostile point,
Often over his buckler glancing, though impelled
By active strength. At last a ponderous blow
Full on the Persian's front descends; a groan
Is heard throughout the rampart as he falls;
The groan redoubles, as the victor bears
That leader captive to the investing camp.
To his own tent Themistocles admits
The Persian's battered, but unwounded limbs;
He praises Hyacinthus; he consoles
The noble foe, commends to healing rest,
And at returning morn salutes him thus:
If thee unransom'd, Mindarus, I send
To Oreus, can thou pity her estate
Cursed in a monster? Can thou feel the wound
Of thy own glory longer to support
The worst of men, excluded by his crimes
From heaven's protection, and the laws of faith?
Will thou, to spare whole rivulets of blood
Greek and Barbarian, render to my arms
The town, and thus procure thyself a name
To live for ever, by a righteous act,
Delighting gods and mortals? Thee my ships
Shall land in safety on thy native shore;
The king will praise thee for his army saved,
Which shall partake my clemency. Reject
All hope, good Persian, to withstand my arm;
I am Themistocles. The satrap starts
From languor thus: Athenian, I confess
Thy greatness, thy ascendency have felt;
But will endure, whatever a victor's power
Inflicts on captives, rather than pollute
My loyal faith to Xerxes; from my king
I took my charge, and never will betray.
The crimes of Demonax I know; myself
Have proved their horrors in Cleora's fate,
I loved, adored her excellence; her thread
His impious rage dissever'd; on her tomb
My tears have daily flowed. Retain me still
Thy captive, never to revisit more
Her father's hateful mansion. Heaven permit,
By thy vindictive arm, but heaven forbid,
That ever by disloyalty of mine,
The infernal author of her death may fall.
The barbarism of loyalty, which binds
Men to a monarch, but the monarch leaves
Free to his lusts, his cruelty and rage,
The enlightened Greek despised, yet now deplored
In one by nature gifted to deserve
A better lot from heaven. Not less aware
Of democratic jealousy, which hurls
From fortune's summit heroes to the dust,
He pressed no further, cautious not to wound
A gallant mind, whose friendship won he meant
To use in wants, such fortune might create.
He leaves Sicinus near him; while his care
Exhausts the light in traversing the camp
To view the works. His evening orders hold
Each band in arms; while anxious in his tent
He sits deep-musing, whether to attempt
The town that night by storm, or patient wait
For some event less bloody, casual boon
Of time and fortune. Wasteful is delay,
But precious too his soldiers; such brave lives
The full completion of his vast design
Requires. Thus, dubious, till the second watch
Throughout the camp is tolled, and clouded heaven
Drops down her sable veil, he sits; when lo!
Before him stands his monitor unknown,
The venerable figure, which he saw
At Aegae. Staid Sicinus is the guide,
Who swift retires, but watches faithful nigh.
Themistocles, the stranger solemn spoke;
Thee I have trusted, thou have trusted me,
Nor either has repented. Who I am,
Now learn. By friendship's sacred ties, by blood
To thy best friend Eudora I am bound,
Elephenor am called, pontific seer
Of Jupiter in Oreus. Timely warned
By her most urgent mandate to repose
All confidence in thee, and lend my aid,
Nor less admonished by Tisander sage,
I helped thee first with counsel; now I bring
Effectual succor. Demonax, though foiled,
Has still a powerful remnant of his host
To man his walls, and desperate will defend.
Select two thousand spears; avoid delay;
A secret passage, known to holy steps
Alone, over town and tyrant will complete
Thy bloodless conquest. Swift the Attic chief:
O father! sacred in my ear the sound
Of good Tisander's, great Eudora's names;
Thy former warnings I have proved sincere
To merit gratitude and trust. He calls
Sicinus, bids him summon all the chiefs
Of Locris and Carystus; they appear.
To Hyacinthus and Nicanor then
Themistocles: Attend with all your bands
This reverend guide; intelligence transmit
As you advance. His orders are performed.
Next he exhorts the Oilean brethren thus,
Nor passes favored Haliartus by:
You with your Locrians follow to support
These friends, lest ambush and deception lurk
Beneath a promise of assured success.
This said, himself forth issues to prepare
The general host for action, even that night,
If fair occasion summons, when he meets
Troezene's leader. Is Cleander here,
Themistocles began? Momentous sure,
The cause which sends thee from thy naval charge.
To him Cleander: Anchored as I lay,
A slender skiff, when darkness first prevailed,
Approached my galley. To an earnest suit
For conference I listened, and received
On board a man of Oreus, all in limbs
Deformed, in lineaments all rude, whose name
Is Lamachus. To render up this night
A separate fort he proffers, which commands
The town and harbor, if thy faith be pledged
Him and Thessalia's garrison to land
Safe on her neighboring coast. Thy will to learn
I come, he waits. His proffer I accept,
Rejoins the alert Athenian, and the doom,
I had prepared for those degenerate Greeks,
Postpone. Cleander to his station flies.
Serene the Athenian in array contains
His army cool, with expectation mute.
So, in deceitful quiet often the main
Before the glazing light of Dian spreads
A mirror smooth; the ruler of the winds
Anon from troubled clouds, and ocean's god
From his tempestuous chariot, give the sign
For wild commotion; then the surging brine
Assails the loftiest tops of reeling masts,
Foams on the rocks, and deluges the beach.
End of the Eighteenth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the NINETEENTH.
THE morning breaks; Nicanor sudden greets
The general; welcome tidings in these words
He utters loud: The citadel is won,
The tyrant slaughtered. With our sacred guide
A rugged, winding track, in brambles hid,
Half up a crag we climbed; there, stooping low,
A narrow cleft we entered; mazy still
We trod through dusky bowels of a rock,
While our conductor gathered, as he stepped,
A clue, which careful in his hand he coil'd.
Our spears we trail'd; each soldier held the skirt
Of his preceding comrade. We attained
An iron wicket, where the ending line
Was fastened; thence a long and steep ascent
Was hewn in steps; suspended on the sides,
Bright rows of tapers cheered our eyes with light.
We reached the top; there lifting over his head
A staff, against two horizontal valves
Our leader smote, which opened at the sound.
Behind me Hyacinthus on the rock
Sunk sudden down, pronouncing in his fall
Cleora; I on Hyacinthus called.
Is this Cleora's husband? cried the priest;
Descend, my Pamphila, my wife, descend.
She came, a reverend priestess; tender both
With me assisting placed my speechless friend
Within a cleft by me unmarked before,
Which seemed a passage to some devious cell.
Me by the hand Elephenor removed
Precipitate; a grating door of brass
Closed on my parting steps. Ascend, he said,
Make no enquiry; but remain assured,
His absence now is best. I mount, I rise
Behind a massy basis which upheld
Jove grasping thunder, and Saturnia crowned,
Who at his side outstretch'd her sceptered hand.
The troops succeeding fill the spacious dome.
Last, unexpected, thence more welcome, rose,
Detached from Medon with five hundred spears,
Brave Haliartus, who repaired the want
Of my disabled colleague. Now the priest:
Ye chiefs, auxiliar to the gods profaned,
And men oppressed, securely you have reached
The citadel of Oreus. The dark hour
Befriends your high attempt. Let one possess
The only entrance from the town below,
The other swift the palace must surprise,
Where Demonax lies slumbering, if his guilt
Admits of rest, and dreams not of your spears.
With small resistance from a drowsy guard
I seized the gate; the palace soon was forced
By Haliartus. Demonax maintained,
From door to door fierce combat, till he sunk,
Blaspheming every power of heaven and hell,
On his own couch, beneath repeated wounds
Delv'd in his body by the Carian sword,
Whose point produced the severed head in view.
These news, Sicinus, to Eudora bear,
Themistocles began. Before her feet
Fall grateful, kiss for me her hallowed robe;
My venerable friend Tisander hail,
To her, to him, this victory we owe.
Salute Timoxenus, my noble host,
Greet his excelling daughter; let them hear
Of brave Nicanor, and the Carian sword,
Which, closing at a blow this dangerous war,
Preserves so many Greeks. Carystian chief,
Accept from me good tidings in return
For thine. Intelligence this hour has brought,
That vigilant Cleander has possessed
The naval fort, an inlet to the town
For this whole army, pouring from our ships
Successive numbers, if the Persian bands
Yet meditate resistance. Not to give
Their consternation leisure to subside,
Against the walls each standard shall advance.
He said, and gave command. The different chiefs
Head their battalions. Oreus trembling sees
Encircling danger; heralds in their pomp,
Dread summoners, are nigh. Her foreign guard,
Deprived of wonted leaders, at the fall
Of Demonax aghast, in thought behold
Death in the conquered citadel extend
His hideous arms to beckon from the fleet
Cleander's valor, and from swarming tents
Themistocles. On his approach the gates
Are thrown abroad. From all the Persian bands
Their javelins, shields, and banners on the ground
Pale fear deposits. Thus the yielding masts
Of all their canvass mariners divest,
When Aeolus is riding on a storm
To overwhelm the vessel, which would drive
In full apparel to resist his ire.
The Athenian, though triumphant, in his joy
Omits no care. To Aeschylus awhile
The charge supreme transferring, he ascends
The citadel; the Carian victor there
Conducts him over the palace, shows the corse
Of Demonax, his treasury unspoil'd,
By chosen Locrians guarded. Pleased, the chief
Embraces Haliartus: Friend, he said,
Though late acquired, inestimable friend,
How shall I praise thee? but my bosom wrapped
In long concealment, now to thee alone
Disclosed, shall warrant my professed regard.
Know, that whatever thou have heard, or seen
Of my Euboean labors, are no more,
Than preparation for a wider stage
Of action. Gold, one necessary means,
Thou have provided; but I want a man
Of hardy limbs and vigorous, bold, discreet,
Who all the Persian quarters would explore,
On either side Thermopylae; would trace
Whatever employs Mardonius, what the time
He takes the field, and where his gathered stores
Of war deposits. Thessaly provoked
Long since my just resentment. Ere the king
Of Asia passed the Hellespont, I led
Ten thousand Greeks her passes to defend;
By her deserted and betrayed, I marched
Unprofitably back. The Carian here:
Had I endowments equal to my will,
I were that man. Accept me, as I am,
Versed in those borders, me, whose faithful zeal
Leonidas experienced and approved;
So let Themistocles. My rustic weeds
I can resume to range the Oetaean crags,
The fields of Locris, and Thessalia's plains.
Thou art that man, the Athenian quick rejoined;
Then hold thee ready. Sudden in their birth
Are my resolves, and when mature have wings.
This said, he visits Aeschylus below.
Judicious he in stations had disposed
The various bands; the prisoners were secured.
Throughout the Ore^an streets and dwellings reigned
Tranquillity and order. Him the son
Of Neocles bespake: Tomorrow's dawn
Shall see thee honored, as becomes a chief,
Whom Aristides named, and Athens chose
To save Euboea. I defer till night
Our consultations. I, not wanted here,
Will reascend the citadel; the voice
Of friendship calls me to a tender care.
He seeks the fane. Elephenor he greets;
Applause to him in gratitude unfeigned
Presenting, next his earnest lips enquire
Of Hyacinthus. Here the reverend man:
First know, his dear Cleora is alive.
I, priest of Jove, and Pamphila my wife,
Who to the Olympian empress in this seat
Of blended rites are ministers, when told
That Demonax had doomed his child to death,
Solicited her pardon in the names
Of both divinities. At both he spurned,
While we contrived this stratagem. Her nurse,
By us admonished, in due time declared
Cleora dead. The body of a slave,
A youthful maiden recently expired,
Was for Cleora carried to the flames,
While her we sheltered in a secret cell,
From human sight, from sight of day concealed.
These powers, alike offended at the intent
As perpetration of an impious deed,
Have sent thee forth their instrument of wrath,
Divinely-prompted hero. Will thou shed
On Hyacinthus and Cleora's bliss
Thy guardian smile? This uttered, down the steps
He guides the Athenian to the hidden cell.
By his Cleora Hyacinthus sat.
The youthful husband over the snowy breast,
Which lulled and cherished a reposing babe,
The blooming father over that precious fruit
Hung fondly. Thoughtful ecstasy recalled
His dream at Juno's temple; where he saw
The visionary bosom of his bride
Disclose maternal to an infant new
That pillow smooth of lillies. Wan her cheek
Told her confinement from the cheerful day.
Six moons in deep obscurity she dwelt;
Where, as a sea-nymph underneath a rock,
Or Indian genie in the cavern'd earth,
Her cell in conchs and coral she had dressed,
By gracious Pamphila supplied to cheat
Time and despair. The loom her patient art
Had plied, her own sad story had begun,
Now to conclude in joy. The starting youth
Beholds his patron, rushes on his breast
In transport thus: Redeemer of my peace!
Balm of my grief! of happiness my source!
My health of mind and body is thy gift.
If in his anguish Hyacinthus felt
His obligation, in the hour of bliss
To what excess must gratitude expand
His bosom now! Cleora and my child
I owe to thy protection -- this is she,
This is my goddess, this my light, my joy,
Derived from thy humanity. Thou god
Of Hyacinthus, tutelary god!
Thou from the pit of horror did upraise
My limbs, for ever to its bottom chained
Without thy helpful hand; without thee death
Had been my portion; never had I lived
To see Cleora, never known this day!
But will my general overlook my fault?
Thy soldier, in his subterranean march
Toward this retirement, threw a casual glance,
Which met Cleora's. Down the shield and spear
Dropped from my hands disabled; life forsook
My heart, which irrecoverably lost
All sense of duty both to thee and Greece,
By me alone deserted. Bless that chance,
Themistocles replies, and leads aside
The attentive youth. Perhaps these gods ordained,
In compensation of thy long distress,
In recompense of pure and constant love,
That to Cleora thou unstained with blood,
Blood of her father by another slain,
Should be restored, nor taint with horrors new
This thy new hymen. Aeschylus by morn
Will sit in judgment righteous, but severe,
On each Euboean criminal, the dead
Not less than living. Instantly remove
To thy Carystian home thy wife and babe;
Whatever can pass in Oreus must offend
Her eye and ear. Then turning to the fair:
From warlike toils thy consort I dismiss;
He, who so nobly signalized his sword
In single combat, and the open field,
And proved his valor equal to his love,
All future palms to others may resign.
Whatever comforts, time and peace can yield,
Are due to both your sufferings; nor an hour
Shall thou be cloistered in this rueful cell.
Elephenor, discreet and reverend man,
Let thy kind clue conduct their secret steps.
With presents laden, tokens of my love,
Cars shall attend them at the cavern's mouth;
Thou add thy blessing, that their newborn day
May never set in sorrow. Thus the chief,
Relaxed from busy care, amid success,
Which not a shade of obstacle o'erhangs,
Spoke, as he felt, remunerating full
For all his service Hyacinthus brave.
His knees embracing, thus Cleora spoke:
I have not utt'rance for my grateful heart;
If thou dismiss us never more to see
Thy guardian face, our day will set in grief.
In smiles the Athenian dissipates that fear:
Long ere thy husband's magisterial term
Is finished, I have further still to crave
From him as archon, not as soldier, help.
This to Carystus would alone direct
My footsteps; else amid domestic joys
To see thy days illumined, precious time
Themistocles would borrow from his charge.
Thus in the grateful fair-one he secured
Another friend, if wanted to support
His vast designs, which, gathering on his mind,
Speed his departure with a kind farewell.
The cars he orders, from the tyrant's stores
Rich presents draws, to Aeschylus returns,
With him in conf'rence spends remaining day.
Aurora hears Themistocles command
Stern proclamation by the trumpet's voice
For judgment on the guilty. All in chains
The tyrant's hated counselors are brought,
Save Lamachus by faith of treaty safe
Bound to Thessalian shores; but chief the sev'n
Geraestian ruffians, their assassin heads
Hang hopeless down. Amid the widest space
In Oreus lofty a tribunal stands,
Which Aeschylus ascends, commander high
Of troops enrolled by Athens. So her son
Disgraced, but courting favor new, devised
Her democratic jealousy to sooth.
The various chieftains, through this glorious war
So late distinguished, round the solemn seat
Conspicuous wait, Themistocles himself
At the right hand of Aeschylus. He sits
Like Minos sage, whose justice gained from Jove
The appointment awful to condemn, or spare
His fellow mortals in the world below.
When now the accusers and accused were heard,
Thus spoke the warrior-poet: Crimes like these
The legislator punishes with death;
Let us attempt within our scanty sphere,
Far as we may, to imitate the gods
In punishment deserved. Through those abodes
Which Hades governs, long the vulture gnaws;
Long is the toil of Sisyphus; to fill
Their leaking vases long the murderous seed
Of Danaus must strive. By labor, pain,
And shame continued, let flagitious men
Long wish to end their sufferings, not enjoy
That wished for period in a single pang.
This heavy sentence on assassin heads,
On foul, atrocious counselors of ill,
Lo! I pronounce. An ignominious brand
Imprint on every forehead; plunge them chained,
Debased by vile impurity of garb,
In deep Chalcidian quarries; give them food
Just for endurance of continued toil,
With daily stripes, that cruelty may feel
What she inflicts on others, and, impelled
By desperation, court relief in death.
Before the gate of Oreus on a cross
Extend the limbs of Demonax; the flesh
Let kites deform, let parching air the bones
Of that despotic malefactor bleach,
Avenging man, and vindicating heaven.
Flow next a strain more pleasing through the ear,
A strain delightful to that favoring god
Who first created laurel to adorn
The good and brave. A chaplet from his tree,
Ten captives, ten selected suits of arms
To every leader; one Barbarian slave,
A sabre, targe, whatever to the field
Accouters one Barbarian, I allot
To every soldier. Phoebus will supply
His laurel too, encompassing your brows,
Ye generous people. But a splendid store
Of tripods, urns, and images provide
For great Eudora, and the Eretrian seer,
That your triumphal offering may emblaze
Euboea's fanes; nor less with honors greet
Elephenor, your genius of success.
Eudora's portion thou, heroic priest,
Phoebean Timon, to her presence bear.
I need but name Acanthe to attract
Your veneration; for Acanthe choose,
Sweet paragon of Chalcis, from your spoils
The costly tissue of Barbaric looms,
And dazzling gems, that gratitude may vie
With obligation. Haliartus, bright
In recent glories from a tyrant slain,
Thou at her feet the precious tribute lay.
For me, if, servant of Cecropia's state,
I have upheld her justice and renown,
Your approbation is the sole reward
Which I solicit, or will bear away
On my returning keel. He ceased. In roar
Surpassing waves, which beat the craggy strand
Amidst a tempest, from the general host
Broke forth applause. The mistocles subjoined:
Awhile, my friends, your labors I suspend;
Go to your homes; to kind, expecting wives
Recount your trophies; let your children see
Paternal mansions hung with Asian spoils.
Remember still, that valor must not sleep;
That law restored and freedom are not firm
While Asia's trumpet sounds a blast in Greece.
Two days elapse; Timoxenus, arrived
From Chalcis, joyful gratulation brings.
Solicitous the Athenian first enquires
Of fair Acanthe's state. The father fond
Thus answers: Wasting malady is fled,
But has behind it left indiff'rence cold
To every joy. Thy wife a bracelet sent;
These words the bearer Hallartus brought,
Charged by Timothea elegant and wise.
"From me this present when Acanthe takes,
"Say, how I prize her elevated mind,
"Enabling my Themistocles to quell
"The hateful breed of tyrants. Further say,
"The man engaging her connubial hand
"I should esteem the favorite of heaven."
I heard approving; on the grateful hint
A secret hour I chose; my daughter's ear
I thus addressed. "My only child and hope,
"Shall no sweet offspring cheer a grandsire's age?
"Shall my possessions to a stranger pass,
"My blood be lost for ever? Shall this war,
"Thy work, Acanthe, which a father's love,
"In all to thee complying, at thy suit
"Commenced, produce no here to console
"Thy widowed couch?" "The sacrifice of life,
"Of my ideal, or my real peace,
"Is due to such a father," she exclaimed
In pious fervor. "Arguments to urge
"Against thy plea my age and thine forbid;
"But ah! dear parent, my capricious fate
"Presents no suitor to thy child's esteem."
The Amarynthian priestess, whose control
Surpasses mine, with sternness often enforced
My just desire. At length my daughter thus
On my departure: "I obey; consult
"Themistocles; let him a consort name,
"Who best has served him in this righteous war."
Never yet ill chance, or sorrow, from the son
Of Neocles drew tears. His soul reflects
On this transcendent fair one, who had changed
The violence of passion to respect
So confidential, dressed in sweetest grace
So far beyond his merits toward a heart
Of purest texture, late by him misled
To error, now to purity restored
By native honor. At the affecting thought
He turns those eyes, till then of steadfast look
On all events and objects, turns aside
To hide their oozing dews; yet soon he spoke:
None can I name, but wise Timothea's choice
To bear her present, Haliartus brave,
Who has avowed to Aeschylus and me
A veneration for thy matchless child;
But he, appointed to a service high,
Like Hercules must labor yet to gain
The sum of bliss. For three successive moons
He must continue mine. The past events
In copious strains the hero now rehearsed,
Concluding thus: The army I disband;
Great Aeschylus for Athens straight embarks;
I shall remain in Oreus to compose
This troubled city; thou resume thy way;
The criminals transported in thy train
Lock in the quarries; to Acanthe all
Unravel; her and Chalcis too prepare
For due reception of that happy man,
Whom Jove has honored in a tyrant's death,
Whom Juno soon in nuptial ties will bless,
And all Euboea to Acanthe sends
With tokens rich of public praise and love.
With joy Timoxenus assents; the morn
Sees him depart; at Chalcis he arrives,
Performing all Themistocles enjoined.
Now every temple breathes perfumes; prepared
Are chosen victims, colonnades and gates
With chaplets hung; the garden's flowery growth,
Each scented produce of luxuriant fields,
The maids and matrons bear to welcome home
Triumphant warriors. Now the expected gleams
Of armor tinge the champaign's utmost verge;
Near and more near the military pomp,
At large develop'd over the green expanse,
Spears, bucklers, helmets, plumes, Barbaric spoils
In trophies pil'd on hollow-sounding cars,
Grow on the sight. Through Chalcis lies the march;
Those in abode the most remote precede.
Geraestian banners first Eudemus shows;
With Lampon follow Styra's gallant troop;
The Amarynthian and Carystian bands
Nicanor leads; the Eretrians, now become
Once more a people, with their wives and race
At length redeemed, to Cleon's orders move.
In blooming garlands had the mothers decked
Their children's heads, whom, tripping through the streets,
Spectatress equal to the loftiest scene,
Eudora blesses. Sweet Acanthe melts
In tears of gladness, while her father nigh
Awakes attention to a numerous train,
Her native friends, whom brave Nearchus heads.
These are thy warriors, fondly cries the sire;
To whom Eudora: Who is he in state
Pontifical, a holy man in arms?
Three hundred Delphians then were passing by,
Phoebean branches twisted round their spears.
Behind them, lodged on axles rolling slow,
Were vases, tripods, images and busts,
Spoils of the palace Demonax had raised.
Thou see, replies Timoxenus, a form
To Phoebus dear, the venerable form
Of Timon, priest and soldier. From that car
He will descend to kiss thy sacred hand,
Before thy feet a precious tribute lay
For thy pure goddess, sister of his god.
But look, my sweet Acanthe, on the man
Themistocles has chosen to revive
My drooping years. Preceded by a troop
Of youths, whom Medon, ever kind, has culled
From all his Locrian files to grace his friend;
Preceded by a trophy, which displays
The silver mail of Demonax, his shield,
His helm of gold, his variegated arms,
And spear in length ten cubits, which upholds
The tyrant's head, his victor meets our eyes,
The illustrious son of Lygdamis. She cast
Not an impassioned, but revering glance
On one, whose might victorious had dissolved
Euboean thraldom, one of noble frame,
In feature comely, and in look serene,
Whom her sole guide, the all controlling son
Of Neocles, had destined for her lord.
Her dream recurs; the tyrant's head she sees;
The exploit sublime, though not by him achiev'd,
Whom partial fancy on her pillow showed,
Her ever-wakeful loftiness of mind
Admires impartial, and applauds the hand
Which dealt the glorious blow. Her awful brow
The priestless softens to a smile, and thus:
Is this suitor, whom my hero chose
For bright Acanthe? Favored by the gods,
Themistocles in every action proves
He cannot err. Acanthe hears, and pressed
By duty's insurmountable control,
Awed by Eudora's majesty austere,
Resolves to meet him with becoming grace,
But of his virtue make one trial more.
The Delphian priest and Haliartus quit
Their chariots; them Timoxenus receives
To his rich mansion and a sumptuous board.
Eudora there, with curious eyes and voice,
Explores and questions often the Carian brave.
His Delphian friend, observing, in these words
Besought him: O, distinguished by the gods!
Who have in thee their care of virtue shown,
Since from Euboea thou must soon depart,
Lose not the present hour. These matchless dames
Must hear thy wondrous narrative at large;
For singular thy fortunes with events
Are interwoven to delight the ear,
Affect the heart, and win the applauding tongue;
That all may honor thy desert supreme
Like me, so much thy debtor. Straight complies
The modest Carian; listening silence reigns.
In native windings from his Lydian fount
As various flowed Maeander, here along
A level champaign, daisy-painted meads,
Or golden fields of Ceres, here through woods
In green arcades projecting over his banks,
There shut in rock, which irritates the stream,
Here by low hamlets, there by stately towns,
Till he attained the rich Magnesian seat;
Thence with augmented fame and prouder floods
Rolled down his plenteous tribute to the main:
So through the mazes of his fortune winds
In artless eloquence the expressive strain
Of Haliartus, from his peasant state
To scenes heroic. Humble still in mind,
Compelled to follow truth's historic clue,
He ends in glory, which his blushes grace;
Nor less they grace these frank and manly words,
Which to Acanthe singly he directs:
Such as I am, thou elevated fair,
Who have Euboea's liberty restored,
Her grateful offerings to thy feet I bring;
With them an humble suppliant to thy smile,
That he may rank thy soldier, in thy name
His own distinguish, and, achieving well
The task by great Themistocles imposed,
Deserve Acanthe's favor. She replies
With virtuous art: Can soldiers never know
Satiety of fame? must her career
Be still beginning, never be complete?
Must every passion yield to thirst of praise?
Should I request thee, would thou for my sake
Thy new attempt relinquish, to enjoy
Thy ample portion of acquired renown
In peace at Chalcis? Haliartus then:
Not love of fame, which oft'ner frowns than smiles,
Not victory, nor spoil inflate my breast
All unaspiring. Sense of duty pure,
Of obligation, which I owe to Greece,
Themistocles, and Medon, rules supreme
Within my soul. O first of mortal fair,
Thou of his peace thy servant might deprive;
But, were thou fairer than the Paphian queen,
In each excelling art like Pallas skilled,
Her paragon in wisdom, thy request
Should thus be answered from a bleeding heart:
To my performance of the trust reposed
The only bar is fate. Astonished gazed
Timoxenus; nor knew the timid sire
That his Acanthe's breast then first conceived
A spark of passion, but a spark divine,
Such as for heroes goddesses have felt;
As Thetis glowed for Peleus. Thus the fair:
O most deserving of that hero's choice,
To which alone Acanthe left her fate!
Weighed in the balance, nor deficient found,
Thou more than worthy of a hand like mine!
Go, but return; triumphantly return
Lord of Acanthe; of my truth unchanged
Accept this pledge. She gave, he kissed her hand.
Eudora's vestment, while the solemn scene
Her looks approved, with fervent lips he touched;
Then, clasping glad Timoxenus, retired
To hoist his canvass in the morning gale.
End of the Nineteenth Book.
THE ATHENAID.
BOOK the TWENTIETH.
AN April zephyr, with reviving sweets
From gay Euboea's myrtle-border'd meads,
Perfumes his breath, scarce ruffling in his course
The pearly robe of morn. A ready skiff
The Carian hero mounts; the gale, though soft,
To him is adverse. From a rapid keel
Of Oreus, lo! Sicinus lifts a sign
Of salutation. Haliartus joins
The faithful man, and joyfully relates
His acquisition of Acanthe's hand.
To good Sicinus grateful sounds the tale,
Who thus replies: To Athens I proceed.
No sooner marched the warriors to their homes,
Than, disengaged from public care, my lord
Addressed me thus: Sicinus, spread the sail,
To Athens fly; my wife and offspring waft
To my embraces; that, while gentle rest
Remits the labors of my limbs disarmed,
I with Timothea, she with me, may share
The past success, and taste of present joy.
Thee, Haliartus, she esteems; thy fame,
Exploits and fortune will augment her bliss.
But of this friendly gale a moment more
I must not lose. His vessel sails along;
The other slowly with laborious strokes
Of oars contends for passage, till broad noon
Flames on the laurell'd poops and colors gay
Of Athens and Troezene; on whose decks,
Emblaz'd with spoils, and trophies, Phoebus pours
His whole effulgence. Back to Attic strands
They steer in view. To fifes and trumpets clear
From every vessel in a blended sound
Reply the concave shores. Now sudden shifts
The wind, and checks their progress; but permits
Glad Haliartus close behind the helm
Of Aeschylus to pass. The choral notes
Of triumph then were hushed. The warrior-bard,
Who had so well accomplished all his charge,
Like Jove in judgment, on the plain like Mars,
Sat in oblivion of his arms, which lay
Beside him. Over the Heliconian hill
In thought he wandered, and invoked the Muse
To sing of civic harmony. The Muse
To Aristides, and the conquering son
Of Neocles united, touched the lyre
With melody rejoicing at their names.
The Attic warriors thronged the silent decks,
The shrouds and yards. Attention closed their lips,
Their minds were opened. Musical and learned,
Minerva's chosen people had been wont
To hear his numbers in the tragic scene.
Sententious weight of poesy, combined
With music's powerful spell, there tamed the rude,
Abashed the vicious, and the good refined.
Oh! Artemisia, Haliartus sighed,
While at the strain his progress he delayed,
How can thou splendid vassalage prefer
In barbarous climes, the residence of slaves,
To Greece, the land of freedom, arts and arms,
The legislator's and the hero's seat,
The guardian pure of equity and laws,
The nurse of orphans helpless and oppressed,
Of all, whom Phoebus and the Muses lift
Above the rank of mortals! Greece, I owe
More than my birth and being to thy love,
My sentiments I owe. Adopted child,
For thee my better parent now I go
To hazard all in voluntary zeal,
Even the possession of Acanthe's charms.
On Atalante's sea-beat verge he lands;
Swift he collects his peasant weeds, the crook,
The pipe and scrip, thus musing: Ancient garb,
Thou do remind me of Oileus good,
Do summon all my gratitude to prove,
That he, who benefits receives, and feels
A grateful sense, is happy. From his side,
His arm, and temples, he ungirds the sword,
The shield releases, and unclasps the helm;
These he commits, Sophronia, to thy care,
Spouse of Leonteus, mother of the race
Oilean. Them, in tenderness embraced,
He leaves with blessings, re-embarks and prints
His bounding feet on Locris. Hermes thus
In shepherd's weeds his deity concealed,
By Jove's appointment on the flowery meads
Of Inachus alighting; where he stole
On watchful Argus, and, his hundred eyes
Eluding, rescued from her bestial form
Afflicted Io. Like the mountain roe
The son of Lygdamis in speed excelled;
He, had he run for Atalanta's love,
Would have rejected Cytherea's aid,
Nor, of her swiftness to beguile the fair,
Before her steps the golden apples thrown.
He quits the shore impatient; on he flies
Unquestioned, ranked among the Locrian hinds,
All Persian subjects now. A midnight course
To Oeta's well-known mountains he prefers
Through winding valleys, sprinkled with his tears
In memory of past events. He finds
The track to Mycon's hut; that goat-herd hears
The sound of footsteps through the morning dew;
He sees, he flies to Meliboeus, clings
Around his neck. The seeming shepherd thus:
Kind friend, inform me of Melissa's weal.
To him the swain: In wonder thou will hear,
That no Barbarian dares ascend this hill;
The attempt with death Mardonius would chastise.
Benign Masistius, who his freedom gained
From generous Medon, to his sister thus
The benefit repays. He often views
Thermopylae, inspects the obsequious band,
Which guards the cavern'd passage to our fane;
The fane he visits. Pleased, Melissa greets
The gentle Persian, who delights to speak
Of Aristides righteous and humane,
Of Medon's valor on Psittalia's isle,
Who made Masistius captive. Thus at times
The tedious winter's melancholy hours
She soothed; deprived of thee, superior swain,
At times conversed with Mycon. She has tuned
My pipe to music, purified my tongue,
Refined its language, and my soul enlarged.
Despairing never of the public weal,
To Aristides, virtuous guardian power
Of Greece, she strikes her celebrating chords.
So will she, Mycon, to the conquering son
Of Neocles, our second guardian power,
Cries Haliartus; but too long I wait
To hail my holy mistress. She, rejoins
The swain, has left this mountain. Forty days,
Since I beheld Masistius, are elapsed;
His welcome hand before Melissa placed
A woman, rather deity in form;
The hoary temple with her beauty seemed
Illumined; regal was her state; her spouse,
The youthful king of Macedon, was by.
She, in Melissa's presence, cast aside
Her majesty; a suppliant in these words,
Whose strong impression I retain, she spoke:
"Most gracious, learned, and prudent of thy rank,
"In Greece the highest, I, in Delphi born,
"Phoebean Timon's child, a pious suit
"Both in my father's and Apollo's name
"To thee prefer. Trachiniae's neighboring walls
"Contain the object of my tenderest care,
"Sandauce, thither from Emathian bounds
"For help conveyed. Masistius will confirm,
"Whatever I utter in Sandauce's praise.
"Her virtues more than equal her estate
"Of princess, Xerxes' sister; but her woes
"Almost exceed her virtues. Nature droops
"Beneath its burden, sickness wastes her youth,
"Resists all medicine, while her feeble frame
"To dissolution verges. O beloved
"By every Muse illumining thy mind
"With every science, holy woman, famed
"Among these nations for benignant deeds,
"Vouchsafe, descending from thy pure abode,
"To grant thy healing aid". Masistius then:
"This is the princess, who her husband saw
"Slain at her feet, her infants doomed to death
"By Euphrantides; never since that day
"The wound inflicted on her gentle heart
"Admitted cure." The charitable suit
Prevailed, and soon Trachiniae's gates received
The priestess borne in Amarantha's car.
Here Haliartus: Have thou never seen,
Among the Persians who frequent this hill,
A youth in rosy vigor, by the name
Of Artamanes known? I have, returns
The goat-herd; he with Amarantha came;
Seemed doubly anxious for Melissa's help
To yon afflicted princess; urged the suit
In Medon's name, his friend and savior styled,
Who made him captive on Psittalia's shore.
But on his cheek the roses, thou do paint,
No longer bloom; his visage, worn and pale,
Denotes some inward malady, or grief.
Now, Meliboeus, to my longing ear
Thy history unfold. We parted last,
Thou may remember, on this fatal spot.
The gentle Agis from this point surveyed
Yon froth of torrents in their stony beds,
Yon shagged rocks, and that disastrous pass
Beneath us; whence Barbarian numbers huge
Overwhelmed Thermopylae. But first accept
Refreshment. Under hairy boughs of pines
A rustic board he piles with oaten loaves,
Dried fruits and chestnuts; bubbling nigh, a spring
Supplies their bev'rage. Here the illustrious son
Of Lygdamis recounts a copious tale
To wondering Mycon; but his birth conceals,
And consanguinity with Caria's queen.
He stops to note the narrow passage thronged
With laden mules and camels. Mycon then:
These are my constant spectacle; his host
Mardonius now assembles. He transports,
Alpenus, yonder Locrian town, receives
The gathered produce of Thessalia's fields;
Nicaea's fort contains an equal store,
Preparatives for war. Where lies the camp,
The Carian questions? On the Malian plain,
Which Oeta's cliffs command, the swain replied.
New tents on clear Spercheos daily rise
Of Persians banded from their winter holds;
Thou shall behold them; follow. Both proceed
Along the green expanse Melissa loved;
Where genial spring had formed of tufted shrubs
A florid cincture to the lucid pool
Behind the dome, inviolable seat
Of all the Muses. Thence harmonious nymphs,
Part of Melissa's ministerial choir,
Left in their function, with mellifluent voice
To harps in cadence true enchant the soul
Of Haliartus, doubly charmed to hear
Leonidas the theme. With numbers sweet
His praise inwoven by Melissa's skill
Was their diurnal song. But sorrow soon
Invades a breast, where gratitude presides;
The time and place to Haliartus rise,
Where he and Medon took their last farewell
Of that devoted hero. In a sigh
The Carian thus: O well-remember'd scene
Once to these eyes delectable! Thy flowers
Have lost their odor; thy crystalline pool
Is dull in aspect to my sad'ning sight;
You cannot sooth, melodious maids, the pain
Of recollection, starting at the name
Your measures sound. Beneath yon solemn beech
Regret sits weeping; Lacedaemon's king
There of terrestrial music heard the last
From Aeschylus, the last of banquets shared
With good Oileus' daughter. Mycon here:
Suppress this grief; the priestess has forbid
All lamentation for that hero's fate,
Who died so glorious. Follow to the cliff.
They soon attain a high projecting point,
When Haliartus in a second sigh:
Here stood Melissa; from her sacred lips
The queen of Caria hence endured reproof;
Hence did the great Leonidas explore
The advancing Persians, when his prudent care
The trees and marble fragments had amassed,
Which from the mountain overwhelmed below
Such multitudes of foes. But, Mycon, speak,
What is that cross beside the public way?
Ah! Meliboeus, let thy spirit grieve
Like mine, exclaims, in gushing tears, the swain;
Lo! Xerxes' coward vengeance! Thou behold'st
Leonidas suspended on that cross.
As often, when lightning strikes the human frame,
The wound, though imperceptible, destroys
Each vital power throughout the stiff'ning limbs,
Which still retain their posture; rigid thus
Is Haliartus; riveted to earth
He seems, nor utters sound, nor breathes, nor moves
His ghastly eyeballs. Now, when Mycon thrice
His name repeated, briefly he replies:
I am benumbed -- Conduct me to a cell
Where I may slumber -- Tend thy herd -- Expect
Me at thy home. A mossy cave is nigh;
There Mycon leaves him. Haliartus stays,
Not slumbering, but, when Mycon is remote,
Darts from the shelter, traverses a wood,
Descends a crag, which bounds the upper straits,
Thence winds his rapid journey to the cross,
Which stands a witness of Barbaric rage.
His ardent zeal to free those honored bones
Admits no pause. The midnight watch is past;
Importunate and hateful, birds obscene
Are gathered round; disturbed, their grating shrieks
They mix, and clatter their ill-omen'd wings.
A station'd guard is roused; resistless force
Surrounds the Carian, seizes, leads him bound
Before the chieftain of a camp advanced.
He, at the sight of Haliartus charged
With guilt, whose punishment is death, commands
The accusing soldiers to retire, and thus:
Alas! has sorrow so impaired the hue
Of Artamanes, that oblivion masks
His face from Haliartus. Thee I know,
Thee Meliboeus once, benignant swain,
My comforter in bondage, when we plough'd
The Grecian seas in Delphian Timon's bark.
Was not I present, when the genuine seed
Of Lygdamis in thee Aronces traced?
But, O! illustrious brother of a queen
Adored in Asia, what disastrous star
Thy midnight steps misguided, to incur
The king's immutable decree of death?
Thy bold attempt was virtuous, but his will
Has made thy virtue criminal. Thy head
At his own peril Artamanes still
Shall guard; thy liberty accept; myself
Will be thy guide to safety. Ah! replies
The generous son of Lygdamis, and clasps
The meritorious Persian, I perceive
Still unimpair'd thy virtues; but receive
Thy noble proffer back. For my behoof
Not with its shadow danger shall approach
My friend; thy prisoner let me rest till morn.
A liberal garb is all the boon I crave,
Then to Mardonius lead me; tell my crime,
No grace solicit; who I am, conceal.
In tears, replied the satrap: Then thou die;
The royal edict cannot be controlled.
It can, returned the Carian; rest assured,
My preservation in myself I bear.
Oh! that with equal certainty my power
Might from thy bosom chase that inmate new,
Whatever it be, which violates thy peace,
Thy early youth disfigures, and consumes
Its fruit unripe. Ah! tell me, is it grief
For some dead friend, or sickness, or the smart
Of injury, or love? Acanthe waked
That tender thought, which softened on the tongue
Of Haliartus. From the Persian's breast
A sigh, deep note of agony, which riv'd
His gentle heart, accompanied these words:
Endeared associate in affliction past,
Thou, and thou only, do unlock the breast
Of Artamanes. It is love, my friend;
The object, once possessing every charm
Exterior, still each beauty of the soul,
By malady incurable devoured
From day to day is hastening to the tomb.
Oh! long deplored Sandauce; thee my steps
Shall follow close -- My passion is unknown
To her; peculiar was her state and mine,
Too delicate at first for me to speak,
For her to hear. My hopes malignant time
Has wasted since, my health in her decay.
But while my heart is bleeding for my love,
The sluice grows wider, and to friendship pours
A stream enlarged. Thy danger -- Ah! permit,
That I reveal thy origin and rank;
Thy sister's name can shake the king's decree.
No, Artamanes, by the immortal gods,
Rejoins the Carian; of my just attempt,
I, if succeeding, all the merit knew,
If taken, knew my ransom. But the stars,
Half through their circles run, suggest repose.
May grief-asswaging heaviness of sleep
Embalm thy eyelids, and like mine thy breast
Feel no disquiet; may thou rise again,
Saluting hope the harbinger of peace.
Stretched on a carpet Haliartus slept;
Not so the troubled Persian, long disused
To lenient rest. Before the dawn he rose;
Among the Greek auxiliars he procured
Apparel fair of Greece. His Carian guest
Attired he guided over the Malian beach,
To that august pavilion, which contained
The royal person once, Mardonius now
In all the state of Xerxes, save the crown.
Thus Artamanes: See a hapless man,
Who has attempted to remove the corse
Of Sparta's king. That hapless man must die,
Returns the general; Xerxes so ordained,
Not I. Then absent on a charge remote,
Mardonius knew not, nor approved when known,
The indignity that noble corse sustained.
To him the Carian: Mindarus to death,
With hecatombs of nobles thou decreest,
Who in Euboea will appease my ghost.
Ha! who art thou, in agitation spoke
The satrap? Guard, bid Lamachus approach,
Our visitor so recent from that isle.
He was not far; the son of Gobryas thus
Addressed him entering: Note that stranger well.
Why do thou start? Themistocles can boast
No bolder warrior, Lamachus exclaimed;
I was his captive in the Ore^an fight.
Again the Carian: Truth for once he speaks;
I dragged him bound my captive on that field;
Ariobarzanes felt me; further learn,
By me the savage Demonax was slain.
But to have rescued from inhuman wrong
The mortal part of that transcendent man,
Who living shook all Asia with dismay,
Had been my proudest boast. Mardonius then:
By Horomazes, I admire and prize
Thy generous flame, brave warrior! Under charge
Of Artamanes in Trachiniae's round
Awhile remain. Now, Lamachus, ascend
Some ready bark; revisit yonder isle;
This Greek for Mindarus exchange; redeem
The rest of Asia's nobles; I allot
For each a talent. In these words salute
Themistocles: "To Athens I have sent
"Young Alexander, Macedonia's prince,
"Ambassador of friendship; I would call
"Themistocles ally; himself may name,
"But Persia's bounty shall exceed his price.
"This if his Attic arrogance rejects,
"Tell him, Mardonius, who disdains a war
"Of oars and sails, the dubious ocean's sport,
"Will give him battle on the plains of Thebes."
Though Artamanes joyfully beholds
His friend in safety, with a trembling step
Trachiniae's gates he passes to the roof,
Which holds Sandauce. Entering, he perceives
Melissa. She, transported at the sight
Of Haliartus, thus began: O friend!
Dear to my sire, to all the Oilean house,
What unexpected ecstacy were mine
At thy appearance, if -- Ah! Persian lord,
Sandauce, sweet Sandauce, yields to fate.
Her dying lips on Artamanes call;
Soft gratitude overflows her gentle breast;
Her wish is eager, ere she breathe her last,
To see her friend and guardian. Ending here,
She moves before him; with unstable feet,
With other prompters, anguish and despair,
He follows. Pallid on her mournful couch
The princess lies; her infants weep around;
Bright Amarantha in disordered garb,
Unloosen'd hair, and frantic with distress,
Stands nigh. The graces sadden on her front;
Her beauteous eyes a gushing torrent pour
Like overswelling fountains, once serene
The lucid mirrors to encircling flowers,
Now troubled by a storm, which levels round
The growth of shade, and scatters on their face
Uprooted shrubs in bloom. Her languid lips
At length unclosing, thus Sandauce spoke:
Omniscient God of nature! let me lift
My voice appealing. When before me lay
Autarctus slaughtered, when these babes, condemned
By cruel rites, to sacrifice were led,
Did not the creature of thy tenderest mold
Feel as a wife, a mother, and receive
A cureless wound? Thy providence uprais'd
A kind protector through my lengthened walks
Of grief, till now they terminate in death.
If to his generous purity of care,
Assiduous, kind and pious, time has raised
Within my breast a secret, soft return,
Was this an error? Has my heart abused
The sensibility, thou gav'st? Alone
Art thou my judge. Creator, I obey;
Before thy awful presence thou do call
Sandauce's youth; unconscious of a crime,
My debt avowed of gratitude I pay
By this confession of my fleeting breath
To Artamanes. O! illustrious youth,
Supreme in rank, in virtue still more high,
Thy care continue to these orphan babes.
She ceased, and speechless on her pillow sunk.
The enamored Persian instant on the floor
Dropped, like a stony mass, which inward throes
Of earth convulsive from a cliff disjoins;
Dead monument of ruin on the beach
Immovable it lies. Melissa calls
On Haliartus; suddenly he bears
The hapless youth, inanimate and cold,
To an adjoining chamber. There outstretch'd,
Restored to sense by kind, unwearied zeal
In Haliartus, all the night he roam'd
Through sad delirium's labyrinths till morn;
When lo! Melissa: Comfort thee, she said,
The princess lives; the burden from her mind
Discharged, has rendered to the powers of life
Exertion less confined, rekindling hope
Of restoration. So the all-ruling gods
Vicissitude to nature have decreed;
The mind, the body languishes today,
Revives to morrow.... Interrupting came
Mardonius thus: What tidings have I heard
Of Artamanes and the princess dead
By malady most rare, a mutual flame
Too long concealed? But entering I received
A milder tale; they live. Thou holy Greek!
Employ thy science; save a lovely dame,
Though Persian born; in him preserve my friend;
Mardonius, long thy country's foe, to thee
Will never be hostile. To Sandauce go,
Say from my lips, and, Artamanes, hear,
The flower of nobles Xerxes shall not lose
Through disappointed passion; were my friend
Less than he is, among the satraps least,
At my enforcement shall the king unite
Their nuptial hands. Now rouse thee, gallant youth,
Not long thy general from his side can spare
Thy worth approved. Masistius is remote;
In virtue rich beyond a mortal's share,
But to that virtue never yielding rest,
He for a time on high adventure bent
Has left me; thou his vacant place must fill.
The son of Gobryas to his tent returns.
End of the Twentieth Book.
ERRATA.
B. XI. l. 157. For conflagation, read conflagration. B. XI. l. 374. For onc f,
read once of. B. XVI. l. 377. After calm, place a full stop. B. XVII. l. 47.
After Iris, instead of a full stop, place a comma.

