LEARNING AT A LOSS, OR THE AMORS OF MR. PEDANT and MISS HARTLEY.

VOL. II.

LEARNING AT A LOSS, OR THE AMORS OF MR. PEDANT and MISS HARTLEY, A NOVEL.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

Qui Studiis annos Septem dedit, Insenuitque
Libris et Curis, Statua taciturnius Exit
Plerumque, et Risu populum Quatit.
HORACE. LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, And Sold by H. GARDNER, opposite St.
Clement's Church in the Strand; and J. BEW, Paternoster-Row.

M.D.CC.LXXVIII.

Learning at a Loss, etc.
WILLIAM EASY to CHARLES MELMOTH.
Foxhall, June, Dear Melmoth,
I AM just at this present Minute in as bad a Humor for Letter-writing, as any
private Gentleman need be. You see I confine myself to Privates, for Statesmen
and Secretaries methinks should be allowed some greater Degree of Latitude for
their Displeasures on this Head, as being more perpetually tormented with it.
You Will find by my Date, where my Quarters are. I have been here about a Week,
just Time enough to assist at the Reception of your Brother, who arrived but a
Day after me. He was followed on Tuesday last by two maiden Aunts of Sir
Thorobred's, who live together at York, and were so obliging as to favor
Foxhall with their Company 'till this Morning, when they left us, which I
believe their ungracious Nephew is not very sorry for. What a Tribe of Aunts he
has! Two at York, two at Woodstock; all Virgins; and a fifth at last married
and settled in Essex, after having lived in fear of the Apes for above these
twenty Years.

I spent an incomparable Evening yesterday, which perhaps you would not have
suspected, when you hear who were our Party. It consisted of Miss Rugg, her two
Aunts aforesaid, your Brother, strongly contrasted by Tom Fetlock, (who is now
in Possession of the Living) the Baronet and Myself. Sir Thorobred having tired
himself with Lunging a young Stone-horse in the Morning, suffered the
Conversation to turn upon general Topics and Newspaper Intelligences, only
reserving to himself the Liberty of putting in a Sentence now and then as he
thought proper. Having dispatched the common Business of Weather, and remarked,
without Reflection, that such a day had been excessive cold, or intensely hot,
or wet, or dry, or neither, without any Regard to the Matter of Fact, which
indeed was not necessary, as the acquiescing Spirit of the Company entirely
agreed in whatever the first Person advanced, however the Common Sense and
Acceptance of Words might suffer by their Politeness; we proceeded to touch a
little upon American Matters, and the Behavior of a late Reverend Criminal at
his Execution, Alas, poor Doctor! cried Aunt Dorothy, (who for some Time had
been nodding over her Snuff Box, whilst the Combination of Snivel and Rappee
streamed its Chocolate Defluxions down her Handkerchief;) Poor Man! Well, they
say he made a fine End! Why, my dear Madam, cried Sir Thorobred, yawning, He
entered at the Post, didn't he, and I Am told there was a dead Heat. Though some
indeed pretend that he was smuggled over to France, which I don't believe a
Word of. Why I was there, says Fetlock, (who affects to be a Cock-fighter,) and
I never in my Life saw any Man die better Game than he did; aye, and struck to
the last. To be sure he wheeled at first a little, but say what they will, your
wheeling Cocks always fight the best Battle. What say you, Thorobred? Miss Rugg
smiled, the old Ladies sniffed and wiped their Noses, and the Captain relaxing
his Features agreeably, took out his Toothpick-case and began playing with the
Contents of it.

I have told you that I arrived here about a Week ago, but have not mentioned a
Mistake I had nearly fallen into. On getting out of my Chaise, I saw a tall
young Fellow standing in the Yard, with dark Hair cropped short, a narrow-brimm'd
Round-Hat bound with black Ferret upon his Head, and his tout Ensemble exactly
corresponding with my Ideas of a Groom or a Stable-boy. Not happening to think
of Fetlock, I was just meditating a Salutation of "Holla my Lady," to ask his
Assistance in bringing in my Luggage, when he turned round, and thereby saved
me an Infinity of Confusion and Apologies, which I should otherwise Infallibly
have intailed upon myself. His Dress was a light Gray Coat with black Buttons,
an outer Waistcoat of green and white striped Cotton, under which, as it was
open at the Breast, I could descry at least seven Flannel ones faced with as
many Scraps of different colored Sattins; a Pair of Fustian Breeches with a
Profusion of String at the Kneebands, white thread Stockings, a colored Silk
Handkerchief round his Neck, and an Hook'd-Stick in his Hand.

Having suppressed my intended Exclamation, I accosted him as a Gentleman, and
made some feeble Efforts toward entering into an equine Conversation; which
however I soon found my utter Incapacity of Supporting, being in less than five
Minutes so completely bewildered with a Variety of Cant Phrases and Technical
Terms, that I was obliged to change the Subject for one more generally
Intelligible. During this Time Sir Thorobred was at some Distance in a Field,
earnestly examining the Heel of one of his Hunters, which Fetlock told me was
gorged a little; and as he was upon his Hands and Knees with his Hair hanging
loose about his Shoulders, he exhibited methought no unapt Representation of
King Nebuchadnezzar at Grass, toward the End of his seven Years Metamorphosis.
Nor was the Similitude at all diminished by his nearer Approach to us. For his
Dwelling had been with the Beasts of the Field, and his Body was wet with the
Dew of Heaven, and his Beard was grown like Eagles Feathers, and his Nails like
Birds Claws.

Upon his coming up to us, I received from him an honest, hearty, downright
Welcome, exemplified, or rather expressed by a violent Blow on the Shoulder,
and such a Shake by the Hand, as exposed the Economy of my Bones and
Cartilages to intolerable Jeopardy, and which indeed nothing but the Extremity
of Friendship would have induced me to submit to, as his Paws were by no means
exempt from the Nastiness attendant on Farriery. Having, however, survived the
Sa^^tation without material Injury, we all three adjourned to his Study, as he
has thought proper to denominate it. And indeed, upon Reflection, I think he
has much Reason on his Side, though probably without being sensible of it.
Cicero, if you remember, defines Studium, or Study, to be the Attention and
Application of the Mind to some one particular Object. And therefore, though the
Name of a Study, or Repository for such Things as may assist us in this
Pursuit, usually conveys the Idea of a Room particularly devoted to Books and
Literature, inasmuch as the Studium of the generality of People tends that Way;
yet it is equally applicable to a Room equipped in any Manner whatsoever,
provided that Manner bears the same Affinity to the Studium of its Possessor.
Whether our Friend's did, you shall be your own Judge. The Size of the Room you
know is small, with two Windows, a Door and a Fireplace. The literary Part of
its Furniture consisted of a pretty considerable Quantity of old Newspapers,
Magazines, Racing Calendars, and Lists of Running Horses; which entirely
occupied the Window Seats, and invellop'd the greatest Part of the Floor. On
his Table was a Bartlett's Farriery garnished with Spurs, Spur-leathers and a
Bootjack; and the Remains of Euclid's Elements without a Cover, which he
informed me was going the Way of all its University Companions, being
constantly made Use of at his Cloacinean Sacrifices. His Chimney was decorated
with Jockey Whips perpendicularly suspended from their Thongs, and every other
Part of the Walls seemed loaded with an astonishing Variety of Curbs, Snaffles,
Cavessons and Martingals, with five thousand other Instruments of Equestrian
Utility, full as curious and entertaining to me, as the Weapons of New Zealand
or Otaheite, or the old Bandoleers and Shot Pouches in the Armoury in the
Tower. As it wanted some Hours to Dinner, we agreed that a Bottle of Strong
Beer and some Slices of cold Ham would not be unseasonable. These were
procured, and dispatched speedily; after which I retired to Dress myself, as
did my two Companions to try a young Horse of Fetlock's at the Leaping Bar.

Miss Rugg and your Brother seem to find each other exceedingly agreeable, and
if I may presume to prophesy, will not be averse in due Time to a Junction of
Forces. The Captain's Method of Attack is not of the most vigorous Nature, but
I dare say, is a very sure and judicious One. He seems to entertain the same
Idea of marrying a Wife, that he would of purchasing an House or a Farm. I
don't mean Venally; but he seems to consider it as a serious Bargain to be
made, which must be abided by, and would therefore choose as thorough an
Acquaintance with the Nature of his Purchase as possible. This is all very
right I dare say, Charles, but I cannot be so exceeding methodical upon the
Occasion. I cannot help admitting a little of the volatilized Spirit of Love
into my Composition; whereas he conducts himself with a calm settled
Resolution, never suffering any Flames or Darts to enter his Head on the
Occasion. Not that I consider myself as a dying Strephon, with Willows and
Billows and Pillows to recline on, nor yet as a hot frantic Firebrand full of
Jealousy and Madness, committing Extravagancies one Minute on purpose to beg
Pardon for them the next, nor in short any way altered in the usual Tenor of my
Behavior by the Fascination of Female Attractions. At least I hope not, for
they say People in Love are blind to the Absurdities of their own Conduct. Pray
tell me, therefore, in Friendship, if you discover any Thing in my Letters at
all savouring of Bedlam, or whether you should think it necessary to consult
Monro or Battie upon the Occasion?

Hei mihi! quod nullis Amor est medicabilis Herbis! said Apollo, the Head of
the College of Physicians, a good many Years ago, when he was desperately
unsuccessful in some Love Affair, and rather desponding and low about it.
However, he speaks only of the Vegetable World, so perhaps since the
Introduction of Minerals into Medicine, a poor Lover's Case may not be quite so
Immedicable. In Expectation of your Opinion on this Head, I remain, my dear
Charles.

Yours, sincerely, W. EASY.

Captain MELMOTH to CHARLES MELMOTH, Esquire
Foxhall, July My dear Brother,
IT would perhaps be needless to say any thing about the Heat of the Weather to
you, did I not intend to employ it as the Excuse for my epistolary Omissions.
Upon m^ Honor it has been too intense for these last ten Days to attempt any
thing, particularly so laborious a Business as that of Letter-writing. My Hours
here pass on very smoothly, calm and unruffled, unless by the occasional
Vociferation of my good Baronet, who is eternally abusing me, because I
sometimes read Italian, and avowedly proclaim my Detestation of the Smell of
Horse-dung. I guess you have heard how much I am determined upon marrying his
Sister. She is a very good Girl, and I think may contribute to make me more
comfortable than I am at present. So I have been laying regular Siege to her
Heart and Understanding ever since my Arrival, and I believe with considerable
Success. Sir Thorobred approves of it in his Way as much as I can wish him; I
approve of it highly; our Fortunes are sufficient to authorize the Step; and in
short nothing is wanted but her Consent absolute, (for I consider her tacit as
given already,) and her Uncle's Approbation, to conclude our Treaty. What think
you, Charles, Shall I do well Ex nitido fieri Rusticus? To change my Red Coat
with Lace for an unornamented Brown one, and without becoming Savage or
Grazier, to endeavor at getting my Health in a quiet family Way, and raising
Children for the Defense of my Country in future, instead of personally
fighting for it at present? I have told you already that my Time passes very
smoothly, but I will give you a Description of my daily Labors, and let you
judge for yourself. I generally rise about Seven, and stroll into the Garden
with my constant Companion Lord Chesterfield. Here we walk for about an Hour,
entertaining ourselves with each other's Conversation, and every two or three
Turns perhaps stopping to take a View of Sir Thorobred, who is deeply engaged
on the other Side of the Hedge in the elegant Occupation of breaking two young
Horses for his Phaeton, and haranguing his Friend Fetlock, who attends with a
long Whip in his Hand, in all the Mode and Figure of Equestrian Vulgarity.
Enter nous, this Fetlock is sometimes a most intolerable Fatigue to me. The
Baronet is at least a rational Savage, and will sometimes divert and be
entertaining even upon the Subject of his own Oddities; but his Chaplain, or
Aid du Camp, is insipid to the most distressing Degree. Sir Thorobred often
attempts to better my Opinion of him, by informing me, what an honest
good-natured Fellow he is, and far be it from me to say otherwise. It would be
cruel to detract from the Merits of a Person who can so very ill afford it,
'twere like robbing a poor Beggar of his Halfpenny. But still it is hard one
must be condemned to suffer his Company. He never commits even a laughable
Absurdity, unless by mere Accident. The most ridiculous Anecdote I ever heard
concerning him, and that too by the Contrivance of Sir Thorobred, was his
falling asleep at Foxhall after a Drinking Match on Saturday Afternoon, and
continuing in that Situation till the Monday Morning, (I believe it was not
above a Week before my Arrival,) when he waked about Eight o'Clock perfectly
Sober, dressed himself, breakfasted, took his Horse out of the Stable, and
departed very quietly with his Sermon in his Pocket to officiate at his Parish
Church, which is about a Mile distant. Upon his Arrival there however, not
finding any Appearance of a Congregation, he rode twice round the Churchyard,
kicked stoutly at the Vestry Door, damned his Clerk and Parishioners ^^parately
and altogether for a Parcel of negligent Heathens, and returned perfectly
satisfied that he had at least performed his Duty, and paid a due Reverence to
the Sanctity of the Sabbath.

Well, after Breakfast, Charles, I attach myself to Miss Rugg; ride or walk out
with her, and Discourse of my Exploits in America, Of Battles, Sieges, Fortunes,
Of moving Accidents by Flood and Field,
Of hair-breadth Escapes in the imminent deadly Breach,
and so on, 'till, like another Desdemona, she almost Loves me for the Dangers
I have past,
And I love her that she does Pity them.
For, in Truth, many of them were very worthy of Pity, and such as I will not
undergo again whilst the Enemy keep on their own Side the Atlantic. Many Times,
Charles, during our Confinement in Boston, have I worn the same Shirt for three
Days together; lived invariably upon Rice and Salt Pork, and when at length the
Place was evacuated, I was absolutely reduced to my last Pint of Lavender
Water. Sometimes these Conversations are broken in upon by Sir Thorobred, who
enquires whether we could turn our Horses to Grass there, and how much a Load I
supposed our Hay might cost Government. Apropos of Sir Thorobred. He always
wears his Hat in the House, and has besides an uncivilized Custom of throwing
his Legs into the Seat of any Chair that happens to stand near him, if empty;
or if occupied, he entangles his Boots and Spurs so effectually with the Bars
of it, as to expose the Stockings of his Neighbor to unavoidable Destruction,
and his Body to imminent Danger of a Fall. I was sitting next to him yesterday
Evening, when he entertained himself in this Manner. Presently I rose from my
Chair, in which, as I expected, his Legs immediately posted themselves. Sir
Thorobred, said I, that Chair I left for your Hat to lie in; and Apropes de
Botes, ringing the Bell, I am now going to give Orders that the gouty Cradle
may be brought to support your Legs, which I should think a much properer Place
for them. He stared for half a Minute in my Face, damned me for an odd Fellow,
flung his Hat into the Middle of the Room, called for his Slippers, and begging
I would lend him my Pocket-glass, began digging his Jaw Bone with his
Horse-picker as composedly as if it had been the Hoof of the Animal it
appertained to.

Alas! poor Brute! he is utterly incorrigible I believe! I have several Times
attempted persuading him to keep his Nails within some tolerable Bounds of
civilized Longitude; for at present they are entirely in a State of unimproved
Nature, full as Extensive and infinitely less Delicate than the Talons of a
Chinese Mandarin; but I have not the Happiness of discovering the least Shadow
of Improvement arising from it. Ah Thorobred, thou art a well meaning Fellow!
But (...), my Dear Baronet, (...)!

Adieu, Charles, Yours, George Melmoth.

CHARLES MELMOTH to WILLIAM EASY.
Melmoth Place, July, My Dear Easy.
I AM sorry to write on a Subject which I doubt not will sensibly afflict you.
Our poor Friend Harry is no more! I received a Letter Yesterday from Ned
Freeman, who went Abroad with him, informing me of his Decease. Wearied of Life
(says he) before he had well entered into it; with a Temper soured by
Reflection, and a Constitution ruined by Excess, he died unknown and unregarded
at Lisbon in the twenty-second Year of his Age. Except Myself and his Servant
there was not a Soul in the Place that he could speak to. We were with him in
his last Moments, and, I declare to you that it was with the utmost difficulty
I supported myself through the Scene. There is at all Times something
inconceivably Awful in that last Agony of convulsed Nature. But in the present
Instance it was particularly so. To see him Pale and Emaciated, falling in the
Prime of Youth, a Sacrifice to his own Imprudence. To see every Feature
distorted, every Nerve striving with its Dissolution, and Nature by her strong
repeated Struggles, loudly exclaiming that her Time was not yet come; is a
Spectacle too affecting to be looked upon with Composure. It was near three
Hours before he breathed his last, with his Eyes fixed steadfastly on me, and
his Hands firmly grasping one of mine. Before you receive this, I shall
probably be on my Passage to England, with our poor Friend's Body.

Surely, Easy, this is a Melacholy History! The Inattention of his Guardians,
and the certain Prospect of an immense Fortune immediately upon his coming of
Age, were the Cause of his Misfortunes. Happy had it been for him, if his
Father had lived a few Years longer! It is amazing too how greatly his Manner
of Life had altered his Disposition. He had latterly lost all that Mirth, that
Ease and Gaiety of Heart which rendered his Company so universally desirable,
and was become peevish and dissatisfied with every thing. I never shall forget
what he said to me, as we were sitting together in his Dressing Room, but a few
Weeks before he went Abroad. I think it was the last Conversation we ever had
together. Melmoth (says he) I am Unhappy! I am sick of my Follies, and almost
wearied of my Life! I enter into Company without Enjoying it; I frequent public
Places, but they are become Indifferent and Irksome to me. Nothing amuses me! I
wish I had lived as you have, Melmoth!

To quit a Subject so unpleasant, let me enquire a little into your Course of
Employment at Foxhall. For Instance, how do you spend your Mornings? do you
ride, or walk, or sit at Home and read those curious Tracts, which you say Sir
Thorobred's Study abounds with? I should think, with a little Application under
so excellent a Master, you might soon acquire a very competent Stock of
Theoretical Horsemanship; I never presume to expect anything considerable from
you in the practical Parts. A few Days ago I received Advices from George,
giving such satisfactory Accounts of his amatorial Progresses, that I expect
every Newspaper to read Particulars of the Marriage. I am heartily glad to find
Matters in so fair a Train with him, because I think he will do a much wiser
Thing in marrying an amiable Girl with a good Fortune, than in returning to
live upon Salt-Beef and Honor in America. I have a Wife, Easy, and I want to
see all my Friends in the same Situation, which believe me is a much more
comfortable one than many silly People imagine. With due Compliments to the
Inhabitants of Foxhall in general, and that Centaur Sir Thorobred in
particular, I remain,

Yours ever, Charles Melmoth.

WILLIAM EASY to CHARLES MELMOTH.
Foxhall, July, Dear Melmoth,
YOUR melancholy Account of our Friend's Decease gives me much Concern. Poor
Harry, I am sincerely sorry for him! Not that he is Dead, for I do not think
Death a Thing to be lamented; nor yet that he died in the Prime of Life. It Is
not his End, but the Causes and Manner of it, the unhappy Course of Dissipation
which occasioned it, and the Stain that may throw upon a Character in itself
truly amiable, which I grieve for. But I will not trouble you with a Detail of
Reflections on this Head, as I have thrown them into a few elegiac Stanzas to
disbuthen my Mind a little of a Subject which I could not help dwelling upon.
These I send to you in Confidence: So far however from wishing (though I have
disposed them in the Manner of an Epitaph) that they should be inscribed on his
Monument, that I even would not choose they should be seen by any Person except
those few Friends who can drop a Tear of Pity when they chance to think of his
Failings, but will always honor his Memory for the Goodness and Excellence of
his Heart.

In Memoriam Infelicis Juvenis.
Here sleeps, a Martyr to illicit Love,
The Breast that once each nobler Feeling fired;
The Mind that Virtue's Self might well approve,
Had Prudence checked what amorous Youth inspired.
Pure were his Thoughts, and innocent his Joys!
But early Wealth seduced his easy Soul!
Soft Scenes of Pleasure seemed to court his Choice,
And Youth and Nature sicken'd at Control.
Each varied Luxury of Sense was there,
That Art could form, or Fancy's Powers design;
Fair laughed the Feast, with mirthful Freedom fair,
And Beauty crowned the imperfect Joys of Wine.
Alas! How soon the illusive Pageant Flies!
Dark Clouds of Death obscure his dawning Day!
In a strange Land, unknown, unwept, he Lies;
A dreadful Warning to the Young and Gay.
Unknown! Unwept! Save where the secret Tear
Steals in sad Silence from the Muse's Eyes,
Lest wrinkled Age, injuriously severe,
Should wrong his Follies with the Name of Vice.
But ye! Wild Partners of my hapless Friend!
Pass not unheedful by this sacred Stone!
And when your heaving Breasts would mourn his End,
Mourn for his Frailties, and correct your own.
Adieu, my poor inconsiderate Friend!
The earth that Bears Thee dead,
Bears not alive so brave a Gentleman.
Adieu, and take thy Praise with thee to Heaven;
Thy Ignominy sleep with thee in the Grave,
But not remembered in thy Epitaph.
And now Melmoth, let me Answer your Questions concerning Myself and my
Amusements. In the first Place then, all my odd Half-Hours, which are a good
many, are devoted to the Study of Tooke's Pantheon, and the Nomina Propria in
Ainsworth's Dictionary. Can you conceive any thing more edifying? But I read
them to refresh my Memory, and prepare myself more fully for an heathenish
Style of Conversation with Pedant, if he should happen to spend the Summer with
us at Hartley's. The Books lie upon the Floor in Sir Thorobred's Study, from
whence Drafts are made occasionally to be employed in the same Services as his
Euclid's Elements; and indeed I find their Pages suffer such considerable
Decrease, that I am obliged to Study very vigorously, in order to keep up with
him in his Consumption. Then I sometimes ride after Breakfast, but "Soberly,"
as Lady Grace says; Not in the frantic whip and cut Style of a Nimrod, nor with
the more dignified Pomposity of the Manege, like a King William the Third in
old Tapestry. And then if any Log, or broken Hurdle, or Furze-bush should
sprout up in my Way, I never risque the whole Army at once, but pass it in two
Divisions. Videlicet, myself first, as being of the greatest Consequence, and
afterward my Cavalry. Or sometimes if the Passage should be very much
obstructed, I place my Horse in the Van, as Pioneer or Forlorn Hope, and bring
up myself as the sustaining Party. You know which he is. Sir Thorobred's old
Gray Poney. I can tell you we are very great Friends. Age and Experience have
cooled down all the little Tricks and Vanities which more youthful Quadrupeds
are subject to, and as each pays the most punctilious Regard to his own
particular Safety, we are excessively cautious of Hazarding anything that might
break the Bond of Union between us. I fear, however, we shall be under the
Necessity of Parting in a Day or two, as my Time of Furlow is nearly elapsed,
and old Hartley will begin to be impatient for the Execution of his University
Plans. Vale Charles, believe me,

Yours, W. EASY.

Miss HARTLEY to Miss RUGG.
Hill-Street, July,
WELL my cunning reserved little Madam, I have heard of all your Coquetries to
ensnare the poor Melmoth, though you have not thought fit to write to me since
his Arrival amongst you. Indeed, I think you might have found some spare half
Hour to scribble in, and acquaint me a little how Matters went on; especially,
as you had declared your Intentions with such a pretty blushing Bashfulness in
your last Letter. Upon my Honor, you deserve to be plagued a little. Should
nothing Material prevent, I shall probably spend great Part of the Summer with
my Brother, as he seems to wish much for my Company.

How very pretty and sisterlike that was of you, was not it? But then, We are
not without Hopes of seeing Captain Melmoth. How that comes stealing in, as if
it thought to escape unobserved. And presently it is, Somehow or other, I wish
he may come down to us. How we have changed by Degrees, from the Plural to the
Singular! And then in the next Sentence, He is such an agreeable Man, and so
ready to do as I please with.

O you little Gipsey! They may talk as they please, but I Will be hanged if one
such little Puritan as yourself will not cost a Lover more Pains and Attendance,
and give him more Plague, aye, and play him more Tricks too, than half a Dozen
of us mad-headed ones. And then to put yourself to the Trouble of telling a
naughty Story and denying it, and afterward running into the lovesick Strain
so artfully, as if you had forgot that you were writing about your Brother.

Indeed I must in Charity believe, that you did it all on Purpose, or I shall
never have any Mercy on you. But you should really have written to me. For my
Part, I have nothing but Scribbling to amuse me at present. Easy (as you may
guess by the Time of his leaving Foxhall,) came here but Tuesday, and this
Morning he was packed up in a Post-chaise with my Father, and transported to
Oxford in pursuit of my Spouse and Tutor elect. Poor Fellow, I dare say he
could have found a Better, without the Expense of Traveling in search of him.
However, he is gone, and his poor disconsolate Kitty has no other Business but
to Wake and Weep, and read Novels by Lamplight all Night, and to write Letters
and accompany despairing Ditties with her Piano Forte all Day. However, I made
him swear eternal Fidelity, and so forth, in the true Style of Chivalry, before
his Departure to that Country of Necromancers and Inchanters, whom he promises
to destroy and spare not, unless they acknowledge the incomparable Princess he
worships, to be the very Flower and Paragon of Perfection: nay, he farther
engages, that he will make them appear, in due Form, as Slaves before my
Footstool, saying, I am the profound Metaphysician and Logician Puzzlearius,
Governor of the College of A. B. who being vanquished by the superior Valor
and Arguments, etc. etc.

I fancy he will find this Task rather difficult, for by the Specimen I have
seen, I believe the odd Things would rather forfeit all Pretensions to Chivalry
and every Thing else, than endure the Terror of passing five Minutes in a
Woman's Company, in which Time at farthest they must have emptied their whole
Budget of Conversation. To speak seriously though, I have no Idea of Pedant's
being prevailed upon to return with them, by any Arguments whatsoever. If he
should not, my Father's Plan of Operations for the present at least, will be
entirely deranged, and before he can form any new Ones, Easy is to chop Logic,
quote Greek, bring him into a good Humor after Dinner, and then, having
recounted his numerous Services and unparalled Disinterestedness, ask my Hand
of him in Form. If on the Contrary, the Pedantic Animal's Avarice, or some
other strange Infatuation, should prompt him to hazard a long Vacation in
Dorsetshire; why, he will be a delightful Subject to exercise one's ill Humors
upon, and after having stayed there 'till every Idea has been ridiculed out of
him, he may return Home to be the laughing Stock of his Fellow Savages, and
leave Easy in peaceable Possession of the Victory and the Prize; for I don't
doubt my Father's Goodness, if we can but once drive this nonsensical Chimera
out of his Head.

Oh, I must tell you now though whilst I think of it, what a Sacrifice Easy has
made at my Shrine, and what Incense he has been offering to that dear favorite
Foible of ours, Vanity. He begged indeed, an assuming Fellow! That I would not
communicate them to any body, but we Women you know never can conceal these
Matters from each other; though I really do not think you deserve them, after the
sly Style of Secrecy, which you would have adopted toward me, if your Pen
would have suffered you. However, if you will beg Pardon, and be a good Girl,
I Will not keep you any longer in Suspense. They are two languishing Epistles,
the Produce of an unalterable Passion which he sustained in his younger Days,
for a Lady whom he calls Delia, and to whom he is distantly related.

As Delia's Papa and Mama lived entirely in the Country, the young People had
not met since they were Children, and Colin's Parents, (for so he calls
himself) having no very good Opinion of Miss Delia, had often described her to
him in a Manner not the most favorable. One Summer, however, they resolved to
pay old Mr. Delia a Month's or six Weeks Visit; and it being Vacation Time with
young Mr. Colin, who was then of the University, he of course accompanied them.
And then it was, that the superlative Excellence and Goodness of Miss Delia
struck him through the Liver! Poor Man, he was in a sad Way about it: for Miss
Delia, though she treated him very kindly, was unluckily engaged already to a Man
of very considerable Fortune; and when, after some Time, he attempted to prefer
his Suit, she revealed to him the State of the Case, and showed him one or two
Letters from her other Lover, Mr. Corydon, which entirely drove poor Colin to
Desperation. Then, it fortunately happened, that instead of hanging or drowning
himself, as a downright ignorant Fellow would have done in similar
Circumstances; Poetry came to his Aid, and he presented her with the first
Epistle.

Soon* afterward she became Mrs. Corydon, and within a Month more the
inexorable Parcae cut down her Husband. Upon this, not having Leisure to
Versify, lest any other Claimant would step in before him, he had nothing for
it but to administer Comfort as early as possible in plain Prose, and endeavor
to bring himself upon the Tapis again. She however, is utterly Inconsolable,
and after having got the Funeral over and taken a little time for
Consideration, absolutely determines upon a perpetual Retirement and Seclusion
from the World in General. This you may imagine, produces a second Piece of
Poetry from her Inamorato, longer than the first; wherein, after having said a
great many fine Things, and attacked her with a Profusion of Morality and
Sentiment, he considers himself as bound in common Politeness to imitate her
illustrious Example, pitches upon a very pretty Cave for the Place of his
Retirement, and resolves to surrender his Body to Tears and Meditations whilst
living, and to Flesh-flies and Jack-daws after he is dead, without Benefit of
Clergy or Christian Burial. In consequence of these pious Determinations on
both Sides, she is married within a Twelvemonth to a Man old enough to be her
Grandfather, but with a very large Fortune; and he, having amused himself for
several Years amongst the Groves and Solitude of the Temple Gardens, is at
present -- just as I would have him be.

I have enclosed the two Pieces of Poetry which he gave me, the Prose I was
only suffered to read before he burnt them.

Adieu, my dear Rugg, Believe me your very affectionate, CATHARINE HARTLEY.
COLIN to DELIA, On her approaching Marriage with CORYDON.
READ, or O say! have present Joys effaced
Each Thought, each fond Remembrance of the past?
Can that blessed Rival censure one sad Sigh,
One transient Tear to me and Misery?
Read; nor with cold Severity reprove
The unconquered Struggles of distracted Love:
Grant one last Look of Comfort to my Grief,
One sympathetic Strain of sad Relief;
Then all my Woes in dark Oblivion drown,
And yield thy Soul to Bliss and Corydon.
Cursed be the Hour! -- No -- be it ever blessed,
When first thy Beauty struck my'astonish'd Breast.
The wild Luxuriance of thine auburn Hair,
Thy Mien majestic, Face divinely fair,
Seemed like the ideal Phantom of a Dream:
I saw, I wondered, but could not esteem.
Vile Prejudice with bigoted Control
Checked every nobler Feeling of my Soul:
Still in my Ear base Slander whispered Lies,
Beheld Vivacity, and named it Vice;
Did any dare applaud your Wit or Sense,
'Twas sneering Satire all and Impudence. --
Gods, how I erred! could I thus grossly Sin,
Or think so fair a Form so foul within!
Thus think of her, whose Virtues now I see,
And Honor almost to Idolatry!
Yet how sincerely I bewailed my Crimes,
And cursed the unfeeling Malice of the Times,
Cursed my weak Heart, that could so soon believe
Such Excellence was made but to deceive;
Bear witness Heaven! and thou, fair Maid, forgive!
For whom alone I can endure to live;
Forgive this Error, it is my last Request;
Then welcome Solitude, my Mind's at rest.
Scarce had three Suns their daily Circuit ran,
And the fourth Morn revealed its Light to Man,
When with full Radiance on my dazzled Sense
Beamed forth the Wonders of your Excellence.
There, veiled in all the Sprightliness of Youth,
Sat meek-eyed Modesty and honest Truth;
There calm Religion reigned with sweet Control;
The Sanctity of Thought and Snow of Soul
Their heaven descended Influence there combined,
To prove thy Face less beauteous than thy Mind.
Slander beheld, and shudd'ring with Affright,
Plunged headlong 'midst the Shades of endless Night.
Ah me! whilst yet I breath my mournful Strain,
Fresh Woes arise, and aggravate my Pain.
Fixed in my tortured Mind's distracted Waste
Sits Memory, 'tween the present and the past
Forming dire Parallels: how erst among
The shadowing Grove's dark gloom we roved along;
Then, whilst my Soul dissolved in amorous Bliss,
Planned idle Schemes of endless Happiness;
Thy Voice, soft soothing, flattered my Desire,
Roused every Sense, and filled my Breast with Fire.
Thus rapt in Extacy my Moments past,
Ah! Extacy too wonderful to last!
When one cursed Hour, one blasting Stroke of Fate,
Down hurled me from my Pinnacle of State;
Snatched every vain ideal Hope of Bliss,
And whelmed me deep in Woe's extreme Abyss.
Unfeeling Maid! by such harsh Means to prove
The boundless Influence of Almighty Love!
Had those sad Papers been at first revealed,
Or ever from my cheated Sight concealed;
One last Farewell, one heartbreaking Adieu,
Had torn my struggling Soul from Love and you:
Or still of happy Ignorance possessed,
I had enjoyed a visionary Rest;
Till shudd'ring with Astonishment and Fear,
Loud nuptial Hymns had pierced my'affrighted Ear;
And, as with Lightning blasted, my strange Doom
Had sunk me deep, deep in the Grave's dark Womb.
Think not I seek to interrupt your Joys,
Upbraid your Conduct, or condemn your Choice:
My Happy Rival boasts far nobler Birth,
Vows earlier plighted, and superior Worth;
Propitious Fortune blessed his Natal Hour,
And Plutus hailed him in a golden Shower;
Ten thousand Heifers over his Pastures rove: --
My only Wealth was Competence and Love!
No -- Could you, pitying as these Lines you see,
Bid me still live to Happiness and Thee;
Could you for me, unmindful of your Vows,
Burst from the Embraces of your promised Spouse;
For me, in some lone Cot consent to dwell,
And bid your Country and your Friends farewell:
Wretch though I am, the Prize I Would still forego,
Nor wish such Joys, even to my deadliest Foe.
Live, long and happy! nor disturb your Bliss,
With one sad Thought of Colin's Wretchedness:
Or should soft Pity prompt you still to bear
The Memory of a Youth you once held dear;
Still grant me your Esteem, since Love must end,
And though the Wife be lost, remain the Friend.
COLIN to DELIA, On the Death of CORYDON. Written at the University.
IF, from these gloomy Walls, these antique Towers,
Where meagre Study wastes the midnight Hours;
Where Pedant Learning sits severe, nor knows
The Anguish of an hopeless Lover's Woes;
Yet Delia, yet again it is given to mourn,
Vent all my Griefs, nor be received with scorn*
Accept these heartfelt Strains: nor fear to join
The bitter Sorrows of thy Cup with mine.
Mix Tear with Tear, heave flow the alternate Sigh;
We may at least unite in Misery.
This Step nor Friends, nor Fortune Disallows;
Nor the pale Phantom of thy shrouded Spouse.
O Corydon! in Life's aspiring bloo^
Snatched from a Bride's Embraces to the Tomb!
Methinks I see thy lingering Spirit fly,
And scarce quit her for Heaven without a Sigh;
Methinks I see thee 'midst the Angelic Choir,
Strike the soft Warblings of thy pensive Lyre,
With listless Eye the Aetherial Mansions range,
Look sadly down, and half regret the Change*
Rest, virtuous Youth, supremely blessed in Heaven!
Nor scorn this Tribute by a Rival given:
No storied Urn, no funeral Dirge you need,
Vain empty Offerings to the senseless Dead!
Silent be Fame, and hushed be every Voice,
Your Worth stands blazoned by your Delia's Choice.
Nor thou, fair Maid, esteem it feigned, that here
I breath sad Strains of Sorrow over his Bier:
To see thee blessed was all my Wish below,
The first best Gift God's Bounty could bestow;
Those Dreams are fled, so cruel Fate decreed,
And a long Train of thickening Ills succeed:
Rest of your Lord, no second you approve,
But shrine your Soul in monumental Love.
By the pale Tapers dimly glimmering Light
Count the long Moments of the tedious Night,
Or with slow Step, majestically sad,
Seek the damp Aisle where his cold Corse is laid,
Invoke his Shade to prove your Vow sincere,
And bid the World farewell without a Tear.
And can thou, Delia, can thou waste thy Bloom
In some dark solitudes sequestered Gloom?
Can thou forget the Honors of thy Race?
Say, can thou yield that fair, that faultless Face
A Prey to Grief, a voluntary Slave;
So sweet a Flower to wither over a Grave? --
No -- yet again in this World's Pleasures join,
Again in all thy fatal Beauty shine;
In social Mirth Life's transient Hours employ,
Nor sour'd by Grief, nor mad with thoughtless joy:
On Reason's Rules let every Action move:
What she prescribes, Religion must approve.
Let peevish Dotards bid the World adieu,
And censure Joys they can no more pursue;
Let Avarice barter Soul and Body's Health
To roll in Piles of solitary Wealth;
Let Superstition, big with righteous Pride,
Pard'ning herself, damn all the World beside;
With pious Rancour against Mankind inveigh,
And thank her God she is not made as they;
Condemn the Blessings by his Mercy given
To smooth this mortal Pilgrimage to Heaven:
It Is thine to spend thy little Hour on Earth
In social Comforts and becoming Mirth;
Catch the World's guiltless Pleasures as they fly,
Thankful to live, yet not afraid to die;
Breath the soft Air of resignation's Gale:
Thus speaks thy Friend, and let his Voice prevail.
And is that all? must my Fierce Passions bend
To the cold Names of Monitor and Friend?
Can those weak, formal, empty Titles, prove
To what Excess of Misery I love?
Ah, fond, aspiring, interested Youth,
In vain you preach up Righteousness and Truth;
In vain with pious Fraud yourself deceive,
And teach your willing Senses to believe;
Pretend it is pure Religion's Flame you feel,
And grace your Passion with the Name of Zeal*
Nor Grace, nor Zeal, Love only Fires your Lays,
It Is the Heart dictates, and the Hand obeys.
Come then, in all thy Pride of Beauty, come;
Pronounce my Sentence, stamp my final Doom!
Come! -- Let me clasp thee in my'enraptur'd Arms,
Drink in thy matchless Luxury of Charms;
With quivering Lips, caressing and carest,
Rouse the tumultuous Heavings of thy Breast;
Then, lost in Love, and sickening with Desire,
Sunk on thy Neck, triumphantly Expire.
Alas! how wildly do my Senses rove!
Yet who can hope consistency in Love! --
Is this the Preacher? will my Delia cry,
Is this the Youth of wondrous Piety?
The Friend, who late with righteous Fervor glowed,
And bade me learn Submission to my God?
Taught me his Bounties were not given in vain,
To be neglected by desponding Man?
And would he now my Peace of Mind destroy
'Midst the rude Transports of illicit Joy?
Mar the fair Prospects of my future Life,
And bid me stoop to be a Beggar's Wife?
O rare Humility! best Gift of Heaven!
Sure Means for all my Sins to be forgiven!
Cease, Delia, cease; nor with too hasty Tongue
Condemn the Wretch who never wished you wrong.
O were the fierce conflicting Struggles known,
'Twixt Grace and Love, your Welfare and my own;
Could you but feel what Seas of Passion roll,
And pang with boisterous Rage my tortured Soul;
Your gentle Heart would pity not reprove
The hapless Youth whose only Crime was Love.
Farewell! -- from every Hope of Comfort driven,
I here devote my future Hours to Heaven!
Far from the Noise and busy Hum of Men,
My Soul has formed a melancholy Scene:
An unfrequented Cave, mossy and old:
There, save the Tinklings of some distant Fold;
Or some small Brook, high overgrown with Reeds,
That Bubbling, winds its Waters amongst the Weeds;
Silence shall reign. -- No Trace of Man intrude
Upon the still sequestered Solitude;
Unless some hapless Wretch's Skeleton,
Who long Time since, like me, by Love undone,
Sought that sad Place out to despair and die.
There, mixed with his, my scattered Bones shall lie;
There, mixed with his, in dark Oblivion rot,
Alike unwept, unhonour'd, and forgot!
Or should strange Chance some wandering Shepherds lead
To these lone Mansions of the unburied Dead;
Shaking their pensive Heads, they will drop a Tear
Of generous Pity on our moss-grown Bier;
Then sighing, say, as the sad Tale they tell,
Alas! These "Loved, not wisely, but too well."


Mr. HARTLEY to Sir ANTHONY ARTICHOKE.
Hill-Street, July. My dear Sir Anthony,
I AM so overjoyed! I am the happiest Man alive! All my Schemes have succeeded,
and I have been down to Oxford, and have brought up Mr. Pedant with me, and we
are as happy and as learned as the Day is long, and we are all going down to
Dorsetshire in a Day or two. And now, my old Friend, since every thing has
turned out so prosperously, I will let you into the Secret which I talked of in
my former Letters, and inform you who has been my Confidant and Assistant in
managing this Business. I say, since every thing has turned out so
prosperously: for else you know as well as I can tell you, that, "Least said is
soonest mended," and, Bad News always comes fast enough. and the like. His Name
is William Easy, a young Man about seven or eight and twenty. His Father and I
were old Schoolfellows and Cronies at Hackney together. Poor old Easy, he used
to be sadly troubled with the Gout latterly like myself, and went to Bath once
or twice in a Year, constantly. And would you believe it, the young Fellow, his
Son, found me out when I was there last, before I visited Staples you know; aye
and came to Breakfast with me too, and was as glad to see me, the young Rogue
was, as if I had been of his own Age. Let them say what they will of the Vices
and Follies of the present Race of young Men, I am glad to find they are not
all so corrupt. And he is clever too in the Bargain, and has read a good Deal,
and has seen a good Deal of the World too, I dare say, which is no harm, when
it does not interfere with a Man's Learning. Now what Person do you think could
be so proper to assist in managing this Business of a Husband for Kitty, as he
was. For his Manner of Introducing himself at first to me, showed how
disinterested he was, and that he came to see me purely because I was so well
acquainted with his poor old Father, and what a Regard he had for me upon that
Account. So I communicated all my Intentions to him, and he approved of them
highly, and accompanied me in my Journey to Oxford, and talked to me about the
Prometheus of Aeschylus and Aristotle's Treatise upon Rhetoric, by the Hour
together as we went along. And I have engaged him to come down with me to
Dorsetshire, to complete the Affair. So Mr. Pedant and myself, (I wanted to
have persuaded Mr. Pedant to have gone down in the same Carriage with my
Daughter, by way of making a Beginning you know, but he chose rather to go with
me.) So Mr. Pedant and myself will travel in my Chariot and four, and I must
make an Apology to Easy about going in an hired Chaise with my Daughter, and
they can keep on before, and prepare Things at the Inns for us. Do write to me
soon, and tell me what your Opinion is of all this, and believe me to be,

Your most faithful Friend, Christopher Hartley.

WILLIAM EASY to CHARLES MELMOTH.
Dorsetshire, August, Dear Charles,
THAT I have for this Week past intended epistolizing Melmoth Place, is as
certain as that I have omitted doing it, and you perhaps would now have been as
well satisfied, with good-naturedly taking the Will for the Deed, and
compounding for my not writing at all. However, since the Pen is put to Paper,
you shall have no Reason to complain of my Brevity in Correspondence, be your
Passion for Letter-reading ever so excessive. It is now about three Weeks since
I made my Escape from Oxford, from whence, in Conjunction with old Hartley, I
have effected the Peregrination of Pedant to this western World: A Piece of
Success as far beyond my Expectation as my Wishes. Indeed, I had not the
smallest Idea that any thing could have induced him to such a desperate
Undertaking, and should have been full as well pleased, had he been inexorable
to our Entreaties; for by the frequent Consultations he has held with the old
Gentleman for these last three or four Days, and some other little Incidents, I
suspect there is more in the Wind than I am aware of. However, as I don't feel
myself disposed to stand greatly in Awe of their Intentions, whatever they may
be, I shall drop him for the present, and commence the Journal, or History of
our University Expedition.

About the Middle of July then, within two Days after my Return from Foxhall to
Hill-Street, I was put on board a Post-chaise with old Hartley about eight
o'Clock in the Morning, and about Four in the Afternoon found myself, with my
Companion, at the Cross Inn, Oxford. As it happened to be during the Time of
the Public Act, the Town was tolerably crowded. So having deposited our Baggage
in the best Room we could meet with, we procured proper Directions to Mr.
Pedant's Chambers, and immediately sallied out in Pursuit of them. Many and
curious were the Figures we encountered in our Way, and of all Sizes and
Dimensions. Several of them I remembered as my Contemporaries, with whom, in
those Days, I had been very well acquainted. But the Devil, or my evil Genius,
or some strange Circumstance that I was not apprized of, had so transformed and
disfigured me since that Time, that not a Man of them could I prevail upon to
remain within Gunshot of me. If I ran, hollowed, or called them by their
Names, it served but to increase their Velocity in Retreating. They scudded up
their Stair-cases like black Rabbits in a Warren; and I believe it was near ten
Minutes before I could procure any Creature to assist me with farther
Instructions toward the Discovery of Pedant's Residence. At last, I had the
good Fortune to meet Tom Frankley, your Neighbor Harborough's Nephew, who is a
Gentleman Commoner of the same College. He conducted us immediately to the
Object of our Pursuit, and begged, if I was not already engaged, I would call
in the Evening and sup with him, and bring old Hartley with me. I told him that
I feared Supper would not be in my Power, but that I would certainly call upon
him about Eight o'Clock, though I could not promise farther, So we parted, and
Mr. Hartley and myself proceeded up the Staircase toward the Door of Pedant's
Apartment. Unluckily it happened, that not thinking of the still Caution
necessary in an Attack of this Sort, we advanced carelessly, talking as our
Vanguard approached the Outworks, and thereby effectually excluded ourselves
from all possibility of entering. For just as we turned round the last
Landing-place, the Vigilance of the Enemy was alarmed, the outer Door shut with
a thunder Clap, and all within was silent. You may imagine that after this, all
the Knocking and Noise we could make, would be of very little Service; so we
were obliged to content ourselves for the present with the Supposition that he
probably was busied, as old Hartley said, in some metaphysical Investigation;
but that he would go there by himself in the Evening, and attempt him a second
Time by Surprise. This Plan of Proceeding I entirely applauded, as it released
me from all the purgatorial Discipline of such a Service, and gave me the
better Opportunity of Supping with Frankley, whose Conversation, though less
abstruse, would probably be more entertaining. So having drank our Tea together
quietly at the Coffee-house, I left my Companion planning the Mode of his
Attack over a Newspaper, and went immediately to fulfill my Engagement. And most
excellently entertained I was, both with the Behavior and Conversation of my
Company. So much so, that without any Apology, I shall send you a minute Detail
of the whole Business, which, if you find yourself too stupid or lazy to read
with due Attention, I desire you will forthwith send back to me again, with all
proper Thanks and Acknowledgements, Carriage paid.

Well, to Frankley's I went then, sat down, and having got through the first
necessary Business of Speechifying and Enquiries, was just verging toward a
Discourse upon University Matters in general; when, on a sudden, (preceded
however by an infinite Variety of Tallios, Hoicks's, hark to Venoms, Vipers,
Vixens, Vermins, which we perceived gradually increasing from the opposite Side
of the Quadrangle,) the Door flew open, and in rushed a Party of Gentlemen,
who, it seems, from their particular Attachment to that Species of Cur, as well
as from the exact Similarity of their Noises, are called the Terriers. At the
Head of this extraordinary Troop was a Mr. Jack Solecism, who first discovered
his Capability of Articulation by a "Damn that villainous Rascal Euclid to * *
* * *, I wish the Fellow * * * * * * * *, and whatever else is usual on such
Occasions.

This curious Exclamation, which having lasted for some Minutes, terminated but
with the Breath of the Utterer, was accompanied by a loud Amen in Chorus from
the Rest of the Company. Presently several of them snatched Chairs, and threw
themselves into them for the Benefit of Conversation. Well Frankley, says
Solecism to my Friend, after all, this College is a damned Place. Here am I
now, a Fellow allowedly clever, preposterously so; now and then a little Drunk
to be sure: why they puzzle and torture me at their Examinations worse than a
rich Criminal in an Inquisition. Strike me sober, if I know whether their
Examinations are most like an Inquisition or a Bullbait. And the Rascals are
true bred Dogs too, every one of them; they run all at the Head; 'till a Man's
Brain becomes as confused as a Bankrupt's Account Books. However, I keep my
Head up, and then they cannot pin me. An old Lord of the Council rated me the
other Day in the Street, but I marked him not, and yet he talked very wisely,
and in the Street too. But I regarded him not. I am unhurt in the midst of
them, like Daniel in the Den of Lions. Aye, or in the fiery Furnace, cried
another, at the same Instant catching his Chair from under him with a Velocity
that tilted him Head-foremost into the Grate. O damn the Expense of a fiery
Furnace, cried a Third, Expense is nothing, Trouble's all, bellowed a Fourth.
Back him up, fan him, spilt, dish'd, all abroad, wound up, sha'n't be bad, not
of the two, a few or so, all abroad, abroad, abro -- ad. Here Articulation
ended, and was succeeded by their former Canine Conversation, with which they
quitted, or, to use their own Expression, dangled out of the Room.

As soon as they were gone, Frankley began entering into some Sort of
Dissertation on the Characters of these Incomprehensibles; explained to me
their Style of Life, their Amusements, the Rules of their Club, with many other
Articles infinitely curious and entertaining. Jack Solecism, says he, is a
Fellow of very excellent Abilities, but very rarely sober enough to employ them
properly; or to adopt his own Words, is Allowedly Clever, preposterously so,
but, Now and then a little Drunk to be sure. He is not at present a Member of
the Terrier Society, but has a very fair Prospect of being speedily admitted,
as he excels particularly in the Indian War Whoop, and is allowed by several
Sea-Captains who are good Judges, to approach nearer the true Sound than any
European they had ever conversed with.

I hope, continued he, that you find yourself pleased with the Company of these
good Folks, as the greater Part infallibly design doing themselves the Honor
of Supping with me, and it is an absolute Impossibility to put them off, or
prevent them. So you see what you are to expect. In reply to this, I could only
say that it was the very Thing which I was most desirous of, provided that he
could insure my Carcass from all practical Wit and manual Pleasantry, which I
acknowledged myself too stupid to enter into the Spirit of, and consequently to
have any particular Taste for. This he undertook to answer for, provided I on
the other Hand would do my Part, by retiring in Case of particular and
extraordinary, Combustion, to which Article I with equal readiness assented. So
Matters being stipulated between us, we stretched ourselves upon a Sopha, and
with the Assistance of Sleep and Chit-Chat, murdered our Interval of Time very
handsomely; and by and by, after having enjoyed I believe about an Hour's
respite, our Friends the Terriers returned, with Jack Solecism the first Fiddle
as usual. As he was still very tolerably drunk, and the Fumes of the Liquor
remained in absolute Possession of his Capital, we had hardly eaten three
Mouthfulls, (I forgot to tell you we were at Supper) when he was upon his Legs,
declaiming with all the Energy of Diction, and before we had well finished our
Meal, entered with an Oration so gloriously absurd and ridiculous, that I could
not help committing it to Paper as soon as I quitted them, and now send it to
you with absolute Injunctions to be diverted, as you value my Friendship, or
regard the Trouble I shall be subjected to, both in transcribing that and
relating the Consequences which attended it.

Gentlemen, said he, (and as he spoke he hiccup'd, and drank two Bumpers of
Punch to assist his Articulation) I think Gentlemen, when I had last the
Happiness of Addressing you in this House, when as I remember, you did me the
Honor of increasing and enforcing my Comparisons by absolute Contact with the
Fender, the Marks whereof my Forehead retains with a grateful Sense of their
Utility unto this Hour: I think, I say, I was then giving it as my Opinion that
this College was a damned Place, that is in other Words, for I mean not to
swear absolutely, a Place to be condemned utterly; and now my present Purpose
is to make good my Assertions by a little incontrovertible Ratiocination.

Now the seniors or graduate Members of a College may, I think, be divided into
three Species or Classes. The first and best, and who as being best should
consequently be first mentioned, had they no other Pretensions to Priority; are
those few fine old Fellows, who being naturally and originally the Children of
Dullness, have chose to enjoy their Birthright unimpaired, uninterrupted,
uncontaminated by Science, and in consequence have vegetated in the Spot
Providence first planted them, without impertinent Interference or Prying into
the Conduct and Behavior of their Betters. Peace be to all such Men! To their
great Grizzle Wigs and Apathy I bow with Reverence. The Honorable Gentlemen may
call them stupid. I adore them for their Stupidity! It Is perhaps a pleasant, it
is certainly an innocent Amusement, It offends nobody. Were they as stupid as
many of them are corpulent, which I allow cannot easily be the Case; as stupid
as a Sot before Dinner, or an Alderman after it; I pay them the greater
Reverence therefore. But perhaps the Honorable Gentlemen may object to their
Corpulence? To their globose Rotundity of Paunch? I would ask the Honorable
Gentlemen, whether they are the Contractors for Victualling it? Do they provide
Covering for its Convexity? Is not the Owner at the sole Expense of continuing
it in its usual State of Dilation? Is not he at the sole Expense of covering
its Nakedness, which unless covered would doubtless be unseemly, with an
extravagant Profusion of Broad-cloth? Is not that Broad-cloth black too? A
Color, (if indeed Black may be considered as a Color, which however my
Philosophy has not yet determined upon,) notoriously Expensive from the
Rottenness of its Die. At least was it not Black originally, though now perhaps
its Tint may be more venerably assimilated to the verd antique Marble of Italy.
But enough of these, Gentlemen; let us now turn our Attention to my second
Species of Existences: To a Set of Men originally endued with Abilities, with
Abilities destroyed and obnubilated by Residence and Application. Does any one
start at my Assertion? The Honorable Gentlemen are not to be taught I hope,
that Application is the Bane and Destruction of Abilities. The human Mind,
Gentlemen, pardon the Comparison, is like a Leg of Mutton. The Meat is fine,
but requires Roasting to make it eatable. We place it before the Fire then, and
it is suffered, according to its Size, to continue there for a longer or
shorter Period. We resume it: and upon cutting it, we find the natural Gravy
remains there, but matured and meliorated by Concoction. So far it has been in
a State of Improvement. It is then at its Point Tropical, its Solstice, its
Zenith of Perfection. But would any Cook in Christendom replace it there in
Expectation of farther Advantages? Would she not know that any farther
Torrefaction must be prejudicial? That the natural Gravy would from that Time
decrease and evaporate gradually? A Gravy, Gentlemen, not to be supplied by all
the adscititious Sauces of the most ingenious Artificer. I presume no Gentleman
needs my Information that Learning is an elegant Accomplishment. So is
Snuff-taking. That the one strengthens the Ideas and clears the Head of its
Votary. So does the other. But in either Case how dangerous are Excesses! In
the one it degenerates into Pedantry; In the other to Bestiality and Nastiness.
I will conclude my Remarks on this Species, with their Character, as drawn by a
late elegant Satyrist.

Fellows! who have soaked away their Knowledge,
In sleepy Residence at College;
Whose Lives are like a stagnant Pool,
Muddy and placid, dull and cool;
Mere drinking, eating; eating, drinking;
With no Impertinence of Thinking;
Who lack no farther Erudition,
Than just to set an Imposition
To cramp, demolish and dispirit,
Each true-begotten Child of Merit;
Censors, who in the Day's broad Light,
Punish the Vice they act at Night;
Whose Charity with self begins,
Nor covers others venial Sins;
But that their Feet may safely tread,
Take up Hypocrisy instead,
As knowing that must always hide,
A Multitude of Sins beside;
Whose rusty Wit is at a stand,
Without a Freshman at their Hand.
I am come now, Gentlemen, to my Third Division. And here willingly would I be
silent, but Justice calls upon me to speak, though my Feelings are wounded by
the Description. What shall I say then? Shall I call them with Dr. Hurd in one
of his Dialogues, a Set of "Bearded Boys?" And would you invite our liberal and
noble Youth to resort hither? Can you expect that their free Spirits will stoop
to be lectured by these? Or that their Minds can ever be formed and tutored by
such Pedants, in a Way that fits them for the real Practice of the World and of
Mankind?

But let us choose an Instance for Illustration. Let one suffer for the Rest,
and be selected as a Subject for Dissection. And can we want a Subject, whilst
Euclid is before us? A Fellow whose only Pleasure and Delight lies in plaguing
every body of equal Genius but less Erudition than himself. A Fellow, whose
very Instructions are Insults, who forces Science upon you, Nolens volens, as
an Apothecary does Physic; thrusts Rhomboids, Parallelograms and
Parallelopipedons down your Throat, like Pistol's Leek; crams you with
Pentagons, Hexagons and Quindekagons, till your Head is as full of odd Shapes
and Figures as a Chinese Manuscript, or an Egyptian Necromancer's Talisman, or
the Hieroglyphics of a greasy Buttery Account Book. A Fellow who claps a
triangular Mathematical Yoke or Collar round your Neck, as they do round a
Hog's, to prevent your getting through the Parallels of a five-barr'd Gate, and
feasting in the Turnip Field of Classical Knowledge on the other Side of it.

Evil Communication, says the old Copy-book, corrupts good Manners; and for my
Part, I declare honestly that I can hardly consider that Knowledge as
respectable, which I behold prostituted and contaminated by a Communication
with the most despicable of Characters. I cannot help connecting my Ideas of one
with the other; and then, damn 'em, I hate both. And yet, get them by
themselves, the Mathematics are good intelligent Things enough. And very useful
too, for a Land Surveyor or Builder of Bridges. I Am sure I look up to them with
Fear and Reverence, as a Thief does to a Gibbet, and only pray secretly that it
may never be my Case.

And then he is such an inveterate unchristian Rascal in his Resentments,
Letting the Sun go down upon his Wrath. An absolute Polypheme; Nec visu
Facilis, nec Dictu Affabilis ulli. In short, ten Times worse than Pedant, or
any of his Compeers, in as much at least as a Person who behaves Ill to every
body is worse than him who has no Behavior at all. And yet they are all bad
enough occasionally, even men who are liberal and well spoken of at any other
Place; as if they thought Illiberality a College Accomplishment, and were
afraid of appearing affected and singular if they did not give into it. Or
perhaps it may be Philosophically accounted for, by the Difference of the
Medium in these Parts, and that the very Atmosphere is mephitically impregnated
with a Sort of illiberal Vapor, from the constant Respiration of such a Number
of uncivilized Inhabitants.

By the Time our Cicero had got thus far in his Oration, (which I have here
endeavored to give you connectively, omitting the frequent Remarks and
Interruptions of his Companions,) the Quantity of Liquor which he had drank, or
according to his own Philosophical Method of accounting for Things, the Vinous
Atmosphere he had been so long Breathing; called off the Organs of Speech from
Elocution, to employ them in an Operation, perhaps more natural, and certainly
better adapted to his present Condition. His Eyes fixed, his Jaw fell; down he
dropped, and, (to use the Words of an Irish Acquaintance of mine, when he was
describing the Issue of one of his Duels,) Never brought Life to the Ground
with him. At least not intellectual Life. Well, in this State he lay for about
five Minutes; formidably Nasty indeed! Cascading like a Leaden River-God's Urn,
or the grotesque Human Waterspouts of a gothic Cathedral. Presently he began to
kick a little, and in a short Time after, by the Application of Salt, hot
Water, and other Methods, according to the Practice of the Humane Society,
which his Companions were very liberally observant of; he started up at once on
his Legs, filled an half-pint Bumper of Punch, and indistinctly muttering an
old Adage of his own, that the more came out, the more Room to go in; drained
it in an Instant. This Act of Heroism, with the sagacious Comment that
accompanied it, excited a Burst of Universal Applause.

"Well Jack," cried Tom Riotous, who stood next him, "Now you have settled your
Internals, I suppose we shall have the Rest of your Oration? Come, come, why
damn ye, you look as Meagre and as Melancholy as Duns Scotus of Merton in the
last Page of the Bible! Come, your Oration!"

"Oration, Sir," exclaimed Solecism, (who since his last half Pint of Lethe,
had been black in the Face with a Kind of hiccuping Convulsion, and remained
without the least Recollection of any previous Circumstances,) "Oration, Sir,
what do you mean to Insult me, Sir? Oration, Sir, is of two Kinds,.......
Demosthenes and his Plumb-stones..... Two Methods of using the Hand, (...), in
Oration, Sir. First, there is the Hand open, employed in the milder Kind of
Argument: Then, Sir, (damme, I will not put up with an Insult,) there is the
Hand closed, commonly called the clinch'd Fist, (...) do you observe me, for more
weighty Arguments, Sir; to evince, convince. The knock-ye-down Argument, Sir,
which will humble the most high-headed Adversary; convert his perpendicular
Arrogance into an horizontal Supineness, as I am now going to demonstrate upon
your poor miserable Carcass." And as he spoke the last Word, he made a Blow at
Riotous, which had it taken Place properly, would most effectually have
verified his Assertion, by levelling the Object of it; but through want of
Precision in the Director, vented itself on an unhappy Plaster Figure of Tully
that stood upon the Mantel-piece, which it broke into a thousand Pieces.

"Sir!" cried Riotous, (enforcing his Exclamation with a most dignified
Profusion of Blasphemy, which, as the Wit will evaporate in Repetition, I shall
leave you to guess at,) "Do you strike me, Sir! Such Behavior requires
Satisfaction. I insist upon immediate Satisfaction." Pistols were produced
instantly; for it seems they are as necessary a Part of Furniture in an Oxford
Apartment, as a Cork-screw or an Horsewhip; Seconds were chosen, Ground
measured, and every thing prepared for Action. In the same Moment, sans
Ceremony, or Compliment, Solecism swore and fired, but without any Effect.
Upon this Riotous advanced; and applying the Muzzle of his Pistol to the Mouth
of his unfortunate Antagonist, who began now to recover his Senses: "Solecism,"
says he, "you have broken the Rules of Honor: And now, by God, Sir, I Am sorry
to tell you that you must die the Death for it. So prepare yourself to drop
like a Gentleman, and here is at you. Gentlemen, fill Bumpers to Solecism's
Voyage in the Ferry-boat, and raise a Subscription to pay for his Passage, for
I dare say he has not a Sixpence of his own to defray the Expenses. Have you
Jack?" Our poor Orator ran behind the Window Curtain and roared for Mercy. As
one deprecated the other persisted; till at last, finding his Enemy inexorable,
he plucked up his scattered Resolution, and being determined I suppose to die
like a good Christian, popp'd forth a Face the most ruefully ridiculous I ever
beheld, and begged but for a minute's Respite. Then drawing it in again, "O
Lord," cried he, "Thou see the Situation I am in, pity a poor miserable
Sinner (aye, cried Riotous, there you see he acknowledges his Poverty, I told
you he had not a Sixpence. Come, subscribe Gentlemen.) who is going to be blown
out of Life in a Smoke by...... He was then silent for about a Minute; but
presently raising his Voice again, Lord Jesus, added he, receive my Spirit! --
and now, Sir, (throwing aside the Curtain, and stepping forward with a calm
assured Countenance,) now, Damn ye, Fire away!" 'Twas done as soon as spoke; a
Cloud of Smoke darkened the Apartment, and upon its dispersing, no Solecism was
to be found. One would have imagined him carried off by some Inchanter, like an
Arabian Night Princess, or absolutely pulverized to an impalpable Powder by the
Horrors of his Situation. Well, for above half an Hour I believe, did we hunt
after him in every Staircase in the Quadrangle, Dogs and all; till at last,
guided by a Degree of Scent which I verily believe led us to the Discovery, we
found him squeezed behind the Door of a Cellar, with his Eyes and Tongue
rolling like the Clock-work Drummer at the Wax-work, and his Hands raised
upwards, like the Effigies of some brazen Saint in the Aisle or Vestibule of a
Cathedral. And here, unobserved by the Rest of the Company, I took my Leave of
Frankley, and departed to my Inn. And so ended the Operations of the first Day.

And now Charles I may tell you, lest you should suspect me of Enchantment in
good earnest, that the Seconds had put no Lead into the Pistols; which allowed
Solecism the Capability of quitting the Room at the Instant Riotous fired. How
he effected it, you must enquire of his Fears, as it was with a more
instantaneous Velocity than I have any Conception of.

The next Morning old Hartley informed me that he had been successful in his
second Attack upon Pedant, and that we were both engaged to Breakfast there. On
our Arrival we found him seated in due Form and Order, surrounded by Food
mental and corporeal, with a Companion on the other Side the Table, whose
Countenance had I met with it in a dark Lane or Alley, would by no means have
corresponded with my Ideas of personal Safety. Upon our Entrance they rose and
bowed distantly, and immediately reseating themselves, we followed their
Example, and took our Chairs in awful Silence. As Pedant had not thought it
necessary to effect a nominal Acquaintance of Parties by introducing us to this
Friend of his, we could only endeavor to supply the Deficiency, by surveying
each other with that Kind of cautious Curiosity, which you may have seen in two
Dogs upon their first Meeting, when they look half afraid and in Doubt whether
they shall quarrel or not. Hartley indeed soon struck up a Conversation with
Pedant, which I joined in occasionally; but my Attention was chiefly occupied
in forming a conjectural Judgment of his Comrade, whose Lips were never opened,
unless once in five Minutes to give an abrupt Negative to what somebody else
had been saying. "No such Thing -- It was not so," -- or "I don't believe a
Word of it;" and then he would take up a Book and begin Reading again. Faith,
Charles, I believe Pedant never appeared to such Advantage before. I began to
suspect that he was determined to make the best of himself, and so brought the
other Animal by way of Foil. For though neither of them could be accused of
being overburthen'd with Entregent or Politeness, yet the Reserve and
Aukwardness which proceeded from Mauvaise Honte in Pedant, seemed in the other
to arise from a churlish Self-conceit, and a predetermined Contempt for the
Understanding of his Company. Good God, thought I, this must be poor Solecism's
Friend Euclid; there cannot surely exist two such Wretches! And Euclid indeed
it was, as I found presently after by Pedant's naming him in the Course of
Conversation. I dare say now, Charles, from the little I saw of the Man, that
he is capable of going into the first Company, committing every Incivility,
perpetrating every shocking Clumsiness he can think of, and in short, just
doing every thing that he ought not to do; without imagining it necessary to be
ashamed of himself. I fancy he is one of those Ipse Dixit infallible Gentlemen,
who either think they cannot do wrong, or imagine themselves qualified to do
it. But I Will not attempt his Character, as I can send it to you drawn in a much
more masterly Manner, by somebody who knows him better than I ever desire to
do. It was given me by Frankley, whom I happened to meet in the Evening at the
Coffee-house, and upon mentioning the Company I had breakfasted with, he took
it out of his Pocket, and told me that it was found about three or four
Mornings since, pasted upon the Door of Euclid's Chambers, by way of Epitaph,
but that the Author was utterly unknown.

EPITAPH.
Here continues to slumber,
Whilst his Mind absorpt in Science
Dreams wildly of imaginary Propositions,
The Body of DIAGRAM EUCLID:
A Man, who in Defiance of the Weaknesses,
Unavoidably incident to his Nature;
Preserved a Consistency of Conduct,
And supported an Uniformity of Character,
Which Malice never could Asperse,
And Slander was unable to Vilify.
As a Tutor and Governor of his College;
Toward his Inferiors, his Superiors, and his Equals;
Toward his Servants, his Pupils, and toward his Friends;
If indeed he ever possessed one!
He persevered in an unvaried Illiberality of Behavior.
That he might avoid the very Suspicion of being Partial.
Politeness he considered as a Servility,
Disgraceful to the Dignity of Learning;
And as his Soul was incapable of the Comforts of Society,
His Actions honestly expressed his dislike to it;
By disgusting every Company he appeared in,
With the Superciliousness of Cynical Contempt.
That he might not be accidentally agreeable,
He observed from his first Entrance at the University,
An inflexible Moroseness of Countenance
Which characterized the Misanthrophy of his Heart:
Nor was he ever seen to relax the Scowl of Severity,
But when his Spleen and Ill Nature were gratified
In wounding the Feelings of the Ingenuous,
Or covering the Face of the Diffident with the Blush of Confusion.
To avoid being imposed upon by Appearances,
His Memory never forgot an Affront,
And his Heart was never weak enough to forgive one:
For he considered Forgiveness as a Credulity,
Which might expose him to the Repetition of Insult.
When he was appointed Lecturer of his College,
In his favorite Science of Mathematics;
He confused the Understanding of his Auditors,
By Expressions they were incapable of comprehending;
And by a vain Ostentation of his own Erudition
Obscured what it was his Business to have illustrated to others.
In his Opinions and Assertions he was dogmatical,
Proud, pedantic, and perplexing;
Nor did he ever scruple to reprobate,
With all the Arrogance of conscious Superiority,
The united Authorities of his Predecessors in Science;
When they chanced to differ in their Sentiments
From his own infallible Standard of Perfection.
Think not, youthful Reader!
From the Depravity of this Man's Character,
That the Pursuit of Learning is to be neglected:
He was but suffered as an Instance,
That without good Manners it may be Despised,
Without good Nature it must ever be Detested.
Well Charles, what think you of it? Is it not a pretty good Pasquinade? God
help the poor Author if he should be discovered! for I don't believe the
Golgotha would have much mercy on him.

To return to my Breakfast again, (which I hope you have not forgot was
suspended from a Principle of pure digressive Politeness;) I must inform you
that Euclid having left us as soon as it was finished, old Hartley and Pedant
sat down to an inveterate Tete a Tete together; and having in the Course of
about two Hours, restored Helen to her Husband, routed the Persian Army at the
Plains of Marathon, with diverse other Achievements equally difficult and
celebrated; it was proposed formally on Hartley's Part, and, after due
Hesitation, as formally consented to on Pedant's, that he should accompany us
to Dorsetshire.

And so here we are all at present, living as comfortably as we can together.
Old Hartley and Pedant, and Pedant and old Hartley, to the End of the Chapter.
And then Kitty and I, and I and Kitty, inseperables. Sometimes strolling in the
Garden, and admiring the horizontal Verdure of her Father's clipped Hedges; with
fifty pretty little Similars full as indolently entertaining. Farewell Melmoth.
The Voice of my Charmer, who at this Instant enters the Room, cuts short my
Tale, and obliges me to conclude incontinently,

W. Easy.
-- "From her Virgin Cheek a fresher Bloom
"Shoots, less and less, the live Carnation round;
"Her Lips blush deeper Sweets; she breaths of "Youth;
"The shining Moisture swells into her Eyes
"In brighter flow; her wishing Bosom heaves
"With Palpitations wild; kind Tumults seize
"Her Veins, and all her yielding Soul is Love."


Miss RUGG to Miss HARTLEY.
Foxhall, August, My Dear Kitty.
I Received yours. Upon my Honor you have treated my last Letter very
unmercifully; and positively accused me of Slyness and Secresy, without
considering the Confidence I placed in you by sending it at all. Suppose I had
thought proper to burn it, and had given you a fair Copy, revised and
corrected? And then, after having been as spiteful and malicious as you
possibly could be, and torn the poor thing Peice-meal, Sentence by Sentence,
you affect to be wondrously merciful, and it is your Charity forsooth that
obliges you to believe that I did it all on Purpose. Since you are so very
ready at Belief and Supposition, I shall not tell you whether I did or not,
perhaps I might. But you know I cannot retort or rally you, which makes you so
saucy. However I must in Charity believe that you did it all by Accident, or I
shall never have any Mercy on you; and as you have made some amends by sending
me Easy's Poetical Secrets, I will even go farther, and give you a little
authentic Information as to my Prospects with Melmoth. And this I can do in a
very few Sentences, merely by way of Continuation to Easy's Intelligence. Since
his Departure from Foxhall then, my Uncle has been applied to by Letter, in
consequence of which he arrived here about three Days ago. He has given his
Consent and Approbation to our Marriage; Melmoth has determined to quit the
Army, and every thing will probably be concluded in the Course of this Month.
We expect my two Aunts from York on Wednesday. Is this Account plain and
undisguised enough? Or is there any sly Style of Secresy to be complained of?
As to expatiating upon my own Happiness and my Inamorato's Extacy, I shall
leave your Sensations when you think of similar Prospects with Easy, to supply
the Omission. You know I love him; I own honestly that I do; and I hope at
least, that he loves me equally. What can I say then, but what your own
Feelings will more forcibly speak for me? Adieu, Kitty; write soon to me; and
believe my Sincerity, when I wish to see you as Happy as she hopes to be, who
now probably for the last Time, subscribes herself

Maria Rugg.

Mr. HARTLEY to Sir ANTHONY ARTICHOKE.
O Sir Anthony! Sir Anthony! My best Set of Plans and Schemes, the best I ever
contrived in my Life, are all blown up, and gone, and come to nothing, as one
may say. Here when I had got him into Dorsetshire, and talked him over, and
persuaded him, and had just brought Matters to bear, and had got him into the
right Humor for it, and he had given his Consent to marry my Daughter, and all
was in a Manner settled except acquainting her with my Success: then what does
she go and do, but runs away within two Hours after I told her of her
Happiness; and takes Easy with her too, and I suppose they are gone to be
married together. O! Never, never, was such an unlucky old Man in this World as
I am! And after you warned me so much against it too in your last Letter, and
told me you thought my Daughter had a Mind for a Husband that I did not in tend
for her. And truly I began latterly to suspect as much myself; but then who
would have thought of her going off and running away in this sudden Manner as
one may call it? or else I had prepared to counteract that Husband for her. O I
am the most unfortunate old Man in the World surely!

-- "Dicique Beatus
"Aute obitum Nemo supremaque Funera debet."
Here I went to her after Breakfast this Morning, and told her that next Monday
was to be the happy Day, and how happy I should be, and the like; and she put
me into a Passion, and when I came to enquire for her at Dinner Time, nobody
could tell what was become of her, and Easy was missing likewise. So I was for
going to the Inn, and making Enquiries, and following them immediately in the
Heat of my Passion, but Mr. Pedant was luckily at Hand to prevent me, and
persuaded me that by staying till the next Morning, we could send and
investigate Matters at the Inn more minutely, and should have more Time to
consider what Steps should be taken, and to pack up our Things, and to prepare
every thing for pursuing them. So here I am, quite out of my Wits about it, as
I may say; and my old Butler that has lived with me these four and twenty Years
come Michaelmas, is quite out of his Wits too, and can hardly believe it, and
is gone to the Fox and Goose, and the Crooked-Billet with John Docktail the
Coachman, to see if he can hear any Tidings of her; and I told him to go to
every Place in the Neighborhood, and to get a Man to cry her. An obstinate
perverse Hussy! I Am sure she has no more Taste for the dead Languages than my
Housemaid, or she would never have ran away from such a Husband as Mr. Pedant.
If she had but known how well the Ancients understood them, and could discourse
in them! And so often as I have talked to her about them, but she never would
listen to me. And there I hear poor Mr. Pedant now, shut up in his Room,
reading Greek like one distracted. Poor Man! I believe he never would express
himself in his native Language if he could help it. But I am in the utmost
Hurry and Confusion, and must go and give Orders about fifty Things
immediately, which obliges me to conclude as that wise People the Spartans used
to do upon urgent Occasions, In great Haste,

Yours Laconically, Christopher Hartley.

Miss HARTLEY to Miss RUGG.
My dear Rugg,
HOW shall I write to you, and what Kind of roundabout Expression shall I adopt
to acquaint you with my Situation! The more I consider the more I feel myself
at a Loss! In three Words then, be it known -- that my Father has been
opinionated and imperious; I have been perhaps a little inconsiderate; and am
at present, almost before I know how to believe it, on the Road to Scotland
with Easy.

And now, if you have had Time enough for your Wonderment and Conjecture, I Will
let you into Particulars. You know my poor Papa, amongst his other
Qualifications, had always that wise one of making every thing a great Secret,
and keeping People as much in the Dark as possible whenever he had a Scheme in
his Head, by way of surprising them all at once with its Excellence, when the
Wind did get to it. So last Thursday after Breakfast he came up to my Room, (a
Thing not very common with him, and which indeed he seldom used but upon grand
Occasions,) and seating himself in a great Chair, and settling his Wig with
both Hands by way of Preparation, "Kitty," says he, with a Face that told me
some wondrous Matter was in Agitation, you remember when I was in London, that
I introduced my Friend Mr. Pedant to you as a Man every Way qualified to make
you a good Husband, and to restrain that Levity and Giddiness which the younger
Part of your Sex are too much guilty of; though I must own I rather despaired
of ever bringing him to consent to the Match. He has now you know, been here
above a Month with me in the Country; in which Time by Persuasions and
Promises, I have at last with Difficulty prevailed upon him to accept of my
Proposals: and therefore, lest upon Reconsideration he should be induced to
alter his Mind toward you in this Matter, I have thought it better to Strike
whilst the Iron is hot, and on Monday next have resolved that you shall be made
happy. In Regard to --

My Dear Rugg I was Thunderstruck! for though I knew this was my Father's
Intention in bringing Pedant to Dorsetshire with him, yet I had no Idea that
the ungain Animal would ever have consented to so dreadful a Ceremony with me,
after the many silly Looks I had helped him to put on, since he had been there.
However, I presently collected myself enough to cut my Father short in the
Middle of his Sentence, which I suppose was to have concluded with a Panegyric
on his Bookworm, by a God forbid, my Dear Sir, that ever the Living and the
Dead should be joined together! Let the Dead bury their Dead, my Dear Father,
and his Books him, say I; for I Am sure he is as disagreeable and dead to the
World as the Languages he cultivates.

My Father looked at me, wondrous petulant I could perceive. O those confounded
Languages! that ever my ill Stars led me to mention the Word! for immediately,
and the Frenzy took him like Lightning, "Peace, Peace, Girl," said he, the
Greek Language though it, -- And here he was tumbling all at once into his
Eulogium upon its various Excellencies, when I, who had experienced the
miserable Ennui of that self same Dissertation at least fifty Times in my Life,
and knew from the Beginning that it might last from two Hours to three or four;
could not help interrupting him, by saying how much I was indebted for the
Trouble he was going to give himself, but as I had it perfectly fresh in my
Memory since the Rehearsal of Tuesday Se'nnight, I should be happy to postpone
the Hearing till some future Opportunity, when my Recollection might begin to
fail me. This put him into a desperate Passion, which I really did not Design.
He snatched up his Stick to express the Vehemence of his Displeasure; but
Impatience begetting Inattention, instead of the Floor which he intended should
be the Sufferer, he applied it to his own Gouty Shins with such a hearty
Good Will, that I thought he would never have forgiven himself. He was now past
all Patience: so that grinning between his high Anger for my contemptuous
Treatment of the Grecians, and the actual Pain he suffered from the Vigor of
his own Bastinado; "By God," cried he, Kitty, I Will not be trifled with. Monday
is the Day on which your Happiness is determined, and Happy you shall be,
(rubbing his Leg all the Time,) in spite of yourself. I know more of Easy,
Madam, than you are aware of. And with these Words he hobbled out of the Room.

What could I do, my Dear? I knew him to be exceeding obstinate, particularly
when Literature was in the Question; besides I was rather piqued at the
Positiveness and Undutifulness of his Behavior; for I hold Undutifulness in a
Parent to be the worst of all possible Offenses. And then too his last obscure
Sentence in regard to Easy, greatly perplexed me. Just as I was in the Midst of
all these Puzzles, Easy came into the Room; and discovering immediately by my
Countenance that all was not Right, enquired what was the Matter. I, as People
in a Passion, like Invalids, are always bursting to tell their Complaints,
related all that had happened; and to cut my Story short, what with Persuasion
and Argument on one Side, and Fear and Displeasure and an odd Taste for Novelty
and Eclat on the other, recollecting too that very just Saying of the Poet,
that The Woman who deliberates is lost, which Easy very forcibly urged upon me:
he made the best of his Opportunity, and within two Hours I found myself in a
Post-chaise, half willing, half unwilling, nothing with me but my Riding-Habit
and some Linen, and indeed not quite certain whether I was there myself.

So you see my Dear, how great Consequences, like great Folks, generally owe
their Greatness to small Causes and little Incidents* for had not that
unfortunate Dissertation upon the Grecians come across us, and had not my
Father, when he catched up his Stick in consequence of my thwarting him there,
made that unpropitious Application to his own Shins, instead of the Ground
which he intended, we might probably have talked the Matter over coolly; the
Day of Marriage might have been postponed; Pedant, after several Protractions,
might in the End have been exploded or tired out; and every Thing terminated as
I could have wished for. Whereas now, my Father I dare say is raving like fifty
Bedlamites, and perhaps spouting Greek too at such a Rate that all the Country
will take him for a Necromancer; whilst I, like a poor inconsiderate
giddy-brain'd Girl, am flourishing away, and killing Posthorses with a Knight
Errant on a Journey to the Land of Matrimony, without so much as a new Gown or
a Wedding-ring prepared for the Occasion.

Well, my Dear Maria! of all the silly Things you feel yourself disposed to,
never make a Runaway Match of it. Though I don't think you are in any great
Danger, with all your Reserve and Prudence about matrimonial Matters. And yet
how should I laugh to see you for once as great a Madcap as myself! To meet you
upon the Road now, going off, as they say, with your Officer. Some how or
other, I am monstrously frightened! I did not think I should have been half
such a Coward when I sat out, or I Am sure he would never have persuaded me!
However, I long anxiously for your Opinion about it. Do you think I have acted
Rightly? If yes, let me know instantly. But if no, you may as well keep your
Pen and Censure to yourself; for since what is done is done, I am determined to
be in the Right, so I tell you beforehand. And yet you cannot write to me, for I
have no Place of Address, and now only steal this Hour from Sleep to scribble
to you, as we are off again very early in the Morning. However, we purpose
seeing you at Foxhall on our Return, when we shall not be in such a desperate
Hurry as we are at present. Adieu, and believe me, whether single or married,

Yours ever, Catharine Hartley.
P. S. I received your last. How different the Style of our two Weddings will
be! As different as our Dispositions.



WILLIAM EASY to CHARLES MELMOTH.
Edinburgh. My Dear Charles,
TO say that I am the happiest Creature existing, will be only repeating what
every vulgar Fool or Merchant's Clerk has said upon the same Occasion; and yet
how else can I express myself? Miss Hartley, Miss Hartley now no more! is mine
by all the Ties of Love and Honor! Don't think me mad and raving now, and
throw down my Letter in a Passion. We were married Yesterday. The Place my
Letter is dated from will give you some Information as to the grand Outline of
our Proceedings; the Particulars I am now going to furnish you with.

I believe I mentioned in my last that I was not entirely satisfied with some
Parts of Pedant's Behavior, nor with the frequent Closetings and Conferences
between him and old Hartley. I cannot say that I paid any Attention to those
Appearances at the Time, but since they have turned out so consequential, I
must mention one particular Circumstance as it occurs to me, before I proceed
any farther. About a Fortnight ago I remember, when old Hartley had retired as
usual to take his Afternoon Nap, and Pedant and myself were left in the Parlour
together, I stepped out of the Room for about ten Minutes, to relieve myself from
the Fatigue of his Taciturnity by a little Conversation with my Kitty above
Stairs. Upon my Return, finding the Wretch exactly where I left him, absorpt in
Cogitation; I was in some doubt at first whether I ought not to attempt a
Recovery from the Torpor he seemed to labor under, by a salutary Tweak of the
Nose; when presently I observed the Forefinger of his Right Hand placed
cautiously and as if it was an Act of Deliberation, across the Palm of his
Left, and after a few unintelligible Mutterings, he began Syllogizing as
follows.

The Man who marries Miss Hartley, gets her Fortune.
I marry Miss Hartley,
Ergo. I get her Fortune.
I could hold out no longer, but instantly gave him the Negatur, with a Voice
that made him start as if he had seen the Ghosts of his Forefathers, for he had
not perceived that I was in the Room. He jumped up, and Rolled his Eyes that
witnessed Huge Dismay, and turned out of the Room with a more meaning Confusion
in his Countenance than I ever before observed there. Now this little
Circumstance I say, (knowing the Man's Style and Character,) as well as several
others, had made me for some Time suspect that the old Gentleman and Pedant had
some silly Piece of Contrivance in their Head. However, as nothing very
Material appeared, I doubted not but that with the Help of my Dear Divinity, I
should be able gradually to Counteract them, before they brought any Thing to a
Conclusion. The Event however proved the Contrary; and as the Suddenness of
their Explosion, left me no Opportunity for Sap or Countermine in my
Operations, I was oblige to commit every Thing to the Hazard of a Coup de Main,
in which I happily succeeded. Going a few Mornings since, I believe it was
Thursday, into Kitty's Dressing Room, "O Easy," says she, and I thought she
seemed nettled at something, "I Am glad you are come to give me Joy! Monday next
is the Day fixed on for my being made happy, that is you know, in my Father's
Dialect, being married to Pedant." "Monday next!" was my Reply. "And more than
that," continued she, "He is so Paternal as to tell me that I shall be made
happy then, whether I like it or not. If he thinks he can effect this, I fancy
he will be about as cunning as Sancho in his Government, when he sentenced a
Criminal to sleep so many Nights in Prison. But what is to be done, Easy? What
Measures can we take to prevent all this? For you know if one did feel an odd
Fancy to accept of the Wretch, one would choose to take one's own Time about
it." Was not this a fair Opening Charles? Little Cupid, who I suppose sat upon
my Shoulder, immediately whispered, "Scotland and a Post-chaise and Four," and
offered himself as first Postillion. Faith I thought the young Fellow advised
very sensibly; so as he had mentioned it in Confidence to me, I could not do
otherwise than communicate it between a Kiss and a Whisper to the Ear of my
Kitty. She looked a little Queerly at the Proposal, and hesitated, and said
nothing. When a Woman does not absolutely start at the first Intimation of a
Thing of this Nature, you may make yourself sure of her Consenting within half
an Hour, if it is not your own Fault. So having once broke the Ice, I thought
it better, like old Hartley, to "Strike whilst the Iron is hot," and urged my
Proposal upon her with all the Rhetoric I was master of. I exaggerated the
inevitable Danger she exposed herself to, by delaying any longer; expatiated
upon the unhappy Obstinacy of her Father's Temper; that as he had hitherto kept
his Designs so secret as to the Time intended for her Marriage, it was too
probable, that excited by his detestable Coadjutor, he would adopt Measures for
the effecting it, which must utterly Ruin all our Prospects. That it was not to
be doubted but that her Father, though he might at first be highly displeased
with the Step I proposed, would soon, upon Consideration, see Things in a
proper Light, and even be inclined to thank us for Counteracting him. That all
his Friends, she very well knew, had invariably condemned his strange Idea of
sacrificing his Daughter to a Bookworm. That their Opinions would certainly
have great Weight with him, when the Delusion he at present labored under was
removed. That, as she knew how well he loved her, his Displeasure would fall in
some Part upon Pedant; mutual Recriminations would ensue, and the Animal would
show himself in his proper Colors. That, at all Events, her Father's strange
Treatment of her in this Business, would entirely justify her Measures; and
that I could not say, however highly I reverenced the Duty of Children toward
their Parents, that I thought it should be observed implicitly, when so great a
Stake as one's own Happiness or Misery was depending." Whilst I was haranguing
thus finely, I could perceive by five hundred little Changes in her
Countenance, what an internal Contest she was engaged in. For Instance, there
was Love I suppose, and the Novelty of the Thing, and a little Pique against
her Father; all Volunteers on my Side the Question. Then there was Prudence,
and Propriety, and Punctilio, and a whole Muster-roll of Presbyterian Virtues,
like a City Militia, on the other. And like a City Militia there they stood by
each other, all in Form no doubt, and made a great Show of Resistance; but as
soon as the other Party charged home upon them, away they ran as if the Devil
was at their Heels, and not two were to be found together 'till all the Danger
was over. For guessing how Matters stood with her, I brought up to the Attack a
Reinforcement of Arguments; and at last, as the Reward for all my Trouble, drew
from her Lips a dear Kind of half denying Affirmative, which I took immediate
Advantage of, by running out of the Room whilst she remained in the right
Humor, and in short conducted every thing with so much Vigor, that I believe
within two Hours from the Time of our Consultation, we found ourselves Cheek by
Jole in a Post-chaise together.

And here we are now in Scotland, as happy as any two new married People can
be. My dear Girl, with all "the Bloom of young Desire, and purple light of
Love" glowing in her Cheeks, is more winning Soft, more amiably Mild than all
the Heathen Beauties I ever heard or read of, if they were put together, with
their Goddesses at the Head of them. O Charles! How she looked Yesterday as we
returned from the Altar! With such a dear Demisaison April Smile upon her
Countenance, moistened with a Tear! And every now and then she is so prettily
Pensive, which I love her ten Times more for, from the Novelty of the Thing. O
Melmoth, how rejoiced I am on all Accounts at what has happened. For if her
Father had been less Precipitate and Peremptory, and I had not taken her at the
Instant when every Thing was favorable, the little Gipsy might have played me
on and off for this Twelvemonth, and teazed my very Soul out. By the Bye, I
wonder why that odd Urchin Cupid pitches upon Scotland as the Place of
Rendezvous for all his mad Votaries, unless he does it to case-harden their
Hearts against all other Impressions by the Rigor of the Climate, like hot
Iron in cold Water. Or, perhaps he means to try whether their Passion will bear
Change of Country; and considers no Love as a true one, which is not sufficient
to keep a Man warm so many Degrees Northward, and enable him to write Odes like
a Laplander to his Orra Moor, though he is Knee deep in Snow all the Time.

Well Charles, I think I have done very handsomely in absenting myself so long
from my Gentle Kate, on purpose to send an Account of Matters to you. And if
you don't think so to; (though I believe you are still uxorious enough to allow
my Plea,) pray put yourself in my Situation for five Minutes, and then if you
are not amazed at my Abstinence, I shall not scruple to call you the most
unreasonable Fellow living whenever I meet you. Adieu, we are now going to
station ourselves at Sir Thorobred's, from whence Penitentials, Mediatorials,
and Conciliatories, will be dispatched to my queer Father-in-law, with all due
Ceremony and Expedition. Encore Adieu. Believe me, though married, as much as
ever, your

William Easy.

Sir THOROBRED RUGG to CHARLES MELMOTH, Esquire
Foxhall,
DAmnation, Charles Melmoth, I believe every body is mad, of our Acquaintance
at least, and are determined to make my House their Bedlam. Here Is your Brother
George and Maria in the first Place; they have been prating and preaching and
palavering one another over, till they have both persuaded themselves they were
in Love; and so then my Uncle was to be wrote to, and fetched to see their
Folly, and consent to their Running in Couples.

By and by I hear a confounded Noise and Rattle at my Gate, and who of all the
Fools in the World should bolt out of a Post-chaise, but our poor silly Friend
Easy, with Kitty Hartley tacked to his Tail by Way of Help-mate. However, they
have had a long Run for it, and good Sport I dare swear. Let me see. A damned
silly Scheme of old Hartley's about one Pedant, first unkennell'd them. 'Twas
at his House they broke cover. And then took off strait an End to Edinburgh.
The old Fellow and Pedant after them, full cry. A fine Burst by God? Well, at
Edinburgh they headed back it seems, and before old Hartley got there, were
both eathed safe enough at Foxhall. However, the old Dog stuck to the Scent,
and was here yesterday Morning by ten o'Clock to dig 'em out again. As for
Pedant, he lagg'd, and was lost some how as soon as he lost Scent of Matrimony.
However, I Am glad to see Easy has so much Bottom. I never thought he would have run
half so well. And the old Buck is in good Humor too, now he finds Things cannot
be altered.

So I have got a fine Housefull of 'em too; and not a Creature, except your
Brother, knows which Side of a Horse to mount on; like that poor stupid Rascal
Nineveh, that didn't know his Right Hand from his left, as King Solomon says. I
wish you and your Wife were here with all my Soul, for the Lovers talk all of
them so much like Fools, and Hartley so much like an old Schoolmaster, that
there is no bearing them; and my Uncle you know is a devilish Slugg in
Conversation at best. So that at present I Am absolutely not Master of my own
House, and can hardly squeeze in a Word edgeways about Surly or my Chestnut
Stone-horse. Faith I begin to find it very true, what my old Friend Virgil used
to tell me when I was at School, in his Art of Prophecy; that it was impossible
to couple a Horse's Neck to a Man's Head. I believe he said, People would laugh
at you, if you tried at it. Humano Capiti Risum tencatis Equinum, You remember
what I mean. And indeed he was pretty right there too, for they generally do
when I begin; and Will Easy in particular, who knows no more of a Horse than I
do of a Rhinoceros. Poor ignorant Fellow! And George too, though he sometimes
will ride with me, yet he always pulls his Boots off and Dresses when he comes
in, and scents himself with all Manner of Nastiness for my Sister to smell to
him. He never goes by my Kennel but the Dogs give tongue; and when he came down
here, was mistaken at two or three Inns for Bailey the great Perfumer in
Cockspur-Street. So I Am always obliged to carry a Fox's Pad in my Pocket to
prevent being infected. Love, Love, Love, and Ottah of Roses from Morning till
Night! Damn it, I Will go and coquet with my Horse!

Thorobred Rugg.

WILLIAM EASY to CHARLES MELMOTH.
Foxhall, September.
WELL, my Dear Friend, here we are all assembled, like Characters in the last
Scene of a Comedy, for the Sake of Matrimony.

Dramatis Personae.
William Easy, Esquire, a young Gentleman of polite Accomplishments, (will that
do to begin, Charles?) just married to Miss Hartley, against her Father's
Consent. A Runaway Match. (Does that look Polite? I Am afraid it is too common
amongst the Canaille now! Damn the Dogs, how soon they ape all our Fashions!)
Mr. Hartley, or Christopher Hartley, Esquire, a Sir Wou'd-be Literate, Father
to Miss Hartley; displeased at first, but afterward reconciled to the Match.
George Melmoth, a young Officer; rather fine, but of good Reputation; (I may
venture to say that, may not I?) on the Brink of Matrimony with Miss Rugg. Mr.
Rugg, her Uncle and Guardian, an inoffensive Chip-in-Porridge sort of a Man.
Sir Thorobred Rugg -- whose Character I must omit as infinitely too Eccentrical
for my Pen to do Justice to. The Reverend Tom Fetlock, a stupid Parson, useful
enough in the marrying Way.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Easy, late Miss Hartley. A Goddess! Miss Rugg. A good natured sensible
Girl, with a good Fortune. And Sir Thorobred's two Aunts, whom I had almost
forgot to mention; A Couple of old Snuffboxes, or Rolls of Pigtail Tobacco.
SCENE, Foxhall.

Servants, Horses, Victuals and Drink, Licenses, Settlements, etc.

ACT 1st. SCENE 1st.

And here, if you please, we will drop our Theatrical Embellishments, and give
you a plain Historical Account of Things. I mentioned in my last our Intention
of stopping at Sir Thorobred's, and dispatching our Penitentials from that
Quarter. But the old Gentleman has saved us the Trouble. For we had hardly been
stationed here four and twenty Hours, just Time enough to tell our Adventures,
eat a comfortable Meal, and enjoy a good Night's sleep upon it, when the next
Morning about half an Hour after Breakfast, as I was sauntering in the Hall
with the Baronet, I heard a Carriage stop at the Gate, and presently in stump'd
old Hartley, with his two Ivory-headed Canes in one Hand, and his Hat and
Handkerchief in the other. You may guess I found myself in a little Embarras at
his appearing so unexpectedly. Sir Thorobred advanced to receive him. He begged
Pardon, he said, for troubling him with this Visit, but that it was needless to
mention the Occasion of it, and that he should be glad of a little private
Conversation with me. So in he went to Sir Thorobred's Study; and I followed,
with as little Inclination as ever I did at Eton to receive a Flogging. And
faith I believe I looked monstrous silly, not unlike a condemned Schoolboy.
However, as it has been always a Rule invariable with me, whenever I am on the
wrong Side of the Question, to carry Matters with an high Hand; and behaving
myself as the injured Person, to astonish my Plaintiff into Silence by the
unexpectedness of the Retort: I resolved not to be wanting to myself in the
present Attack, and had already prepared a tolerable Volley of Recrimination to
counterpoise my Antagonist, when my Expectations were very agreeably
disappointed. So far from arraigning me with all the just Resentment of an
injured Parent, he only censured me mildly for the Precipitancy and Unkindness
of my Conduct toward him, and after sagaciously remarking (which I suppose he
had discovered in his Way from Edinburgh as well as ourselves,) that What was
done could not be undone, and that We should always make the best of a bad
Bargain, with a few more pretty Proverbials of the same Sort; he absolutely
found me Guilty only of Petty Larceny, and enquired kindly after his Daughter,
desiring to see her. I need not tell you my Amazement at a Reception so
entirely unhoped for, nor of the many Vows and Protestations I gave him in
return for it. I ran up Stairs to Kitty, whom I found with Miss Rugg at her
Elbow, in no small Consternation. My Intelligence was Spirits of Hartshorn to
her. Down she came instantly, not forgetting however to look as Melancholy and
Repentant as possible, and threw herself at his Feet. He, immediately raised
her up you know; and so then, after allowing a sufficient Quantity of
Slobbering, and Blessing, and White Handkerchief Work; all was well again. I
believe we are all apt to form Judgments of People in Proportion to their good
or bad Behavior toward ourselves, and indeed we should be sad Wretches if we
did not show some such Gratitude to our Benefactors; but I really think I never
knew old Hartley so agreeable, or felt half so much regard for him, as at
present. We all get our Health here as well as can be expected, and both young
and old are exceedingly Convivial. In about a Week your poor Brother's
Slip-Knot is to be drawn tight; and according to old Hartley, I am likely to
come in for a second Edition of Matrimony, as he seems not at all satisfied
with the Validity of any Thing on the other Side the Tweed. So "in for a Penny,
in for a Pound," as they say; I have nothing to do but submit myself. And yet I
don't know, Charles! a Double Knot is confoundedly difficult to be untied,
though one should have ever so great a Mind for it. Well, God help us, poor
Souls, since we must March! Two and Two, Newgate Fashion! as Bardolph says. God
help us, say I, and keep us all from Quarrelling, and that we may not hate one
another, is the sincere Wish and Prayer of William Easy the married Man.

I had almost forgot to tell you that I could not rest till I had endeavored
to find out the Cause of Hartley's wonderful Acquiescence, and where his Rarity
of a Companion had bestowed himself. Upon enquiring of his Servant, I found
that his Master upon first missing us, which was about two Hours after our
Departure, flew into a most violent Passion, and would have prepared for an
immediate Pursuit; (now I did not imagine he would have pursued us at all) but
that upon Pedant's over-persuasion, they delayed it till the next Morning. That
upon their Arrival at Edinburgh, finding the Turtles paired and flown, the old
Gentleman appeared very thoughtful; and hearing some how or other of our
Intention to visit Foxhall, he determined to follow us thither, and proposed it
to his Companion, who seemingly acquiesced. But that next Morning upon his
enquiring after him at Breakfast, no Pedant was to be found, nor any body that
could give the smallest Account of him. Old Hartley was inconsolable; and
People were just beginning to propose a grand Searching of Horse-ponds,
Hog-tubs, and I suppose Necessaries, had there been any; when one of the
Postilions or Bootcatchers recollected, that he had seen a maddish looking
Gentleman go out of their House very early in the Morning to a Stage-Coach that
was passing, which he believed he went away with, but could not tell whether it
was in the Inside or the Basket. So here all our Wonderments are unriddled, and
our Reception accounted for. For the sneaking Animal you see, finding all his
Hopes at an End, thinks proper to slink off, and leave Hartley to make the best
of it. This piques the old Gentleman, who begins at last to open his Eyes a
little and perceive what a Fool he has been. And so, considering as he says,
that What is done cannot be undone, he resolves to put the best Face upon
Things, and make up his Mind as well as he can about it, before he sees us. I
wondered what the Deuce made him so amazingly Piano upon the Occasion, but this
clears up the Mystery. And as for Pedant, he has shown his Wisdom too. For to
be sure his Appearance at the Baronet's must have been rather a silly one,
circumstanced as he was, like Squire Gawkey at the End of a Pantomime, when he
finds Harlequin in full Possession of his Mistress. So All Is well that Ends
well, that I may conclude like my Father-in-law with a Proverb, and I forthwith
subscribe myself,

Yours, sincerely, W. Easy.

FINIS.

