OBSERVATIONS ON THE MOUNTAINS, AND LAKES OF Cumberland, and Westmoreland.

OBSERVATIONS, RELATIVE CHIEFLY TO PICTURESQUE BEAUTY, Made in the YEAR 1772,
On several PARTS of ENGLAND; PARTICULARLY THE MOUNTAINS, AND LAKES OF
CUMBERLAND, AND WESTMORELAND.

VOL. II.

By WILLIAM GILPIN, M. A. PREBENDARY OF SALISBURY; AND VICAR OF BOLDRE, IN
NEW-FOREST, NEAR LYMINGTON.

LONDON; PRINTED FOR R. BLAMIRE, STRAND.

M.DCC.LXXXVI.

OBSERVATIONS ON Several PARTS of ENGLAND, ESPECIALLY The LAKES, etc.
SECTION XVI.
HAVING refreshed ourselves, and our horses, after a fatiguing morning, we
proceeded along the vale of Butermer; and following the course of the river, as
far as the inequalities of the ground would admit, we soon came to another
lake, still more beautiful, than that we had left above. The two lakes bear a
great resemblance to each other. Both are oblong: both wind round promontories;
and both are surrounded by mountains. But the lower lake is near a mile longer,
than the upper; the lines it forms are much easier; and tho it has less wood on
it is banks, the loss is compensated by a richer display of rocky scenery. The
forms of these rocks are in general, beautiful; most of them being broken into
grand square surfaces. This species, as we have already observed See Page, 108,
, are in a greater style, than the cragg, which is shattered into more
diminutive parts.

With this rocky scenery much hilly ground is intermixed. Patches of meadow
also, here and there, on the banks of the lake, improve the variety. Nothing is
wanting but a little more wood, to make this lake, and the vale in which it
lies, a very enchanting scene; or rather a succession of enchanting scenes: for
the hills and rising grounds, into which it every where swells, acting in due
subordination to the grand mountains, which inviron the whole vale, break and
separate the area of it into smaller parts. Many of these form themselves into
little valleys, and other recesses, which are very picturesque.

Not far from the lake the mountain of Grasmer appears rising above all the
mountains in it is neighborhood. A lake of this name we had already seen in our
road between Ambleside, and Keswick; but there is no connection between the
lake, and the mountain.

This mountain forms rather a vast ridge, than a pointed summit: and is
connected with two or three other mountains of inferior dignity: itself is said
to be equal to Skiddaw; which is the common gage of altitude through the whole
country; and therefore may be supposed the highest. No mountain aspires to be
higher than Skiddaw: some boast an equal height: but two or three only have
real pretensions.

Grasmer, and the mountains in it is neighborhood, form the eastern boundary of
the vale, which we now traversed; a vale at least five miles in length, and one
third of that space in breadth. Our road carried us near the village of
Brackenthwait, which lies at the bottom of Grasmer.

Here we had an account of an inundation occasioned by the bursting of a
water-spout. The particulars, which are well authenticated, are curious. But it
will be necessary first to exhibit the geography of the mountain.

In that part, where Grasmer is connected with the other high lands in it is
neighborhood, three little streams take their origin; of which the Lissa is
the least inconsiderable. The course of this stream down the mountain is very
steep, and about a mile in length. It Is bed, which is a deep gully, and the
sides of the mountain all around, are profusely spread with loose stones, and
gravel. On leaving the mountain, the Lissa divides the vale, through which we
now passed; and, after a course of four or five miles, joins the Cocker.

On the 9th of September 1760, about midnight, the water-spout fell upon
Grasmer, nearly, as was conjectured, where the three little streams, just
mentioned, issue from their fountains.

At first it swept the whole side of the mountain, and charging itself with all
the rubbish it found there, made it is way into the vale, following chiefly the
direction of the Lissa. At the foot of the mountain it was received by a piece
of arable ground; on which it is violence first broke. Here it tore away trees,
soil, and gravel; and laid all bare, many feet in depth, to the naked rock.
Over the next ten acres it seems to have made an immense roll; covering them
with so vast a bed of stones; that no human art can ever again restore the soil

When we saw the place, tho twelve years after the event, many marks remained,
still flagrant, of this scene of ruin. We saw the natural bed of the Lissa, a
mere contracted rivulet; and on it is banks the vestiges of a stony channel,
spreading far and wide, almost enough to contain the waters of the Rhine, or
the Danube. It was computed from the flood-marks, that in many parts the stream
must have been five or six yards deep; and near a hundred broad; and if it is
great velocity be added to this weight of water, it is moment will be found
equal to almost any effect.

On the banks of this stony channel, we saw a few scattered houses, a part of
the village of Brackenthwait, which had a wonderful escape. They stood at the
bottom of Grasmer, rather on a rising ground; and the current, taking it is
first direction toward them, would have undermined them in a few moments, (for
the soil was instantly laid bare) had not a projection of native rock, the
interior stratum, on which the houses had unknowingly been founded, resisted
the current, and given it a new direction. Unless this had intervened, it is
probable, these houses, and all the inhabitants of them (so instantaneous was
the ruin) had been swept away together.

In passing farther along the vale, we saw other marks of the fury of the
inundation; where, bridges had been thrown down, houses carried off, and woods
rooted up. But it is effects upon a stone-causeway were thought the most
surprising. This fabric was of great thickness; and supported, on each side, by
an enormous bank of earth. The memory of man could trace it, unaltered in any
particular, near a hundred years: but by the soundness and firmness of it is
parts and texture, it seemed as if it had stood for ages. It was almost a
doubt, whether it were a work of nature, or of art. This massy mole the deluge
not only carried off; but, as if it turned it into sport, made it is very
foundations the channel of it is own stream.

Having done all this mischief, not only here, but in many other parts, the
Lissa threw all it is waters into the Cocker, where an end was put to it is
devastation: for tho the Cocker was unable to contain so immense an increase;
yet as it flows through a more level country, the deluge spread far and wide,
and wasted it is strength in one vast, stagnant inundation.

Having passed through the vale of Butermer, we entered another beautiful
scene, the vale of Lorton.

This vale, like all the past, presents us with a scene entirely new. No lakes,
no rocks are here, to blend the ideas of dignity, and grandeur with that of
beauty. All is simplicity, and repose. Nature, in this scene, lays totally
aside her majestic frown, and wears only a lovely smile.

The vale of Lorton is of the extended kind, running a considerable way between
mountains, which range at about a mile's distance. They are near enough to
screen it from the storm; and yet not so impending as to exclude the sun. Their
sides, tho not smooth, are not much diversified. A few knolls and hollows just
give a little variety to the broad lights and shades, which overspread them.

This vale, which enjoys a rich soil, is in general a rural, cultivated scene;
tho in many parts the ground is beautifully broken, and abrupt. A bright
stream, which might almost take the name of a river, pours along a rocky
channel; and sparkles down numberless little cascades. It Is banks are adorned
with wood; and varied with different objects; a bridge; a mill; a hamlet; a
glade over-hung with wood; or some little sweet recess; or natural vista,
through which the eye ranges, between irregular trees, along the windings of
the stream.

Except the mountains, nothing in all this scenery is great; but every part is
filled with those sweet engaging passages of nature, which tend to sooth the
mind, and instill tranquillity.

-- The passions to divine repose
Persuaded yield: and love and joy alone
Are waking: love and joy, such as await
An angel's meditation --
Scenes of this kind, (however pleasing) in which few objects occur, either of
grandeur or peculiarity, in a singular manner elude the powers of verbal
description. They almost elude the power of colors. The soft and elegant form
of beauty is hard to hit: while the strong, harsh feature is a mark, which
every pencil can strike.

But tho a peculiar difficulty attends the verbal description of these mild,
and quiet haunts of nature; yet undoubtedly all her scenery is ill-attempted in
language.

Mountains, rocks, broken ground, water, and wood, are the simple materials,
which she employs in all her beautiful pictures: but the variety and harmony,
with which she employs them, are infinite. In description these words stand
only for general ideas: on her charts each is detailed into a thousand varied
forms. Words may give the great outlines of a scene. They can measure the
dimensions of a lake. They can hang it is sides with wood. They can rear a
castle on some projecting rock: or place an island near this, or the other
shore. But their range extends no farther. They cannot mark the characteristic
distinctions of each scene -- the touches of nature -- her living tints -- her
endless varieties, both in form and color. -- In a word, all her elegant
peculiarities are beyond their reach. Language is equally unable to convey
these to the eye; as the eye is to convey the various divisions of sound to the
ear.

The pencil, it is true, offers a more perfect mode of description. It speaks a
language more intelligible; and describes the scene in stronger, and more
varied terms. The shapes, and hues of objects it delineates, and marks, with
more exactness. It gives the lake the louring shade of tempest; or the glowing
blush of sunset. It spreads a warmer, or a colder tint on the tufts of the
forest. It adds form to the castle; and tips it is shattered battlements with
light. -- But all this, all that words can express, or even the pencil
describe, are gross, insipid substitutes of the living scene This is not at all
inconsistent with what is said in the 119th page. Here we speak chiefly of the
detail of nature's works: there of the composition. The nearer we approach the
character of nature in every mode of imitation, no doubt the better: yet still
there are many irregularities and deformities in the natural scene, which we
may wish to correct -- that is, to correct, by improving one part of nature by
another.
. We may be pleased with the description, and the picture: but the soul can
feel neither, unless the force of our own imagination aid the poet's, or the
painter's art; exalt the idea; and picture things unseen.

Hence it perhaps follows, that the perfection of the art of painting is not so
much attained by an endeavor to form an exact resemblance of nature in a nice
representation of all her minute parts, which we consider as almost
impracticable, ending generally in flatness, and insipidity; as by aiming to
give those bold, those strong characteristic touches, which excite the
imagination; and lead it to form half the picture, itself. Painting is the art
of deceiving; and it is great perfection lies in the exercise of this art.

Hence it is that genius, and knowledge are as requisite in surveying a
picture, as in painting one. The cold, untutored eye, (tho it may enjoy the
real scene, (be it history, History-painting is certainly the most elevated
species. Nothing exalts the human mind so much, as to see the great actions of
our fellow creatures brought before the eye. But this pleasure we seldom find
in painting. So much is required from the history-painter, so intimate a
knowledge both of nature and art, that we rarely see a history-piece, even from
the best masters, that is able to raise raptures. We may admire the coloring,
or the execution; or some under-part; but the soul is seldom reached. The
imagination soars beyond the picture. In the inferior walks of painting, where
less is required, more of course is performed: and tho we have few good
pictures in history, we have many in portrait, in landscape, in animal-life,
dead-game, fruit, and flowers. History painting is a mode of epic; and tho the
literary world abounds with admirable productions in the lower walks of poetry,
an epic is the wonder of an age.
landscape, or what it will) is unmoved at the finest representation. It does
not see an exact resemblance of what it sees abroad; and having no internal
pencil, if I may so speak, to work within; it is utterly unable to administer a
picture to itself. Whereas the learned eye The admirers of painting may be
divided into two classes: -- The inferior admirer values himself on
distinguishing the master -- on knowing the peculiar touch of each pencil; and
the ruling tint of every pallet. But he has no feeling. If the picture be an
original, or if it be in the master's best manner (which may be the case of
many a bad picture) it is the object of his veneration; tho the story be
ill-told, the characters feebly marked, and a total deficiency appear in every
excellence of the art.

The more liberal professor, (and who alone is here considered as capable of
administering a picture to himself) thinks the knowledge of names, (any further
than as it marks excellence, till we get a better criterion,) is the bane of
the art he admires. A work, worthy of admiration, may be produced by an
inferior hand; and a paltry composition may escape from a master. He would have
the intrinsic merit of a work, not any arbitrary stamp proclaim it is
excellence. In examining a picture, he leaves the name entirely out of the
question. It may mislead, it cannot assist, his judgment. The characters of
nature, and the knowledge of art, are all he looks for: the rest, be they
Guido's, Carrache's, or Raphael's, he despises as the bubbles of
picture-dealers; the mere sweepings, and refuse of Italian garrets.


, versed equally in nature, and art, easily compares the picture with it is
archetype: and when it finds the characteristic touches of nature, the
imagination immediately takes fire; and glows with a thousand beautiful ideas,
suggested only by the canvas. When the canvas therefore is so artificially
wrought, as to suggest these ideas in the strongest manner, the picture is then
most perfect. This is generally best done by little labor, and great
knowledge. It is knowledge only, which inspires that free, that fearless, and
determined pencil, so expressive in a skilful hand. As to the minutiae of
nature, the picturesque eye will generally suggest them better itself; and yet
give the artist, as he deserves, the credit of the whole.

We sometimes indeed see pictures highly finished, and yet full of spirit. They
will bear a nice examination at hand, and yet lose nothing of their distant
effect. But such pictures are so exceedingly rare, that I should think, few
painters would in prudence attempt a labored manner. Indeed, as pictures are
not designed to be seen through a microscope, but at a proper distance, it is
labor thrown away In the higher walks of painting I know of no artist, who
does not lose his spirit in attempting to finish highly. In the inferior walks
we have a few. Among the first we may rank Van Huysum, who painted flowers, and
fruits, with equal labor and spirit. And yet even here, I own I have more
pleasure in helping myself to these delicacies from the bolder works of
Baptiste.
.

Hence it is that even a rough sketch, by the hand of a master, will often
strike the imagination beyond the most finished work. I have seen the learned
eye pass unmoved along rows of pictures by the cold, and inanimate pencil of
such a master as Carlo Marat; and start astonished, when it came to a sketch of
Rubens. In one case the painter endeavoring in vain to administer every thing
by giving the full roundness, and smoothness to every part, instead of the
bold, characteristic touches of nature, had done too much: in the other, tho
the work was left unfinished, yet many of the bold characteristic touches being
thrown in, enough was done to excite the imagination of the spectator, which
could easily supply the rest.

A very ingenious writer Burke on the sublime and beautiful, Part II. Sect. XI.
indeed gives another reason for our being better pleased with a sketch, than
with a finished piece. The imagination, says he, is entertained with the
promise of something more; and does not acquiesce in the present object of the
sense. But this observation, I think, is scarce founded on truth. It is true
the imagination does not acquiesce in the present object of the sense: but, I
should suppose, not because it is entertained with a promise of something more;
but because it has the power, of creating something more itself. If a promise
of something more, were the cause of this pleasure, it should seem, that a
sketch, in it is rudest form, would be more pleasing, than when it is more
advanced: for the imagination must have still higher entertainment in
proportion to the largeness of the promise. But this is not the case. The
sketch, in it is naked chalk-lines, affects us little in comparison. The
instrument must be tuned higher, to excite vibrations in the imagination.

Again, on the same supposition, one would imagine, that the rude beginning, or
rough plan of a house, would please us more than the complete pile; for the
imagination is entertained with the promise of something more. But, I believe,
no one was ever so well pleased with an unfinished shell, amidst all it is
rubbish of scaffolding, paper-windows, and other deformities; as with a
structure complete in all it is members, and set off with all it is proper
decorations. -- But on the supposition I have ventured to suggest, we see why
the sketch may please beyond the picture; tho the unfinished fabric
disappoints. An elegant house is a complete object. The imagination can rise no
higher. It receives full satisfaction. But a picture is not an object itself;
but only the representation of an object. We may easily therefore conceive,
that it may fall below it is archetype; and also below the imagination of the
spectator, whose fancy may be more picturesque, than the hand of the artist,
who composed the picture. In this case, a sketch may afford the spectator more
pleasure, as it gives his imagination freer scope; and suffers it to complete
the artist's imperfect draught from the fund of it is own richer, and more
perfect ideas.

The variety of scenes, which nature exhibits; and their infinite combinations,
and peculiarities, to which neither language, nor colors, unaided by
imagination, can, in any degree, do justice; gave occasion to these remarks,
which have carried me perhaps too far into digression.

We had to regret, that we saw the vale of Lorton only in half it is beauty. It
was at too late an hour; and the evening besides was dark. The morning had been
cloudy; in some part of it rather tempestuous; and we thought ourselves then
very happy in the disposition of the weather: for as we had before seen the
mountains in a clear atmosphere; it was a desirable variety to see the grand
effects they produced in a storm. A mountain is an object of grandeur; and it is
dignity receives new force by mixing with the clouds; and arraying itself in
the majesty of darkness. Here the idea of infinity See Page, 228.
produces strongly the sublime. But the cheerful scenes of such a vale as this,
pretend not to dignity: they are mere scenes of tranquillity. The early blush
of dawn, the noontide shade, or evening-glow, are the circumstances, in which
they most rejoice: a storm, in any shape, will injure them. Here therefore we
might have dispensed with more light, and sunshine. Or at the close of day we
might have wished for a quiet, tranquil hour, when the glimmering surfaces of
things are sometimes perhaps more pleasing -- at all times certainly more
soothing, than images of the brightest hue: When through the dusk obscurely seen
Sweet evening-objects intervene.


The evening, which grew more tempestuous, began to close upon us, as we left
the more beautiful parts of the vale of Lorton. We were still about six miles
from Keswick; and had before us a very wild country, which probably would have
afforded no great amusement even in full day: but amid the obscurity, which now
overspread the landscape, the imagination was left at large; and painted many
images, which perhaps did not really exist, upon the dead coloring of nature.
Every great and pleasing form, whether clear, or obscure, which we had seen
during the day, now played, in strong imagery before the fancy: as when the
grand chorus ceases, ideal music vibrates in the ear.

In one part, a view pleased us much; tho perhaps, in stronger light, it might
have escaped notice. The road made a sudden dip into a little, winding valley;
which being too abrupt for a carriage, was eased by a bridge: and the form of
the arch appeared to be what we commonly find in Roman aquaducts. The winding
road; the woody valley, and broken ground below; the mountain beyond; the form
of the bridge, which gave a classic air to the scene; and the obscurity, which
melted the whole into one harmonious mass; made all together a very pleasing
view.

But it soon grew too dark even for the imagination to roam. It was now ten
o'clock: and tho in this northern climate, the twilight of a clear
summer-evening affords even at that late hour, a bright effulgence; yet now all
was dark.

-- A faint, erroneous ray
Glanced from the imperfect surfaces of things,
Threw half an image on the straining eye.
While wavering woods, and villages, and streams,
And rocks, and mountain-tops, that long retained
The ascending gleam, were all one swimming scene,
Uncertain if beheld --
We could just discern, through the dimness of the night, the shadowy forms of
the mountains, sometimes blotting out half the sky, on one side; and sometimes
winding round, as a gloomy barrier on the other.

Often too the road would appear to dive into some dark abyss, a cataract
roaring at the bottom: while the mountain-torrents on every side rushed down
the hills in notes of various cadence, as their quantities of water, the
declivities of their fall, their distances, or the intermission of the blast,
brought the sound fuller, or fainter to the ear; which organ became now more
alert, as the imagination depended rather on it, than on the eye for
information.

These various notes of water-music, answering each other from hill to hill,
were a kind of translation of that passage in the psalms, in which one deep is
represented calling another because of the noise of the water-pipes.

Among other images of the night, a lake (for the lake of Bassenthwait was now
in view) appeared through the uncertainty of the gloom, like something of
ambiguous texture, spreading a lengthened gleam of wan, dead light under the
dark shade of the incumbent mountains: but whether this light was owing to
vapors arising from the valley; or whether it was water -- and if water,
whether it was an arm of the sea, a lake, or a river -- to the uninformed
traveller would appear matter of great uncertainty. Whatever it was, it would
seem sufficient to alarm his apprehensions; and to raise in his fancy, (now in
quest of dangers,) the idea of something, that might stop his farther progress.

A good turnpike-road, on which we entered near the village of Lorton, and a
knowledge of the country, set at naught all such ideas with us: but it may
easily be conceived, that a traveller, wandering in the midst of a stormy
night, in a mountainous country, unknown, and unbeaten by human footsteps,
might feel palpitations of a very uneasy kind.

We have in Ossian some beautiful images, which accompany a night-storm in such
a country as this. I shall subjoin, with a few alterations, an extract from
them; as it will illustrate the subject before us. It is contained in a note on
Croma; in which several bards are introduced entertaining their patron with
their respective descriptions of the night.

The storm gathers on the tops of the mountains; and spreads it is black mantle
before the moon. It comes forward in the majesty of darkness, moving upon the
wings of the blast. It sweeps along the vale, and nothing can withstand it is
force. The lightning from the rifted cloud flashes before it: the thunder rolls
among the mountains in its rear.

All nature is restless, and uneasy.

The stag lies wakeful on the mountain-moss: the hind close by his side. She
hears the storm roaring through the branches of the trees. She starts -- and
lies down again.

The heath-cock lifts his head at intervals; and returns it under his wing.

The owl leaves her unfinished dirge; and sits ruffled in her feathers in a
cleft of the blasted oak.

The famished fox shrinks from the storm, and seeks the shelter of his den.

The hunter alarmed, leaps from his pallet in the lonely hut. He raises his
decaying fire. His wet dogs smoke around him. He half-opens his cabin-door, and
looks out: but he instantly retreats from the terrors of the night.

For now the whole storm descends. The mountain-torrents join their impetuous
streams. The growing river swells.

The benighted traveller pauses as he enters the gloomy dell. The glaring sky
discovers the terrors of the scene. With a face of wild despair he looks round.
He recollects neither the rock above, nor the precipice below. Still he urges
his bewildered way. His steed trembles at the frequent flash. The thunder
bursts over his head -- The torrents roar aloud. -- He attempts the rapid ford.
-- Heard you that scream? -- It was the shriek of death.

How tumultuous is the bosom of the lake! The waves lash it is rocky sides. The
boat is brimful in the cove. The oars are dashed against the shore.

What melancholy shade is that sitting under the tree on the lonely beach? -- I
just discern it faintly shadowed out by the pale beam of the moon, passing
through a thin-robed cloud. -- It is a female form. -- Her eyes are fixed upon
the lake. Her dischevelled hair floats loose around her arm, which supports her
pensive head. -- Ah! mournful maid! do thou still expect thy lover over the
lake? -- Thou saw his distant boat, at the close of day, dancing upon the
feathery waves. -- Thy breast throbs with suspense: but thou know not yet,
that he lies a corpse upon the shore.

SECT. XVII.
AFTER a wet, and stormy night we rejoiced to see the morning arise with all
the signs of a calm and splendid day. We wished for the opportunity of
surveying Ulleswater in serene, bright weather. This was the next scene we
proposed to visit; and with which we intended to close our views of this
picturesque country.

From Keswick we mounted a hill, on the great turnpike road to Penrith. At the
summit we left our horses; and went to examine a Druid temple, in a field on
the right. The diameter of this circle is thirty-two paces; which, as nearly as
could be judged from so inaccurate a mode of mensuration, is the diameter of
Stonehenge; which I once measured in the same way. But the structures are very
different; tho the diameters may be nearly equal. The stones here are
diminutive in comparison with those on Salisbury-Plain. If Stonehenge were a
cathedral in it is day; this circle was little more than a country church.

These structures, I suppose, are by far the most ancient vestiges of
architecture (if we may call them architecture) which we have in England. Their
rude workmanship hands down the great barbarity of the times of the Druids: and
furnishes strong proof of the savage nature of the religion of these heathen
priests. Within these magical circles we may conceive any incantations to have
been performed; and any rites of superstition to have been celebrated. It is
history, as well as poetry, when Ossian mentions the circles of stones, where
our ancestors, in their nocturnal orgies, invoked the spirits which rode upon
the winds -- the awful forms of their deceased forefathers; through which, he
sublimely tells us, the stars dimly twinkled.

As singular a part as the Druids make in the ancient history, not only of
Britain, but of other countries, I know not, that I ever saw any of their
transactions introduced as the subject of a capital picture. That they can
furnish a fund of excellent imagery for poetry we know: and I see not why the
scenes of Caractacus might not be as well suited to picturesque, as dramatic
representation. -- And yet there is a difference. The drama depends at least as
much on sentiment, as on representation. Whereas the picture depends entirely
on the latter. The beautiful sentiments of the poet are lost; and the spectator
must make out the dialogue, as he is able, from the energetic looks of the
figures. -- Hence therefore it follows, that the same subjects are not equally
calculated to shine in poetry, and in painting.

Those subjects, no doubt, are best adapted to the pencil, which tell
themselves by action. In general, however, all animated stories, which admit
either of strong action, or passion, are judiciously chosen. Unanimated
subjects have little chance of producing an effect; particularly love-stories;
which, of all others, I could wish to exclude from canvas. The language of love
is so difficult to translate, that I know not that I ever saw a representation
of lovers, who were not strongly marked with the character of simpletons.

But besides such subjects, as admit of strong action, or passion, there are
others of a more inanimate cast, which, through the peculiarity of the
characters, of which they consist, can never be mistaken. Such is the
settlement of Pensylvania, painted by Mr. West. From the mixture of English,
and Indian characters, and a variety of apposite appendages, the story is not
only well told; but, as every picturesque story should be told, it is obvious
at sight.

Among subjects of this kind, are those, which occasioned this digression --
druidical subjects. I know few of the less animated kind, which would admit
more picturesque embellishment, than a Druid-sacrifice. The peculiar character,
and savage features of these barbarous priests -- their white, flowing
vestments -- the branch of misleto, which they hold -- the circular stones (if
they could be brought into composition) -- the spreading oak -- the altar
beneath it -- and the milk-white steer -- might all together form a good
picture.

I have often admired an etching by Teipolo, which I have always conceived to
be a representation of this subject It is contained in a book of etchings on
emblematical subjects.
. He does not indeed introduce all the circumstances of a Druid-sacrifice,
which I have here enumerated: but the characters are such, as exactly suit the
subject; and the whole seems to be an excellent illustration of it.

After we left the temple of the Druids, we met with little which engaged our
attention, till we came to the vale of St. John. This scene appeared from the
stand, where we viewed it, to be a circular area, of about six, or seven miles
in circumference. It is surrounded entirely by mountains; and is watered by a
small river, called the Grata.

The vale of St. John is esteemed one of the most celebrated scenes of beauty
in the country: but it did not answer our expectation. The ground, consisting
of patches of fenced meadow, adorned with farm-houses, and clumps of trees, was
beautifully tumbled about in many parts: but the whole was rather rich, than
picturesque: and on this account, I suppose, it has obtained it is celebrity.
It Is circular form, every where within the scope of the eye, wanted that
variety, which the winding vale affords; where one part is continually receding
from another in all the pleasing gradations of perspective See the same idea
applied to water, page 184.
.

The kind of scenery here, is much the same, as in the vale of Lorton: both are
composed of rural objects; but these objects are differently presented. In the
vale of Lorton, the houses, and hamlets, seated on a wandering stream, are
confined to the same level; and appear of course, one after another, as so many
little separate scenes. Here they are scattered about the inequalities of the
ground, through the area of a vale, circular at least in appearance; and offer
the eye too much at once -- a confusion, rather than a succession, of scenery.
I speak however only of the general appearance of the vale: it contains
undoubtedly many beautiful scenes, if we had had time to explore them.

The plan, or ground-plot, of the vale of Tempe was somewhat similar to this of
St. John. Nature seems in both to have wrought on the same model; excepting
only that the furniture of that very celebrated scene of antiquity was more
picturesque.

The vale of Tempe, like this, was circular, and encompassed with mountains.
But it is area was composed of level lawns, (at least, we suppose, not rising
uniformly before the eye,) interspersed with wood; which in many parts was
thick, and close; and must every where have intercepted some portion of the
mountain-line, and broken the regularity of a circular shape.

The mountains too in Tempe were of a more beautiful structure; abrupt, hung
with rock, and finely adorned with wood. -- At the head of the vale was a
grand, rocky chasm, shaded with a profusion of woody scenery; through which the
whole weight of the river Peneus forced it is way, with a tremendous sound; and
having been dashed into foam and vapors by the fall, reunited it is strength at
the bottom, and poured through the vale in a wild, impetuous torrent, roaring
over rocks and shelves, till it found an exit, through the folding of the
mountains on the opposite side.

Elian indeed tells us, that the stream was smooth: but as Ovid's description
is more picturesque, the reader will give me leave to consider his authority as
more decisive. His view of Tempe is very noble: but as he meant principally to
describe the palace of a river god, which lay among the caverns, and recesses
of the rocky chasm at the entrance of the vale, his subject naturally led him
to dwell chiefly on the cascade, which was undoubtedly the greatest ornament of
the place.

Est nemus Aemoniae, praerupta quod undique claudit
Silva: vocant Tempe: per quae Peneus ab imo
Effusus Pindo, spumosis volvitur undis;
Dejectuque gravi tenues agitantia fumos
Nubila conducit; summasque aspergine silvas
Impluit: and sonitu plus quam vicina fatigat.
Haec domus, hae seeds, haec sunt penetralia magni
Amnis: in hoc residens facto de cautibus antro,
Undis jura dabat. --
A vale thus circumstanced is so pleasing, that other poets have seized the
idea in their descriptions. I could multiply quotations: but I shall select
two, in which the same subject is treated in a different manner. In one the
natural grandeur of the scene is softened by little circumstances of
cheerfulness: in the other, it strikes in the full majesty of the sublime. The
former is more the vale of St. John: the latter approaches nearer the idea of
the Thessalian vale.

Into a forest far they thence him led,
Where was their dwelling in a pleasant glade,
With mountains round about environed,
And mighty woods that did the valley shade,
And like a stately theater it made,
Spreading itself into a spacious plain.
And in the midst a little river played
Amongst the pumy stones, which seemed to plain,
With gentle murmur that his course they did restrain.
-- The hills
Of Aeta, yielding to a fruitful vale,
Within their range half-circling had enclosed
A fair expanse in verdure smooth. The bounds
Were edged by wood, o'erhung by hoary cliffs,
Which from the clouds bent frowning. Down a rock,
Above the loftiest summit of the grove,
A tumbling torrent wore the shagged stone;
Then gleaming through the intervals of shade,
Attained the valley, where the level stream
Diffused refreshment --
The vale of St. John was, some years ago, the scene of one of those terrible
inundations, which wasted lately the vale of Brackenthwait. I shall relate the
circumstances of it, as they were given to me on the spot: but as we had them
not perhaps on the best authority, they may, in some particulars, be
overcharged.

It was on the 22d of August 1749, that this disaster happened. That day, which
had been preceded by weather uncommonly close and sultry; set in with a gloomy
aspect. The blackness gathered, more, and more, from every quarter. The air was
hot beyond sufferance. The whole atmosphere, and every thing around was in a
state of perfect stagnation. Not a leaf was in motion.

In the mean time, the inhabitants of the vale heard a strange noise in various
parts around them: but whether it was in the air, or whether it arose from the
mountains, they could not ascertain. It was like the hollow murmur of a rising
wind, among the tops of trees. This noise (which in a smaller degree is not an
uncommon prelude to a storm) continued without intermission about two hours;
when a tempest of wind, and rain, and thunder, and lightning succeeded; which
was violent, beyond any thing, remembered in former times; and lasted, without
pause, near three hours.

During this storm the cataract fell upon the mountain, on the north of the
vale; or as some people thought, tho I should suppose without any probability,
burst from the bowels of it. The side of that mountain is a continued
precipice, through the space of a mile. This whole tract, we were told, was
covered, in an instant, with one continuous cascade of roaring torrent (an
appearance, which must have equalled the fall of Niagara) sweeping all before
it from the top of the mountain to the bottom. There, like that other
inundation, it followed the channel of the brooks it met with; and showed
similar effects of it is fury.

One of these effects was astonishing. The fragments of rock, and deluges of
stone, and sand, which were swept from the mountain by the torrent, choked one
of the streams, which received it at the bottom. The water, thus pent up, and
receiving continually vast accession of strength, after rolling sullenly about
that part of the vale in frightful whirlpools, at length forced a new channel
through a solid rock, which we were informed, it disjointed in some fractured
crevice, and made a chasm at least ten feet wide. Many of the fragments were
carried to a great distance; and some of them were so large, that a dozen
horses could scarce move them. We were sorry afterward, that we had not seen
this remarkable chasm: but we had not time to go in quest of it.

From the vale of St. John we ascended a steep hill, called Branthwait-cragg;
where being obliged to leave the great road in our way to Ulleswater, and
investigate a pathless desert over the mountains, which environed us; we put
ourselves under the conduct of a guide.

These mountains were covered with a profusion of huge stones, and detached
rocks; among which we found many old people, and children, from the
neighboring villages, gathering a species of white lychen, that grows upon the
craggs; and which we heard had been found very useful in dying a murray-colour.

Among the difficulties of our rout over these mountains, the bogs and morasses
we met with, were the most troublesome. We were often obliged to dismount; and
in some parts the surface could hardly bear a man. Where rushes grew, our guide
informed us, the ground was firmest. We endeavored therefore, as much as
possible, to make the little tussocks of these plants the basis of our
footsteps. But as we could not convey this intelligence to our horses, they
often plunged very deep.

In several parts of our ride, we had a view of that grand cluster of
mountains, which forms a circle in the heart of Cumberland; and makes a back
ground to the central views from almost every part of the extremities of that
county. These mountains unite on the south with those of Westmoreland. The side
next us was composed of Skiddaw -- Threlkate-fell, a part of which is called
Saddle-back -- and Grisedale-fell. As we rode nearer the northern limit of this
chain, Skiddaw, which is by much the highest mountain, appeared, in
perspective, the least. Behind these mountains arise, in order, Mosedale-fell
-- Carric -- and Caudbeck -- the tops of which we sometimes saw, from the
higher grounds, peering, in their blue attire, over the concave parts of the
browner mountains, which stood nearer the eye.

Between us, and this circular chain, which occupied the whole horizon on the
left, was spread a very extensive vale; stretching from side to side hardly
less than seven or eight miles; and in length winding out of sight. It is a
scene of little beauty, except what arises from the gradation of distance: but
it suggests an idea of greatness; which space, and grand boundaries, however
unadorned, will always suggest.

This idea has sometimes misled the tastless improver of little scenes. He has
heard, that space gives beauty; but not knowing how to accommodate the rule to
circumstances, he often shows all that is to be seen; when, in fact, he should
have hid half of it, as a deformity. Mere space gives the idea of grandeur,
rather than of beauty. Such an idea the ocean presents. But a little scene
cannot present it. Grandeur therefore is not attained by attempting it; while
beauty is often lost.

Along this vale ran the great road we had just left; which was no little
ornament to it. The mazy course of a river is a still nobler object of the same
kind: but a great road is no bad substitute; and is in some respects superior.
The river being on a level, and contained within banks, is generally too much
hid, unless it be viewed from an elevated point: but the road following the
inequalities of the ground, is easily traced by the eye, as it winds along the
several elevations and depressions it meets with; and has therefore more
variety in it is course.

On the right, forming the other side of this extensive vale, arise several
very high mountains; among which Hara-side, and White-pike are the most
magnificent. At the bottom of these, verging toward the skirts of the vale,
are other hills less formidable: but two of them, called the Mell-fells, are
very remarkable; being shaped like earthen graves, in a country churchyard.

A little before we approached the Mell-fells, the path we pursued, led us
under a towering rocky hill, which is known by the name of Wolf's-cragg, and is
probably one of the monuments of this animal remaining in Britain. It is a
fortress entirely adapted to a garrison of wolves; from whence they might
plunder the vale, which was spread before them; and make prey of every thing,
as far as the eye could reach. Such a scene, in painting, would be highly
characterized by such appendages. It would have pleased Ridinger. If that
picturesque naturalist had been in quest of a wolf-scene, he could not have
found a better.

When we had passed this range of mountains, we got more into a beaten path,
leading to the village of Matterdale, about a mile only from Ulleswater; which
was still entirely excluded from our sight by high grounds. Here we dismissed
our guide, and were directed into Gobray-park, which is the northern boundary
of the lake.

This part of the country we found well inhabited; and the roads, at this
season, much frequented. It was about the time of a statute-fair; when the
young people of the country leave their old services, and go to their new: and
we were not a little entertained with the simplicity, and variety of the
several groups and figures we met, both on horseback, and on foot.

These are the picturesque inhabitants of a landscape. The dressed-out figures,
and gaudy carriages, along the great roads of the capital, afford them not. The
pencil rejects with indignation the splendour of art. In grand scenes, even the
peasant cannot be admitted, if he be employed in the low occupations of his
profession: the spade, the scythe, and the rake are all excluded.

Moral, and picturesque ideas do not always coincide. In a moral light,
cultivation, in all it is parts, is pleasing; the hedge, and the furrow; the
waving corn field, and the ripened sheaf. But all these, the picturesque eye,
in quest of scenes of grandeur, and beauty, looks at with disgust. It ranges
after nature, untamed by art, and bursting wildly into all it is irregular forms.

-- Juvat arva videre
Non rastris hominum, non ulli obnoxia curae.
It is thus also in the introduction of figures. In a moral view, the
industrious mechanic is a more pleasing object, than the loitering peasant. But
in a picturesque light, it is otherwise. The arts of industry are rejected; and
even idleness, if I may so speak, adds dignity to a character. Thus the lazy
cowherd resting on his pole; or the peasant lolling on a rock, may be allowed
in the grandest scenes; while the laborious mechanic, with his impliments of
labor, would be repulsed. The fisherman, it is true, may follow his calling
upon the lake: but he is indebted for this privilege, not to his art; but to
the picturesque apparatus of it -- his boat, and his nets, which qualify his
art. They are the objects: he is but an appendage. Place him on the shore, as a
single figure, with his rod, and line; and his art would ruin him. In a
cheerful glade, along a purling brook, near some mill, or cottage, let him
angle, if he please: in such a scene the picturesque eye takes no offense. But
let him take care not to introduce the vulgarity of his employment in a scene
of grandeur.

At the same time, we must observe, that figures, which thus take their
importance merely from not mixing with low, mechanic arts, are at best only
picturesque appendages. They are of a negative nature, neither adding to the
grandeur of the idea, nor taking from it. They merely and simply adorn a scene.

The characters, which are most suited to these scenes of grandeur, are such as
impress us with some idea of greatness, wildness, or ferocity; all which touch
on the sublime.

Figures in long, folding draperies; gypsies; banditti; and soldiers, -- not in
modern regimentals; but as Virgil paints them, -- longis adnixi hastis, et
scuta tenentes; are all marked with one or other of these characters: and
mixing with the magnificence, wildness, or horror of the place, they properly
coalesce; and reflecting the same images, add a deeper tinge to the character
of the scene.

For the truth of all these remarks I might appeal to the decisive judgment of
Salvator Rosa; who seems to have thoroughly studied propriety in figures,
especially in scenes of grandeur. His works are a model on this head. We have a
book of figures, particularly composed for scenery of this kind, and etched by
himself. In this collection there is great variety, both in the characters,
groups, and dresses: but I do not remember, either there, or in any other of
his works, a low, mechanic character. All his figures are either of (what I
have called) the negative kind; or marked with some trait of greatness,
wildness, or ferocity. Of this last species his figures generally partook: his
grand scenes being inhabited chiefly by banditti.

I met with a passage, not a little illustrative of these remarks on figures,
in the travels of Mr. Thickness through Spain.

"The worst sort of beggars, says he, in Spain are the troops of male, and
female gypsies. They are of the genuine breed, and differ widely from all other
gypsies; and I may say, from all other human beings. I often met troops of
these people; and when an interview happens in roads very distant from towns,
or dwellings, it is not very pleasing: for they ask, as if they knew they were
not to be refused; and I dare say often commit murders, when they can commit
them by surprise. They are extremely swarthy, with hair as black as jet; and
form very picturesque groups under the shade of the rocks and trees of the
Pyraenean mountains, where they spend their evenings: and live suitably to the
climate; where bread, and water, and idleness, are preferable to better fare,
and hard-labour."

SECT. XVIII.
ON descending the hill from Matterdale, before we came to the lake, we had a
beautiful specimen (as the naturalists speak) of what in this country is called
a gill. The road carried us along the edge of one of it is precipices: but the
chasm was so entirely filled with wood, that when we looked down, we could not
see into it. Even the sunbeams, unable to enter, rested only on the tufted
foliage of the trees, which grew from the sides. -- But though the eye was
excluded, the ear was soothed by the harmony of an invisible torrent; whose
notes, sounding along innumerable broken falls, and softened by ascending
through the trees, were very melodious.

A winding road brought us to the bottom; where the torrent tumbling out of the
wood, received us. We had a short view into the deep recesses of the scene,
through the branches of the trees, which stretched over the stream; but we had
not time, to penetrate the alluring shade.

Having passed over more high grounds, we came at length in view of the lake.
The first catch of it was thus presented.

A road occupied the nearest part of the landscape, winding around a broken
cliff; which rose considerably on the left. A portion of a distant mountain
appeared on the right, with a small part of the lake at it is foot. The
fore-ground was well-disposed; and the distant mountain, which fell into the
lake, beautifully tinted. The composition, as far as it went, was very correct:
but we yet saw only enough to excite our curiosity; and to give us, from the
bearing of the land, a general idea of the lake.

Ulleswater is the largest lake in this country, except Windermere; being eight
miles long; and about two broad in the widest part; tho, in general, it rarely
exceeds a mile in breadth. It points nearly north, and south; as most of these
lakes do; but being placed at an extremity of the barrier-mountains, it affords
a greater variety than is exhibited by such lakes, as are environed by them.
These having few accompaniments, receive their character chiefly from the
surrounding desolation. Such a lake is Wyburn. Windermere, on the other hand,
Keswick, Butermer, and Ulleswater may all be called boundary-lakes. One end of
each participates more of the rugged country; and the other of the cultivated:
tho each end participates, in some degree, of both. A few traits of romantic
scenery are added to the tameness of one end; and the native horror of the
other is softened by a few cheerful appendages.

The form of Ulleswater resembles a Z; only there is no angular acuteness in
it is line. It spreads every where in an easy curve; beautifully broken in some
parts by promontories. -- The middle reach contains in length near two thirds
of the lake. The southern side is mountainous; and becomes more so, as it
verges toward the west. As the mountains approach the north, they glide (as we
have seen is usual in boundary-lakes) into meadows and pastures. The northern
and western sides contain a great variety of woody and rocky scenes; but these
also, as they approach the east, become smooth and fertilized. At the southern
point, under impending mountains, lies the village of Patterdale. -- With this
general idea of Ulleswater, let us return to the descent from Matterdale, where
we caught the first view of it.

As we descended a little further, the whole scene of the lake opened before
us; and such a scene, as almost drew from us the apostrophe of the inraptured
bard, Visions of glory, spare my aching sight!

Among all the visions of this enchanting country, we had seen nothing so
beautifully sublime, so correctly picturesque as this. -- And yet I am averse
to make comparisons; especially on seeing a country but once. Much depends on
the circumstances of light, and weather. I would wish therefore only to say,
that I was more pleased with Ulleswater, than with any lake I had seen; adding,
at the same time, that we were fortunate in a concurrence of incidents, that
aided it is beauty. We had hitherto seen all the lakes we had visited, under a
rough, or cloudy sky: and tho their dignity was certainly increased by that
circumstance; yet the beauty of a lake in splendid, serene weather, aided, at
this time, by the powers of contrast, made a wonderful impression on the
imagination.

"The effect of the sublime, Mr. Burke informs us, is astonishment; and the
effect of beauty, is pleasure: but when the two ingredients mix, the effect, he
says, is in a good measure destroyed in both. They constitute a species
something different both from the sublime and beautiful, which I have before
called fine: but this kind, I imagine, has not such a power on the passions,
either as vast bodies have, which are endowed with the correspondent qualities
of the sublime; or as the qualities of beauty have, when united in a small
object. The affection produced by large bodies, adorned with the spoils of
beauty, is a tention continually relieved; which approaches to the nature of
mediocrity Sublime and beautiful, part IV. sect. 25.
."

This refined reasoning does not seem entirely grounded on experience. -- I do
not remember any scene in which beauty and sublimity, according to my ideas,
are more blended than in this: and tho Mr. Burke's ideas of beauty are perhaps
more exceptionable, than his ideas of the sublime; yet it happens, that most of
the qualities, which he predicates of both, unite also in this scene. Their
effect therefore, according to his argument, should be destroyed. But the
feelings of every lover of nature, on viewing these scenes, I dare be bold to
say, would revolt from such reasoning.

The fore-ground of the grand view before us, is a part of Gobray-park, which
belongs to the duke of Norfolk; rough, broken, and woody. Among the old oaks,
which enriched it, herds of deer, and cattle grazed in groups. Beyond this is
spread an extensive reach of the lake, winding round a rocky promontory on the
left; which is the point of a mountain, called Martindale-fell, or Place-fell;
the southern boundary of the lake. This promontory uniting with the mountain,
lets it easily down into the water, as by a step. An hesitation, if I may so
call it, of this kind, eases greatly the heaviness of a line. In a distance, it
is of less consequence: but in all the nearer grounds, it is necessary. I speak
chiefly however of those scenes, in which beauty, and grandeur are combined. In
those of simple grandeur, and sublimity, as in that of Penmanmaur, for
instance, in north Wales, the heavy line, which is very remarkable in that
scene, perhaps strengthens the effect.

Martindale-fell is entirely unplanted: but it is line, and surface are both
well varied. Numberless breaks (little valleys, and knolls) give it a
lightness, without injuring it is simplicity.

Such was the disposition of the objects, on the left of the lake: on the
right, two woody promontories, pursuing each other in perspective, made a
beautiful contrast with the smooth continuity of Martindale-fell.

In front, the distance was composed of mountains, falling gently into the
lake; near the edge of which lies the village of Patterdale.

We took this view at a point, which had just so much elevation, as to give a
variety to the lines of the lake. As we descended to the water, the view was
still grand, and beautiful, but had lost some of it is more picturesque
beauties: it had lost the fore-ground: it had lost the sweeping line round the
mountain on the left: and it had lost the recess between the two woody
promontories on the right. The whole margin of the lake was nearly reduced to
one straight line. -- The beauty of a view, especially in lake-scenery, we have
before observed See page 96. Vol. I.
, depends greatly on the nice position of it is point.

Having spent some time in examining this very enchanting scene, we skirted the
lake toward Patterdale, on a tolerable road, which runs from one end of it to
the other: on the south it is continued to Ambleside; on the north, to Penrith.
I call it a tolerable road; but I mean only for horses. It has not the
quartering and commodious width of a carriage road.

As we lest Gobray-park, we took our rout along the margin of the first of
those woody promontories on the right. We were carried by the side of the lake,
through close lanes, and thick groves: yet not so thick, but that we had every
where, through the openings of the trees, and windings of the road, views in
front, and on the right, into woody recesses; some of which were very pleasing:
and on the left, the lake, and all it is distant furniture, broke frequently
upon us.

After skirting the first wooded promontory, which carried us about a mile, the
road turned suddenly to the right, and led us round into the second, rising a
considerable height above the water. -- In this promontory, a new scene opened:
the woods became intermixed with rock; and a great variety of very beautiful
fore-grounds were produced. The rocks, through which the road was sometimes
cut, were chiefly on our right. -- In this promontory also, as well as in the
other, we were amused with catches of the lake, and of Martindale-fell, through
the trees.

Scenes, like these, are adapted to every state of the sky. They were beautiful
in the calm season, in which we saw them; and in which indeed we wished to see
them. But they would have received peculiar advantages also from a storm. The
objects are all in that great style, which is suited to the violences of
nature. The imagination would have risen with the tempest, and given a double
grandeur to every awful form. -- The trees, in the mean time, which rear
themselves stage above stage, upon the mountain's brow, and spread down to the
very road, would have made a noble instrument for the hollow blast to sound,
consisting of various notes: while the surges of the lake, resounding among the
caverns, and dashing against the rocks, many fathoms below, would have aided
the concert with new notes of terrific harmony.

-- There is a mood,
(I sing not to the vacant and the young)
There is a kindly mood of melancholy,
That wings the soul, and points her to the sky.
While winds, and tempests sweep the various lyre,
How sweet the diapason! --
The mind is not always indeed in unison with such scenes, and circumstances,
as these. When it does not happen to be so, no effect can be produced.
Sometimes indeed the scene may draw the mind into unison; if it be not under
the impression of any strong passion of an opposite kind; but in a sort of
neutral state. The effect however will always be strongest, when the mind
happens to be possessed of ideas congenial to the scene -- when, in a kindly
mood of melancholy, it feels itself soothed by the objects around.

But besides the music of winds and tempests, the echoes, which are excited in
different parts of this lake, are still more grand, and affecting. More or less
they accompany all lakes, that are circumscribed by lofty, and rocky screens.
We found them on Windermere; we found them on Derwentwater. But every lake,
being surrounded by rocks and mountains of a structure peculiar to itself,
forms a variety of instru^^^^^ and, of course, a variety of sounds. The echoes
therefore of no two lakes are alike; unless they are mere monotonists.

We took notice of a very grand echo on the western shores of the great island
in Windermere: but the most celebrated echoes are said to be found on
Ulleswater; in some of which the sound of a cannon is distinctly reverberated
six, or seven times. It first rolls over the head in one vast peal. -- Then
subsiding a few seconds, it rises again in a grand, interrupted burst, perhaps
on the right. -- Another solemn pause ensues. Then the sound arises again on
the left. -- Thus thrown from rock to rock, in a sort of aerial perspective, it
is caught again perhaps by some nearer promontory; and returning full on the
ear, surprises you, after you thought all had been over, with as great a peal
as at first.

But the grandest effect of this kind is produced by a successive discharge of
cannon The duke of Portland, who has property in this neighborhood, has a
vessel on the lake, with brass guns, for the purpose of exciting echoes.
; at the interval of a few seconds between each discharge. The effect of the
first is not over, when the echoes of the second, the third, or perhaps of the
fourth, begin. Such a variety of awful sounds, mixing, and commixing, and at
the same moment heard from all sides, have a wonderful effect on the mind; as
if the very foundations of every rock on the lake were giving way; and the
whole scene, from some strange convulsion, were falling into general ruin.

These sounds, which are all of the terrific kind, are suited chiefly to scenes
of grandeur during some moment of wildness, when the lake is under the
agitation of a storm. In a calm, still evening, the gradations of an echo,
dying away in distant thunder, are certainly heard with most advantage. But
that is a different idea. You attend then only to the echoes themselves. When
you take the scene into the combination; and attend to the effect of the whole
together; no doubt such sounds, as are of the most violent kind, are best
suited to moments of the greatest uproar.

But there is another species of echoes, which are as well adapted to the lake
in all it is stillness, and tranquillity, as the others are to it is wildness,
and confusion: and which recommend themselves chiefly to those feelings, which
depend on the gentler movements of the mind. Instead of cannon, let a few
French-horns, and clarionets be introduced. Softer music than such loud
wind-instruments, would scarce have power to vibrate. The effect is now
wonderfully changed. The sound of a cannon is heard in bursts. It is the music
only of thunder. But the continuation of musical sounds forms a continuation of
musical echoes; which reverberating around the lake, are exquisitely melodious
in their several gradations; and form a thousand symphonies, playing together
from every part. The variety of notes is inconceivable. The ear is not equal to
their innumerable combinations. It listens to a symphony dying away at a
distance; when other melodious sounds arise close at hand. These have scarce
attracted the attention; when a different mode of harmony arises from another
quarter. In short, every rock is vocal, and the whole lake is transformed into
a kind of magical scene; in which every promontory seems peopled by aerial
beings, answering each other in celestial music.

-- How often from the steep
Of ecchoing hill, or thicket, have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to other's note,
Singing their great Creator? Often in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk,
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds,
In full harmonic number joined, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to heaven.
We had now almost skirted the two woody promontories in our rout to
Patterdale. The conclusion is the grandest part of the whole scenery. It is a
bold projection of rock finely marked, and adorned with hanging woods; under
the beetling summit of which the road makes a sudden turn. This is the point of
the second promontory; and, I believe, is known by the name of Stibray-cragg.

The trees which compose the whole scenery through both these promontories, are
in general, oak.

From hence through lanes of the same kind, though less superbly decorated, we
came to the village of Patterdale; situated on rising grounds, among two or
three little rivers, or branches of a river, which feed the lake. It lies in a
cove of mountains, open in front to the southern reach of the lake; beyond
which appear the high and woody lands of Gobray-park. The situation is
magnificent.

Among the cottages of this village, there is a house, belonging to a person of
somewhat better condition; whose little estate, which he occupies himself, lies
in the neighborhood. As his property, inconsiderable as it is, is better than
that of any of his neighbors, it has gained him the title of King of
Patterdale, in which his family name is lost. His ancestors have long enjoyed
the title before him. We had the honor of seeing this prince, as he took the
diversion of fishing on the lake; and I could not help thinking, that if I were
inclined to envy the situation of any potentate in Europe, it would be that of
the king of Patterdale. The pride of Windsor and Versailles would shrink in a
comparison with the magnificence of his dominions.

The great simplicity of this country, and that rigid temperance, and economy,
which necessity injoins to all it is inhabitants, may be exemplified by the
following little history.

A clergyman, of the name of Mattison, was minister of this place sixty years;
and died lately at the age of ninety. During the early part of his life, his
benefice brought him in only twelve pounds a year. It was afterward increased,
(I suppose by the queen's bounty,) to eighteen; which it never exceeded. On
this income he married -- brought up four children -- lived comfortably among
his neighbors -- educated a son, I believe, at college -- and left upwards of
1000L. behind him.

With that singular simplicity, and inattention to forms which characterize a
country like this; he himself read the burial-service over his mother; he
married his father to a second wife; and afterward buried him also. He
published his own banns of marriage in the church, with a woman, whom he had
formerly christened; and himself married all his four children.

From this specimen, the manners of the country may easily be conceived. At a
distance from the refinements of the age, they are at a distance also from it is
vices. Many sage writers, and Montesquieu Book XVIII. Chapter II.
in particular, have supposed these rough scenes of nature to have a great
effect on the human mind: and have found virtues in mountainous countries,
which were not the growth of tamer regions. Many opinions perhaps have passed
current among mankind, which have less foundation in truth. Montesquieu is in
quest chiefly of political virtue -- liberty -- bravery -- and the arts of bold
defense: but, I believe, private virtue is equally befriended by these rough
scenes. It is some happiness indeed to these people, that they have no great
roads among them; and that their simple villages, on the sides of lakes, and
mountains, are in no line of communication with any of the busy haunts of men.
Ignorance is sometimes called the mother of vice. I apprehend it to be as often
the nurse of innocence.

Much have those travelers to answer for, whose casual intercourse with this
innocent, and simple people tends to corrupt them; disseminating among them
ideas of extravagance, and dissipation -- giving them a taste for pleasures,
and gratifications, of which they had no ideas -- inspiring them with
discontent at home -- and tainting their rough, industrious manners with
idleness, and a thirst after dishonest means.

If travelers would frequent this country with a view to examine it is
grandeur, and beauty -- or to explore it is varied, and curious regions with the
eye of philosophy -- or, if that could be hoped, to adore the great Creator in
these his sublimer works -- if, in their passage through it, they could be
content with such fare as the country produces; or, at least reconcile
themselves to it by manly exercise, and fatigue (for there is a time, when the
stomach, and the plainest food will be found in perfect harmony) -- if they
could thus, instead of corrupting the manners of an innocent people; learn to
amend their own, by seeing in how narrow a compass the wants of human life may
be compressed -- a journey through these wild scenes might be attended perhaps
with more improvement, than a journey to Rome, or Paris. Where manners are
polished into vicious refinement, simplifying is the best mode of improving;
and the example of innocence is a more instructive lesson, than any that can be
taught by artists, and literati.

But these scenes are too often the resort of gay company, who are under no
impressions of this kind -- who have no ideas, but of extending the sphere of
their amusements -- or, of varying a life of dissipation. The grandeur of the
country is not taken into the question: or, at least it is no otherwise
considered, than as affording some new mode of pleasurable enjoyment. Thus even
the diversions of Newmarket are introduced -- diversions, one would imagine,
more foreign to the nature of this country, than any other. A number of horses
are carried into the middle of a lake in a flat boat. A plug is drawn from the
bottom: the boat sinks, and the horses are left floating on the surface. In
different directions they make to land; and the horse, which soonest arrives,
secures the prize.

Strenua nos exercet inertia: navibus atque
Quadrigis petimus been vivere. Quod petis, hic est:
Est Ulubris; animus si te non deficit aequus.
SECT. XIX.
HAVING spent two hours at Patterdale, in refreshing our horses, and in
surveying the beauty of it is situation; we left it with regret, and set out for
Penrith.

We had now the whole length of the lake to skirt; part of which we had already
traversed in our rout from Gobray-park: but we felt no reluctance at taking a
second view of it.

As we traversed the two woody promontories, which we had passed in the
morning, we had a grand exhibition of the middle reach of the lake; which, I
have observed, is by far the longest. Martindale-fell, shooting into the water,
which before adorned the left of the landscape, now took it is station on the
right. The left was composed of the high woody grounds about Gobray-park. -- In
the center, the hills gently declining, formed a boundary at the bottom of the
lake; stretching far to the east. -- As a fore-ground, we had the woods, and
rocks of the two promontories, through which we passed.

Such were the outlines, and composition of the view before us; but it is
coloring was still more exquisite.

The sun was now descending low, and cast the broad shades of evening athwart
the landscape: while his beams, gleaming with yellow luster through the
valleys, spread over the enlightened summits of the mountains, a thousand
lovely tints -- in sober harmony, where some deep recess was faintly shadowed
-- in splendid hue, where jutting knolls, or promontories received the fuller
radiance of the diverging ray. The air was still: the lake, one vast expanse of
crystal mirror. The mountain-shadows, which sometimes give the water a deep,
black hue (in many circumstances, extremely picturesque;) were softened here
into a mild, blue tint, which swept over half the surface. The other half
received the fair impression of every radiant form, that glowed around. The
inverted landscape was touched in fainter colors, than the real one. Yet it it
was more than laid in. It was almost finished. The last touches alone were
wanting.

What an admirable study for the pallet is such a scene as this! infinitely
beyond the camera's contracted bounds. Here you see nature in her full
dimensions. You are let into the very mystery -- into every artifice, of her
pencil. In the reflected picture, you see the ground she lays in -- the great
effects preserved -- and that veil of expressive obscurity thrown over all, in
which what is done, is done so exquisitely, that if you wish the finishing
touches, you wish them only by the same inimitable hand that gave the sketch.
Turn from the shadow to the reality, and you have them. There the obscurity is
detailed. The picture, and the sketch reflect mutual graces on each other.

I dwell the longer on this scene, because during five days, which we spent in
this romantic country, where we took a view of so many lakes, this was the only
moment, in which we were so fortunate, as to see the water in a pure,
reflecting state. Partial exhibitions of this kind we had often met with: but
here we were presented with a scene of the utmost magnificence.

Having examined this very lovely landscape, so perfect both in composition,
and in coloring, we proceeded in our rout along the lake.

We now re-entered Gobray-park; which afforded us, for near three miles, a
great variety of beautiful scenes on the left, composed of rocky, and
broken-ground, forest-trees, copse-wood, and wooded-hills: while the lake, and
mountains, whose summits were now glowing with the full splendour of an evening
sun, were a continued fund of varied entertainment on the right. The eye was
both amused, and relieved by surveying the two different modes of scenery in
succession: the broad shades, and bright diversified tints, of the distant
mountains, on one side; and the beautiful forms, and objects of the
fore-ground, on the other.

One part of the fore-ground was marked with singular wildness. It was a kind
of rocky pass near the margin of the lake; known, I believe, by the name of
Yew-cragg. If Caesar had seen it, it would have struck him in a military light;
and he would have described it as a defile, "angustum, and difficile, inter
montem, and lacum; quo vix singuli carri ducerentur. Mons altissimus
impendebat; ut facile perpauci transitum prohibere possent Caes. Com. lib. 1.
."

But our imaginations were more amused with picturesque, than military ideas.
It struck us therefore merely as an object of beauty. -- It Is features were
these.

At a little distance from the lake, the broken side of a mountain falls
abruptly to the ground in two noble tiers of rock; both which are shattered in
every direction. This rocky scene was ornamented in the richest manner with
wood. The road skirted the lake; and between it and the rocks, all was rough,
broken-ground, entangled with brakes, and impassible. Among the rocks arose a
grove of forest-trees of various height, according to the inequality of the
ground. Here and there, a few scattered oaks, the fathers of the forest, reared
their peeled, and withered trunks across the glade; and set off the vivid green
of the more luxuriant trees. The deer starting from the brakes, as the feet of
our horses approached, added new wildness to the native character of the view;
while the screams of a hernery (the wildest notes in nature) allowed the ear to
participate in the scene.

The illumination of this grand mass of rock was as interesting, as the
composition of it. It was overspread, when we saw it, with a deep
evening-shadow, with many a darker tint in the closer recesses. A mild ray,
just tinged with the blush of a setting sun, tipped the summits of the trees:
While, rushing through the branches, rifted cliffs
Dart their white heads, and glitter through the gloom.


Were a man disposed to turn hermit, I know not where he could fix his abode
more agreeably than here. The projecting rocks would afford a sheltered
situation for his cell; which would open to a scene every way fitted for
meditation. He might wander along the bottom of a mountain; and by the side of
a lake, almost unfrequented, except by the foot of curiosity, or of some hasty
shepherd, seeking for the stragglers of his flock. Here he might enjoy the
contemplation of nature in all her simplicity and grandeur. This single scene,
the mere invirons of his cell, under all the varieties of light, and shade --
sunshine, and storm -- morning, and evening, would itself afford an
inexhausted fund of entertainment: while the ample tome expanded daily before
his eye, would banish the littleness of life; and naturally impress his mind
with great ideas.

From this wild scene we soon entered another of a different cast. It was a
circular plain, about half a mile in diameter; surrounded by mountains, with an
opening to the lake. The plain was smooth, but varied: the mountains, rather
low, but rugged.

A valley, like this, considered as a whole, has little picturesque beauty. But
a picturesque eye will find it is objects even here. It will investigate the
hills, and pick out such portions, as are most pleasing. These it will form
into back-grounds, and enrich the fore-ground (which can only be a plain) with
cattle, trees, or other objects. -- Even such simple scenes, by the aid of
judicious lights, may form pictures.

We had the same kind of scene, soon after, repeated, -- a circular valley,
surrounded with mountains, tho varied in many particulars from the other. Both
however were equally unadorned; and as both were capable, by a few well-chosen
accompaniments, of being formed into good pictures; so likewise both were
capable of being made delightful scenes in nature, by a little judicious
planting; tho we must still have wished this planting to have had the growth of
a century.

It is remarkable, that we find scarce any disposition of ground, that belongs
to a mountainous country, of which Virgil has not taken notice. The scenes we
now examined, he exactly describes: only he has given his hills the ornament of
wood, which he knew was their most picturesque dress.

-- Tendit
Gramineum in campum, quem collibus undique curvis
Cingebant sylvae, mediaque in valle theatri
Circus erat. --
Not far from these circular plains appears Gobray-hall; once the capital of
these domains; but now a neglected mansion. If situation can recommend a place,
this seems to enjoy one in great perfection. It stands on high ground, with
higher still behind it. We did not ride up to the house; but it seemed to
command a noble view of the lake, and of the scenery around it.

Nearly at the point where Ulleswater makes it is last curve, stands the village
of Water-Mullock; situated rather within the land. Through this place the road
carried us to the last reach of the lake; which is the least beautiful part.
Here the hills grow smooth, and lumpish; and the country, at every step, loses
some of the wild strokes of nature; and degenerates, if I may so speak, into
cultivation.

At the end of the lake stands Dunmallet, a remarkable hill, which overlooks
the last reach; but is itself rather a disgusting object. Shaped with conic
exactness; planted uniformly with Scotch firs; and cut as uniformly into walks
verging to a center, it becomes a vile termination of a noble scene. -- Once
probably it was more interesting; when the Roman eagle was planted, as it
formerly was, upon it is summit -- when it is bold, rough sides were in unison
with the objects around -- and a noble castle frowned, from it is precipices
over the lake. This fortress, whose ramparts may yet easily be traced, must
once have been of considerable importance, as it commanded all the avenues of
the country.

We had now finished our view of Ulleswater, which contains a wonderful variety
of grand, and picturesque scenes, compressed within a very narrow compass. --
In one part, not far from Water-Mullock, the road carried us to the higher
grounds, from whence we had a view of the whole lake, and all it is vast
accompaniments together -- a troubled sea of mountains; a broken scene --
amusing, but not picturesque.

In our evening's ride, we had skirted only one side of the lake; and wished
our time would have allowed us to skirt the other also. It is probable the
southern coast might have afforded very noble distant views of the woods, and
rocks of Gobray-park, and the adjacent lofty grounds.

We could have wished also to have navigated the lake: for though views from
the water, are in general less beautiful, than the same views from the land, as
they want the advantage of a fore-ground, and also bring the horizon too low
See Page 96.
; yet it is probable the grand reaches of this lake, and the woody
promontories, round which the water winds, would have displayed many beautiful
passages from a boat.

One view from the water, we heard much commended, that of the last reach of
the lake, toward the conic hill of Dunmallet. The sides of the lake -- it is
gliding away into the river Eamot, which carries it off -- Pooly-bridge, which
is thrown over that river, at the bottom of the lake -- and the country beyond
-- were all much extolled: but we could not conceive, that any views, at this
end of the lake, could be comparable to what we had seen near the shores of
Patterdale: especially any views, in which the regular form of Dunmallet made
so considerable a part.

It would have added also to our amusement, to have taken a view of the lake by
moonlight. For tho it is very difficult in painting to manage so feeble an
effusion of light in such a manner, as, at the same time, to illumine objects,
and produce an effect; yet the reality, in such scenes as these, is attended
often with a wonderful solemnity and grandeur. That shadowy form of great
objects, which is sometimes traced out by a silver thread, and sometimes by a
kind of bright obscurity on a darker ground, almost oppresses the imagination
with sublime ideas. Great effects also we sometimes see of light and shade, tho
only faintly marked. In the absence of color, the clair-obscur is more
striking; -- one expanded sheet of light
Diffusing: while the shades from rock to rock
Irregularly thrown, with solemn gloom
Diversify the whole. --


I cannot leave the scenes of Ulleswater, without taking notice of an uncommon
fish, which frequents it is waters; and which is equally the object of the
naturalist, and of the epicure. It is of the trout-species; beautifully clad in
scales of silver; firm, and finely flavoured; and of such dimensions, that it
has sometimes been known to weigh between thirty, and forty pounds.

Having now past the limits of the lake, we traversed a very pleasant country
in our road to Penrith, keeping the Eamot commonly within view on our right;
and leaving on the left, the ruins of Dacre-castle, the ancient seat of the
noble family of that name.

No part of Cumberland is more inhabited by the genteeler families of the
county, than this. Within the circumference of a few miles stand many of their
houses; some of which have formerly been castles: but the road carried us in
view only of two or three of them.

Before we arrived at Penrith, one of these fortresses, which is known by the
name of Penrith-castle, presented us with a very noble ruin; and under the most
interesting circumstances. The sun, which, through the length of a summer-day,
had befriended us with all his morning, noon, and evening powers; preparing
now, with farewell sweet, to take his leave, gave us yet one more beautiful
exhibition.

A grand broken arch presented itself first in deep shadow. Through the
aperture appeared a part of the internal structure, thrown into perspective to
great advantage; and illumined by the departing ray. Other fragments of the
shattered towers, and battlements were just touched with the splendid tint: but
the body of light rested on those parts, which were seen through the shadowed
arch.

In the offskip, beyond the castle, arose a hill, in shadow likewise; on the
top of which stood a lonely beacon. The windows answering each other, we could
just discern the glowing horizon through them -- a circumstance, which however
trivial in description, has a beautiful effect in landscape.

This beacon is a monument of those tumultuous times, which preceded the union;
and the only monument of the kind now remaining in these parts; though such
beacons were formerly stationed over the whole country; and could spread
intelligence, in a few seconds, from one end of it to the other.

At this later day these castles and posts of alarm, adorning the country, they
once defended, raise pleasing reflections on a comparison of present times with
past -- those turbulent times, when no man could sleep in safety unless secured
by a fortress. In war he feared the invasion of an open enemy: and in peace a
mischief still more formidable, the ravages of banditti; with whom the country
was always at that time infested. These wretches were composed of the outlaws
from both nations; and inhabiting the fastnesses of the bogs, and mountains,
used to sally out, and plunder in all directions.

Penrith is a neat town, situated not unpleasantly, under mountains; and in the
neighborhood of lakes.

In the churchyard we saw an ancient monument, which has occasioned much
speculation among antiquarians. It consists of two rough pillars, with four
semicircular stones, fixed in the ground between them. Dr. Todd, an antiquarian
of the last age, found out four wild-boars, and other ingenious devices, on the
different parts of this monument. We examined it with attention: but could not
find even the most distant resemblance of any form in nature. The whole surface
seemed to be nothing more than a piece of rough chissel work. -- In the church,
which is a handsome, plain structure, is placed a stone, recording the ravages
of the plague among the several towns of this neighborhood, in the year 1598.

As we leave Penrith, which is within twenty miles of Carlisle, we enter that
vast waste, called Inglewood-forest, through which we rode at least nine miles;
in all which space there is scarce a tree to be seen: and yet were it well
planted, as it once probably was, many parts of it might be admired: for the
ground makes bold and noble swells; the back scenery is composed of a grand
sweep of mountains; and on the left, are distant views into a cultivated
country.

The mountains, which adorn these scenes, are the same we saw, as we left
Keswick; only the more northern part of that circular chain is now turned
toward us. In this view, the ridge of Saddle-back assumes that shape, from
which it derives it is appellation.

That part of Inglewood-forest, which lies nearest the town, is known by the
name of Penrith-fell, consisting of rough, and hilly grounds. One of the
highest hills is occupied by the beacon, of which we had a distant view, as we
examined the ruins of Penrith-castle.

On this spot, in the year 1715, the Cumberland militia assembled to oppose the
rebels in their march to the south. But a militia without discipline, is never
formidable. The whole body fled, as the van of the rebels appeared marching
round an opposite hill.

Nicolson, bishop of Carlisle, a strenuous man, who had been very instrumental
in bringing them together, and now attended their march; was so chagrined, and
mortified at their behavior, that in a fit of obstinate vexation, he would not
quit the field. The enemy was coming on apace. His servants rode up to the
coach for orders. The bishop sat mute with indignation. All thoughts of himself
were lost in the public disgrace. His coachman however, whose feelings were
less delicate, thinking the management of affairs, in this interruption of
government, now devolved upon him, lashed his horses, and carried his master
off the field.

On the verge of the forest, at a place called Plumpton, a large Roman station
(or stative camp) runs a quarter of a mile, on the right. You trace the ground
broken variously, where tents, kitchens, and earthen tables probably stood, not
unlike the vestiges of a modern encampment. On the left appear the lines of a
fort of considerable dimensions, about one hundred and fifty yards square,
which was once the citadel of this military colony. The ramparts, and ditches
may easily be traced on every side.

The great road indeed, which we traveled, is entirely Roman; and is laid
almost by a line over the forest. You seldom see a winding road of Roman
construction. Their surveyors, and pioneers had no idea of the line of beauty;
nor stood in reverence of any enclosures; but always took the shortest cut;
making the Appian way the model of all their provincial roads.

At Ragmire, about a mile farther, where the road crosses a bog, large wooden
frameworks, yet uninjured by time, were lately dug up; which the Romans had
laid, as a foundation for their causey, over that unstable surface.

On leaving Inglewood-forest, the road enters an enclosed country, in which is
little variety, and scarce an interesting object, till we arrive at Carlisle.

The approach to that city, from the rising ground, near the little village of
Hereby, is grand. The town, which terminates a vista of a mile in length, takes
a very compact form; in which no part is seen, but what makes a handsome
appearance. The square, and massy tower of the castle rises on the right: in
the middle, the cathedral rises still higher; and contiguous to it, on the
left, appear the round towers of the citadel; which was built by Henry VIII, in
the form of all his castles on the Hampshire, and Kentish coasts.

The beauty however of this approach is soon lost. As we descend the hill from
Hereby, the town sinks into the insignificance of it is invirons.

The entrance is still beautiful; the road winding to the gate round the towers
of the citadel.

SECT. XX.
FEW towns offer a fairer field to an antiquary, than Carlisle. It Is origin,
and history, are remote, curious and obscure. It was unquestionably a place of
consequence in Roman times. Severus's wall just includes it in the British
pale. The vestiges of that barrier run within half a mile of it is gates; and it
probably figured first under the character of a fortress, on that celebrated
rampart.

In after ages it had it is share successively in the history of Saxons, Danes,
and Scots; and during the revolutions of these several nations, was the scene
of every vicissitude of war. It has been frequently besieged, pillaged, burnt,
and rebuilt. Once it lay buried in it is ruins for the space of two centuries.
Rufus brought it again into existence. The present town is founded on the
vestiges of former towns; which in many parts have raised the ground within,
nearly to the height of the walls. The foundations of a house are rarely dug
without disturbing the ruins of some other house. It has been the residence;
and it has been the prison of kings. An old ashtree is still shown, near the
gate of the castle; which is said to have been planted by the unfortunate Mary
of Scotland, who spent a part of her captivity in this fortress; whither she
was soon brought, after her landing at Workington. Many princes also have shed
their royal favors on this ancient town; and made it is fortifications their
care.

Now all it is military honors are disgraced. Northern commotions are no longer
dreaded. It Is gates stand always open; and it is walls, the object of no farther
attention, are falling fast into ruin. The firing of a morning and an evening
gun from the castle, which was the last garrison-form that remained, has been
discontinued these six years, to the great regret of the country around, whose
hours of labor it regulated.

But I mean not to enter into the history of Carlisle: it concerns me only as
an object of beauty. Within it is walls indeed it contains little that deserves
notice. The castle is heavy in all it is parts, as these fabrics commonly are.
It is too perfect to afford much pleasure to the picturesque eye; except as a
remote object, softened by distance. Hereafter, when it is shattered towers, and
buttresses, give a lightness to it is parts, it may adorn some future landscape.

The cathedral deserves still less attention. It is a heavy, Saxon pile; and
there is nothing about it, that is beautiful; except the east-window, which is
a rich, and very elegant piece of Gothic ramification.

The fratry, as it is called, or chapter house, in the abbey, is the only
building that deserves notice. On one side, where it has formerly been
connected with the cloisters, it has little beauty: but on the other, next the
deanery, it is proportions and ornaments are elegant. It seems to be of that
style of architecture, which prevailed rather before the two later Henry's.

But though Carlisle furnishes little amusement within it is walls; yet it adds
great beauty, as a distant object, to the country around. Few towns enjoy a
better situation. It stands on a rising ground, in the midst of meadows,
watered by two considerable rivers; which flowing on different sides of the
city, unite a little below it; and form the whole ground-plot, on which it
stands, into a kind of peninsula. Beyond the meadows, the ground rises, in
almost all parts, at different distances.

The meadows around it, especially along the banks of the river Eden, want only
a little more wood to make them very beautiful. In high floods, which happen
two or three times in the course of a winter, they exhibit a very grand scene.
The town appears standing out, like a promontory in the midst of a vast lake.

The short siege which Carlisle sustained in the rebellion of the year 1745,
together with some awkward circumstances that attended it, threw a general
odium upon the town; and many believed, among whom was the late duke of
Cumberland, that it was very ill-affected to the government. No suspicion was
ever more unjust. I dare take upon me to say, there were scarce half a dozen
people in the whole place, who wished well to the rebellion.

The following anecdote, known but to few; and totally unknown, till many years
after the event, will throw some light on it is hasty surrender; which brought
it into such disgrace.

When the rebels came before it, it was garrisoned only by two companies of
invalids; and two raw, undisciplined regiments of militia. General Wade lay at
Newcastle with a considerable force: and the governor of Carlisle informing
him, how unprovided he was, begged a reinforcement. The single hope of this
relief, enabled the gentlemen of the country, who commanded the militia, to
keep their men under arms.

In the mean time the rebels were known to be as ill-prepared for an attack, as
the town was for a defense. They had now lain a week before it; and found it
was impracticable, for want of artillery, to make any attempt. They feared also
an interruption from general Wade: and besides, were unwilling to delay any
longer their march toward London. Under these difficulties, they had come to a
resolution to abandon their design.

At this critical time the governor of Carlisle received a letter from general
Wade, informing him, he was so circumstanced, that he could not possibly send
the reinforcement that had been desired. This mortifying intelligence, tho not
publicly known, was however communicated to the principal officers; and to
some others; among whom was a busy attorney, whose name was H -- s.

H -- s was then addressing a young lady, the daughter of Mr. F -- r, a
gentleman of the country; and to assist his cause, and give himself consequence
with his intended father in law, he whispered to him, among his other political
secrets, the disappointment from general Wade.

The whisper did not rest here. F -- r frequented a club in the neighborhood;
where observing (in the jollity of a cheerful evening) that only friends were
present, he gave his company the information, he had just received from H -- s.

There was in that company, one S -- d, a gentleman of some fortune near
Carlisle, who, tho a known papist, was however at that time, thought to be of
very entire affection to the government. This man, possessed of such a secret,
and wishing for an opportunity to serve a cause, which he favored in his
heart, took horse that very night, after he left the club-room, and rode
directly to the rebel-camp; which he found under orders to break up the next
morning. He was carried immediately to the Duke of Perth, and others of the
rebel leaders, to whom he communicated his intelligence; and assured them, they
might expect a mutiny in the town, if they continued before it, one day longer.
Counter orders were immediately issued; and the next day the Cumberland and
Westmoreland militia, being under no discipline, began to mutiny, and disperse;
and the town defended now only by two companies of invalids, was thought no
longer tenable. The governor was tried by a court martial; and acquitted: and
nobody supposed that either the militia-officers, or their men, were impressed
by any motive worse than fear.

In so variegated a country, as England, there are few parts, which do not
afford many pleasing, and picturesque scenes. The most probable way of finding
them, as I observed a little above, is to follow the course of the rivers.
About their banks we shall generally find the richest scenery, which the
country can produce. This rule we followed in the few excursions which we had
time to make from Carlisle: and first we took a view of the river Cauda.

Near the town this river is broken into so many streams; and throws up, every
where, so many barren beds of pebbles, that there is no great beauty in this
part of it is course. But above, where higher banks confine it is impetuosity, it
becomes more interesting. The vales of Sebergham and Dalston, we heard much
commended. The former we did not visit* the latter we followed with great
pleasure, along it is winding course, for many miles; and found ourselves often
in the midst of very beautiful scenes; the river being shut up sometimes by
close, and lofty banks, and sometimes flowing through meadows edged with wood.

Among other situations on the Cauda we were much pleased with that of
Rose-castle, the seat of the bishop of Carlisle; which stands on a gentle rise,
in a wide part of the vale; the river winding round it, in a semi-circular
form, at about half a mile's distance. The ground between the castle, and the
river, consists of beautiful meadows; and beyond the river, the lofty bank,
which winds with it, is well-planted; and forms a sweep of hanging wood. The
castle composed of square towers, tho no object on the spot, is a good ornament
to the scene.

Between Rose-castle and Wigton the country abounds with the relics of Roman
incampments. At a place, called Chalk-cliff (which, by the way, is a cliff of
red stone) this legionary inscription is engraved in the native rock.

LEG II AVG
MILITES FEC.
COH III COH IIII
From the Cauda, our next excursion was along the Eden. On the banks of this
river, we were informed of many interesting scenes. At Kirkoswal, and Nunnery
particularly, the country was represented as very engaging; but Corby-castle,
about five miles from Carlisle, was the only place above the town, which we had
time to visit.

At Wetherall we ferried over the river; and landed under the castle, which
stands on the edge of a lofty bank. This bank stretches at least three miles
along the course of the river, partly below, but chiefly above, the castle. I
give it it is ancient title; tho it is now a mere modern house, without the
least vestige of it is primeval dignity. Below the castle, the bank is rocky,
and falls precipitately into the water: above, it makes a more gentle descent;
and leaves an edging, which, in some parts, spreads into little winding meads,
and where it is narrowest, is broad enough for a handsome walk. The whole bank,
both above, and below the castle, is covered with wood; large oak, and ash; and
in many places the scenery is rocky also. But the rocks are not of the gray
kind, stained with a variety of different tints -- the saxa circumlita musco;
but incline rather to a sandy red, which is not the most coalescing hue. They
give however great spirit, and beauty to the scene.

The bank of the river, opposite to the castle, is likewise high; in many parts
woody; in others affording an intermixture of wood, and lawn. Here stand the
ruins of Wetherall-abbey; tho little more of it is left, than a square tower,
which is some ornament, tho no very picturesque one, to the scene. These ruins
were once extensive, and, I have heard, beautiful; but the dean and chapter of
Carlisle, to whom the place belongs, some years ago carried off the stones,
with more economy than taste, to build a prebendal house.

On this side of the river also, an object presents itself, known by the name
of Wetherall-safeguard, which is esteemed a great curiosity. It consists of
three chambers cut in the solid rock, which being in this part, almost a
precipice, the access to these chambers is very difficult. It is supposed to
have been an appendage of the abbey; where the monks, in times of disorder,
secreted their wealth. Some antiquarians suppose it to have been inhabited by a
religious devotee, and call it St. Constantine's cell. It is rather a curious
place, than any great ornament to the scene.

To the natural advantages of the scenery about Corby-castle, the improvements
of art have added little. The late proprietor, who had seen nothing himself;
and imagined from the resort of strangers to see the beauty of his situation,
that they admired his taste, resolved to make Corby one of the most sumptuous
places in Europe. With this view, he scooped his rocks into grottos --
fabricated a cascade, consisting of a lofty flight of regular stone steps --
cut a straight walk through his woods, along the banks of the river; at the end
of which he reared a temple: and being resolved to add every ornament, that
expense could procure, he hired an artist of the country, at four-pence a day
(for labor was then cheap) to make statues. Numberless were the works of this
genius. Diana, Neptune, Polyphemus, Nymphs and Satyrs in abundance, and a
variety of other figures, became soon the ornaments of the woods; and met the
eye of the spectator wherever he turned. A punster, who was remarkable for
making only one good pun in his life, made it here. Pointing to one of these
strange figures, he called it a satyr upon the place.

But the taste of the present age has destroyed the pride of the last. The
present proprietor has done little; but what he has done, is done well. The
rocks indeed scooped into holes, can never be restored to their native
simplicity, and grandeur. Their bold projections are for ever effaced. Nor
could a century restore those trees which were rooted up to form the vista. But
the statues, like the ancient sculpture of the Egyptians, are now no more. The
temple is going fast into ruins; and the cascade (so frivolous, if it had even
been good in it is kind, on the banks of a great, and rapid river) is now
overgrown with thickets. The old line of the walk could not easily be effaced:
but a new one, beyond the temple, is carried on, which follows naturally the
course of the river. And indeed this part of the walk admits more beauty, than
any other; for the varieties of ground are greater; the bank, and edging of
meadow, are more irregular; and the river more sinuous.

The path having conducted us along the river, through these pleasing
irregulariti^^ about two miles from the castle, climbs (...) higher grounds,
and returns through (...) and beautiful sheep walks, which lie on (...) sides,
and summit of the bank.

Through the whole of this walk, both at the top, and bottom, are many pleasant
views; but they are all of the more confined kind.

Many parts of this walk were wrought by the manual labor of the priest of the
family, which is a popish branch of the Howards. He belongs to an order, which
injoins it is members to work in the ground so many hours a day; laying them,
with admirable wisdom, under the wholesome necessity of acquiring health and
spirits. I am persuaded, that if a studious man were obliged to dig three or
four hours a day, he would study the better, during the remaining part of it.
We had been recommended to the civilities of this ecclesiastic (the family
being then in France,) and found him at work in the garden. He received us
politely; and discovered the manners of a gentleman, under the garb of a
day-labourer, without the least apology for his dress, and occupation. There is
something very pleasing in the simplicity and manliness of not being ashamed of
the necessary functions of any state, which we have made our option in life. --
This ecclesiastic succeeded Father Walsh, who has lately engaged the attention
of the public. -- I have dwelt the longer on this scene, as it is the most
admired one in Cumberland.

From Corby-castle to Warwick, which lies about two miles nearer Carlisle, on
the banks of the same river, the road is beautiful. Many admire the situation
of Warwick also. It seems to be a sweet, retired scene; but we had not time to
view it.

The antiquarian's eye is immediately caught here by the parish church; the
chancel of which, forming the segment of a circle, and being pierced with small
lancet-windows, shows at once, that it is of Norman origin. Tho every other
mark were obliterated, he will tell you, that this is evidence sufficient of
it is antiquity.



SECT. XXI.
HAVING seen as much of the river Eden, above Carlisle, as our time would
allow, we made our next excursion toward it is mouth, where Brugh-marsh
attracted our attention. In our way we had many pleasing river views.

Brugh-marsh lies at the extremity of the English border; running up as far as
Solwayfrith, which, in this part, divides England from Scotland. It is a vast
extended plain, flat as the surface of a quiet ocean. I do not remember that
land, ever gave me before so vast an idea of space. The idea of this kind,
which such scenes as Salisbury-Plain suggests, is much less pure. The
inequality of the ground there, sets bounds to the idea. It is the ocean in a
storm; in which the idea of extension is greatly broken, and intercepted by the
turbulence of the waves. Brugh-marsh indeed gives us the idea of solid water,
rather than of land, if we except only the color: -- Interminable meads,
And vast savannahs, where the wandering eye
Unfixt, is in a verdant ocean lost.


Brugh-marsh is one of those extended plains, (only more extensive, than such
plains commonly are) from which the sea, in a course of ages, has retired. It
is difficult to compute it is limits. It ranges many leagues, in every
direction, from a center (for space so diffuse assumes of course a circular
appearance) without a hedge, or even a bush, to intercept it is bounds; till it
softens into the azure mountains of the horizon. Nothing indeed, but mountains,
can circumscribe such a scene. All inferior boundaries of woods, and rising
grounds are lost. On the English side it is bounded by that circular chain, in
the heart of Cumberland, in which Skiddaw is preeminent. Nothing intermediate
appears. On the Scotch side it is course is interrupted, through the space of a
few leagues, by Solwayfrith; which spreads, when the tide is at ebb, into a
vast stretch of sand. The plain however is still preserved: and having passed
this sandy obstruction, it changes it is hue again into vivid green, and
stretches far and wide into the Scotch border, till it is progress at length is
stopped by the mountains of Galloway, and Niddsdale. This extension is as much
as the eye can well comprehend. Had the plain been boundless, like an Arabian
desert, I know not whether it would not have lost that idea of space, which so
vast a circumscription gives it.

The whole area of Brugh-marsh, (which from it is denomination we should suppose
to be swampy,) is every where perfectly firm; and the turf, soft, bright, and
pure. Scarce a weed rears it is head. Nothing appears of statelier growth, than
a mushroom, which spreads here in very luxuriant knots.

This vast plain is far from being a desert waste. Innumerable herds of cattle
pasture at large in it is rich verdure, and range, as in a state of nature.

But tho the primary idea, which this scene presents, arises purely from space,
and is therefore an idea rather grand than picturesque; yet is it not totally
incapable of picturesque embellishment. It is true, it wants almost every
ingredient of landscape; on the fore-ground, it wants objects to preserve the
keeping; and in the offskip, that profusion of little parts, which in a scene
of cultivation gives richness to distance. In treating therefore a subject of
this kind on canvas, recourse must be had to adventitious objects. Cattle come
most naturally to hand; which being stationed, in various groups, at different
distances, may serve both as a fore-ground to the landscape, and as a gage to
the perspective.

Brugh-marsh is farther remarkable for having been the scene of one of the
greatest catastrophes of the English history -- the death of Edward the I.
Here, after the third revolt of Scotland, that prince, drew together the most
puissant army, which England had ever seen. The Scots from their borders, saw
the whole plain whitened with tents: but they knew not how nearly their
deliverance approached. The greatest events generally arrive unlooked for. They
saw a delay; and afterward a confusion in the mighty host before them; but
they heard not, till three days after, that the soul, and spirit of the
enterprise was gone; and that their great adversary lay breathless in his camp.

Edward had been taken ill at Carlisle; where he had met his parliament. But
neither disease, nor age (for he was now near seventy) could repress his
ardour. Tho he could not mount his horse, he ordered himself to be carried in a
litter to the camp; where the troops received him with acclamations of joy. But
it was short-lived. The motion had irritated his disorder into a violent
dysentery; which immediately carried him off.

The English borderers long revered the memory of a prince, who had so often
chastised an enemy, they hated: and in gratitude reared a pillar to his name;
which still testifies the spot, on which he died. It stands rather on the edge
of the marsh, and bears this simple inscription.

MEMORIAE AETERNAE EDVARDI, REGIS ANGLIAE LONG CLARISSIMI, QUI, IN BELLI
APPARATU CONTRA SCOTOS OCCUPATUS, HIC IN CASTRIS OBIIT, 7 JULII A. D. 1307.

Among other places in the neighborhood of Carlisle, we made an excursion into
Gillsland, with an intention chiefly to see Naworth-castle, the vale and ruins
of the Abbey of Lanercost; and the ruins of Scaleby-castle.

As we leave Carlisle, along the great military road to Newcastle, the view of
the river Eden from Stanwix-bank, is very pleasing. The curve it describes; the
beautiful meadows it winds through; and the mountains, which close the scene,
make all together a very amusing combination of objects. Wood only is wanting.

On crossing the river Irthing, about seven miles from Carlisle, the country,
which was before unpleasing, becomes rich, and interesting. Here we enter the
barony of Gillsland, an extensive district, which consists, in this part, of a
great variety of hill, and dale. The hills are sandy, bleak, and unpleasant:
but the valleys, which are commonly of the contracted kind, are beautiful. They
are generally woody, and each of them watered by some little busy stream. --
From these valleys, or gills, (as the country people call them,) with which the
whole barony abounds, Campden supposes it to have taken the name of Gillsland.

On a delightful knoll, gently gliding into a sinuous gill, surrounded with
full-grown oak, and overlooking the vale of Lanercost, stands Naworth-castle.
The house, which consists of two large square towers, united by a main body, is
too regular to be beautiful, unless thrown into perspective. It was formerly
one of those fortified places, in which the nobility and gentry of the borders
were obliged to live, in those times of confusion, which preceded the union.
And indeed the whole internal contrivance of this castle appears calculated
either to keep an enemy out; or to elude his search, if he should happen to get
in. The idea of a comfortable dwelling has been totally excluded. The
state-rooms are few, and ordinary: but the little apartments, and hiding holes,
accessible only by dark passages, and blind stair-cases, are innumerable. Many
of the close recesses, which it contains, are probably at this time, unknown.
Nothing indeed can mark in stronger colors the fears, and jealousies, and
caution of those times, than the internal structure of one of these castles.

Naworth-castle was formerly the capital mansion of the barons of Gillsland;
who, at so great a distance from court, and seated in a country, at that time,
untamed by law, are said to have exercised very extraordinary powers. The Lord
William Howard, who is remembered by the name of bald Willy, is still the
object of invective for his acts of tyranny. His prisons are shown; and the
site of his gibbets; where, in the phrase of the country, he would head, and
hang (...) out judge, or jury. -- But it is probable, that his memory is
injured. He acted under a standing commission of oyer, and terminer from
Elizabeth; and was one of those bold spirits, which are necessary to repress
the violence of lawless times. Many acts of power undoubtedly he committed: but
his difficult situation compelled him. This part of the kingdom was most
harrassed by those troops of mischievous banditti; whom I have just had
occasion to mention. They were a numerous, and not an ill-regulated, body;
acting under leaders, whom a spirit of enterprise raised to power. These
miscreants, in times even of profoundest peace, called for all the wariness and
activity of the chiefs of the country. Sometimes they would plunder in large
bodies; and sometimes in little pilfering bands. When they were taken in the
fact; or, as it was called, by the bloody hand, they were put to instant death.
In other cases a jury was impannelled.

The active chief, who gave occasion to this digression, seems to have lived in
as much terror himself, as he spread among others. He had contrived a sort of
citadel in his own castle; a room, which is still shown, with an iron door,
where he constantly slept, and where his armor lies rusting to this day. From
him the earls of Carlisle are descended; and have been, in succession, the
proprietors of Naworth-castle.

As we left this old fortress, and descended the hill toward the ruins of the
abbey of Lanercost, which lie about two miles farther, the whole vale, in which
they are seated, opened before us. It is esteemed one of the sweetest scenes in
this country; and indeed we found it such. It Is area is about half a mile in
breadth, and two or three miles in length, consisting of one ample sweep. The
sides, which are gentle declivities, are covered thick with wood, in which
larger depredations have been lately made, than are consistent with picturesque
beauty. -- At the distant end of the vale, where the woods appear to unite, the
river Irthing enters; which is considerable enough, tho divided into two
channels, to be fully adequate to the scene. -- The banks of the river, and
indeed the whole area of the vale, are sprinkled with clumps, and single trees;
which have a good effect in breaking the lines, and regular continuity of the
side-screens; and in hiding, here and there, the course of the river; and
especially the bridges, which would otherwise be too bare and formal.

Near that extremity of the vale, which is opposite to Naworth-castle, lies the
abbey. At a distance it forms a good object, rising among the woods. As you
approach, it begins to raise a disappointment: and on the spot, it is but an
unpleasing ruin. The whole is a heavy, Saxon pile; compressed together without
any of that airy lightness, which accompanies the Gothic. Scarce one detached
fragment appears in any point of view. The tower is low, and without either
form, or ornament; and one of the great ailes is modernized into an awkward
parish church. The only beautiful part of the whole is the east end. It is
composed of four broken ailes; every wall of which consists of two tiers of
arches, affording, a very unusual appearance; and at the same time a very
amusing confusion, from the uncommon multiplication of so many arches, and
pillars. -- This part of the abbey seems to have been a separate chapel; or
perhaps an oratory belonging to the noble family of Dacre, which had once
possessions in these parts. Here lie the remains of several ancient chiefs of
that house; whose sepulchral honors are now almost entirely obliterated. Their
blazoned arms, and Gothic tombs, many of which are sumptuous, are so matted
with briars, and thistles, that even the foot of curiosity is kept at a
distance.

Except these remains of the abbey-church no other parts of this ancient
monastery are now left; except an old gateway; and a square building, patched
into a farm-house, which has no beauty.

In returning to Carlisle we passed through the valley of Cambeck, which
contains some pleasing scenery; and a very considerable Roman station, on a
high bank at Castle-steeds.

Rivers often present us with very moral analogies; their characters greatly
resembling those of men. The violent, the restless, the (...), the active, the
sluggish, the gentle, (...), and many other epithets, be^^^^ (...) to both. The
little stream, which divides the valley of Cambeck, suggested the analogy. It Is
whole course is marked with acts of violence. In every part you see heaps of
barren sand, and gravel, which in it is furious moods it has thrown up,
sometimes on one side, and sometimes on another; destroying every where the
little scenes of beauty, and plots of cultivation.

About three miles further stand the ruins of Scaleby-castle. This was another
of those fortified houses, which are so frequent in this country.

It stands, as castles rarely do, on a flat; and yet, tho it is site be
ill-adapted to any modes of defense, it has been a place of more than ordinary
strength. Rocks, knolls, and bold, projecting promontories, on which castles
usually stand, suggest various advantages of situation; and generally determine
the kind of structure. On a flat, the engineer was at liberty to choose his
own. Every part was alike open to assault.

He first drew two circular motes round the spot he designed to fortify: the
circumference of the outward circle was about a mile. The earth, thrown out of
these two motes, which were broad and deep, seems to have been heaped up at the
center, where there is a considerable rise. On this was built the castle, which
was entered by two draw-bridges; and defended by a high tower, and a very lofty
wall.

At present, one of the motes only remains. The other is filled up; but may
still be traced. The castle is more perfect, than such buildings commonly are.
The walls are very entire; and great part of the tower, which is square, is
still left. It preserved it is perfect form, till the civil wars of the last
century; when the castle, in too much confidence of it is strength, shut it is
gates against Cromwell, then marching into Scotland; who made it a monument of
his vengeance.

What share of picturesque genius Cromwell might have, I know not. Certain
however it is, that no man, since Henry the eighth, has contributed more to
adorn this country with picturesque ruins. The difference between these two
masters lay chiefly in the style of ruins, in which they composed. Henry
adorned his landscapes with the ruins of abbeys; Cromwell, with those of
castles. I have seen many pieces by this master, executed in a very grand
style; but seldom a finer monument of his masterly hand than this. He has rent
the tower, and demolished two of it is sides; the edges of the other two he has
shattered into broken lines. The chasm discovers the whole plan of the internal
structure -- the vestiges of the several stories -- the insertion of the
arches, which supported them -- the windows for speculation; and the
breast-work for assault.

The walls of this castle are uncommonly magnificent. They are not only of
great height, but of great thickness; and defended by a large bastion; which
appears to be of more modern workmanship. The greatest part of them is
chambered within, and wrought into secret recesses. A massy portcullis gate
leads to the ruins of what was once the habitable part of the castle, in which
a large vaulted hall is the most remarkable apartment; and under it, are dark,
and capacious dungeons.

The area within the mote, which consists of several acres, was originally
intended to support the cattle, which should be driven thither in times of
alarm. When the house was inhabited, (whose cheerful and better days are still
remembered,) this area was the garden; and all around, on the outside of the
mote stood noble trees, irregularly planted, the growth of a century. Beneath
the trees ran a walk round the castle; to which the situation naturally gave
that pleasing curve, which in modern days has been so much the object of art.
This walk might admit of great embellishment. On one hand, it commands the
ruins of the castle in every point of view; on the other, a country, which, tho
flat, is not unpleasing; consisting of extensive meadows, (which a little
planting would turn into beautiful lawns,) bounded by lofty mountains.

This venerable pile has now undergone a second ruin. The old oaks and elms,
the ancient natives of the scene, are felled. Weeds, and spiry grass have taken
possession of the courts, and obliterated the very plan of a garden: while the
house itself, (whose hospitable roof deserved a better fate,) is now a scene of
desolation. Two wretched families, the only inhabitants of the place, occupy
the two ends of the vaulted hall; the fragment of a tattered curtain, reaching
half was to the top, being the simple boundary of their respective limits. All
the rest is waste: no other part of the house is habitable. The chambers
unwindowed, and almost unroofed, fluttering with rags of ancient tapestry, are
the haunt of daws, and pigeons; which burst out in clouds of dust, when the
doors are opened: while the floors, yielding to the tread, make curiosity
dangerous. A few pictures, heir-looms of the wall, which have long deserved
oblivion, by I know not what fate, are the only appendages of this dissolving
pile, which have triumphed over the injuries of time.

Shakespeare's castle of Macbeth could not be more the haunt of swallows and
martins, than this. You see them every where about the ruins; either twittering
on broken coins; threading some fractured arch; or pursuing each other, in
screaming circles, round the walls of the castle In this old castle the author
of this tour was born, and spent his early youth; which must be his apology for
dwelling so long upon it. -- Since this description was written, it has, in
some degree, been repaired.
.

SECT. XXII.
OUR last expedition, in the neighborhood of Carlisle, was to see the
improvements of Mr. Graham of Netherby; and the scene of desolation, occasioned
by the late overflowing of Solway-moss.

Mr. Graham's improvements are not confined to a garden, or the space of a mile
or two around his house. The whole country is changed; and from a barren waste,
has assumed the face -- if not of beauty, at least of fertility.

The domain of Netherby lies on the very skirts of the English border. The
Romans considered it as a part of Caledonia; and shut it from the British pale.
In after ages the district around it assumed the name of the Debateable-land,
and was the great rendezvous of those crews of outlawed banditti, who, under
the denomination of Moss-troopers, plundered the country. We have already had
occasion to mention them. In this neighborhood were the strong holds of many
of their chiefs; particularly of Johnny Armstrong of famous memory; the moted
ruins of whose castle are still extant.

Among these people the arts of tillage were unknown. It was absurd to be at
the trouble of sowing land themselves, when they could so easily plunder the
lands of others.

Tho the union of the two kingdoms put an end to these ravages on the borders;
yet the manners of the inhabitants, in some respects, suffered little change.
Their native laziness, and inattention to all the arts of husbandry, remained.
They occupied large tracts of excellent land at easy rates: but having no idea
of producing yearly crops from the same soil by culture; they ploughed their
patches of ground alternately, leaving them to recover their fertility by
fallows. An indolent and scanty maintenance was all they wished; and this they
obtained from a small portion of their land, with a small portion of their
labor. Their lords in the mean time, never lived on the spot; and knew little
of the state either of the country, or of it is inhabitants.

Mr. Graham immediately set himself to alter this state of things. He built a
noble mansion for himself; which makes a grand appearance, rising on the ruins
of a Roman station. Without the presence of the lord, he knew it was in vain to
expect reformation. He divided his lands into moderate farms; and built
commodious farm-houses. As his lands improved, he raised his rents: and his
tenants in proportion found it necessary to increase their labor. Thus he has
doubled his own income, and introduced a spirit of industry into the country.
These indolent inhabitants of the borders begin now to work like other
laborers; and notwithstanding they pay higher rents, live more comfortably:
for idleness can never be attended with the comforts of industry.

To bring about this great change, Mr. Graham thinks it necessary to rule his
subjects with a rod of iron. While he makes them laborers, he keeps them
slaves. -- Perhaps indeed the rough manners of the people in those parts, could
not easily be molded by the hand of tenderness.

The feudal idea of vassalage, which has long disappeared in all the internal
parts of England, remains here in great force; and throws a large share of
power into the hands of the landholder. Mr. Graham's estates, which are very
extensive, contain about six hundred tenants; all of whom, with their families,
lie in a manner at his mercy for their subsistence. Their time and labor he
commands, by their mode of tenure, whenever he pleases. Under the denomination
of boon-days, he expects, at any time, their personal service; and can, in a
few hours, muster the strength of five or six hundred men and horses.

Once he had occasion to call them together on military service. On a supposed
injury, I have heard since, that this injury has been proved to be a real one;
and that reparation has been made.
which, about two years ago, he had done the Scotch-borderers, by intercepting
the salmon in the Esk, a body of three hundred of these people marched down
upon him with an intention to destroy his works. He had intelligence of their
design, and issuing his precepts, mustered, in a few hours, above four hundred
men before his gates, armed as the exigence would allow: and if the Scotch, on
finding such superiority, had not retreated, Mr. Graham, who told us the story
himself, said he believed, that all the spirit and animosity of ancient times
would have revived on this occasion.

In a civil light he acts on as large a scale. His manor-courts are kept with
great strictness; in which his attorney, with a jury, sits regularly to try
causes; and the tenants are injoined, at the hazard of being turned out of
their farms, to bring into these courts every suit under the value of five
pounds. Thus he prevents much ill-blood among them, by bringing their disputes
to a speedy issue; and giving the quarrel no time to rankle. He saves them also
much expense: for a suit, which in the king's courts would at least cost five
or six pounds; may in his, be carried through all it is forms for eight-pence.
-- At Patterdale we found a nominal king. Here we found almost a king in
reality.

The works on the Esk, which gave so much offense to the Scotch-borderers,
deserve more notice. They consisted of a massy head thrown across the river,
constructed, at a great expense, of hewn stone. This mole was formed at right
angles with the bank; but the floods of the ensuing winter swept it away. It
was attempted a second time on the same plan; but was a second time destroyed.
Mr. Brindley was then sent for, whose works near Manchester had given him so
high a reputation. He changed the plan; and instead of carrying the mole in a
direct line across the river, formed it in a curve, arching against the stream:
so that it resists the current, as a bridge does the incumbent weight. This
work has stood several very great floods, and seems sufficiently firm Since
this was written, I am informed, Mr. Brindley's work was destroyed from an
unsuspected quarter, when the water was low. On the breaking of a frost, a
great quantity of ice coming down the river, and collecting at this stoppage,
some of it edged under the looser parts of the foundation, and being pressed on
with a continued accession of strength, the whole blew up.
. From the curvature of it is form the fall of the water appears also to more
advantage. It now forms a semi-circular cove, which has a fine effect.

The chief end which this work had in view, was a fishery. At this place
salmon-coops are placed; where all the fish, which enter the Esk, are taken.
But besides this, and other purposes of utility, it adds great beauty to the
neighborhood. The Esk, which was before in comparison, a shallow stream,
gliding unseen beneath it is banks, is now a noble piece of water, raised to a
level with them, and seen to great advantage from the house, and every part of
the ground.

It was in this part of the country where that dreadful inundation, from the
overflowing of Solway-moss, destroyed lately so large a district. To see the
effects of this, was the object of our next expedition.

Solway-moss is a flat area, about seven miles in circumference. The substance
of it is a gross fluid, composed of mud, and the putrid fibers of heath,
diluted by internal springs, which arise in every part. The surface is a dry
crust, covered with moss, and rushes; offering a fair appearance over an
unsound bottom -- shaking under the least pressure. Cattle by instinct know,
and avoid it. Where rushes grow, the bottom is soundest. The adventrous
passenger therefore, who sometimes, in dry seasons, traverses this perilous
waste to save a few miles, picks his cautious way over the rushy tussocks, as
they appear before him. If his foot slip, or if he venture to desert this mark
of security, it is possible he may never more be heard of.

At the battle of Solway, in the time of Henry VIII, Oliver Sinclair was
imprudently set over the Scotch army, which had no confidence in him. A total
rout ensued; when an unfortunate troop of horse, driven by their fears, plunged
into this morass, which instantly closed upon them. The tale, which was
traditional; was generally believed; but is now authenticated. A man and horse
in complete armor were lately found by the peat-diggers, in the place, where
it was always supposed the affair had happened; and are preserved at the house
of a Scotch baronet, if I mistake not, of the name of Maxwell; as we were
informed by a gentleman Joseph Dacre, Esquire of Kirklinton, near Longtown.
of the borders, who assured us he had seen them himself. The skeleton of each
was well preserved; and the different parts of the armor easily distinguished.

Solway-moss is bounded on the south by a cultivated plain, which declines
gently, through the space of a mile, to the river Esk. This plain is rather
lower than the moss itself, being separated from it by a breastwork formed by
digging peat, which makes an irregular, tho perpendicular, line of low, black
boundary.

It was the bursting of the moss through this peat breastwork, over the plain
between it and the Esk, which occasioned that dreadful ruin, the effects of
which we came hither to explore. -- The more remarkable circumstances, relating
to this calamitous event, as we had them on the best authority, were these.

On the 16th of November, 1771, in a dark tempestuous night, the inhabitants of
the plain were alarmed with a dreadful crash, which they could in no way
account for. Many of them were then abroad in the fields, watching their
cattle; lest the Esk, which was rising violently in the storm, should carry
them off. None of those miserable people could conceive the noise they heard to
proceed from any cause, but the overflowing of the river in some shape, tho to
them unaccountable. Such indeed, as lived nearer the source of the eruption,
were sensible, that the noise came in a different direction; but were equally
at a loss for the cause.

In the mean time the enormous mass of fluid substance, which had burst from
the moss, moved slowly on, spreading itself more and more, as it got possession
of the plain. Some of the inhabitants, through the terror of the night, could
plainly discover it advancing, like a moving hill. This was in fact the case;
for the gush of mud carried before it, through the first two or three hundred
yards of it is course, a part of the breastwork; which, tho low, was yet several
feet in perpendicular height. But it soon deposited this solid mass; and became
a heavy fluid. One house after another, it spread round -- filled -- and
crushed into ruin; just giving time to the terrified inhabitants to escape.
Scarce any thing was saved; except their lives: nothing of their furniture: few
of their cattle. Some people were even surprised in their beds, and had the
additional distress of flying naked from the ruin.

The morning-light explained the cause of this amazing scene of terror; and
showed the calamity in it is full extent: and yet, among all the conjectures of
that dreadful night, the mischief which really happened, had never been
supposed. Who could have imagined, that a breastwork, which had stood for ages,
should at length give way? or that those subterraneous floods, which had been
bedded in darkness, since the memory of man, should ever burst from their black
abode?

This dreadful inundation, tho the first shock of it was the most tremendous,
continued still spreading for many weeks, till it covered the whole plain -- an
area of five hundred acres; and, like molten metal poured into a mould, filled
all the hollows of it, lying in some parts thirty or forty feet deep, reducing
the whole to one level surface. The overplus found it is way into the Esk; where
it is quantity was such, as to annoy the fish; no salmon, during that season,
venturing into the river. We were assured also, that many lumps of earth, which
had floated out at sea, were taken up, some months after, at the isle of Man.

As we descended from the higher grounds to take a nearer view of this scene of
horror, it exhibited a very grand appearance. The whole plain was covered by a
thick smoke, occasioned by a smothering fire set to it in various parts, with a
view to consume it; and brought before us that simple, and sublime idea of the
smoke of a country going up like the smoke of a furnace.

When we came to the plain on that side, which is next the Esk, it had so
forbidding an aspect, as far as we could discover through the smoke, that we
almost despaired of crossing to the chasm, as we had intended. On horseback it
was impossible; and when we had alighted, we stood hesitating on the brink,
whether it were prudent, even on foot, to attempt so dangerous a march.

While we remained in this situation, we observed several groups of peasants
working in the ruins: and beckoning to the nearest, one of the group came
forward. He was an elderly man, strengthening his steps with a long measuring
wand. His features, and gait, tho hard and clownish, were marked with an air of
vulgar consequence. As he approached, one of our company, who knew him,
accosted him by the name of Wilson; and we found he was the person who
conducted the works which were set on foot to clear the soil of this melancholy
encumbrance.

On informing him of our difficulties, and asking, whether we might venture
across the plain; he bad us, like Caesar, with an air of assurance, follow him,
and fear nothing. From one tussock to another we followed, sometimes stepping
-- sometimes leaping -- and sometimes hesitating, whether to go on, or to
return. In very difficult places, our guide condescended to lay us a plank. In
the midst of our perplexity, one of our company, straying a step from the right
path, fell in; but the mud being shallow in that part, he sank only to the
knees. Mr. Wilson helped him out; but reprimanded his carelessness. The reproof
and the example having a good effect upon us all, we followed our guide, like
pack-horses in a string, and at length completed our undertaking.

When we got to the gulf, from whence all this mischief had issued, the
spectacle was hideous. The surface of the moss itself had suffered little
change. Near the chasm it appeared indented, through a space of several yards:
but not in any degree, as one would have expected from so vast a discharge. The
mouth of the chasm was heaped round by monstrous piles of ruin, formed by the
broken breastwork, and shell of the moss, on the first great burst; and a
black, mossy tincture continued still to issue from it. If this continue to
run, as it probably will, it may be a fortunate circumstance; and save the
country from any farther mischief, by draining this bloated mass through a
perpetual discharge.

As we stood on the higher ground, and got to windward of the smoke, we
obtained a clear idea of the plain, and of the course of the irruption over it.
Many fragments of a very large size, which had been carried away in the first
full stream of the discharge, appeared thrown to a considerable distance. These
were what made that moving bulwark, which some of the inhabitants had seen in
the night. Fragments of a smaller size, (and yet many of these considerable)
appeared scattered over the plain, as the heavy torrent was able to carry them.
The interstices between the fragments, which had been filled with fluid moss,
were now baked by the heat of the sun, and crusted over like the great surface
of the moss itself. Here and there, along this surface, the broken rafters of a
house, or the top of a blasted tree were seen; and made an odd appearance,
rising as it were, out of the ground. But through the whole waste, there was
not the least sign left of any culture; tho this plain had once been the pride
of the country. Lands, which in the evening would have let for twenty shillings
an acre, by the morning-light were not worth sixpence.

On this well cultivated plain twenty-eight families had their dwellings, and
little farms; every one of which, except perhaps a few, who lived near the
skirts of it, had the world totally to begin again. -- Mr. Graham, agreeably to
the prudential maxims he has ever observed, affords them little assistance
himself; and discourages the bounty of others. -- He seems to wish his
dominions should thrive by industry alone; and would have his subjects depend
on this great virtue for the supply of every want, and the reparation of every
loss. If the maxim, in so full an extent, be good; it requires at least, a
great hardiness of resolution to carry it into practice.

Whether the immense work of clearing this plain can ever totally be effected,
is a doubt with many. It is attempted however with great spirit, through the
united force of the two powerful elements of fire and water.

All the skirts, and other parts of it which are drier than the rest, are
reduced by fire; which occasioned the great smoke from the plain, as we
descended into it; and which, at that distance, appeared to arise from the
whole area.

But this method is not found very effectual; as it reaches only a little below
the surface. Much more is expected from the application of water; which is the
part our guide Mr. Wilson has undertaken. -- How well qualified he is for the
undertaking, and in what manner he proposes to accomplish it, may be conceived
from the following story.

Mr. Graham's house stands on an eminence, with higher grounds above it. A
little on one side of the front, stood a knoll, which made a disagreeable
appearance before his windows. -- Being desirous therefore of removing it, he
sent to Newcastle for a person accustomed to works of this kind. The undertaker
came, surveyed the ground, and estimated the expense at thirteen hundred pounds.

While the affair was in agitation, Mr. Graham heard, that Wilson had said, the
earth might be removed at a much easier rate. He was examined on the subject;
and his answers appeared so rational, that he was set to work. He had already
surveyed the higher grounds, where he first collected all the springs he found,
into two large reservoirs; from which he cut a precipitate channel, pointed at
an abrupt corner of the knoll. He cut also a channel of communication between
his two reservoirs. These being both filled, he opened his sluices, and let out
such a continued torrent of water, (the upper pool feeding the lower) that he
very soon carried away the corner of the knoll, against which he had pointed
his artillery. He then charged again, and levelled against another part with
equal success. In short, by a few efforts of this kind, he carried away the
whole hill; and told Mr. Graham, with an air of triumph, that, if he pleased,
he would carry away his house next. The work was completed in a few days; and
Mr. Graham himself informed us, that the whole expense did not amount to twenty
pounds.

This man, with so much genius about him, lives in the lowest style of life;
and works for the lowest wages. When we regretted, that he was paid so
inadequately to his worth, we were assured, as his appearance indeed testified,
that he had no higher idea of happiness, than to get drunk after his day's
labor: and that better wages would only destroy him sooner.

I have since heard, that one hundred and fifty acres of the plain are now
cleared by the ingenuity of this man; and that there is reason to believe, he
will in time clear a considerable part of it. From the reservoirs formed by a
little stream at the highest part of the overflowed ground, he cut channels in
various directions to the Esk: and when the water was let off, he placed
numbers of men by the side of the stream, who rolled into it large masses of
mossy earth, which were hardened by the sun.

SECT. XXIII.
HAVING seen such parts of the country on the borders of England, as were most
curious; we set out on our return. But, instead of taking the Keswick-road, we
proposed to vary our rout, by the mountains of Brugh See page 168, Vol. I.
.

At Penrith the road divides. We turned to the left, toward Appelby; and soon
fell into a rich, and beautiful vale, in which the river Lowther, gliding under
lofty woody banks, bore us company a considerable way.

When we crossed that river, the situation of Brougham-castle, one of the seats
of the celebrated countess of Pembroke, attracted our notice. It had not
escaped the notice of the Romans; who fixed here a station to command the
country. It appears as great, at this time, in a picturesque light, as it did
formerly in a military one. But we had not time to ride up to it; contenting
ourselves with viewing it only as the ornament of a second distance.

At Clifton the road opens again into a wild scene. Here we examined the spot,
where, in the year 1745, the rebels entering an enclosed country, made a stand;
and lined the hedges to retard the duke of Cumberland's pursuit. Sir Joseph
York, in his road from Ireland, had been there, we found, a few days before. He
had accompanied the duke in his expedition against the rebels; and stopped a
little at Clifton to review the scene. He left the people, we were informed,
much pleased with his remembering a gallant action, which had been achieved,
about that time, by a heroine of the country, who had carried a letter across
the fire of the rebels, when no other messenger could be obtained.

From Clifton, we turned a little aside to see Lowther-hall, the seat of lord
Londsdale. It is only a temporary house, the old mansion having been burnt in
the time of the late lord. But materials are now collecting for a grand
structure. It is situated in an extensive park, which contains a great variety
of beautiful scenery.

From Lowther-hall, we pursued our rout to Appelby, keeping on our left that
vast tract of barren country, called Wingfield-forest.

The situation of Appelby-castle, which belongs to the earl of Thanet, is
magnificent. It stands on a rocky eminence, falling precipitately into the
river Eden; which half incircles it. The banks of the river, and the sides of
the precipice, are finely hung with wood. The castle is still in good repair;
and is a noble pile. But, in a picturesque light, it loses half it is beauty,
from it is being broken into two parts. A smaller break from a grand pile
removes heaviness; and is a source of beauty. We have seen the principle
exemplified in mountains, and other objects See page 55, Vol. II.
. But here the whole is divided into two parts, of such equal dimensions, that
each aspires to pre-eminence. Each therefore becomes a separate whole: and both
together distract the eye. The detached part should always observe a due
inferiority.

We had not time to take a view from the castle; which must command a very
beautiful distance, over the woody vale of Eden, and the mountains, which arise
beyond it.

Appelby-castle was the Apallaba of the Romans; and preserves it is origin
clearer in it is etymology, than the generality of Roman stations.

This castle was formerly the favorite mansion of Ann, countess of Pembroke,
Dorset, and Montgomery. As this very extraordinary lady is still the object of
great veneration in these parts; as her history is curious, and less known than
it ought to be; and as it is so intimately connected with all this country; the
reader will excuse the following digression.

She was the daughter of George Clifford, earl of Cumberland; one of the heroes
of the gallant age of Elizabeth. This noble person distinguished himself
chiefly by his naval expeditions; on which he was suffered, in those frugal
times, to expend a great portion of his patrimony. In return for his
patriotism, he was appointed by his royal mistress, her champion in all tilts
and tournaments; where the grace, and dignity of his behavior, and his skill
and address in arms, were equally admired. The rich armor he wore, on these
occasions, is still shown in this castle.

Lady Ann Clifford was only ten years of age, when her father died. But her
education was conducted by two excellent women -- her mother, a daughter of the
earl of Bedford -- and afterward by her aunt the countess of Warwick.

In her early youth she married lord Buckhurst, earl of Dorset; with whom
during a few years she lived very happily. But he soon leaving her a widow; she
married, six years after, Philip earl of Pembroke, and Montgomery.

This nobleman, through the favor of James I, as a reward for his great skill
in the arts of hunting, and hawking, possessed a prodigious estate; not less,
at that time, than eighteen thousand pounds a year. His manner of living was
sumptuous beyond example; and his apparatus for field-sports magnificent beyond
belief. His dog-kennels were superb; and his stables vied with palaces. But his
falconry was his chief pride; which he had furnished, at a wonderful expense,
with birds of game; and proper persons to manage, train, and exercise them.

Here ends the history of Philip earl of Pembroke -- unless we add, that in
private life, he was vicious, ignorant, and unlettered in a surprising degree;
and that his public character was stained with ingratitude, and tergiversation,
by the noble historian of those unfortunate times.

With this worthless man his unhappy lady lived near twenty years. During the
latter part of his life indeed he became so dissolute, that she was obliged to
leave him.

About the time of his death she found herself possessed of a very ample
fortune. For, it seems, her immediate succession to the large estates of her
ancestors in the north, had been disputed by an uncle, who inherited the title:
and an award had been given against her by James I, to which indeed she would
never submit. The uncle, and his son however both dying, the great estates of
the Cliffords, tho considerably impaired by her father's generosity, came to
her without any farther molestation. She had besides two great jointures. That
which she received from her first husband, was between three, and four
thousand, a year; and that from the earl of Pembroke was nearly equal to it.

On the event of the earl of Pembroke's death, she immediately laid out the
whole plan of her future life; determining to retire into the north; and spend
it on her own estate.

In ancient times the earls of Cumberland possessed five noble castles in the
three counties of Yorkshire, Westmoreland, and Cumberland -- Skipton --
Pendragon -- Appelby -- Brougham -- and Brugh. The tower of Bardon also was
another fortified seat, where they sometimes resided. But all these castles had
suffered in the late civil wars; and were reduced, more or less, to a state of
great decay.

The countess of Pembroke however determined, on her coming into the north, to
repair and furnish them all. This great work she completed during the years
1657, and 1658; and placed over the gate of each castle the following
inscription:

THIS CASTLE WAS REPAIRED BY THE LADY ANN CLIFFORD, COUNTESS DOWAGER OF
PEMBROKE, etc. IN THE YEAR -- AFTER THE MAIN PART OF IT HAD LAIN RUINOUS EVER
SINCE 1648, WHEN IT WAS DEMOLISHED, ALMOST TO THE GROUND BY THE PARLIAMENT THEN
SITTING AT WESTMINSTER, BECAUSE IT HAD BEEN A GARRISON IN THE CIVIL WARS. IS.
LVIII. 12. LAUS DEO!

Oliver Cromwell was, at this time, at the head of affairs; whose hypocrisy and
villainy the countess of Pembroke detested: and as she had too much spirit to
conceal her sentiments, it is probable, the protector was enough informed, how
little she esteemed him. Her friends therefore, knowing the jealousy of his
temper, advised her not to be so profuse in building; as they were well assured
that as soon as she had built her castles, he would order them to be destroyed.
But she answered with great spirit, "Let him destroy them if he will: but he
shall surely find, that as often as he destroys them, I will rebuild them,
while he leaves me a shilling in my pocket."

She showed her contempt for Cromwell, and her own high spirit, on another
occasion. Her uncle had left her affairs so involved, that she found herself
under a necessity of recovering some of her rights by a tedious lawsuit. The
affair being represented to Cromwell by the opposite party, he offered his
mediation. But she answered loftily, she would never accept it, while there was
any law to be found in England. "What! said she, does he imagine, that I, who
refused to submit to king James, will submit to him?"

But, notwithstanding her spirit, neither her castles, nor her estates were
injured. Some ascribed this lenity to Cromwell's reverence of her virtue; which
is very improbable: others, to her numerous friends, with whom the protector
wished to keep fair; which, it is most likely, was the truth.

Her dislike to Cromwell was not founded on party; but on principle. She had
the same dislike to Charles, when she became acquainted with the spirit of his
government. On being pressed by her friends, sometime after the restoration, to
go to court; "By no means, said she; unless I may be allowed to wear blinkers
Blinkers are those blinds affixed to the bridles of coach-horses, which prevent
their seeing what they ought not to see.
."

Besides her castles, she found likewise in ruins, almost all the churches,
belonging to the several villages on her estates. The spire of one had been
beaten down: another had been turned into a magazine: a third into a hospital.
Seven of them were in this ruinous condition: each of which she either built
from the ground, or repaired; furnishing them all with decent pews; that her
tenants, in every part of her estates, might have churches in their
neighborhood.

Her several buildings, and repairs, at her first coming into the north, did
not cost her less, than forty thousand pounds.

At each of her castles she resided a part of every year; regularly moving from
one to the other; thus over-looking the whole of her vast estates; and blessing
the country, wherever she went. For she was every where the common patroness of
all, who were distressed. Her heart was as large, as her ability: and misery of
every kind, that could get it is story fairly represented to her, was sure of
relief.

Nor was she content with occasional acts of charity; but made many of her
charitable intentions permanent by endowments. The greatest of these works were
two hospitals, which she founded.

One little pleasing monument of this kind stands by the side of the road,
between Penrith and Appelby. It is a monument indeed rather of her filial
piety, than of her charity. On this spot, in her early youth, she had parted
with her beloved mother; whom she never afterward saw. She always remembered
this parting-scene with the tenderest feelings: and, when she came into
Westmoreland, among her other buildings, she raised a pillar to record it; with
a stone-table at it is base. The pillar, which is still known in the country by
the name of Countess-pillar, is decorated with her arms; a sundial, for the
benefit or travelers; and the following inscription.

THIS PILLAR WAS ERECTED IN THE YEAR 1656, BY ANN COUNTESS DOWAGER OF PEMBROKE,
etc. FOR A MEMORIAL OF HER LAST PARTING, IN THIS PLACE, WITH HER GOOD AND PIOUS
MOTHER, MARGARET, COUNTESS DOWAGER OF CUMBERLAND, ON THE 2d OF APRIL 1616: IN
MEMORY WHEREOF SHE HAS LEFT AN ANNUITY OF L.4. TO BE DISTRIBUTED TO THE POOR
OF THE PARISH OF BROUGHAM, EVERY 2d DAY OF APRIL FOR EVER, UPON THE STONE-TABLE
PLACED HARD BY. LAUS DEO! Her very household was a noble charity. Her servants
were generally the children of her tenants; and were sure of a provision, if
they behaved well. Her women-servants had always little portions given them, to
begin the world with, if they married to please her.

The calamities of the times also, during Cromwell's government, particularly
the distressed situation of several ejected ministers of the church, furnished
her with ample opportunities of exerting her generosity. Among others, she was
particularly kind to King, afterward bishop of Chichester; and Duppa, and
Morley, both afterward bishops of Winchester. To each of these she allowed
40L. a year; and when, in their distresses abroad, they informed her, that a
sum of money would be of more service to them, than the annuities she was
pleased to give them; she remitted a thousand pounds to be divided among them.

She was a lady of uncommon prudence in the management of her affairs. Bishop
Rainbow sums up her character on this head, in two words, by calling her a
perfect mistress of forecast, and aftercast.

For the numberless acts of bounty, that flowed from her she depended on two
things -- her exactness in keeping accounts; and her great economy.

With regard to the former, in whatever castle she resided, an office was kept,
in which all her receipts, and disbursements were entered with commercial
punctuality. Of her private charities, she kept an account herself: but was so
exact, that, at any time by comparing it with her public accounts, she had, at
once, a complete view of the situation of her affairs.

Her economy was equal to her exactness. Nothing was spent in vanity. Nothing
was trifled away. All her family-expences were under the article of
necessaries: and the very form of regularity, in which they constantly ran,
made one year a check upon another.

The spirit, which she showed in defending her rights, may perhaps be mentioned
also among her plans of economy. It was a spirit not often exerted; but when it
was raised, it always carried her vigorously to the end of the question; and,
no doubt, secured her from many contentions, which might otherwise have
disturbed her, in the midst of so complex a property; and in those dubious
days, when legal rights were so much unhinged. I have mentioned her spirit, in
one suit, with regard to an affair of consequence. We have an account of
another of less importance.

It was a custom, on all her estates, for each tenant to pay, besides his rent,
an annual boon-hen, as it was called. This had ever been acknowledged a just
claim; and is, I believe, to this day, paid on many of the great estates in the
north; being generally considered as a steward's perquisite.

It happened, that a rich clothier from Halifax, one Murgatroyd, having taken a
tenement near Skipton, was called upon by the steward of the castle for his
boon-hen. On his refusal to pay it, the countess ordered a suit to be commenced
against him. He was obstinate; and she determined; so it was carried into
length. At last she recovered her hen; but at the expense of 200L. -- It is
said, that after the affair was decided, she invited Mr. Murgatroyd to dinner;
and drawing the hen to her, which was served up as the first dish, "Come, said
she, Mr. Murgatroyd, let us now be good friends: Since you allow the hen to be
dressed at my table, we'll divide it between us."

She had a mind improved, and cultivated in many parts of learning. Dr. Donn,
in his humourous manner, used to say, she knew how to converse of every thing;
from predestination to slea-silk A kind of raw silk used, at that time, in
embroidery.
. But history seems to have been her chief amusement; to the study of which she
was probably first led, by examining the history of her own ancestors. This
indeed comprehended, in a great degree, the history of England from the times
of the conquest: for there were few scenes of public life, in which her
progenitors, the Veteriponts and the Cliffords, an active race of men, were not
deeply engaged.

She seems to have entertained a design of collecting materials for a history
of these two potent northern families. At a great expense she employed learned
men to make collections, for this purpose, from the records in the tower; the
rolls; and other depositaries of public papers; which being all fairly
transcribed, filled three large volumes. This work, which contains a great
variety of original characters, exerting themselves on very important
occasions, is still among the family-records at Appelby-castle.

While she was thus careful to preserve the honor of her ancestors; she
instituted a very severe historical restraint, if I may so call it, on herself.
In a large folio volume, which made a part of her equipage, when she traveled
from one castle to another, she ordered an entry to be made, under her own
inspection, of the transactions of every day. To what particulars this journal
extended, I have not learned. But if it was kept, as it probably was, by a
confidential secretary, it might have included very minute particulars. What an
interesting collection of valuable anecdotes might be furnished from the
incidents of such a life! What a satyr would it be on the vanity, the
dissipation, and frivolous employments of the generality of the great! This
work, I am informed, is still extant; and in the hands of the earl of Thanet.

But the most conspicuous part of the character of this illustrious lady, was
her piety, and great attachment to religion. No doubt the amiable instructors
of her youth had given her disposition, which was naturally serious, a proper
direction: but perhaps the best school, in which she had learned to think
justly, was, that school of affliction, the house of her second husband, the
earl of Pembroke; whose dissipated, abandoned life taught her, more than any
thing else, the vanity of all earthly things, unless used for the purposes they
were given.

Few divines were better versed in scripture, than she was. She could quote it
pertinently on all occasions; and never failed to read a portion of it every
day; or have it read to her, in the latter part of her life.

The new testament was her principal study. Next to it she was particularly
fond of the psalms of David; and had those appointed for the day, read
regularly to her.

She had been bred up in the church of England from her youth; and tho she
could not, in the fanatical times of the usurpation, attend any public service;
yet in the worst of those times she never failed to hear the church service in
her own private chapels, which she had been careful to fit up in all her
castles. Many menaces of sequestrations she received from the ruling powers, if
she persisted in that practice. But she showed the same spirit on this
occasion, which she had before shown on many others. She continued her
practice; and left them to do as they pleased. No attempts however were made
against her.

She had no idea of pomp, and grandeur. With regard to herself, her mode of
living was rather parsimonious. Amidst all the objects of her generosity,
herself was the only person forgotten. In her diet she was even abstemious; and
would sometimes pleasantly boast, that she had scarce ever tasted wine, or
physic; during her whole life. Of the elegance of dress she had never been
fond; but in her latter life she laid it entirely aside; wearing nothing, for
many years, but a close habit of plain, black serge; which occasioned many
pleasant mistakes between her, and her attendants.

Her retinue was merely for use, not parade. Besides her common domestics, she
had always two ladies of education, who lived with her. Many hours she spent
alone: at other times, they read to her, and were her companions.

Her chief expense, as far as concerned herself, was in books. Her library was
stored with all the best writers in the English language. She knew no other.

Such was the life of this excellent lady; equally suited to any station, in
which God had pleased to place her. It was a life of no more indulgence, than
the most abridged circumstances would have allowed. Her ability in doing good,
was that only, in which she exceeded others.

She lived twenty-six years, after the death of her second husband: Providence
lengthening out her life, as a blessing to the country, beyond her eightieth
year. The 23d of March 1675 was the day of her dissolution -- one of the most
melancholy days the northern counties ever experienced.

In her ended the noble family of the Cliffords. Her daughter Margaret, by the
earl of Dorset (her sole surviving heiress) marrying the earl of Thanet,
carried the Clifford estates into the Tufton family The most material part of
this little history is taken from a MS life of Mr. Sedgwick, her secretary,
written by himself. In this work Mr. Sedgwick occasionally inserts a few
circumstances relating to his lady. -- It is a pity he had not given her the
better share. His MS is still extant in Appelby-castle.
.

SECT. XXIV.
FROM Appelby-castle we soon approach the barrier-mountains: but we approach
them, in the usual order of nature, by regular progress. The ground is first
high, before it becomes mountainous; and tillage appears in scanty plots,
before cultivation ceases.

A little to the north of Brugh, the ground on the left, makes a singular
appearance. A hill, on which a fair is annually held, forms an exact,
semi-circular unequal. Scarce a knoll, or bush break the regularity of the line.
Beyond this, but without any intervening ground, rises a range of distant
mountains. These wore a light purple hue, when we saw them -- the circular
hill, a deep green. Perhaps no disposition of ground was ever more totally
unpicturesque: and yet even this (such is the force of contrast) if it be only
bisected, and in a small degree adorned, is not wholly disagreeable.

At the commencement of the mountains stand the town, and castle of Brugh, not
unpleasantly seated. The castle which consists, like that at Appelby, of two
parts, seems to have been a very strong place. Since the time of it is last
noble inhabitant, the countess of Pembroke, it has been falling fast into ruin;
but we found it no easy matter, even yet, to scale the outworks of it is
earthen mounds: so strong a fortress has it once been. -- Some parts of it,
especially a shattered round tower, are very picturesque.

We had not the opportunity of seeing this castle in so advantageous a light,
as had favored us, when we saw the castle of Penrith. We saw them both in the
evening; but here we had no bright beam of sunset to illumine the ruins. And
yet the effect was grand. The castle and landscape around, were in deep shadow;
under the influence of a retiring storm, which had hung a settled gloom on all
the upper regions of the sky. The sun was invisible; but had fired the whole
western horizon with a deep red. We viewed the castle from the east; and had
therefore the ruddy part of the hemisphere as a back-ground to the gray tints,
and strong shadows of the towers, and battlements, which intervened. These,
with the deep solemnity of the gloom, were a sufficient balance to the glowing
red of the horizon, which would otherwise have been too glaring. But the whole
was in perfect harmony; and had a fine effect. -- Indeed nature's coloring is
rarely without harmony. If the lights be glowing, the shades are proportionably
deep: on the contrary, if the lights decay, the shadows decay with them; and as
light is also the source of color, the landscape wears always one uniform hue.
Either the sober coloring prevails, or one vivid tint supports another. In
composition, See the idea of improving natural composition, explained, p. 119,
etc. Vol. I.
we have found, that nature may be improved; but in the beauty, and proportion
of her tints, in the harmony of her coloring, she is an undeviating model of
perfection.

The square tower, which made the grand part of the castle, conveyed, as we
looked into it, a very horrid idea. Most of these old structures have suffered
great external dilapidations. But here the shell was entire; and all the
internal parts were gone -- the roof, the stories, and even the vault over the
dungeon. The whole was a mere excavation. I know not, that I was ever struck
with a more horrid idea of the kind. The eye, confined within the walls of a
vast tower, open to the sky above, which loured with unusual blackness, looked
down with hideous contrast, deep into a dungeon below.

The whole road, over the mountains of Stainmore, from Brugh-castle to
Bowes-castle, which is about thirteen miles, is the most unpleasant that can be
conceived; and the more so, as it reminded us of the sublime scenes, which we
had passed, in another part of this chain, between Ambleside and Keswick. In
the mountains of Stainmore, the parts are neither sufficiently ample to be
grand; nor rich and varied, to be beautiful. We did not even find what we have
elsewhere called a mere scene of mountains See page 160, Vol. I.
. In such a scene, the parts are beautiful, tho there is no whole; but here, in
a picturesque view, there is neither whole nor parts.

Nothing remains of Bowes-castle, but one heavy, square tower, much defaced,
and ruined; tho the stone-work appears to have been excellent. This fortress
seems originally to have been intended as a defense at the southern end of the
mountains; as Brugh-castle was at the northern.

From the position of these castles, it seems probable, that formerly the road
over the mountains of Stainmore was the only road into Cumberland, that was
passable, and of course necessary to be defended. The Keswick mountains, till
lately, were imp^rvious; and the mountains of Shap are much fuller of defiles
and dangerous passes, than those of Stainmore, which are the most level, and
the most penetrable part of this vast chain.

As we leave the mountains, a very rich and extensive view opens before us into
Yorkshire. We had not seen such a view for many days. For tho in Cumberland, we
had many very extensive prospects, yet they extended chiefly over barren
country.

At Grata we found much devastation from the late high floods. The bridge was
beaten down; and large fragments of it carried away, through the violence of
the stream, many hundred yards. With these, and huge stones torn from the
adjoining cliffs, the bed of the river was choked. Nothing could have a more
ruinous appearance. A broken bridge impresses one of the strongest emblems of
desolation, from the idea of cutting off all intercourse among men.

Here Sir Thomas Robinson has a house, It is now Mr. Morritt's.
situated in a pleasant park; one side of which is bounded by the river.

The road from Grata-bridge leads through a rich country, but open, and
unpleasing; unless in distance.

The middle of Gatherly-moor commands a most extensive view in every direction.
Hambledon-hills bound the prospect in front. On the right stretches an extent
of country toward Richmond. A distance still more remote opens, on the left,
into the bishopric of Durham; and behind rise the mountains of Westmoreland, as
a back-ground to all the wild scenes we had left.

Few places afford a situation, where a painter may see, at once, so many modes
of distance: or where he may better compare, at one glance, their several
beauties and imperfections.

The wild, unwooded waste, when thrown into distance, has neither variety, nor
richness. It is one uniform, dark, and dreary spread: unless it be happily
enlightened; or consist of hilly ground broken into large parts.

The intermixture of tracts of woodland, adds a pleasing variety to distance;
and is adapted to receive the sweetest effects of light.

But the cultivated country forms the most amusing distance. See page 7, Vol. I.
Meadows, cornfieldsd, hedge-rows, spires, towns, and villages, tho lost as
single objects, are all melted together into the richest mass of variegated
surface; over which the eye ranges with delight; and following the flitting
gleams of sunshine, catches a thousand dubious objects, as they arise; and
creates as many more, which do not really exist. But such a country will not
bear a nearer approach; especially if it be over-built, which is the case of
most of the rich distances about London: the parts assume too much consequence,
and the whole becomes a scene of confusion.

When the death of Elizabeth called James to the crown of England, he took this
road from Scotland; and on Gatherly-moor, we are told, he stopped to take a
view around him; with which he is said to have been greatly delighted. The
spot, where this royal survey was taken, is still shown -- the summit of a
Roman station. -- It is not likely, that picturesque thoughts engaged his
princely attention at that time. It is rather probable, that he began here to
measure the length of his new scepter -- for here his wistful eyes were blessed
with the first fair prospect of the promised land.

From Gatherly-moor we entered Leeminglane; grieved to leave so much fine
country on both sides unseen. Within a few miles the Tees pouring through a
rocky channel, forms some of the most romantic scenery in England; and boasts,
at Winston-bridge, a more magnificent single arch, than perhaps any English
river can produce. -- Within a few miles, in another direction, lie the
beautiful, and varied grounds about Richmond; which among other noble scenes,
exhibit the magnificent ruins of a castle, on the summit of a lofty rock,
over-hanging the Swale. -- All these beautiful scenes we were obliged to leave
behind, and enter Leeming-lane, which extends near thirty miles, in a straight
line, shut up between hedges; being a part of a great Roman causey. And yet the
whole is so well planted, that we found it less disgusting, than we expected.
The smallest turn, where the wood hung loosely over the lane, especially when
there was any variety in the ground, broke the lines, and destroyed much of the
disagreeable regularity of the road.

We left the lane however abruptly, and went to Norton Conyers, near Rippon,
the seat of Sir Bellingham Graham; from whence we proposed to visit the
neighboring scenes of Studley, and Hackfall.

SECT. XXV.
THE most improved part of the gardens at Studley, and what is chiefly shown to
strangers, is a valley, nearly circular, surrounded by high woody grounds,
which slope gently into it in various directions. The circumference of the
higher grounds includes about one hundred and fifty acres; the area, at the
bottom, consists of eight. The higher parts present many openings into the
country. The lower, of course, are more confined; but might afford many
pleasing woody scenes, and solitary retreats. A considerable stream runs
through the valley: and on the banks of this stream, in another valley,
contiguous to the circular one, stand the ruins of Fountain's abbey; the
grandest, and most beautiful, except perhaps those of Glastonbury, which the
kingdom can produce.

The idea, which such a scene naturally suggests, is that of retirement -- the
habitation of cheerful solitude. Every object points it out; all tending to
sooth and amuse; but not to rouse and transport; like the great scenes of
nature.

Sometimes indeed the recluse may be more enamoured of the great scenes of
nature, and wish to fix his abode, where his eye may be continually presented
with sublime ideas. But, in general, we observe (from the whole history of
monastic life) that he wishes rather to sequester himself in some tranquil
scene: and this in particular was chosen as a quiet recess, consecrated to
retirement.

Solitude therefore being the reigning idea of the scene, every accompaniment
should tend to impress it. The ruins of the abbey, which is the great object of
the place, certainly do. The river and the paths should wind carelessly through
the lawns and woods, with little decoration. Buildings should be sparingly
introduced. Those which appear, should be as simple as possible -- the mere
retreats of solitude. The scene allows no more; and the neighborhood of so
noble a ruin renders every other decoration, in the way of building, either
trivial, or offensive.

Instead of these ideas, which the scenes of Studley naturally suggest, the
whole is a vain ostentation of expense; a mere Timon's villa; decorated by a
taste debauched in it is conceptions, and puerile in it is execution. Not only
the reigning idea of the place is forgotten; but all the great master-strokes
of nature, in every shape are effaced. Every part is touched and retouched with
the insipid sedulity of a Dutch master: -- Labor improbus omnia vincit.

What a lovely scene might a person of pure taste have made at Studley, with
one tenth part of the expense, which has been laid out in deforming it.

Fresh shadows fit to shroud from sunny ray;
Fair lawns to take the sun in season due;
Sweet springs, in which a thousand nymphs did play;
Soft, tumbling brooks, that gentle slumber drew;
High reared mounts, the lands about to view;
Low-winding dales, disloigned from common gaze;
Delightful bowers to solace lovers true.
Such might have been the scenes of Studley: but such is the whimsical channel
of human operations, that we sometimes see the pencil of Reubens employed on a
country wake; and that of Teniers disgracing the nuptials of an emperor.

On the whole, it is hard to say, whether nature has done more to embellish the
scenes of Studley; or art to deform them. Much indeed is below criticism. But
even, where the rules of more genuine taste have been adopted, they are for the
most part unhappily misapplied. In the point of opening views, for instance,
few of the openings here are simple, and natural. The artifice is apparent. The
marks of the sheers, and hatchet, are conspicuous in them all. Whereas half the
beauty of a thing consists in the easiness of it is introduction. Bring in your
story awkwardly; and it offends. It is thus in a view. The eye roving at large
in quest of objects, cannot bear prescription. Every thing forced upon it,
disgusts; and when it is apparent, that the view is contrived; the effect is
lost.

The valley, in which Fountain's abbey stands, is not of larger dimensions,
than the other, we have just described: but instead of the circular form, it
winds (in a more beautiful proportion) into length. It Is sides are composed of
woody hills sloping down in varied declivities; and uniting with the trees at
the bottom, which adorn the river.

At one end of this valley stand the ruins of the abbey, which formerly
overspread a large space of ground. Besides the grand remains of ruin, there
appeared in various parts, among the trees and bushes, detached fragments,
which were once the appendages of this great house. One of these, which was
much admired, seemed evidently to have been a court of justice.

Such was the general idea of this beautiful valley, and of the ruins which
adorned it, before they fell into the hands of the present proprietor. Long had
he wished to draw them within the circle of his improvements: but some
difficulties of law withstood. At length they were removed; and the time came
(which every lover of picturesque beauty must lament) when the legal possession
of this beautiful scene was yielded to him; and his busy hands were let loose
upon it. He found it indeed somewhat ruder, than even picturesque beauty
required; and a little might have been well done. But his improvements have had
no bounds. He has pared away all the bold roughness, and freedom of the scene,
and given every part a trim polish.

A few fragments lying scattered around the body of a ruin are proper, and
picturesque. They are proper, because they account for what is defaced: and
they are picturesque, because they unite the principal pile with the ground; on
which union the beauty of composition, in a good measure, depends. See the same
idea in mountains, p. 55, Vol. II. and in building, p. 150, and afterward in
cattle, Sect. XXXI.
But here they were thought rough and unsightly; and fell a sacrifice to
neatness. Even the court of justice was not spared; tho a fragment, probably as
beautiful, as it was curious.

In the room of these detached fragments, which were the proper, and
picturesque embellishments of the scene, a gaudy temple is erected, and other
trumpery wholly foreign to it. -- It is a difficult matter, at the sight of
such monstrous absurdities, to keep resentment within decent bounds. I hope I
have not exceeded.

But not only the scenery is defaced, and the outworks of the ruin violently
torn away; the main body of the ruin itself, is, at this very time, under the
alarming hand of decoration.

The remains of this pile are very magnificent. Almost the entire skeleton of
the abbey-church is left, which is a beautiful piece of Gothic architecture.
The tower seems wholly to have escaped the injuries of time. It Is mouldering
lines only are softened. Near the church stand a double row of cloisters; which
are singularly curious from the pointed arches, which do the office of columns,
in supporting the roof. At the end of these cloisters stand the abbot's
apartments; which open into a court, called the Monk's-garden. On one side of
this court is the hall, a noble room; which communicates, in the spirit of
hospitality, with the kitchen. There are besides a few other detached parts.

When the present proprietor made his purchase, he found this whole mass of
ruin, the cloisters, the abbey-church, and the hall, choked with rubbish. His
first work therefore was to clear, and open. And something in this way, as I
have just observed, might have been done with propriety. For we see ruins
sometimes so choked, that no view of them can be obtained.

To this business succeeded the great work of restoring, and ornamenting. This
required a very delicate touch. Among the ruins were found scraps of Gothic
windows; small, marble columns; tiles of different colors; and a variety of
other ornamental fragments. These the proprietor has picked from the rubbish
with great care; and with infinite industry is now restoring to their old
situation. But in vain; for the friability of the edges of every fracture makes
any restoration of parts an awkward patchwork.

Indeed the very idea of giving a finished splendour to a ruin, is absurd. How
unnatural, in a place, evidently forlorn and deserted by man, are the recent
marks of human industry! -- Besides, every sentiment, which the scene suggests,
is destroyed. Instead of that soothing melancholy, on which the mind feeds in
contemplating the ruins of time; a sort of jargon is excited by these
heterogeneous mixtures: as if, when some grand chorus had taken possession of
the soul -- when the sounds in all their sublimity, were yet vibrating on the
ear -- a light jig should strike up.

But the restoration of parts is not enough: ornaments must be added: and such
incongruous ornaments, as disgraced the scene, are disgracing also the ruin.
The monk's garden is turned into a trim parterre, and planted with flowering
shrubs: a view is opened, through the great window, to some ridiculous figure,
(I know not what; Ann Bolein, I think, they called it) that is placed in the
valley; and in the central part of the abbey-church, a circular pedestal is
raised out of the fragments of the old pavement; on which is erected -- a
mutilated heathen statue!!!

A legal right the proprietor (...) has to deform his ruin, as he (...) he fear
no indictment in the (...) must expect a very severe (...) court of taste. The
refined code of (...) does not consider an elegant ruin (...) property, on
which he may exercise (...) ^ill the irregular sallies of a wanton imagination:
but as a deposit, of which he is only the guardian, for the amusement and
admiration of posterity. -- A ruin is a sacred thing. Rooted for ages in the
soil; assimilated to it; and become, as it were, a part of it; we consider it
as a work of nature, rather than of art. Art cannot reach it. A Gothic window,
a fretted arch, some trivial peculiarity may have been aimed at with success:
but the magnificence of ruin was never attained by any modern attempt.

What reverence then is due to these sacred relics; which the rough hand of
temerity, and caprice dare mangle without remorse? The least error is
irretrievable. Let us pause a moment -- A Goth may deform: but it exceeds the
power of art to amend.

The scenes of Studley, which I have here described, are confined to the two
contiguous valleys. The improvements of the place extend considerably farther:
but we had neither time, nor inclination, to examine more. We had seen enough.

About the close of the last century, a piece of human antiquity existed in the
neighborhood of this abbey, still more curious, than the abbey itself -- that
venerable instance of longevity, Henry Jenkins. Among all the events, which, in
the course of a hundred and sixty-nine years, had fastened upon the memory of
this singular man, he spoke of nothing with so much emotion, as the ancient
state of Fountain's abbey. If he were ever questioned on that subject, he would
be sure to inform you, "What a brave place it had once been;" and would speak
with much feeling of the clamor, which it is dissolution occasioned in the
country. The substance of these particulars the author had from a MS, shown him
by Sir Bellingham Graham.
. "About a hundred and thirty years ago, he would say, when I was butler to
lord Conyers, and old Marmaduke Bradley, now dead and gone, was lord-abbot, I
was often sent by my lord to inquire after the lord-abbot's health; and the
lord abbot would always send for me up into his chamber, and would order me
roast-beef; The MS says, a quarter of a yard of roast-beef. I have heard that
the monasteries used to measure out their beef; but in what way I never
understood.
and wassel; which, I remember well, was always brought in a black-jack." --
From this account we see what it was that rivetted Fountain's abbey so
distinctly in the old man's memory. The black-jack, I doubt not, was a stronger
idea, than all the splendour of the house, or all the virtues of the lord-abbot.

SECT. XXVI.
FROM Studley we visited the scenes of Hackfall. These own the same proprietor;
and are adorned with equal taste.

It is a circumstance of great advantage, when you are carried to this grand
exhibition (as you always should be) through the close lanes of the Rippon
road. You have not the least intimation of a design upon you; nor any
suggestion, that you are on high grounds; till the folding-doors of the
building at Mowbray-point being thrown open, you are struck with one of the
grandest, and most beautiful bursts of country, that the imagination can form.

Your eye is first carried many fathoms precipitately down a bold, woody steep,
to the river Ewer, which forms a large semi-circular curve below; winding to
the very foot of the precipice, on which you stand. The trees of the precipice
over-hang the central part of the curve.

In other parts too the river is intercepted by woods; but enough of it is
discovered to leave the eye at no uncertainty in tracing it is course. At the
two opposite points of the curve, two promontories shoot into the river, in
contrast with each other: that on the right is woody, faced with rock, and
crowned with a castle: that, on the left, rises smooth from the water, and is
scattered over with a few clumps. The peninsular part, and the grounds also at
some distance beyond the isthmus, consist of one entire woody scene; which
advancing boldly to the front of the precipice, unites itself with it.

This woody scenery on the banks of the river may be called the first distance.
Beyond this lies a rich, extensive country -- broken into large parts --
decorated with all the objects, and diversified with all the tints of distant
landscape -- retiring from the eye, scene after scene -- till at length every
vivid hue fading gradually away, and all distinction of parts being lost, the
country imperceptibly melts into the horizon; except in some parts, where the
blue hills of Hambledon close the view.

Through the whole extent of this grand scene -- this delightful gradation of
light and colors -- nature has wrought with her broadest, and freest pencil.
The parts are ample: the composition perfectly correct. She has admitted
nothing disgusting, or even trivial. I scarce remember any where an extensive
view so full of beauties, and so free from faults. The fore-ground is as
pleasing as the background; which it never can be, when plots of cultivation
approach the eye: and it is rare to find so large an extent of near-ground,
covered by wood, or other surface, whose parts are alike grand, and beautiful.

The vale, of which this view is composed, has not yet entirely lost it is
ancient name -- the vale of Mowbray; so called from Mowbray-castle now no
longer traced even in it is ruins; but once supposed to be the capital mansion
of these wide domains. This vale extends from York almost to the confines of
Durham; is adorned by the Swale, and the Ewer, both considerable rivers; and is
certainly one of the noblest tracts of country of the kind in England.

Hackfall is as much a contrast to Studley, as the idea of magnificence is to
that of solitude. It requires of course a different mode of ornament. A
banqueting house, enriched with every elegance of architecture, in the form
perhaps of a Grecian temple, might be a proper decoration at Mowbray-point;
which at Studley would be superfluous, and absurd. The ruins of a castle too,
if they could be executed with veri-similitude and grandeur, might adorn the
rocky promontory on the right with propriety. The present ruin is a paltry
thing. Any other ornamental building, besides these two, I should suppose
unnecessary. These might sufficiently adorn every part of the scenery, both in
the higher, and in the lower grounds. If the expense, which is generally laid
out, in our great gardens, on a variety of little buildings, was confined to
one or two capital objects, the general effect would be better. A profusion of
buildings is one of the extravagances of false taste. One object is a proper
ornament in every scene: more than one, at least on the fore-grounds, distract
it. Particular circumstances indeed may add a propriety to a greater number of
objects: as at Kew; where a specimen is given of different kinds of religious
structures: or at Chiswick; where it is intended to exhibit an idea of various
modes of architecture. But it is unity of design, not of picturesque
composition, which pleases us in these scenes. As far as this is concerned, one
handsome object is enough.

Having examined the whole of this very extraordinary burst of landscape from
Mowbray-point, we descended to the bottom, where a great variety of grand, and
pleasing views are exhibited; particularly a view of Mowbray-point from
Limus-hill; and another of the promontory with the castle upon it, from the
tent: and it must be acknowledged, that many of these scenes are opened in a
very natural, and masterly manner. If any art has been used, it has been used
with discretion.

At the same time, amidst all this profusion of great objects, and all this
grandeur of design (for nature has here not only brought her materials
together, but has composed them likewise) the eye is every where called aside
from the contemplation of them by some trivial object -- an awkward cascade --
a fountain -- a view through a hole cut in a wood -- or some other ridiculous
specimen of absurd taste.

It is a great happiness however, that the improver of these scenes had less in
his power at Hackfall, than he had at Studley. The valleys there, and
home-views were all within the reach of his spade, and axe. Here he could only
contemplate at a distance what glorious scenes he might have displayed, if his
arm could have extended to the horizon. Some of the nearer grounds of this
grand exhibition, (I believe all beyond the Ewer,) are the property of another
person. So that the whole peninsular part, and the grounds immediately beyond
it, continue sacred, and untouched: and these are the scenes, which form the
grand part of the view from Mowbray-point. In surveying these, the eye
overlooks the puerilities of improvement at the bottom of the precipice.

The banks of rivers are so various, that I know not any two river-views of any
celebrity, which at all resemble each other in the detail; though in the
general cast, and outlines of the scene, they agree. Thus at Studley, and at
See page 102.
Corby, the materials of the scenery are, in both places, the same. Each has
it is woody banks -- it is river -- and the ruins of an abbey. In each also the
beauties of the scene are in a great measure shut up within itself; and the
idea of solitude is impressed on both. Notwithstanding this similarity, two
scenes can hardly be more different. At Corby, the woody bank is grander than
that at Studley, bordering rather on the sublime. At Studley, the form and
contrast of the valleys, and great variety of the ground, is more pleasing. In
the former scene the river is superior: in the latter, the ruins. In one, you
wander about the mazes of a circular woody bank: in the other, the principal
part of the walk is continued along the margin of the river; the woody bank,
which is too steep to admit a path, serving only as a skreen.

There is the same union and difference between the scenes of Persfield See
observations on the Wye, page 39.
, and Hackfall. Both are great and commanding situations. The river, in both,
forms a sweeping curve. Both are adorned with rocks, and woods: and sublimity
is the reigning idea of each. Notwithstanding all these points of union, they
are wholly unlike. Persfield, though the country is open before it, depends
little on it is beauties. It Is own wild, winding banks supply an endless variety
of rocky scenery; which is sufficient to engage the attention. The banks of
Hackfall are less magnificent; tho it is river is more picturesque, and it is
woods more beautiful. But it is views into the country are it is pride; and
beyond any comparison, grander and more enchanting, than those at Persfield.

From Hackfall we returned to our hospitable quarters at Norton Conyers, which
is situated in a pleasant park-scene; but too flat to admit much variety.

In the time of the civil wars, the owner of this mansion was Sir Richard
Graham; of whom we heard an anecdote in the family, which is worth relating; as
it is not only curious in itself, but throws a very strong, and yet natural
shade, on the character of Cromwell.

When the affairs of Charles I. were in their wane in all the southern
counties; the marquess of Newcastle's prudence gave them some credit in the
north. His residence was at York, where he engaged two of the gentlemen of the
country to act under him as lieutenants. Sir Richard Graham was one; whose
commission under the marquess is still in the hands of the family. As Sir
Richard was both an active man, and much attached to the royal cause; he
entered into it with all that vigor, which ability; inspired by inclination,
could exert; and did the king more effectual service, than perhaps any private
gentleman in those parts.

On that fatal day, when the precipitancy of prince Rupert, in opposition to
the sage advice of the marquess, led the king's forces out of York against
Cromwell, who waited for them on Marsden-moor, Sir Richard Graham had a
principal command; and no man did more than he, to end an action with success,
which had been undertaken with temerity.

When the day was irretrievably lost; and nothing remained, but for every man
to seek the best means of security that offered, Sir Richard fled, with
twenty-six bleeding wounds upon him, to his own house at Norton Conyers, about
fifteen miles from the field. Here he arrived in the evening; and being spent
with loss of blood, and fatigue, he was carried into his chamber; where taking
a last farewell of his disconsolate lady, he expired.

Cromwell, who had ever expressed a peculiar inveteracy against this gentleman,
and thought a victory only half obtained, if he escaped; pursued his flight in
person, with a troop of horse.

When he arrived at Norton, his gallant enemy was dead; having scarce lived an
hour. after he was carried into his chamber: and Cromwell found his wretched
lady weeping over the mangled corpse of her husband, yet scarce cold.

Such a sight, one would have imagined, might have given him -- not indeed an
emotion of pity -- but at least a satiety of revenge. The inhuman miscreant
still felt the vengeance of his soul unsatisfied; and turning round to his
troopers, who had stalked after him into the sacred recesses of sorrow, he gave
the sign of havoc; and in a few moments the whole house was torn in pieces: not
even the bed was spared, on which the mangled body was extended: and every
thing was destroyed, which the hands of rapine could not carry off.

In this country we met with another curious memorial of the battle of
Marsden-moor. A carpenter, about two years ago, bought some trees, which had
grown there. But when the timber was brought to the saw-pit, it was found very
refractory. On examining it with more attention, it appeared, that great
numbers of leaden bullets were in the hearts of several of the trees; which
thus recorded the very spot, where the heat of the battle had raged.

SECT. XXVII.
FROM Norton we proposed to take our rout, through Yorkshire into Derbyshire;
and so through the other midland counties into the south of England.

The town of Rippon makes a better appearance, as you approach it, than the
generality of country towns. The church is a large building; and gives a
consequence to the place.

From Rippon the road is not unpleasant; passing generally through a woody
country, till we entered Knaresborough-forest, where all wood ceased. Like
other royal chases, it has now lost all it is sylvan honors, and is a wild,
bleak, unornamented tract of country.

Near the close of the forest, lies Harrogate, in the dip of a hill; a
cheerless, unpleasant village. Nor does the country make any change for the
better; till we cross the river Wharf.

From hence, leaving the ruins of Harewood-castle on the left, and
Harewood-house on the right, the ancient, and modern seats of the family of
Lascelles, we ascended, by degrees, a tract of high ground, and had an
extensive view which was illumined, when we saw it, by those gleaming, cursory
lights, which are so beautiful in distant landscape; and so common, when the
incidents of a bright sun, a windy sky, and floating clouds coincide. It is
amusing, under these circumstances, to pursue the flitting gleams, as they
spread, decay, and vanish -- then rise in some other part; varied by the
different surfaces, over which they spread.

We have this appearance beautifully detailed in an old Erse poem, the title of
which is Dargo. The bard poetically, and picturesquely compares the short
transitions of joy in the mind, to these transitory gleams of light.

"The tales of the years that are past, are beams of light to the soul of the
bard. They are like the sunbeams, that travel over the heaths of Morven. Joy
is in their course, tho darkness dwells around. Joy is in their course; but it
is soon past: the shades of darkness pursue them: they overtake them on the
mountains; and the footsteps of the cheerful beam are no longer discovered. --
Thus the tale of Dargo travels over my soul like a beam of light, tho the
gathering of the clouds is behind."

We should have been glad to have examined Harewood-house, as it is a sumptuous
pile; but it is shown only on particular days; and we happened to be there on a
wrong one.

We regretted also another misfortune of the same kind, for which we had only
ourselves to blame; and that was the omission of Kirkstall-abbey. In the
precipitancy of an early morning, and through an unaccountable error in
geography, we passed it; and did not recollect the mistake, till we were half a
day's journey beyond it.

Around Leeds the soil wears an unpleasant hue; owing in part to the dirtiness
of the surface; within a few yards of which, coal is every where found. -- The
country however changes greatly for the better, before we arrive at Wakefield,
which lies in the midst of beautiful scenery. The river Calder makes a fine
appearance, as we leave the town; and it is banks are adorned by a Gothic
chapel, now in ruins, dedicated, by Edward IV, to the memory of the duke of
York, his father, and the other chiefs of his party, who fell at the battle of
Wakefield. It is built in the elegant proportion of ten by six; plain on the
sides; but richly adorned on the front; and finished with a small octagon
turret at the east end. -- This little edifice serves both to ascertain the
history of architecture, which appears to have been near it is meridian; and to
illustrate an important part of the English story. It Is whimsical situation by
the side of a bridge, was intended probably to mark the spot, where some
principal part of the action happened: tho at the entrance of great towns it
was not unusual, in popish times, to place chapels on bridges; that travelers
might immediately have the benefit of a mass. There was, for this purpose, a
chapel formerly in one of the piers of London Bridge.

Not far from Wakefield we rode past a piece of water, which takes the humble
name of a mill-pond; but is in fact a beautiful little lake, being near two
miles in circumference, and containing some pleasing scenery, along it is little
woody shores, and promontories.

From Bank-top we had a good descending view of Wentworth-castle -- of the
grounds, which inviron it -- and the country, which surrounds it. The scene all
together is grand. The eminence, on which we stood, is adorned with a great
profusion of something, in the way of an artificial ruin. It is possible it may
have an effect from the castle below: but on the spot, it is certainly no
ornament. We found some difficulty in passing through lord Strafford's park;
and proceeded therefore to Wentworth-house; which is a superb; and is esteemed,
an elegant pile: but there seems to be a want of simplicity about it. The front
appears broken into too many parts; and the inside, incumbered. A simple plan
has certainly more dignity. Such, for instance, is lord Tinley's house at
Wanstead, where the whole is intelligible at sight. The hall at lord
Rockingham's is a cube of sixty feet. The gallery is what they call a shelf.
For myself, I saw nothing offensive in it, tho it is undoubtedly a more
masterly contrivance to raise a gallery upon a wall, than to affix one to it.
The long gallery is a noble apartment; and the interception of a breakfast room
from it by pillars, and an occasional curtain, gives a pleasant combined idea
of retirement, and company. The library also is grand.

There are few good pictures at Wentworth: the original of lord Strafford, and
his secretary is said to be here. It Is pretensions are disputed; tho I think it
has merit enough to maintain them any where. -- There is another good portrait
by Vandyke of the same nobleman. He rests his hand upon a dog; and his head in
this picture is perhaps superior to that of the other. -- Here is also, by
Vandyke, a son of the same earl, with his two sisters. The management of the
whole displeases; but the boy is delightfully painted.

Wentworth-house stands low. It Is front commands an extensive plain, and a flat
distant country; which are seen betwixt a rising wood on the left; and a
variety of crossing lawns on the right. On the whole, I was not much pleased
with any thing I saw here.

SECT. XXVIII.
FROM Wentworth-house the same pleasant face of country continues to Sheffield.
But it soon begins to change, as we approach Derbyshire. The rising grounds
become insensibly more wild: rocks start every where from the soil; and a new
country comes on apace. For we now approached that great central tract of high
lands; which arising in these parts, form themselves into mountains; and
spreading here, and there, run on without interruption, as far as Scotland See
page 3, Vol. I.
Before we reach Middleton, the whole face of the land has suffered change; and
we see nothing around us, but wildness, and desolation.

About two miles short of Middleton we are cheared again by a beautiful valley;
which participates indeed of the wildness of the country; but is both finely
wooded, and watered. In a recess of this valley stands Middleton, a very
romantic village; beyond which the valley still continues two miles farther.

It is this continuation of it, which is known by the name of Middleton-dale;
and is esteemed one of the most romantic scenes of the country. It is a narrow,
winding chasm; hardly broader than to give space for a road. On the right, it
is rocky; on the left, the hills wear a smoother form. The rocks are gray,
tinged in many parts with plots of verdure insinuating themselves, and running
among them. Some of these rocks assume a peculiar form, rearing themselves like
the round towers, and buttresses of a ruined castle; and their upper strata
running in parallel directions, take the form of cornices. The turriti scopuli
of Virgil cannot be illustrated better.

When we leave Middleton-dale the wastes of Derbyshire open before us; and wear
the same face as those we had left behind, on the borders of Yorkshire. They
are tracts of coarse, moorish pasturage, forming vast unequal sweeps, without
any intersection of line, or variation of ground; divided into portions by
stone walls, without a cottage to diversisy the scene, or a tree to enliven it.
Middletondale is the pass, which unites these two dreary scenes.

Having traveled several miles in this high country, in our way to Castleton,
we came at length to the edge of a precipice; down which ran a long, steep
descent. From the brow an extensive vale lay before us. It Is name is Hopedale.
It is a wide, open scene of cultivation; the sides of which, tho mountainous,
are tilled to the top. The village of Hope stands at one end of it, and
Castleton at the other. In a direction toward the middle of this vale we
descended. The object of our pursuit, was that celebrated chasm, near
Castleton, called the Devil's cave.

A descent of two miles brought us to it. -- A combination of more horrid ideas
is rarely found, than this place affords. It exceeded our liveliest imagination.

A rocky mountain rises to a great height: in most parts perpendicular; in
some, beetling over it is base. As it ascends, it divides; forming at the top,
two rocky summits.

On one of these summits stands an old castle; the battlements of which appear
to grow out of the rock. It Is situation, on the edge of a precipice, is
tremendous. Looking up from the bottom, you may trace a narrow path, formed
merely by the adventrous foot of curiosity, winding here and there round the
walls of the castle; which, as far as appears, is the only road, which leads to
it.

The other rock reserves it is terrors for the bottom. There it opens into that
tremendous chasm, called the Devil's cave. Few places have more the air of the
poetical regions of Tartarus.

The combination of a castle, and a cave, which we have here in reality, Virgil
feigns -- with a view perhaps of giving an additional terror to each. -- Aeneas
arces, quibus altus Apollo
Praesidet, horrendaeque procul secreta Sibyllae,
Antrum immane, petit --
The poet does not give the detail of his antrum immane: if he had, he could
not have conceived more interesting circumstances, than are here brought
together.

A towering rock hangs over you; under which you enter an arched cavern, twelve
yards high, forty wide, and near a hundred long. So vast a canopy of unpillared
rock stretching over your head, gives you an involuntary shudder. A strong
light at the mouth of the cave, displays all the horrors of the entrance in
full proportion. But this light decaying, as you proceed, the imagination is
left to explore it is deeper caverns by torch-light, which gives them additional
terror. At the end of the first cavern runs a river, above forty feet wide,
over which you are ferried into a seeond, of dimensions vaster than the first.
It is known by the name of the Cathedral. The height of it is horribly
discovered by a few spiracles at the top; through which you see the light of
the day, without being able, at such a distance, to enjoy the least benefit
from it. Beyond this cavern flows another branch of the same river, which
becomes the boundary of other caverns still more remote. But this was farther
than we chose to proceed. I never found any picturesque beauty in the interior
regions of the earth; and the idea growing too infernal, we were glad to return.

-- coeli melioris ad auras. The inhabitants of these scenes are as savage as
the scenes themselves. We were reminded by a disagreeable contrast of the
pleasing simplicity and civility of manners, which we found among the lakes and
mountains of Cumberland. Here a wild, uninformed stare, through matted,
dishevelled locks, marks every feature; and the traveller is followed, like a
spectacle, by a crowd of gazers. Many of these miserable people live under the
tremendous roof we have just described; where a manufacture of rope-yarn is
carried on. One poor wretch has erected a hut within it is verge, where she has
lived these forty years. A little straw suffices for a roof, which has only to
resist the droppings of unwholesome vapor from the top of the cavern.

The exit from Hope-dale, in our road to Buxton, is not inferior to the scene
we had left. We ascend a straining steep, ornamented on each side, with bold
projecting rocks, most of which are picturesque; tho some of them are rather
fantastic.

As we leave this pass, on our right appears Mam-tor, surnamed the Shivering
mountain. A part of it is side has the appearance of a cascade; down which it
continually discharges the flaky substance, of which it is composed.

On the confines of this mountain, and but a little below the surface, is found
that curious, variegated mineral, which is formed into small ornamental
obelisks, urns and vases. It is supposed to be a petrifaction; and is known in
London by the name of the Derbyshire drop. But on the spot it is called Blue
John, from the beautiful blue veins, which overspread the finest parts of it.
Where it wears a yellowish hue, the vein is coarsest: in many parts it is
beautifully honeycombed, and transparent. The proprietors of the marble works
at Ashford farmed the quarry of this curious mineral, last year, at ninety-five
pounds; and it is thought have nearly exhausted it.

From Hope-dale to Buxton, the country is dreary, and uncomfortable. The eye
ranges over bleak wastes, such as we had seen before, divided every where by
stone walls. The pasturage in many parts seems good, as the fields were stocked
with cattle; but hardly a tree, or a house appears through the whole district.

In a bottom, in this uncomfortable country, lies Buxton, surrounded with
dreary, barren hills; and streaming, on every side, with offensive lime-kilns.
Nothing, but absolute want of health, could make a man endure a scene so wholly
disgusting.

Near Buxton we visited another horrid cave, called Pool's hole; but it wants
those magnificent accompaniments of external scenery, which we found at the
Devil's cave.

The same dreary face of country continues from Buxton to Ashford. Here we fall
into a beautiful vale fringed with wood, and watered by a brilliant stream,
which recalled to our memory the pleasing scenes of this kind we had met with
among the mountains of Cumberland.

At Ashford is carried on a manufactory of marble dug on the spot; some of
which, curiously incrusted with shells, is very beautiful.

The vale of Ashford continues with little interruption to Bakewell, where it
enters another sweet vale -- the vale of Haddon; so called from Haddon-hall, a
magnificent old mansion, which stands in the middle of it, on a rocky knoll,
encompassed with wood.

This princely structure, scarce yet in a state of ruin, is able, it is said,
to trace it is origin into times before the conquest. It then wore a military
form. In after ages, it became possessed by different noble families; and about
the beginning of this century was inhabited by the dukes of Rutland. Since that
time, it has been neglected. Many fragments of it is ancient grandeur remain --
sculptured chimnies; fretted cornices; patches of costly tapestry; Auratasque
trabes, veterum decora alta parentum.

Not far from hence lies Chatsworth, in a situation naturally bleak; but
rendered not unpleasant by it is accompaniments of well-grown wood.

Chatsworth was the glory of the last age, when trim parterres, and formal
waterworks were in fashion. It then acquired a celebrity, which it has never
lost; tho it has now many rivals. A good approach has been made to it; but in
other respects, when we saw it, it is invirons had not kept pace with the
improvements of the times. Many of the old formalities remained. But a dozen
years, no doubt, have introduced much improvement.

The house itself would have been no way striking; except in the wilds of
Derbyshire. The chapel is magnificent. It is adorned, on the whole of one side,
by a fresco, representing Christ employed in works of charity.

There are few pictures in the house. A portrait of the late duke of Cumberland
by Reynolds was the best. But there is much exquisite carving by the hand of
Gibbons. We admired chiefly the dead fowl of various kinds, with which the
chimney of one of the state rooms is adorned. It is astonishing to see the
downy softness of feathers given to wood. The particulars however alone are
admirable: Gibbons was no adept at composition.

From Chatsworth, through Darley-dale, a sweet, extensive scene, we approached
Matlock.

The rocky scenery about the bridge is the first grand specimen of what we were
to expect.

As we advanced toward the boat-house, the views became more interesting.

Soon after the great Torr appeared, which is a most magnificent rock,
decorated with wood, and stained with various hues, yellow, green, and gray. --
On the opposite side, the rocks, contracting the road, slope diagonally.

These straits open into the vale of Matlock; a romantic, and most delightful
scene, in which the ideas of sublimity and beauty are blended in a high degree.
It extends about two miles in length; and in the widest parts is half a mile
broad. The area consists of much irregular ground. The right hand bank has
little consequence, except that of shaping the vale. It is the left hand bank
which ennobles the scene. This very magnificent rampart, rising in a
semi-circular form, is divided into four ample faces of rock, with an
interruption of wood between each. The first, which you approach, is the
highest; but of least extent: the next spreads more; and the third most of all.
A larger interruption succeeds; and the last, in comparison of the others,
seems but a gentle effort. The whole vast rampart is beautifully shaded with
wood; which in some places, grows among the cliffs, garnishing the rocks -- in
others, it grows wildly among those breaks, and interruptions, which separate
their several faces. The summit of the whole semi-circular range is finely
adorned with scattered trees, which often break the hard lines of the rock; and
by admitting the light, give an airiness to the whole.

The river Derwent, which winds under this semi-circular screen, is a broken,
rapid stream. In some places only, it is visible: in others, delving among
rocks, and woody projections, it is an object only to the ear.

It is impossible to view such scenes as these, without feeling the imagination
take fire. Little fairy scenes, where the parts, tho trifling, are happily
disposed; such, for instance, as the cascade-scene See page 53, Vol. I.
in the gardens at the Leasowes, please the fancy. But this is scenery of a
different kind. Every object here, is sublime, and wonderful. Not only the eye
is pleased; but the imagination is filled. We are carried at once into the
fields of fiction, and romance. Enthusiastic ideas take possession of us; and
we suppose ourselves among the inhabitants of fabled times. -- The transition
indeed is easy and natural, from romantic scenes to romantic inhabitants, --
Sylvis scena coruscis
Desuper, horrentique atrum nemus imminet umbra;
Nympharum domus --


The woods here are subject to one great inconvenience -- that of periodical
lopping. About seven years ago, I had the mortification to see almost the whole
of this scenery displaying one continued bald face of rock. It is now, In the
year 1772.
I should suppose, in perfection. More wood would cover, and less would
dismantle it.

The exit of this bold romantic scene, which from the south is the entrance
into it, like the exit from Hope-dale, is equal to the scene itself. Grand
rocks arise on each side, and dismiss you through a winding barrier, which
lengthens out the impression of the scene, like the vibration of a sound. In
some parts the solid stone is cut through; Admittitque viam sectae per viscera
rupis.

From hence to Ashburn the road is pleasant, after the first steeps. The ground
is varied, and adorned with wood; and we lose all those wild scenes, which we
met with in the Peak. When nature throws her wild scenes into beautiful
composition; and decorates them with great, and noble objects; they are, of all
scenes, the most engaging. But as there is little of this decoration in the
wild scenes of the Peak, we left them without regret.



SECT. XXIX.
FROM Ashburn, which is among the larger villages, and stands sweetly, we made
an excursion to Dove-dale.

Dove-dale is the continuation of another similar dale, which is sometimes
called Bunster-dale; tho I believe both parts of the valley are known, except
just on the spot, by the general name of Dove-dale.

Bunster-dale opens with a grand craggy mountain on the right. As you look up
to the cliffs, which form the irregular sides of this precipice, your guide
will not fail to tell you the melancholy fate of a late dignitary of the
church, who riding along the top of it with a young lady, a Miss Laroche,
behind him, and pursuing a track, which happened to be only a sheep-path, and
led to a declivity; fell in attempting to turn his horse out of it. He was
killed: but the young lady was caught by a bush, and saved. -- A dreadful story
is an admirable introduction to an awful scene. It rouses the mind; and adds
double terror to every impending rock.

The bare sides of these lofty craggs on the right, are contrasted by a woody
mountain on the left. In the midst of the wood, a sort of rocky-wall rises
perpendicular from the soil. These detached rocks are what chiefly characterize
the scene. -- A little beyond them, we enter, what is properly called,
Dove-dale.

From the description given of Dove-dale, even by men of taste, we had
conceived it to be a scene rather of curiosity, than of beauty. We supposed the
rocks were formed into the most fantastic shapes; and expected to see a
gigantic display of all the conic sections. But we were agreeably deceived. The
whole composition is chaste, and picturesquely beautiful, in a high degree.

On the right, you have a continuation of the same grand, craggy mountain,
which ran along Bunster-dale; only the mountain in Dove-dale is higher, and the
rocks still more majestic, and more detached.

On the lest, is a continuation also of the same hanging woods, which began in
Bunster-dale. In the midst of this woody scenery arises a grand, solitary,
pointed rock, the characteristic feature of the whole scene; which by way of
eminence is known by the name of Dove-dale-church. It consists of a large face
of rock, with two or three little spiry heads, and one very large one: and tho
the form is rather peculiar, yet is it pleasing. It Is rising a single object
among surrounding woods takes away the fantastic idea; and gives it sublimity.
It is the multiplicity of these spiry heads, which makes them disgusting: as
when we see several of them adorning the summits of alpine mountains See page
83, Vol. I.
. But a solitary rock, tho spiry, has often a good effect. A picturesque
ornament of this kind, marks a beautiful scene, at a place called the New-Weir,
on the banks of the Wye See observations on the Wye, page 24.
.

The color of all these rocks is gray; and harmonizes agreeably with the
verdure, which runs in large patches down their channelled sides. Among all the
picturesque accompaniments of rocks there is nothing which has a finer effect
in painting, than this variation and contrast of color, between the cold, gray
hue of a rocky surface, and the rich tints of herbage.

The valley of Dove-dale is very narrow at the bottom, consisting of little
more than the channel of the Dove, which is a considerable stream; and of a
foot-path along it is banks. When the river rises, it swells over the whole area
of the valley; and has a fine effect. The grandeur of the river is then in full
harmony with the grandeur of it is banks.

Dove-dale is a calm, sequestered scene; and yet not wholly the haunt of
solitude, and contemplation. It is too magnificent, and too interesting a piece
of scenery, to leave the mind wholly disengaged.

The late Dr. Brown, comparing the scenery here, with that of Keswick In a
letter to lord Lyttelton, already quoted.
, tells us, that of the three circumstances, beauty, horror, and immensity (by
which last he means grandeur) of which Keswick consists, the second alone is
found in Dove-dale.

In this description he seems, in my opinion, just to have inverted the truth.
It is difficult to conceive, why he should either rob this scene of beauty, and
grandeur; or fill it with horror. If beauty consist in a pleasing arrangement
of pleasing parts, Dove-dale has certainly a great share of beauty. If grandeur
consist in large parts, and large objects, it has certainly grandeur also. But
if horror consist in the vastness, of those parts, it certainly predominates
less here, than in the regions of Keswick. The hills, the woods, and the rocks
of Dove-dale are sufficient to raise the idea of grandeur; but not to impress
that of horror.

On the whole, Dove-dale is perhaps one of the most pleasing pieces of scenery
of the kind we any where meet with. It has something in it peculiarly
characteristic. It Is detached, perpendicular rocks stamp it with an image
entirely it is own: and for that reason it affords the greater pleasure. For it
is in scenery, as in life; we are most struck with the peculiarity of an
original character; provided there is nothing offensive in it.

From Dove-dale we proceeded to Ilam; which is also a very characteristic scene.

Ilam stands on a hill, which slopes gently in front; but is abrupt, and broken
behind, where it is garnished with rock, and hanging wood. Round this hill
sweeps a semi-circular valley; the area of which is a flat meadow, nearly a
quarter of a mile in breadth, and twice as much in circumference. At the
extremity of the meadow winds the channel of a river, considerable in it is
dimensions; tho penuriously supplied with water: and beyond all, sweeps a
grand, woody bank, which forms a barrier to all the scenery behind the house;
and yet, in the front, admits a view of distant mountains; particularly of that
square-capt hill, called Thorp-cloud, which stands near the entrance of
Dove-dale.

Besides the beauty of the scene, we are presented with a great curiosity. The
river Manifold formerly ran in that channel under the woody bank, which we
observed to be now so penuriously supplied. -- It has deserted it is ancient
bed; and about seven miles from Ilam, enters gradually the body of a mountain;
under which it forces a way, and continues it is subterraneous rout as far as
the hill, on which Ilam stands. There it rises from the ground, and forms a
river in a burst. The channel under the bank is a sort of waste-pipe to it;
carrying off the superfluity of water, which in heavy rains cannot enter the
mountain.

Curious this river certainly is: but were it mine, I should wish much to check
it is subterraneous progress, and throw it into it is old channel. The o^zy bed,
which is now a deformity, would then be an object of beauty, circling the
meadow with a noble stream. -- Another deformity also would be avoided, that of
cutting the meadow with two channels. -- Or perhaps all ends might be answered,
if the waste-stream could be diverted. Then both the curiosity; and, in a good
degree, the beauty, would remain.

On the whole, we have few situations so pleasingly romantic, as Ilam. The
rocky hill it stands on; the ample lawn, which incircles it; the bold, woody
bank, which invirons the whole (where pleasing walks might be formed) the bold
incursion of the river; the views into the country; and the neighborhood of
Dove-dale, which lies within the distance of a summer-evening walk, bring
together such a variety of uncommon, and beautiful circumstances, as are rarely
to be found in one place.

Very little had been done, at Ilam, when we saw it, to improve it is natural
situation; tho it is capable of great improvement; particularly in the front of
the house. There the ground, which is now a formal flower-garden, might easily
be united with the other parts of the scenery in it is neighborhood. It is now
totally at variance with it.

In the higher part of the garden, under a rock, is a seat dedicated to the
memory of Congreve; where, you are told by your conductor, he composed several
of his plays.

From Ilam we went to Oakover to see the holy family by Raphael. As this
picture is very celebrated, we gave it a minute examination.

Whether it be an original, I am not critic enough in the works of Raphael to
determine. I should suppose, it is; and it were a pity to rob it of it is
greatest merit. Nothing, I think, but the character of the master could give it
the reputation it holds. If it be examined by the rules of painting, it is
certainly deficient. The manner is hard, without freedom; and the coloring
black, without sweetness. Neither is there any harmony in the whole. What
harmony can arise from a conjunction of red, blue, and yellow, of which the
draperies are composed, almost in raw tints? Nor is the deficiency in the
coloring, compensated by any harmony in the light and shade.

But these things perhaps we are not led to expect in the works of Raphael. In
them we seek for grace, drawing, character, and expression. Here however they
are not found Since I made these remarks I was glad to see a kind of sanction
given them by a great authority. Sir Joshua Reynolds, in one of his lectures,
before the academy, speaks very slightly of the easel-pictures of Raphael;
which, he says, give us no idea of that great master's genius.
. The virgin, we allow to be a sweet, and lovely figure: but Joseph is
inanimate; the boys are grinning satyrins; and with regard to drawing, the
right arm of Christ, I should suppose, is very faulty Since I made these
remarks I was glad to see a kind of sanction given them by a great authority.
Sir Joshua Reynolds, in one of his lectures, before the academy, speaks very
slightly of the easel-pictures of Raphael; which, he says, give us no idea of
that great master's genius.
.

On the whole, a holy family is a subject but indifferently adapted to the
pencil. Unless the painter could give the mother that celestial love; and the
child, that divine composure, and sweetness, (which, I take it for granted, no
painter can give,) the subject immediately degenerates into a mother, and a
child. The actions of our Savior's life may be good subjects for a picture:
for although the divine energy of the principal figure cannot be expressed; yet
the other parts of the story being well told, may supply that deficiency. But
in a holy family there is no action -- no story told -- the whole consists in
the expression of characters and affections, which we must suppose beyond
conception. So that if these are not expressed, the whole is nothing.

In the same room hang three or four pictures, any of which I should value more
than the celebrated Raphael. There is a small picture, by Rubens, representing
the angels appearing to the women in the garden, which pleased me. The angels
indeed are clumsey figures; and dressed like choiristers: but every other part
of the picture, and the management of the whole, is good.

In a large picture also of the unjust steward, the family in distress is well
described: but on the whole, it is one of those ambiguous pictures, on which we
cannot well pronounce at sight. One half of it seems painted by Rubens; of the
other half we doubted.

There are also in the same room two very capital Vanderveldts -- a calm, and a
storm. Both are good: but the former pleased me better, than almost any picture
by that master, I have any where seen.

SECT. XXX.
FROM Ashburn, to which we returned from Oakover, we went, the next day,
through a cheerful, woody country, to Keddleston, the seat of lord Scarsdale.

The situation of Keddleston, participates little of the romantic country, on
which it borders. The house stands in a pleasant park, rather bare of wood; but
the deficiency is in a great degree compensated by the beauty of the trees;
some of which are large, and noble. A stream, by the help of art, is changed
into a river, over which the road conducts you obliquely to the house; forming
a good approach.

The architecture of Keddleston, as far as I could judge, is a composition of
elegance, and grandeur. The main body of the house, which you enter by a noble
portico, is joined, by a corridore on each side, to a handsome wing. In the
back front, the saloon, which is a rotunda, appears to advantage. From the hall
lead the state rooms, which are not many. The rest of the house consists of
excellent offices, and comfortable apartments; and the plan of the whole is
easy, and intelligible.

The hall is perhaps one of the grandest, and most beautiful private rooms in
England. The roof is supported by very noble columns; some of which are entire
blocks of marble, dug, as we were informed, from lord Scarsdale's own quarries.
It is rather indeed a spurious sort of marble; but more beautiful, at least in
color, than any that is imported. There is a richness, and a variety in it,
that pleases the eye exceedingly: the veins are large, and suited to columns;
and a rough polish, by receiving the light in one body, gives a noble swell to
the column; and adds much to it is beauty.

When I saw this grand room, I thought it wanted no farther decoration. All was
simple, great, and uniform, as it ought to be. Since that time I have heard the
doors, and windows have been painted, and varnished in the cabinet style. I
have not seen these alterations; and cannot pronounce on their merit: but I am
at a loss to conceive, that any further embellishment could add to the effect.

The entrance of a great house, should, in my opinion, consist only of that
kind of beauty, which arises merely from simplicity and grandeur. These ideas,
as you proceed in the apartments, may detail themselves into ornaments of
various kinds; and, in their proper places, even into prettinesses. Alien,
misplaced, ambitious ornaments, no doubt, are every where disgusting: but in
the grand entrance of a house, they should particularly be avoided. A false
taste, discovered there, is apt to pursue you through the apartments; and throw
it is colors on what may happen to be good. -- I should be unwilling however to
suppose, that any improper decorations are added to the hall at Keddleston; as
the ornaments of the house, in general, when I saw it, seemed to be under the
conduct of a chaste and elegant taste. Tho every thing was rich; I do not
recollect, that any thing was tawdry, trifling, or affected.

The pictures, of which there is a considerable collection, are chiefly, what
may be called good furniture pictures See page 24, Vol. I.
. A Rembrandt is the first in rank; and is indeed a valuable piece. It
represents Daniel interpreting Belteshazzar's dream. There is great amusement
in this picture. It is highly finished; and the heads are particularly
excellent. For the rest, it is a scattered piece, without any idea of
composition.

In the drawing room are two large uprights by Benedetto Lutti; one
representing the last supper; the other the death of Abel. They are painted in
a singular manner with strong lights. The former has a good effect. The death
of Abel is likewise a shewy picture; but has nothing very striking in it,
except the figure of Cain.

In the dead game by Snyders, there is a good fawn; but the picture is made
disagreeable by the glaring tail of a peacock.

In the dead game and dogs, by Fyt, there are good passages, but no whole.

The woman of Samaria, and St. John in the wilderness, by B. Stiozzi, are good
pictures.

There is also a large Coyp, well-painted; but badly composed.

At Derby, which lies within three miles of Keddleston, we were immediately
struck with the tower of the great church, which is a very beautiful piece of
Gothic architecture.

The object of the china-works there is merely ornament; which is particularly
unhappy, as they were, at the time we saw them, under no regulation of taste. A
very free hand we found employed in painting the vases; and the first colors
were laid in with spirit: but in the finishing, they were so richly daubed,
that all freedom was lost in finery. -- It may now be otherwise.

The gaudy painters however of such works, have the example of a great master
before them, even Raphael himself; whose paintings in the pottery way, tho
highly esteemed in the cabinets of the curious, seem generally to be daubed in
a manner fit only ad captandum vulgus. It is said, that Raphael fell in love
with a potter's daughter; and that to please her, he painted her father's
dishes. It is probable therefore, that he suited them to her taste; which
accounts for the gaudy coloring they display. -- How much more simple,
elegant, and beautiful is the painting of the old Etruscan vases, many of which
Mr. Wedgewood has so happily imitated? There we see how much better an effect
is produced by chaste colors on a dark ground; than by gaudy colors, on a
light one.

A person curious in machinery would be much amused by the silk-mill at Derby,
in which thirty thousand little wheels are put in motion by one great wheel.
The various parts, tho so complicated in appearance, are yet so distinct in
their movements; that I was told, any one workman has the power of stopping
that part of the machinery, which is under his direction, without interrupting
the motion of the rest.

The country between Derby and Leicester is flat. Quardon-wood, a little beyond
Loughborough, rising on the right, makes an agreeable variety, amidst such a
continuation of uniformity. Mount Sorrel also has the same effect.

The approach to Leicester gives it more consequence than it really has. The
town itself, old and incumbered, has little beauty: but it abounds with
fragments of antiquity.

Behind St. Nicholas's church is a piece of Roman architecture; one of the only
pure pieces perhaps in England. We see many towers, which go by the name of
Caesar; and boast of Roman origin. I doubt, whether any of them can boast it
with truth. And what few remnants we have, it is thought, have all been
retouched in after times. This fragment seems to have suffered no alteration.
It Is insignificance has secured it. Little more is left, than a wall, with four
double arches on it is face, retiring, but not perforated. And yet in this
trifling remnant there is a simplicity and dignity, which are very pleasing. It
is possible however that prejudice may in part, be the source of it is beauty.
Through an association of ideas, we may here be pleased with what we have
admired in Italian views.

This wall is built of brick; tho it has probably been faced with better
materials. For what purpose it was constructed, does not appear: nor whether it
was intended for the end, or side of a building. The idea of the country is,
that it has been a temple, from the great number of bones of animals, which
have been found near it: from whence it takes the name of Holy-bones.

The church of St. Nicholas, which stands opposite to it, seems to have been
built out of it is ruins, from the many Roman bricks with which it abounds.
Indeed the style of building, in the body of the church, is not unlike it.

At Leicester also we were put on the pursuit of another Roman fragment -- a
curious piece of sculpture; which we found at last in a cellar. It is a scrap
of tessulated pavement, on which three figures are represented; a stag; a woman
leaning over it; and a boy shooting with a bow. It may be a piece of Roman
antiquity; but it is a piece of miserable workmanship.

In this ancient town are found also many vestiges of British antiquity. --
From so rich an endowment as the abbey of Leicester formerly possessed, we
expected many beautiful remains; as it is still in a kind of sequestered state:
but in that expectation we were disappointed. Not the least fragment of a
Gothic window is left: not the merest mutilation of an arch. It Is present
remains afford as little beauty, as the ruins of a common dwelling. And in all
probability the present ruin is nothing better, than a common dwelling; built
from the materials of the ancient abbey. Such at least is the tradition of the
place. It belonged formerly, we were told, to the family of Hastings; and was
lost at play to the earl of Devonshire: but before the conveyance was prepared;
the owner, in the spirit of revenge, and mortification, sent private orders to
have it burnt. -- Many a black tale might be unfolded in most old houses, if
walls could speak.

But the great story of this abbey has a virtuous tendency. Within it is walls
was once exhibited a scene more humiliating to human ambition, and more
instructive to human grandeur, than almost any, which history has produced.
Here the fallen pride of Woolsey retreated from the insults of the world. All
his visions of ambition were now gone; his pomp; and pageantry; and crowded
levees. On this spot he told the listening monks, the sole attendants of his
dying hour, as they stood around his pallet, that he was come to lay his bones
among them: and gave that pathetic testimony to the truth, and joys of
religion, which preaches beyond a thousand lectures. "If I had served God as
faithfully as I served the king, he would not thus have forsaken my old age."

The death of Woolsey would make a fine moral picture; if the hand of any
master could give the pallid features of the dying statesman that chagrin, that
remorse, those pangs of anguish, which, in these last bitter moments of his
life, possessed him.

The point might be taken, when the monks are administering the comforts of
religion, which the despairing prelate cannot feel. The subject requires a
gloomy apartment; which a ray through a Gothic window might just enlighten;
throwing it is force chiefly on the principal figure; and dying away on the
rest. The appendages of the piece need only be few, and simple; little more
than the crozier, and red hat, to mark the cardinal, and tell the story.

This is not the only piece of English history, which is illustrated in this
ancient town. -- Here the house is still shown, where Richard III passed the
night, before the battle of Bosworth: and there is a story of him, still
preserved in the corporation-records, as we were informed by our conductor,
(who did not however appear to be a man of deep erudition) which illustrates
the caution and darkness of that prince's character. -- It was his custom to
carry, among the baggage of his camp, a cumbersome, wooden bed, which he
pretended was the only bed he could sleep in. Here he contrived a secret
receptacle for his treasure, which lay concealed under a weight of timber.
After the fatal day, on which Richard fell, the earl of Richmond entered
Leicester with his victorious troops. The friends of Richard were pillaged; but
the bed was neglected by every plunderer, as useless lumber. -- The owner of
the house afterward discovering the hoard, became suddenly rich, without any
visible cause. He bought lands; and at length (as our intelligencer informed
us) arrived at the dignity of being mayor of Leicester. Many years afterward,
his widow, who had been left in great affluence, was murdered for her wealth by
a servant maid, who had been privy to the affair: and at the trial of this
woman, and her accomplices, the whole transaction came to light.



SECT. XXXI.
FROM Leicester the country still continues flat and woody; stretching out into
meadows, pastures, and common fields. The horizon, on every side, is generally
terminated by spires. Oftener than once we were able to count six, or seven
adorning the limits of one circular view.

Of all the countries in England, this is the place for that noble species of
diversion, to which the inventive genius of our young sportsmen has given the
name of steeple-hunting. In a dearth of game, the chassieurs draw up in a body,
and pointing to some conspicuous steeple, set off, in full speed toward it,
over hedge and ditch. He who is so happy, as to arrive first, receives equal
honor, it is said, as if he had come in foremost, at the death of the fox.

In these plains, as rich, as they are unpicturesque, we had nothing to
observe, but the numerous herds of cattle, and flocks of sheep, which graze
them: and in the deficiency of other objects, we amused ourselves with the
various forms of these animals, and their most agreeable combinations.

The horse, in itself, is certainly a nobler animal, than the cow. His form is
more elegant; and his spirit gives fire and grace to his actions. But in a
picturesque light the cow has undoubtedly the advantage; and is every way
better suited to receive the graces of the pencil.

In the first place, the lines of the horse are round and smooth; and admit
little variety: whereas the bones of the cow are high, and vary the line, here
and there, by a squareness, which is very picturesque. There is a greater
proportion also of concavity in them; the lines of the horse being chiefly
unequal.



But is not the lean, worn-out horse, whose bones are staring, as picturesque
as the cow? In a degree it is; but we do not with pleasure admit the idea of
beauty into any deficient form. Prejudice, even in spite of us, rather revolts
against such an admission, however picturesque.

Nor are the lines only of the cow more picturesque, it has the advantage also
in the filling up of those lines. If the horse be sleek especially, and have,
what the jockies call, a fine coat, the smoothness of the surface is not so
well adapted to receive the spirited touches of the pencil, as the rougher form
and coat of the cow. The very action of licking herself, which is so common
among cows, throws the hair, when it is long, into different feathery flakes;
and gives it those strong touches, which are indeed the very touches of the
pencil. -- Cows are commonly the most picturesque in the months of April, and
May, when the old hair is coming off. There is a contrast between the rougher,
and smoother parts of the coat; and often also a pleasing variety of greyish
tints, blended with others of a richer hue. We observe this too in colts, when
we see them in a state of nature.

But the cow is not only better adapted to receive the spirited touches of the
pencil, it is better adapted also to receive the beauties of light. The horse,
like a piece of smooth garden-ground, receives it in a gradual spread: the cow,
like the abruptness of a rugged country, receives it in bold catches. And tho
in large objects a gradation of light is one of the great sources of beauty;
yet, in a small object, it has not commonly so pleasing an effect, as arises
from smart, catching lights.

The color of the cow also is often more picturesque. That of the horse is
generally uniform. Whereas the tints of the cow frequently play into each
other; a dark head melting into lighter sides; and these again being still
darker than the hinder parts. Those are always the most beautiful, which are
thus tinted with dark colors, harmoniously stealing into lighter. Here and
there a few small white spots may add a beauty; but if they run into large
blotches, and make a harsh termination between the dark, and light color, they
are disagreeable. The full black also, and full red, have little variety in
themselves; tho in a group all this unpleasant coloring may harmonize.

In the character, and general form of cows, as well as of horses, there are
many degrees of beauty and deformity.

The character of the cow is marked chiefly in the head. An open, or contracted
forehead; a long or a short visage; the twist of a horn; or the color of an
eyebrow; will totally alter the character, and give a sour, or an agreeable air
to the countenance. Nor is the head of this animal more characteristic, than it
is adapted to receive all the graces of the pencil.

With regard to the general form of the cow, we are not indeed so exact, as in
that of the horse. The points and proportions of the horse are studied, and
determined with so much exactness, that a small deviation strikes the eye. In
the form of the cow, we are not so learned. If deformity be avoided, it is
enough. There are two faults particularly in the line of a cow, a hog-back, and
a sinking rump, which are it is most usual blemishes. If it be free from these,
and have an harmonious coloring, and a pleasant character, it cannot well be
disagreeable.

The bull and the cow differ more in character and form, than the horse and the
mare. They are cast in different moulds. The sourness of the head; the
thickness and convexity of the neck; the heaviness of the chest, and shoulders;
the smoothness of the hip-bones; and the lightness of the hind-quarters, are
always found in the bull; and rarely in the cow.

The sheep is as beautiful an animal, as the cow; and as well adapted to
receive the graces of painting. Tho it want the variety of coloring; yet there
is a softness in it is fleece, a richness, a delicacy of touch, and a sweet
tenderness of shadow, which make it a very pleasing object.

The sheep is beautiful in every state, except just when it has past under the
sheers. But it soon recovers it is beauty; and in a few weeks loses it is
furrowed sides, and appears again in a picturesque dress. It Is beauty
continues, as the wool increases. What it loses in shape, it gains in the
feathered flakiness of it is fleece. Nor is it the least beautiful, when it is
sides are a little ragged -- when part of it is shape is discovered, and part
hid beneath the wool. Berghem delights to represent it in this ragged form.

In the characters, and forms of sheep we observe little difference. We
sometimes see an unpleasing visage; and sometimes the disagreeable rounding
line, which we have just called the hog-back: but in an animal so small, the
eye is less apt to investigate parts: it rather rests on the whole appearance;
and the more so, as sheep, being particularly gregarious, are generally
considered as objects in a group.

The observations I have made with regard to the beauty of these animals, are
confirmed by the practice of all the great masters in animal life, Berghem,
Coyp, Potter and others; who always preferred them to horses and deer, in
adorning their rural scenes. -- It is an additional pleasure therefore, that
such animals, as are the most useful, are likewise the most ornamental.

Having thus examined the forms of these picturesque animals, we spent some
time also in examining their most agreeable combinations.

Cattle are so large, that when they ornament a fore-ground, a few are
sufficient. Two will hardly combine. Three make a good group -- either united
-- or when one is a little removed from the other two. If you increase the
group beyond three; one, or more, in proportion, must necessarily be a little
detached. This detachment prevents heaviness, and adds variety. It is the same
principle applied to cattle, which we before applied to mountains, and other
objects See page 55, Vol. II. etc.
.

The same rules in grouping may be applied to distant cattle; only here you may
introduce a greater number.

In grouping, contrasted attitudes should be studied. Recumbency should be
opposed to a standing posture; fore-shortened figures, to lengthened; and one
color, to another. White blotches may inliven a group, tho in a single animal,
we observed, they are offensive.

Sheep come under the same rules; only the fore-ground, as well as the
distance, admits a larger number of these smaller animals. In pastoral subjects
sheep are often ornamental, when dotted about the sides of distant hills. Here
little more is necessary, than to guard against regular shapes -- lines;
circles; and crosses; which large flocks of sheep sometimes form. In combining
them however, or, rather scattering them, the painter may keep in view the
principle, we have already so often inculcated. They may be huddled together,
in one, or more large bodies; from which little groups of different sizes, in
proportion to the larger, should be detached.

In favor of the doctrine I have here advanced of the subordinate group, I
cannot forbear adding the authority of a great master, whose thorough
acquaintance with every part of painting has often, in the course of this
work, been observed.

Aeneas, on his landing upon the coast of Africa, sees from the higher ground a
herd of deer feeding in a valley; and Virgil, who, in the slightest instance,
seems ever to have had before his eyes, ideas of picturesque beauty, introduces
the herd, just as a painter would have done. From the larger group he detaches
a subordinate one: -- Tres litore cervos
Prospicit errantes; hos tota armenta sequuntur
A tergo. --
I need not conceal, that some commentators have found in these three stags,
which the followed, the poet's inclination to aristocracy; and that others have
supposed, he meant a compliment to the triumvirate. It is the commentator's
business to find out a recondite meaning: common sense is satisfied with what
is most obvious.

It may be observed further, that cattle and sheep mix very agreeably together;
as also young animals, and old. Lambs and calves fill up little interstices in
a group, and assist the combination. -- I may add, that human figures also
combine very agreeably with animals. Indeed they generally give a grace to a
group, as they draw it to an apex.

I scarce need to apologize for this long digression, as it is so naturally
suggested by the country, through which we passed; and so closely connected
with the subject, which we treat. He who studies landscape, will find himself
very deficient, if he has not paid great attention to the choice, and
combination, both of animal and human figures.

SECT. XXXII.
LEAVING the plains of Leicestershire, we entered the county of Northampton,
which assumes a new face. The ground begins to rise and fall, and distances to
open.

Lord Strafford's gardens, extending a considerable way on the left, are a
great ornament to the country.

Lord Hallifax's improvements succeed. They make little appearance from the
road: but the road itself is so beautiful, that it requires no aid. It passes
through spacious lanes, adorned on each side by a broad, irregular border of
grass; and winds through hedge-rows of full-grown oak, which the several turns
of the road form into clumps. You have both a good fore-ground, and beautiful
views into a fine country, through the boles of the trees. The undressed
simplicity, and native beauty, of such lanes as these, exceed the walks of the
most finished garden.

From Newport-Pagnel the country still continues pleasant. Before we reach
Wooburn, we have a good view of Wooburn-abbey, and of the surrounding woods;
which decorate the landscape.

Wooburn-park is an extensive woody scene, and capable of much improvement. We
rode through it: but could not see the duke of Bedford's house; which is shown
only on particular days. -- But the disappointment was not great. The furniture
of all fine houses is much the same; and as for pictures (such is the
prevalence of names, and fashion) that sometimes what are called the best
collections, scarce repay the ceremonies you are obliged to go through in
getting a sight of them.

After we leave Wooburn, the views continue still pleasant; till we meet the
chalky hills of Dunstable. These would disfigure the loveliest scene. But when
we have passed these glaring heights, the country revives: the rising grounds
are covered with wood, and verdure; and the whole looks pleasing. About Redburn
particularly the country is beautiful; and is thrown into distance by large
oaks, which over-hang the road.

St. Albans' church, and the ruins about it, make an immense pile; of which
some parts are picturesque. There is a mixture too of brick and stone in the
building, which often makes a pleasing contrast in the tints. Tho there are
many remains of beautiful Gothic in this church; there are more deformities of
Saxon architecture; particularly the tower, which is heavy, and disagreeably
ornamented. The little spire, which arises from it, is very absurd. -- Within
the church is a monument near the altar, of very curious Gothic workmanship.

Among the numerous inhabitants of the subterraneous regions of this church,
lies that celebrated prince, remembered by the name of good duke Humphrey; the
youngest brother of Henry V. He was put to death by a faction, in the
succeeding reign; and was buried somewhere in this abbey; but his grave was
unknown. Having lain concealed near three centuries, he came again to light,
not many years ago. By an accident, a large vault was discovered, in which he
was found sole tenant; wrapped in lead, and immersed in a pickle, which had
preserved him in tolerable order.

Leaving St. Alban's, we past the ruins of Verulam; which was raised in Roman
times, and destroyed in Saxon. As it was never restored, very little now
remains of that ancient town. In one part, about a quarter of a mile from the
road, a fragment has the appearance of an old castle; but the vestiges of the
wall run at least a mile.

Beyond Verulam the country grows pleasant. Soon after you pass Barnet, the
road enters Finchley-common. The distance is woody, intersected by an extensive
plain, which is connected with it by a sprinkling of scattered trees. The parts
are large; and the scenery not unpicturesque.

The first view of Highgate-hill would make a good distance, if it were
properly supported by a fore-ground. The view from it, is very grand; but is
distracted by a multiplicity of objects.

After this, the country is gone. London comes on apace; and all those
disgusting ideas, with which it is great avenues abound -- brick-kilns steaming
with offensive smoke -- sewers and ditches sweating with filth -- heaps of
collected soil, and stinks of every denomination -- clouds of dust, rising and
vanishing, from agitated wheels, pursuing each other in rapid motion -- or
taking stationary possession of the road, by becoming the atmosphere of some
cumbersome, slow-moving wagon -- villages without rural ideas -- trees, and
hedge-rows without a tinge of green -- and fields and meadows without
pasturage, in which lowing bullocks are crowded together, waiting for the
shambles; or cows penned, like hogs, to feed on grains. -- It was an agreeable
relief to get through this succession of noisome objects, which did violence to
all the senses by turns: and to leave behind us the busy hum of men; stealing
from it through the quiet lanes of Surry; which leading to no great mart, or
general rendezvous, afford calmer retreats on every side, than can easily be
found in the neighborhood of so great a town.

July 3, 1772.
THE END.
EXPLANATION OF THE PRINTS.
VOLUME I.
PAGE 39. THIS view of Warwick-castle, is inserted chiefly as an illustration
of what has been advanced in the preface (see page xxv) that a faithful
portrait is rarely in every part beautiful. Nothing can be more disagreeable to
the eye, than the cap represented here upon the round tower; and the
squareness, and formality of the remoter parts of the building: tho in other
situations Warwick-castle affords many pleasing views; some of which, with a
little alteration on the fore-grounds (see preface, page xxvii) would be very
picturesque. PAGE 69. A specimen of the elegant mode, in which handles are
adapted to Tuscan vases; and the awkward manner in which they are commonly
affixed to those of modern construction. PAGE 83. An explanation of the shapes
and lines of mountains. They are left unshadowed, that their forms may be more
conspicuous. PAGE 95. An illustration of the appearance, which the shores of a
lake form, when seen from its surface, in a boat. The promontories, and bays,
unless very large, lose all their indentations; and the whole boundary of the
lake becomes a mere thread. When you stand upon the shore, if your situation
be, in any degree, elevated, the promontories appear to come forward; and all
the indentations are distinct. These two modes of viewing may be compared by
turning from this print to page 55, vol. II; in which is represented a lake
seen from the shore. This latter mode of viewing a lake is generally the most
pleasing; unless indeed the stand be taken too high, which elevates the horizon
too much. PAGE 99. This print is meant to exemplify those beautiful
reflections, which are sometimes formed on the surface of a lake; and broken by
it is tremulous motion; as explained in page 100. PAGE 113. The contracted
valley may be considered as a species of fore-ground. The valley here
represented, opens rather too abruptly. There is more beauty in this kind of
landscape, when the removed screen folds more behind the front one; and the
distance appears over the intersecting point. These scenes are generally
decorated with a river; but sometimes only with a road. Of this latter kind is
Middleton-dale, described in the 212th page of the IId vol. The contracted
valley is contrasted by the open, extended vale; a scene of which kind is
represented in the 41st page of the IId vol. PAGE 123. An illustration of the
effect of light; which is so great, as to give consequence even where there are
no objects. A setting sun; or a storm, (as here represented) are most
favorable to an exhibition of this kind. PAGE 135. This plan of Windermere is
not geographically exact; but enough so to give the reader an idea of it is
shape, and the situation of the several places mentioned on it is shores. PAGE
135. This view of the middle part of Windermere, is taken from the grounds a
little to the north of Bowness. The distance, as the reader will observe from
the plan, is composed of that country, which shoots away toward the south. The
high grounds make a part of Furness-fell; which is described, in page 143,
stretching along the western shores of the lake toward the north. -- Below
Furness-fell appear some of the islands of the lake, particularly the great
island; which is the most southern of them. PAGE 157. This is a view of that
part of Furness-abbey, which is called the school; and which is one of the most
beautiful fragments of that elegant ruin. PAGE 163. An illustration of that
kind of wild country, of which we saw several instances, as we entered
Cumberland. In general, the mountains make the most considerable part of these
scenes. But when any of them is furnished with a distant view of a lake, the
landscape is greatly enriched. PAGE 179. This plan of Keswick-lake means only
to express the general shape of it; and the relative situation of it is several
parts. PAGE 187. The character of that sort of rocky scenery is here given,
which is not uncommonly found on the banks of lakes, particularly of Keswick
lake; the shores of which exhibit several instances of these detached rocks.
PAGE 193. An illustration of that sort of country, which composes the narrower
parts of the straits of Borrodale. They consist of rocky, or craggy mountains
on each side; with a stream, or, in some parts (where the stream may be hid) a
road, in the middle. But it is difficult to give any idea of these tremendous
scenes, in so small a compass, as they are here exhibited: for as their terror
consists greatly in their immensity, it is not easy to persuade the eye to
conceive highly of their grandeur from these diminutive representations. -- Mr.
Farrington has given us, on a larger scale, a fine portrait, and I think, a
very exact one, of the entrance into these straits at the village of Grange.
PAGE 227. This print was intended to give some idea of that kind of rocky
scenery, of which Gatesgarth-dale is composed; and of that solemnity, which it
assumed, when we saw the sweeping clouds pass over it is summits: but I am sorry
to say, it does not express the idea so well as I could wish. The proofs of
this print escaped me too soon. Indeed I thought it had been brought nearer my
idea, than I find it is. The clouds are ill made-out: the distant rocks are
worse; and the figures, as a scale to the perspective, are twice as large as
they ought to be. -- With these hints, however, I hope the imagination of the
spectator may not be misled by the deficiences of the print.
VOLUME II.
PAGE 41. AN illustration of that beautiful species of landscape, produced by
an extensive vale. Gradation is among the first principles of picturesque
beauty. A graduating light, a graduating shade, or a graduating distance, are
all beautiful. When the vale therefore does not exceed such a proportion, as is
adapted to the eye, it is pleasing to see it fading away gradually, from the
fore-ground, into the obscurity of distance. It presents indeed only one
uniform idea; which, tho often grand, is not generally so pleasing, as the
variety, and intricacy of a country broken into parts, and yet harmoniously
combined. PAGE 51. This plan of Ulleswater, like the others, is not very exact;
but enough so, to give an idea of it is general shape, and the relative
situation of the several places on it is shores. PAGE 55. This print illustrates
that kind of scenery, which is presented by Ulleswater. It is, by no means, a
portrait: but it gives some idea of the view toward Patterdale, in which the
rocky promontory on the left, and the two woody promontories on the right, are
conspicuous features. PAGE 85. This view has more the air of Dacre-castle, than
of any of the other old castles we met with: but it is chiefly introduced to
show the beautiful effect which some of these ruins had, when seen, under a
gloomy hemisphere, enlightened by the rays of a setting sun. PAGE 121. A view
of Scaleby-castle, in which the old tower, part of the walls, and the bastion,
are represented. PAGE 169. An illustration of the force of contrast, in a piece
of regular ground, bisected. PAGE 221. This print is meant to give some idea of
that kind of continuation of rocky scenery, which is found at Matlock, along
the banks of the Derwent: but it is not so good an illustration, as might be
wished. PAGE 227. This view of Dovedale, represents that beautiful scene in a
more naked state, than it is described. The stratum of it only is here
represented, which the spectator's imagination must cloth with wood, to give
it complete beauty. -- The fact is, a little gain unluckily arises from
dismantling it periodically of it is wood; and this drawing was made, just after
the axe had been at work. PAGE 251. An illustration of that kind of flat
country, which we meet with in Leicestershire. The horizon is generally bounded
by a distance, and yet seldom an extensive one; as there is rarely a rising
ground, that can command it. The country is uninteresting, and wants
adventitious objects to set it off. If the distance happen to be spread with
light under a dark cloud, it is a happy circumstance; and has a good effect.
Sometimes, on the middle grounds, a gentle rise, adorned with a spire; or a
shepherd attending his flock, may relieve the eye. Such circumstances are all
we can expect. In defect of these, we must wait, till we can find a few cattle
on the fore-ground, which may turn the landscape into an appendage; and give us
one of the pictures of Coyp. PAGE 253. This print exhibits a comparison between
the lines of the horse and the cow, as objects of picturesque beauty. PAGE 255.
And this exhibits the same mode of comparison between the bull, and the cow.
PAGE 259. These two prints are meant to explain the doctrine of grouping larger
cattle. Two will hardly combine. There is indeed no way of forming two into a
group, but by uniting them, as they are represented in the former of these
prints. If they stand apart, whatever their attitudes, or situation may be,
there will be a deficiency. But with three, you are almost sure of a good
group, except indeed they all stand in the same attitude, and at equal
distances. They generally however combine the most beautifully, when two are
united, and the third a little removed. Four introduce a new difficulty in
grouping. Separate they would have a bad effect. Two, and two together would be
equally bad. The only way, in which they will group well, is to unite three, as
represented in the second of these prints, and to remove the fourth. PAGE 261.
These two prints illustrate the doctrine of grouping smaller animals, as sheep,
goats, and deer. When they occupy the fore-ground, as represented in the first,
they come under the same rule of grouping, as larger cattle: only a greater
number may be introduced. And if the main body be larger, the subordinate group
must be so of course. If they be removed to a middle distance, as represented
in the other of these prints, the subordinate group is of less consequence; and
still of less, the farther it recedes from the eye. The whole is only
considered as one body, blended, as it were, and shadowed, or enlightened, with
the ground: and it is enough, if regular, and disagreeable shapes are avoided.
ERRATA, etc.
VOL. I.
Page 3 for, where the admirers, read that the admirers. Page 3 for, feature,
that, read feature, which. Page 9 for, have still possession, read has still
possession. Page 10 for, this just species of taste, read this just taste in
decoration. Page 27, etc. for, Vanburgh, read Vanbrugh. Page 30 for, lake) seen
together, read lake, seen together.) Page 56 dele, Shenstone was poor, and with
a little of that vanity, which often attends poverty, Page 59 for, aboribus,
read arboribus. Page 105 for, which is the most profitable, read which is
thought the most profitable. Page 108 for, looses, read loses. Page 135 for,
grandeur of the country, read grandeur of the scene. Page 145 for, splended,
read splendid. Page 184 for, as the lake of Windermere, read as those of
Windermere. Page 200 for, singular character, read peculiar character. Page 222
for, genus, read species.
VOL. II.
Page 5 for, moment, read force. Page 36 for, given to me, read given us. Page
76 for, in the scene, read in the effect. Page 120 for, except an old gateway,
read but an old gateway. Page 121 for, stand the ruins, read we visited the
ruins. Page 149 for, Lord Lonsdale, read Sir James Lowther: and for, late lord,
read late lord Lonsdale. Page 150 At the end of the first paragraph, after due
inferiority, insert -- "But what is said of these two detached parts of the
castle, is meant only with regard to that view of it, which appears from the
road. If you go round it, you are presented with other views, in which it is
seen more advantageously: particularly where you see the bridge, and the first
opening into the vale of Eden. There the castle takes a very grand situation on
a hanging rock over the river; and the detached part makes but an
inconsiderable appearance." Page 165 for, life taught her, read life had taught
her. Page 169 for, break, read breaks. Page 174 for, Grata, read Greta. Page
192 for, the front of the precipice, read the foot of the precipice. Page 208
for, Tinley, read Tilney. Page 233 for, barrier to all the scenery, read
barrier to the scenery. Page 251 for, chassieurs, read chasseurs. Page 258 for,
two will hardly, read two cows will hardly.
In page the 11th, etc. the author endeavors to show, that the art of painting
consists rather in giving the strong characteristic touches of nature, than in
minutely detailing her beauties, by high finishing. Since he wrote that
passage, he met with, in a work of Dr. Johnson's, the application of the same
rules to poetry. The passage is here transcribed, as a new argument, to show
the near resemblance of the two arts. The business of a poet, is, to examine --
not the individual; but the species -- to remark general properties, and large
appearances. He does not number the streaks of the tulip, or describe the
different shades in the verdure of the forest. He is to exhibit in his
portraits of nature such prominent, and striking features, as recall the
original to every mind: and must neglect the minuter discriminations (which one
may have remarked, and another have neglected), for those characteristics,
which are alike obvious to attention, and carelessness.

Pr. of Abyssin. p. 68.
