THE Siege of AQUILEIA.

A TRAGEDY.

As it is acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

-- Me non oracula certum,
Sed mors certa facit, pavido, fortique cadendum est:
Hoc satis est dixisse Jovem.
LUCAN. DUBLIN: Printed for G. and A. EWING in Dame-street.

M.DCC.LX.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.
WHEN Philip's son led forth his warlike band,
To die, or conquer, in a distant land;
To fan the fire, a martial muse he chose;
From Homer's song a new Achilles rose!
When generous Athens her prime trophies won,
Vanquisb'd Darius, and Darius' son,
The stage breathed war -- the soldiers bosom burned,
And fiercer to the field each chief returned:
Now, when the world resounds with loud alarms,
When victory sits plan'd on Britain's arms,
Be war our theme: the hero's glorious toil,
And virtue springing from the iron soil!
Our scenes present a siege in story known;
Where magnanimity, and valor shone:
If nature guides us, if the hand of truth
Draws the just portrait of a Roman youth,
Who, with the best and noblest passions sir'd,
In the same moment, conquered and expired;
Perhaps your bearts may own the pictured woe,
And from a fonder source your sorrows flow:
Whilst warm remembrance aids the poet's strain,
And England weeps for English heroes slain.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
AEMILIUS, Consul of Rome, and Governor of Aquileia. Mr. GARRICK. Sons of the
Consul. PAULUS, Mr. AUSTIN. TITUS, Mr. HOLLAND
Officers in the Army of MAXIMIN. VARUS, Mr. DAVIES. DUMNORIX, Mr. BRANSBY.
GARTHA, a Numidian Officer in the Troops of AEMILIUS. Mr. SCRASE. Priest of
JUPITER, Mr. BURTON. LUCIUS, a Freedman. Mr. PACKER. OFFICER, a Messenger. Mr.
ACKMAN.
WOMEN.
CORNELIA, Wife to the Consul. Mrs. CIBBER.
THE Siege of AQUILEIA.
A TRAGEDY.
ACT. I. SCENE I.
The Palace Court. Enter PAULUS and TITUS. THIS is no time to strive for vain
renown.
The fate of Rome, remember that, my brother!
Depends on the Defense of Aquileia.
TITUS. PAULUS, I know.

PAULUS. But thou do not consider
The importance of this war. We fight not now,
As often since Freedom fell our fathers fought,
When Latian chiefs contended who should reign,
With half the senate listed on each side;
The victor still was Roman, and revered
The gods and temples of immortal Rome.
But over yon mighty host, that girds our walls,
Fierce MAXIMIN commands: whether of Thrace,
Or wild Dalmatia, so obscure his birth,
Himself scarce knows; but sure Barbarian born.
This savage soldier, nursed in blood and war,
Whom military frenzy has set up
To trample on mankind, abhors a Roman;
And marks for death the noble and the brave.
His yoke, at last, the indignant senate scorns,
The slumbering Genius of our country wakes,
And rouses slothful Italy to arms.
The furious tyrant from the frontier hastes,
Like a wild beast galled by the hunter's spear,
And, breathing vengeance, rushes upon Rome:
Here first opposed, tenfold his fury burns;
Here, in the pass of fate, our father stands,
Defies and stops the monster in his rage,
Till Rome's last legions come to give him battle.
Now, when a soldier's life is of such moment,
When destiny hangs on a single day,
To fight for glory, TITUS, were a crime.

TITUS. No, PAULUS, no! it is not fame alone
That TITUS seeks to purchase from the foe;
Though such a crime the gods and men would pardon.
I know the peril that over Rome impends,
And know the hated cause of all our ills,
That army, only brave against their country,
I mean to smite them, and their giant leader,
Whom nature for a gladiator formed,
To be the sport, and not the lord, of Rome.
The blow once struck, our foe must raise the siege,
Or waste his veterans in vain attacks,
And give to GORDIANUS easy conquest.

PAULUS. Were this a frontier city far from Rome,
And yon huge host composed of foes remote,
German, or Parthian; I would say to thee,
Lead on, my brother! Shield to shield we'd go,
And fire yon turret, or together perish.
But now when conquest by delay is gained,
When Aquileia guards the walls of Rome,
Dread of the great event has so possessed me,
That, like the Persian soldier, I could stay
My arm uplifted, patient to the call
Of cautious Duty.

TITUS. And renouncing fame?
Oh! PAULUS! you have gained long since the prize
That I contend for. Every martial palm
Thy sword has won. When I, like thee, am great
In deeds of arms, like thee I may be wary.
Now to my brother I lay bare my breast:
This famous siege approaches to its end;
Whatever end the ruling gods ordain,
Yet no distinguished action graces me.
I Have done my duty. That I reckon nothing;
The meanest soldier has not shrunk from duty;
Son of AEMILIUS, and thy brother, PAULUS!
I must do more, and by the gods I will!
Here I have found a path that leads to glory;
Do not oppose me, else -- we are friends no more. --
Our father comes. Speak not against my purpose,
And I shall move the consul's noble mind.
Enter AEMILIUS.
AEMILIUS. Health to my sons!
PAULUS and TITUS. Heaven guard our father's life!

AEMILIUS. And bless my children! ha! your looks are keen.
Yours chiefly, TITUS! what has stirred your spirit?
How points the enemy? This quiet night,
In preparation past, portends a storm.

PAULUS. On that attack which threats the eastern gate
The enemy has labored all night long,
Repairing what the river's rage had ruined.

AEMILIUS. It was a friendly flood. The river god
With all his waters guards his native walls;
On that strong quarter they can never prevail.
The north I fear, where yon stupendous tower
Our works commands.

TITUS. It shall not long command,
Let but the consul grant me my desire.

AEMILIUS. What would my son?

TITUS. Their tower is weakly guarded.
At break of day, a soldier from yon camp
Fled to my post; hollow and gaunt he was;
His shrivelled limbs scarce bore his sounding arms.
Like him, he said, with toil and famine worn,
Were half the tyrant's host. For MAXIMIN,
Mad with delay, and fiercer from repulse,
Reviles his soldiers, drives them to the trench
With whips and sharp reproach. This day, overcome
By strong necessity, he breathes a while,
And sends his legions forth, to gather in
Whatever this exhausted region yields.
I saw the busy foragers in troops
March, and disperse themselves on every side,
Like playful children on a summer day,
Secure and careless; for no martial band
Of late has sallied from our guarded gates.
This is the time. Permit me, O my father!
Now to attack their ill defended lines,
And fire that mighty tower in which they trust.

AEMILIUS. Well have thou spoke, my son! thy zeal I love,
Nor must thy skill and judgment pass unprais'd.
Be thus attentive still, and trust me, TITUS,
In future sieges, and in other wars,
Swift execution shall thy purpose honor.

TITUS. Never shall I see another siege like this,
Never draw my sword in such a glorious cause.
Alas! my lord! check not my spring of thought,
Nor nip the only bud it yet has borne.

AEMILIUS. Riper occasions will thy valor claim.
Danger comes on; Typhaeus-like it comes,
Whose fabled stature every hour increased.

TITUS. O! judge not of the counsel by the weight
Of him that gives it. Would to heaven, my lord!
That I could now divest me of that youth
Which mars my credit. Cheerfully I Would step
Far into age, to gain but for a day
The grave authority which years bestow.

PAULUS. What brings the brave Numidian GARTHA hither?
Enter GARTHA.
GARTHA. Hail to the general!

AEMILIUS. Hail, valiant GARTHA.
How has the morning past where you command?

GARTHA. It has been busy. The presumptuous foe
In loose disordered squadrons ranged the fields.
I watched the time; and sudden as the blast
That rises in the desert, out we rushed
And swept them from the plain. Safe in our speed
We urged the chase far as the rising ground,
And unmolested viewed the camp below.
This worthy of your notice I observed,
Their wondrous tower, the work of many a day,
Stands now protected by a feeble guard.

TITUS. Thanks for thy welcome tidings, noble GARTHA!
The guardian gods of Rome bend from their skies,
And point this action out. Hear me, my father!
If ever since my birth I gave thee joy,
If ever thou did, as parents often are wont,
Interpret large the promise of my childhood,
O hear and grant my chief and dear request!
Let me go forth: be this my first exploit,
To wrap in fire the tyrant's boasted tower;
That Rome, who glories in the Aemilian line,
May join your TITUS to his kindred names!

AEMILIUS. In thee the spirit of thy fathers speak,
Or some superior power thy bosom fires,
Whom I oppose no more. Go, and fulfill
Thy destiny. Brave GARTHA too shall add
His troops to thine. Prepare what else --

TITUS. It Is done.
Destructive instruments and balls of fire
Are ready at the gate.

AEMILIUS. Farewell, my son!
If you prevail, urge not too far your fortune.
Remember still my words; that when we meet,
I may have cause to praise thy conduct then,
As now thy courage, TITUS.

TITUS. GARTHA, come!
[Exeunt TITUS and GARTHA.
AEMILIUS. PAULUS, lead thou thy legion to the gate,
And favor their retreat. It may be needful;
But mix not in the fight, for mighty cities
Have been by such temerity surpised.

PAULUS. Would there was no Roman breast more prone
To rash attempts, than mine! I wish, my lord,
That I had led, and TITUS had sustained me.
Enter an OFFICER.
OFFICER. Consul of Rome! this arrow, thus inscribed,
Fell on the green slop'd bank fast by my post;
And as it bears your name, myself have brought it.
[AEMILIUS reads. "In three days hence, even with the ides of June,
"The Roman army comes to your relief.
"Be sparing of your troops; protract the siege;
"Thou art the shield of Rome and GORDIANUS."

AEMILIUS. Soldier, return, and publish to the legions
The welcome tidings of a near relief.

OFFICER. Gladly, my lord. Much have the troops endured,
And with unshaken constancy they suffer.
[Exit OFFICER.
PAULUS. Had this advice arrived ere TITUS went,
I think he hardly had obtained permission.
Though MAXIMIN should raise an hundred towers,
And, like the Giants when they warred with Jove,
Pile mountains on each other, high as heaven,
For three short days his fury we may scorn.

AEMILIUS. Go, and prevent the sally. Tell thy brother,
What the imperial mandate here contains.
It is the emperor's command recalls him.

PAULUS. With pleasure I obey.
[Exit PAULUS.
AEMILIUS alone. I must reserve
My sons, my soldiers, for a nobler service,
And in the battle aid the Roman arms.
The hour approaches that must give to Rome
A legal lord, by her own suffrage chosen,
Or fix a barbarous master over mankind,
That barbarous master I shall never own.
If I could stoop to drag the servile chain,
And live the vassal of a vile Dalmatian,
Yet I could not conceal me in the crowd
Of prostrate Romans; I that stood aloft,
And bore through Italy the senate's standard.
Fast by that standard will I plant my foot,
There with my boys a glorious conquest gain,
Or end at once the long Aemilian line.
[CORNELIA appears. Behold the only object that can shake
One moment my resolve! What will become
Of thee, CORNELIA! doomed perhaps to live,
Like PRIAM's wretched queen, the slave of those
By whom her sons, her husband, country fell.
Enter CORNELIA and PRIEST.
CORNELIA. Why is my lord alone? Where are my sons?

AEMILIUS. This day, CORNELIA, brings us welcome tidings,
The Emperor approaches with his host.

CORNELIA. Thanks to the gods! But say, where are my children?

AEMILIA. This instant I expect them to return.

CORNELIA. From whence, AEMILIUS?

AEMILIUS. From the northern gate.
TITUS had formed a brave, a great design;
But when assurance of relief arrived,
My PAULUS hastened to recall his brother.

CORNELIA. It Is as I feared. PAULUS will come too late.
The omens of the gods must be fulfilled.

AEMILIUS. What evil omens has CORNELIA seen?

CORNELIA. It Is strange to tell; but as I slumbering lay,
About that hour when glad Aurora springs,
To chase the lagging shades, methought I was
In Rome, and full of peace the city seemed.
My mind oblivious too had lost it is care.
Serene I stepped along the lofty hall,
Imbellish'd with the statues of our fathers,
When suddenly an universal groan
Issued at once from every marble breast.
Aghast I gazed around! when slowly down
From their high pedestals I saw descend
The murdered GRACCHI. Hand in hand, the brothers
Stalked toward me. As they approached more near,
They were no more the GRACCHI, but my sons
PAULUS and TITUS. At that dreadful change
I shrieked and waked. But never from my mind
The spectacle shall part. Their rueful eyes!
Their cheeks of stone! the look of death and woe!
So strange a vision never from fancy rose.
The rest, my lord! this holy Priest can tell.

AEMILIUS. Why this is nothing but a common dream;
For often when the waking mind is charged
With apprehension of uncertain ills,
Imagination, in the hour of rest,
Presents wild fantastic combinations,
That have a shade and tincture of the past:
But it is the weakness of the human mind
That joins the vain assemblage to futurity.

PRIEST. Men reason thus, my lord! who think their reason
Can grasp and measure all; presumptuous thought!
Sounds more than human have been often heard,
And shapes celestial seen, by mortal man;
But yet most frequent in the silent night
Are warnings given by strange portentuous dreams.
The history of mighty Rome abounds
In awful instances. The old republic
By them has often been swayed; and often preferv'd.

AEMILIUS. But tell me, Priest of JOVE! what do the gods
By their more certain omens now declare?

PRIEST. Consul! with the most venerable rites
That our religion knows, I have performed
A sacrifice to Capitolian JOVE,
This pious matron present: never yet
Since at the altars of the gods I stood
Did I behold such omens of calamity.
Yet they were intricate, ambiguous, dark;
And though some parts I might interpret fair,
Even these were mixed and full of dire perplexity.
No further can I see into the cloud,
That veils the will of heaven; but this I say,
And by the scepter of the god I serve
It is the truth: Some dreadful danger hangs
Over thee thyself, this city, or thy race.
(Shout.
CORNELIA. Ha! what means that shout?

AEMILIUS. It is a joyful shout.
Behold the cause: see where that dusky smoke
Darkens the air. And now the flame bursts out;
Their turret blazes, and my TITUS conquers.

CORNELIA. O heaven and earth! O son too well beloved!
Why do these cruel omens check my joy?
Enter an OFFICER.
OFFICER. Consul! your valiant son has fired the tower;
But whilst he urged too far the flying foe,
A band, that lay concealed beyond the height,
Has gained the plain between him and the city.

AEMILIUS. O rashly brave! whom I forewarned in vain. --
Retire, CORNELIA, yet he may be rescued.
LUCIUS.

Enter another OFFICER. LUCIUS. The northern gate unguarded stands:
For when brave PAULUS saw his brother's peril,
He with his legion rushed upon the foe,
And furious is the fight.

CORNELIA. Both, both are lost!

AEMILIUS. Unhappy youths! My steady PAULUS too!
Where is our discipline, obedience where? --
I have no leisure now for words, CORNELIA!
Implore the gods to guard you and your children.
[Exit with his attendants. Manent CORNELIA, and PRIEST.
CORNELIA. Perhaps ere this CORNELIA has no children!
They both are fallen into the fatal snare.
Tremendous oracle! too late revealed.

PRIEST. Abandon not thy soul to such despair;
The sword of war, devouring as it is,
Consumes not all. The destined number die,
And from the bloodiest field still some return.

CORNELIA. My sons will never return, I know them well.
The noble heart of TITUS, if he lives,
This instant swells with grief, and pride, and shame.
Will he, the author of this fatal combat,
Forsake the soldiers whom he led to slaughter;
Return discomfited, and saved by flight,
To bear reproach, and blush in Aquileia?
He will not, holy Flamen! Nor will PAULUS:
Calm as he is, and master of himself,
My generous PAULUS will not leave his brother.
Alas! I never shall behold them more.
This is the evil that the gods foretold.
Ye constant matrons of Rome's former days!
Alas! I have no fortitude like yours.
Mine were no public cares. In the mild shade
Of sweet domestic happiness I lived,
Till this fierce tempest rose, the storm of war,
Whose rage has burst on the Aemilian race.

PRIEST. Lady, retire. I to the walls will go,
And learn what has befallen. Remember thou,
How often, in human life, the great conclusion
Of feared and wished events mocks all conjecture.
Exeunt.
End of the first Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter PRIEST. PRIEST. TOO soon thy omens are accomplished, JOVE!
O wretched parents! O devoted race!
Enter LUCIUS.
LUCIUS. CORNELIA comes, impatient of thy stay.

PRIEST. How shall my tongue perform a faithful office,
And tell CORNELIA what my eyes beheld?
Her sons I saw surrounded by the foe;
And their small troops seemed like a bank of fand,
Which, by the flowing tide encompassed round,
Each moment wastes and lessens to the view.
Their wretched father saw, and could not save them.
For full opposed to him the tyrant stood
With half his host embattled. Thrice AEMILIUS
Came to the front of his remaining troops,
As if he meant to rush upon the foe,
And thrice the consul pulled the father back:
Then looking down and leaning on his sword,
The tears fast trickling down the warrior's cheeks,
He paused a while, and turned him to the city.

Enter CORNELIA. CORNELIA. Thou bring'st no comfort! Terror and dismay
Are written on thy brow! Haste, tell me, Flamen.

PRIEST. Behold a soldier, bleeding from the field.
Enter GARTHA wounded.
CORNELIA. It Is the Numidian chief!

GARTHA. Lady, these wounds,
Which bleed to death, make GARTHA not ashamed
That he alone revisits Aquileia.
Involuntary messenger am I
Of tidings harsh to tell. My fiery steed,
Galled with an arrow, bore me from the plain,
Where still your valiant sons maintain the fight,
And with amazing actions fate suspend.
The boldest soldiers of the tyrant's host
Shrink from their rage. Lady, I speak with pain.
This to the consul, I advised the sally,
And fell into the ambush. I rejoice
That I shall not survive it.

PRIEST. Help! he faints.

GARTHA. Ch would I had fallen at the feet of TITUS!
[Enter Attendants.
PRIEST. Support, and bear him hence.

CORNELIA. O generous GARTHA!
Too dearly have thou proved thy constant faith.
[Exit GARTHA supported. No more I hear the shouts of distant war,
It Is horrid silence all. The work of death
Is over; doubt and fear are at an end.
Now certain anguish and despair prevail.
Enter AEMILIUS attended. My husband!

AEMILIUS. Oh! CORNELIA! wretched dame!
Look not to me; I bring no consolation,
I cannot comfort thee. I could not save
My children from destruction. Rigid duty
Made me spectator of their overthrow.
O fatal ensigns of unhappy power!
O had AEMILIUS been a poor Centurion,
He might unheeded have forsook his station,
And perished with his children.

CORNELIA. They are dead.
PAULUS and TITUS dead. Their mother lives!
Ye all directing gods, whom we adore,
Whom I with spotless hands have ever served,
Is misery like this my just reward?
Your dearest gifts are to destruction turned.
Had I not been the fond, the happy mother
Of sons, for whom all mothers envied me,
I had not been above all women wretched.

PRIEST. Great are thy woes, CORNELIA, great indeed!
Yet not unfrequent in this changeful world
Are woes like thine; and greater still than thine.
The famous matron of thy name and blood,
The first CORNELIA, saw her godlike sons
In Rome betrayed, and slain by Roman hands.
And often in every age have wretched mothers
Survived their families', their country's ruin,
And lived sad captives in a foreign land:
No kindred ear to hear, no eye to weep
In pity of their woes: no human face
For them to look on, but the hateful face
Of foes, who made them childless, widows, slaves.
To thee remain thy husband, and thy country,
In whose defense thy sons so greatly died.
Thee Rome shall honor, and revere in thee
The sacred memory of her heroes slain.

AEMILIUS. It is the right, the birthright, of our house,
For Rome to die: in every signal strife,
In every struggling period of the state,
My sires have bled. My sons have chose their time;
Bravely they fought, and nobly were they slain.
Rome still shall stand, though the AEMILII fall.
The tyrant's works are levelled with the ground,
And his proud tower yet smokes upon the plain.
Our ramparts now his fierce assaults desy;
The Roman army, like a gathered storm,
Rolls toward him. My sons shall be revenged;
My eyes shall see, my sword shall share, the vengeance.

CORNELIA. Mean while, unburied on the bloody field,
Amidst the common heap, my children lie.
Majestic PAULUS, and my lovely TITUS,
Is this the end of all your mother's care?
Some fierce barbarian now insults the dead;
Adding dishonest wounds. O! might not gold
Their dear remains redeem? Alas! alas!
It Is the sole consolation I can hope for,
To save them from the beasts and birds of prey,
That howl and scream around these fatal walls.
To fold once more their bodies in my arms;
To lay them decent on the funeral pile,
And over their ashes pour a parent's heart.

AEMILIUS. Mindful of that sad duty, I sent forth
A herald to the tyrant, and expect
Each moment his return. The trumpet sounds.
[Enter Herald, with an Officer of MAXIMIN's. It Is he, and with him one whose
lofty port,
And splendid arms, bespeak his high command.

CORNELIA. Forgive, O chief unknown, a mother's grief,
Which, short'ning the respect thy presence claims,
Hastes to enquire, if MAXIMIN will give
The bodies of her children to the tomb?

OFFICER. Far be its dismal honors from your offspring!
Lady, your valiant sons survive the field.

CORNELIA. Are they not dead? were not the AEMILII slain
On yonder field? Their father saw them fall.

OFFICER. Faint with long fighting, and encompast round,
Oppressed with numbers, and borne down they fell;
Not slain, nor greatly wounded. Captives now,
In their behalf, from MAXIMIN I come.

CORNELIA. O! sire of gods and men! eternal JOVE!
For ever praised be thy protecting arm!

OFFICER. Upon their father now depends their fate;
It Is his to grant what MAXIMIN requires.

CORNELIA. Let his demands be boundless as the wish
Of avarice itself, they shall be granted.
Treasures there are from age to age preserved,
The acquisition of our frugal sires;
Well are the treasures of our house bestowed,
If they redeem their lives who should possess them.

OFFICER. It is not gold that MAXIMIN requires.
To thee, AEMILIUS, I address my words:
Imperial MAXIMIN, lord of mankind,
Charges the senate and the Roman people
With breach of vows, and unprovoked rebellion;
But chiefly thee, who first withstood thy sovereign,
And stopped the progress of his just revenge.
The righteous gods, he says, to thee averse,
Have made thy sons the captives of his arms;
Them he has doomed to death, and will this day
The sentence execute, unless their father,
Before the sun shall set, give up the city.

CORNELIA. Relentless tyrant! O all-seeing gods!
How dire a prospect opens to CORNELIA!

AEMILIUS. I stand now not in equal lists with MAXIMIN,
Nor mean I here to plead the cause of Rome:
'Twould but offend thine ear. Yet tell thy lord,
He knows AEMILIUS not, and therefore wrongs him
By this unworthy trial of his faith;
Unhappy, most unhappy, he may make me,
But he and fortune cannot make me base.

OFFICER. Is this the answer I must bear to MAXIMIN?

AEMILIUS. What other answer could he hope from me?

OFFICER. Think of the consequence of this defiance.

AEMILIUS. I Will meet it when it comes: now I must think
Of trust reposed in me by injured Rome.

OFFICER. Stout are thy words. But will this pride of spirit
Sustain thee through the horrors that surround thee?
Thy lips have now pronounced thy children's doom,
Which executed, as it soon must be,
Will move the sternest soldier of our camp
To tender pity. Never yet were seen
So brave a pair as thy unhappy sons;
Nature on them has poured out all her gifts,
And dressed their virtue in the fairest form.

CORNELIA. O thou, whose tongue in Roman accents speaks,
Whose gentle aspect shows a mind humane!
Take pity on the most unhappy parents,
That ever bore the name. This fatal day
Has proved too well the worth of these my sons,
Whom nature, though they less deserved, would love,
O! soften to the tyrant this refusal. --
I know not what to say; I have no right,
But that which signal misery confers,
To beg from thee assistance. If thou have
At home an anxious mother, or sad spouse,
Who daily trembles for thy noble life,
Think of her state, and listen to CORNELIA,
Whose tongue till now did never plead for favor.

AEMILIUS. O generous stranger! our misfortunes touch
Thy manly mind.

OFFICER. No stranger I: behold
A Roman, and a friend. This helmet off,
Perhaps CORNELIA may remember VARUS.

CORNELIA. VARUS! my friend! companion of my youth!
O heavy change of times! on other terms
In Rome, delightful Rome, we wont to meet.

VARUS. Most true, CORNELIA.

CORNELIA. And is VARUS come
To aid the tyrant's arms against his country!
Come the fierce herald of his kinsmen's doom?

VARUS. With the same heart, the same unaltered mind
To all that ever he loved, is VARUS come.

AEMILIUS. Permit me, gallant VARUS! still to claim
Thy friendship, though I stand the tyrant's foe.

VARUS. AEMILIUS! fortune rules the lives of men.
Had I been consul, and possessed in Rome
Of civil dignity; perhaps, like thee,
I should have armed me in the senate's cause;
Whilst thou, a soldier on the distant frontier,
Perhaps, like me, had fought thy leader's quarrel.
The armies of the north acknowledge MAXIMIN.
I lead the British legions to the war:
But more of this hereafter. Thou have heard
My horrid message, and have made such answer
As well becomes a Roman and a consul.

AEMILIUS. Barbarian as he is -- forgive me VARUS!
He cannot mean this threatening to fulfill.

VARUS. O! trust not the humanity of MAXIMIN.
If he is not cruel, why art thou in arms?
Besides, his temper, ever fierce and savage,
Is now incensed, enraged almost to madness,
By the wide was^ing havoc of this day.
His works are levelled, his best legions thin'd,
His nephew ALGAR slain by TITUS' hand.
In the first transport of his furious wrath,
He did devote to the infernal gods,
And ALGAR's shade, the prisoners of the field.
An old Ligurian, captain of his guards,
Stepped in and interposed this crafty counsel. --
Your answer I will bear, but give it colors
That may denote the dawning of submission,
And so retard --
Enter an OFFICER.
OFFICER. An herald from the camp
Requires the tribune forthwith to return:
Impatient MAXIMIN stands on the plain,
Known by his purple and gigantick stature.

CORNELIA. Dreadful impatience! most inhuman rage!
By the dear sympathy of Roman blood,
Which in our veins from the same fountain flows,
Let me entreat thee, VARUS, to appease
The angry tyrant. Represent AEMILIUS
Disposed to yield all that his honor can.
And if stern MAXIMIN prefers revenge.
To profer'd gold, yet try if wealth can win
His friends and favorites to be more gentle.

VARUS. He has no friends nor favorites; from fear
His soldiers serve, his officers obey.
I must be gone, for MAXIMIN brooks not
His orders slighted. Trust my zeal, CORNELIA!
Had I but equal power, your sons were free,
Consul.

AEMILIUS. Let me conduct thee to the gate,
And tell thee, as we go, what yet remains
Untold of our condition.
Exeunt AEMILIUS and VARUS.
CORNELIA. Interpreter of heaven's mysterious will,
Angur revered! how will the evening close
Of this distressful day? Haste to repeat
The sacred rites, and prove thy art divine.

PRIEST. Such is my purpose, soon as Phoebus bows
From his meridian height. Lady, my mind
Has pondered MAXIMIN's abhorred demand.
One only course there is to end the strife,
The dreadful strife of nature and of duty,
In great AEMILIUS' mind; and reconcile
The children's safety with the father's honor.

CORNELIA. It Is that I wish for, but of that despair.

PRIEST. The Roman host, by GORDIANUS led,
In three days hence reach Aquileia's walls;
Their near approach to MAXIMIN unknown.
Therefore the consul, without breach of honor,
Without injustice to the Roman state,
May stipulate with MAXIMIN, to yield
The city on the fourth returning day;
If not relieved. Ever that the chance of war
Raises the siege, or makes resistance vain.

CORNELIA. Wise are thy words; and now the dawn of hope
Breaks on my darksome mind. Believe me, priest,
The loss of my dear sons in battle slain,
As once I thought them, was less terrible
Than the dire apprehension of that death
To which the tyrant dooms them; worse to me,
And worse, far worse to them. Alas! my sons!
Uncertain is your fate! who can foretell
The savage motions of the tyrant's will?
And yet this counsel seems the only means
Of preservation. Minister of heaven!
Let us retire, and at the altar bow
Of JOVE eternal, who thy heart inspired.
Exeunt.
End of the second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter AEMILIUS; and from the other side of the stage LUCIUS. LUCIUS. TO every
post and station round the wall
Your orders have been borne. And each commander
With zeal obeyed.

AEMILIUS. The soldiers' countenance,
How seems it, LUCIUS?

LUCIUS. Determined to the death.
Strong indignation at their leader's fate,
With grief and pity, over their visage gleams;
But every passion settles to revenge.

AEMILIUS. LUCIUS! it is well. See that my steed be led
Accoutr'd to the gate I know not, LUCIUS,
How soon I may bestride him.
Exit LUCIUS.
AEMILIUS alone. This distress
Grows heavier every hour: like a green wound,
At first I felt it not; it rankles now.
Would I had listened to the urgent voice
Of nature, when she called me to the field!
Who could have blamed the passions of a father?
If Rome had blamed me, in the silent tomb
Her voice had not been heard.

Enter CORNELIA. CORNELIA. Why tarries VARUS?

AEMILIUS. He will return, CORNELIA! doubt not that.
The tyrant knows the snare in which we are caught,
And to the uttermost will prove our souls
Before he breaks it.

CORNELIA. By the gods inspired,
The priest has found the means to set us free,
If you consent.

AEMILIUS. If I consent? alas!
That doubt implies suspicion of the means.

CORNELIA. Hear me, and judge: capitulate with MAXIMIN,
In three days hence to yield up Aquileia,
If not relieved. Before that time expires,
The arms of Rome victorious raise the siege;
Or, if defeated, make resistance vain.
Bend not thine eye, AEMILIUS, on the ground!
The strictest law of duty is fulfilled.
If thou reject'st this counsel, I will say,
Not MAXIMIN the tyrant slew my children,
But their own cruel father.

AEMILIUS. Oh! forbear!
My soul is racked; my heart asunder torn.
The eyes of all the world on me are fixed;
Rome and mankind from me expect their fate:
I must consider this applauded counsel,
Ere I embrace.

CORNELIA. This city is not Rome,
Nor your small garrison the Roman host,
A part, a little part, a very grain
Of public interest, in your mind outweighs
Your children, all your children. Oh! AEMILIUS!
Alike the father and the mother bear
The name of parent; but a parent's love
Lives only in the tender mother's heart.

AEMILIUS. First let us learn what answer. VARUS brings.
Enter VARUS. He comes, and various passions dim his face.

CORNELIA. O! VARUS, VARUS!

VARUS. Oh! too just thy fears!
Of my loved kinsmen unrevok'd the doom!
VARUS has kneeled in vain. Hard as the rocks
Of wild Dalmatia, is the tyrant's heart.
Incensed at the refusal which I bore,
His fury rages like a fire confined,
And threatens every quarter. Hear, AEMILIUS,
And tremble now for Rome, as for thy children!

AEMILIUS. For Rome?

VARUS. The tyrant (lend me patience, Heaven!
To speak with calmness, I who serve him still)
This day has vowed to raze imperial Rome.

AEMILIUS. Barbarian! why?

VARUS. To fix his wavering host,
To glut his legions with the mighty spoil.
Disease and famine prey upon his troops,
And rumor cries, that a relief is near.
The soldiers faint, and murmur at the length
And havoc of this siege. The crafty tyrant
With sound of trumpet through the camp proclaimed,
That he will give the city to be sacked,
Raze her proud walls, and change the seat of empire.
The glad Barbarians shouted to the skies,
And mixed with their applause unheard of oaths
To die with MAXIMIN.

AEMILIUS. What said the Romans?

VARUS. In number few, but scattered through the bands,
They grieved, and carefully suppressed their sorrow.

AEMILIUS. Was there no Roman near enough to plant
A dagger in the heart of MAXIMIN?

VARUS. Before the tyrant reach the walls of Rome,
That Roman may be found.

AEMILIUS. Above the name
Of god-like SCAEVOLA his fame shall rise.

VARUS. The righteous gods, whom MAXIMIN contemns,
Have in their vengeance urged his frantic mind
By this decree to work his own perdition.
Long honored Rome! though thou have lost so much
Of thy primaeval splendour, still my heart
Thy image worships; still for thee I fought,
And from Siluria, to the savage shore
Of Caledonia, I thy trophies reared!
And shall thy soldier draw his sword against thee,
Or stand a tame spectator of thy fall?
No! I am thine, devoted, as of old
Thy darling sons, when first thy glory rose.
Nor shall thy turrets bow, imperial Rome!
Till low in dust the head of VARUS lies.

AEMILIUS. There spoke a Roman!

CORNELIA. I rejoice to hear*
The voice of VARUS thus declare for Rome.
Her distant danger may thy arm avert!
But who defends my sons, whose sudden fate
This day decides?

VARUS. O were it possible
To gain a short delay! Time presses me;
For strong in troops and terrible is MAXIMIN,
Nor am I yet prepared to rise in arms.
In a few days -- nay, if the Roman host.
Were near at hand, --

CORNELIA. My husband, speak

AEMILIUS. O! VARUS!
The fates are merciful. Peruse these lines.

VARUS. "In three days hence." Then, tyrant, I shall meet thee.
But what can sheath this day the naked sword?

AEMILIUS. A truce I Will offer, bind myself by vow
(Nor is the practice new or strange in war)
Within a certain time to yield the city,
If not relieved; the time, this scroll directs,
The fourth revolving day.

VARUS. I see their aim.
Ere that, the blow is struck by GORDIANUS;
Ere that shall VARUS spread his Roman eagle,
And chase the raven of Dalmatia home.

AEMILIUS. Thou think the tyrant will accept those terms?

VARUS. I hold it certain: he can wish no more;
Unknown to him the approach of GORDIANUS.
By MARS, the father of the Roman race,
Whose spear omnipotent in battle rules,
My life shall stand betwixt your sons and death.

CORNELIA. O best of friends! This is the work of heaven,
Whose awful purposes, unconscious man
Promotes, and fondly thinks he serves his own,
Thus from remotest Britain's frozen shore
The tyrant to his aid the warrior calls,
Who comes, a Weapon in the hand of JOVE,
To smite the proud usurper, and preserve
My children.

AEMILIUS. Yea, his country and mankind.

VARUS. May the event these pleasing hopes fulfill.
I, that have been a soldier from my youth,
And fought out many a hard unequal conflict.
With tribes and nations who no mercy know,
Yet never felt my bosom thus alarmed.

AEMILIUS. For us, for Rome, thy Roman mind is moved.

VARUS. In a new path I tread. I, that never used
Dissimulation, must a while dissemble.
Soon may the hour of nobler action come!
When in the front of my brave troops I stand,
And dare the hateful tyrant with my sword,
My heart shall beat no more. My friends, farewell!

CORNELIA. The gods protect thee, VARUS!

VARUS. Consul, it is meet
You hold your troops prepared, and from the walls
Each motion watch, that rises in our camp.

AEMILIUS. My vigilance shall equal the occasion.
[Exit VARUS. It Is, as thou said, indeed the hand of heaven!
Ye powers supreme! who guide the line of fate,
Whose winding course eludes the sense of man,
Who could have thought that from our deep distress,
My son's captivity, and threatened death,
Should spring the ruin of insulting MAXIMIN?

CORNELIA. Him, who contemns the gods, the gods will punish
Now or hereafter. To the altar I
Of JOVE will hasten, and his power implore,
Here LUCIUS comes.
Enter LUCIUS.
AEMILIUS. What tidings?

LUCIUS. Good, my lord!
Far on the distant heights that close the vale,
The watchmen have descried a welcome sight,
Eagles and standards glittering in the sun,
Squadrons of horse that move along the hill.
Your faithful soldiers in loud shouts rejoice,
And hail the van of GORDIANUS' host.

AEMILIUS. Too soon, great gods! they come.

LUCIUS. Too soon, my lord!
That cannot be. In a most happy hour
Relief approaches. For in every street
The afflicted citizens exclaim against you,
And, as they pass, upbraid the patient soldier
For tame submission to your rigid will;
Which even your children's danger cannot bend.

AEMILIUS. Would to the gods their murmurs and reproaches
Were all I had to bear!
Enter a Herald and an Officer. from MAXIMIN. Now bursts the storm.

CORNELIA. This is not VARUS. Sternly he comes on.
This is the dreadful harbinger of death.

OFFICER. Consul! I come from MAXIMIN; that prince
Whose wrath is terrible, now burns with wrath
At thee, and sends me to denounce his vengeance.
He has discovered thy unworthy arts,
The fraudulent proposal of a truce,
When thou did know the rebel host drew near.
Hither I come to cut all treaties short,
And to pronounce thy son's immediate death,
Unless, without delay, thou yield'st this city,
Thyself, thy legions, freely to his mercy.

AEMILIUS. A cruel message harshly thou deliver'st,
The dreadful echo of thy threatening lord.
He grows in his demands.

OFFICER. It Is fit he should.
When basely dealt with: treachery still finds
Its due reward from him.

AEMILIUS. Ha! who art thou,
Who dare presume thus to address the consul?

OFFICER. I am the slave of MAXIMIN; if thou
Have any other name, it is a worse one,
Rebel, proud Roman!

AEMILIUS. You Are protected, slave!
Thy character is sacred; else -- Barbarian!
Return to MAXIMIN, the terms I sent
By VARUS I adhere to, and expect
another answer, by a gentler herald.

CORNELIA. Thou art no Roman. Will thou deign to tell!
Thy name and country?

OFFICER. DUMNORIX my name,
My country Gaul.

CORNELIA. And of Ligurian race,
Chief of the band Pretorian, art thou not?

OFFICER. I am, and faithful to the prince I serve.

CORNELIA. Faithful to evil, false to all that is good!
To nature and humanity a traitor;
Contriver of the murder of my children!
My soul by strong antipathy divined thee,
And shudder'd at thee as her evil genius.

AEMILIUS. CORNELIA, beware, thou wrong'st thyself,
Thus to expose to him thy wounded heart.

OFFICER. VARUS, your countryman, has told you, lady!
What counsel I suggested to my prince.
This I expected from a Roman messenger,
Whose treachery his master soon shall know,
He told you true. From me the counsel came;
I thought the dames of Rome had loved their children.
[Exit DUMNORIX.
CORNELIA. Oh! my husband! What remedy, what hope!

AEMILIUS. In VARUS still I trust. The troops of Rome
Are near at hand. That insolent Ligurian
Has chafed me to the height. O! awful Rome!
Where are thy honors? Queen of all the earth!
How art thou fallen! When a vile slave like this,
Insults thy consul, and decrees the doom
Of thy Patrician race! If this must be,
It Is time to die; we all have lived too long.

CORNELIA. I felt the insult, but my feeble anger
Blazed for a moment only. Other passions
Soon quenched my indignation. O! my children!
Enter an OFFICER.
OFFICER. To arms, my lord! The enemy comes on.

AEMILIUS. We are prepared, for MAXIMIN is known.
I looked for this attack. Against what gate
Bend they their force?

OFFICER. They threaten every gate;
For all their legions move. Distinct I saw
Three mighty columns shoaling to the plain,
And in their front are carriages advanced
Loaded with beams and rafters, fit to frame
Some engine strong, against our battered walls.

AEMILIUS. Be not afraid.
[To CORNELIA.] [A shout.] What means that fearful cry?

CORNELIA. A cry! it was a groan, a dreadful groan,
As if a multitude, a legion died.

AEMILIUS. Farewell!

CORNELIA. My lord, one moment stay, behold!

Enter LUCIUS. AEMILIUS. From whence that dismal cry?

OFFICER. Alas! alas!
It was the people's voice, the soldiers voice,
Lamenting for your sons.

CORNELIA. Already! heaven!

AEMILIUS. Say, what has befallen?

OFFICER. Still, my lord, they live;
But on the verge of death the brothers stand.

CORNELIA. Still they live!

AEMILIUS. Uninterrupted now relate,
Without a comment, what thy eyes have seen.

OFFICER. The host of MAXIMIN for fight arrayed,
In three huge columns onward slowly moved,
And when their van had reached the little hill,
From whence the fountain springs, fast by the wall
The army halted: then appeared a band,
Busy artificers, who reared in haste,
A pile we wondered at; but soon was changed
Our wonder into sorrow, when we knew
It was a scaffold; and beheld your sons,
Guarded and bound, draw near. That spectacle
Produced the cry.

CORNELIA. O! insupportable!
My lord! my husband! oh!

AEMILIUS. Matron, retire,
And hide thy anguish from the common eye.

CORNELIA. Ha! Whither do thou go?

AEMILIUS. Straight to the gate.

CORNELIA. Where thou art, I will be. I cannot leave thee,
Have mercy upon me, your sons, yourself,
And to necessity a little yield;
Entreat a short delay, new terms propound,
Let not your children die.

AEMILIUS. Think thou thy sons
Will choose a life, bought by their father's shame?
If right my soul divines of both my boys,
What they dread most this instant, is to live,
Redeemed inglorious with my honor lost,

CORNELIA. I am encompassed; on a pointed rock
I stand, a dreadful gulf on either side.

AEMILIUS. The time is not expired; some hours the sun
Has yet to fall; this awful preparation
Is meant to terrify and shake my soul,
That I may bow before the next demand.
Go to the palace, when a message comes
From the fell tyrant, thou shall hear it answered.

CORNELIA. Deal not, my lord, deceitfully with me.
I have a right, a mother's right.

AEMILIUS. Be calm,
Let me conjure thee by the sacred names
Of thy great ancestors, who died for Rome,
Remember them, and prove thyself their daughter.
[Exit AEMILIUS.
CORNELIA alone. My ancestors! alas! ill-omen'd names!
Ye shades of heroes, over the world renowned
For virtue, and for great misfortunes famed!
Why should I think of you, but to confirm
The dire presage that rises from my heart?
Your matchless worth exempted not from ills,
But was the cause recorded of your ruin.
Sprung from your blood, I fear that I am born
Heir to the fortunes of the fated line.
[Exit CORNELIA.
End of the third ACT.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter LUCIUS. I Will report the truth; too visible
Is the sad object from our crowded walls.
Unhappy mother! whom excess of anguish
Drives to pursue additional distress!
O! good and great AEMILIUS! how my soul
Is grieved for thee, and for thy valiant sons!
Whom I so often have carried in my arms.
My generous master made me free in vain;
Still I remained a voluntary slave,
Preferred his service in a foreign land
To sweet LARISSA, and my native-shore.
My only son, under his roof brought forth,
Born on the day that gave young TITUS birth,
Bred up with him in every Roman art,
Unlike the rudeness of our simple land,
Wild with despair, vows he will not outlive
His dear, dear lord! his kind, his noble master.
Enter CORNELIA.
CORNELIA. Calamity comes on me like a torrent,
And overwhelms a mind not used to woe.
Ha! LUCIUS, have thou seen my hapless sons?
Say, can I view them from the adjacent wall?

LUCIUS. Too well, alas! conspicuous they stand.

CORNELIA. LUCIUS, lead on.

LUCIUS. Reluctant I obey.
I fear the transports of a mother's mind.

CORNELIA. I will behold them; I will see my children,
Whatever befall me; I will gaze upon them,
Though frantic madness should my soul surprise:
All lesser fears are in a greater lost.
Haste and conduct me.

LUCIUS. The sad spectacle
Is near at hand.

CORNELIA. O! feeble limbs that fail,
And weakly serve the strength of my despair!

LUCIUS. It Is nature shrinks. O! lady! yet be warned.

CORNELIA. No; if my wretched limbs refuse their office,
The arms of slaves shall bear me to the wall.
I Am firmer now, proceed.

LUCIUS. The herald comes.

CORNELIA. The last of heralds; but I will not tarry.
[Exeunt CORNELIA and LUCIUS. Enter Herald and VARUS. This is the place
appointed by the consul;
Find, and inform him quickly of my presence.
[Exit Herald.
VARUS alone. They must not die. It were a deed, to strike
Horror from pole to pole. The Parthian fierce,
And the wild Moor would tremble at the tale,
And mark accursed the pale of Roman empire.
Tyrant, too savage over beasts to rule!
Fidelity to thee were horrid treason
To human nature, to the gracious gods,
Who over distressed humanity preside.
This day has full displayed the tyrant's soul,
And ripened thoughts long growing in my breast.
It Is vain to think of ancient freedom now;
The senate, and the people are no more.
Rome's vast dominions for the scepter call,
The world subdued, one master must command,
But let us have a monarch, not a tyrant.
Enter AEMILIUS.
AEMILIUS. VARUS returned! can MAXIMIN relent!

VARUS. Never! his rage would stab the hoary Priest
Before the altar. Hardly have I gained
This last renewal of the first conditions.

AEMILIUS. Where is the host of Rome?

VARUS. Far distant still
Those squadrons, that in evil hour alarmed
The tyrant, and defeated our design,
The zeal of GORDIANUS had advanced
To cheer your troops, with promise of relief.

AEMILIUS. It Is fate o'erwhelms us. To the tyrant bear
My first and latest answer. With delight,
With transport I would die to save my sons;
But will not save them by an act of baseness.

VARUS. With fortitude, with dignity, AEMILIUS,
Thou have sustained this cruel shock of fortune,
And justified the sentiments of Rome,
That placed her sovereign confidence in thee.
Now hear the counsel of a faithful friend,
Anxious for thee, and zealous for his country.

AEMILIUS. No vain desire of glory rules my breast;
I feel the throbs of nature: all I wish
Is to be just to Rome; I envy not,
Nor emulate the older Brutus' fame.

VARUS. The profer'd terms accept, and save thy children.
Rome shall not suffer: when her troops draw near,
I will forsake the tyrant's shattered side,
And fix the fortune of the future field.

AEMILIUS. Compassion dictates this delusive counsel;
Thy pity for a miserable father;
But chance may mar thy generous design,
And deep dismay for Aquileia lost,
Confound the legions that contend for Rome.
Then whither shall forlorn AEMILIUS fly?
Where shall he hide him from reproach and shame?
What joy, what comfort, will his children yield,
When he and they with infamy must dwell?
A new companion to our noble race.
No! rather let the blow tremendous fall,
And crush us in the path our fathers trod,
I see the image of my bleeding country:
I hear the voice of Rome her consul call;
The chosen guardian in her last extreme,
City of gods! mother of heroes famed
Like gods of old! shall I abandon thee.
Eor whom so many noble youths have died,
So many fathers?
Enter CORNELIA. Now, my heart, be firm.

CORNELIA. Where is AEMILIUS? the hard-hearted father.
Who whets the tyrant's sword against his children!

AEMILIUS. Alas, CORNELIA!

CORNELIA. I have seen my sons,
Both bound with chains: I saw the deadly ax,
And the stern villain standing by their side.
Consul! I kneel to thee! O hear thy wife!
Hear me, my husband, whilst I yet have sense
And reason left to regulate my words.
O drive me not to madness, to despair:
Already wavering on the brink I stand,
In agony extreme.

AEMILIUS. Trust in the gods;
They sooth the agonies of guiltless woe,
But to despair resign the self-condemned.
O my beloved wife, do not assail
Thy husband's soul, that labors to be just.
Heaven knows how dear to my afflicted heart
Thou, and the pledges of our virtuous love,
Have ever been; more dear than ever now.
But if their danger, and thy fears should bend
My yielding mind to baseness and to shame,
Remorse would break the concord of our love,
And hate succeed to criminal affection.

CORNELIA. Me only hate; acquit thy noble sons,
Too like thyself; AEMILIUS, had thou seen,
Thy sons, as I beheld them from the ramparts.
With head erect, and high, my PAULUS stood.
I knew his stature eminent; unmoved,
And steadfast was his gesture, firm he seemed,
Like a strong castle on its rocky base.
The port of TITUS showed a mind less calm,
Around he looked, and from his scornful eyes,
Threw on his foes defiance, and disdain.
At last in earnest speech the brothers joined.
I saw them whisper; PAULUS bowed his head.
The multitude, long silent at my presence,
Lamented then; the weeping mothers clasped
Their infants to their breasts, and looked at me.
I left the walls, to find thee out, my husband!
And lead thee thither, that thou might relent.

AEMILIUS. Relent, CORNELIA! O eternal powers,
That see the anguish of my tortured soul,
Sustain me still; let not my duty yield
To the strong yearning of a father's heart.

CORNELIA. Why speaks not VARUS? Has he too conspired
Against me and my children?

VARUS. I have spoke,
And told the consul, that his sons may live,
And Roman arms over MAXIMIN prevail.

CORNELIA. What would thou more? inexorable man!

VARUS. I see the bottom of thy troubled mind,
And in this awful hour revere thy virtue,
Which stands aloof, and trembles at dishonor.
But hear this new addition to my counsel;
Soldiers I have, in every danger tried,
Bred to hard service in our British wars,
Accustomed to explore the forests wild,
Alone, amidst the perils of the night,
And mingle fearless with the savage foes;
Disguised in their attire and uncouth arms,
Of those the most expert, I will dispatch,
That GORDIANUS may his arms advance.
Enter an OFFICER.
OFFICER. My Lord, your son approaches.

CORNELIA. Ha! my son!

OFFICER. TITUS your son, attended by a herald,
Slow through the gazing multitude proceeds,
Who weep and bless him.

AEMILIUS. Ha! what change is this?

OFFICER. The herald as he passes scatters gladness,
Saying that TITUS comes to end the war,
And to compassion move his father's mind.

AEMILIUS. TITUS! does TITUS come to plead compassion?
Now destiny, thou tramplest down AEMILIUS.
Go tell him, Herald, that I will not see him;
Let him not come to hear me curse the hour
That made me father of a son like him.

CORNELIA. Judge not so rashly, see and hear thy son.

AEMILIUS. Mention him not; that father has my envy*
Who mourns over his sons in battle slain,
Short-sighted mortals! Let no man repine
When fate bereaves him of the child he loves;
Amidst his anguish let him think of mine,
And that will comfort him.

CORNELIA. This is not well,
Nor like my son; yet valor cannot change
Its quality so quickly. He has proved
His dauntless courage. Death in terror clad:
Could not dismay him. But his noble mind.
Is swayed by pity of his brother's fate,
In his involved.
Enter TITUS.
AEMILIUS. Gods! unabash'd he seems,
Nor at his most inglorious purpose blushes.
[AEMILIUS turns from him.
CORNELIA. Dear to thy mother still.

TITUS. [To his father.] Turn not away,
Nor hold thy TITUS of one look unworthy.

AEMILIUS. Art thou my TITUS? Thou that fear to die,
And comes a servile suppliant for life!
With coward prayers to seduce the consul.
No! thou art not my son. I had a son!
Whose only fault was valor to excess,
Whose fatal courage was the source of ills
Which he was bound in honor to sustain.
Thou art not he! Thou scandal to thy country!
Thou tool of MAXIMIN.

TITUS. Wrong not thy son.
Fast roll the numbered moments of my life,
And I must hasten to redeem my fame.

CORNELIA. I fear, but know not what his words portend.

TITUS. I have deceived the tyrant, and am come
No messenger or counselor of shame.
The cause of honor, of my father's honor,
The cause of Rome against myself I plead,
And in my voice the noble PAULUS speaks.
Let no man pity us; aloft we stand
On a high theater, objects I think
Of admiration, and of envy rather.
The tyrant and his menaced deaths we scorn,
The cheerful victims of our sacred country.

AEMILIUS. Hear this! O earth and heaven! my son! my pride!
Come to thy father's arms; now, now I know
My blood again. O bitter pleasing hour!
For I must lose thee, lose thee, O my hero!
Now when I love thee best, and most admire.

CORNELIA. Preserve that virtue which you thus admire,
My son! my husband! VARUS pity me.

TITUS. This to prevent I came; the force I feared
Of strong affection, and a mother's tears.
We saw the busy heralds come and go,
And trembled lest the consul might be won;
For ebbing resolution never returns,
But still falls farther from its former shore.
To aid my father in this trying hour
Did I assume a dastard's vile disguise.

AEMILIUS. And did I meet thee with reproach and anger?
With scorn encounter my devoted son,
Who came to strengthen and support his sire?
Forgive me, last of the Aemilian line!
Pure and unstained the current of our blood
Ends as it long hsa flowed

CORNELIA. O VARUS! speak,
Tell them, thou guardian angel of thy country!
That Rome does not this sacrifice demand.
Why should they die in vain?

VARUS. Thou noble youth,
Whose life more and more precious still I deem,
I am the friend of Rome; of yonder host
No slender part under my ensigns move.
With them I watch the tyrant's overthrow,
And guard my country with a stronger power,
Than Aquileia, and her feeble walls.
Great is thy glory, thou have reached the top
Of magnanimity in bloom of youth,
The REGULUS revived of ancient Rome;
Inflexible to terror, yield to prudence,
No tongue-shall tax thine or thy father's fame.

TITUS. Renowned VARUS! often have I heard
Of thee, and of thy virtues; often rejoiced,
That I could claim affinity with them;
But not the sanction of thy honored voice,
Not all the credence due to worth like thine,
Can move my steadfast mind. There is but one,
One only path which mortals safely tread,
The sacred path of rectitude and truth.
I follow, though it leads me to the tomb.
Forgive me, noble Roman! over thy head;
Perhaps, this instant dire discovery hangs,
And thou and Rome are lost, and basely lost.
No, let the consul, as he ought, defy
The tyrant's threatening, and rely on heaven.
For me, and PAULUS too, our hearts are fixed,
Deliberation of our state is vain:
For if the consul should this city yield,
Inevitable death abides his sons.

CORNELIA. Eternal Gods! thy mystic words explain.

TITUS. A solemn oath determined we have sworn,
Never to survive the ignominious ransom.
Restored to liberty, to death we fly,
And perish mutual by each other's sword.

AEMILIUS. Immortal Gods! who gave me sons like these,
Forsake them not, but guard your work divine.

CORNELIA. My best-belov'd! my darling! my sond heart
Bleeds tenderness for thee. But there is something
So awful and so great, a glory round thee,
Which dazzles and o'erwhelms me. O my son!
Is life a burden? Love thou not thy parents?
Who for the love of thee would gladly die.

TITUS. Think not, O best of mothers, best of women,
That with unfilial arrogance I speak.
My heart is full this instant of affection,
Hard to suppress. Dear to my soul are those
I leave behind, bitter to me their sorrows.
But destiny supreme has marked my way:
And I accept what honor cannot shun.
By trivial accident, by various ills
Fatal to man, thou might have lost thy sons,
And they in dark oblivion would have slept:
But now I see the goal that JOVE assigns,
And glory terminates our short career.
Be this thy comfort; I avow it mine.
Admired and mourned by Rome, for Rome we die,
Of fate secure, immortal is our fame,
And spotless laurels deck thy childrens tomb.

CORNELIA. Mysterious Powers! how strange is my distress!
Thy virtue, TITUS, rends thy mother's heart!
Even now the grandeur of thy towering soul
Exalts my humbler mind to thoughts like thine:
But when thou go, alas! I sink again,
Like the weak Pythian when her God has left her.

TITUS. My father!

AEMILIUS. O my son, thou art the judge
And arbiter of fate. Time, rapid fly,
And bring a joyful victory to Rome.
Let me but see the scale of combat turned,
And die in glad assurance of her fafety.

VARUS. The hero's fire invades my secret soul:
Like his my bosom burns. You shall not die,
[To TITUS.] Unaided and alone. Perhaps the Gods! --
I know not that; but I will raise a pile
Of glorious ruin. Shine, ye stars of Rome.
First in the column stand my British bands.
[To AEMILIUS.] Prepare your squadrons, and protract the time
Of his return.
Enter PRIEST of JUPITER and the younger LUCIUS.
PRIEST. Consul of mighty Rome!
Firm be the purpose of the present hour.
The sire of Gods a happy sign has given:
Trust in the aid of heaven's eternal king,
His adamantine ages JOVE extends.

VARUS. Romans and friends, farewell! Undaunted TITUS,
I go to aid thee too with mortal arms.
[Exit VARUS.
TITUS. Deem me not impious, servant of the Gods!
Thee, and thy sacred office I revere,
But signs and omens may our thoughts deceive.
Men may mistake the purposes of heaven;
The shield of JOVE guards not the brave man's life,
Nor wards his body from the mortal blow.
A shield there is, that never can be pierced,
The heavenly armor of a mind resolved.
That mail, who wears, against all force is clad,
And triumphs over the fate by which he falls.

Enter OFFICER. OFFICER. My Lords! the assembled citizens demand
An audience.

AEMILIUS. Tell them, No. It will require
My presence to appease their fearful clamor.
Retire, my son, and till the herald comes
A sad but dear society enjoy.
[Exeunt.
End of the fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
The Trumpets sound. Enter TITUS, CORNELIA and AEMILIUS. TITUS. FOR me the
trumpet sounds.

CORNELIA. O dreadful sound!

TITUS. The hour is come.

CORNELIA. Alas! not yet, my son!
To the last moment stay. So VARUS counseled.

TITUS. The herald's at the gate. I must not stay,
Nor linger, like a criminal oppressed
With shameful fears. Farewell, my sire, farewell!

CORNELIA. Thou go to die, and say thou but farewell?
It were too little, if from Rome thou went
A sportful journey to the Baian shore.
But thou art going never to return,
To the dark region.

TITUS. Where all men have gone:
Where all must go; but glorious is the path
Thy offspring tread. An honorable death
Is the sole gift which fate cannot resume.
Methinks it suits us not thus to discourse:
Combat thy grief, and make our parting noble.

CORNELIA. Nature forbids. I cannot conquer nature.
Speak not so firm, look not so unconcerned:
Leave in thy mother's ear some tender words,
Fit for eternal memory.

TITUS. If thou love,
O spare thy son, lest MAXIMIN should think
He has subdued me. No. He shall not see
Upon my cheek the vestige of a tear.

AEMILIUS. Thy spirit shall inspire thy father's soul,
Till to the shades he sinks to meet thee there:
Then to the founders of immortal Rome,
I Will point my heroes. -- To my PAULUS this,
[Embraces. And now, farewell.

CORNELIA. Alas! thy fire despairs,
He quits thy hand; till now I never despaired.
The moment is arrived, the dreadful moment,
I durst not think of, and cannot endure.
O TITUS! TITUS! let me clasp thy neck,
My son! those eyes I never shall behold
In living luster more.
Enter LUCIUS.
LUCIUS. Strife and confusion
Reign in the tyrant's camp. Himself I saw
Leap from his high tribunal.

AEMILIUS. Sound the alarm.
This is the work of VARUS.

TITUS. Consul, beware.
Hostility from thee is breach of faith,
Whilst I remain.

AEMILIUS. Too true, my son! Begone,
And free thy father's sword.

CORNELIA. [Embraces him.] He shall not go.
One instant saves him, keeps him from the storm.
My arms have strength enough to hold my son,
My only left, for now his brother dies.

TITUS. Nothing shall hold me. I have deeply sworn,
And left my brother pledge of my return;
Left him, to bear alone the tyrant's rage,
To die by torture, if I break my faith.
Thus would thou buy my life! Unhand me straight,
Or I must tear myself.

AEMILIUS. Thy frenzy, woman,
Cuts off our last resource, adds shame to ruin;
I will not, cannot succor noble VARUS,
And much wronged PAULUS, till thou sett'st him free.
The clamor ceases, Oh! what have thou done?

CORNELIA. There, let him go, and perish with his brother.
Forgive this action; for excess of anguish
Deprives CORNELIA of her reason's aid.
Now comes the raven that still bodes my woes.
Enter Herald and DUMNORIX.
DUMNORIX. Captive, the time's expired.

TITUS. Soldier, it is well.
Turn to the gate thy steps, I follow thee.

DUMNORIX. Thou art the first that ever employed deceit
Against himself; thy artifice prevails.
[To AEMILIUS.] Roman! once more, though not from love, I speak;
Yield thee, for now thou have no hope in VARUS.

AEMILIUS. Who told thee, that my resolution stood
On such a hope? What has befallen VARUS?

DUMNORIX. His treason is detected; he himself
Seized, and condemned with thy rash sons to die.

CORNELIA. Eternal god! -- How did the legions brook
Their valiant leader's fate?

DUMNORIX. Her tongue betrays
Your secret expectation of revolt,
Where all is calm submission. VARUS came
From hence, entrusted with your last resolve,
And, like an orator, addressed himself,
To the tribunal, with a voice so raised,
That every soldier in the circle heard;
And as he told a tale to move their pity,
A sudden murmur rose. The emperor
Leapt from his throne, and called aloud to seize
The artful traitor. Soon his guards obeyed.

AEMILIUS. VARUS, the noble VARUS, too must die.
But there are gods above! Vengeance is theirs,
The tyrant yet shall feel.

CORNELIA. Will vengeance raise
My children from the tomb?

DUMNORIX. Thou question'st well.
Matron, I pity thee. Can thou not move
Thy husband's heart to spare his dying sons,
Nor win thy children to consent to live?

CORNELIA. Thou pity me! thou, whose inhuman soul
Devised the counsel that has caused my woe.
In vain do thou attempt my troubled mind;
Had I a magic voice to cleave the earth,
To pluck the sun and moon from their high sphere,
Unmoved my husband and my sons would hear me.

TITUS. This ineffectual conference I Will end.
[To DUMNORIX.] It Is not your office, sir! to counsel here,
Conduct me to the camp.

DUMNORIX. I will, be sure.
The death that thou have courted, now abides thee:
Come, try the rough embrace.

TITUS. Lead on, Ligurian!
I answer to thy lord*
[Going.]
CORNELIA. TITUS, my son!
Break, break my heart, for I can bear no more.
[swoons.]
TITUS. She saints, support her; now let me escape
From her affliction: think of Rome, my father!

[Exit. [CORNELIA is carried off.] [Manet AEMILIUS. AEMILIUS. Of Rome! aye, and
of thee, of thee, my son,
And of thy brother. O unequalled pair,
Your deeds, your destiny have raised your sire
Above the pitch of man. My heart is steel,
I weep not, nor complain. Relentless fiend,
Inhuman MAXIMIN! for thee I live;
To bury in thy hated breast my sword,
Then die upon the blow.
Enter LUCIUS.
LUCIUS. Thy faithful slave,
Uncalled, intrudes upon his master's woe.
Resign not to despair thy noble mind,
Still there is hope.

AEMILIUS. Affectionate old man!
Thou speak thy earnest wish, but my frail hopes*
Were wrecked with VARUS.

LUCIUS. Often when wisdom fails,
Chance interposes, and atchieves the deed.
The British legions, wheeling from their host,
An angry parley with the tyrant hold,
And every rank re-echoes VARUS' name.

AEMILIUS. Immortal gods! Would I were at their head
A single spark may kindle up the flame.

LUCIUS. My son, devoted to his master's fate,
Armed like a soldier of the tyrant's guard,
Mixed with the herald's train.

AEMILIUS. O generous youth!
Perhaps -- but I have nourished hope too much.
He who divests him of that constancy
Which stands in expectation of the worst,
Encounters fortune with a naked breast.
I will do so no more. Now I go forth.
Less credulous of what my soul desires,
But not remiss to seize on swfit occasion,
And urge it to the utmost. LUCIUS, stay
And tell CORNELIA -- She has no support,
No medicine, but hope -- I Will to the gate.
[Exit AEMILIUS. Manet LUCIUS.
LUCIUS. O best of men, I know where thou will go,
The first alarm provokes thee to the field,
One fate abides the children, and their fire.
Tyrannic fortune! when thou raisest up.
To envied eminence the sons of men,
Thou but prepar'st a triumph for thyself,
A second triumph from their grievous fall.
Alike the column, and its ruins, mark
Thy sovereign sway. Now LUCIUS will obey
Thy orders, lord; then hasten to thy side;
The humble shrub shall with the cedar fall.
[CORNELIA behind the Scene.
CORNLLIA. Stand off.

LUCIUS. CORNELIA'S voice; it sounds of woe*
[Enter CORNELIA, followed by her woman.
CORNELIA. Stand off, I say, and let me find my husband.
Fit mate for me, for me, whose eyes have seen.
The murder of my child.

LUCIUS. Alas! alas!
The blow at last has fallen.

CORNELIA. His streaming bood
I saw.

LUCIUS. His blood! whom has the tyrant spared!

CORNELIA. None, LUCIUS, none. I tarried not to see
A second stroke. O lead me to my husband.

LUCIUS. He guards the gate.
[Sound of trumpets. But hark his trumpets sound,
And sound a charge. Lady, my son went forth
To rouse the British legions to defend
Their leader, and thy sons. That sound proclaims
Tumult and war are up. My lord is there.
[Exit. Manent CORNELIA and attendants.
CORNELIA. The frantic father rushes to revenge
His sons, or throw the load of life away.
The desolate CORNELIA she remains,
Her children murdered, and her husband slain.
Enter PRIEST. Where are thy omens, thy predictions too,
Thou priest of falsehood!

PRIEST. Know 'twas VARUS fell,
And not thy son; his fall the signal proved
Of instant battle. With a whirlwind's rage
His legions rushed upon the tyrant's guard;
Thy valiant sons are free, and lead the fight.

CORNELIA. Can this be truth? Shall I again believe,
And wake me from the dreadful dream of death
That had possessed my soul?

PRIEST. Matron! thy sons,
Thy husband too, victorious shall return,
I saw the bird of JOVE his wings extend,
And hover over their battle; still he bears
Upon his pinions conquest.

CORNELIA. Say thou so!
Then heaven and thou forgive me. JOVE supreme!
If I have ought offended, on my head,
On mine alone, let all thy wrath descend:
But spare my sons, and spare their blameless sire.
Enter LUCIUS.
LUCIUS. Lady, rejoice, the tyrant is no more;
His barbarous cohorts yield.

CORNELIA. Blessed be thy tongue.
But tell me of my sons, and of their father?

LUCIUS. With voice and hand they urge the fainting foe,
Whose courage with their furious leader died.
Long, like a mound against the raging main,
Stood MAXIMIN, the bulwark of his host;
His strength defied the fury of the storm;
Till to the van resistless TITUS came.
By TITUS' noble arm the giant fell,
And over him rushed the war.

CORNELIA. Not without crush
And havoc round him, such a ruin fell.
O minister of heaven! why do thou bend
Thine eye on empty space, and gaze on air?
Can thou descry the future, or perceive
Events accomplished, though unknown?

PRIEST. It Is done.
The weary sisters rest. CYLLENIUS -- comes,
Like a bright meteor streaming down the vault
Of azure heaven; in his right hand the rod,
And in his left, a laurel dropping blood,
Behold!
Enter AEMILIUS attended.
CORNELIA. My husband! oh! Where have thou left
Thy sons? --

AEMILIUS. They come victorious from the field.

CORNELIA. Why do thou faintly speak such welcome tidings?
Thou art not wounded?

AEMILIUS. No

CORNELIA. From whence that cloud
Which overcasts thy brow? What damps thy joy?
Tell me, AEMILIUS! for I read thy soul,
There indivulg'd some cruel evil lies.

AEMILIUS. Alas!

CORNELIA. Thou sigh'st not thus for VARUS lost.
My sons, thou say, draw near; what is the grief
That wrings thy heart?

AEMILIUS. O summon to thine aid
What constancy thou have; soon shall thou see
What I would not relate.

CORNELIA. Ha! am I mocked
With false reports?
What spectacle is this!
[Enter TITUS wounded, and supported by PAULUS and soldiers.] Are these the
victors! oh my TITUS dies!

TITUS. I stood the chance of war. Do not bewail
A fate so far above my highest hope
When last we parted. Men are born to die.

CORNELIA. But not like thee, in youth untimely slain.

TITUS. This active day has been an age of life.
Rome is delivered. Thou have still a son.
Why mourns my brother over a soldier's fall?

PAULUS. I grieved not, TITUS! when our lot was equal.

CORNELIA. There will be wars again to snatch thee too.
Fear not too long a life: the useless live,
The vile, the odious; thy desert is death.

TITUS. My limbs grow weak, upon the earth I Will rest.
Have I redeemed my rashness? O my father!

AEMILIUS. It Is scarce a blemish to be brave to rashness.
To thee Rome owes her safety, her existence;
And with her chief deliverers ranks thy name.

TITUS. I feel my father's praise, now when the hand
Of death comes near my heart.

CORNELIA. I will be calm.
O let me not disturb his parting soul.
Sustain me, mighty gods!

TITUS. To sooth her grief,
My PAULUS, be thy care. My last request,
My father, hear. O comfort that good man;
His son before me rushing, in his breast
Received a javelin, that was aimed at mine.
Cherish his age.
[Dies.]
AEMILIUS. Thou Roman, to the height
Of Roman virtue! to lament for thee,
With common wailings, were a feeble part;
And far beneath the spirit of thy fall;
Unworthy of thy father.

PAULUS. From this place
Let me persuade my mother to retire.

CORNELIA. I must behold the dead. Fear not excess,
Nor vehemence from me. Those features wear
A look of triumph. Yes, thy mother's heart,
Amidst her anguish, at that look revives.
The cruel fate thy generous mind embraced
Thou have escaped, to meet the death thou lov'd'st
In arms, victorious over thy prostrate foe.
Now to the place, where I will dwell with grief,
And ever listen to my hero's praise.
[Exit CORNELIA with PAULUS.
PRIEST. He fell not till each omen was accomplished,
Himself, his brother, and his country free.
No height, beyond the summit where he stood,
On earth remained: that he might never descend,
The gods could only grant a death like his.

AEMILIUS. Hence to the forum bear the noble corpse;
And let the music of the legions sound
A warlike symphony, whose strains express
Our mingled state of triumph, and of sorrow.
[Exeunt omnes.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. CIBBER.
OUR Author, as I Am told, is not to seek
In ancient Lore; in Latin, nor in Greek.
I therefore did advise him, as a friend,
To make his learning serve some useful end:
And let me know, what rules he had observed,
What unities of time and place preserved.
He answered, Poetry is not an art;
It Is nature only frames the poet's heart:
Still as he thinks, the scene he feels along,
And from his bosom bursts the raptured song.
This is the sacred oracle, the shrine
The bard consults, and here, the tuneful Nine.
With the same fire, the hearer's soul must glow,
Else vain to him, the tale of tragic woe.
There is a temper, which is all and all:
That sounds responsive to the poet's call.
Like Memnon's harp, which poured harmonious lays,
Whenever its strings were touched by Phoebus' rays.
This temper of the soul is sweet and wild;
It sobs, or smiles, as sudden as a child;
To woes imagined tears unfeigned gives,
And in the poet's world of fancy lives.
Whilst thus he spoke, a bell was heard to ring;
He stopped, and started like a guilty thing;
Ere the dread curtain rose, in haste withdrew,
And at a distance wails his doom from you.
FINIS.

