THE History and Antiquities OF THE COUNTY PALATINE, of DURHAM; By William
Hutchinson F.A.S.

VOL. II.

A View of Durham from Castle Chair.
view of Durham

NEWCASTLE Printed for S. Hodgson; and Messrs Robinsons* Paternoster Row*
London.

MDCCLXXXVII.

DURHAM ABBEY from Admeasurement by G. Nicholson Arch. 1780
depiction of Durham Abbey



^ETTS BURGHS DUNELM. N.E. Asp^^t.


view of Durham Banks DURHAM BANKS


A View on Durham Banks.
view of Durham Banks

INTRODUCTION.
DURHAM is a maritime county, and takes its name from the city of Durham;
commonly called the bishopric, and sometimes the county palatine.

The description given by Camden is to the following effect Camden's Brit.
(Gibson's edition, 1772) vol. ii. p. 127.
: It lies north of Yorkshire, and is shaped like a triangle Geographers deal
with countries as astronomers with their asterismes, and fancy them into
shapes; as Italy into a man's leg, Spain into an Oxhyde, and the form of
this bishopric into a, or an equilateral triangle. It lies in the bosom of
the German Neptune, and embraced between the arms of the two crystal
rivers Teese and Derwent. -- Legend of St Cuthbert.


, the apex or top whereof lies to the west, being formed there by the meeting
of the north boundary and the head of the river Tees: The southern side is
wholly bounded by the course of the Tees: The northern side, from about the
point of the angle, forms a line to the river Derwent, and then is bounded by
that river (till it receives the rivulet called Chopwell or Milkburn), and so
full north to the river Tyne: The basis of this triangle, to the east, is
formed by the shore of the German ocean.

Modern geographers have laid down the abuttals so variously, that in regard to
the north-west point, we can in general only say, the river Tees totally
separates the county of Durham from Westmorland and Yorkshire, and a very
narrow point of Cumberland intervenes between that river and the confines of
Northumberland, a space in which the proprietors are not well ascertained of
their real boundaries. On the other sides, Camden's description is accurate.

The parts of this county, extended into the upper point or apex of the
triangle, Camden describes Camd. Brit. ibid.
to consist of naked lands, the woods few, the hills bald, but not destitute of
veins of iron ore, whilst the valleys produce plenty of grass, the English
Appenines intersecting the country at this angle. At the distance of two
hundred years, we cannot wonder at this picture of our county, or the ignorance
of naturalists in regard to its produce and riches: The contrast we shall draw,
it is hoped, will prove interesting. Our author then proceeds to describe the
eastern side or basis of the triangle, where he observes, as well as to the
south, the soil by tillage is rendered fertile, and the country enamelled with
meadows, cornfieldsd, and pastures, and graced with many towns, the bowels of
the earth abounding in coal. Such is the imperfect account given by this great
writer.

The Magna Britannia describes this county to be thirty-five miles in length,
thirty in breadth, and about one hundred and seven in circumference: Another
account says, it is thirty-nine miles long, and thirty-five broad; containing
nine hundred and fifty-eight square miles, and six hundred and ten thousand
acres of land; and comprehending one city, eleven other market towns, fifty-two
parishes, and twenty-one chapels; two hundred and twenty-three villages,
nineteen thousand nine hundred and eighty-five houses, and ninety-seven
thousand inhabitants; sixteen rivers, twenty-one parks, and several castles
Market Towns in Durhamshire.
Duneholm -- Akeland -- Wickingham -- the Quickke Market of Darlington,
standing betwixt Tese and Were -- Stoketon upon Tese -- Wulsingham upon Were,
almost in the middle way betwixt Stanhope and Akeland -- Hertilpole Leland's
information was erroneous, several other markets being established before his
time.
.
Castelles in Durhamshire.
Duneholm -- Akeland -- Prudhoe Castle is in Northumberland, etc.
Prudo upon Tyne -- Stoketon upon Tese -- Barnard Castle -- Lomeley Castle, not
far from Chestre.
Abbais and Priories in Durhamshire.
Duneholme upon Were River -- Finkelo upon Were, a celle of xiij monks
belonging to Durham -- Weremouth -- Garaw. -- There was a priori not far from
Darington, as I remember, about Teis River N^asham priory or abbey.
.
The Limits of Durhamshire.
Tese River -- Tine River, on til he receive Derwent Water. --
Leland's Itin. vol. vii.


. These are the only modern accounts of the county worth attention, except the
geographical table given in the notes It has four wards instead of hundreds;
one city (Durham); and eight market towns, viz. Auckland, Stockton, Sunderland,
Darlington, Hartlepool, Stainthorp, Barnardcastle, and Wolsingham; eighty
parishes or ecclesiastical livings, of which thirty are rectories, twenty-one
vicarages, and twenty-eight chapels. -- Mag. Brit.

Geographical Table. -- Durham. Acres 610,000 -- Circumference 107 miles -- 1
borough -- 9 market towns -- 118 parishes -- 15,984 houses -- 79,920
inhabitants -- 4 members to parliament -- 2 proportions paid to the land tax --
4 wards -- Tyne, Wear, and Tees, chief rivers -- Coal, iron, and lead,
principal produce -- Northern circuit -- 264 miles N. W. Durham from London.


.

The county is divided into four wards, called Easington ward, Stockton ward,
Darlington ward, and Chester ward. We know no reason why the several districts
took those denominations, or derived their names from places of inferior
consequence and distinction.

The air of the county is generally healthy, though cold on the hills; and
according to some authors, that of the western parts sharper than that of the
east. It is well watered by rivers and brooks, the chief of which are the Tees
and Were Hollinshed's description of these two rivers, and the several streams
that join them, is so accurate, that we cannot omit the same.

The THESE, a river that bears and feeds an excellent salmon, rises in the
Black Lowes, above two miles flat west of the southerlie head of Were called
Burdop, and south of the head of West Alen, and thence runs through Tildale
forest, and taking in the Langdon-water from northwdst, it runs to Durtpit
chapel, to Newbiggin, and so to Middleton, receiving by west of each of these
a rill coming from by north (of which the last is called Hude) and likewise
the Lune afterward by southwest, that rises at three several places, whereof
the first is in the borders of Westmerland and there called Arnegill-becke, the
second more southerlie named Lune-becke, and the third by south at Bandor
Skarth-hill, and meeting all above Arnegill-house, they run together in one
bottom to Lathekirke-bridge, and then into the These. Having therefore met
with these, it runs to Mickleton, and there taking in the Skirkwith-water,
it goes to Rombaldkirke, crossing there also one rill and the Bander-brooke by
southwest, and then going to Morewood-hag and Morewood-parke, till it come to
Bernard's castle. Here also it receives the Thuresgill-water coming east of
Rere-crosse in Yorkshire from the Spittle in Stanmore by Crag almost southwest,
and being united with the These, it goes by Stratford, Eglesdon, Rokesbie,
Thorpe, Wickliffe, Ovington, Winston, and between Barfurth and Gainfurth
meets with another rill, that comes from Langleie forest, between Rabie
castle and Standorpe, of whose name I have no knowledge. But to proceed, the
These being past Ramfurth, runs between Persore and Cliffe, and in the way
to Croftsbridge takes in the Skerne, a pretty water, which rises above
Trimdon, and goes by Fishburne, Bradburie, Preston, Braforton, Skirmingham,
the Burdons, Haughton and Darlington, and there finally meeting with the
Cocke-becke or Dare, it falls in the These beneath Stapleton before it come
at Croftsbridge, and (as it should seem) is the same which Leland calls
Gretteie or Grettie. From thence it runs to Sockburne, nether Dunsleie,
Middleton-row, Newsham, Yarne (crossing a brook from Levenbridge) called
Levin, or Leuinus in Latin, whose crinkling course is notable, and the stream
of some called Thorpe. After this the These hastes on to Barwic, Preston,
Thorn abbeie, and Arsham, which stands on the southeast side of the river
almost between the falls of two waters, whereof one descends from West
Hartburne, by Long Newton, Elton, and Stockton; the other from Stillington or
Shillington, by Whitton, Thorpe, Blackeston, Billingham, and Norton. From
Arsham finally it goes to Bellasis, Middleburgh, and so into the sea.

Ptolomie writing of the WERE, calls it VEDRA. It rises of three heads in
Kelloppeslaw-hill, whereof the most southerlie is called Burdop, the middlemost
Wallop, and the northerliest Kellop, which uniting themselves about St John's
chapel, or a little by west thereof, their confluence runs through
Stanhope-parke, by east Yate, and so to Frosterlie. But yer it come there, it
receives three rilles from the north in Weredale, whereof one comes in by
Stanhope, another west of Woodcroft-hall, and the third at Frosterlie
aforementioned; and a little beneath these, a fourth on the southside, which
descends from southwest by Bolliop, Bishop-sleie, Millhouses, and Landew.
Being therefore united all with the Were, this stream goes on to Wolsingham,
there taking in the Wascropburne, beside another at Bradleie, the third at
Harpleie-hall (and these on the northside) and the fourth, between Witton and
Witton castle, called Bedburne, coming by Hamsterleie, whereby this river
does now wax very great. Going therefore from hence, it hastes to Bishop's
Akeland* and beneath it receives the Garondlesse, which rises six miles by
west of Akeland castle, and running south thereof, passes by West-Akeland, St
Helens Akeland, St Andrews Akeland, and Bishops Akeland, and then into the
Were, which goes to Newfield and Willington. Near unto this place also, and
somewhat beneath Sunderland, the Were crosses one brook from southwest by
Het, Coxseie, Cornefurth, Tursdale, and Croxdale, and two other from by
northwest in one botome, whereof the first comes from above Ash, by Langleie.
The other, called Coue, from above Kinchleie, by Newbiggin, Lanchester, North
Langley, and through Beareparke, and so meeting beneath Kelleie or Hedleie with
the other, they fall both as one into the Were, between South Sunderland and
Burnall. From hence our river goes on to Howghwell, Shirkeleie, Old Duresme,
and there taking in the Pidding-brooke by northeast, it goes to Duresme,
Finkeleie, Harbarhouse, Lumleie castle, (where it meets with the Pilis,
whose heads are united between Pelton and Whitwell, and after called Hedleie)
and from thence to Lampton. Harraton, the Beddikes, Ufferton, Hilton-parke,
Bishops Weremouth, and so into the sea between North Sunderland and North
Weremouth town, which now is called Monk Weremouth.


, both abounding with fish, and particularly with trout and salmon.

The diocese contains the whole county, and all Northumberland, except eight
churches and chapels, being Hexham peculiar, which belongs to York: It has also
one parish, viz. Alston-Moor in Cumberland, and claims Craike in the county of
York to be under its jurisdiction.

It is divided into two archdeaconries, viz. DURHAM, which has the deanries of
Chester, Darlington, Easington, and Stockton; and NORTHUMBERLAND, which
compriseth Alnwick, Bamborough, Corbridge, Morpeth, and Newcastle deanries
Willis's Cath. vol. i. p. 221.
.

A VIEW of the CATHEDRAL and CITY of DURHAM from ELVETT MOOR.
view of Durham THE HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF THE COUNTY PALATINE OF DURHAM.
THE city of Durham claims our first attention. It is in Easington ward, and
lies near the center of the county, in latitude 54 50, and 1 27 west longitude
from London. From whatever quarter the traveller approaches this place, he is
struck with its elegant situation, and the grandeur of some of its public
buildings. A few paces from the south road, this English Zion makes a noble
appearance. In the center, the castle and cathedral crown a very lofty
eminence, girt by the two streets called the Baileys, enclosed with the remains
of the ancient city walls, and skirted with hanging gardens and plantations
which descend to the river Were, in this point of view exhibiting the figure of
a horse-shoe This reverend aged abbey is seated in the heart of the city,
advanced upon the shoulders of an high hill, and encompassed again with the
higher hills, that he that has seen the situation of this city, has seen
the map of Sion, and may save a journey to the Jerusalem. She is girded almost
rownd with the renowned river of Weer, in which, as in a glass of crystal,
she might once have beheld the beauty, but now the ruin of her walls. --
Legend of St Cuthbert.


. To form the right wing of this picturesque prospect, the banks on the
opposite side of the river are high, rocky, steep, and scattered over with
trees; along the brink of which the street of New-Elvet is extended, and
terminated by the handsome church of St Oswald: At the bottom runs Old-Elvet.
Across the bridge are the streets of Claypeth and St Giles, which climb the
more distant eminence, the church terminating the line of buildings. The slopes
of the hills are beautified with hanging gardens and rich meadows. Newton-Hall,
one of the seats of Sir Henry Liddell, bart. with its adjacent plantations,
fills the nearer back-ground; behind which a fine cultivated country is
discovered, lengthening the prospect to the distance of ten miles, on which
Penshar-Hill, with its peaked brow, is a beautiful object. To form the left
wing, the banks opposite to the castle and cathedral are clothed with wood and
fruit trees; and South-street stretches along the summit. The long canal which
the river exhibits to the eye in this part, is crossed by Framwelgate bridge,
of two eliptic arches. Crook-Hall, a seat of one of the family of Hopper, is
seen on the river's banks, with the woodlands of Newton-Hall on the more
distant ground; to the left of which the sweet villa of Francis Johnson, esquire at
Aykley-Heads, is seen, surrounded with irregular mounts Here, it is alleged,
was a dru^^lical grove: The b^rrow is now very conspicuous, and resembling
those given by Stu^elty ^t (...) and (...).
and rising plantations.

Approaching the city from the north, it has the most romantic and uncommon
appearance: It seems to be scattered over a multitude of irregular hills, (for
the ground by which it is approached is thrown up into round mounts), and we
discover various parts of the town, the castle, and churches, through several
valleys in one point of view, so that they appear like so many distinct places.
The west front of the castle is seen on the summit of a ragged and steep rock,
with some parts of the cathedral; and the street of St Giles, as if totally
unconnected with the rest of the town, is spread over the brow of a distant
eminence. The hollow passes amongst the hills on the north-west of the city,
afford beautiful and picturesque prospects. At Castle-Chair, where the view is
much confined, the castle and cathedral have a noble appearance; the octagon
tower of the former, with the mound on which it is placed, have a grand effect.
On the eminence opposite to Shaw-Wood, the view just mentioned is enlarged;
yet, the distant branches of the town being intercepted by rising grounds,
leave the principal objects in the most distinct and picturesque arrangement.
Approaching from the east down the street of St Giles, we command the second
noblest view of the city: In front, the river Were forms a fine canal through a
rich vale, crossed by Elvet bridge, of seven wet arches, and many other land
arches; the town crowds the swift risings of the hill, pile upon pile; the
castle and cathedral church crowning the summit of the eminence. To the left
are seen the banks of Elvet and the church, flanked by a distant forest of
oaks, and the groves which hang on the margin of the river: On the right is a
view of Newton-Hall, and the adjacent grounds. -- To this general description,
more minute particulars will be added as we pass through the city.

A short view of historical facts relative to this place, as each circumstance
arose in the respective aeras of our prelates, is given in due order in the
preceding volume of this work. It is to be observed, that the first mention as
to time, made by old writers of the name of Durham (or Duresme according to the
language of those days) is by Hollinshed, in the reign of Athelstan, when,
speaking of Sithric's The Charter granted by Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham to
the Burgesses of the City of Durham.
The Confirmation of Bishop Pudsey's Charter to the Burgesses of the City of
Durham by Pope Alexander 3d. (...)
sons, Anlaf and Godred, he says, Godred with a power of men entering into
Northumberland, besieged the city of Duresme, soliciting the citizens to
receive him, which they would gladly have done, if they had not perceived how
he was not of power able to resist the puissance of king Athelstan Hollinshed's
Hist. p. 225.
. It is evident, from circumstances, that this author adopted a wrong name for
the capital of Deira; for the most approved historians concur in relating, that
Godred arrived at York, where some of his partisans held the castle, but on
Athelstan's approaching, Malmsbury says, it was surrendered and demolished even
to the ground, and Godred, in despair, took to piratical courses and a roving
life at sea Rapin, vol. i. p. 100. -- Malms. p. 50. -- Sax. An. -- Hoved. --
Hunting. -- Smollet, 4to edit. p. 100.
.

We have not the least evidence of any town where Durham now stands, before the
monks rested with the remains of St Cuthbert, after the Danish invasion. It was
also remarked in the course of this work, that there is a place adjacent to the
present city called Old Durham; but we have neither traces in history nor
records to show that any town existed there previous to St Cuthbert's arrival.
The legendary tale, alone supported by the effigies on the north-west tower of
the transept of the cathedral church, (which will be described when that
edifice is treated of) relates, that after the revelation or vision at Wedelau,
according to Symeon's text, but Werdele by others, and described to lie east of
Durham, the monks were much at a loss to find the place pointed out by the
oracle, where they should rest from their labor: The name of Dunholme, then
said to be given them, was not known to any. If they then lay at Warden Law,
(which from much similarity of name some have conceived was the place of the
vision) it was within eight miles; if on the banks of the Were, (where we shall
by some observations attempt to ground a supposition that the monks halted) it
was to the east of the city, at a very little distance; for that river from its
source flows almost due east to Bishop-Auckland, and from thence almost due
north to Old Durham. It would have been strange if Deiraham, Duresme, or
Dunholme, a place named from the kingdom of Deira in which it was situated, or
some such memorable distinction, had then stood on the site of Old Durham, and
was not known to the inhabitants within so small a distance as Chester, the
last residence of the monks. The discovery of the place of their destination
occurred to the wanderers accidentally, as the legend relates; for whilst they
traveled through the country with uncertain steps, a woman, seeking her cow,
was informed by a person she met that she would find it in Dunholme: The
astonished monks rejoiced at the propitious voice, and followed their fortunate
guide, where indeed they found a country flowing with milk and honey. So much
for the legend; which we would not have troubled the reader with, but it leads
to an argument, that the effigies on the church were placed there in
commemoration of the happy possession of the rich meads and valleys on the
Were, which could not be more aptly expressed in emblem than by the figure of
the bountiful cow distending her udder to dispense charitable gifts to mankind:
It was emblematical of the rich country they had obtained, of the gracious
gifts of Providence decreed to them, and the holy benevolence of the church. In
pursuance of this idea, it is probable the monks, on discovering their destined
residence with the pious host which accompanied them, sat down on the plains
south-east of the present city, by the brink of the river; and there erected
themselves habitations, till they could build a church wherein to deposite the
saint's remains: This conjecture has a strict correspondence, not only with the
name of Old Durham, but of the Burgus vetus, (which we shall point out from
several records) afterward granted to the convent. On the one side of this
plain was a fortress, perhaps of no less antiquity than the times we are
speaking of, called the Maiden Castle, In the Gentleman's Magazine for the year
1755, the origin of the name Maiden, when annexed to Way or Castle, is
learnedly defined by that great antiquary Mr Pegge, under his then signature of
Gemsege: Particularly he says, To risque a conjecture upon a point so obscure,
perhaps it may come from the British word MAD. pulcher or beautiful; hence
possibly may come the Anglo-Saxon word MAID and MAIDEN, virgo, which in that
case answers exactly to our present expressions a fair one, and in the plural
the fair; a sense undoubtedly very well accommodated to all the three names of
Maiden-Castle, Maiden-Way, and Maiden-Hold.


the remains of which are described in the sequel; and on the other side, a
peel or castle, as is presumed from the name of the eminence called the
Peel-Law or Castle-Hill, though no traces of any such erection are at this time
to be seen or found in the forest of oak that grows on the hill. The river runs
between the eminences, and almost fills the whole intervening space. The
remains of extensive breastworks and trenches are to be seen a little farther
up the vale, such as the people of that age used to cast up for the defense of
their habitations; and not far distant is an eminence called Mont-Joye, from
whence the wanderers obtained a view of the Hill of Zion, whereon St Cuthbert
was to rest for ever. Mr Cade of Durham, in his tract on the Roman roads of
this county, published in the Archaeologia, vol. vii. p. 74, has taken great
pains to trace the works, and entertains an idea that they were the vestiges of
a Roman winter-camp. -- For the satisfaction of our readers, we shall extract
his letter on the subject when we describe those places.
Warden-Law lies several points to the north-east of the city of Durham, and on
the wrong side of the river for the monks to approach Chester from Ripon. The
fords are dangerous and uncertain, and even impassable at certain seasons by
travelers on foot: Warden-Law is also at a greater distance from Ripon by
eight miles than Durham. Such circumstances counterpoise the apparent
similarity of names, and induce a belief, that as the religious troop would
cross the river Tees either at Neseham, Croft, or Piercebridge, they would seek
the fordable passes of the river Were near Durham; and that Wedelau, Werdale,
and such other names as we find in ancient authors, express the Dale of Were.
Though names grow corrupt, yet points of the compass must remain; and if the
pious host sat down east of Durham, on the banks of the Were, there was no
other ground so situated but in the vicinity of Old Durham. This argument shall
not be pressed further till we come to describe the ground, in our progress
through the county.

Dunholme, or the eminence on which St Cuthbert was to rest, is described to us
as being insufficient for the reception of the multitude that attended the
saint, till they had cut down the thickets and forests which grew upon the
skirts of the hill. The first work the pious laborers engaged in, was to erect
an ark or tabernacle with timber and boughs of trees, where they deposited the
saint's body; after which they built a complete edifice, similar to the
churches of that age, which was called the White Church. This transaction all
the monkish writers fix to the year 995 The learned editor of Camden adds, And
to omit the many pretended miracles, and other passages of less moment, he
(Symeon) says further, that the first church erected at Dunholm by bishop
Aldwin was, facta citissime de virgis ecclesiola, "a little church quickly made
of rods;" just such another structure as that which is said to have been first
built at Glastenbury, whereof Sir Henry Spelman has given us a draught: Qui
locus non erat inhabitatus vel aedisicatus, sed densissima undiq. sylva totum
occupavit. -- Elenchus Liber, cui tit. Liber Ruber Dun.


. It does not appear that any habitations were erected for the people on the
mount where the church was built, for a considerable time after their coming to
Dunholme; for we are told, in the course of three years from the date of the
first tabernacle, that a church of stone-work was begun and dedicated by bishop
Aldun, wherein the saint's remains were deposited. According to the course of
events exhibited by the ancient writers, it was not till after the foundation
of Aldun's church was laid; that the forest which grew round the eminence was
cut down, and the skirts of the hill were rendered sit for human habitation.
Much labor was expended; and all the inhabitants between Coquet and Tees
rivers, at the command of the earl of Northumberland, are said to have been
employed therein; workmen drawn from a tract of country not less than fifty
miles in length: Such was the mighty concourse which on that occasion crowded
the banks of the Were The topography of Dunholme at that time was, that it was
more beholding to nature for fortification than fertility; where thick woods
both hindered the stars from viewing the earth, and the earth from the
prospect of heaven. Here the monks, with extemporary devotion, instead of a
church, built an arbor of boughs for St. Cuthbert, and from thence translated
it into Whitkyrk (for three years); while Aldwinus the bishop raised no small
building of stone work for his cathedral church, where all the people between
Coqued and Tees three years were at work, and were paid for their pains with
treasure in heaven, than which there was never a dearer or cheaper way to build
churches. Into this new basilica, St. Cuthbert's restless body, in the three
hundred and ninth year after his first burial, was with all funeral pomp
enshrined. -- Legend of St Cuthbert.


. From the above circumstances we are led to date the rise of the town of
Durham in the opening of the eleventh century. Bishop Aldun did not live to see
his design completed, but left the western part of the edifice, after eighteen
years pious care, for his successors to finish.

We hear nothing further of the town of Durham till the year 1040, when, some
authors say, it was attacked by Duncan of Scotland; and it seems there were
then fortifications, for the townsmen, as reported, sustained the invaders
assaults for a long time, and at length made a victorious sally, whereby the
enemy were totally routed. The heads of such Scots leaders as fell or were
taken prisoners, were sixed on poles round the marketplace. The eminence
chosen for the first buildings was so steep on every side but one, that it was
easily defended against the attacks of an enemy: The weakest part was on the
north-east, where Claypeth, or Clayport-gate, now stands, being on the neck of
land between the streams of the river: This neck, from brink to brink of the
Were, is not much above 200 paces in width in its present state; and there are
sufficient appearances on the adjacent ground to encourage a conjecture, that a
sluice or moat crossed this narrow part, whereby the whole city could on
occasion be completely insulated. The name of Clayport, as it is styled in all
the ancient writers, appears to be a corruption of Cluerport, or the gate of
the sluice; cleur being a north-country word, in acceptance for a sluice-gate
or sluice-board, by which a dam-head is stopped. Leland, who visited this
country, in his Itinerary says I^in. vol. i. p. 81.
, The town self of Duresme stondith on a rocky hille: and stondith as men cum
from the south cuntre on the ripe of Were, the which water so with his course
natural in a botom windith about, that from Elvet a great stone bridge of 14
arches, it crepith about the town to Framagate bridge of 3 arches also on
Were, that betwixt these 2 bridges, or a little lower at St Nicholas, the town,
except the lenght of an arrowshot, is brought in insulam; and some hold
opinion, that of ancient time, Were ran from the place where now Elvet bridge
is, strait down by St Nicholas, now stonding on a hille; and that the other
course, part for policy, and part by digging of stones for building of the
town and minstre, was made a valley, and so the water course was conveyid that
way, but I approve not full this conjecture. Leland, doubting the truth of the
report, does not express his opinion concerning the neck of land which he
mentions. Symeon, who gives us the account of the beforementioned attack on
Durham, takes no notice of any fort or strong-hold which contributed to the
gallant defense of the inhabitants; but it is probable the mound on which the
octagonal tower of the castle stands, was cotemporary with the church, and
perhaps formed of the soil, which was necessarily moved when the foundations of
that structure were laid. At Warwick there is a mound of the same form, with
terraces similar to those at Durham; and Dugdale Warwickshire, p. 308.
tells us, If it was presumption to carry its antiquity higher, to refer the
foundation thereof to the renowned lady Ethelstede, daughter of king Alfred,
and lady of the Mercians, I am sure will not, in regard it appears, that she in
915 (scil. in the 16th year of king Edward the Elder) caused the dungeon to be
made, which is a strong tower or platform, upon a large and high mount of
earth, artificially raised (such being usually placed toward the side of a
castle or fort, which is least defensible) the substance whereof is yet to be
seen. This passage is quoted, to show the reader there was an example for the
people to follow, and that such mounts were of that antiquity. It is said to be
the opinion of the ingenious Mr Wright, of Byers-green Author of Louthiania.
, that this was a Danish mount or fort; but we have no traces in history of
that people having a residence here; and indeed the former arguments hold
against it, as such a work would have rendered the place notorious to the monks
of Chester, at the distance of six miles.

The next event noted in history, wherein Durham is distinguished, was in the
year 1069, after the coming in of William the Norman, when he sent down Cumin
as governor of Northumberland with a guard of 700 veteran Norman soldiers.
Despising bishop Egelwin's caution and advice, Cumin entered the city with
marks of cruelty and tyranny, and through the insolence of his own
self-sufficiency, permitted his troops to give themselves up to rioting and
wantonness; they forcibly took possession of the houses, were dispersed through
every quarter of the city, and committed various enormities against the
inhabitants. The Normans, overcome with drunkenness and revelling, were totally
off their guard; whilst the people of the adjacent country, arming themselves,
assembled in the night, and at the dawn of day forced the gates of the city,
fell upon the Normans when they suspected no violence, and put them to the
sword; so that the streets were filled with blood and carcases, the house where
the earl lodged was set on fire, and those within endeavoring to fly were
immediately slain, only one wounded person of the whole band escaping death.
When the ruthless tyrant William, greedy of revenge, marched his army
northward, the affrighted inhabitants of Durham fled the city Camd. Brit.
; and the monks forsook their convent, leaving the Normans a melancholy
solitude, on which to wreak their vengeance by fire and destruction. As soon as
the troops retired, the inhabitants came from their hiding places, and the
religious host brought back their holy charge after an absence of four months.

The king having appointed Walcher to the bishopric, on his return from an
expedition against Malcolm of Scotland in 1072, ordered a castle or fortress to
be built at Durham, at once to protect the bishop and his convent, to keep the
people in subjection, and to awe the northern territories, this place being
esteemed a fit situation for a barrier. It is certain such an edifice was begun
about that period of time; but we have no information of what form it was,
though the octagonal figure is not unusual in the Norman buildings. It seems,
Camden apprehended the castle directed to be built by William was not founded
on the site of any ancient fortress, his words being in eminentiori collis
part extruxit; but that a more elevated situation was chosen for the new
bulwark than the stronghold alluded to by Gulielmus Gemiticencis, whose words
he quotes, describing the fortress: From whence (he says) the English,
dissatisfied with the Norman yoke, made frequent sallies, and kept themselves
close there, waiting for the expected approach of the Danes; that it was in a
part of the country inaccessible by reason of woods and waters; that it had a
strong rampire round it, which they called Dunholme. This account seems to
strengthen the former arguments. William de Malmsbury, whom Camden quotes, and
who lived about that time, gives us this description of the city: Durham is a
hill rising gradually from out the valley to its summit; and notwithstanding,
by its rugged situation and broken rocks, all access for an enemy is cut off,
yet lately they have built a castle upon a hill, at whose foot runs an
excellent river. Dugdale, further speaking of the castle of Warwick, says, In
those days (in the Saxons time I mean) were very few such defensible places as
we now call castles, that being a French name; so that though the English were
a bold and warlike people, yet, for want of the like strongholds, were they
much less able to resist their enemies, which defect gave great advantage to
the Norman conqueror after his victory at Hastings; whereof he was so sensible,
that he neglected not to raise store of such forts through the whole realm, as
I have elsewhere observed, amongst which this at Warwick was not the least.

Bishop Walcher's assumption of the civil jurisdiction, in the character of
palatine, it is apprehended brought on the tragical catastrophe before related
See vol. i. p. 130.
, in the month of May, 1080; and the city of Durham, after his death, sustained
the assault of the rioters for four days, who, not able to make any impression,
dispersed themselves.

William de Carilepho, who succeeded in the bishopric, was among the
malcontents on the accession of William Rufus: After the king had quelled the
southern insurrections, he sent an army into the north, which laid siege to
Durham, and soon reduced the place; the bishop flying into Normandy: On this
occasion, the temporalties of the Sea were seized into the hands of the crown,
John de Tailbois and Ernesius de Burone were made governors of the castle and
palatinate, and it was not till the year 1091 that the bishop was restored:
Soon after that event, he granted, or (if the ancient authorities are not
confused on this subject) rather regranted to the convent, Elvet in the order
of a borough, where the monks should have forty merchants houses or tradesmen's
shops, distinct and separate from the bishop's borough of Durham, that they
might trade there, freed from duties payable to the bishop and his successors
Linwood, upon the Provincial, (ut singula de sensibus) speaks to this effect:
Aliqui interpretantur Burgum esse Cast^um, vel locum ubi sunt crebra cast^a:
vel dicitur Burgus, ubi sunt per limits habitucula plura constituta. But
afterward defines it thus: Burgus dici potest villa quoecunq. alia in
civitate, in qua est universitas approbata. -- Some derive it from the Greek
word (...), i. e. Turris. See Skene De Verb Signif. -- Verstegan, in his
Restitution of decayed Intelligence, says, Burg or Burgh, whereof we take our
Borough, metaphorically signifies a town having a wall or some kind of a
closure about it: All places that in old time had amongst our ancestors the
name of Borough, were one way or other fenced or fortified. -- It is doubtful,
whether, before the statute of Acton Burnell, goods were devisable but in
ancient Boroughs, where by prescriptive custom they were usually devised.


. Though we have no previous account of the borough of Durham, Vol. i. p. 134.
yet by inference we may determine that such borough existed, with exclusive
privileges, even till the institution of the borough of Elvet held an entire
trade: How this diminution was relished, we are not informed; nor how the new
borough supported its authority.

In the time of bishop Flambard Bishop Flambard was consecrated A. D. 1099, and
died 1128.
, whilst the temporalties were in the hands of the crown, it appears by the
guardians accounts, the borough of Durham sustained considerable damage by fire
Vol. i. p. 147.
. After the bishop's restoration to the Sea, he improved the fortifications of
the city, by extending the walls between the church and the castle: He removed
all the houses on the area between those two edifices, and levelled the ground:
He fortified the castle with a moat, strengthened the banks of the river, and
built the beautiful bridge called Framwellgate-bridge.

In April 1139, this city entertained the members of congress, when articles of
peace were agreed upon; Maud queen of England, with a great number of barons,
on the part of that crown, and prince Henry, with many Scotch nobles, on the
other part, being present.

King Henry II. during his displeasure with bishop Pudsey, took possession of
the castle and city of Durham, and on various pretexts repeatedly deprived him
of the custody of this strong place. It was a custom for the burgesses, on the
demise of a prelate, to deposite the keys of the city gates at the shrine of St
Cuthbert: On the death of bishop Pudsey, the officers of the crown, who had
seized the temporalties, took violent possession of the keys contrary to the
ancient usage. As the election of a prelate was studiously delayed, and much
oppression happened during the vacancy of the Sea, under the influence of the
crown officers, and as a creature of the king succeeded, it is not to be
wondered that we hear no further than the mere mention of this infringement of
the privilege of the convent.

King Henry III. on his northern excursion, honored this city with his
residence for some short time, during the episcopacy of bishop Farnham.

After the victory of Falkirk, Edward I. halted at Durham, to which place
intelligence was brought that the Scots again appeared in force, which obliged
the king to march nothward, and he celebrated the festival of Christmas at
Tynemouth. In the year 1300, the king was again at Durham, as a mediator
between the bishop and his convent, touching their then bitter dissentions.

On Brus's incursion in the time of Edward II. a party of the Scotch, whilst
the inhabitants were in their beds, surprised the suburbs of Durham, which they
reduced to ashes.

Edward III. with a great army, was at Durham for some time, before the Scotch
were discovered to lie in Stanhope-park: In 1333 he was again at Durham, on his
march northward, previous to the victory of Hallidown-hill.

The walls of the city of Durham having been neglected, and becoming ruinous,
were restored and put into a state of defense by bishop Beaumont, who in 1323
received a severe censure from Edward II. for his negligence in matters so
important to his palatinate. On the 23d of December, 1356, Edward III. was at
Durham, and issued summonses for the military tenants to attend him on a
northern expedition, in which Berwick was besieged and reduced.

In 1424 this city was crowded with the nobility of England and Scotland, on
the liberation of the Scotch king, and his marriage with the lady Jane Seymour;
the hostages were received here; a truce for seven years was also then settled
between the two nations; and certain laws established for the government of the
borders: The king and queen of Scotland remained at Durham a considerable time,
not departing thence until the last day of March or first of April.

A dreadful visitation of the plague happened here in the time of bishop
Langley, which occasioned an See note to vol. i. p. 271.
adjournment of the assizes, and a total suspension of all public assemblies in
the year 1416: It continued to rage for five successive years.

In the time of bishop Nevill, this city was the place of many conventions of
the delegates of England and Scotland. In 1448, Henry VI. came here on a
Pilgrimage to the shrine of St Cuthbert. In 1463, lord Montague was at Durham
with his army, previous to the battle of Hedgley-Moor.

Bishop Fox, on the anniversary of his installation, the 23d of July 1503,
entertained, in the great hall of his palace at Durham, the princess Margaret,
daughter of Henry VII, in her progress into Scotland, on her espousal with
James king of Scotland The syancells of Margaret, eldest daughter of Henry VII.
to James king of Scotland; together with her departure from England, journey
into Scotland, her reception and marriage there, and the great feasts held on
that account. Written by John Young, somerset, herald, who attended the said
princess on her journey. From a manuscript late in the possession of John
Anstis, esquire garter king at arms. -- De Rebus Anglicanis Opuscula varia. Lel.
Col. vol. iv. p. 275. Edit. 1774.


. July, 1503, on the 18th day of the monneth, the queen departed fro Newbrough
to Allerton; and at the intrygne of the said place, sche was receyved by the
vicayr and the folks of the church with the freres Carmelits in processyon.
From that place sche was conveyed, as custom was, to the manayr of the said
bysschop of Durham.

The xixth day of the said monneth, the queen departed from Allerton, in fair
array and noble companyd, and Sir James Straungwysch knight, sheryffe for the
said lordschyp, for the said bischop met her well accompanyd.

After sche drew to Darneton to her bed, and three mylle from the said place
came to her the lord Lomley and his son, accompanyd of many gentylmen and others
well appointed, there folks arayd with their liveray and well monted, to the
nombre of xxiiij horsys.

At the village of Nesham she was met by Sir Rawf Bows and Sir William
Aylton, well appointed, with a fair cumpany arayd in their liverays, to the
nombre of xl horsys, well appointed and well horst.

In the said place of Nesham was the said queen receyved with the abbasse and
religyouses, with the cross without the gatt, and the byschop of Durham gaffe
her the said cross for to kiss. At two mylle ny to the said town of
Darneton, met the qwene, Sir William Boummer, sheriff of the lordship of
Durham. In company with him was Sir William Ewers, and many other folks of
honor of that contre, in fair order, well appointed of liverays and horst; to
the nombre of six score horsys.

By the said company was sche conveyed to Darnton. And at the gatt of the
church of the said place, war revested the vicayr and folks of the church, were
doing as sche had done on the days before, sche was led to the manayer of the
said byschop of Durham for that night.

The xxth day of the said monneth the queen departed from Darnton in fair array,
and with the precedente company went to the town of Durham. A mylle out of the
said town, came before her Sir Richard Stanley and my lady his wyffe,
accompanyd of gentlemen and gentlewomen varey well appointed, his folks arayd
in his liveray, to the nombre of l. horsys, well mounted.

Then the queen prepared herself to enter into the said town, and every ychon
in lyk wys, in fair array, and rychely, after the manner acostomed. In special
the earl of Northumberlaund ware on a goodly gown of tynsill fourred with
hermynes. He was mounted upon a fair courser, his harnays of goldsmyth warke,
and thorough that sam was sawen small bells that maid a mellodyous noise,
without sparing gambads. His gentylmen of honor and his company were well
appointed.

At the intryng of the said town, and within, in the streytts and in the
wyndowes was so innumerable people, that it was a fair thing for to se. And in
fair order she was conveyed to the church, the officers of arms, sergeants of
arms, trompetts, and mynstrells going before her.

At the gatt of the church was my lord the byschop of the said place, and my
lord the prior, revested in pontificalls, with the convent all revested of
riches copps, in processyon, with the crossys. And there was appointed a place
for to kiss them.

Then the said processyon departed in order, and all the noblesse in like wys,
to the church, in which ny to the fount was a rich awter, adorned of riches
jwells and precyowses relikes, the which the said bischop delivered to the said
qwene to kiss. And by the earl of Surrey was gyffyn her offrynge. After this
sche was noble conveyed to the castle, where her lodging was prepared and dressed
honnestly. And every ychon returned again to his repair.

The XXIst, XXIId, and XXIIId days of the said monneth sche sejourned in the
said place of Durham, where sche was well cheryscht, and her costs borne by the
said byschop; who on the XXIIId day held holle hall, and dowble dynner, and
dowble soupper to all comers worthy for to be there. And in the said hall was
set all the noblesse, as well spiritualls as temporalls, grett and small, the
which was welcome; for this was his day of installacyon.

The XXIIIIth day of the said monneth the qwene departed from Durham,
accompayned of her noble company, as she had been in the days past, in fair
manner and good order, for to com to the town of the New Castle.

All the nobility and people of distinction of the adjacent counties, together
with the ecclesiastics of the neighboring monasteries, were entertained on
this occasion.

Durham was the scene of a bloody execution on the suppression of Nevill's
rebellion, no less than sixty-six persons suffering death there. In the year
1589 the plague again broke out and raged in Durham for a considerable time:
After abating for some months, which gave hopes that the tremendous visitation
was about to cease, it appeared again in 1597 with redoubled violence, so as to
oblige the poorer people to be removed into huts and sheds on the adjacent
commons, particularly Elvet-Moor, where the marks of arrangement of melancholy
cells were distinctly to be observed, before the late enclosures, on the south
side of the hill, below the wood. An idea may be formed of the miserable
situation of these unhappy people from the account (in the Annals Vol. i. p.
1139.
of bishop Morton) of the wretched sufferers on Hob-Moor near York: His
benevolence, it is to be hoped, was not unrivalled by the ecclesiastics of our
city. In 1633, Charles I. was resident at Durham a considerable time with
bishop Morton, who entertained him and his whole retinue, at the expense of
1500l. a day.

Having recapitulated the most memorable events in which Durham was
particularly concerned, attention will be paid in the next place to the
government of the borough or city Extracts from the Boldon Buke.
Dunelm. Erat autem civitas Dunelm. ad firmam et reddebat quatringinti marcas.

Molendina ejusdem villae et Queringdonshire xxxvj marcas.

Cunci monetae solebant reddere x marcas, sed d'nus rex Henricus secundus per
cuneos quos in Novo Castello primum posuit, redditus x marcar. usque ad tres
marcas diminuitur, et ad ultimum cuneos a multis retro temporibus habitos
abstulit.

Terra Reginaldi Fullonis in eadem villa reddit tres solidos.

Terra Lefwyni praepositi ultra aquam juxta pratam xvjd.

Terra Gual^ranni de Cestria ibid. viijd.

Turstinus de Capella tenet unum tostum juxta virgultum d'ni episcopi de
accommodatione et elemosina ipsius episcopi.

Firmum de eadem villa x marcas.

Hatfield's Survey.
Mag. hospitalis de Kypier tenet quandam terram infra port. ballij borial.
quondam Radulphi de Whitwell et red. p. ann. xijd.

Capellanu^ Cantariae S. Jacobi super nov. pontem tenet j. ten. et -- cum prato
vocat le Mylnermydowe juxta molend. red. p. ann. v^.

Commorar. Dunolm. tenet. j. ten. in ballio quondam Roberti Leycestr. et red.
p. ann. ijs.

Rector ecclesiae B. Ma^iae in ball. borial. tenet j. ten. extra port. borial.
juxta venell. red. us.

Elemos. Dunolm. tenet cert. ten. infra ball. Dunolm. cum quodam gardin.
quondam -- Lyghtfote red. iijs.

Johannes Kylinghall tenet j. gardin. sub mot. castri extra le Kyngesgate
quondam Henry Olyndershaw ijs.

Johannes Bowman tenet j. seldam sub le Tollebothe red. p. ann. vjs. viijd.

Johannes Chestr. barber tenet j. plac. sub le Heugh quondam Nicholai molend.
cum multis aliis.

Alanus de Bylingham, etc. et alij tenentes ibid. tenent burg. Dunelm. ad firm.
cum tolnet. molend. redd. burg. cum forisfactur. tolnet. transeuntium et for --
eorund. reddendo per ann. etc. ad terminum trium annorum hoc anno secundo per
equales portiones xxiiij l.


. The ancient government of the borough was, like others of the same antiquity
and dignity, by a bailiff, who was nominated by the bishop. In royal franchises
the title of bailiff is retained to this day, as (inter alias) the chief
bailiff of the liberty and franchise of Richmond and Richmondshire; and the
bishop having jura regalia, his bailiff held jurisdiction of the franchise of
the borough of Durham By the inquisitions post mortem, taken of the borough
lands and tenements, we find the following particulars of their tenure.

A burg. in the bor. of Durh. was held per servic. pro landmale ballio burg.
Dun." Inq. p. m. John de Wodesende, a'o 5o Hatfield.

Wm Fleshewer held of the lord bishop in capite a burg. in the bor. of Durh.
called Archia Inferior, by fealty, three suits to the borough court and 12 d.
rent.

Patricius Calice and Agnes his wife took of the lord bishop 2 acres of land in
Framwelgate, at 16 d. rent, payable at the Tollboth for landmale, a'o xio
Hatfield ap. Dun. cor. R. de Boghes vic. Dun.

John Bille d. seized of 2 mess. in Claipworth, by suit at the Tollboth, etc.
a'o 12o Hatfield, cor. J. de Birland vic. Dun.

Peter Burngham held, etc. a burg. in Framwelgate by hom. fealty, rent 1 d. at
the Tollboth, and three suits there, etc. a'o 14o Hatfield, cor. W. de Claxton
esc. in co. Dun.

Johanna de Luceby held, etc. a mess. etc. by fealty, 6 d. rent and three suits
at the borough court, and paying toward the maintenance of a light before the
crucifix in the church of St Nicholas in Durham 4 lb. of wax a'o 23o Hatfield,
cor. W. de Menevillvic. Dun.

John Hoton d. s. of 6 burg. in the borough of Durham, held of the lord bishop
in burgage tenure, etc. a'o 15o Langley. -- Cum multis aliis.


. In the statute of Marlebridge 52 Hen. III. c. 2. Cok. Inst. fo. 105.
the words are, Ubi balivam habeat vel jurisdictionem; and counties are called
the sheriffs bailiwics. Many considerable towns are governed by bailiffs to
this day, as Ipswich, Yarmouth, Colchester, and sundry others. In the time of
bishop Nevill, this officer of the borough began to be styled bailiff of the
city of Durham; but no cause is assigned for avoiding the name of borough, and
substituting that of city. The name of city, even by the ancient statutes and
law authorities, is indefinite and uncertain in application, being adopted in
many instances, and in this case appears to have been used as a name of modern
acceptance, without meaning to express any superior dignities; for Durham was
the capital of the palatinate, as well whilst called a borough as a city A. D.
1307. Ballivus e'pi Dun. Ad petic'o'em ejusdem ballivi, petentis remedium sup.
eo q'd cum regal. libertas e'patus capta sit in manu regis certis de causis,
custos dicti e'patus impedit ipsum episcopum, quod non possit habere curiam
suam baron. sicut alii liberi dicti e'patus habent, et etiam idem custos levare
fecil blad. ad valene. xi lb. de villanis dicti e'pi pro sustentatione
coronatorum et subballivorum regis ibidem, et non distringit aliquem liberum
seu villanum in dicto e'patu pro hujusmodi sustentac'o'e nisi tantummodo
villanos dicti e'pi. Et preterea idem custos cepit in manum domini regis Burgum
Dunelm. Derlington, Aukeland, Stoketon, and Gatisheved, et mereat et tolnet in
dicto e'patu et tenet curias ibidem et capit prosicua, et jam duo brevia de
recto pendet in curia ipsius e'pi et ballivi sui non possunt ingredi cur.
praedictam ad saciend. p'tibus justiciam, etc. Ita responsum est, mittatur sub
pede sigilli cancellar* ista petitio Rogero le Branbanzon et sociis suis, etc.
coram quibus judicium redditum suit de regali liberate capiend. in manum
regis, et ipsi super hoc ordinent remedium competens quoad omnes istos
articulos. -- Ryley's Pleas in Pa^l. p. 352.


.

We are totally ignorant what privileges this place anciently enjoyed as a
borough. The munificent prelate, Hugh Pudsey, after the disputes with his
sovereign subsided, granted a written charter to the burgesses of Durham, which
was the first charter the borough received: The people of Durham are therein
styled burgesses, we presume, from their inhabiting within the gates of a
walled town, and under the protection of a fortress, where they carried on a
secure trade, and perhaps held certain customs established by successive
prelates. By this charter, of which the plate is a fac-simile, the people were
for ever thereafter discharged from the customs of in-toll and out-toll for all
their merchandises; they were also exempted from heriots, a duty or tribute
established in very distant antiquity, and in the Saxon times given to the lord
for his better maintenance in war. Most of the ancient writers have
distinguished heriots in two branches, heriot custom and heriot service: Law
definitions have little right to a place here; it must suffice to say, that
both denominate an estate of inheritance, and the heriot service a fee-simple.
But the fourth exemption by this charter is most singular; it is a discharge
from the custom of marchet: This was the old borough custom Marchet -- turpis
Scotorum veterum consuetudo, qua territorii dominus vassalli sponsam prima
nocte comprimeret, ^loremque carperet pudicitiae. -- Spelman's ^loss. p. 397.

King Evenus did wickedlie ordain, that the lord or master of the ground or
land should have the first nicht of ilk married woman within the famine. The quhilk
ordonance was after abrogate be king Malcome the Third, quha ordained, that the
bridegroom should have the use of his awin wise, and therefore should pay ane
piece of money called marca. (Hector Boethius, lib. 3. c. 12.) For the quhilk
certain kye was used to be paid (lib. 4. Cap. Sciendum 63.) Bot utherwaies, in
my opinion, mark or march signifies ane horse: In the auld French, Irish, and
Dutch tounges (for in the French tongue, marcher is to ride or gang, etc. etc.)
I think that marcheta mulieris is the raide of the woman, or the first carnal
copulation and conjunction with her; quhilk, in respect of her virginity, is
may esteemed be men. Quhilk interpretation is confirmed alswa be Cuiac, lib.
1. de fendi. -- Expository to Regiam Majestatem, by John Skene.

Et debet tallagium, fectam curiae et merchet hoc modo, quod si voluerit
maritare filiam suam cum quodam homine libero extra villam faciet pacem cum
Dom. pro maritagio -- Et si eam maritaverit alicui, custumario villae nihil
dabit pro maritagio. Et dabit duplex heriotum, etc. -- Spelman's Glossary.

Consuetudo pecuniaria, in mancipiorum siliabus maritandis. -- Bract. lib. ii.
cap. 8. Vide Spelman, who defines it in like manner. -- Coke on Lit. sol. 148,
says it was called Marchet, as it were a che^e or sine for marriage. -- In the
manor of Denever, in the county of Caermarthen, 10 s. is paid to the lord
there, called Gwbr-merched. -- In the manor of Biulth, in Radnorshire, a noble
is paid to the lord. -- See Pennant's Welsh Tour, vol. i. p. 221.

The plate of bishop Pudsey's charter, with the confirmation by pope Alexander
III. was given to this work by Mr George Allan. When this was engraved, the
originals were in the hands of Christ. Fawcett, esquire of Newcastle, who lent them
to Mr Allan to copy, and have since been delivered up to the corporation.

Pope Alexander III. was elected 6th Sept. 1159, and died in 1181, having
reigned 21 years, 11 month and 22 days.

The seal to the confirmation is of lead, appendant by a yellow and crimson
silk string. Popes bulls are public writings, issued from the Roman Chancery,
commonly sealed with lead, and are the same with edic^, letters patent, and
provisions of secular princes: If they are letters of grace and favor, the
lead is hung on silk thread; if they be of justice, and executory, the lead is
hung by an hempen cord. Such instruments are declared to be void in England by
an act 28 Hen. VIII.

There are a great many in the Chapter House at Durham, particularly one of
pope Clement VII. A. D. ^^24. with the seal of solid gold, confirming the title
of sidei defensor to Hen. VIII.

Collier, in his Geographical Dictionary, says, "The council held at Lateran
was on the 5th of March, 1179. where pope Alexander III. was assisted by 300
bishops."


, and brings ludicrous ideas, when one considers it had relation to a prelate's
borough. When the barbarous customs of our ancestors began to be corrected
through the medium of more polished manners, and learning had diffused a
liberality of sentiment, this brutal and absurd mark of the vilest vassalage
was commuted for a money payment. In various parts of this island the custom
bore different names; in some places the marchet, in others maiden-rents, and
in Wales gwabr-marched; all distinguishing a mulct paid to the lord for the
marriage of a vassal's daughter, and originally commuted for his right with the
virgin bride. The additional bounty to the borough, which has reference to the
free customs of Newcastle, may not be so easily explained, no historian having
hitherto informed us what were the original privileges of Newcastle, or by whom
they were granted. If in the laborious researches of the reverend Mr Brand this
may be discovered, it will add new light to the history of our city, whose
burgesses, by this grant, were entitled to hold all such free customs as the
burgesses of Newcastle enjoyed Joh'es Dei gra. etc: Sciatis nos concessisse et
hac carta n'ra confirmasse burgensibus n'ris de Novo Castro sup. Tinam pro
fideli servicio suo et heredibus eor. imperpetuum q'd nullus eor. per aliquem
distringat. extra eundem burgum ad reddendum alicui debitum aliquod unde non
sit capital. debtor vel plegius. Concessimus etiam eis gildam mercatoriam et
quod nullus eor. fac duellum, etc: -- E. MS. Dun. Eccl. lib. iv. cap. 26. fol.
28.


. This prelate improved the city greatly by building Elvet bridge, and
continuing the city wall from the North-gate, now called the Gaol-gate to the
South-gate, or Watergate.

The city continued under the government of its bailiff from the time of bishop
Pudsey till after the Reformation. Indeed we find a superintendent appointed to
regulate the merchandise, who took the title of marshal, or clerk of the
markets, and he had the custody of the alnage-seal, not only for the city of
Durham, but the province at large. He was an officer appointed by virtue of the
jura regalia, in pursuance of the statute of the 25th of Edw. III. and
subsequent laws, and collected the duties payable on cloths, and by his seal
distinguished their quality. In 1448, bishop Nevill granted to Robert Kelsey,
esquire the office of marshal, or clerk of all the markets within the bishopric of
Durham, and also keeper of his alnage-seal, to be exercised by himself or his
sufficient deputies, under the yearly rent of 13s. 4d. to be paid into the
bishop's exchequer R. etc. o'ib's balivis et sid. suis ad quos, etc. s. Sciatis
q'd nos de fidelitate circu'spec'o'e et industria dil'ci armig'i n'ri Rob.
Kelsey, before co'siden. ac de gra. n'ra spi'ali ac p. bono et g'tuito s'vic'o
q'd id R. nob. et eccl. n're Dun. a diu impendit, et in suturu. nob. et succ.
n'ris ac eccl'e n're p'd'ce impende^, co'cessimus et dedimus eid. R. officiu.
mariscalcie sive clerici m'cati n'ri o'in. et si'g'lor. e^itat. burgor. et
villar. infra e'pat. n'ru. Dun. necnon custodium figilli ulnagii nostri infra
epat. n'rum Dunelm. p'd. l^'end. ^enend. occupand. et ex'eend. offic. et
custod. p'd. eid. R. a t'mi'o vite sue p. se vel suffici^n. deputatum sive
deputatos suos sufficientes p. quo v'l p. quib's nob. et succ. n'ris respondere
volucrunt, una ^u. o'ib's et si'g lis com'oditab's p'ficuis advantagijs et
emolume'tis quibuscu'q. inde p'venien. reddend. inde an. nob. et succ. n'ris
p'd'cis ad sace'm n'ra Dun. xiij s. iiij d. absq. aliquo compo. seu raciocinio
nob. et succ. n'ris p'd'eis aut alieni officiario n'ro aut succ. n'ror.
p'd'cor. p'inde reddend. Dantes et co'cedentes eid. R. plena. (tenore
p'sentiu.) p'tatem faciend. et ex'cend. o'ia et si'g'la que ad offic. et
custodium p'd'ca. debent p'tinent faciend. exertend. et exequend. Damus
univ'sis et si'g'lis constabilariis, ^alivis, firmarii^, p'positis et cum'mub's
tenentib's et subditis n'ris civitat. burgor. et villar. p'd'car. firmit. in
madatis, q'd eid. R. in p'mistis faciend. ex'cend. et execuend, intendentes
sint obedientes, co'sulentes, facientes, et auxiliantes p'nt decet. In c. rei,
etc pat. dat. etc. duodeci'o d. Janu. a'o p. n'ri undeci'o. -- P. bre. de pr.
sig. -- Rot. M. Nevill, No 115.


. Though this is the first record met with, yet from various evidence we are
led to determine, it was not an office then originally instituted in this city,
but had taken place in consequence of the beforementioned statute. Antecedent
to the creation of aldermen, mayors, and other chief officers of incorporated
towns, the marshal of the markets was an appointment absolutely necessary to
the subject at large, for the prevention of fraud, and encouragement of fair
trading. This was one of the badges of regality; for the marshal or clerk of
the markets was an officer of the king's house 1 Edw. IV. c. 1. 13 Rich. II. c.
4. -- Fleta, lib. ii. c. 1. Britton, etc.
, of whom Britton, rehearsing the law, says, We will that none have measures in
the realm but we ourselves, but that every man take his measures and weights
from our standards.

The burgesses by the foregoing charter were exempted from in-toll and
out-toll, but foreign merchants bringing in their merchandise, were subject to
certain duties imposed by and payable to the bishop. The bishop for the time
being imposed those duties on various special occasions, particularly as a
tallage or aid, for the inhabitants of the city, toward repairing and
maintaining the city walls Murage.
. In bishop Bury's time, we have a record of the revocation of a grant of this
nature, dated the 13th of April 1345 See notes to vol. i. p. 295.
. In the year 1377, bishop Hatfield granted to the inhabitants of Durham, by
the title of Burgensibus and aliis probis hominibus in civitate n'ra Dun.
certain duties for diverse wares coming into the city, as an aid for supporting
the walls and pavements of the place See notes to vol. i. p. 309.
; and in bishop Fordham's time an inquisition was taken of the receipt and
application of such duties, dated the 14th of January 1385 Joh'es Dei gra. ep.
Dun. dil. et fid. suis Rad'o de Eure chiv. Tho. de Claxton, Walt'o de Hawyk,
Will'o Blakeden, Joh'i Sadburye, et Joh'i Lewyn, s. Quia datum est nob.
intelligi, q'd div'si ho'i'es vill. n're Dun. p'textu div'sar. l'rar. p'bis
ho'ib's vill. p'd'ce in auxiliu. rep'ac'o's et emendac'o's clausure ville
p'd'ce p. d'nu. Tho nup. ep'u. Dun. predecess. n'rum co'cessar. non modicas
pecuniar. sum'as de reb's venal. ad villam p'd'cam venien. receperunt et
colligerunt et denarios sic receptos et collectos, quos in repar'c'o'e et
emendac'one clausure p'd. apposuisse debuerant, p. majori p'te in suos proprios
usus converterunt, et penes se retinuerunt et adhuc retinent in n'ri dampnu.
non modicum et deteriorac'o'em vill. p'd'ce. Nos volen. maliciis h'mo'i
collector. in hac p'te obviare, et d. sic collectos in rep'ac'o'em et
ame'dac'o'em clausure p'd. apponi sacere, ut decet. assign. vos 5. 4. 3, v'l
duos v'ru. ad inquirend. p. sacr. p'bor. et legaliu. ho'i'u. de co. Dun. p.
quos rei v'itas melius sciri pot'it de no'ib's o'iu. et fi'g'lor. ad custumas
de reb's venal. ad d'cam villam adductis in ead. villa ex cau. p'd'ca levand.
et colligend. deputator. et p. q'ntu. te'pus sic deputati custumas h'mo'i de
toto te'pore tam d'ni Tho. nup. e'pi D. p'd. n'ri q'm de toto te'pore n'ro
recep'unt et sic levaverunt et qua' sum'am denariorum de custumis p'd. p. ipsos
sic levator. in reparac'o'e et emendae'o'e clausure p'd. apposuerunt. Et qua'
sum'am inde pen. se retinuerunt et adhuc retinent, necnon ad compot. p'd'cor.
collector in hac p'te see'd'm legem, etc. in rep'ac'o'em et eme'dac'o'em
clausure p'd'ce p'ut vob. melius visu. fuerit, apponi faciend. etc. expediri.
Et ideo vob. mandamus, etc. In cuj. etc. dat. Dun. p. m. W. de Elmeden, etc.
xiiij d. Jan a'o p. n'ri quinto (14 Jan. 1385. -- Rot. Fordham Sch. 8, No. 2.
-- Randal's MSS.


; and of the same date a demise was granted for six years of the revenues of
the city Tho. Tuddowe et Joh. Custson nup. firmarij ville Dun. ven'unt in cane.
Dun. xiiii die Janu. a'o p. d'ni Joh'is e'pi Dun. quinto et fursum reddiderunt
villam Dun. Rad'o de Eure tunc sene^^allo q'm h'^e^nt ad firmam et gratis
concesserunt se esse computabiles Woe de Shrimeton, Hen de Shirburne, Will'o
Kyowe, et sociis suis, nunc firmariis p'd. ville de exit. et p'ficuis ejusd.
ville a sesto Circumcisionis D^ui a'o p'd. d'ni e'pi quarto usq. diem lune p'x
post s'm S'ci Hillar. p'd'eo anno quinto. Quam quid. villen. pred. senesc.
p'satis Woe de Shrimeton, Hen. de Shirburne, Woe de Kyowe. et sociis suis, fe
d^rt ad sunt in eu. o'i'lb's exit. et p'sic. ejusd. ville. H'end. a p'd'eo
festo Circu'cisionis usq. ad sine. sex ann^. extu'c p'^ sequen. plen'ie
completor. -- Rot. Fordham Sch. 8, No 1. -- Ibid.


. Before any charter was granted for the government of the burgesses, the
several crafts, who exercised their trades within the city, were under special
restrictions and bye-laws, framed by themselves, and confirmed by the prelates
in whose times they were respectively instituted, thus obtaining the force of a
charter No 10. Rob'ti Nevill, e'pi. -- Joh'is Burn, W. Lethom (et 15 al.)
sutores sive alut. ex cor. unanim^ coufensu et assensu p. se et o'i'bus alijs
eadem art imposterum infra d'cam civitat. uten. quantum, etc. (...) die Nov.
anno pont. etc. coram ip'o d'no e'po in canc. sua Dun. p'sonalit. constitut.
recogn. se et quemli't eor. debere et forisfacere d'eo d'no e'po et succ'or.
etc. xx s. p. vic. Dunelm. p. t'pore existen. de bonis et catallis suis, etc.
levand. et etiam forisfacere xx s. p. mag'rum artis sue p. t'pore existen. ad
sustentac. cujusd'm luminis sui vocat. luminis corporis Christi de bonis et
catallis suis, etc. levand. et disponend. quotiens et quando aliquis p'd'c'or.
Joh'is, Will'i, etc. vel aliquis alius d'ca art in p'f't. civitat. impost'um
utens conducat recipiat seu detineat in s'vicio suo aut art qua utitur sive
infra mansum suum vel extra aliquem Scotum infra rega. Scotie nativ. ultra duos
dies postquam per aliquem officiar. etc. et coram cancellar. Dunelm. inde
convictus, etc.

The like recognizance from the fullers to the bishop to the same purport. --
Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.

An exemplification of the agreement of the weavers is among the rolls of the
13th year of bishop Neville, the preamble of which is to the following effect:
-- In the worship of God, and the susteniac'on of the procession and the play
on Corpus Christi day, in the city of Durham, after the old custom, for the
well, profit, and right of all the king's people, it is ordained and assented
by all them that occupy the weaver craft in the said city of Durham, etc. That
they meet yearly, and choose two wardens and searchers; that they make
procession on Corpus Christi day; and to play, and gar to play, the play that
of old time longes to yaire craft, penalty 6 d. To obey the ordonances
stipulated by the wardens, under the penalty of iiij d. That no one shall set
up and exercise his trade, till his looms and his proficiency in the trade be
certified by the wardens, under the penalty of 6s. 8d. No Scotchman to be taken
apprentice, penalty 6s. 8d. No one to weave till he has taken oath before the
bishop's officers in the city court, to be true, and trewely to occupy and use
his craft to the proset of the co'mon people, and no dissaite to use in his
craft, and trewly on his party to fulfill his ordonance on pain of xx s. --
Imprisonment on refusing to take the oaths. Also that no man shall go into the
said city, to desire no other man, customers, or werk from him, penalty 3 s. 4
d. to the bishop, and 3 s. 4 d. to the craft. -- Will'm of Nesse, of
Framwelgate, and John Frank of Clayport, first wardens. -- Exemplification
dated xxo die Septr. anno etc. 13o.

In the time of bishop Booth, the bye-laws and ordinances of the cordwainers
were exemplified and enrolled, greatly similar to those of the weavers; dated
the last day of January, 1463. Bishop James granted a confirmation thereof by
letters patent, dated 27th Sept. 1582.

In the time of bishop Tunstall, the bye-laws, etc. of the goldsmith craft,
plumber craft, pewterer craft, potter craft, glazier craft, and painter craft,
were confirmed and ratified by that prelate; witnessed by Robt Hyndmers,
chancellor, 22d May, in the third year of his translation.

In the time of bishop Pilkington, the bye-laws, etc. of the mercer craft were
confirmed and ratified by that prelate; witnessed by Robt Swift, chancellor,
6th Oct. 3d of Eliz.

In the time of bishop James, the bye-laws, etc. of those professing the art or
mystery of rough masons, wallers, slaters, paviors, tylers, and plaisterers,
were confirmed by that prelate the 21st Jan. 1609, and enrolled the 13th Sept.
1615, in the Heralds book, by Rich. St George, king of arms.

In bishop Morton's time, a charter was granted to the rough masons, wallers,
slaters, paviors, plaisterers, and bricklayers, whereby they were incorporated
and made a body politic, by the name of wardens, stewards, and searchers of the
company of free masons, rough masons, wallers, slaters, paviors, plaisterers,
and bricklayers. And the same was made patent; dated the 16th Apr. 1638; and
enrolled in the close tolls of the Chancery at Durham.

The sadlers have no charter or confirmation, under seal, of their bye-laws;
but a long roll of orders and bye-laws, signed by the several members as they
are admitted, beginning 28th Feb. 1628, and confirmed by the whole trade 4th
Feb. 1688.

[Mr Rudd's MSS. contain a full copy of the above instruments.]

Inquisitio capt. in thelonio Dunelm. xo Maij 1468, cor. Ric'o Raket senesc.
cur. burgi Dunelm. inter textores voc. wolne-websters and textores voc.
chalon-websters, sup. textura pannor. The jurors said, Q'd textores voc.
wolne-websters a tempore etc usi fuerunt pannu. lanen. and pannu. lineum voc.
playnlyn, caresay, seckeloth and Celicia operare, and d'ei textores vocati
chalon-websters etc tapstre werk, Say, worset, motleys, tweled werk and dyaper
etc etc. -- Rudd's MSS.

[This shows the manufactories carried on at that period.]


.

The city continued under the beforementioned government till bishop
Pilkington granted the burgesses a charter of incorporation, dated the 30th day
of January 1565 Jacobus, Dei gratia, e'pus Dunelm. Omnibus ad quos presents
literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis, quod nos de gratia nostra speciali ac ex
certa scientia et mero motu n'ris concessimus, et p. praesentes concedimus et
volumnus pro nobis et successoribus n'ris, quod omnes illi qui modo sunt
habitantes, aut qui imposterum de tempore in tempus habitabunt infra civitatem
n'ram Dunelm. et Framwelgate, in comitatu Dunelm. sint et erunt re, facto, et
nomine, una societas et unum corpus de se imperpetuum, et habeant successionem
perpetuam. Et ulterius assignavimus, nominavimus, constituimus, fecimus et
ordinavimus, ac ^ praesentes assignamus, nominamus, constituimus, facimus et
ordinamus difectum mihi in Christo Christoferum Sewerties unum habitantium
infra predict. civitatem Dunelm. sore aldermanum infra dictam civitatem Dunelm.
et Framwelgate, ad regend. et gubernand. eand. civitatem et Fram. usq. quartum
diem Octobris p'ximum futurum. Ac etiam assignavimus, nominavimus,
constituimus, ordinavimus et fecimus per praesentes dilectos nobis in Christo,
Will'um Walton, Will'um Wright, Rob'tum Anderson, Christoferuum Mayor, Thomam
Knighton, Hugonem Whitfield, Edwardum Hudspeth, Petrum Pattenson, Will'um
Harper, Gilbertum Nixon, Edwardum Renelley, et Johannem Anderson, xij
burgentium habitantium infra predict. civitatem fore auxiliantes et assistentes
prefato aldermano et successoribus suis durantibus separalibus vitis
predictorum Will'i Walton, Will'i Wright, Rob'ti Anderson, Christoseri Mayor,
Thom. Knighton, Hug. Whitfield. Edw. Hudspeth, Petri Pattenson, Will i Harper,
Gilb'ti Nixon, Edw. Renelley, et Joh'em Anderson, xij burgensium habitantium
infra. pred. civitatem sore auxiliantes et assistentes prefato aldermano et
successoribus suis durantibus seperalibus vitis predictor. Will'i Walton,
Will'i Wright, Rob. Anderson, Chr. Mayor, T. Knighton, H. Whitfield, E.
Hudspeth, P. Pattenson, Will'i Harper, G. Nixon, E. Renelley, et J. Anderson.
dummodo predicti xij burgenses honest se gesserint et e'po Dun. pro tempore
existenti aliter visum non fuerit: Et ulterius assignavimus, nominavimus,
ordinavimus, constituimus et feelmus p. praesentes q'd predict. aldermanus et
xij burgenses predicti, ac omnes alij habitantes infra dictam civitatem Dun. et
Framw. de cetero sint in re, facto, et nomine, unum corpus incorporatum de se
imp'petuum per nomen aldermani et burgensium infra civitat. Dunelm. et Framw.
ac ipsos aldermanum et burgenses infra civitat. predict. et Framwelgate p.
praesentes incorporamus, stabilimus et unimus ac corpus corporatum p. nomen
aldermani et burgensium infra civitat. Dun. imp'petuum duratur realiter et ad
plenum creamus, erigimus, ordinamus, facimus et constituimus p. praesentes. Et
q'd habeant successionem p'petuam. Ac etiam volumus et pro nobis et
successoribus n'ris p. presents concedimus prefat. aldermano et burgensibus
infra predictam civitatem Dunelm. et Framwelgate et successoribus suis
imp'petuum, q'd aldermanus et xij burgenses pred. et eor. successores quotannis
de anno in annum tertio die Octobris assignabunt, nominabunt et eligent
duodecim alios ex discretioribus viris qui tunc erunt inhabitants et pro
tempore existentes infra predict. civitatem et Framwde tempore in tempus
imperpetuum, qui quidem xxiiij burgenses sic nominati, assignati, et electi
(publicis precationibus cum litania aut concione prius habita) annuatim quarto
die Octobris in thelonio seu in aliquo alio loco convenient infra pred.
civitatem vijs et modis, quibus eis seu majori parti eorum placuerit,
nominabunt, assignabunt et eligent, et nominare, assignare et eligere possint
et valiant imp'petuum unum de ead. societate pro tempore existent. fore
aldermanum infra pred. civitatem et Framw. pro uno anno integro: Ac xij
burgenses et habitantes de ead. societate pro tempore existent. fore
auxiliantes et assistentes alderman. infra cand. civitat. et Framw. pro uno
anno integro tunc proxime sequent. Ac q'd illo qui erit nominatus, assignatus,
et electus p. majorem partem pred. burgensium ad^unc et ibid. present. erit
aldermanus infra eand. civitat. et Framw. et geret officium aldermani infra
cand. civ. et Framw. pro uno anno integro extunc proxime sequent. que quidem
persona sic eligenda et nominanda essendi aldermanus infra eand. civ. et Framw.
prestabit corporale juramentum coram e'po Dun. pro tempore existent. seu coram
cancellario dicti e'pi pro tempore existent. si idem e'pus non crit infra
e'patum Dunelm. pro fideli exercitione et vera exercitio os^eij sui pr^d. cujus
quidem juramenti tenor sequitur in hec verba: I shall truth and faith bear to
our sovereign lady the queen's majesty, her heirs and successors, kings and
queens of England; and to the bushopp of Duresme and his successors, bushops of
Duresme. And all such acts and orders as I shall consent and agree unto to be
made shall be for the commonwealth of the city of Duresme and Framw. and shall
at noe time or times hereafter go about to make any private orders against
the privileges of the bushopp of Durham, nor for the only profit of myself,
nor of any other private person or persons, or consent or agree unto the same:
And also I shall at all and every time and times hereafter go about by word,
will, and consent, well and truly to execute every point, article, and
agreement contained in the corporation to the burgesses and inhabitants of the
said city and Framw. granted, to my power: and also to keep my lord's
counsel, my fellows, and my own. So help me God, and by the contents of
this book. Volumus tamen per presents q'd toties quoties contigerit quod pred.
aldermanus et burgenses pred. b^ne concordare non, possunt de eod. aldermano
eligendo in et sup. presat. quarto die Oct. ante solis occasum ^unc is pro
aldermano illius anni tunc proxime sequent. erit et habebitur qu^m' nos aut
successores n'ri, si infra regnum sucrimus, quod si extra regnum nos aut
successores n'ros esse contigerit, tunc is erit aldermanus dicta civitatis pro
uno anno integro proxime sequent. quem canc^llarius ^'pi Dunelm. pro tempore
existens nominaverit et assignaverit. Et ulterius volumus et p. presents
concedimus prefato aldermano et burgentibus infra pred. civitatem, q'd si
contingat aliquam p'sonam exist^ntem aldermanum ejusd. civitatis obire durante
anno quo officium aldermani ejusd. civitatis geret vel gerere deberet, vel ab
eod. officio infra annum ex cuacunq. causa rationabili et p. ^'pam Dunelm. p.
tempore existent. approb^nda deprivani vel removeri, q'd tunc pred. xxiiij
burgenses habebunt potestatem, ut praesentur, nominandi, assignandi, cligendi
(qui tunc crunt infra pred. civitatem et Framw.) vel major pars eorum ad tale
tempus quale eis bonum et idoneum videbitur, infra spatium quatuor decim dierum
tunc proxime sequentium in thelonio seu in aliquo alio loco convenient. infra
pred. civitat. vijs et modis quibus eis placuerit, nominabunt, assignabunt et
eligent, ac nominare, assignare et eligere possint et valiant, unum de ead.
societate pro tempore existent. fore aldermanum ejusd. societatis abinde usque
ad quartum diem Octobris post hujusmodi deprivationem, mortem, vel remotionem,
ac quod ille qui sic erit nominatus et electus geret officium aldermani
societatis predicti usque dictum quartum diem Octobris extunc proxime
sequentem, nisi cum interim ex causa rationabili ut prefertur removeri
contigerit, que quidem persona sic electa et nominata essendi aldermanus dictae
civitatis prestabit, predictum corporale juramentum coram e'po Dunelm. pro
tempore existent. Et si idem e'pus non fuerit tunc infra dictum comitatum
Dunelm. coram cancellario dicti e'pi pro tempore existent. pro fideli
exercitione et vero exercitio officii sui pred. modo et forma supradictis. Et
si aliquis de societate pred. qui erit nominatus, assignatus, et electus modo
et forma predict. fore aldermanum recusaverit idem officium gerere vel
juramentum pred. in forma pred. prestare et suscipere, tunc ipse sic recusans
forisfaciet dicto e'po protempore existenti quinq. libras, et societati
predictae et burgensibus de burgo et civitate predicta quinq. libras. Volumus
etiam et per praesentes pro nobis et successoribus n'ris concedimus prefato
aldermano et burgensibus et successoribus suis imp'petuum, quod si contingat
aliquem dictorum xii burgensium obire vel ex quacunq. causa rationabili et p.
e'pum Dunelm. pro tempore existentem approbanda deprivari vel removeri, q'd
tunc aldermanus dictae civitatis pro tempore existens et pred. xxiiij burgenses
habebunt potestatem annuatim, ut prefertur, nominandi, assiguandi, et eligendi
(qui tunc erunt praesentes infra dict. civitat. et Framw. vel major pars little)
de tempore in tempus ad tale tempus quale eis bonum et idoneum videbitur, infra
spatium quatuor decim dicrum extunc proxime sequentium nominabunt, assignabunt
et eligent, ac nominare, assignare et eligere possint, modo et forma praedict.
unum de dicta societate pred. civitatis et Framw. pro tempore existent. sore
unum assistentium aldermano diclae civitatis et Fram. loco illius sic
decedentis deprivati vel remoti existentis; ac q'd ille qui sic erit assignatus
et electus erit unus assistentium aldermano dictae civitatis pro termino vitae
suae naturalis, nisi interim et causa rationabili per ipsos alderman. et
burgenses et p. e'pum Dunelm. pro tempore existent. approbanda ab officio illo
removeri contigerit. Et insup. de uberiori gratia n'ra, et ex certa scientia
n'ra, et mero motu, n'ris, damus, volumus, et concedimus, pro nobis et
successoribus n'ris, p. presents, prefato alderm. et burgensibus et
successoribus suis imp'petuum, q'd idem aldermanus et burgenses p. nomen
aldermani et burgensium infra civitatem Dunelm. et Framw. prosequi, clamare,
placitare et placitari, defendere et defendi possint in quibuscunq. curijs et
locis n'ris et successor. n'rorum et quantum in nobis est alibi de et sup.
omnibus et singulis brevibus, querelis, actionibus, sectis, et demandis
quibuscunq. et de et sup. omnibus aliis rebus, materijs, et causis quibuscunq.
Ac q'd dicti aldermanus et burgenses et successores sui imp'petu. habeant et
habebunt commune sigillum ad omnia et singula chartas evidentias et cetera
scripta vel facta ipsos aldermanum et burgenses et societatem aut successores
suos, aut terras, tenementa, hereditamenta, bona seu catalla realia seu
p'sonalia quecunq. aliquo modo tangentia seu concernentia figilland. Et q'd
presati aldermanus et burgenses et successores sui imp'petuum sint habiles et
in lege capaces, maneria, dominia, messuagia, terras, tenementa, et cetera
hereditamenta quecunq. bona et catalla, tam realia quam p'sonalia, capere,
recipere, et perquirere, eis et successorib's suis imp'petuum, seu aliter de
quibuscunq* personis seu quacunq. persona que illis dare, concedere, legare vel
assignare voluerint vel voluerit, dummodo dicta maneria, terras, tent'a, et
hereditamenta, sic p. eos et successor. suos p'quirenda, capienda, aut
recipienda, de nobis et successoribus n'ris in capite, aut ad voluntatem,
secundu. consuetudinem curiae, nisi e'pus Dun. pro tempore existens
consenserit, neque excedant annualem valorem ^ marcarum. Ac q'd dicti
aldermanus et burgenses et successor. sui possunt omnia et singula pred.
maneria, dominia, messuagia, terras, ten'ta, hereditamenta, bona et catalla
quecunque, p. ipsos seu p. successor. p'quirenda, capienda vel recipienda,
dare, alienare, dimittere, concedere et assignare cuicunq. et quib^scunq.
voluerint. Et ulterius volumus et concedimus pro nobis et successoribus n'ris
p. praesentes, q'd prefat. aldermanus et xxiiij burgenses eid. aldermano
assistentes vel major pars little pro tempore existent. habeant et habebunt
authoritatem et potestatem de t'pore in t'pus imp'petuum edendi, faciendi et
condendi pro bono et publico com'odo ejusd. societat. ac pro salubri
gubernatione ejusd. leges, statuta, et ordinationes, tantummodo concernentia
illos qui sunt vel erunt de ead. societate civitat. et Framw. pred. dummodo
e'pus Dun. p. tempore existens non contradixerit; et q'd illa leges, statuta,
et ordinationes, licite et impune, in pred. civitate Dunelm. et Framw. exequi
et uti prout res postulabit, acetiam eor. quodlibet prout eis melius videbitur,
juxta eor. sa^as discretiones altera^e et muta^e possint et valiant de tempore
in tempus imp'petuum. Ac omnes qui huju modi leges et ordinationes infregerint
et violaverint p. siu^s et amerciamenta dummodo non iniqua vide^^tur e'po Dun.
pro tempore existent, punire et mule^are, et ead. sines et amerciamenta p.
debitum processa' levare et capete ad ulu' dict. societatis. Et ulterius ex
abundantiori gratia n'ra concessimus et licentiam dedimus ac p. praesentes
concedimus et licentium damus pro nobis et successoribus n'ris quantum ^^ nobis
est, quod ijd. in aldermanus et burgenses et successores sui imp'petuum habeant
et teneant ac habere et tenere possint unum marcatu' singulis septimanis ap.
civ. Dunelm. pred. quolibet die Sabbati tenendum; ac etiam tres sep'ales serias
sive nundinas ib'm p. duos dies ad quamlibet seriam annuatim tenend. viz. in
sesto S'ti Cuthb'ti in Sept. in sesto S'ti Cuthb'ti in Martio, et die Lune
crastino festi Pentecosti, vulgariter vocat. Whitsonmunday cum curiis pedis
pulverigati Statutes at Westminster, 17 Edw. IV. A. D. 1477, were calculated to
prevent the encroachments of the court of Pipowder, which, like most other
courts, wanted to extend its jurisdiction, or in other terms, the profits
arising from it. As these lowest courts of justice were under the direction of
the steward, or auditor of him who had the grant of the fair, the steward, by
way of drawing every litigation to his own court, supposed, by an ingenious
fiction, that parties who never made any contract at the fair, and who perhaps
lived at a great distance, had made the bargain in dispute within the limits of
his jurisdiction, and by this means claimed conusance of suit. The statute
therefore directs, that the plaintiff in the Pipowder court shall swear that
his cause of action actually arose within the precint of the fair; and the law
seems to be effectually carried into execution, as we hear little of these
courts at present. I cannot but here take notice, that the etymology of the
word Pipowder seems to be mistaken by all the writers upon the law, who derive
it from Pe^ pulv^^^ticus, or dusty foot; now Trans^untes significant, et
vagabundos, qui ideo pedes minus tersos habent sed pulvere squallentes, Pied
cuim est Pes, Pouldreux pulverulentus. -- Spelman's Gloss. p. 455.
pied puldrecux, in old French, signifies a pedlar, who gets his livelihood by
vending his goods where he can, without any certain and fixed residence. In the
burrow laws of Scotland, an alien merchant is called pied puldreoux, and
likewise and fair and man, or a man who frequents fairs; the court of Pipowder
is therefore to determine disputes between those who resort to fairs, and these
kind of pedlars, and low tradesmen who generally attend them. -- Barrington's
Observations on the Ancient Statutes. p. 321, 2d edit. Dublin printed, 1767.


ib'm tenendis durantibus eisd. serijs sive nundinis, una cum exitib. proficuis
et amerciamentis ad hujusmodi mereat. ferias sive nundinis provenientibus; ac
cum omnibus libertatibus et liberis consuetudinibus proficuis et emolumentis ad
hujusmodi mereat. serias p'tinentibus sive spectantibus. Preterea volumus et
sirmiter precipimua quod constabularij pred. civitat. et Framw. pro tempore
existentes sint auxiliantes et obedientes aldermano dictae civitat. pro tempore
existenti, in o'ibus heitis et honestis rebus et mandatis pro meliori
exercitione et executione officij sui pred. Et ulterius volumus et mandamus nec
aldermanus dictae civitatis nec quisquam e duodecim burgensibus assistentibus
eid. aldermano pro tempore existentibus quamdiu in eod. officio erint, servint
cuiquam alteri nobili viro vel generoso, nec ejus tunica vel insignibus utatur
in tunica nisi forte (sicut ei been licuerit) in servitio reginae aut regis
Angliae, vele e'pi Dun. pro tempore existent retentus fuerit. In eujus rei
testim. has Tras fieri fecimus patentes. Test Tho. Calverley, arm. cancellario
n'ro Dun. apud Dun. tricesimo die Jan'ij, a^o regni Elizabethae Dei gratia
Angliae, Franciae, et Hib'niae r'ne, fidei defensor, etc. octavo. et
consecrationis n're quinto. -- Randal's MSS.


, whereby he directed, that all persons then inhabiting, or who should
thereafter after from time to time become inhabitants within the city of
Durham, and Framwelgate in the county of Durham, should become one society and
one body for ever, and have a perpetual succession; and he appointed
Christopher Sewerties, one of the citizens, to be alderman within the said city
of Durham and Framwelgate, to govern the said city and Framwelgate until the
4th day of October then next; and also appointed William Walton, William
Wright, Robert Anderson, Christopher Mayor, Thomas Knighton, Hugh Whitfield,
Edward Hudspeth, Peter Pattenson, William Harper, Gilbert Nixon, Edward
Renelley, and John Anderson, twelve burgesses, inhabiting within the said city,
to be assistants to the said alderman and his successors during their several
lives, if they so long demeaned themselves well and honestly, and the bishop of
Durham for the time being should see nothing to the contrary: And the said
alderman, twelve burgesses, and all others the inhabitants within the said city
of Durham and Framwelgate, should be for ever thereafter incorporated by the
name of alderman and burgesses within the city of Durham and Framwelgate; with
a power for the alderman and twelve burgesses, on the 3d day of October yearly,
to nominate twelve other discreet men, inhabitants within the said city and
Framwelgate; which twenty-four burgesses, on the 4th of October yearly, should
name one of the same society to be alderman for the year ensuing, and also
twelve assistant burgesses, which alderman should take the oath therein
prescribed before the bishop for the time being, or before his chancellor, if
the bishop should not be within his diocese: And as often as it should happen
that the alderman and burgesses could not agree in the choice of a succeeding
alderman, before sunset on the said 4th of October, then the bishop and his
successors, if within the palatine jurisdiction Infra regnum, -- if within the
realm.
, or the chancellor, if the bishop was not within the palatinate, should
appoint an alderman for that time: And in case an alderman should die in the
time of his office, or be removed, then the four-and-twenty should in fourteen
days nominate another fit person in his room, he taking the oath prescribed:
And if any person elected alderman should refuse to accept the office or take
the oath, he should pay a fine of 5l. to the bishop, and to the burgesses the
like sum of 5l.; with like powers for supplying the number of assistant
burgesses. And the said charter did also ordain and give power to the said
alderman and burgesses, by the name of alderman and burgesses within the city
of Durham and Framwelgate, to plead and be impleaded in all matters whatsoever,
and to have a common seal; and to take, receive, and purchase Perquirere. --
Bracton, lib. ii. cap. 30. and lib. iv. cap. 22.
manors, lordships, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments, Statutes at
Westminster, 17 Edw. IV. A. D. 1477, were calculated to prevent the
encroachments of the court of Pipowder, which, like most other courts, wanted
to extend its jurisdiction, or, in other terms, the profits arising from it. As
these lowest courts of justice were under the direction of the steward, or
auditor of him who had the grant of the fair, the steward, by way of drawing
every litigation to his own court, supposed, by an ingenious fiction, that
parties who never made any contract at the fair, and who perhaps lived at a
great distance, had made the bargain in dispute within the limits of his
jurisdiction, and by this means claimed conusance of suit. The statute
therefore directs, that the plaintiff in the Pipowder court shall swear that
his cause of action actually arose within the precinct of the fair; and the law
seems to be effectually carried into execution, as we hear little of these
courts at present. I cannot but here take notice, that the etymology of the
word Pipowder seems to be mistaken by all the writers upon the law, who derive
it from Pe^ pulv^^cticus, or dusty foot; now Transcuntes significat, et
vagabundos, qui ideo pedes minus tersos habent sed pulvere squall^ntes, Pied
enim est Pes, Pouldreux pulverul^ntus. -- Spelman's Gloss. p. 455.
pied puldreaux, in old French, signifies a pe^lar. who gets his livelihood by
vending his goods where he can, without any certain and fixed residence. In the
bu^row laws of Scotland, an alien merchant is called pied puldreaux, and
likewise are fair and man, or a man who frequents fairs; the court of Pipowder
is therefore to determine disputes between those who resort to fairs, and these
kind of pedlars and low tradesmen who generally attend them. -- Barrington's,
Observation on the Ancient Statutes, p. 321, 2d edit. Dublin printed, 1767.


goods and chattels as well real as personal, so as the same should not exceed
the annual value of one hundred marks; with power to alienate, demise, grant,
and assign the same. And the said alderman and twenty-four assistant burgesses,
or the major part of them, were thereby authorized from time to time to make,
order, and publish, laws, statutes, and ordinances, for the public benefit of
the said society, and better government thereof, in case the bishop of Durham
should not prohibit the same; and to alter and change the same at their
discretion, and punish offenders therein by fine and amercement, to be levied
to the use of the said society. And that the said alderman and burgesses should
for ever thereafter hold a weekly market within the said city of Durham on the
day before the Sabbath, and also three several fairs in the year, for two days
together at each time, viz. on the feast of St Cuthbert in September, the feast
of St Cuthbert in March, and on Whitsun-Monday, together with a court of
pyepowder during the said fairs: And all profits thereof, and all liberties and
free customs, profits and emoluments to markets and fairs belonging: And the
constables of the said city and Framwelgate were commanded to be aiding and
obedient to the alderman for the time being, for the better exercise and
execution of his office: And lastly it was ordained, that neither the alderman
nor any of the twelve assistant burgesses, whilst in office, should serve any
nobleman or gentleman, use the arms, or bear the badge, of any such person,
unless he pleased, or should happen to be retained in the service of the queen
or king of England, or the bishop of Durham for the time being.

Neither the city records nor those of the bishops furnish us with the names,
in succession, of the chief magistrates or aldermen under bishop Pilkington's
charter; and, from the time of Christopher Sewerties, we have an entire blank
to the year 1598 Christopher Sewerties ap. first alderman.

Christopher Mayer, named in the curriers and chandlers charter. No date.
Thomas Pearson, 4th Oct. 1598. Robert Surtis 1599. Wm Hall 1600. Hugh Wright
1601.
Ap. by bishop Matthew's charter, first mayor, 21st Sept. 1602.

^ames Fareless, second mayor; elected Oct. 4, 1602. -- Randal's MSS.


. The city continued to be governed under the above charter till the year 1602,
when bishop Matthews granted a new charter.

Preceding this second charter, several of the crafts and artificers entered
into separate associations, for the better government of their respective
trades; which being confirmed by the alderman and twelve assistant burgesses,
they held as ordinances constituted under the powers of the incorporation
charter, and thereby made obligatory: To such, the companies who framed and
received them gave the denomination of charters; and they had their power of
operation from such ordinance or confirmation. Some of these charters or
bylaws are not now to be found; one in the most usual form will satisfy the
curiosity of the reader, as the tenors in general are not interesting to the
public, and relate only to the private government of the respective companies
The Charter of the Curriers and Chandlers.
For the honor of God and the common wealth, profit and comoditie of all the
queens majesty's liege people and subjects resient and abideing as well within
the city of Duresme, within the co^ palatine of Duresme, and the suburbs of the
same, as elsewhere. It is ordained and established by the com'on assents and
agreements of all the citizens of the said city, and inhabitants within the
said suburbs, of the arts and mysteries of corriers and tallow chandlers. And
they the said citizens and inhabitants, for them and their successors, do by
these presents ordain, establish, and agree in manner and form following, that
is to say, That they and their succ'rs occupying and exercising the arts and
mysteries of curriers crafts and chandlers crafts, within the same city and
suburbs, shall from henceforth yearly, within 20 days next and im'ediately
after the term of Martinmas day, assemble themselves and meet in a place
convenient for the same purpose, then and there by their com'on assents and
agreements, choose, elect, and create of themselves, of the most honest,
discreetest, and substantialest men of the said mysteries and crafts, one
alderman and two wardens or searchers, and that the said alderman, wardens or
searchers, so elected and chosen, shall have full power and authority for the
same year then next following, to do all and every such thing and things as to
the office and charge of an alderman, wardens or searchers of right
appertains. And if it so shall fortune, any p'son or p'sons of their crafts
and mysteries aforesaid to be absent at the said assembly and meeting, being by
the said wardens, or any other in their names, lawfully warned thereunto, and
having no lawful impediment to the contrary, that then the said p'sons shall
forfeit and loose unto the lord bishop of Duresme for the time being, for every
such default, xij d. the same to be levied of the goods and chattles of the
said offender in that behalf, by the officers of the said bishop, and other
xij d. to the said alderman and wardens, to the common use of the said
brethren of the said mysteries and crafts, and to be levied by the said
wardens for the time being. And it is also ordained and established, agreed and
assented, that every man of the said mysteries and crafts, and every of them,
shall at all time and times hereafter, do, perform, fulfill, and keep of his
party, of all and every thing or things whatsoever that shall hereafter be
ordained, devised, or made by the said alderman and wardens or searchers for
the time being, or by the assent of the most part of the brethren of the said
occupations and mysteries, being for the common wealth and the profit and
commodity and honesty of the said brethren, upon pain of forfeiting to the said
bishop of Duresme for the time being for any such default 3 s. 4d. the same to
be levied by the said bailiff or servants as aforesaid, and other 3s. 4 d. to
the said alderman, wardens and searchers, to the common use of the said
brethren of the said crafts and mysteries, and to be levied by the said wardens
and searchers as aforesaid. Also it is ordained, established, and agreed, by
all the brethren of the same mysteries and crafts, that none of the said
mysteries and crafts inhabiting or dwelling within the said city or suburbs, or
any of them, shall from henceforth take to his prentice at the said mysteries
or crafts, any Scotishman or other not born under the obeisance of the queens
majesty, not denysons, upon pain of forfeiting to the said bishop for the time
being 6 s. 8d. and to the same alderman, wardens and searchers for the time
being, to the common use of the same brethren of the said mysteries and crafts,
6s. 8d. to be levied as is aforesaid. And it is also ordained, assented and
agreed, by all the said brethren of the craft of curtiers, that none of their
company shall work no kind of leather but -- hide leather and calves leather;
and none of the said coryers shall color no horse leather nor sheeps leather,
neither to shoemaker nor sadler, for the defrauding of the queens majestys
liege people, upon pain of forfeiting to the said bishop of Duresme for the
time being, for every such default, 6s. 8d. the same to be levied by the
bailiffe or sergeant as is above said, and other 6 s. 8 d. to the said
alderman, wardens and searchers for the time being, to the common use of the
same brethren of the said crafts, to be levied by the said wardens or searchers
as is abovesaid. Also it is ordained, assented, and agreed by all the brethren
of the said craft, that no corryer being a foreigner or stranger, nor other not
being free of the same crafts within the said city, shall set up, use, or
occupy the same craft, nor none of them within the said city or suburbs, unto
such time he have agreed with the lord bishop, alderman, wardens and searchers
for the time being, and have contented and paid to the said bishop for the time
being for his agreement xxs. and to the said alderman, wardens and searchers
for the time being, to the use of the said crafts, other xxs. upon pain of
forfeiture to the same bishop for the time being 40 s. and to the same wardens
and searchers other 40 s. to be levied as is aforesaid. Also it is ordained,
agreed and assented, by all the said brethren of the craft of the chandlers,
that they shall make no candles but of neats tallow, sheeps tallow, and to make
the wear of good stuff, upon pain of forfeiting to the bishop of Duresme for
the time being for every default 3s. 4d. and to the use of the said craft 3s.
4d. to be levied as is aforesaid. Also it is ordained, assented and agreed, by
all the said brethren of the said craft of chandlers, that no foreigner or
stranger, nor other being not free of the same crafts of the chandlers within
the said city, shall set up, use, or occupy the same crafts, or any of them,
within the said city or suburbs, or market, unto such time he have agreed with
the said bishop, alderman, wardens and searchers for the time being, and have
contented and paid to the said bishop for the time being, for his agreement, 20
s. and to the said alderman, wardens and searchers for the time being, to the
use of the same craft, other 20 s. upon pain of forfeiting to the same bishop
for the time being 40 s. and to the same wardens and searchers other 40 s. to
be levied as is aforesaid. Also it is ordained, assented and agreed, that none
of the said brethren of the said crafts of chandlers, or of any of them, shall
take any prentice hereafter to be bound under or for less time than seven
years. And that the said prentice shall be of full age, of fourteen years or
more, and his indenture to be engrossed and entered in the common book of the
same craft, within one year next and immediately after he shall be so bound,
upon pain of any one taking any such prentice to the contrary to forfeit to the
bishop for the time being 3s. 4d. and to the said wardens and searchers, to the
use of the said crafts, other 3s. 4d. to be levied as is aforesaid. And it is
also ordained, assented and agreed by all the said brethren, that no prentice
within the said city and suburbs shall set up the said arts and sciences, or
make any candles, or set within the market, unto such time he have served out
his prentiship, and agreed with the lord b'p, alderman, and wardens for the
time being; and that he have contented and paid to the I Would. b'p for his
agreement, that he have been prentice within the same city and suburbs at the
same science, or any of them, by the space of seven years, 3 s. and to the said
warden and searchers for the time being, to the use of the same brethren, other
3 s. upon pain of forfeiting to the same lord bishop for the time being 20 s.
and to the said wardens and searchers, to the common use of the said brethren,
other 20 s. to be levied as is aforesaid. Also it is ordained, assented and
agreed by all the same brethren of the chandlers, that they shall make no
candle of ^le, nor of no slot of the pott, upon pain of forfeiting to the same
bishop for the time being, for every offense, 10 s. and to the said wardens and
searchers, to the use of the same craft, other 10 s. to be levied as is
aforesaid. And also it is ordained, assented and agreed, that if the master die
within the said seven years, that then the prentice, by the advice of the
wardens and searchers of the said craft, shall be admitted to serve from the
residue of his years with another of the said crafts within the said city or
suburbs, and to have his freedom. And if the said apprentice will not be so
contented, that then he to forfeit his freedom he should have in the said city
and suburbs. And also it is ordained, assented and agreed, that the wardens and
searchers of the said crafts shall yearly, from year to year, make their full
and whole account unto the new wardens and searchers of the said crafts, of all
such respective forfeitures and sums of money as they shall have received to
the use of the said crafts, during the time that they were wardens, and that
within five days next after the election of the new wardens, upon pain to
forfeit for every default to the said bishop of Duresme for the time being 6 s.
8 d. and to the said new wardens and searchers, to the use of the said crafts,
6 s. 8 d. to be levied as aforesaid. And it is also ordained, assented and
agreed, that every man of the said craft shall at all time and times hereafter
do, perform and fulfill of his party, all and every thing or things that
hereafter shall be ordained, devised, or made by the said wardens and searchers
for the time being, by the assent of the most part of the brethren of the said
occupation, for the weal, honesty and profit of the queens subjects of the
said crafts, upon pain of forfeiting of 3 s. 4 d. for every default to the said
bishop of Duresme for the time being, and to be levied by the said baylifes or
sergeants as is aforesaid, and other 3 s. 4 d. to the said wardens and
searchers of the said crafts, to the common use of the said crafts, to be
levied by the said wardens and searchers for the time being, so that the same
orders and devises to be made by the advice, assent and agreement of the
alderman of the same city and his assistants for the time being. And moreover
it is assented and agreed upon, by all the brethren and occupiers of the same
sciences, that it shall and may be lawful unto all and every the inhabitants
within the same city and suburbs, at all times hereafter to make their own
candles in their own houses, as heretofore they have been accustomed, any thing
herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And it is further assented
and agreed by all the same brethren, and occupiers of the same arts and
sciences, that they shall make no orders concerning the same arts and sciences
hereafter, others than such as heretofore are contained in this writing, except
the same orders be made, assented and agreed to by the said alderman and
assistants for the time being, upon pain of forfeiting to the same bishop for
the time being, 10 s. and to the same wardens and searchers 10 s. to be levied
as abovesaid.

-- Et nos Christophorus Maire, aldermannus et duodecim assistentes ejusd.
civitat. et Framwellgate ad requisitionem R'adi Stevenson guardiani, etc etc.
-- Randal's MSS.

Lawrentij Booth episc No 85. Rot. M. Inquisitio de corporat. textorum ibidem
in dorso, No 16. Corporatio de cordiners.

Cuthberti Tunstall epise. Charta incorporationis d' carpenders, joyners,
wheelwrights, sawyers, and coopers.

Similis, pro clothworkers et walkercraft, per Jacobum Pilkington ep. anno 7,
pont. sui.

Similis, pro rough masons, wallers, et slaters, p. Matthaeum Hutton ep. an. 7,
pont. sui.

Clothworkers per Tob. Matthew ep. -- Spearman's Enquiry, p. 19.


.

Bishop Matthew's charter Bishop Matthew's Charter.
TOBIAS, Dei gratia, e'pus Dun. Cum civitas Dun. in com. palatino Dun. sit et
absq. memoria hominis fuerit antiqua civitas bone memory cumq. burgenses,
homines, et inhabitants ejusd. civitatis. una cum hominibus et inhabitantibus
in Framwelgate, juxta civitatem predicta. in com. praed. habuere et gravisi
fuere diversa jura, jurisdictiones, libertates, et privilegia, tam p.
prescriptionem qua. pretextu diversaru. chartaru. concessionu. et
confirmationu. ta. p. nos qua. p. diversos predecessores n'ros e'pos Dunelm.
cumq. burgenses, homines, et habitantes predict. civitatis et Framwelgate,
dampna non modica temporibus transactis sustulerunt ratione defectus aliquar.
dictaru. literaru. patentiu. et metuentes se de et in hujusmodi libertatibus et
liberis consuetudinibus ob defectu. declarationis et expressionis earund. et
alijs occasionibus futuro te'pore molestari praegravari, impediri, et p'turbari
nobis humillime supplicaverunt quatenus libertates et liberas consuetudines
praed. sub verbis spi'alibus declarat. et expresat. eisd. burgensibus,
hominibus, et inhabitantibus, et eoru. successoribus, in forma subsequenti
concedere, et ipsos burgenses, homines, et inhabitants incorporare, et
personas habiles et capaces cu. successione p.petuua facere dignaremur. Nos pro
melioratione civitatis praed. et pro gubernatione et prestantiori regimine
ejusd. et pro meliore sustentatione et supportatione graviu. oneru. sumptuu. et
expensaru. que ipsip. manutentione ejusd. civitat. de t'pore in t'pus
sustinent. ac in dies magis magisq. sustinere et sustentare verisimiliter
videnter supplicationi sue in hac part favorabiliter inclinati de gra. n'ra,
ac ex spi'ali, ac ex certa scientia, et mero motu, n'ris volumus, ordinamus,
constituimus, et concedimus, p. nobis et successoribus n'^is, quantum in nobis
est, quod dicti burgenses, homines, et inhabitants dicti civit. Dun. et
Framwelgate sint et erunt unu. corpus politicu. et incorporatum de majore
duodecem aldermanis et communitate p'petuis t'poribus duratur. Et quod dicti
burgenses, ho'i'es, et inhabitants de cetero imp'petuum sint et erunt unu.
corpus politicu. et incorporatu. in re, facto, et nomine, p. nomen majoris,
aldermanoru. et com'unitatis civitatis Dun. et Framwelgate. Et eos p. nomen
majoris, alderman. et communitatis civitat. Dun. et Fram. unu. corpus
corporatum et politicu. realiter et ad plenu. quantu. in nobis est p. nobis et
successoribus n'ris erigimus, facimus, ordinamus, constituimus, et creamus, p.
praesentes, ipsosq. et successores suos p. p'petuo, incorporari, uniri, et unum
corpus stabiliri, decernimus et declaramus quodq. nominentur, vocentur, et
nuncupentur major, aldermani, et com'unitatis civitatis Dunelm. et Framwelgate
imp'petuum, et p. idem nomen habeant successionem p'petuam et sint et erunt
p'petuis futuris temporibus person habiles et in lege capaces. Et quod p. idem
nomen implacitare poterint et implacitari ac in et p. omnibus et omnimodis
causis, querelis, actionibus, sectis realibus et personalibus, ac mixtis
cujuscunq. fuerint generis vel nature prosequi, defendere, vel respondere
valiant sub nomine predicto, cora. quibuscunq. judicib's ta. sp'ualibus qu.
te'p'alibus, in o'i'bus curijs n'ris vel successor. n'roru. infra comitat.
palatinu. Dun. et Sadberge, et quantu. in'nobis est, alibi in o'i'bus aliis
curijs et locis quibuscunq. Et quod pred. major, aldermani, et com'unitatis
civitat. Dun. et Framwelgate, et successores sui, sint habiles et capaces in
lege ad p'quirend. et recipiend. terras, tenementa, annuitates, redditus,
servitia, advocationes, et patronatus eccl'siaru. emolumenta, possessiones, et
hereditamenta, nec non bona et catalla quecunq. ta. sp'ualia qua. te'poralia,
de quacunq. persona seu quibuscunq. personis que illa eis dare, concedere,
legare, vendere, vel assignare voluerit vel voluerint, dum'odo dicti terre,
tenementa, hereditamenta, et premissa p. ipsos recipiend. et p'quirend. non
excedunt an'uum valorem centu. marcaru. habend. sibi et successoribus suis,
secundu. status et formas hujusmodi donationum, legationu. venditionu. et
perquisitionum, absque molestatione vel impetitione nostrum vel successor.
n'roru. vel aliquor. officiarior. vel ministroru. n'roru. vel successor.
n'roru. quorumcunq. salvis semper nobis et successoribus n'ris omnibus sinibus,
forisfacturis, et juribus regalibus n'ris, p. vel ratione hujusmodi donationu.
legationu. venditionu. vel perquisitionum aliqualiter emergentibus vel
contingentibus nobis et successoribus n'ris debitis et de jure consuetis. Et
quod dicti major, aldermani, et co'itas civitat. Dun. et Framwelgate habeant et
habebunt com'une siigillu. ad o'ia et singula scripta, chartas, instrumenta,
ipsos majorem, et aldermanos, et com'unitatem, et successores suos, aut terras,
tenementa, hereditamenta, bona, catalla, sive negotia sua publica, aliquo modo
tangentia seu concernentia sigilland. imp'petuum. Et p. meliore executione
premissor. volumus, et p. has l'ras n'ras patentes assignavimus, facimus, et
constituimus, et realiter nomina'mus, dilectu. nobis in Christo, Hugonem
Wright, unu. burgensiu. et inhabitantiu infra pred. civitat. Dun. sore et esse
primum et modernum majorem infra dictam civitat. Dunelm. et Framwelgate pred.
in dicto officio majoratus moraturum, a dat. presentium usque quartu. diem
Octobris prox. futur. Et postea quousq. alius de aldermanis civitat. Dun. et
Framwelgate pred. in officiu. majoratus ejusd. civitat. Dun. et Framw. predict.
debite electus et presectus fuerit, si idem Hugo Wright tam diu vixerit et been
se gesserit in eodem: Et post decessum dicti Hugonis Wright de dicto officio
suo majoratus pred. dictu. Hugonem Wright sore aldermanum civitat. Dun. et
Framwelgate pred. durante vita sua, quamdiu se been gesserit in eod. in
supplementum integri muneri dictor. duodecem aldermanoru. absq. aliqua alia
electione nova, inde sienda in loco illius aldermani qui contigerit majorem
civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. p. proximo anno sutur. eligi et nominari.
Assignamus e^iam, nominamus, et constituimus, p. nob. et success. n'ris, per
praesentes, dilectos nobis in Christo, Rob'tum Suerties, Rich. Hutchinson, Edw.
Wanles, Wm. Hall, Jac. Farales, Tho. Pearson, Joh'em Wall, Edw. Tailor, Hug.
Hutchinson, Joh'em Heighington, Joh'em Pattinson, et Rich'um Wright, duodecem
de burgensibus et inhabitantibus infra pred. civitatem Dun. et Framw. fore
aldermanos dicte civitatis Dun. et Framwelgate durantibus seperalibus vitis
suis, quamdiu se been gesserint in eisd. officiis suis. Volumus etiam,
ordinamus, et constituimus, ac p. nobis et successoribus n'ris concedimus
prefatis majori, aldermanis, et communitati civitat. Dun. et Framw. et
successoribus suis imp'petuum, quod major et aldermani dicte civitat. Dun. et
Framw. et eoru. successores p. tempore existen. vel major pars eorund. quolibet
anno et de anno in annu. imp'petuum tertio die Octobris assignabunt,
nominabunt, et eligent viginti-quatuor alios ex discretioribus et probioribus
viris, qui tunc erunt residentes, com'orantes, et inhabitants infra dictam
civitatem Dun. et Framw. pred. videlicet, duos de qualibet duodecem harum
sep'alium artium, mysterioru. sive facultatu, infra nominat. videlicet, duos de
mercatoribus, Anglice mercers, grocers, haberdashers, ironmongers, and
salterers; duos de mercatoribus panni lanei, Anglice drapers and tailors; duos
de pelliparijs, Anglice skinners and glovers; duos de tannatorijs, Anglice
tanners; duos de textoribus, Anglice weavers; duos de tinctoribus et
sulloribus, Anglice dyers and fullers; duos de allutarijs, Anglice cordwainers;
duos de fallarijs, Anglice fadlers; duos de lanijs, Anglice butchers; duos de
fabris ferrarijs, Anglice smiths; duos de fabris lignarijs, Anglice carpenters
and joiners; et duos de lapidarijs, Anglice free-masons and rough-masons, tunc
com'orantes, residentes, et inhabitants infra civitatem Dun. et Framw. pred.
Qui quidem major, aldermani, et viginti-quatuor probiores ho'i'es de mysterijs
pred. de t'pore in t'pus sint et erunt perpetuis futuris temporibus commune
concilium civitat. Dun. et Fram. pred. Et quod pred. major, aldermani, et
viginti-quatuor probiores ho'i'es nominati et sic electi p. t'pore existen.
commune concilium civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. vel major pars eorum quor.
septem de aldermanis p. tempore existen. septem esse volumus annuatim quarto
die Octobris in Gildam-aulam sive Tolbooth civitat. predict. sive in aliquem
alium locum convenientem infra civitat. pred. nominabunt, assignabunt, et
eligent, et nominare, assignare, et eligere possint et valiant imp'petuum unum
de aldermanis civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. p. tempore existen. in majoratum et
fore majorem civitat. Dun et Framw. pred. p. uno anno integro tunc proxime
sequen. si idem major sic electus tamdiu vixerit et been se gesserit in eod. Et
quod ille qui sic erit nominatus, assignatus, et electus in officium majoratus
immediate post hujusmodi electionem erit major civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. et
geret officium majoratus ibid. pro uno anno integro tunc proximo sequente.
Volumus nihilominus, et ordinamus, et statuimus, quod pred. aldermani et
viginti-quatuor p'b'res ho'es nominati et electi in com'une conciliu. ut
prefertur, vel major pars eorund. quor. septem aldermani (septem esse volumus)
ex quacunq. causa legitima p. nos vel success. n'ris approbanda possint,
valiant, et habeant potestatem deprivare vel removere aliquam personam majorem
civ. Dun. et Fram. pred. existen. ex officio suo majoratus quandocunq. status
bonum publicum ejusd. civitat. et causa rationabilis hoc exiget et requiret:
q'd que si contingat aliquam personam existentem majorem civ. Dun. et Fram.
pred. t'pore quo fuerit sic major obire et hac luce privari anno durante et
currente quo offic. majoris sic geret vel gerere debet vel ab ^od. offic.
majoris infra an. pred. ex quacunq. causa legitima deprivari vel removeri, quod
tunc pred. aldermani et vigintiquatuor p'biores ho'es p. t'pore existen.
nominati et electi in commune conciliu. ut prefertur, vel major pars eorund.
tunc present. quorum septem aldermani (septem esse volumus) habebunt potestatem
nominandi et eligendi ad tale tempus quale eis bonum et idoneum videbitur infra
spatium undecem dierum ex tunc prox. sequen. in Guilda-aula sive Tolbooth pred.
seu in alio aliquo loco convenien. infra pred. civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred.
unum de aldermanis ejusd. civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. p. tempore existen.
fore majorem civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. ab inde et a t'pore hujusmodi
deprivationis mortis vel remotionis usq. quartu. diem Octobris tunc proxime
sequen. sinitum si tamdiu vixerit et been se gesserit in eod. Ac quod ille qui
sic erit nominatus et electus major, geret et exercebit officium majoris
civitatis Dun. et Fram. pred. usq. quartum diem Octobris tunc proxime sequen.
finitum, nisi eum ex aliqua causa removeri contigerit, aut interim obierit. Que
quidem persona sic ut prefertur nominata et electa in officium majoris n^cnon
quilibet major civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. p. tempore existen. infra tres
dies post electionem suam in officium suum majoratus pred. prestabit et subibit
corporale juramentum coram nobis et successoribus n'^is, e'pis Dun. p. tempore
existen. Ac sede e'pali Dun. vacant vel nobis aut successoribus n'ris in
remotis agentibus, tunc coram cancellario com. palatin. p. tempore existen. et
in absentia ejusd. cancellar extra comitatu. pred. tunc coram aldermanis et
viginti-quatuor p'bis ho'ibus p. tempore existen. elect. in commune concilium,
ut prefertur, vel majore part eorund. ad hoc solemniter congregat. p. sideli
executione et vera exercitio officii sui, cujus quidem juramenti tenor sequitur
in haec verba: I shall truth and faith hear to our sovereigne lady the queen's
majesty, her heirs and successors, kings and queens of England; and to the
lord bush^pp of Duresme and his successors, bushopps of Duresme. And all such
acts and orders as I shall consent and agree unto to be made, shall be for the
commonwealth of the city of Duresme and Framw. and shall all noe time or times
hereafter go about to make any private orders against the privileges of the
bushopp of Duresme, nor for the only profit of myself, nor of any other
private person or persons, or consent or agree unto the same: And also I shall
at all and every time and times hereafter go about by word, will, and consent,
well and truly to execute every point, article, and agreement contained in
this corporation to the mayor, aldermen, and commonality of the said city and
Fram. granted, to my power; and also shall keep my lord's counsel, my
fellows, and my own. So help me God, and by the contents of this book.
Etiam volumus, et p. nobis et successor. n'ris concedimus, quantum in nobis
est, prefato majori, aldermanis, et communitate civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred.
q'd de t'pore in t'pus imp'petuum quinto die Octobris quolibet anno ijdem
major, aldermani, et viginti-quatuor p'biores ho'i'es p. tempore existen.
commune concilium pred. vel major pars eorund. quoru. majorem et sex aldermanos
(septem esse volumus) nominarint et eligerint et nominabunt et eligent secundum
sanas descretiones suas duos burgenses sive inhabitants civitat. Dun. et Fram.
pred. tunc existen. fore servientes ad clavam et ministros curiar. n'rarum et
curiar. dictor. major, aldermanor. et communitat. civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred.
tenend. t'porum utroq. in dicto officio suo remansuro p. uno anno integro tunc
proxime sequen. si ipsi tamdiu vixerint, et se been gesserint in eod. Et insup.
volumus, et p. nobis et successoribus n'ris concedimus quantum in nobis est,
quod dict. major, aldermani, et viginti-quatuor p'biores ho'i'es in dict.
commune concilium electi p. t'pore existentes, vel major pars eorund. (quor.
septem de aldermanis p. t'pore existen. septem esse volumus) p. uno anno
integro prox. sequen. quartum diem Octobris annuatim, sint et erunt electores
o'ium officiorum eligibilium civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. in casu acciderit
aliquem aut aliquos officiarios electos obire, amoveri, vel deponi infra annum
proximum post hujusmodi electionem de se factam, et si contingat aliquem
dictor. viginti-quatuor p'biorum hominum in commune concilium electorum obire
infra annum p'ximum post electionem de se factam, ut prefertur, q'd tunc et
toties major et aldermani pred. p. t'pore existen. vel major pars eorund. infra
viginti dies proximos post hujusmodi mortem eligent et nominabunt alios
civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. burgenses et inhabitants de ead. facultate sive
mysteria sic morientes in supplimentum dicti numeri dictor. viginti-quatuor
probiorum hominum in dict. commune concilium elect. Et insuper volumus q'd si
contingat aliquem vel aliquos dictor. duodecem aldermanorum obire, decedere,
deponi, aut a loco vel locis suis amoveri, tunc et toties quoties aliquis
hujusmodi casus acciderit, dicti major, aldermani, et viginti-quatuor p'biores
ho'i'es in dict. commune concilium electi p. t'pore existen. vel major pars
eorund. (quor. majorem et sex de aldermanis p. tempore existen. septem esse
volumus) infra viginti dies tunc prox. post hujusmodi obitum, decessum, aut
amotionem alicujus aut aliquor. aldermanor. pred. vel successor. suor.
nominabunt et eligent, et eligere et nominare possint et valiant alium aut
alios, burgensem vel burgenses, inhabitantem vel inhabitants civitat. Dun. et
Framw. pred. existentes, residentes, et inhabitants in ead. civitat. Dun. et
Framw. pred. fore aldermanum vel aldermanos civitat. Dun. et Framw. predict.
loco vel loci^ hujusmodi aldermani vel aldermanorum sic obiuntium, decedentium,
depositorum, aut amotorum, qui qu^dem aldermanus vel aldermani sic nominati et
electi, erunt et existent, et erit et existet, aldermanus et aldermani civitat.
Dun. et Framw. pred. p. et durante naturali vita hujusmodi sic nominati et
electi aut nominatorum et electorum, si non contingat eum vel eos ob
rationabilem causam deponi vel amoveri. Volumus etiam, et p. presents, p.
nobis et successoribus n'ris, quantum in nobis est, damus et concedimus dicto
majori, aldermanis, et communitati civitatis Dun. et Framw. pred. q'd si aliqua
persona que ad officium majoratus sive aldermani infra civitatem Dun. et Framw.
pred. sic, ut prefertur, electus vel prefectus fuerit, renuerit vel recusaverit
onus et executionem officij pred. in se suscipere et subire, q'd tunc et toties
quoties hujusmodi persona sic elect. vel prefect. sic renuerit vel recusaverit,
major, aldermani, et commune concilium civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. p. t'pore
existen. vel major pars eorund. (quor. major et sex de aldermanis septem esse
volumus) habeant et habebunt p. presents p'petuis futuris temporibus plenam
authoritatem et potestatem assidendi, taxandi, et imponendi quecunq.
rationabilem sinem, penam, seu pecuniarum summam sup. hujusmodi personam sic
electam, renuentem, et recusantem dictum officium majoratus vel aldermani, ita
q'd dictus sinis, pena, sive pecuniarum summam non excedat summam viginti
librarum de bonis et catallis ejusd. person levand. aut eundem personam
negantem et recusantem solvere dict. finem, penam, seu pecuniarum summam sic in
eu. assess. et imposit. ad prisonam sive gaolam infra civitat. pred.
committendi quousq. satisfaceret vel solveret nobis et successoribus n'ris
dictum finem, penam, seu pecuniarum summam sic sibi impositam, ut prefertur. Et
pred. majorem, aldermanos, et communitatem, omnes et omnimodas hujusmodi sines,
penas, et pecuniarum summas habere recipere et ad publicum usum ejusd. civitat.
confer de t'pore in t'pus imp'petuum. Volumus insup. ordinamus, et
constituimus, ac p. presents, p. nobis et successoribus n'ris, concedimus
prefat. majori, aldermanis, et communitati civitat Dun. et Framw. pred. et
eorum successoribus. quantum in nobis est, q'd pred. major, aldermani, et
viginti-quatuor probiores homines, dictum commune concilium civitat. Dun. et
Fra^w. pred. p. t'pore existen. vel major pars eorund. (quorum major et sex
aldermani nos septem esse volumus) habebunt, et p. presents habeant, quantum
in nobis, est plenam authoritatem, potestatem, et facultatem, vice p. et in
nomine totiua corporis corporalis civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. componendi,
constituendi, ordinandi, saciendi, et stabiliendi, de t'pore in t'pus,
hujusmodi leges, statuta, ordinationes, et consuetudines, que eis bona,
salubria, utilia, honesta, et necessaria, juxta eorum ^^nas descretiones sore
videbuntur, p. bonis, regimine, et gubernatione majoris, aldermanor. et
communitatis civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. ac omnium mercator. officior.
ministror. artific. et resident. quorumcunq. civitat. Dun. et Fram. pred. p.
t'po^e existen. ac p. regimine et gubernatione market. feriarum, et nundinarum
infra civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. et limits et lib'tates ejusd. tenend. ac
gent. ad dictum mercatum, ferias, et nundinas, sive eorum aliquod venient. et
consluent. ac p. declaratione pro modo et ordine major, aldermani, et
comunitas, et ceteri omnes, et singuli ministri, officiarij, et artifices,
inhabitants et residentes civitat. Dun. et Fram. pred. ac eorum sactores,
servientes, et apprenticij, in officiis, functionibus, ministerijs, artificijs,
et negotijs suis infra civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. ac lib'tates eorund. p.
t'pore existen. sese habebunt, gerent, et utentur, ac aliter p. uberiori, bono
publico, commune utilitate, et bono regimine civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. ac
etiam p. meliore preservatione, gubernatione, locatione, dimissione terrarum,
ten'torum, revertionum, et hereditamentorum prefat. majoris, aldermanor. et
communitatis, ac successorum suor. eis dator. concessor. sive assignator. seu
imposterum concedend. dand. vel assignand. ac res ac causas alias quascunq.
civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. aut status, jura, et interesse ejusd. civitat.
Dun. et Framw. pred. contingent. sive quocunq. modo concernent. q'd'q. major,
aldermani, et commune concilium civitat. Dun. et Fram. pred. p. t'pore existen.
vel major pars eorund. quor. majorem civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred et sex
aldermanos ejusd. civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. pro tempore existen. (septem
esse volumus) quotiescunq. hujusmodi leges, instituta, jura, ordinationes, et
constitutiones condiderint, fecerint, ordinaverint, et stabilierint, in forma
pred. hujusmodi et tales penas, punitiones, penalitatas, et imprisonamenta
corporis, vel p. fines et amerciamenta, vel p. coru' utrumq. erga et sup. eos
delinquentes contra hujusmodi leges statuta jura ordinationes constitutiones
sive eor. aliquod vel aliqua, qualia et que eisd. majori aldermanis et com'uni
concilio pro tempore existen. sive majori parti eorun. (quoru. majorem et sex
aldermanos p. t'pore existen. septem esse volumus) necessar. et requisite. p.
observatione hujusmodi legum ordinationum et constitutionu. melius fore
videbuntur facere ordinary, limitare, et p'videre, ac eadem fines et
amerciamenta, p. districtiones, seu alio modo quocunq. levare hac habere et
retinere possint et valiant sibi et successoribus suis ad usum predict.
civitatis Dun. et Framw. pred. absq. calumpnia vel impedimento n'ri, vel
successor. n'roru. vel alicujus, sive aliquor. officiariorum n'rorum aut
successor. n'rorum. Que o'ia et sing'la leges ordinationes constitutiones jura
et instituta sic ut prefertur faciend. observari volumus sub penis in eisd.
content. Ita tamen quod leges ordinationes, constitutiones, et institutiones
hujusmodi pene punitiones, penalitates, et imprisonamenta non sint repugnantia
et contraria legibus statutis, juribus sive consuetudinibus regni Anglie. Ac p.
eor. quod volumus, quod prefat. major aldermani et eos burgenses, inhabitants
civit. Dun. et Framw. pred. deinceps possint et valiant laudabilius et alacrius
p. bono publico ejusd. civitat. et Framw. officia sua e^ercere et p. meliore
manutentione statum et gradum suoru. pred. nos dictos majorem aldermanos et
com'unitatem amplioribus previlegiis locupletare statuentes, de ampliori gra.
n'ra ac ex certa scientia et mero motu n'ris p. nobis, et successoribus n'ris
quantu. in nobis est, damus et concedimus prefat. majori aldermanis et
communitati civ. Dun. et Fr. et successoribus suis, quod ip'i et successores
sui imp'petuum gaudeant, habeant et teneant o'es et singulas curias, ferias,
merchat. tolneta, piccagia, stallagia, pontagia, passagia, custumas, et o'es et
sing'las lib'tates, franchesias, proficua, commoditates, emolumenta, et liberas
consuetudines quibus ante hec t'pora burgenses civitat. Dun. et quibus ho'i'es
lib'tatis et civ. Dun. et quibus balivus civit. Dun. et quibus aldermanus et
burgenses infra civ. Dun. et Fram. et quibus aldermanus burgenses et
inhabitants infra civ. Dun. et Framw. aut coru aliqui, aut aliquis usus suit
habuit tenuit, aut gavisus est, vel usi fuerunt tenuerunt et gavisi fuerunt,
vel habere tenere uti aut gaudere debuerunt seu debuit ratione sive pretextu
aliquaru. chartaru. vel l'rarum patent. p. nos, vel p. aliquem predecessorum
n'rorum ep'oru. Dunelm. quoquo modo ante hac sact. consirmat. vel concess. seu
quocunq. alio legali modo, jure, consuetudine, usu, prescriptione, sive titulo,
ante hac usitata, habita, seu consueta. Volumus etiam, et per presents, p.
nobis et successoribus n'ris, quantum in nobis est, eisdem majori, aldermanis,
et communitatibus, et successoribus suis, concedimus quod ipsi et successores
sui imp'petuum habeant et teneant infra civitat. pred. una. curiam quolibet die
Martis de quindecim in quindecim dies, coram senescallo suo ad hoc p. ip'os
ordinand. et constituend. tenend. Et quod habeant potestatem audiendi et
terminandi in ead. curia p. sen'c'lum suum pred. o'es et omnimodas, actiones
sectas querelas et demandas reales, et personales ta. de debitis ad quamcunq.
sum'am attingentibus qua. de computis transgressionibus, detentionibus,
conventionibus, deceptionibus. actionibus, sup. casum et alijs contractibus
materijs causis et demandis quibuscunq. et o'ia alia placita, p'sonalia,
realia, et mixta, infra civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred. libertat. limits,
bundas, et precinct. eorund. quoquomodo surgent sive emergent in curia pred.
levand. et affirmand. et parts defendentes in eisd. qu^erelis, sectis et
demandis in pl'i^um deducere p. sumonitiones, attachiamenta et destrictiones,
si parts ille sufficienter fuerint. et si sufficientes non fuerint, p.
attachiamenta corporu. suorum et in o'ibus placitis sectis et querilis sic
affirmatis et levatis judicia reddere, ac executiones inde facere secundum
debitum legis formam. Et quod serventes ad ^lavam et uterq. eoru. vel alii
ministri ejusd. curie debita authoritate sulciti facient et exequentur o'es et
sing'las sum'onitiones districtiones attachiamenta et alia precepta ejusd.
curie, ta. p. corpora qua. aliter insia dicta. civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred.
secundu. exigent ^ujuscunq. warrant. precepti sive processus authoritate pred.
ei vel eis direct. vel dirigend. Et quod major aldermani et com'unitas p.
t'pore existen. p. pred. servientes ad clavas vel aliu. aut alios ministru. vel
ministros curie predict. in o'ibus et singulis sectis querelis actionibus et
demandis cora. sen'c'lo suo in cad. curia motis seu dependen. possi^t et
valiant personas defendentes in eisd. sectis querelis actionibus et demandis in
terris tenementis possessionibus et facultatibus suis infra jurisdictionem
curie pred. minus sufficient. p. corpora sua attachiare, et eisd. personas
prisone, infra civitat. pred. comittere, et in prisona detinere, prout lex
postulat. et casus exiget et requiret. Et quod id major aldermani et com'unitas
civ. Dun. et Framw. pred. habeant imp'petuum cognitionem o'iu. pl^itorum ta.
realiu. qua. p'sonaliu. et mixtoru. et alior. pl'toru. quorumcunq. infra
civitat. Dun. et Framw. pred^vel eoru. lib'tates limits vel precinctus
emersur. et emergend. in quibuscunq. curiis n'ris infra comitat. palatinu. Dun.
mot. motur. vel movend. in pred. curia cora. sen'c'lo suo p. t'pore existen.
infra civitat. pred. ut prefertur, tenend. audiend. et terminand. secundu.
debita legis sormam et p'ut casus exiget et requiret. Et quod sen'c'lus eorund.
majoris aldermanorum et comunitatis p. t'pore existen. in curia pred. coram
illo tenenda habeat potestatem puniendi et coercendi o'es et sing'los
officiatios et ministros curie illius vel alias personas quascunq. delinquentes
in dictam curiam ob. little contemptum negligentiam aut alia quecunq. delicta in
dictam curiam p'petrata et p'petrand. p. rationabilem finem aut p.
imprisonamentum corporis aut corporum suorum, aut aliquibus aliis ligittimis
viis et modis quibuscunq. Concedimus insup. p. presents p. nobis et
successoribus n'ris presatis majori aldermani et communitati et successoribus
suis o'ia et sing'la exitus, proficua, fines, amerciamenta, et alias
emolumentas quecunq. in cur. pred. quocunq. modo contingentia ad eorum usus et
opus p'pria imp'petuum Et ulteria nos de uberiori gra. n'ra. p nobis et
successoribus n'ris concessimus, et p. presents concedimus quantum in nobis
est, prefatis majori aldermanis et com'unitati ac successoribus suis, quod idem
major. aldermani et com'unitas et successores sui, imp'petuum habeant et
teneant singulis annis visum francii-pledgii, sive letam, cum o'ibus ad
hujusmodi visu. francii-pledgii p'tinentibus infra precinctum dicte civ. Dun et
Framw. pred. coram senescallo suo aut ejus sufficient. deputato suo secundum
legem bis p. annu. viz. semel infra mensem post Michaelis festum archangeli, et
iterum infra mensem post festum Pasche tenenda. Et quod habeant emendationem
assise panis et cervisie fract. et aliorum venalium quorumcunq. necnon
correctionem et punitionem eorund. et cujuslibet inde parcel. ac totum et
quicquid quod ad visum francii-pledgii p'tinet aut p'tinere debeat aut poterit.
Ac etiam quod pred. major aldermani et com'unitas et successores sui habeant,
omnia exitus et proficua, p'quisitiones, fines, penas, redemptiones,
forisfacturas et amerciamenta in o'ibus et sing'lis hujusmodi visibus franc.
pleg. sive leet forisfaciend. sive assidend. Et ulterius de uberiori gra. n'ta,
p. nobis et successoribus n'ris concessimus et p. presents concedimus et hac
present. charta n'ra confirmavimus p. nobis et successoribus n'ris prefat.
majori aldermanis et com'unitat. et successoribus suis quod ipsi, et eorum
successores imp'petuum habeant et teneant, apud dict. civit. Dun. unum
mercatum, p. o'ibus bonis catallis et merchandizis emend. et vendend. et
quicquid quod ad marcatum, pertinet sive pertinere debet aut poterit insia,
quamlibet septimanam singulis annis imp petuum modo et forma sequen. viz.
quolibet die Sabbathi ib'm tenend. imp'petuum. Et insup. quod idem major
aldermani, et com'unitas, et successores sui, habeant et teneant imp'petuum
tres serias sive nundinas infra dict. civitat. Dunelm. p. o ibus bonis cataliis
et merchandizis emend. et vendend. et quicquid quod ad seria^ sive nundinum
p'tinet sive p'tinere debet vel poterit, viz. unam seriam sive nundinum pred.
triu. seriarum sive nundinorum tenend apud dict. civitat Dun. singulis annis p.
duos dies, viz. in festo et Crastino S'ti Cuthb'ti in mense Martii, secundum
vero feriarum sive nundinorum pred. triu. seriaru. sive nundinoru. tenend. apud
pred. civitat. Dun. annuatim imp'pe^uum in festo S'ti Cuthberti in mense
Septembris, ac tertiam seriar, sive nundinor. pred. trin seriar. sive nundinor.
tenend. apud civitat. Dun. pred. an'uatim imp'petuum die Martis post festum
Pentecoste vulgariter vocat, Whitsuntewsday, una cum o'ibus s^odis exitibus,
tolnetia, piccagiis, pontagiis, et amerciamentis, de hujusmodi mercatis,
seriis, sive nundinis p'venientibus, sive emergentibus, cum o'^bus lib'tatibus,
et liberis consuetudinibus, prosicuis, revertionibus, advantagiis,
com'oditatibus, et emolumentis, ad hujusmodi serias, sive nundinas et ^ercata,
quovis modo p'tinentibus, sive spectantibus, dum tamen serie, sive nundine et
mercatu. illud non sa^t ad nocumentum aliorum viciniorum mercatorum, sive
aliar. vicinaru. feriaru sive nundinaru. Preterea de abundantio^e gra. n'ra
volumus et p. presents, p. nobis et successoribus n'ris quantum in nobis est,
concedi aut presat. majori aldermanis et com'unitati ^iv. Dun. et Framw. pred.
et successoribus suis imp'petuum q'd quilibet major p. t'pore existen. sit et
erit el'icus mercati n'ri, et successorum n'rorum in civitat. Dun. et Framw.
pred durante t'pore quo officium majoratus civit. Dun. et Framw. pred
occupaverit. Et quod habeat at potestatem jurisdictionem, authoritatem, et
lib'tatem, faciendi et exercendi o'ia et sing'la que^ad officium e^^ci mercati,
ib'm pertinent. ad saciend. et exequend. p'ut ceteri el'ici mereati n'ti et
predecessorum n'roru. infra comitat. palate n'ru. habuerunt et habere
contigerunt in futurum, una cum o'ibus exitibus et proficuis, perquisitionibus,
sinibus, penis, redemptionibus, sorisfacturis, amerciamentis, de o'ibus et
aliquibus forisfac^nd. vel assidend. Habend. gaudend. et tenend. o'ia et
sing'la preantea concessa consuetudines lib'tates, previlegia, franchefias,
jurisdictiones, curias, mercata, ferias, officia, et premissa quecunq. cum suis
pertin. presat. majori aldermanis et com'unitati civ. Dun. et Framw. pred. et
successorib. suis ad usum eorund. majoris aldermanor. et com'unitatis et
successor. suor. imp'petuum. Reddend. et faciend. nobis et successoribus n'ris
antiqua feoda firma sive reddit. p. premissis seu antiqua inde parceila ante
hac nobis reddita et soluta p o'ibus aliis servitiis exactionib et demandis
(except. praexceptis) p. inde nob. et successorib. n'ris reddend. solvend. ^eu
faciend. Et ulterius volumus et firmiter precipimus p. nobis et successorib.
n'ris q'd pred. major. aldermani, et com'unitas, et success. sui imp'petuu.
o'ia preconcessa lib'tates, consuetudines, privilegia, franchesias,
jurisdictiones, mercata, ferias, et cetera o'ia et sing'la premissa, cum suis
pertinen. de cetero, libere, quiet, et fine impedimento n'roru. vel success.
n'roru. aut aliquor. n'roru. ministror. officiarior. vel substitutor.
quorumcunq. In cuj. rei test. has l'ras n'ras fieri fecimus patentes. Test
Tho. Calverley, arm. cancellar. n'ro Dun. dat. apud manerium n'ru. de
Awkeland-epi. in festo S'ti Matthei apostoli, ao r'ni d'ne n're Elizabethe, Dei
gra. Anglie, Francie, et Hib'nie, regine, fidei defensor, etc. quadragesimo
quarto, anno D'ni millessimo sexcentessimo secundo, et consecrationis n'rae,
anno octavo.

Confirmation of the preceding Charter by King James.
JACOBUS, etc. omnibus ad quos presents littere nostre patentes p'venerint,
salutem. Inspeximus litteras patentes Tobie e'pi Dunelm. factas in he verba
[the charter rehearsed.] Sciatis, q'd nos de gra. n'ra spi'ali ac ex certa
scientia et mero motu n'ris, co'cessimus, co'firmavimus, ratificamus, et
approbavimus, ac p. p'sentes, p. nob. he'dibus et succ. n'ris, co'cedimus,
co'firmamus, ratificamus, et app'bamus p'fat. majori, aldermanis, et co'itat.
civitat. Dun. et Framwelgate p'dict. et succ. suis, quantu. in nobis est, om'es
et omni'odas lib'tates, franches. jurisdicc'o'es, custum. consuetud. privileg.
jura, im'unitates, quietanc. ac cet'a om'ia et sing'la in eisd. l'ris pat.
content. et specificat. necnon p'dict. l'ras pat. p'd'ci e'pi, necno. om'ia al.
lib'tates, franches. privilegia, im'unitat. et hereditamenta, que p'dict.
major, aldermani, et co'itas civitat. Dun. et Fram. p'dict. aut eor. aliquis,
habere, tenere, uti, vel gaudere debuerunt vel debent, rac'o'e et p'textu
aliquar. chartar. aut l'rar. pat. per aliquem e'pum aut aliquos e'pos Dun. seu
p. aliqua. al. personam, sive aliquas alias personas ante hac fact. et
confirmat. vel concess. seu quocu'q. alio legali modo, jure, clameo, seu titulo
ante hac habit. et usitat. Ac etia. co'cedimus p'fat. majori, aldermanis, et
co'itat. civitat. Dun. et Framw. p'dict. et succ. suis, q'd ha'eant, teneant,
utantur, et gaudeant, ac plene h'ere, tenere, uti, et gaudere possint et
valiant imp'p'm o'nes lib'tates et lib'as consuetudines, previleg. auctoritat.
et quietanc. p'dict. se'd'm tenorem et eff'e'm d'ear. l'rar. pat. p'd'ci e'pi,
sive occ'one vel impedimento n'ro he'dum vel succ. n'ror. quor'cumq. Nolentes
q'd ijd. major, aldermani, et co'itat. civitat. Dun. et Framw. p'dict. eor
p'missor. sive eor. aliquis, p. nos vel he would. n'ros justiciar. vicecom.
eschaetor. aut al. ballivos seu ministros n'ros he'dum seu successor. n'ror.
quor'cunq. inde occ'onentur, molestentur, vexentur, seu graventur, occ'onetur,
molestetur, vexetur, gravetur, seu in aliquo p'turbetur. Volentes, et p.
p'sentes firmit. mandan. p. nob. h'd. et succ. n'ris, et p'cipientes tam
thesaurar. cancellar. et baronib's n'ris, sec'ij n'ri, he'dum vel succ. n'ror.
quem attornat. et solicitor n'r gen'al p. te'pe existen. et eor. cu'ib't et
o'ib's al. ossiciar. et ministris n'ris quibuscu'q. q'd nec ipsi nec cor.
aliquis sive aliqui aliquod bre. sive sum'onic'o'em de quo warranto seu aliquod
aliu. bre. vel p'cess. n'r quecunq. versus p'dict. majorem, aldermanos, et
co'itat. civ. Dun. et Framw. p'dict. vel cor. aliquem vel aliquos p. aliquib's
causis, rebus, et materiis, ossen's, clameo, aut usurpac'o'e, aut cor. aliquis,
p. ipsos sive eor. aliquos, debit. clamat. attempt. usitat. habit. seu usurpat.
an. die co'sec^'o'is p'sentiu. p'sequantur aut continuantur, aut p'sequi aut
continuari, saciant aut causabunt, seu eor. aliquis faciet et causabit. Volumus
etia. ac p. p'sentes concedim. p'sat. majori, aldermanis, et co'itat. ^iv. Dun.
et Framw. q'd h'eant et h'abunt has l'ras n'ras pat. sub magno sigillo n'ro
Anglie, debito modo ^act et sigillat. absq. sine, seu feodo magno, vel p'vo
nob. in hanap'io n'ro seu alibi, ad usum n'r'm proi^de quoquo modo redde'do,
solvendo, seu faciend. Et q'd expressa men'co de vero valor annuo aut de aliqo
al. valor e'titudine premissor. sive eor. alicujus aut de al. donis sive
concessionibus per nos seu per aliqu. p'genitor. n'ror. p'sat. majori,
aldermanis, et co'itat. civ. Dun. et Framw. an. haec t'pora facta in p'ntib's
minime sact. existit aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinac'o'e, p'vis'o'^,
p'elamac'o'e, sive restrie'o'e in contrariu. inde ante hac h'it. sact. edit.
ordinat. seu p'vis. aut aliqua al. re, causa, vel materia quacunq. in aliqo non
obstan. In cujus rei test. has l'ras n'ras fieri fecimus patentes, test
meipso, ap. Westminster. quinto deci'o die Feb. a'o regni n'ri Anglie, Fr. et Hib.
t'cio, et Scotie tricesimo nono. Per breve de privato sigillo. -- Clapham.


was much more ample than the preceding one: It opens with this preamble:
Tobias, by the grace of God, bishop of Durham. Whereas the city of Durham in
the county palatine of Durham is, and time out of mind has been, an ancient
city, of good fame. And the burgesses, men and inhabitants of the said city,
together with those of Framwelgate, have had and enjoyed diverse rights,
jurisdictions, liberties, and privileges, as well by prescription as by virtue
of diverse charters, grants, and confirmations, as well from us, as several of
our predecessors, bishops of Durham. And the burgesses, men and inhabitants in
time past, have suffered great damage, by reason of the defect of some of the
said charters; and fearing lest in time to come they should be molested in the
enjoyment of such their liberties and free customs, for want of publication,
and other causes; they have therefore humbly entreated us to express, in
special words, what the said liberties and free customs are, and to grant the
same to the said burgesses and inhabitants and their successors, and to
incorporate them, etc. By this charter he constituted and granted, that the
burgesses and inhabitants should be one body politic and corporate, consisting
of a mayor, twelve aldermen, and commonalty, to continue for ever, by the name
of mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the city of Durham and Framwelgate, and
by that title to plead and be impleaded in all courts of law within the county,
with power to purchase lands not exceeding the yearly value of 100 marks, and
to have a common seal. Hugh Wright was therein appointed the first mayor, to
continue in office till the 4th day of October then next following, and then to
be an alderman for life, to supply the number of twelve without any new
election. Robt Sureties, Rich. Hutchinson, Edw. Wanles, Wm Hall, Ja. Farales,
Tho. Pearson, John Wall, Edw. Tailor, Hugh Hutchinson, John Heighington, John
Pattinson, and Richard Wright, were appointed aldermen for life. They were
directed to choose yearly twenty-four discreet men out of their several twelve
arts, mysteries, or trades, that is to say, two out of the mercers, grocers,
haberdashers, ironmongers, and salters; two of the drapers and tailors, two of
the skinners and glovers, two of the tanners, two of the weavers, two of the
dyers and fullers, two of the cordwainers, two of the saddlers, two of the
butchers, two of the smiths, two of the carpenters and joiners, two of the free
masons and rough masons, inhabitants of the city and Framwelgate, which, with
the mayor and aldermen, should form a common council for the said city, and, on
the 4th day of October yearly, to choose a mayor out of the body of the said
aldermen, it being requisite to have seven aldermen in the majority of votes on
that occasion, with a power for a like majority to deprive or suspend the mayor
for any offense committed in his office; and on such occasion, or on the death
of the mayor, another chief magistrate should be in like manner elected, within
eleven days from the time of such deprivation, to supply that year; and within
three days after such election, to be sworn before the bishop for the time
being, or, on the Sea being vacant, or the bishop being in distant parts, then
before the chancellor of the county palatine, or, on his absence out of the
jurisdiction, before the aldermen and the twenty-four common-councilmen, or the
major part of them. On the fifth day of October, yearly, the said mayor,
aldermen, and common council are directed to choose two sergeants. On the death
of a common councilman, the mayor and aldermen, within twenty days, are to
nominate one in his stead, out of the same trade; and on the vacancy of an
alderman within the same time, to nominate another out of the burgesses and
inhabitants of the said city and Framwelgate. Any person elected mayor or
alderman, and refusing to take upon him the office, is made subject to a fine
not exceeding twenty pounds, to be levied on the desaulter's goods and
chattles, or committed to the gaol at Durham till the same is paid; and such
^ines to be applied to the public use of the city. They were also authorized to
make laws, statutes, and ordinances, for the better government of the city, and
the markets and fairs therein, and all officers, mysteries, artificers and
inhabitants, and for regulating their several trades and mysteries; and the due
preservation and management of the lands and possessions of the said body
corporate. And for the better maintenance, state, and dignity of the said
mayor, aldermen, and commonalty, the same charter grants them all courts,
fairs, markets, tolls, perquisites, stallages, pontages, passages, customs, and
all and singular liberties, franchises, profits, commodities, emoluments, and
free customs, which at any time before the date thereof the burgesses had
enjoyed, or the bailiffs or aldermen of the city had held and used, by virtue
of any preceding charter, or by means of any custom or prescriptive right
whatsoever; and that the said mayor, aldermen, and commonalty, and their
successors, should hold their court within the city, from fifteen days to
fifteen days for ever, and therein, before their steward, to hear and determine
all actions, suits, quarrels, and demands, which might arise within the said
city and Framwelgate; the sergeants having power to serve process, and enter
into the lands, possessions, or shops of the parties, to satisfy the executions
or judgments of the said court, or to attach their bodies and commit them to
prison: They were also empowered to take cognizance of all pleas, as well real
as personal or mixed in the said court, and have equal authority within their
precincts as any other courts of the county palatine of Durham had. The steward
was also authorized to punish the officers and ministers of the court by fine
or imprisonment; and all such fines and profits were granted to the said mayor,
aldermen, and commonalty; with view of frank-pledge, to be holden by their
steward within the precincts of the city twice a year, within a month after
Michaelmas and Easter; with power of settling the assize of bread and corn
unground, and all other things for sale; and, in their leet, to punish
offenses; and the profits of such courts were also thereby granted to them.
Also a market weekly Die Sabbathi.
on Saturday, and three yearly fairs on the days appointed by bishop
Pilkington's charter See p. 29.
, with the profits and perquisites thereof; and every mayor for the time being
was made clerk of the market, to enjoy the profits thereof.

This charter received royal confirmation by letters patent dated at
Westminster the 14th day of February 1605, though it is apprehended, the bishop
was competent to make his charter without the aid of the crown, and therefore
this badge of honor, after the gilding of its dignity was removed, was no
better than a scab on the constitution and privileges of the palatinate.

Notwithstanding the preceding charters, the bishops and their officers or
lessees continued to take the tolls and dues of goods coming into the markets
within the borough, and to appoint a bailliff of the borough, and clerk of the
market. The record RICHARDUS (Neile) Dei gra. ep. Dun. etc. Sciatis, etc.
dedimus et concessimus, ac p. presents, pro nob. et successor. n'ris, damus et
concedimus Radulpho Allanson officium ballivat. civitat. et burgi nostri
Dunelm. etc. habend. gaudend. et tenend et exercend officium pred. prefat Rad'o
Allanson, p. se vel p. sufficient. deputat. suum, sive p. deputat. suos
sufficientes, pro et durante termino vitae suae naturalis p'cipiend. annuatim
de firmar. exitum civitat. et burgi praed. et mercatus ibidem pro exercitio
officii predict. omnia et singula feod. et vadia eid. officio ab antiquo debita
et consueta, una cum omnibus et singulis aliis regard. advantag. com'oditat.
proficuis, preheminentiis, juribus, dignit. et consuetud. eid, officio
qualitercunq. debit. consuet. et spectant. adeo plene, libere, et integre, et
in tam amplis modo et forma prout Laur'us Halye, Tho. Gower, Rob'tus Raw,
Ric'us Raw, Edw. Hutton, aut eorum aliquis, etc. Sciatis etiam, etc. dedimus et
concessimus eid. Rad'o Allanson officium cli'ci mercatus n'ri infra civitatem
et burgum pred. et suburb. ejusd. habend. tenend. occupand. et exercend.
officium predict. eidem Radulpho Allanson, pro et durante termino vitae suae
naturalis, p. se vel p. sufficient. deputat. etc. percipiend. in officio illo
vadia et seoda eidem officio debit. et consuet dantes et concedentes eid. Rad'o
Allanson plenam tenore praesentium potestatem faciend. exequend. et exercend.
omnia et singula quae ad pred. officium cl'ici mercatus pred. p'tinent.
faciend. et exequend. Damus insup. o'ibus et singulis ball. tenentibus,
burgensibus, et firmar. n'ris, tam in pred. civitat. Dun. quam alibi, tenore
praesentium, firmiter in mandatis aliosq. quor. interesse et contig. et rogamus
q'd eid. Rad'o Allanson officia seperalia antedict. exequent. intendentes sint
obedientes, consulentes, faventes, et auxiliantes prout decet. In cujus, etc.
has l'ras n'ras sieri fec. pat. test. Ric. Hutton, cancellar. 15o die Oct. 1627.

Confirmation by Rich. Hunt, dean, and the chapter, etc. Dat. in domo n'ra
capitulari Dun. 23o die men sis Octobris, A. D. 1627.

Pat. Joh. Stathom. de offic. ball. Dun. by bishop Dudley. Rot A. No 68.
P'cipiend. annuatim in officio illo p. feod. suo, 66 s. 8 d. etc. -- Randal's
MSS.

Lib. K. p. 415. In canc. Dunelm. sexto die Sep. A. D. 1637, int. Tho. Mann et
all is, quer. et Marg. Forster et all is, def'ts. -- The bill was filed by lessees
of the tolls, under a lease granted by Richard (Neile) bishop of Durham, dated
3d Oct. 3 Cha. I. 1628, under the yearly rent of 20 l. The defendants alleged,
that the corn of which the toll was demanded, was not sold in the market, but
by private contract, and delivered at the buyer's house, who lived in the
limits of the borough. The following decree was made: "It appeared to this
court, that scavadge corn is an ancient duty, time out of mind had and
received by the bishop of Durham for the time being, his servants, tenants, or
farmers of the said borough markets or fayres, for all manner of corn and
grain brought into the said markets and sayres, and otherwise sold in the said
city of Durham. That the defendant Forster, besides other payments which were
proved, did pay scavadge corn for 20 bushells of corn, which were brought to
her in the weekday, and not on the markett day, and made agreement for the
said scavadge corn, and was to pay and did pay in lewe thereof for some
quantities of the said corn after the rate of one penny for every bushel of
corn and grain she bought in the said markett or was brought unto her; and it
then appeared, that the bringinge in of corn on the week day was to the
manifest preventinge and hinderinge of the said compts. being farmers of the
said scavadge corn, of the said duty and ^olls of the said corn by ancient
custom had and received as aforesaid; and did much tend to the inhancing of the
prices of corn and grain, and was and is contrary to a proclamation made in
the sixth year of his maj. reign that now is, which is yet in force:
Whereupon, and to the end this court might be better informed touching such
order and proceedings as is elsewhere in matters of this nature, etc. this
court did think fit to respitt the final determination of the said
differences until this sittinge, etc. Therefore, upon due consideration had of
the proofs already made as aforesaid, and after perusal of diverse suits and
controversies which formerly had been moved and were then depending, as well at
the common law, as also in his maj. court of the duchy chamber, between
Rich. Prance als Prince, plaintiff, and major ^nglebie, deputy bailiff of
Knaisbrough in the county of York, and others, being the scavangers or
gatherers of the markett sweepings or hand-law-corne of Knaisbrough aforesaid,
defendants, touching the takeinge and distreyninge of certain corn in sacks
of the said Richard, which was brought to the market of Knaisbrough to be sold
for a due of markett sweepings or hand-lawe-corne claimed by the defendants as
scavengers or gatherers of the said duty for the time being, It is ordered and
decreed by the Right Hon. Sir Rich. Hu^ton, knt. one of his maj. justices of
the court of common pleas at Westminster, and chancellor of the county palatine
of Durham and Sadberge. That if the said defendants or any other person or
persons do at any time henceforth bring into the said city or borough, or
suburbs of the same, any corn or grain of what nature or kind soever to be
sold, or to be delivered to any person or persons upon any bargain or
contracte for the same shall before such delivery thereof present the said
corn or grain in the public markett place within the said city where such
corn or grain is used or accustomed to be brought and sold in the markett
days as aforesaid, and thereof shall give notice to the common officer or the
gatherer or taker of such scavadge corn, and after such notice given, shall
stay there a convenient time, to the end the complts. and others the farmers
aforesaid, their servants or agents, may take their scavadge corn thereof. And
because this court was informed, that the dish now used for the taking of the
said scavadge or s^avell corn, did conteyne much more than the ancient dish
wherewith the said s^avell or scavadge corn was usually taken and received did
conteyne, and that the same is now reduced to the ancient measure of a pint
dish, it is therefore likewise ordered by Mr Chancellor, that the said dish
being of the measure of a pint only, shall be from henceforth continuallye,
and that quantity and proportion to be taken for every bushel of the corn
and grain so sold on the said markett and fair days, and of every bushel of
corn bought and delivered as aforesaid on the said week days, which are
neither markett nor fair days, shall conteyne only a pynte for every
bushel, and so proportionabl^e according to that rate and no more, the bushel
hear conteyinge 12 gallons at the least; and that no scavadge corn shall be
taken, challenged, or demanded of any thing there brought to he sold
whatsoever, other than of corn, grain, oatemeale and salt only, and that not
of any less quantity thereof then of a bushel at the least, unless the
owner shall at any time bring a bushel or more to be sold, and of purpose to
defraud and defeat the said duty, shall divide the same to be sold by peeks
or lesser quantities than a bushel. And it is further ordered by this course,
that the said pynte dish shall not be uppheaped, but by hand stroke and even
s^ick^n by the taker thereof; and that the said dish shall be sealed and
brought to the head burrowe court to be holden for the said city and burrowe
of Durham next after the feast of St Michael the archangel, yearlie to be
viewed by the then mayor, steward, and clerk of the said court, and the
suitors there present, to conteyne no more quantity then only a pynte as
aforesaid. And this court does further order and set down, that when it shall
happen that the duty of scavadge corn has been taken one markett day, and
that the corn be not sold but left unsould bona fide in the city or suburbs,
and kept until the next markett day, and then brought again to be sold the said
next markett day; that no more scavadge corn shall be taken for the same corn
for which the said duty of scavadge was paid. And whereas it was complained to
this court, that such as brought corn to be sold on the said markett or
fair days were oftentimes constreyned to stay until one or two of the clock
in the afternoon before they might vent or sell their said corn, in regard the
markett bell has not been sooner runge, and this court was then moved to
appoint a certain hour for the most convenience and time the corn bell should
be rung, the rather for that as was alleged, sundry persons in the winter
season, whose dwellings are somewhat more remote from the said city, have been
constreyned by the late ringing of the said bell to stay in the town all night
to their needless charge, and so to ride home on the Sunday. Upon consideration
had whereof, it is now likewise further ordered by the court, that the said
markett bell or corn bell shall for ever hereafter be runge at 12 o'clocke or
near thereupon; and if the said bell shall not be runge at twelve o'clock or
near that time, that then it shall be lawful for every one to sell their corn
at their pleasure; but that no corn shall be sold or carried away before the
hour of twelve of the clock, and scavadge duty thereof taken, under the
danger and penalty that the same was subject unto before, if it had been sold
before the markett bell or corn bell had been runge. And lastly, it is
ordered, that if the said dish shall not be sealed, or that the taker of the
said scavadge corn do not observe this order, that then such as shall have
cause and be wronged, may from time to time complain at the next sessions of
peace to be held for the county of Durham: Provided always, that this decree or
any thing therein contained shall not extend to such only as buy corn at
Newcastle and other places where toll of such corn is taken, and bring the
same to their own houses in Durham, unless that the same parties do afterward
bring such their corn to the said city to be there sold again, in which
case only, it shall be lawful for the takers of the said scavadge corn to
take toll of the said corn also according to the proportion aforesaid. --
Mann's MSS.


given in the notes, was of so recent a date as the year 1627, after the time
of granting bishop Matthew's charter; and the decree there stated was made in
the year 1637.

The charter of bishop Matthew was kept in force until an order was made, on
the 25th day of August 1684, to the following purport: Then ordered by us the
major, aldermen, and common council in the common council assembled, or the
majoritie of us, That the charter of incorporation of this city be forthwith
surrendered under the common seal into the hands of the right honorable and
right reverend father in God, Nathaniel, lord bishop of Durham, to be disposed
of as his lordship pleases. In testimony whereof we have set our hands, the
day and year first above written. (Signed) Jos. Hutchinson major, Jo. Morland,
Jo. Duck, Mar. Allenson, Tho. Mascall, Jo. Hall, Cuthb. Hutchinson, Geo.
Morland, aldermen; Wheatley, Dobson, and twenty-three others, common-councilmen
Pro nobis et successoribus n'ris, damus, concedimus, assignavimus, et sursum
reddimus prenobili viro necnon Rev'ndus in Christo, etc. D'no d'no Nathaniel,
Dei gra. ep'o^ Dunelm. et Sadberg. et succ'oribus suis imp'p'm tam p'd'^as
l'ras patentes sic ut prefertur nobis f'cas, etc. q'm o'ia et singula, jura,
lib'tates, privilegia, franches, consuetudines, commoditates, et jurisdic'o'es
quecunq. etc. Test. 25 Aug. 1684.


. In pursuance of this order, the charter abovementioned was surrendered to
bishop Crewe, who granted a new charter to the city, bearing date the 7th of
March 1684; but on account of some want of form in the surrender of Matthew's
charter, it was deemed illegal and ineffectual, and the body corporate
continued to act under the former until the year 1761, not enforcing any of the
powers contained in Crewe's charter, and for that reason unnecessary to be set
forth.

It appears, that in late years several innovations were practiced in the city,
by persons not free exercising their trades within the liberties, and
apprentices gaining their freedom by illicit practices of the several
companies. To prevent such abuses in future, the body corporate, at a public
meeting, made bye-laws or ordinances, dated the 8th of November 1728, whereby
they imposed a fine on all intruders, who should exercise their trades within
the liberties, of twenty shillings a week, so long as they continued so to do
At a meeting of the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the city of Durham and
borough of Framwelgate, held at the Guild Hall or Tollbooth within the said
city the 8th day of Nov. 1728, the several orders and bye-laws
herein-after-mentioned were then made by the said mayor, aldermen, and
commonalty, to be observed and kept by them and by the wardens, stewards, and
freemen of the several respective companies, fraternities, or fellowships in or
belonging to the said city or borough.

WHEREAS diverse persons have of late used and exercised trades within this city
of Durham and borough of Framwelgate, which trades by immemorial custom have
belonged to some of the respective companies or fraternities within the said
city or borough, without being members or free of such company or fraternity
there, to which the said trades respectively belonged, or of any other company
or fraternity there, contrary to the said immemorial custom there used, and
much to the prejudice of the said corporation and the other members of such
companies or fraternities: For the remedying thereof, it is this day ordered by
the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of this corporation, That if any person or
persons not being free of the company or fraternity within this corporation to
which his their trade or trades has or have usually belonged, in case the same
so belonged to any, or if not, of some other company or fraternity within this
corporation, he or they so offending shall forfeit to the mayor, aldermen, and
commonalty of this corporation for the time being, Twenty Shillings for every
week he or they so offending shall use and exercise such trade, to be by them
recovered by action or distress of the goods of the offender or offenders
respectively, which said respective sins shall be paid by the mayor for the
time being into the chest or hutch, for the use of the said mayor, aldermen,
and commonalty, to defray any public expense that may happen to the said
corporation and fraternities.

And it is likewise ordered by the said mayor, aldermen, and commonalty, that
every person that shall hereafter be admitted a freeman into any company within
the said city and borough, shall pay the sum of One Shilling to the mayor of
Durham for the time being, over and above the usual fees, which shilling shall
be paid into the hutch for the purposes aforesaid.

And for the effectual preventing all persons being made free, that have not a
right or title to their freedom in the said city, and for the better regulating
the same, the mayor, one or more alderman or aldermen of the said city, and the
wardens and stewards of the said several and respective companies for the time
being, shall from henceforth meet at the Guild Hall or Tollbooth in the said
city four times in every year, viz. on the first Monday after Martinmas, the
first Monday after Candlemas, the first Monday after May Day, and the first
Monday after Lammas; and every person that is hereafter to be admitted a
freeman of the said city and borough of Framwelgate, shall be then and there
called at three of the said several meetings, before such his admittance to be
a freeman, and to be approved of by the said mayor, and one or more alderman or
aldermen, and the wardens and stewards of the several and respective company or
fraternity for the time being, whereof he or they is or are to be made and
admitted a freeman or freemen respectively, or the majority of the said mayor,
alderman or aldermen, and wardens of such respective company then and there
present.

And that any warden, steward, or other freeman, that will make any person a
freeman of the said city, or of any company therein, contrary to this order or
bye-law, shall respectively forfeit and pay the sum of Thirty Pounds to the
mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the said city of Durham, to be by them
recovered by action or distress of the offenders goods or otherwise, and to be
paid into the hutch for the purposes aforesaid.

And that the town clerk of the said city for the time being shall attend at
such the said meetings, to call every such person or persons as is or are to be
admitted a freeman or freemen, and enter his or their names as a freeman in a
book to be kept for that purpose, for which every person so admitted a freeman
shall pay him sixpence as his fee for his doing thereof, over and above his
usual fee.

And it is further ordered, that if any freeman of any company whatsoever
within the said city or borough of Framwelgate shall take an apprentice after
a clandestine manner, only with intent or design to make him free of the said
city and borough, and does not actually teach his said apprentice the art and
mystery of which he the said master is free, but shall turn or assign him over,
or suffer him to go to some other master not freeman of the same company, or to
some other place out of the said city or borough, or the liberties thereof, to
learn his trade, and only serve his master at certain times, he the said master
shall forfeit the sum of Thirty Pounds to and for the use and benefit of the
said mayor, aldermen, and commonalty for the purposes aforesaid, and to be
recovered as aforesaid; and that any apprentice so bound, and who shall not
serve his apprenticeship fairly and regularly with a freeman of the same
company to which he is bound as an apprentice in the city of Durham or borough
of Framwelgate, or be legally assigned over to a trading freeman of such
fraternity inhabiting within the said city or suburbs, not to be entitled to
his freedom in the said city of Durham or borough of Framwelgate upon any
pretense whatsoever.

And in case the mayor of the said city for the time being shall swear such
apprentice or any other person that has not actually served seven years as an
apprentice with a freeman of one of the said companies or fraternities
belonging or used in the said city, or shall not be justly entitled to the same
by ancient usage or custom within the said city, shall forfeit and pay the sum
of Thirty Pounds into the said hutch for the benefit and purpose aforesaid;
which said sum of thirty pounds shall be recovered by the succeeding mayor, or
the aldermen and commonalty, by action or distress of the goods of the
offender, or otherwise. In witness whereof the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty
aforesaid have respectively hereunto subscribed their names the day and year
within written. (Signed) Hen. Forster, mayor; Ra. Gelson, Cuth. Bainbridge,
Tho. Dunn, Rich. Stonehewer, John Gray, Fr. Cornforth, Mich. Brabin, Rob.
Smith, Giles Rain, Rob. Wharton, Geo. Dale, Geo. Bows, John Lamb, aldermen;
Wm Richardson, Ra. Bainbridge, Mich. Brown, Tho. Mellmerby, Tho. Sheffield,
Tho. Mason, John White, Jos. Woodmass, Wm Arrowsmith, John Potts, Cuth.
Bainbridge, Edw. Davison, Oliver Paxton, Tho. Thompson, Rob. Parkin, Sam.
Corner, Nath. Robinson, Jos. Busby, Tho. Craggs, Rob. White, Wm Botcherby, Rob.
Dixon, John Horsman, John Sikes, Philip Hazard, common-council-men. -- The
bye-laws were also assented to by twenty-four common-council-men afterward
elected.


; and ordained, that the mayor should hold four guild days in the year, at
three of which, every person claiming title to his freedom should be called
before he should be admitted, under a penalty against the warden of the trade
in which any breach of the rule was committed of 30l. And also to prevent
taking apprentices who should not manually serve seven years to his master,
under a penalty of 30l. against the master, and a like penalty of 30l. against
the mayor for swearing in any illegal person.

Notwithstanding such prudent regulations, several efforts were made to evade
the ordinances, and in the year 1756 an experimental freedom was created to try
the legality of the bye-laws or rules last mentioned, which brought on a legal
discussion, in the result, confirming them as consistent with law and the
constitution of the incorporation Green against mayor of Durham. -- King's
Bench, Hilary Term, 30 Geo. II. 26th Jan. 1757. -- Burrow's Reports, vol. i. p.
127.

This case was set down in the crown paper as a special verdict, and was so
called and argued by one council on each side, in the same manner as if it had
been a special verdict: But it was only a verdict on six several traverses to
the return of a mandamus (on 9 Ann, c. 20) directed to the mayor of Durham,
commanding him to swear and admit Robert Green into the place and office of a
freeman of the company or fraternity of freemasons of the city of Durham.

The right set up by Robert Green was, his having been duly elected and
admitted a freeman of the company; but the objection to his being sworn by the
mayor was, "that he had not conformed to certain bye-laws particularly
specified in the return, and found by the verdict."

The return was, That Durham is, and for time immemorial has been, an ancient
city, etc. and also that a power is given by a charter of Tobias, then bishop
of Durham, in 44 Eliz. confirmed by James I. to the mayor, aldermen, and common
council for the time being, or the major part of them (of whom the mayor and
six of the aldermen to be seven) to make bye-laws in the stead, for, and in the
name of the whole corporate body of the city of Durham and Framwelgate.

Then the return set forth, that certain bye-laws were duly made by the mayor,
aldermen, and commonalty, in due manner met and assembled at the Guild Hall,
etc. on the 8th Nov. 1728, and particularly specifies three several bye-laws as
having been then and there made by them, for calling the names at four
meetings, and the penal laws against the wardens and the mayor, etc. -- Vide
bye-laws on the preceding page.

All which said several ordinances and bye-laws, the return alleges to have,
ever since the making thereof, been constantly observed and kept, etc. and to
be still in their full force and virtue, etc.

That Robert Green was not elected and admitted a freeman of the said company
of free-masons, rough-masons, wallers, paviors, plasterers* slaters, and
bricklayers.

That Green was never duly called to be a freeman of the said city of Durham
and Framwelgate, nor ever approved of by the mayor, or one or more alderman or
aldermen of the city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid, and the warden and
stewards of the said company or fraternity of free-masons, etc. before his
supposed election and admission to be a freeman of the said company or
fraternity, according to the first ordinance or bye-law abovementioned, as he
ought to have been.

And for these reasons, the said mayor has not sworn and admitted him, nor
administered the oaths usually taken for the due execution of the said office.

Upon this return, Green takes six several traverses, on which issues were
tried. -- 1st issue, That the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty, did not duly
meet, etc. 8th Nov. 1728, in order to make bye-laws, etc. modo et (...) and ^d
issue, That they did not in due manner make the first bye-law mentioned in the
return. -- 3d issue, That they did not in due manner make the second bye-law
mentioned in the return. 4th issue, The like denial of their making the third
bye-law mentioned in the return. 5th issue, That he was elected and admitted a
freeman of the said company or fraternity of free-masons, etc. as in the writ
is alleged* 6th issue, That he was duly called to be a freeman of the said
city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid, and was approved by the wardens and
stewards of the said company to be a freeman of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate.

The jury find; -- as to the 1st issue, That upon the 8th of Nov. 1728, the
then mayor, aldermen, and commonalty did in due manner meet and assemble at,
etc. in order, etc. in such manner and form as the said mayor by his return
has alleged. -- As to the 2d issue, That the said mayor, aldermen, and
commonalty did then and there in due manner make the first bye-law in the
return mentioned, in such manner and form as is therein by the said mayor
alleged. -- As to the third issue, That they did in due manner make the second
bye-law in manner and form, etc. -- As to the 4th issue, The like finding with
regard to the third bye-law. -- As to the 5th issue, That Green was elected and
admitted a freeman as in and by the writ is alleged; but that before such his
admittance, he was not called at any meeting held according to the said bye-law
in the said second issue mentioned, nor approved of by the then mayor, and one
or more alderman or aldermen, and warden and stewards of the said company or
fraternity, nor by a majority of them according to the said bye-law. -- As to
the 6th issue, That the said Robert Green was not duly called to be a freeman
of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, and approved of by the wardens and
stewards of the said company or fraternity of free-masons, rough-masons, etc.
to be a freeman of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate.

This case was argued on the 24th of Nov. 1756, by Mr Ambler for the plaintiff,
and Mr Clayton for the defendant; when the court ordered it to stand for
judgment to the then next term: And lord Mansfield then delivered the
resolution of the court -- The general question depends upon Robert Green's
right to the franchise which he claims -- The objection to his right arises
from his not being qualified according to the bye-law -- If the bye-law is good
and binding, and he appears to be an object of it, he is certainly not
qualified, and the mayor has returned a sufficient reason for not admitting and
swearing him -- All the objections which have been made, therefore, tend to set
aside the bye-law; or if the bye-law be good, to show that Green's case is not
within it. -- It has been argued, that the bye-law is void upon two grounds;
1st, for want of authority to make it; 2dly, from the subject matter. -- As to
the first, the objection is, that the bye-laws are returned to be made by the
mayor, aldermen, and commonalty; whereas the power is given to the mayor,
aldermen, and twenty-four common council, or the major part of them, of whom
the mayor and six aldermen should be seven. -- ANSWER. The power to the select
number is, "To make bye-laws in the stead, for, and in the name of the whole
corporate body." These bye-laws might be made by the select number, acting in
the name of the whole incorporate body, and must be so intended: For the jury
find, "That they did in due manner meet, and in due manner make the bye-laws."
-- As to the second, That the bye-law is unreasonable and void: For it is
likened to the case of the tailors of Ipswich, (2. Co 53.) a bye-law that none
should work at his trade until he had presented himself to the company of
tailors, and proved that he had served seven years as an apprentice, and
admitted by them to be a sufficient workman. -- ANSW. In that case the bye-law
was against law; it was against the 5th of Eliz. and a further restraint than
that act made. -- But this bye-law is not against any law; it is not a
restraint upon trade, but seems a reasonable regulation, to prevent persons
being unduly made free, who are not entitled by birthright, service, or
purchase; it provides a method for previously examining into the right of those
who claim to be made free. -- OBJECTION. That there is no method to compel a
meeting of the mayor, alderman or aldermen, and the wardens and stewards of
companies. -- ANSW. This objection extends equally to all corporate assemblies,
by custom, charter, or bye-law; but there is a known method by Mandamus. --
OBJECT. If a person has a right to be admitted a freeman, yet unless he be
approved of by the mayor, etc. he is not to be admitted; and there is no method
to compel them to approve. -- ANSW. If the mayor, etc. disapprove without a
cause, a Mandamus will lie, suggesting the qualification and right of the
person claiming to be a freeman, and commanding the mayor to approve and admit.
But supposing the bye-law good, it has been argued that this case is not within
it. -- 1st OBJECT. The Mandamus is to admit Green to the freedom of the
company; the bye-law relates only to the freedom of the city. -- ANSW. It
appears by the second bye-law to be the same thing. -- 2d OBJECT. The bye-law
prohibits, indeed, the election of persons not called and approved, etc. and
subjects disobedience to a penalty; but does not make the election void, and
cannot transfer the right of election vested in the electors to the mayor. --
ANSW. These objections are sounded upon a misunderstanding of the bye-law, and
a misconception of the nature of the case. The writ recites "That Green had
been duly elected and admitted a freeman," and therefore commands the mayor to
swear him -- The mayor returns the bye law, etc and that before Green's
supposed election and admittance (by the company) to be a freeman, "he was not
called and approved by the mayor, etc." And the fact found by the jury is*
"That he was elected and admitted by the company, but not called and approved
by the mayor, etc." So that it appears upon this record, that the intent of the
bye-law was, that no person should be elected and admitted a freeman of the
company, unless he was called at the assembly and approved, etc. which was a
previous act to be done, before the company could elect him, -- the way to
prevent the abuse "That the company unduly admitted persons to their freedom."
The second bye-law inflicts a penalty on the company who should make any one
free without the previous calling and approbation. And the third bye-law
inflicts a penalty on the mayor who should swear any such person. -- The
stating the fact answers both the objections: For the bye-law makes the
appearance and approbation a necessary qualification to the being made free by
the company; and a restraint upon them, to elect any one to his freedom, before
his conforming to the bye-law: And the right of election is not transferred to
the mayor, but remains where it was. -- OBJECT. It is not returned, that there
was any assembly, at which Green might appear to be called. -- ANSW. It shall
be intended: And if in fact there was no assembly, Green might have pleaded it
excuse. -- OBJECT. He might have been elected and admitted before the making
this bye-law. -- ANS. The jury have found, "That he was elected and admitted;
but that he was not called and approved pursuant to the bye-law:" So that the
bye-law was in being at the time of his election.

It is to be observed, that it is not stated, what is the method of the
company's electing freemen, nor any thing in the charter concerning it. For
aught that appears, the first bye-law may be agreeable to the ancient usage,
and revived by this bye-law, and enforced by penalties. But supposing it to be
introductory of a previous qualification, it seems to be reasonable, and well
calculated to prevent improper persons, not entitled, being made free. It is
much more reasonable than the custom of London, "that no broad cloth should be
sold but what was brought to Blackwell-Hall to be examined," 5. Co. 62. Yet
this custom was held good, because it was to prevent fraud.

We are of opinion, that none of the objections are well sounded, and,
therefore, that the return ought to be allowed. -- Consequently, as this was
the case of traversing the return to a Mandamu^, pursuant to the stat. 9 Ann,
cap. 20. the rule was taken, That judgment be entered for the defendant.


.

The hydra of innovation gained strength by the loss of the above project; for,
upon the arguments in the King's Bench, discovery was obtained how to overset
the whole of the above prudential rule, and let in a shoal of freemen, who
might, at the election of members of parliament, exercise the freedom of
voting, and thereby depreciate the privileges of the burgesses who had acquired
their franchise under the powers of the chartered incorporation. This project
was played off in the year 1761, and threw the whole city into confusion,
creating, in the event, such a division in the body, that they refused to join
in the exercise of the powers of their charter; so that, in the year 1768, the
number of members prescribed for carrying into execution the several powers of
the charter, was lost, and the charter itself became disolved and obsolete. In
Mr Mann's MSS. Penes G. Allan.
is the following account of the transactions in 1761: The bye-law of 1728 was
found to be a good and wholesome law, and answered the end for which it was
made, by preventing persons being made free who had no right to their freedom;
and other orders and bye-laws were afterward made, tending to the same
purpose, which were constantly observed until the 13th of October 1761, some
short time after the death of Henry Lambton, esquire one of the members in
parliament for the city, when the mayor, with some of the aldermen and common
council, made an order or bye-law to repeal or make void the former, thereby
altering the manner of admitting freemen prescribed in such former orders or
bye-laws.

On the 2d of November 1761, at a meeting of some of the aldermen and common
council at the toll-booth, under this new order or bye-law, the town clerk Mr
Robt Robinson, attorney at law.
, by their order, in an arbitrary and hasty manner, did call over the names of
several persons to the number of 264, or thereabouts, living in different
counties, in order to be admitted freemen of the said city, though no way
entitled thereunto, several wardens of different companies and freemen then and
there objecting and protesting against the same; but no notice was taken of
such objections and protests; and at the election of a member for the city, in
the place of Mr Lambton, which began on the 7th of December 1761, 215 persons
so called on the 2d of November, were admitted to poll as freemen of the city.

The candidates in this election were, Ralph Gowland esquire of Durham, then major
of the Durham regiment of militia, and major general John Lambton, esquire of
Harraton, in the county of Durham. The poll continued six days: At the
conclusion the numbers stood, for Mr Gowland (including the 215 occasional
freemen) 775, for Mr Lambton 752; so that Mr Gowland was returned elected with
a majority of 23 votes: But upon a petition by Mr Lambton, the house of
commons, on Tuesday the 11th of May 1762, resolved, that the 215 made or
pretended to be made free, had no right to vote, and that general Lambton was
duly elected; on a division of the house, 88 against 72.

The members of the incorporated body being thrown into distraction by this
strange transaction, as was observed before, suffered their charter to be
vacated The following petition was presented to bishop Trevor for a new
charter; but he died before the matter was proceeded in, and the petition was
renewed to his successor.

To the honorable and right reverend father in God, Richard, lord bishop of
Durham. The humble petition of all the several companies and fraternities of
and within the city of Durham,
Humbly shows,
THAT by charter formerly granted by Tobias Matthew, bishop of Durham, in the
reign of the late queen Elizabeth, the commonalty of the city of Durham were
incorporated, and were made to consist of three integral parts, viz. a mayor,
twelve aldermen, and twenty-four common councilmen, who by the said charter
were invested with diverse powers and authorities, and particularly a power was
by the said charter given to the said mayor and aldermen, and their successors,
solely of choosing and electing two such persons from each of the twelve trades
therein named, as they should think proper, who were to be of the common
council of the said city, together and along with the said mayor and aldermen.

And your petitioners further humbly show unto your lordship, that by the death
and amotion of several of the aldermen who acted under the said charter, the
persons now being or taking upon themselves to be aldermen of the said city,
are so reduced in point of number, as to be disabled from doing many corporate
acts in cases where a particular number of the said mayor and aldermen is by
the said charter required, by which means the said charter in some instances is
rendered totally of no use.

And your petitioners further humbly show unto your lordship, that they have
been informed that a petition has already been presented, or is intended to be
presented to your lordship for a new charter, subscribed only by a small part
of the body of freemen of and belonging to the said city, many of whom not
knowing the purport or meaning thereof, were induced to sign the same, but
being since more rightly informed, are now very desirous that the said petition
should be retracted and suppressed.

And your petitioners humbly submit to your lordship, that the power given to
the mayor and aldermen of the said city by the said old charter, solely of
choosing the common council, is contrary to the mode of electing in such cases
given by almost every other charter in the kingdom, is very unreasonable, has
all along been attended with great inconveniences, and particularly of late
years, the same having been productive of many mischiefs, expensive lawsuits,
and other very disagreeable incidents, and is of great detriment and oppression
to the said several companies and fraternities, who by such means are not
represented by two such persons of their respective companies as they would
respectively desire to appoint.

That the said old charter directs the mayor and aldermen, and their successors
for the time being, or the major part of them, should yearly on the third day
of October assign, name and choose twenty-four persons of the most discreet and
upright men, (that is to say) two out of those twelve several arts, meetings,
or faculties following (to wit) two out of the mercers, grocers, haberdashers,
ironmongers and salters, two out of the drapers and tailors, two out of the
skinners and glovers, two out of the tanners, two out of the weavers, two out
of the dyers and fullers, two out of the cordwainers, two out of the sadlers,
two out of the butchers, two out of the smiths, two out of the carpenters and
joiners, and two out of the free masons and rough masons, to be of the common
council of the said city.

That there are within the said city three other trades or mysteries, viz. the
goldsmiths, plumbers, pewterers, potters, glaziers, and painters, the curriers
and tallow chandlers, the barbers and ropers, who apprehend they have been
injured in their liberties and privileges as freemen of the said city, and are
desirous of being represented as a part of the collective body of the said
corporation, equally and in the same manner with the other twelve trades
abovementioned.

To the intent therefore that your petitioners (who are by much the greater
part of the freemen residing in or near the said city) and their successors
freemen of all the several companies and fraternities aforesaid, may be equally
and properly represented by two of the most able and discreet persons out of
each of the said companies or fraternities respectively, your petitioners, with
all humble submission and deference to your lordship, pray, that your lordship
will be pleased, in the framing of such new charter, to order and direct, that
such able and discreet persons as aforesaid may be annually elected and sent,
as well from each of the said three trades or mysteries last abovementioned,
as from the twelve trades in the said old charter named, who may be of the
common council of the said city, together and along with the said mayor and
aldermen for the time being: And that the right of electing such common
councilmen may be vested in the several companies from which they shall
respectively be sent; and which mode and right of electing the said common
council, your petitioners humbly hope, your lordship will not only approve of,
but grant, as being not only reasonable, but also consistent with and agreeable
to almost every other corporation charter in the kingdom.

And your petitioners further humbly hope and pray, that your lordship at the
time of granting such new charter will, according to your wonted and well-known
goodness, be pleased to appoint such persons to be the new mayor, aldermen, and
common councilmen as shall, by a majority of the said several companies and
fraternities at a general meeting of the same, be recommended to your lordship
as the most proper persons to fill such offices.

And that such further and other wholesome and salutary laws and ordinances may
in the said new charter be contained, as will have a manifest tendency to, and
promote within the said city, good rule and government, and a due
administration of public justice, and as to your lordship shall seem meet.

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, shall ever pray, etc.


. Under this predicament the city remained until the 2d of October 1780, when
the present bishop of Durham was graciously pleased to grant a new charter as
follows.

"John by the grace of God, bishop of Durham. Whereas the city of Durham in the
county palatine of Durham is, and for time whereof the memory of man is not to
the contrary, has been, an ancient city, and the burgesses, men and
inhabitants of the said city, together with the men and inhabitants of
Framwelgate near the said city in the county aforesaid, have had and enjoyed
diverse rights, liberties, jurisdictions, franchises and privileges, as well by
prescription as by reason of diverse charters, grants and confirmations, by
diverse of our predecessors bishops of Durham: And whereas our predecessor
TOBIAS, by the grace of God (formerly bishop of Durham) by his letters patent
under the seal of the said county palatine, bearing date the twenty-first day
of September, in the forty-fourth year of the reign of the lady Elizabeth, late
queen of England, and in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and two,
did will, ordain, constitute and grant for him and his successors, as much as
in him laid, that the burgesses, men and inhabitants of the said city of Durham
and Framwelgate, should be one body politic and incorporate, of a mayor, twelve
aldermen and commonalty, to endure for ever: And further, that the said
burgesses, men and inhabitants, for ever, should be one body politic and
corporate, in deed, fact and name, by the name of the mayor, aldermen and
commonalty of the city of Durham and Framwelgate; and did for himself and his
successors, really and fully, as much as in him lay, thereby erect, make,
ordain, constitute and create them one body corporate and politic, by the name
of the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the city of Durham and Framwelgate,
and did decree and declare them and their successors for ever to be
incorporated, united and established one body corporate and politic, by the
name of the mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of Durham and
Framwelgate, and did decree and declare them and their successors for ever to
be incorporated, united and established one body, and that they should be for
ever named and called the mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of Durham
and Framwelgate, and by that name have perpetual succession, and should be for
all future times persons able and capable in law, and that by the same name
they might plead and be impleaded, and under the aforesaid name might
prosecute, defend or answer in and for all and all manner of causes,
complaints, actions and suits, real, personal and mixed, of what nature or kind
soever, before whatsoever judges, as well spiritual as temporal, in all courts
of him and his successors within the county palatine of Durham and Sadberge,
and as much as in him laid elsewhere in all other courts and places whatsoever:
And that the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of Durham and
Framwelgate, and the successors of them, should be able and capable in law to
purchase and receive lands, tenements, annuities, rents, services, advowsons,
patronage of churches, emoluments, possessions and hereditaments; and also all
goods and chattels whatsoever, as well spiritual as temporal, of any person or
persons whomsoever, who would give, grant, leave, sell or assign the same unto
them, so that the said lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises by them to
be taken and purchased, should not exceed the yearly value of one hundred
marks; to hold to them and their successors according to the states and forms
of the same gifts, grants, bequests, sales, and purchases, without the
molestation or disturbance of him or his successors, or of his or their
officers or ministers whatsoever, saving always to the said late bishop and his
successors, all fines, forfeitures, and royal rights, by or by reason of the
same gifts, bequests, sales, or purchases, howsoever arising and happening to
him and his successors, due and of right accustomed.

And that the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of Durham and
Framwelgate, should have one common seal to seal all and singular writings,
charters, and instruments, any way touching or concerning them the mayor,
aldermen and commonalty and their successors, or their lands, tenements,
hereditaments, goods, chattels, or public affairs.

And for the better execution of the premises, he did thereby assign, make,
constitute and name Hugh Wright, one of the burgesses and inhabitants within
the aforesaid city of Durham, to be the first and modern mayor of the said city
of Durham and Framwelgate, and afterward to be one of the aldermen of the said
city of Durham and Framwelgate; and did also thereby assign, name and
constitute, for him and his successors, twelve other burgesses and inhabitants
within the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, in the said charter or letters
patent named, to be aldermen of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate.

And did thereby also will and grant, that the mayor and aldermen of the said
city of Durham and Framwelgate, and their successors for the time being for
ever, should yearly choose and name twenty-four other discreet men out of the
twelve several arts, mysteries, or faculties, and in the manner therein
mentioned, who should be resident, commorant, and inhabitant within the said
city of Durham and Framwelgate: And that the mayor, aldermen, and twenty-four
other discreet men of the said city, should be the common council of the said
city of Durham and Framwelgate: And by the said letters patent, did give and
grant powers to choose future mayors, aldermen and common council, together with
diverse other powers, liberties, privileges, franchises, immunities, and
jurisdictions.

And whereas it appears to us, that by several disputes, events and accidents,
no mayor, aldermen, or twenty-four, so to be elected as aforesaid, can in
future be elected, under or by virtue of the powers and authorities given and
granted by the said letters patent or otherwise; and the said corporation of
the said city of Durham and Framwelgate is incapable of doing any corporate
act, and is dissolved, or in great danger of being dissolved.

And whereas diverse of the burgesses of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, as well on the behalf of themselves, as all other the burgesses
thereof, have most humbly besought us to show and extend our grace and favor
to the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, and that it would please us to
revive the said corporation, and to restore to them their ancient franchises,
privileges and immunities, by granting them a new charter of incorporation,
with such powers and authorities as we should think proper, and with provisions
to prevent, as far as may be, diverse inconveniences and dangers, which the said
corporation, from the form of the said charter or letters patent of the said
late bishop of Durham, were exposed to; and we being willing to give relief in
the premises, as far as in us lies, KNOW YE THEREFORE Extracts from the
report of James Wallace, esquire the bishop's attorney general, dated 7th Aug. 1773.
The title of some of the aldermen was disputed upon the grounds of their not
being inhabitants within Durham or Framwelgate at the time of their elections,
which is a qualification required by the charter, and had been disregarded in
the election of aldermen in a variety of instances at different periods.
Informations in the nature of quo warranto were filed in the court of King's
Bench at Westminster, against the earl of Darlington, the hon. Frederick Vane,
John Tempest, esquire Ra. Bowser, and John Hopper, who were removed from their
office of aldermen either by judgment of ouster or disclaimer, and the hon.
Gilbert Vane resigned his office.

The election of the common council on the 3d of Oct. 1766, was attended with
disorder and confusion, and mistakes and irregularities were then committed in
the choice of some of them, which in their consequences affected the title of
Mr John Lamb in the office of mayor, to which he was elected the day
following; and on an information in the nature of quo warranto, judgment was
obtained against him for exercising the office of mayor under that election,
and from that time there has not been any legal mayor.

By the means before stated, and by the natural deaths of Mr Tho. Hornsby and
Mr Jos. Gray, the aldermen are reduced to four, namely, Mr Tho. Dunn residing
in Elvet, Mr Tho. Bainbridge residing in Stockton, Mr John Drake Bainbridge
residing at Durham, Mr Benj. Whitaker residing in America and not likely to
return, and who before his departure signified his intention to resign his
office of alderman.

In this situation, the powers and authorities vested in the corporation are
suspended; and as the charter made a greater number of aldermen than at present
exist essential to the election of a mayor and aldermen, I conceive it is
impossible for the corporation to preserve or continue itself by the operation
of the stat. of 11th Geo. I. or by any other means.

The expediency of a charter to revive the corporation, is admitted by the
petitioners, and cannot be denied or doubted. The members of the corporation,
and those entitled to the privileges and advantages of it, are not the only
persons interested: many charities are in the disposal of the corporation, the
objects of which t^o sensibly find the benevolent designs of the founders
prevented and frustrated. There are besides, public reasons, which render a new
charter immediately necessary.

I conceive your lordship is possessed of jura regalia within the county
palatine of Durham, subject to the prohibitions and restrictions contained in
the stat. of 27th Hen. VIII. chapter 24. and that the sole power of granting a new
charter to the city of Durham and Framwelgate is vested in your lordship.

It appears to me, that the old charter should be the basis of the new one, and
to be departed from in those particular provisions only, which have in
experience been found, or probably may be inconvenient to the corporation.

By the old charter, the residence of an alderman within the city of Durham at
the time of his election, is an indispensible qualification, etc. If the
circuit of the city of Durham and Framwelgate shall not be sufficient for the
supply of proper persons to fill the office of aldermen, your lordship may in
the new charter enlarge the bounds, 1 Strange, 177. -- That the king by letters
patent may enlarge the boundaries of a city.
The ceremony of granting the charter at Durham-castle 2d Oct. 1780.
The members of the new corporation being assembled in the breakfast room, were
introduced by his lordship's secretary -- The several petitions were presented,
and the solicitor delivered the draft of the new charter, approved by the
bishop's attorney general -- The exemplification, laid on a velvet cushion, was
signed and sealed; then delivered to the mayor by the bishop, wishing
prosperity to the new corporation; the mayor received it on bended knee -- The
corporation thus created, the mayor, aldermen, recorder, and town clerk put on
their gowns, and the mayor kneeling took the oath, after him the aldermen, etc.
and the bishop attested the entry of the oaths in the corporation book -- The
corporation, etc. were then regaled, the freemen were entertained in the great
hall, the fountains in the great court ran with liquor for the populace -- The
mayor delivered the charter to the recorder, and he to the town clerk, when
they moved in proce^^on; the constables, wardens of the companies, the flags
and banners of the companies, city music, drums, sergeants at mace, the
town-clerk's clerk with the corporation book, etc. the town clerk bearing the
charter on a velvet cushion, on his left the secretary with the petitions, on
his right the solicitor with the draft of the charter; the mayor, the recorder,
aldermen two and two, inferior officers, etc. -- Having arrived at the
town hall amidst the acclamations of the people, the mayor received the
charter, and in a short speech congratulated the citizens, who answered with
repeated huzzas -- The secretary then addressed the citizens, expressing his
lordship's joy in restoring to them their ancient franchises and privileges,
which was received with loud acclamations; after which, the charter was read
aloud, and the recorder made a short oration on the duty of the citizen, which
was received with the like expressions of popular applause. After the members
of the corporation had signed the book and deposited the charter, the rest of
the day was devoted to ^estivity and rejo^cing.


or provide that a certain number of aldermen shall be inhabitants, etc.


that we of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have willed,
granted, ordained, constituted, confirmed and declared, and by these presents
do, for us and our successors, as far as in us lies, will, grant, ordain,
constitute, confirm and declare,

That the burgesses, men and inhabitants of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, by whatsoever name or names of incorporation they have heretofore
been incorporated, may, and shall for ever be, one body corporate and politic,
of a mayor, twelve aldermen and commonalty: And the said burgesses for ever
hereafter may and shall be one body corporate and politic, in deed, fact and
name, by the name of the mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of Durham
and Framwelgate.

And we also by these presents for us and our successors, as much as in us
lies, really and fully erect, make, ordain, create, constitute, confirm and
declare them to be one body corporate and politic, in deed, fact and name, by
the name of mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of Durham and
Framwelgate, and that by the same name they shall have perpetual succession;
and that they, by the name of mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of
Durham and Framwelgate, may and shall be at all times hereafter persons able
and capable in law to have, purchase, receive, and possess lands, tenements,
annuities, rents, services, advowsons, patronage of churches, emoluments,
possessions and hereditaments, and also goods and chattels, as well spiritual
as temporal, from whatever person or persons who will give, grant, bequeath,
sell or assign unto them, so that the said lands, tenements, hereditaments and
premises by them to be taken or acquired, do not exceed the annual value of
one hundred marks: To hold to them and their successors, according to the
condition and form of such gift, bequest, sale, or acquisitions, without the
molestation or interruption of us or our successors, or any of our officers or
ministers whatsoever; saving always to us and our successors, all fines,
forfeitures, royalties and rights, which by reason of such gifts, bequests,
sales or acquisitions, shall be issuing or happening to us and our successors,
due and of right accustomed: And also to give, grant, release, assign and
dispose of lands, tenements, and hereditaments, goods and chattels, and to do
and execute all other acts and things by the name aforesaid.

And that they by the same name of the mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the
city of Durham and Framwelgate, may, and shall be able to plead and be
impleaded, and to prosecute, defend or answer, as well in the several courts
within the county palatine of Durham and Sadberge, as in all other courts and
places, and before whatever judges, justices, and other officers, as well
spiritual as temporal, in all causes, complaints, actions and suits, real,
personal and mixed, of whatsoever nature, kind or sort.

And that they the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city of
Durham and Framwelgate, and their successors, may and shall for ever hereafter
have a common seal, wherewith shall be sealed all and singular writings,
charters and instruments, in any manner touching or concerning them the said
mayor, aldermen and commonalty and their successors, or their lands, tenements,
hereditaments, goods, chattels, or public affairs: And that it shall and may be
lawful for the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty and their successors, from
time to time, at their pleasure, to break, alter and renew The corporation have
not had a new seal cut in pursuance of their new charter, but in all corporate
acts use the old seal, as depicted in the next page.
the said seal, as to them shall seem meet and expedient.

And we do further will, and by these presents for us and our successors grant,
that for ever hereafter, one of the most honest and discreet aldermen of the
said city of Durham and Framwelgate, to be nominated and elected in the manner
hereafter in these presents mentioned, shall be, and shall be called the mayor
of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, and that in like manner there shall
and may be twelve other honest and discreet burgesses, to be elected in the
manner hereafter in these presents mentioned, besides the mayor of the city
aforesaid for the time being, who shall be, and shall be called aldermen of the
said city of Durham and Framwelgate; and that there shall and may be hereafter
a common council of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, to consist of the
mayor and aldermen of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, for the time
being, and twenty-four other persons, to be elected in the manner hereinafter
in these presents mentioned; and for the better execution of our will and grant
in this behalf, we have appointed, named, created, constituted and made, and by
these presents for us and our successors, do appoint, name, create, constitute
and make, our trusty and well-beloved John Drake Bainbridge MAYORS of the City
of DURHAM.
First mayor, Hugh Wright, ap. by bishop Tobias 21st Sept. 1602 James Farrales
elected 4th Oct. 1602 Edw. Wanles, dyer 1603 Tho. Pearson 1604
[An order was made on the 4th of Oct. concerning such persons as were then
^cted with the plague within the ci^ and borough.]

Wm Hall, draper 1605 Robt Suerties, mercer 1606 Hugh Hutchinson, tanner 1607
John Pattinson, mercer 1608 Edw. Wanles, dyer 1609 Hugh Wright, gent. 27th Feb.
1611 1610 Wm Hall, 14th Aug. 1612, called to account 1611 1612 1613 1614 1615
1616 Geo. Walton 1617
[The market cross was erected this year at the expense of Tho. Emerson, of
Black-Friars, London. And on the 18th of April, K. James came in state to the
city; and was received by the mayor, who made an elegant speech on the
occasion, and presented his majesty with a gold cup: At the same time on
apprentice spoke some verses before the king.]

Wm Hall, oc. 30th Aug. 1619 1618 Wm Hall, oc. again 10th April, 1620 1619 Tim.
Common, oc. 17th Sept. 1721 1620
[In his mayoralty, a petition was presented for the city sending two burgesses
to parliament.]

Nich. Whitfield, oc. 14th Sept. 1622 1621 Wm Hall, oc. 12th Jan. 1622 1622
Hugh Wright, oc. 12th March 1623 1624 John Heighington 1625 John Lambtoune 1626
An entry is made in the corporation books of this year, that a large silver
seal was given to the corporation in 1606, by Matthew Pattisonne, the son of a
burgess, whereof the following is a fac simile: S COMVNE CIVITAT DVNELMIE
seal

Wm Philipson, esquire oc. 12th Sept. 1628 1627 John Pattison, 4th Oct. 1628 Rich.
Whitfield, oc. 27th Oct. and 18th Dec. 1628 John Heighington 1629 Nich.
Whitfield (died soon after) 1630 Wm Hall suc. Whitfield, and oc. 11th Sept.
1632 1631 Hugh Wright 1632 Hugh Walton 1633 Hugh Walton again. His acct. 19th
Jan. 1635 1634 Ra. Allison, oc. 19th Jan. 1635 1635 John Heighington, 4th Oct.
1636 John Heighington again 1637 Tho. Cook, 4th Oct. 1638. Tho. Mann, 28 Jan.
1638 Hugh Walton, 4th Oct. 1639 Hugh Walton again 1640 Chr. Cookson, Oct. 1641
Ra. Allison 1642 1643 John Hall 1644 1645 John Hall 1646 1647 John Airson,
mercer, 4th Oct. 1648 John Airson again 1649 John Hall, draper 1650 John Hall
again 1651 John Walton, mercer 1652 Anth. Dale, 24th April 1654 1653 John
Airson, mercer 1654 Anth. Bayles, esquire 1655 John Hall, draper, oc. 10th Oct.
1656 Hen. Rowell, mercer, oc. Dec. Anth. Smith 1657 Rich. Lee 1658 -- Rowell
1659 Anth. Dale, 4th Oct. 1660 1661 Stephen Thompson 1662 Matt. Bailes, oc.
18th Feb. 1663 1664 John Stokeld 1665 Tho. Mascall, oc. 18th Dec. 1666 Hen.
Wanles, dyer, oc. 3d Feb. 1667 1668 1669 1670 Geo. Hodgson 1671 1672 Stephen
Thompson, oc. 28th Apr. 1674 1673
[This year an act passed for the city to send burgesses to parliament.]

John Hall, oc. 18th Nov. 1674 1674 1675 John Morland, esquire oc. 25th Sept. 1677
1676 Tho. Stokeld, esquire oc. 13th and 28th Sept. 1678 1677 Wm Blakiston, esquire oc.
19th Oct. 1678 1678 Cuth. Hutchinson, 17th Sept. 1679 John Duck, esquire oc. 1st
Nov. 1680 John Hutchinson, oc. 26th Oct. 1681 1682 John Hutchinson, oc. 24th
Apr. 1684 1683 Marmaduke Allison, 15th Sept. 1685 1684 Again 21st Apr. 1686
1685 Robt Delaval, esquire 23d Nov. 1686 1687 Robt Delaval 1688 1689 Geo. Morland,
mercer, 29th July 1690 Wm Greveson, 4th Oct. 1691 Wheatley Dobson, grocer 1692
Wheatley Dobson again 1693 Wm Hodgson 1694 John Gordon 1695 Wheatley Dobson
1696 Wheatley Dobson re-elected 1697 Cuth. Hutchinson, esquire School Edw. Fairless
1699 Anth. Hall 1700 Geo. Tweddle 1701 Cuth. Hutchinson 1702 Edw. Fairless 1703
Ra. Paxton 1704 Anth. Hall 1705 Ra. Paxton 1706 John Gray 1707 Rich. Mascall
1708 Ra. Bainbridge 1709 Anth. Hall 1710 Fran. Cornsorth 1711 Mich. Brabin 1712
Rich. Mascall 1713 John Hutchinson 1714 Mich. Brabin 1714 John Gray 1715 Fran.
Cornsorth 1716 Ra. Bainbridge 1717 Mich. Brabin 1718 Robt Smith 1719 Giles Rain
1720 Hen. Forster 1721 John Gray 1722 Fran. Cornsorth 1723 Ra. Bainbridge 1724
Mich. Brabin 1725 Robt Smith 1726 Giles Rain 1727 Hen. Forster 1728 Robt
Wharton 1729 Geo. Dale 1730 John Lamb 1731 Geo. Bows 1732 Robt Smith 1733 Hen.
Forster 1734 John Gray 1735 Robt Wharton 1736 Geo. Dale 1737 Geo. Bows 1738
John Aisley 1739 Cuth. Bainbridge 1740 Tho. Dunn 1741 Wm Forster 1742 Tho.
Bainbridge 1743 Hilton Shaw 1744 Tho. Hornsby 1745 Cuth. Bainbridge 1746 Tho.
Dunn 1747 Wm Forster 1748 Tho. Bainbridge 1749 Tho. Hornsby 1750 Jos. Gray 1751
Sir Robt Eden, bart. 1752 Geo. Bows, esquire 1753 John Richardson 1754 Earl of
Darlington 1755 John Lamb 1756 Lord Barnard 1757 Cuth. Smith 1758 Cuth.
Bainbridge 1759 Rich. Wharton 1760 John Drake Bainbridge 1761 Tho. Hornsby 1762
Jos. Gray 1763 John Hopper 1764 Ra. Bowser 1765 John Lamb 1766 John Drake
Bainbridge 1767 Tho. Hornsby 1768 John Lamb 1769 John Drake Bainbridge 1770
[1780, 2d Oct. the new charter granted by bishop Egerton.]

John Drake Bainbridge 1780 Ra. Bowser 1781 Rich. Shuttleworth 1782 Wm Kirton
1783 Tho. Dunn 1784 Wm Kirton 1785 John Starforth 1786
MEMBERS of PARLIAMENT for the City were called at the same time with those for
the County of Durham, viz.

Oliver Cromwell, usurper.

3d Sept. 1654. -- Anth. Smith, mercer. Buried in St Nicholas' church 13th Mar.
1682. -- P. Reg.

17th Sept. 1656 -- Anth. Smith. He with Capt. Tho. Lilburn, knt. for the
county, and some others, (members) were kinglings, or voted that the crown and
title of king should be offered to Oliv. Cromwell.

Richard Cromwell, usurper.

27th Jan. 1658. -- No burgesses for the city of Durham were summoned to this
parliament.

Charles II.

1675. 27th parl. at Westminster. -- Ra. Cole, of Brancepeth-castle, bart. and John
Parkhurst, of Catesby, in Northamptonshire, esquire Elected March 27, 1675.

Candidates. No polled. Ra. Cole, of Brancepeth-castle, bart. 408 John
Parkhurst, of Catesby, esquire 379 Wm Tempest, of Old Durham, esquire 391 John Turner,
sergeant at law 187 Wm Christian, esquire 171

N. B. Upon a scrutiny it was found that twelve of Mr Tempest's votes were not
freemen, and that three of his voters had polled twice over.

The single number of freemen that voted at the above election was 838, viz.
Mercers and grocers 53 Drapers, tailors 94 Skinners, glovers 89 Tanners 40
Weavers 72 Dyers, sullers 33 Cordwainers 100 Sadlers 25 Butchers 67 Smiths 43
Carpenters, joiners, and coopers 78 Masons 62 Goldsmiths 22 Curriers, chandlers
21 Barbers, robers 25 Cutlers 4 Feltmakers 10 Plumbers, glaziers Potters,
painters, and braziers In all 838


1678. -- Wm Tempest, of Old Durham, esquire and Ra. Cole, of Brancepeth-castle,
bart. Elected 20th Feb. 1678.

Candidates. No polled. Wm Tempest, esquire 571 Ra. Cole, bart. 515 Wm Blakiston,
esquire mayor of Durham 436

1679. -- Wm Blakiston, esquire mayor of Durham, and Rich. Lloyd. Elected 10th
Sept. 1679.

Candidates. No polled. Wm Blakiston, esquire 514 Rich. Lloyd 506 Wm Tempest, of
Old Durham, esquire 504

1680. -- Rich. Lloyd, and Wm Tempest, of Old Durham, esquire Elected 10th Feb.
1680, sans poll.

James II.

1685. 1st parl. at Westminster. -- Rich. Lloyd, and Cha. Montague. Elected 12th
March, 1684, sans poll.

1688. -- Geo. Morland, and Hen. Liddell. Elected 18th Dec. 1688.

Candidates. No polled. Geo. Morland 599 Hen. Liddell 407 Wm Tempest, of Old
Durham, esquire 278

1688. -- Wm Tempest, of Old Durham, esquire and Geo. Morland. Elected 3d Mar.
1688, sans poll.

William III.

1695. 7th parl. at Westminster. -- Cha. Montague, and Hen. Liddell. Elected 30th
Oct. 1695, sans poll.

School, 24th Aug. 10th parl. at Westminster. -- Cha. Montague, and Tho. Conyers.
Elected 28th July, School.

Candidates. No polled. Cha. Montague 637 Tho. Conyers 424 Hen. Liddell 408

1700, 10th Feb. 12th parl. at Westminster. -- Cha. Montague, and Tho. Conyers.

1701, 30th Dec. 13th parl. at Westminster. -- Cha. Montague, and Hen. Bellasis, of
Brancepeth-castle, knt.

Queen Anne.

1702, 20th Aug. 1st parl. at Westminster. -- Hen. Bellasis, of Brancepeth-castle,
knt. and Tho. Conyers.

1705, 14th Jan. 4th parl. at Westminster. -- Hen. Bellasis, of Brancepeth-castle,
knt. and Tho. Conyers.

1708, 18th Nov. 7th parl. at Westminster. -- Thomas Conyers, and James Nicholson.
Both voted for the impeachment of Dr Hen. Sacheverel.

1710, 25th Nov. 9th parl. at Westminster. -- Tho. Conyers, and Hen. Bellasis. -- The
number of votes exceeded 1000.

Candidates. Thomas Conyers, -- Henry Bellasis, -- James Nicholson.

Bellasis was appointed a commissioner in Spain, and a new writ was ordered
15th Feb. 1712.

Robt Shafto, of Whitworth, esquire elected.

Candidates. Robt Shafto, -- Anth. Hall, alderman of Durham.

1713, 12th Nov. 12th parl. at Westminster. -- Tho. Conyers, and Geo. Baker, of
Crook, esquire

George I.

1714, 17th Mar. 1st parl. at Westminster. -- Tho. Conyers, and Geo. Baker, of Crook,
esquire

Mr Baker died at Bristol 1st June, and was buried in Lanchester church 12th
June, 1723.

1722, 10th May, 7th parl. at Westminster. -- Tho. Conyers, and Cha. Talbot. Elected
27th Mar. 1722.

Candidates. No polled. Cha. Talbot 860 Tho. Conyers 654 James Montague 563

Mr Talbot, the son of Wm Talbot bishop of Durham, 23d Apr. was made the king's
solicitor-general, and a new writ ordered 23d Apr. 1726. He was re-chosen 2d
May, 1726, sans poll.

George II.

1727. -- Cha. Talbot, and Robt Shafto, of Whitworth, esquire

Mr Shafto dying in 1729, a new writ was ordered 15th Jan. 1729.

John Shafto, of Whitworth, esquire was elected 29th Jan. 1729.

Candidates. No polled. John Shafto, esquire 577 Hen Lambton, of Lambton-hall, esquire
553 -- Cradock 2 Tho. Hanmer, bart. 1

The election continued four days, viz. 26th, 27th, 28th, and 29th January.

Cha. Talbot, esquire being appointed lord chancellor 29th Nov. 1733, and 5th Dec.
following created baron Talbot of Hensol, -- a new writ was ordered.

Hen. Lambton, of Lambton-hall, esquire was elected 29th April, 1734.

1741, 14th parl. at Westminster -- John Shafto, of Whitworth, esquire and Hen. Lambton,
of Lambton-hall, esquire Elected 8th May, 1741, sans poll.

Mr Shafto dying at London 3d April, 1742, John Tempest, of Winyard, esquire was
elected 23d April, 1712.

1747, 21st parliam. at Westminster. -- Hen. Lambton, of Lambton-hall, esquire and John
Tempest, of Winyard, esquire Elected 30th June, 1747.

Candidates. No polled. Hen. Lambton, esquire 737 John Tempest, esquire 581 Robt
Wharton, esquire ald. of Durham 538

The election continued two days, viz. 29th and 30th of Jan. 1747.

17^^, 27th parliam. at Westminster. -- Hen. Lambton, of Lambton-hall, esquire and John
Tempest, of Winyard, esquire Elected 15th April, 1754, sans poll.

George III.

1761, 1 parl. at Westminster. -- John Tempest, of Win^ard, esquire and Hen. Lambton, of
Lambton-hall, esquire Elected 6th April, 1761.

Candidates. No polled. John Tempest, esquire 705 Hen. Lambton, esquire 546 Ra.
Gowland, of Durham, esquire 526

Number of voters 1050. Increase of freemen since 1675, 212 in 86 years.

The election lasted three days, viz. 30th and 31st Mar. and 1st Apr. 1761. --
A scrutiny was demanded by Mr Gowland, and granted by Mr Rich Wharton, mayor;
but on Monday (6th Apr.) Mr Gowland declined the scrutiny.

Mr Lambton died suddenly in his chariot 26th June, 1761.

Ralph Gowland, of Durham, esquire was elected 12th Dec. 1761.

Candidates. No polled. Ra. Gowland, esquire 775 Major Genesis John Lambton, of
Harraton, esquire 752

The election continued six days, viz. 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th Dec.
1761.

The mayor of Durham, with the majority of the aldermen, having displaced
sixteen common-councilmen, and named others of inferior fortunes, the
corporation repealed the bye-laws made in 1728 (p. 33) and made a new one,
under the sanction whereof the mayor, etc. at several times swore 215
occasional freemen, who were fetched out of Yorkshire, Westmorland, Cumberland,
Northumberland, and the county of Durham, in order to serve Mr Gowland, then
major of the Durham militia. At the close of the poll, the numbers stood, for
Mr Gowland (with the 215) 775; for Mr Lambton 752 -- Mr Gowland's majority 23,
his legal voters 560. On Mr Lambton's petition, Mr Gowland was ousted of his
seat, and in 1775 was elected for Cockermouth (see p. 36.) The number of legal
freemen who then voted was 1312.

1768, 8th parl. at West. -- Major Genesis John Lambton, of Harraton, esquire and John
Tempest the younger, of Winyard, esquire Elected 21st Mar. 1768, sans poll.

1771. -- Major Gen John Lambton, and John Tempest the younger. Elected 14th
Oct. 1774.

Candidates. No polled. John Tempest, esquire 369 Genesis Lambton 325 Mark Milbanke,
esquire 248

The election continued four days, viz. 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th Oct 1774.

1780. -- Major Genesis John Lambton, esquire and John Tempest, esquire Elected.

1784. -- The same gentlemen elected again.


to be the first and modern mayor of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate,
willing, that the said John Drake Bainbridge may and shall be, and shall
continue in the office of mayor of the said city from the date of these
presents, until Monday next after the feast of St Michael the archangel now
next ensuing, and from thence until one other of the aldermen of the said city
shall be in due manner elected and sworn into that office, if the said John
Drake Bainbridge shall so long live.

We have also appointed, named, elected, constituted and made, and by these
presents for us and our successors, do appoint, name, create, constitute and
make the said John Drake Bainbridge, and our trusty and well-beloved Thomas
Bainbridge, Ralph Bowser, Joseph Airey, Richard Shuttleworth, John Hall, John
Lowther, William Kirton, John Starforth, Thomas Dunn, Christopher Hopper, John
Potts, and William Archer, to be the first and modern aldermen of the city of
Durham and Framwelgate, to continue in the same office during their natural
lives, unless in the mean time they or any or either of them for misgovernment
or misbehaviour therein, or for any other reasonable cause, shall be amoved
from their said offices.

WE ALSO will, ordain and constitute, and for us and our successors by these
presents grant to the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city of
Durham and Framwelgate, and their successors, as far as in us lies, that the
mayor and aldermen of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, or the major
part of them (of whom the mayor for the time being shall be one) shall and may,
as soon as conveniently may be after the date of these presents, meet and
assemble together in the Guildhall or Tollbooth of the said city, or in any
other convenient place within the said city; and being so assembled, shall and
do then nominate and elect twenty-four other persons of the most discreet and
honest men residing and inhabiting within the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, that is to say, two of each of the separate arts, mysteries, and
faculties following, to wit, two out of the mercers, grocers, haberdashers,
ironmongers, and salters -- two out of the drapers and tailors -- two out of
the skinners and glovers -- two out of the tanners -- two out of the weavers --
two out of the fullers and dyers -- two out of the cordwainers -- two out of
the sadlers -- two out of the butchers -- two out of the smiths -- two out of
the carpenters and joiners -- and two out of the free masons and rough masons,
residing and inhabiting within the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, or
within the several parishes of St Nicholas, St Mary-le-bow, and St Mary the
Less, or the extra parochial places of or belonging to the castle of Durham,
and the college or cathedral church of Durham, or the parochial chapelry of St
Margaret, the borough of Framwelgate, or the several parishes of St Oswald and
St Giles This extension is an exercise of the ^ra regalia. -- See 1 Strange's
Reports, 1^7.
, near the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, in the said county palatine of
Durham; which said mayor, aldermen, and twenty-four discreet and honest men of
the trades, arts or mysteries aforesaid, shall be the common council of the
said city of Durham and Framwelgate; and the said twenty-four so named and
elected shall continue in the same offices until the second Monday next after
the feast of St Michael the archangel then next ensuing, if they shall so long
live, unless they or any of them in the mean time, for misgovernment or
misbehaviour therein, or other reasonable causes, shall be removed from their
said offices.

AND we further will, and do by these presents for us and our successors grant,
to the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, and their successors, that the mayor, aldermen and twenty-four
other persons to be elected in the manner herein mentioned, to be of the common
council of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate for the time being, or the
major part of them, (of whom the mayor for the time being we will shall be one)
from time to time and at all times hereafter, yearly and every year, on the
Monday next after the feast of St Michael the archangel, shall and may meet and
assemble in the Guildhall or Tollbooth of the said city, or in any other
convenient place within the said city; and being so assembled, shall and may
nominate and elect one of the aldermen of the city of Durham and Framwelgate
aforesaid, residing and inhabiting within the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, or within the said several parishes of St Nicholas, St
Mary-le-Bow, and St Mary the Less, or the extra parochial places of or
belonging to the castle of Durham, and the college or cathedral church of
Durham, or the parochial chapelry of St Margaret, the borough of Framwelgate,
or the several parishes of St Oswald and St Giles near the said city of Durham
and Framwelgate, in the said county palatine of Durham, to be mayor of the said
city of Durham and Fram. for one whole year then next following, that is to
say, until Monday next after the feast day of St Michael the archangel then
next ensuing; and that he in manner aforesaid elected and named to be mayor of
the said city, before he be admitted to the execution of that office, shall
take his corporal oath before us or our successors bishops of Durham for the
time being, but if we or our successors shall be absent from the said county
palatine, then before the chancellor of the said county palatine for the time
being, and in case of his absence from the said county palatine, or in case the
episcopal See of Durham shall be vacant, then before his last predecessor in
the office of mayor of the said city, for the due execution of his office,
according to the tenor following, that is to say, I shall truth and faith bear
to our sovereign lord the king's majesty, his heirs and successors kings and
queens of England, and to the lord bishop of Durham and his successors bishops
of Durham, and all such acts and orders as I shall consent and agree unto to be
made, shall be for the commonwealth of the city of Durham and Framwelgate; and
shall at no time or times hereafter go about to make any private orders against
the privileges of the bishop of Durham, nor for the only profit of myself, nor
of any other private person or persons; or consent or agree unto the same: And
also, I shall at all and every time and times hereafter, go about by word, will
and consent, well and truly to execute every point, article and agreement
contained in this corporation, to the mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the
said city of Durham and Framwelgate granted, to my power, and I shall keep my
lords council, my fellows and my own, so help me God, and by the contents of
this book. And after he shall have so taken the said oath, he shall hold the
said office of mayor of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, until Monday
next after the feast of St Michael the archangel then next following, and from
thence until another of the aldermen of the said city shall in due manner and
form aforesaid be elected and sworn into the office of mayor of the said city
of Durham and Framwelgate, unless he shall in the mean time be removed from
that office for misgovernment or misbehaviour therein, or of or for any other
reasonable cause.

And further we will, and do by these presents for us and our successors grant
to the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate and their successors, that if it shall happen that the said John
Drake Bainbridge or any future mayor of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, shall die or be removed from the office of mayor of the said city,
at any time before Monday next after the feast of St Michael the archangel,
next after he shall be elected and sworn into the office of mayor of the said
city of Durham and Framwelgate, (and which said John Drake Bainbridge and every
future mayor of the said city, we will shall be removeable from his said office
for misgovernment or misbehaviour therein, or any other reasonable cause, by
the aldermen and twenty-four so elected of the common council of the said city,
or the major part of them, of whom we will that seven of the aldermen of the
said city shall be seven) that then and so often it shall and may be lawful for
the aldermen and twenty-four elected of the common council of the said city of
Durham and Framwelgate for the time being, or the major part of them, (of whom
we will that three of the aldermen of the said city be three) within twenty
days after such death or removal, to assemble in the Guildhall or Tollbooth of
the said city, or in any other convenient place within the said city, and that
they, or the major part of them then and there assembled, shall nominate and
elect one other of the aldermen of the said city (residing and inhabiting
within the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, or within the several parishes
of St Nicholas, St Mary-le-bow, and St Mary the Less, or the extra parochial
places of or belonging to the castle of Durham and the college and cathedral
church of Durham, the parochial chapelry of St Margaret, the borough of
Framwelgate, or the several parishes of St Oswald and St Giles, near the said
city of Durham and Framwelgate, for the time being) to be mayor of the said
city, for the remainder of the year; and that the person so elected to the
office of mayor of the said city, before he be admitted to execute the said
office, shall take his corporal oath to the purport or effect herein before
mentioned, before us and our successors bishops of Durham; or in case of our
absence, before the chancellor of the said county, or in case of his absence,
or the vacancy of the said See, then before two of the aldermen of the said
city; and having taken the said oath, he shall hold the said office until
Monday next after the feast of St Michael the archangel then next following,
and from thence until another alderman of the said city shall be elected and
sworn into the said office, if he shall so long live; unless in the mean time
he shall be removed from his office, for misgovernment or misbehaviour therein,
or other reasonable cause.

And we further will, and by these presents for us and our successors grant, to
the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city of Durham and Framwelgate
and their successors, that the mayor and aldermen of the said city for the time
being, or the major part of them, (of whom the mayor for the time being we will
shall be one) shall and may from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
yearly and every year, on the second Monday next after the feast of St Michael
the archangel, (that is to say) on the Monday next after the day by these
presents appointed for the election of a mayor of the said city, to nominate
and elect twenty-four of the most discreet and honest men, inhabiting and
residing within the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, (that is to say) two
out of each of the twelve several arts, mysteries or faculties following, (to
wit) two out of the mercers, grocers, haberdashers, ironmongers and salters;
two out of the drapers and tailors, two out of the skinners and glovers, two
out of the tanners, two out of the weavers, two out of the dyers and fullers,
two out of the cordwainers, two out of the sadlers, two out of the butchers,
two out of the smiths, two out of the carpenters and joiners, and two out of
the free-masons and rough-masons, residing and inhabiting within the said city
of Durham and Framwelgate, or within the several parishes of St Nicholas, St
Mary-le-Bow and St Mary the Less, or the extra parochial places of or belonging
to the castle of Durham, and the college or cathedral church of Durham, or the
parochial chapelry of St Margaret, the borough of Framwelgate, or the said
several parishes of St Oswald and St Giles, near the city of Durham and
Framwelgate, for one whole year, (that is to say) until the second Monday after
the feast of St Michael the archangel then next following; and that every
person elected and named to be of the common council of the said city, before
he be admitted to the execution of that office, shall take his corporal oath
upon the holy evangelists, before the mayor, or in his absence before four of
the aldermen of the said city for the time being, well and faithfully to
execute their office in all things relating thereto; and that after having
taken such oath, he shall and may execute the said office for one year, (that
is to say) until the second Monday after the said feast of St Michael the
archangel then next following, unless he shall in the mean time be removed from
his said office, for misgovernment or misbehaviour, or other reasonable cause.

Provided always, and our will is, that in case there shall not be a sufficient
number of arts, mysteries, or faculties aforesaid, residing and inhabiting as
aforesaid, out of which two can be elected according to the directions
aforesaid, that then and so often as the case shall happen, the said mayor and
aldermen, or the major part of them, shall and may nominate and elect so many
out of the other arts, mysteries, or faculties, or any of them, residing and
inhabiting as aforesaid, as will make up the number 24; and may supply the
same, in case of the death or removal of any of the twenty-four, in the same
manner; which said mayor, aldermen and twenty-four, elected to be of the common
council of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, shall in all time to come
be the common council of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate.

And whenever it shall happen, that any of the aldermen of the said city of
Durham and Framwelgate for the time being, shall die or be removed from his or
their office or offices, for misgovernment or misbehaviour therein, or any
other reasonable cause, by the mayor, aldermen and twenty-four so elected of
the common council as aforesaid, or the major part of them, (of whom we will
the mayor shall be one) that then and so often, it shall and may be lawful for
the mayor and rest of the aldermen and twenty-four so elected of the common
council of the said city for the time being, or the major part of them, (of
whom the mayor for the time being shall be one) within twenty days next after
such death or amotion, to nominate or elect one or more burgess or burgesses of
the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, dwelling and inhabiting within the
said city of Durham and Framwelgate, or within the several parishes of St
Nicholas, St Mary-le-Bow and St Mary the Less, or the extra-parochial places of
or belonging to the castle of Durham, and the college or cathedral church of
Durham, or the parochial chapelry of St Margaret, the borough of Framwelgate,
or the several parishes of St Oswald and St Giles, near the city of Durham and
Framwelgate, to be an alderman or aldermen of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, in the place or places of him or them so dying or happening to be
removed; and that he or they so nominated and elected to be alderman or
aldermen, before he or they shall be admitted to execute the said office or
offices, shall take his or their corporal oath or oaths, before the mayor of
the said city for the time being, or before four or more of the aldermen of the
said city for the time being, well and truly to execute his or their office or
offices, in all things thereunto belonging; and the person or persons so
elected and sworn, shall hold the said office and offices during the term of
his and their natural life and lives, unless he or they shall in the mean time
be removed from the said office or offices, for misgovernment or misbehaviour
therein, or for any other reasonable cause.

And also whenever it shall happen, that any of the twenty-four, to be elected
of the common council of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate as aforesaid
for the time being, shall die or be removed from his or their office or
offices, (and which said twenty-four we will shall be removeable from their
said offices for misgovernment or misbehaviour therein, or other reasonable
cause, by the mayor, aldermen and twenty-four, or the major part of them, of
whom we will that the mayor for the time being shall be one) that then and so
often, it shall and may be lawful for the mayor and aldermen of the said city
of Durham and Framwelgate for the time being, or the major part of them, (of
whom the mayor we will shall be one) within twenty days after such death or
removal, to elect and prefer one or more of the burgesses of the said city, of
the same trade, art or mystery, or trades, arts or mysteries of him or them so
dying or being removed, and residing or dwelling within the said city of Durham
and Framwelgate, or within the said several parishes of St Nicholas, St
Mary-le-Bow and St Mary the Less, or the extra-parochial places of or belonging
to the castle of Durham, and the college or cathedral church of Durham, or the
parochial chapelry of St Margaret, the borough of Framwelgate, or the said
several parishes of St Oswald and St Giles, near the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, to be of the common council of the said city, in the place or
places of him or them so dying or happening to be removed; and that he or they
so elected into the said office or offices, shall take his and their corporal
oath and oaths, before the mayor of the said city for the time being, or before
four or more of the aldermen of the said city for the time being, well and
truly to execute his and their office or offices in all things thereunto
belonging; and the person or persons so elected and sworn into the said office
and offices shall hold the same until the said second Monday next after the
feast of St Michael the archangel then next ensuing, if he and they shall so
long live; unless he or they shall in the mean time be removed from the said
office or offices, for mismanagement or misbehaviour therein, or for any other
reasonable cause.

And moreover, for us and our successors, we grant to the said mayor, aldermen
and commonalty of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, and their
successors, that if any one or more of the aldermen and burgesses of the said
city for the time being, who hereafter shall be elected to the office or
offices of mayor, aldermen, or of the common council of the said city, and
having due notice given to him or them of such election, shall refuse to accept
or take upon himself or themselves, and to execute that office, to which he or
they shall have been so elected and nominated, then and so often, it shall and
may be lawful for the mayor, aldermen and twenty-four, so elected as aforesaid,
for the time being, or the major part of them present at any meeting for that
purpose (of whom the mayor to be one) to assess and impose such fines and
amerciaments, not exceeding the sum of one hundred pounds, upon such person or
persons so refusing, as to the said mayor, aldermen and common council for the
time being, or such major part of them as aforesaid, shall seem reasonable;
which sine or sines shall be recovered, received and applied to the public use
of the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate.

And further, we will and do by these presents for us and our successors grant,
to the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city, and their
successors, that there shall for ever hereafter be, in the city of Durham and
Framwelgate, one honest and discreet man, skilled in the laws of England, who
shall and may be, and shall be called the recorder of the city of Durham and
Framwelgate; which said recorder, before he shall be admitted to execute that
office, shall take his corporal oath, before the mayor of the said city for the
time being, well and faithfully to execute the said office of recorder of the
city aforesaid, according to the best of his judgment, in all things touching
or concerning that office: And that after such oath so taken, he may exercise
and use the office of recorder of and for the said city, for so long time as he
shall behave himself well in the said office. And we have assigned, created,
constituted and made, and by these presents for us and our successors do
assign, nominate, create, constitute and make, our trusty and well-beloved
William Ambler, esquire, skilled in the laws of England, to be the first and
modern recorder of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, to execute that
office so long as he shall behave himself well in the same; the said William
Ambler first taking his corporal oath before the said John Drake Bainbridge, or
the mayor of the said city for the time being, well and truly to execute the
office of recorder of the city aforesaid, according to the best of his
judgment, in all things touching and concerning that office. And we will, that
the recorder of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, from time to time, be
aiding and assisting to the common council of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, for the time being, in all things and causes, which in the court
of record in the said city, or any other court to be held in the said city,
from time to time, shall be cognizable and determinable in the said city; and
that he may do and execute all things which to the office of recorder belong
and appertain, in as ample manner and form as any other recorder in any other
city or town incorporate within the kingdom of Great Britain, by virtue of his
office of recorder, may or can do: And that from time to time and at all times,
upon every vacancy of the office of recorder of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate, it shall and may be lawful for the mayor, aldermen, and
twenty-four so elected as aforesaid, for the time being, or the major part of
them, present at any meeting for that purpose, (of whom we will the mayor shall
be one) to elect, nominate and prefer one other discreet man, skilled in the
laws of England, from time to time, to be recorder of the said city; and that
he so elected and preferred into the office of recorder of the said city, from
time to time, after the death or amoval of the said William Ambler, shall and
may have, enjoy and exercise the office of recorder, as long as he shall behave
himself well in the same; first taking his corporal oath in manner aforesaid
Recorders of Durham.
1603, Sept. 11. -- Win Smith, of Gray's Inn, London, gent. 1642, Nov. 10. --
Fra. Tempest, of Durham, esquire 1645, April 11. -- Edw. Wright, of Gray's Inn, esquire
1647, Aug. 11. -- John Turner of the Middle Temple and Kirkleatham, esquire 1686,
-- John Jefferson, sergeant at law; appointed a judge in Ireland. 1691, Sept.
25. -- Wm Davison, of Durham, esquire 1696, June 3. -- John Middleton, esquire 1702,
March 4. -- John Cuthbert, of Durham, esquire resigned on being chosen recorder of
Newcastle. 1706, Feb. 5. -- Geo. Bows, esquire of Durham 1719, Oct. 1. -- John
Faweett, esquire of Durham. 1760, Oct 27. -- Wm Rudd, esquire of Durham 1767, Nov. 9.
-- Tho. Gyll, esquire of Durham; ob. 12th March, 1780. 1780, Oct. 2. -- Wm Ambler,
esquire of Durham; appointed by the new charter.

.

And further we do will, and by these presents for us and our successors grant,
to the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city, and their
successors, that they and their successors hereafter for ever, may and shall
have in the said city one honest and discreet man, who may and shall be called
the town clerk of the said city, which said town clerk, before he be admitted
to execute that office, shall take his corporal oath, before the mayor of the
said city for the time being, well and truly to perform that office, to the
best of his knowledge, in all things touching or concerning the said office;
and that after taking such oath, he shall use and exercise the office of
town clerk of the city aforesaid, so long as he shall behave himself well in
the said office; and we have assigned, created, constituted and made, and do by
these presents, for us and our successors, assign, nominate, create, constitute
and make, Martin Wilkinson to be the first and modern town clerk of the said
city, to exercise that office, as long as he shall behave himself well, first
taking his corporal oath, before the said John Drake Bainbridge, or the mayor
of the said city for the time being, truly to perform that office, to the best
of his knowledge, in all things touching or concerning the said office: And
that from time to time and at all times, whenever hereafter the said office
shall be vacant, it shall and may be lawful for the said mayor, aldermen, and
twenty-four of the common council of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate,
for the time being, or the major part of them, of whom the mayor of the said
city for the time being we will shall be one, to elect, nominate and prefer,
one other honest and discreet man to be town clerk of the said city, to
exercise that office as long as he shall behave himself well in the same, who
shall take his oath before the mayor of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate
for the time being, for the due execution of the said office TOWN CLERKS of
DURHAM.
1610, Oct. 4. -- Mark Forster, gent. 1663, Nov. 27. -- George Kirkby. 1690,
Sept. 4. -- George Dixon appointed for life, but on the 27th of Sept. 1711 was
removed, and Richard Lee appointed; but Dixon was restored, in pursuance of a
Mandamus, 4th March 1712. 1716, Oct. 5. -- John Ingleby appointed for the year
ensuing, and from thence annually. 1761, Nov. 2. -- Robert Robinson. 1766, Oct.
5. -- Cuthbert Swainston. 1768, Oct. 5. -- Martin Wilkinson, also appointed by
the new charter 2d Oct. 1780.

.

And moreover we will, and by these presents for us and our successors do
grant, to the said mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the said city of Durham
and Framwelgate, and their successors, that the mayor, aldermen and
twenty-four, the common council of the said city, or the major part of them,
(of whom the mayor for the time being shall be one) shall and may, within a
convenient time from the date of these presents, name and elect two men, being
burgesses or inhabitants of the said city, who shall be, and shall be called,
sergeants at mace, to serve in the court of the said city, and for making
proclamations, arrests, and executions of all processes, mandates, and other
affairs belonging to the office of sergeant at mace, to be done and executed
from time to time in the city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid; and in like
manner name and elect all such and so many constables, and other inferior
officers and servants, as have been usual and accustomed within the city
aforesaid; and the said sergeants at mace, and other inferior officer and
officers, so to be elected and nominated, shall and may be in due manner sworn,
before the mayor of the said city for the time being, for the due and faithful
execution of the office and offices, to which they shall be respectively
elected and appointed; and the said sergeants at mace, and other the officer
and officers so to be elected, shall be and continue in their respective
offices, until Monday next after the feast of St Michael the archangel now next
ensuing, and until some other person or persons shall in due manner be elected
and preferred into his or their office or offices respectively; and that the
said sergeants at mace, constables, and other inferior officer and officers of
the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, shall from time to time be annually
elective, by the mayor, aldermen and twenty-four, the common council aforesaid,
or the major part of them, (of whom the mayor we will shall be one) on Monday
next after the said feast of St Michael the archangel then next following, if
they shall respectively behave themselves well in the same: And as often as,
and whenever it shall happen, that such sergeants, constables, and other
inferior officers of the said city, shall die or be removed from their offices,
within one year after they have been elected, preferred, and sworn into their
said office or offices respectively, that then and so often, it shall and may
be lawful for the mayor, aldermen and twenty-four, the common council of the
said city of Durham and Framwelgate for the time being, or the major part of
them, (of whom we will the mayor of the said city for the time being shall be
one) within twenty days next ensuing such death or amotion, or any other
convenient time, to elect and prefer other and others in the place or places of
him and them so dying or being amoved; and that he or they so elected and
preferred, shall hold and exercise the office or offices to which they shall be
elected, named and preferred, if they shall respectively behave themselves well
in the same, until Monday next after the feast of St Michael then next ensuing,
and from thenceforth until another or others shall be elected and sworn into
the said office or offices respectively, first taking his or their corporal
oath or oaths in form aforesaid.

We also will and ordain, and by these presents for us and our successors do
grant and confirm, to the aforesaid mayor, aldermen and commonalty of the city
of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid, and their successors, as much as in us
lies, that the aforesaid mayor, aldermen and twenty-four, so elected of the
common council of the city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid, for the time
being, or the major part of them, (of whom the mayor for the time being shall
be one) shall have full authority, power and license, in the place of, for and
in the name of the whole corporate body of the said city of Durham and
Framwelgate aforesaid, to compose, constitute, ordain, make and establish, from
time to time, such laws, statutes, ordinances and constitutions, as to them in
their discretions shall seem good, salutary, useful, fit, profitable, and
necessary, for the good rule and government of the mayor, aldermen and
commonalty of the said city of Durham and Framwelgate, and all trades,
officers, ministers, artificers, and residents whomsoever, within the said city
of Durham and Framwelgate, for the time being; and for the rule and government
of the markets, fairs, and marts, within the city of Durham and Framwelgate
aforesaid, and the limits and liberties of the same, and of other persons
coming and resorting to the said fairs and markets; and for declaring after
what manner and order the mayor, aldermen and commonalty, and all and singular
other the ministers, officers and artificers, inhabitants and residents within
the city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid, with their servants and
apprentices, in their several offices, functions, mysteries, arts and
businesses, within the city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid, and the
liberties of the same, for the time being, shall conduct and employ themselves,
and otherwise, for the more public good and good rule of the city of Durham and
Framwelgate aforesaid; and also for the better preservation, government, and
letting of the lands, tenements, reversions and hereditaments of the aforesaid
mayor, aldermen and commonalty, and their successors, to them given, granted or
assigned, or hereafter to be given, granted or assigned, and all other things
and causes whatsoever, relating to the city of Durham and Framwelgate
aforesaid, or concerning the state, right and interest of the said city of
Durham and Framwelgate; and that the mayor, aldermen and twenty-four, so
elected of the common council of the city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid,
for the time being, or the major part of them, (of whom the mayor for the time
being shall be one) as often as such laws, institutions, ordinances and
constitutions shall be declared and established in manner aforesaid, do make,
ordain, limit and provide such punishments, penalties and imprisonments of the
body, or by fines and amerciaments, or by both, upon all offenders against such
laws, statutes and ordinances, or any of them, which to the said mayor,
aldermen and common council for the time being, or the major part of them, (of
whom the mayor for the time being shall be one) shall seem necessary, requisite
and proper for the observance of such laws, ordinances and constitutions; and
the same fines and amerciaments, by distress or any other manner, to levy and
have and retain, to them and their successors, to the use of the said city of
Durham and Framwelgate, without question or impediment of us or our successors,
or any of the officers of us or our successors; all and singular which laws,
ordinances, constitutions and institutions, so to be made, we will shall be
observed under the penalties therein mentioned, so as such laws, ordinances and
institutions, punishments, penalties and imprisonments, are not repugnant or
contrary to the laws, statutes, rights and customs of England.

We will moreover, and by these presents, for us and our successors, as far as
in us lies, do grant, ratify and confirm, unto the said mayor, aldermen and
commonalty of the city of Durham and Framwelgate aforesaid, and their
successors, that the said mayor, aldermen, commonalty, and their successors,
shall have, hold, enjoy and use, from henceforth for ever, all and singular
such rights, liberties, powers, authorities, franchises, immunities, free
customs, lands, tenements and hereditaments, as the mayor, aldermen and
commonalty of the city of Durham and Framwelgate, under, by virtue or reason of
the said letters patent of Tobias late bishop of Durham, or by, under, or by
virtue of any charter or letters patent by any of our predecessors heretofore
bishops of Durham, or otherwise by any lawful means, right or title whatsoever,
could or were lawfully entitled to have, use or enjoy; except in such cases,
and so far only as the same are varied or altered by these presents.

And further we will, by these presents, for us and our successors, of our
special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, do grant unto the said
mayor, aldermen and commonalty, and their successors, that these our letters
patent, and all and singular things in the same contained, shall be and remain,
from time to time, good, firm, valid, sufficient and effectual in the law,
according to the true meaning of these presents; notwithstanding the not
naming, or the not right and certain naming the premises aforesaid, or any
parcel thereof, in their or in either of their proper names, kinds, sorts,
quantities or qualities; and notwithstanding the not reciting, or not truly
reciting the said letters patent before mentioned, or any thing in the same
contained, or any act, ordinance, provision or restriction, or any defect,
uncertainty or imperfection in these our letters patent, or any other matter,
cause or thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding:
In witness whereof we have caused these our letters to be made patent. Witness
the honorable Edward Wills, our chancellor of Durham. Given at our castle of
Durham this second day of October, in the twentieth year of the reign of our
sovereign lord George the Third, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, king, defender of the faith and so forth; and in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty, of our consecration the
twenty-fifth, and of our translation to the Sea of Durham the tenth."

CHARITABLE FUNDS.
"There is a charitable fund belonging to the city of Durham, for which the
mayor and aldermen are trustees This account was taken by Mr Randal from the
papers of Mr John Dixon, late of Durham, deceased, an eminent attorney at law.
. Mr Henry Smith, the great benefactor of the city of Durham whilst it stood
incorporated by the name of aldermen and burgesses, by will dated the 20th of
July 1598, gave all his coal-mines, then of the clear yearly value of 100l.
besides a personal estate in money, debts, and goods, beyond debts and
legacies, worth 600l. unto the city of Durham, in these words: And as touching
my colemynes, and that the increase thereof may be employed for the benefit of
many, I freely give them all to this city of Durham, and the cause why I do
so, and further as follows is, that some good trade may be devised for
setting of the youth and other idle persons to work, as shall be thought most
convenient, whereby some profit may arise to the benefit of the said city, and
relief of those that are past work. -- Then he gives away several legacies,
and adds, All the rest that remains I fully give and bequeath to this city of
Durham, as fully and amply as I have done my colemynes, and to the uses before
expressed. -- And then appoints one alderman pro tempore, Edward Wanles, dyer,
and William Hall, draper, his executors, to see the said will performed; and
died on the 17th of November 1598. Mr Tho. Pierson was alderman at Mr Smith's
death, and, together with Wanles and Hall, entered upon his estate, and
continued the receipt and management thereof, until Tobias Matthew bishop of
Durham, in the year 1602, incorporated the city by the name of mayor and
aldermen, and then the succeeding mayors joined with the two executors, in the
receipt and management thereof, and so it continued until the eighth year of K.
James I. when a commission of pious uses was awarded to William bishop of
Durham, and several others, upon which an inquest was taken, and this charity
found and decreed against the executors, in whose hands it was, and several
persons were appointed to be the governors thereof, particularly the then
bishop, Richard Hutton, esquire his temporal chancellor, H. Dethick, H. Ewbanke,
Rob. Cooper, and several others. Those governors (14th Aug. 1612) called the
executors to an account, and found in their hands in ready cash 577l. 10s. 2d.
which they received and lodged in the chest in the town chamber, which they had
bought for the purpose, under four locks, and there also placed the bonds and
other securities and writings relating to this charity; and then ordered the
New-Place The palace of the Nevill family.
to be bought, for a trade of cloth-working to be set up in, which was
accordingly done, and 150l. paid for the purchase thereof.

In May 1614, Henry Doughty and Wm Bastoe, clothworkers, were employed to begin
the work, and were settled in the New-Place; and one Richard Thomlinson had by
copy of court-roll an assignment made him of some ground upon Brassside Moor,
de novo incremento, and enclosed it for the benefit of the works, and 200l. was
paid them to provide materials, for which sum Wm Hall the executor, who had
recommended these three men, was bound.

In September 1614 a new commission of pious uses issued, to the said bishop,
chancellor Hutton, and several other commissioners, who approved of what the
governors had done, and ordered 250l. more to be advanced to the clothiers,
upon the statute-merchant of them and two other sureties, relations of Doughty
and Bastoe, and upon surrender of Tomlinson's Intack; and so the works went
forward for about two years, and then Doughty and his partners broke, and the
governors took in one William Atkinson, then master of the house of correction,
to spin and employ children that way, and gave him 60l. to buy wool: And also
in the year 1616 the governor employed Thomas Brown and George Beecrofte, two
new clothworkers, and bought them in wool, and gave them it to work, and
employed William Hall the executor to be their inspector; and the work went on
but slowly and to no great purpose, till Jan. 1619, and then was discontinued;
and instead thereof, 20l. per annum was ordered to be paid by 5l. per quarter
to the several streets in Durham, and apprentices were ordered to be bound out,
ten or more per annum, as the stock should answer.

Thus it has continued ever since, with the addition only of two half yearly
pays more to the poor of the several streets; and in the year 1622, Wydop
Leezes and Redmyers House were purchased for 660l. at the yearly rent of 50l.
per annum, 3l. 6s. 8d. being discounted for a copyhold rent payable thereout
annually to the bishop.

After this the governors put their statute-merchant in suit against Doughty
and Bastoe's relations, and recovered most of the 250l. last lent; but all that
Hall the executor was bound for, and more which he had got into his hands,
amounting to 598l. odd money, was lost.

The mayors of Durham, from the discontinuing of the last clothworking in the
year 1619 or 20, again received the money arising of the stock, and yearly
accounted for it to the governors till the year 1659, and then a treasurer
received it; and so it continued during the troubles, and till after the
restoration, to wit, in December 1669, when a commission of pious uses was
awarded to bishop Cousin, Dr Sudbury then dean of Durham, and others, and
thereupon an inquest was taken, whereby one John Heighington, who had been
mayor of Durham, was found debtor for Smith's charity 414l. and for charities
given by others almost as much more; but all that was got in satisfaction
thereof was only the house and shop in the marketplace, in Mrs Fulthorpe and
alderman Paxton's possession, valued at 18l. per ann. called Heighington's
Burgage.

In the year 1659 the receipt of the mayors of Durham was discontinued, and a
treasurer appointed to receive and pay out the stock as the governors ordered.
All the collieries are now failed, and have so been for many years past, so
that all the stock Linsell bishop of Hereford and prebendary of Durham gave by
will "for the use of the poor people of the city of Durham 100l. to be placed
out at interest, or lands to be purchased therewith."

F. Buney by his will dated 20th Jan. 1626, gave to the city of Durham "20l. to
be lent to poor men decayed, by five marks a-piece upon good security, to be
paid at the year's end."

Mr Walton archdeacon of Derby gave "to the city of Durham 40l. to be lent
gratis to poor tradesmen by 5l. a-piece for four years together."

Dr Hartwell, by will dated 9th March 1724, gave to the corporation of the city
of Durham "20l. a year, to be disposed of to two merchants or tradesmen of the
established church, 10l. each, that have served out their time in the said
city, and want some assistance to set up with; which persons the mayor and six
aldermen or more, are unanimously to pitch upon, without favor to any but
those that stand in most need of it. And that this benevolence may have its
full effect, as designed by me, it shall be in the power of the mayor and all
the residing aldermen to bestow the whole 20l. on any one person whom they
shall judge in their consciences to deserve it, by the narrowness of his
circumstances. Moreover, the said 20l. per ann. is not to be paid but to the
person or persons themselves, chosen by the mayor and aldermen of Durham,
according to the limitations herein named, who are to certify their choice
under their hands to the trustees of this part of my last will and testament."
-- This charity is chargeable on lands at

Lord Crewe gave 100l. a year, as mentioned in page 560 of the first volume of
this work, for putting out poor children apprentices to such trades as the
mayor and aldermen should appoint.


consists of The New-Place, let for about per annum 40 0 0 Wydop Leezes, p.
ann. 50 0 0 Dye-Houses, p. ann. 16 0 0 Hager Leezes, p. ann. 3 0 0
Heighington's Burgage, p. ann. 18 0 0 Newby's House, p. ann. 2 0 0

All this was purchased by the governors out of Smith's charity, and yields
annually 129l.

As to cash unaltered or newly given for a manufactory, Old charities in the
stock. There is besides this due upon bonds from persons having donation money
given by several 90 0 0 In ready money 100 0 0 New charities to be brought in.
Bishop Wood's charity given to the poor of the city "I Tho Wood, by divine
Providence lord bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, etc. I bequeath unto the
city of Durham 20l. yearly for ever, payable out of all my lands and tenements
at Egglescliff in the bishopric of Durham, to be disposed of toward the relief
and release of poor prisoners for debt that shall be lawfully committed to the
common gaol there, each such prisoner's debt not exceeding five pounds And I
will that every such prisoner so to be released shall be appointed by the mayor
and aldermen of Durham for the time being, and their successors, or the major
part of them. -- Item, I give to the corporation of Durham 100l. to be laid out
by the said corporation, or major part of them, upon a rent charge, toward the
maintenance of the poor of that corporation for ever." Dated 11th Nov. 1690.
Proved in Doctors-Commons 10th Nov. 1692. -- The above estate is now (1786) the
property of Vide Strype's Survey of London, vol. ii. Append. p. 126.


100 0 0 New charities to be brought in. Mr Cradock's money, interest and
principal 220 0 0 New charities to be brought in. Mr Baker's money "I George
Baker of Crook in the county of Durham, esquire etc. And I do hereby desire my
dear brothers, that my debts and funeral charges first being discharged, they
will dispose of the overplus in such manner as by writing under my hand to that
purpose I shall direct, leaving them notwithstanding to their own discretion in
such matters wherein they may reasonably think me overseen. Dated the 5th of
March 1697. -- 5th March 1697 -- What I desire of my brothers (Mr Tho. and Mr
Fran. Baker) as to the disposal of that part of my estate I leave in trust to
them, I desire them to dispose of the sum of 500l. to pious and charitable
uses, so as they shall think will be best employed. -- July 29, 1699 -- I
desire that 1000l. may be raised out of my estate, and disposed of by my
executors according to their discretion, in pious and charitable uses, and that
these two paragraphs with all before be taken as part of my last will. Witness
my hand." -- He died in Aug. 1699, and was buried in Lanchester church.

The sum of 500l. is lent by the corporation to the master of the woollen
manufactory, without interest, for the encouragement of that trade. He also has
the workhouses, etc. rent-free.


500 0 0

By all this it appears, that the charitable stock of the city of Durham has
chiefly arisen from Mr Smith's charity, which was originally given for a
manufactory; but by reason of the disappointments met with, by trusting the
clothworkers' (who proved knaves) with the money, the governors in 1619 devised
a different disposition of the charity money as beforementioned, for which end
the bulk of the stock was laid out in land." -- Such is the account given of
the rise of this charitable stock.

A full illustration of the foregoing history of the charitable stock will
appear in the inquisitions taken by virtue of the several commissions for
charitable uses mentioned hereafter.

The first commission bears date the 12th of March, 1609, directed to William
lord bishop of Durham and others, for the due execution of a certain statute
made in the high court of parliament, holden the 27th of October, in the 43d
year of the reign of queen Elizabeth, entitled, An act to redress the
misemployments of lands, goods, and stocks of money given to charitable uses;
to enquire by the oaths of twelve lawful men, etc. A new commission in like
form issued, dated the 22d of Feb. 1610.

To these commissions, or the one of them, an inquisition was taken and
returned at the city of Durham the 28th day of March, 1611, setting forth, that
Hen. Smith, of Durham, gentleman, deceased, by his last will and testament,
written in his lifetime, subscribed and sealed, etc. the 20th of July, 1598,
did bequeath all his leases of the colemines of Hargyll, Grewburne, and
Softley, in the county of Durham, and all the estate, tithe, and interest that
he had therein for diverse years then unexpired, by virtue of sundry leases
made to him by the queen (Elizabeth) and bishops of Durham, xx lb. yearly rent
yssuing out of the colepitts called Carter-thorne Colliery-pitts, in the said
county; the interest in which mine of coals he in his said will devised to
Toby lord archbishop of York, his grace then bishop of Durham, to all his term
therein yet for sundry years by course of time contynuing, to the city of
Durham, with all his coals above the ground, with all implements whatsoever,
and all books of reckonnings, with all leases and writings touching the said
colepitts, with all the coals provided for those uses, and two great chists
wherein they were So in the original.
; that the increase thereof might be employed to the benefit of many, etc. And
they also say, that he did by his last will give sundry legacies to sundry his
friends, amounting in all to the sum of 305l. and for the payment of the said
legacies only, did nominate Tho. Pearson then alderman of the said city of
Durham, Edw. Wanless of the said city, dyer, and Wm Hall of the same, draper,
his executors; and upon payment of the said legacies did ordain, that his said
executors should be no further troubled; and all the rest of his goods he did
bequeath to the city, of Durham for the uses above expressed. And then sets
forth the receipt of the profits of the colemines from the year 1598 to 1607,
but no amount is mentioned. The inquisition also further sets forth, that John
Franklyn, then late of Coken, in the county of Durham, gentleman, did, by his
last will, dated the 19th of Nov. 1572, bequeath 100 l. to the mayor, aldermen
and others of Newcastle, upon condition that they should see paid for the same
xl. yearly for the increase thereof (part of which) 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. to the
prisoners and other poor people of Durham.

Several subsequent commissions issued, one in 1617, another 1622, a third
1629, and a fourth during the usurpation in 1659, directed to Sir Tho.
Widdrington, knt. Sir Arthur Hazelrigg, bart. Sir Geo. Vane, knt. Francis Wren,
etc. etc. and a fifth, dated the 10th of Dec. 1669, to which latter an
inquisition was taken and returned, dated the 4th of Nov. 1670, which sets
forth, that it appears by an inquisition, taken at Durham on the 22d day of
June, 1650, before, etc. that one Mr John Heighington, late of Durham,
alderman, being mayor of the said city in 1637, got then into his hands several
large sums of money, belonging to the charity stock of the said city of Durham,
as follows; -- of the donation of Mr Hen. Smith, 131 l. 1 s. 4 d. -- of the
donation of Mr Hugh Hutchinson, 170 l. -- of, etc. of Mr Francis Buney, 20 l.
-- of, etc. of Mr John Walton, some time alderman of Derby, 5 l. -- of, etc. of
Dr Augustine Linsells, 196 l. -- in all 542 l. 1 s. 4 d. That the said John
Heighington did afterward, etc. clear himself of 20 l. of Mr Buney's money,
and 196 l. of Dr Linsell's donation; but in 1663 was in arrear to the said
charitable stock, part of Mr Smith's donation, 414 l. 13 s. 10 d. -- of Mr
Hutchinson's, 208 l. -- of Mr Walton's, 10 l. -- in all, 632 l. 13 s. 10 d.
which he was decreed to pay within three months; but that no part either for
principal or interest had been paid: So that with interest from the 12th of
Nov. 1663, at 6 l. per cent. the whole amount is 898 l. 8 s.

There is a charity or blue-coat school maintained in the city by subscriptions
and other charitable benefactions. It was begun in 1718, for six boys; in 1736,
six girls were added; since that time, as the fund increased, the numbers also
increased; so that now 30 boys and 30 girls are clothed and educated; and
seven boys in 1750 were superadded, in pursuance of the will of Mrs Ann Carr,
who lest 500 l. to be placed out at interest for that purpose.

THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH.
HAVING shown the government of the city, and privileges of the incorporated
body, we beg leave to call the reader's attention to the history and
description of the cathedral church.

In the preceding volume, under the annals of the bishops, are shown the origin
and foundation of this rich church, which renders it unnecessary now to revert
to many of the facts there stated.

The reader will recollect, that in the first institution this church was
served by secular clergy, who are said to have been governed by a provost.
Bishop Walcher first projected a change, intending to introduce regular canons,
but did not live to effect his purpose. His successor, William de Carilepho, in
the year 1083 accomplished that matter, aided by the power of the crown, under
the influence of the Sea of Rome. He applied to pope Gregory the Seventh for
his precept or license, on which he grounded his charter Vid. notes vol. i. p.
133, where an extract from this charter is given.
, thereby declaring he granted the same by the command and council of the holy
See, and that the king was present at the time of making thereof; and ordained,
that all future priors of the church at Durham should possess the liberties,
dignities, and honors of abbots, with the abbot's seat in the choir of the
church; and to hold all their lands, churches, and possessions in their own
hands and free disposition, so as the revenues thereof might thereby be
increased as much as possible, exempted from royal customs Lel. Col. vol. ii.
p. 384. -- Wharton's Anglia Sacra, p. 785. -- Dugdale's Monast. Angl. vol. i.
p. 42.
. He obtained the king's diploma to maintain and support his charter, dated in
the year 1084, establishing the removal of the secular clergy from his
episcopal church, and translating thither monks from Jarrow and Weremouth
monasteries, who were of the order of St Augustine; by which instrument the
king ordained, that all priors of that monastery should possess the same
liberties, customs, dignities, and honors, as abbots See vol. i. p. 135. for
this record. -- Monast. Ang. vol. i. p. 44.
; to hold the left hand seat in the choir; have full power of appointing and
removing the officers of the church; similar to the authority of a dean, have
the first place and voice after the bishop; when in chapter, the first voice in
all elections to the Sea; and, whatever dignities and honors the dean of York
held, inferior to the archbishop, but superior to the archdeacon, the prior of
Durham should equally hold in inferiority to his prelate, but in superiority of
the archdeacon. By this instrument, the king also confirmed whatever the bishop
had granted to his convent; and declared his protection of the monastery and
its possessions, as well those then enjoyed, as whatever should thereafter be
acquired by the money of St Cuthbert or otherwise, with sac. and socne, tol and
team, and infangeontheof, privilege of courts, and wreck of the sea: And he
also thereby ordained, that the convent and their people should be for ever
thereafter exempt from all outgoings, exactions, rents, tolls, and all other
royal customs appertaining to the crown. This diploma was signed in the
presence of the bishops and peers of the realm, who subscribed and attested the
same A catalogue of the priors of Durham in Stevens' Monast. vol i. p. 350.

The prior of Durham had a protection granted by K. Edw. I. when all other
monasteries were obliged to sue for such. -- Ibid. p. 174.

Catalog. Prior. Dunelm. in Bibl. Cotton. Vespasian A. 6.

Cl. Reyner's Appendix de Monachis Benedictinis, Script. 37, p. 42.

Registrum Prioratus Dun. -- Barnard. Catalog. MSS. p. 261. -- Several matters
relating to the priors of Durham, transcribed from the orig. in Cotton Libr.
Bern. pl. 2, p. 60. -- S'ti Bernardi ep. ad priorem et convent. Dunelm. in
Bibliotheca Dec. et Cap. Dunelm. lib. iv. 24, p. 96.

The priors of this church were always invested with the dignity and privileges
of abbots. -- J. Wessington de Juribus et Possessionibus Ecclesiae Dunelm. --
MSS. in Bibl. Cotton. Vitellius A. 9.

Walt's Glossary in Math. Paris.

The priors of Durham summoned to sit in parl. -- Dugd. Summons, p. 1. --
Fuller's Chapter Hist. lib. 6. His History of Abbeys, p. 292. -- Selden's Titles of
Hon. pl. 2, c. 5, p. 598, 599.

Concerning the government of the monasteries of Benedictines, -- see the stat.
in Walt's addition to Math. Paris, p. 169, 228, 244. -- Ceremoniale Benedict.
p. 77, 115, 151, 194, -- vide Ordinarium totius anni, ibid. p. 211

Durham Col. Oxon, dedicated to St Cuthbert, founded by the prior and convent
of Durh. 1290, for eight Benedictines.

A college founded by the prior and convent of Durh. 1426, at Hemmingburgh in
Yorkshire, for a provost, three canons, six vicars, and six clerks, dedicated
to the Blessed Virgin. -- Dugd. Mon. tom. iii. pl. 2, p. 96.

Reyner, in his Apostolatus Benedictorum in Anglia, makes the arms of the
priory of Durham to be a chevron between three lions argent. -- Grey's MSS.

See Tanner's Notitia Monastica, p. 112, where there is a full repertory of
books, charters, etc. relating this church.


. The bishop also gave to the monastery full jurisdiction over all their
churches, and acquitted them of the authority of their prelate and archdeacon,
save only touching the cure of souls; and in the year 1094 he decreed, that the
priors should for ever thereafter be archdeacons of the whole diocese of
Durham, vicars-general, and officials 1083, Monachi in Dunelmum convenerunt,
jubente rege Gulielmo majore, 7o call. Jan. feria 6o. -- Gulielmo interim
Dunelmensi episcopo, de sede apostolica, litteras Gregorij papae 7 ad Gulielmi
regis consilium apud West monasterium deserente, canonicos de ecclesia sua
amovere, et monachos substituere, omnium consensu, impetravit. -- Ex Hist. Rog.
Hoved. Lel. Col. v. iii.


.

The seculars, though removed from the seat of dignity, were not sent abroad
unprovided for, several places being prepared for their residence, as will be
shown in the course of this work.

Not content with solely accomplishing so great a reformation, this prelate
gave to the monastery, Rennington, the two Pittingtons, Hesselton, Dalton,
Merrington, Shincliff, and Elvet; with Willington and Wall's-End north of Tyne,
together with the churches of Lindisfarn, the adjacent villages of Fenham,
Norham, and Skirworth, with diverse churches in Yorkshire; and other donations
were added by the king, among which are lands in Keverston and Gretham.

After the bishop's return from exile, he furnished the altar with various
vessels and ornaments of gold and silver, and gave to the convent a large
collection of valuable books Lel. Col. vol. ii. p. 381.
. It would be an unprofitable labor in this place to note the several gifts of
lands, as the whole possessions of the church appear in the endowment after the
Reformation.

The bishop, conceiving the church built by his predecessors was not of
suitable magnificence to the dignity and increasing power of the Sea, formed a
plan for a new erection, similar to the superb structures he had seen on the
continent; and in the year 1093 he began to erect the stately edifice, now the
subject of our attention. Though the art of making glass was introduced from
France in the beginning of the seventh century, and Eddius, who wrote the life
of Wilfrid, and lived about the year 720, asserts, that he glazed the windows
of the church of York when he repaired that edifice, yet we have no proofs to
maintain the assertion. It is probable that the use of glass prevailed greatly
when our prelate began this work. The original form of the windows was of the
circular arch, similar to the galleries above the ailes, and they were
constructed for glazing. Glass windows introduced great embellishments in
public edifices, as the use of stucco and plaistering succeeded that
improvement; before which the insides of the walls were regularly chisselled
and polished; which circumstance has contributed greatly to the permanency of
ancient buildings, the inside surface being as exactly compacted as the
outside. The large windows introduced in this building are apparently of a
fashion and fabrication more modern than the eleventh century, their pointed
arches in nowise corresponding with the mode which is adopted through the
greatest part of the ancient edifice, that kind of arch being, as our best
authors agree, introduced since the reign of Henry II. The annexed plate, taken
from as accurate a drawing as perhaps was ever given to the public, will save
much description, and convey to the reader the most perfect idea of this fabric
before the repairs and embellishments now carrying on were begun. In the plates
given in the Monasticon, the western towers are ornamented with spires, which
went to decay, and were removed many years ago. In Willis's Cathedrals is a
beautiful plate of the north front, dedicated to bishop Talbot, but the drawing
is contracted and inaccurate.

The foundation of the church was laid on the 11th of Aug. 1093, with a
solemnity suited to so great and pious a work, the bishop being assisted
therein by Malcolm king of Scotland, and Turgot the prior: But the prelate
departing this life in the year 1095 1093, 11th Aug. Juxta Turgot.

1094, 12th Aug. Annal. Dunelm. -- Wharton (notes.) -- Bishop William died 2d
Jan. 1096.


, saw but a small part of his plan carried into execution. The work was
zealously proceeded in by his successor bishop Flambard, who lived to see great
part of the building up to the roof Symeon Dun. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac.
.

We are not informed in what state the monastic buildings were at the time the
new foundation of the church was laid. Whilst bishop William was in exile, the
convent built their refectory or frater-house A description of this cathedral
church, and various ceremonies there used, was published by J. Davies of
Kidwelly in 1671, collected from ancient manuscripts about the time of the
suppression of religious houses, and reprinted at Durham in the year 1733 by
John Richardson, a bookseller there, together with several additions, and
particularly a description of the fine paintings in the windows, therein
alleged to be written by prior Wessington; again reprinted 1767 by Patrick
Sanderson, another bookseller there, with additions.

The author was favored by John Hogg, esquire of Norton, with a curious manuscript
roll, appar^ntly the manuscript, or a copy of that from whence Davies compiled
his work; he was also favored with another compendious manuscript by Sir John
Lawson, bart. and from these, several notes relative to the ancient state of
the church are compiled.

The SOUTH ALLEY of the CLOISTERS.
On the south side of the cloisters, was fastened to the wall at the side of
the cloister door, a seat, having four feet and a back of wood, and boarded
under foot for warmth: On this the porter was seated, to keep the cloister
door. The last porter was Edward Pattison. From the stool westward, on the
south side, was a long bench of stone, almost to the Frater-house door, whereon
were seated certain children in a row, upon Maunday Thursday, it being intended
for that purpose. The whole convent of monks had each a boy assigned him, whose
feet he was to wash and dry with a towel, and every monk then kissed the feet
he had washed, and gave to each child thirty pence in money, seven red
herrings, three loaves of bread, and a wafer cake, serving every child with
drink themselves: This godly ceremony thus ended; after prayers said by the
prior and convent, they all departed in good decorum. At the end of the bench
adjoining to the Frater-house door, was a fine almery fixed to the wall, and
another on the other side of the door; the fore part of the almeries was
through-carved work, to admit air to the towels, and three doors in the fore
part of each almery, and a lock on each, to which every monk had a key, to dry
their hands with the towels when they washed and went to dinner. This stool and
bench Tobias Matthew, then dean of Durham, caused to be taken down, and made as
plain as the rest of the floor of the cloisters.

The FRATER-HOUSE.
In the south alley of the cloisters, is a large hall, called the Frater-house,
finely wainscotted on the north and south sides; and in the west and nether
part thereof, is a long bench of stone, in mason-work, from the cellar door to
the pantry or cove door: Above the bench is wainscot-work two yards and a half
high, finely carved, set with embossed work in wainscot, and gilded under the
carved work. Above the wainscot was a large picture of our Savior Christ, the
blessed Virgin, and St John, in fine gilt work, and most excellent colors;
which pictures having been washed over with lime, did long appear through it.
This wainscot had engraven on the top of it, Thomas Castle, prior, anno Domini
1518, mensis Julij. Whence it is manifest, that prior Castle wainscotted the
Frater-house.

Within the Frater-house door, on the left hand at entering, is a strong almery
in the wall, wherein a great mazer, called the grace-cup, stood, which every
day served the monks after grace, to drink out of round the table; the cup was
finely edged about with silver, and double gilt. In the same place were kept
many large and great mazers of the same sort; among which was one called
Judas's cup, edged about with silver, and double gilt, having a base to stand
upon of silver double gilt: This was never in use but on Maundy Thursday, at
night, when the prior and convent met to keep their Maundy. In the same almery
was a goodly cup, called St Bede's bowl; the outside was of black mazer, the
inside of silver double gilt, and the edge finely wrought with silver, and
double gilt; in the midst was the picture of the holy Saint Bede, sitting in a
writing posture; the base thereof of silver, double gilt, with four joints of
silver coming down, all double gilt from the edge to the base to be taken in
pieces. In that almery lay all the best plate that served the whole convent in
the Frater-house on festival days; and there was a fine work of carved
wainscot, and a strong lock on the door, so that none could perceive there was
any almery at all, the keyhole being made under the carved work of the
wainscot: And there is another large a^mery within the Frater-house, on the
right hand on going to the cellar, of wainscot, having several almeries within,
fine wrought, and varished over with red varnish, in which lay several
table-cloths, salts, mazers, a basin and ewer of latten, with other things
pertaining to the Frater-house, and the loft where the monks dined and supped.
Every monk had his mazer to himself to drink in, and all other things that
served the whole convent, and the Frater-house, in their daily service, at
their diet, and at their table. All the mazers were finely edged with double
gilt silver, and another basin and ewer of latten. On this ewer was pourtrayed
a man on horseback, as riding a-hunting, which served the sub-prior to wash his
hands in at the aforesaid table, he sitting there as chief.

In this Frater-house the prior and whole convent of the monks held the great
feast of St Cuthbert, in Lent, having their meat served out of the
dresser-window of the great kitchen into the Frater-house, and their drink out
of the great cellar. From the east end, being the highest of the Frater-house,
adjoining to the deanery, the roof of lead was taken down by dean Whittingham,
and that part annexed to his own house, making it a flat roof, whereby he
gained twenty pounds.

At the east end of the Frater-house stood a neat table, with a screen of
wainscot over it, being kept for the master of the novices, the elects, and the
novices, to dine and sup at, having their meat served to them in at the dresser
widow from the great kitchen, and their drink out of the great cellar.

At these times the master observed these wholesome and godly orders, for the
continual instruction of their youth in virtue and learning; that is, one of
the novices, appointed by the master, read some part of the Old and New
Testament in Latin, during dinner, having a convenient place at the south end
of the high table, within a beautiful glass widow, encompassed with iron, and
certain stone-steps, with iron rails to go up to an iron desk, whereon lay the
holy Bible. When he had done reading, the master ^any a silver bell, bringing
over his head, thereby giving notice to one of the novices to come to the high
table and say grace; and that ended, they departed to their books.

Within the cloyster-garth, over against the Frater-house door, was a sine
laver or conduit, for the monks to wash their hands and faces in, being in form
round, covered with lead, and all of ma^ble, excepting the outer wall, within
which they might walk about the laver. It had many spouts of brass, with 24
brazen cocks about it, and seven windows of stone-work in it; and above, a
do^e^t covered with lead. The workmanship was both fine and costly. Adjoining
to the east side of the conduit door hung a bell, to call the monks at eleven
o'clock, to wash before dinner. In the closets or almeries, on each side of the
Frater house door, in the cloisters, towels were kept white and clean to dry
their hands upon.


, a description of which is given in the notes. The present library was built
where it stood.

ALDWINE,
who was the head of the monastic houses of Jarrow and Weremouth, at the time
their monks were translated to Durham, was made the first prior of the convent.
He was originally of Wincelcambe Lel. Col. vol. i. p. 332. -- Aug. Sac. p. 787.
-- Chronic. Melros, p. 160, (edit. Gale) makes Aldwine to have founded the
monastery anno 1073. -- He was archdeacon of Durham. -- Grey's Notes.

The monks built their own offices, and the bishop was at the charge of
building the church. -- Steven^ Monast. vol. i. p. 350.


, but having an irresistible desire to visit the venerable monastic remains in
the north, traveled into this province, accompanied by two monks from Evesham.
They arrived in this country in the year 1073, and first sat down at
Monkchester, now Newcastle; but on the invitation of bishop Walcher, came to
the ruined house of Girwa or Jarrow. That place soon becoming crowded by the
number of devotees who resorted thither, several colonies emigrated from
thence: One body of monks settled at Streoneschale or Whitby; another at York,
from whom arose the noted monastery of St Mary; another went to Melros; and a
fourth to Weremouth. Aldwine enjoyed his new dignity but a very short time, he
departing this life on the 12th of April, 1087 Lel. Col. vol. i. p. 332. --
Aug. Sac. p. 787. -- Chronic. Melros, p. 160, (edit. Gale) makes Aldwine to
have founded the monastery anno 1073. -- He was archdeacon of Durham. -- Grey's
Notes.

The monks built their own offices, and the bishop was at the charge of
building the church. -- Steven^ Monast. vol. i. p. 350.


. His successor

TURGOT,
to whom the modern historian is so much indebted for information touching the
ancient state of this See, was said to be of noble birth, and, in his youth,
one of those unhappy persons who were confined in the castle of Lincoln, soon
after the Norman conquest: Escaping from prison, he fled to Norway, and was
graciously received. Some years after, returning to England, he suffered
shipwreck, and lost all his effects. He resorted to Durham, where he obtained
protection of bishop Walcher, who recommended a religious life to him, and
placed him under the tuition of Aldwine at Jarrow. From that monastery he went
to Melros; from thence to Weremouth, where he assumed the monastic habit; and,
lastly, returned to Durham. On Aldwine's death, Turgot, with the general assent
of the prelate and monastery, was elected prior of Durham in the year 1087, the
office of archdeacon being annexed to that dignity. The monastery profited
greatly by his prudent government; the privileges were enlarged, and revenues
considerably increased by his influence; and he promoted many improvements in
the sacred edifices. He contributed an everlasting ornament to the monastery by
the Ecclesiastical History which he compiled, beginning with the foundation of
the Sea, and proceeding to the year 1096. After filling the office of prior
with great dignity and piety for near twenty years, he was elected bishop of St
Andrew's and primate of Scotland in 1107, and consecrated by archbishop Thomas,
at York, on the 1st of August, 1109 Ang. bac. ^86. -- Hoveden, 2^1. -- Symeon,
2^^
. Dissentions arising between bishop Turgot and the king of Scotland, the
prelate's anxiety and distress of mind brought on a decline of health, under
which he obtained permission to return to England; and came back to Durham in
the year 1115, where he resided little more than two months before his death.
Stevens says, that he returned to Durham after the death of king Malcolm and
his queen He was grave, modest, sober, temperate, prudent, of great authority,
and no less piety and erudition. The veracity in his writings is reckoned
unquestionable, for, besides his natural modesty, he never committed any thing
to paper, of the certain truth whereof he was not thoro'ly assured. -- Stevens'
Mon. p. 199.

Willis's Hist. of Mitr. Abb. p. 259. -- Spotiswood's Chapter Hist. of Scotland, p.
30 and 31, says, Turgot died in Scotland, and was from thence conveyed to and
buried at Durham: And in the Appendix, p. 43, says, Turgot was bishop of St
Andrew's 1063.

Turgot wrote De Exordio et Progressu Ecclesiae Dunelm. ab. an. 635 ad. an.
1097. MSS. in Bibl. Cotton. Faustina A 5. which was transcribed by Symeon
Dunelm. inter 10 scriptores. -- Vide Seldom, Prefat. ib. -- Collier's
Supplement. -- Monuments of Durham, p. 94, 113. -- Archbishop Usher's Letters,
p. 315, 321. -- Lel. Col. vol. i. pl. 2. p. 386. -- Stevens, Monasticon, vol.
i. p. 199, says, he was one of the hostages given to William the Conqueror for
Lindsey and the castle of Lincoln, etc. -- By his advice Malcolm king of
Scotland repaired the monastery of Durham. He wrote the Life of king Malcolm
and his queen Margaret, of the kings of Scots, Annals of his Own Times, and
Chronicle of Durham. After the death of king Malcolm and his queen, he returned
to Durham, and soon after died.

Symeon Dunelmensis, a Benedictine, and precentor of Durham, who lived in the
same age, made very bold with Turgot's performance, and leaving out some few
passages relating to Turgot's person, transcribed his book, and published it
under his own name. Notwithstanding the conjecture of Pits and Bale, it is plain
Turgot wrote his Annals or History in Latin. -- Collier, vol. i. p. 307.

The CUSTOM of BURYING PRIORS.
The priors of the house of Durham were accustomed in ancient time to be buried
in their boots, and wound in their cowls by the barber, as the monks used to be
buried. The dead prior was carried out of his lodgings in the priory, to the
chamber in the infirmary, called the Dead Man's Chamber, there to remain a
certain time: At night he was carried into a chapel opposite to that chamber
door, called St Andrew's Chapel, and was watched all that night by the children
of the almery, reading David's psalms over him; and two monks either of kindred
or kindness, were appointed to sit all night at his feet, mourning for him. In
the morning he was carried into the chapter house, where the same solemn
service was performed for him, which the monks had at their burial; thence he
was carried through the parlour into the centry-garth to be buried, where every
prior lay under a sine marble stone: And the monks and barber buried him with a
little chalice of silver, other metal, or wax, which was laid upon his breast
within the coffin, and his blue bed was held over him by four monks till he was
buried, which the barber had for his pains, for making the grave and burying
him, as he had for the monks.

Afterward the priors were buried within the church, and not in the
centry-garth, in the same order and habit, with the mi^re, and all other
furniture, as their predecessors were buried before them in the centry-garth --
Ancient Customs of the Church at Durham.


. He was buried in the chapter house, between bishops Walcher and William.

After Turgot's departure for the Sea of St Andrew's, unhappy dissentions took
place between the monastery and bishop Flambard; no prior was appointed for a
considerable time; and the duties of archdeacon, official, and vicar general,
were severed from the office of prior: The bishop also possessed himself of
several of the conventual estates, as lands beyond the bridge which he built,
called Framwelgate or Durham bridge, Staindrop, Blakiston, lands in Wolviston
and Burdon, and the church of Siggeston.

Before we advance further in the history of this church, it is necessary to
observe, that the monks translated thither were of the Benedictine order. They
followed the rules of St Benedict, who was born at Norsi, in the dukedom of
Spoletto, in Italy, about the year 480, and died about 543. But his rule seems
not to have been confirmed till 52 years after his death, when pope Gregory the
Great gave a sanction to it. The habit of these monks was a black loose coat,
or a gown of stuff reaching down to their heels, with a cowl or hood of the
same, and a scapulary; and under that, a white habit, as large as the former,
made of flannel, with boots on their legs; and from the color of their outward
habit, they were generally called Black monks. This rule was introduced into
England in king Edgar's time, but never perfectly observed till after the
Conquest. Of this order were all our cathedral priories, except Carlisle and
most of the richest abbeys in England.

The Benedictines were obliged to perform their devotion seven times within
four-and-twenty hours Concord. Regular, collected by St Benedict, and published
with a comment by Friar Aenard 1638. -- Fuller's Chapter Hist. lib. vi. p. 287. --
Collier's Ecc. Hist. lib. ii. p. 107.
. At cock-crowing, or the NOCTURNAL: This service was performed at two o'clock
in the morning: The reason for pitching upon this hour, is taken partly from
David's saying, At midnight I will praise the Lord, and partly from a tradition
of our Savior's rising from the dead about that time. MATINS: These were said
at the first hour, or, according to our computation, at six o'clock: At this
time the Jewish morning sacrifice was offered: The angels likewise were
supposed to have acquainted the women with our Savior's resurrection about
this hour. The TIERCE; which was at nine in the morning, when our Savior was
condemned and scourged by Pilate. The SEXTE, or twelve at noon. The NONE, or
three in the afternoon: At this hour it is said our Savior gave up the ghost;
besides which circumstance, it was a time for public prayer in the temple at
Jerusalem. VESPERS, at six in the afternoon: The evening sacrifice was then
offered in the Jewish temple; and our Savior is supposed to have been taken
down from the cross at this hour. The COMPLINE: This service was performed
after seven, when our Savior's agony in the garden, it is believed, begun. The
monks going to bed at eight, had six hours to sleep before the Nocturnal began:
If they went to bed after that service, it was not, as we understand, reckoned
a fault; but after mattins they were not allowed that liberty. At the tolling
of the bell for prayers, the monks were immediately to leave off their
business; and herein the canon was so strict, that those who copied books, or
were clerks in any business, and had begun a text letter, were not allowed to
finish it. Those who were employed abroad about the business of the house, were
presumed to be present, and excused other duties; and that they might not
suffer by being elsewhere, they were particularly recommended to the divine
protection. The monks were obliged to go always two together; this was done to
guard their conduct, to prompt them to good thoughts, and furnish them with a
witness to defend their behavior. From Easter to Whitsuntide the primitive
church observed no fasts; at other times the religious were bound to fast till
three o'clock on Wednesdays and Fridays; but the twelve days in Christmas were
excepted in this canon. Every day in Lent they were enjoined to fast till six
in the evening: During this solemnity, they shortened their refreshment,
allowed fewer hours for sleep, and spent more time in their devotions; but they
were not permitted to go into voluntary austerities, without leave from the
abbot. They were not to talk in the refectory at meals, but hearken to the
scriptures read to them at that time. The Septimarians, so called from their
weekly offices of readers, waiters, cooks, etc. were to dine by themselves,
after the rest. Those who were absent about business, had the same hours of
prayer prescribed, though not the same length of devotions. Those sent abroad,
and expected to return at night, were forbidden to eat till they came home: But
this canon was sometimes dispensed with. The Compline was to be solemnly sung
about seven at night: The service concluded with this verse, Set a watch, O
Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. After this service the
monks were not allowed to talk, but went to bed immediately. They were all to
sleep in the same dormitory, but not two in a bed: They lay in their clothes.
For small faults they were excluded the public table; but for greater, were
debarred religious commerce, and the service of the chapel: And those
conversing with a person under such censure, were liable to the same
punishment. Incorrigible criminals were expelled the monasteries. When a
brother was again received after expulsion, he lost his seniority, and was
placed the last in the convent. Every monk was to have two coats and two cowls;
and when they had new clothes, their old ones were given to the poor: Each had
a table book, a knife, a needle, and a handkerchief: The furniture of the bed
was a mat, blanket, rug, and pillow. The superior was never to dine alone; so,
when there were no strangers, he was to invite some of his brethren to his
table. -- Such were the regulations of this monastery.

In the year 1109 the bishop consented to nominate

ALGAR
to be prior Wharton's Ang. Sac. p. 786. -- Lel. Col. vol. i. part 2, p. 390,
391.
. He presided over the monastery till the year 1137, (according to Stevens)
when he departed this life. The bishop was reconciled to the convent in this
prior's time, and in the year 1128 restored several of the possessions which he
had usurped, and filled the vacant offices. In a solemn act of expiation, he
confirmed the restitution, by offering a ring at the high altar, and granting
two several written charters to that purpose Vide notes to vol. i. p. 151, of
this work, where the charters are set forth. The ring was in that age (...) a
sacred emblem of unity and solemn compact.
. He also enlarged and ornamented the common hall of the monastery, and gave to
the convent the hermitage, church, and possessions of Finchale. He opened out
the north front of the cathedral church, and cleared away all the buildings
which crowded the area or plain between the cathedral and castle, rendering it
a level and beautiful square, which then took the name of the Placea, or Green
Place, of which we shall speak in course. After this prelate's death, the monks
proceeded in the building of the church, and during the vacancy of the Sea
finished that great work.

Galfrid, surnamed Rufus, who succeeded to the bishopric, built the
chapter house for the convent. Soon after Algar's death,

ROGER
was made prior; a man of the most pious life, brought up from infancy in the
discipline of the cloister. He held a controversy with archdeacon Wazo,
touching the place of honor on the right hand of the bishop; which was
adjudged to be the prior's right, by bishop William de Sancta Barbara, in the
year 1147. He held his dignity during the whole time of Cumin's usurpation, and
departed this life in the year 1149 A^g. S^c. p. 78.
.

LAWRENCE
was then made prior Angl. Sac. p. 787.
; after whose coming in bishop William survived only three years, and was
succeeded by bishop Pudsey, in the year 1153. The prior is described as a man
of approved discretion, of a heart superior to evil, possessing a refined
eloquence, and duly disciplined in religious rules. Strenuous in the matter of
Pudsey's election, he was included with the rest of the religious body in the
sentence of excommunication pronounced by the archbishop of York, and underwent
the discipline of the whip in Beverley church; after which he traveled to Rome
with bishop Pudsey, and died as he was returning in the year 1154. His remains
were brought to Durham, and interred in the cemetery-yard The custom of burying
within the church had not then taken place.
. He was a man of singular prudence and learning, a great writer, and many of
his works are spoken of with much applause. There are nine MSS. of his in the
bishop's library Angl. Sac. p. 787. -- Stevens' Mon. vol. i. p. 351. -- Lel.
Col. vol. ii. p. 365. vol. iii. p. 41. -- De Scrip. vol. i. c. 174.
. He was succeeded by

ABSALOM,
a person of whom little more is known than that he had a foreign education,
and was but a shallow scholar. He was under the bishop's displeasure during the
whole time he held this high office, and from weakness and want of resolution
suffered the angry prelate to infringe the privileges of the convent in various
instances. He departed this life in the year 1162 Geof. de Coldingham. --
Wharton's Ang. Sac. p. 781, 787. -- MS. B. iv. 26, p. 1. In the library of the
dean and chapter of Durham. -- Hic incipiunt instituta priorum Dunelm.
ecclesiae sacta per consensum capituli. Constitutum est in capitulo a priore
Absalom and conventu, ut in mandato quod fit in coena d'ni unusquisq. monachus
duos pauperes habeat et sexternos denarios; singulis dans pauperibus. Et ad hoc
assignavit duas marcas de eccl'ia de Aclea, et xv den. de villa de
Cramelingtona. Quod si denarii defecerint de duabus marcis que ad hoc deputate
sunt de eccl'ia de Aclea, de communi suppleantur, donec redditus ad hoc
deputetur qui possit sufficere.

Ex hac nota collegi potest, suisse ea aetate in coenobio Dunelm. monachos
saltem quinquaginta. -- Randal's MSS.

In statutis prioris T. vid. p. 131, note (), tunicae 50 dantur annuatim
conventui.


.

THOMAS
was soon after elected prior. He could not brook the insolence which bishop
Pudsey discovered on every occasion, and was of too great rectitude of mind to
suffer passively the infringements that prelate repeatedly made on the rights
of his monastery. He entered into a contest with the bishop concerning the
church of Allerton. The monks not supporting their prior in this just suit, the
bishop deposed him, or constrained him by his persecutions to resign. In
disgust with the world, he retired to one of the Farne islands, in which St
Cuthbert formerly had his residence, and, restoring some of the buildings,
lived the life of a recluse, and died there in 1163 Geoff. de Cold. -- Ang.
Sac. p. 721, 787. -- Stevens' Mon. vol. i. p. 351.
.

GERMAN
succeeded in the year 1163. He was a monk of this house, and described to be
of a patient and forbearing disposition, prudent and peaceful; that, from his
predecessor's example, he thought it better to submit to the troubles of the
monastery, than increase them by fruitless contention: He continued prior to
the time of his death, which happened in the year 1186. In his time,
restitution was made to the convent of several matters which bishop Flambard
had taken away, as well as others withheld by the then prelate Geof. de Cold.
-- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 721. -- Wharton, p. 788. -- MS. lib. iv. 26. Dec. et
Cap. -- Deinde constituit Germanus prior, ut unusquisque monachus in predicto
mandato tres pauperes habeat et novem denarios. Et ad hoc assignavit xvs. de
capella de Ertona. -- MS. lib. iv. 24. Folio tertio inscribitur haec notula
(Biblioth. Dec. et Cap.) Anno ab incarnatione D'ni Mo. Co. Lxxvo. quo rex
Henricus major recepit legantias et fidelitates de Scottis apud Eboracum,
Dusgal silius Sumerledi et Stephanus Capellanus suus et Adam de Stanford
receperunt fraternitatem eccl'ie n're ad pedes S'ci Cuthb'ti, in vigilia S'ci
Bartholomei et idem Dusgal obtulit ibi duos annulos aureos S'co Cuthb'to et
promisit se singulis annis quamdiu vixerit daturum conventui unam marcam sive
in denariis sive in equivalentia.


; but it was not till the time of his successor,

BERTRAM,
that the abbot's seat in the choir and chapter house was reassumed, the priors
having been denied that place of honor for several years, whilst under the
prelate's displeasure. It appears that the office of prior was vacant for two
years, Bertram not being elected till the year 1188 or 1189. He survived bishop
Pudsey, and for some years before his death had power to conciliate the mind of
that prelate, and reconcile him to the convent Geof. de Cold. -- Wharton's
Angl. Sac. p. 721. -- Warton, 788. -- Stevens' Mon. vol. i. p. 351. -- MS. lib.
iv. 26. Dec. et Cap. -- D'nus Bertramus prior cum concilio et consensu capituli
statuit, ut unusquisque monachis in predicto mandato v. pauperes habeat et ad
hoc assignavit xxs. annuatim de bladis et de pasturis de Heworth. Et constituit
ut annuatim in die S'ti Cuthberti in quadragesima pascantur centum pauperes in
curia S'ti Cuthberti; et totidem in translatione ejusdem. Item constituit cum
concilio capituli festivitatem omnium Sanctorum principalem, et festivitatem
purificationis beati Marie V'ginis similiter. Et in annunciatione et in
nativitate S'te Mar^e panem dominicum in refectorio. Et in adventu D'ni et in
septuagesima wastellas et albas sabas sicut in quadragesima. Statuit etiam ut
in die Animarum pascantur centum pauperes in curia S'ti Cuthberti de quibus
sexaginta sint el'ici qui psalteria sua cantent pro animabus o'in. fidelium
desunctorum. Et similiter in crastino die pro animabus omnium parentum et
benefactorum nostrorum siet. Et utroq. die singuli ^l'iei recipiant singulos
denarios.


.

Hugh Pudsey, after the example of his predecessors, was desirous of
contributing to the beauty and magnificence of the church at Durham, and
projected a sumptuous addition toward the east. The only author who mentions
this, is Geoffrey de Coldingham Wharton's Ang. Sac. p. 722, 723.
, who tells us, that he began to erect a new work at the east end of the
church, for which he imported from abroad marble columns and bases; but having
laid the foundations, and carried up the walls to some considerable height,
employing the most skilful artists therein, the building repeatedly failed and
shrunk, to the imminent peril of the workmen; which sufficiently indicated to
him, that the intended work was not acceptable to Heaven and St Cuthbert: So
that he desisted therefrom, and built the Gallilee at the west end of the
church, for the reception of women; where they might have the benefit of the
holy offices, being otherwise debarred from the solemnities. It does not appear
the marble columns were placed in the Gallilee. It must be observed in this
place, that the eastern transept of the church is rather a singularity, and was
not built near the time of the other parts; the architecture throughout the
whole being different. Great improvements in architecture were made, from the
era of the foundation by bishop William, to the time of bishop Pudsey's death:
The more elegant Gothic order took place of the Saxon, and the pointed arches
came in use: All the windows of this part of the edifice, in the lower
arrangement to the east, are pointed: The clustered pilasters are chiefly of
marble, though shamefully defaced and bedaubed with a wash of lime and ochre:
There are no marble pilasters in any other part of the church, or any of the
like order of masonry. Although no historian tells us who finished this work,
yet that it was begun by bishop Pudsey is certain, and left by him unfinished
for reasons hid in superstitious allegory; probably it was completed in the
time of bishop Farnham and prior Thomas Melsonby. The Gallilee, said to be
built by bishop Pudsey, does not appear to be wholly a new erection; it is
probable he improved it, and appropriated the place to the pious purpose before
ascribed to it: It is formed with a triple range of pillars, so as to divide it
into five ailes, nearly of equal width; the arches are circular, and ornamented
with zigzag mouldings; the pillars are light, and clustered; above the arches
is a dead facing or wall, which goes up to the roof, without any apparent
utility, and far from being ornamental; the windows are pointed. It is noted to
us, that a certain part of the most ancient churches had a place called the
Gallilee, where the processions ended E Catalog. Cod. MS. Ecclesiae Cathedr.
Dunelm. L. 4to. 13 Lucas Glosatus.

In fine libri haec nota legitur: "Dicitur quod in primitiva ecclesia omni
quinta seria faciebant processionem in memoriam eductionis discipulorum in
Bethaniam, et ascensionis Domini in coelum, et discipulorum etiam in templo
laudantium et expectantium: Que postea translata est in diem dominicam, et sit
singulis diebus dominicis. Alii dicunt quod processio sit in diebus dominicis,
ad significandum, quod discipuli secuti lunt in Galileam: Unde in quibusdam
ecclesiis stationem faciunt in Galilea."

Hanc notam exscripsi, ut pateret mos ecclesiasticus processiones faciendi,
saltem ante ^am aetatem, qua codex hic scriptus est, circ. an. 1150.

Quaere an Galilea in occidentali part hujus ecclesiae (Dunelm.) nomen inde
traxerit, quod stationes et processiones iste in ea fierent. -- Randal's MSS.


: Those processions were made on the Sabbath Day, to signify or commemorate the
passage of the disciples into Gallilee; so that in every church where those
processions were practiced, a certain station therein had that name.

Bishop Pudsey gave to the church many rich ornaments, and greatly enlarged the
power of the monastery: The Yorkshire churches, until the time of this prelate,
appertained to the bishops, as appears by a deed of composition made with the
archbishop of York about the year 1174; but Pudsey granted them to the convent
Compositio inter Rogerum archiep. E^orum et epise. Dunolm. super ecclesis St.
Cuthberti. Vide Hoveden, p. 309, edit. 1596. -- Mon. Angl tom. ^. p. 16^.

Capella et cimiterium de Alvertona in manu. prioris Hagustald erunt, ita quod
archiepiscopus non coget aliquem ibi sepeliri, nec episcopus prohibe^it.

Ecclesia Hagustald crisma et oleum recipiet a Dunelmensi ecclesia, sicut
solet: Prior quoq. ve^et ad synodum Dunelm. clerici et canonici Hagustald ab
episcopo Dunelm. ordines recipient, parochi^m Hagustald in Pentecosten
visitabunt, si voluerint. Prior Hagustald omnia placita ecclesiastica illius
parochite placitabit sine paena pecuniaria, et pecunias dabit.

Decedente vero priore Richardo, qui nunc est, eam auctoritatem habebit
episcopus Dunelmensis in alterius prioris constitutione, quam idem prior
Richardus, et prior Guiseburn, et Petrus, s^ater prioris de Brenlynton,
juraverunt ecclesiam Dunelmensem habuisse in constitutione ejusdem prioris
Richard siquam habuisse eam juraverunt.

De ecclesiis B. Cuthberti quarum h^ec sunt nomina in archidiaconatu Johannis
silij Letoldi. Ecclesia de Hamingburgh, ecclesia de Skipewith, ecclesia de
Alverton, ecclesia de Bre^teby, ecclesia de Osmunderlay, ecclesia de
Siggistone, ecclesia de Leic, ecclesia de Ott^mtona, ecclesia de Cre^^,
ecclesia de Holteby. In archidia-conatu Gaufridi in Eboraco, ecclesia omnium
Sanctorum in Usegate, ecclesia S. Petri Parva, et dimidia ecclesia S.
Trinitatis. In archidiaconatu thesaurarij, ecclesia de Hovedon, ecclesia de
Wellet, ecclesia de Brentingham, ecclesia de Walkintona; non exiget
archiepiscopus denarios synodales. Si vero clerici earundum ecclesiarum, vel
laici de dominicis manerijs B. Cuthberti in Eboraciscira aliquid dignum
ecclesiastica castigatione perpetraverint, per archiepiscopum emendabitur tali
prius facta sub monitione, quod episcopus interesse poterit vel minister ejus.

Haec fupradicta firmaverunt archiepiscopus et episcopus fide invicem
interposita se servaturos sine dolo et fraud quamdiu vixerit, sine prejudicio
utriusq. ecclesiae imposterum post alterutrum decessum.

Preterea de capellis de Ottrintona et Walgaby plenarium rectum tenebit
archiepiscopus episcopo in curia sua sicut equus et favorabilis judex. Et si
episcopus alteram vel utramq. nullo se opponente adquirere poterit, non plus
exigetur ab illis quam a caeteris B. Cuthberti ecclesijs.

Si persona de Levintona adversus episcopum de capella de Werkessale tam --
voluerit, episcopus in curia archiepiscopi judicio stabit, episcopi pro amore
archiepiscopus reseisiet Gamalielem de decimis quas postulat, salva pensione,
etc. Testibus A. Abbate Rival. Rad. Ralph was treasurer of York anno Domini
1093 and 1113; or Ralph de Warnavilla, who was archdeacon of York anno 1173.
[The above instrument is supposed to bear date A. D. 1174. -- Ex MS. C. Hunter,
M. D. and Randal.]
thesaur. Eborum, Johanne fill. Letoldi archidiac. Eborum, etc.

Hugonis episcopi Dunelm. confirmatio ecclesiarum in dioc. Ebor. priori et
conventui Dunelm.
Hugo, Dei gratia, Dun. ep'us, archidiaconis, et baron, clericis et laicis,
Francis et Anglis, cunctisq. hominibus S. Cuthberti de Everwichescire. salutem.
Cum singularum ecclesiarum in nostra diocesi consistentium cura et solicitudo
nobis incumbat, illius praecipue utilitati et quieti operam impendere
satagimus; cum Deo auctore specialiter assignati sumus. Ea propter caritatis
iustinctu commoniti priori et conventui S. Cuthberti damus et concedimus, et
nostro munimine confirmamus personatum omnium ecclesiarum quas habent tam in
dominijs meis quam in terris propriis vel alienis quae ad episcopatum vel
ecclesiam nostram pertinent. Ex quibus has proprijs exprimendas duximus
vocabulis, ecclesiam de Allvertuna, ecclesiam de Mathrebruntuna, ecclesiam de
Siggistuna, ecclesiam omnium Sanctorum in Eboraco, cum duabus eccl'ijs alijs,
ecclesiam de Holteby, ecclesiam de Walchintuna, ecclesiam de Welletuna,
ecclesiam de Brentyngham, ecclesiam de Offendene, ecclesiam de Hemyngburgh,
ecclesiam de Skypwith. Harum omnium ecclesiarum sive capellarum ad easdem
ecclesias pertinentium personatum et dispositionem eis ita libere concedimus,
ut quoscunq. eligerint vicarios per se, sive per vicarios suos absq. omni
contradictione introducant, assignatis eis portionibus quibus sustentari
valiant, et episcopalia jura persolvere, et honest ecclesiae deservire.
Sancimus itaq. et episcopale auctoritate prohibemus, nequis de caetero
ecclesiastica secularisve persona presatam dignitatem auferre vel diminuere,
seu quolibet modo perturbare praesumat, sed sicut a nobis pietatis intuitu
concessum est, perpetuis temporibus inviolabiliter observetur. Si quis autem
hanc nostrae constitutionis seriem sciens ille timere contraire praesumpserit,
indignationem Dei omnipotentis, et beatissimi confessoris ejus Cuthberti, se
noverit incursurum. Hujus donationis et concessionis testes sunt Gwazo et
Johannes archidiac. Mag. Laurentius, Theodbaldus, et alius Theodbaldus, Mag.
Thomas de Jorevals, et Helias clerici episcopi, Alanus presbiter de Valeshend,
Mag. Roger Testard, Helias et Rad. de Werkeworth, Richardus presbiter de
Pitinduna, Dolsinus presbiter de Elwete, Rodbertus et Michael de Billingham,
Helias Escoland, Thomas silius Osberti, et multi alii clerici et laici.


.

On bishop Pudsey's death, Hugh Bardolph had custody of the temporalties of the Sea, whose officers entered the church, and took by violence the keys of the
city gates from St Cuthbert's shrine. Philip, who succeeded to the bishopric,
held violent contentions with the monastery, prior Bertram strenuously
maintaining the rights and privileges of his convent. The persecution this
prelate exercised against the religious body, was scandalous to religion; but
how far the injuries and indignities he received might irritate, we know not
Geof. de Cold. -- Wharton's Ang. Sac. p. 727, 728, 729. -- Vide notes, vol. i.
p. 189.
. Prior Bertram survived him, but did not live to see his successor in the Sea;
for dissentions arose concerning the election of a prelate, the convent not
being willing to submit to the papal injunctions, or the king's nomination; and
during this state of perplexity, the prior departed this life in the year 1209.

The disagreement which subsisted between the late prelate and his convent
prevented improvements taking place in the sacred edifices; and it is
apprehended the eastern transept of the cathedral church was neglected during
that bishop's time.

In the annals of the bishops it is observed, that a vacancy of the Sea took
place after the death of Philip of Poicteu, for the space of nine years and
upwards, in which period, Wharton notes, much darkness and perplexity appear in
the history of this church, occasioned by the distraction of the religious
body, who had neglected their records; so that, if during this vacancy the
eastern transept was proceeded in, it is not mentioned by the scribes of the
house in any of their chronicles.

WILLIAM,
a native of Durham, was elected successor to Bertram during the vacancy of the Sea, the king having granted license to the convent for that purpose. He
departed this life in the year 1214, or, as some say, 1219. If we rest upon the
credit of Wharton, he died before Richard de Marisco had the bishopric. Geoff.
de Coldingham tells us of an honorable distinction given to this prior of
Durham by the legate archbishop of York, at a council held there, in which the
prior, in the place of the bishop of Durham, had the right hand of the legate
both in council and at dinner Geof. de Cold. -- Wharton's Ang. Sac. p. 726. --
Ibid. p. 788.
.

RALPH KERNECH
succeeded to the office of prior, and governed the church for nineteen years.
He departed this life in the year 1203. In the second year of the episcopacy of
Richard de Marisco a reconciliation took place between the prelate and
monastery, and the bishop by his charter confirmed to the prior and convent all
the liberties and privileges granted to them by bishop William de Carilepho;
and as an additional bounty, appropriated to them the church of Dalton, (alias
Datton) for the better support of their house, and also confirmed the
appropriations of the churches of Aycliff and Pittington.

In the year 1228 Richard Poor was translated to the Sea: He lived on terms of
amity with the monastery, entering into a convention with the prior and
convent, for preventing future disputes with their bishops, quieting their
possessions, and ascertaining their privileges Vide record at length in the
notes, vol. i. p. 202.

Ranulphus Kerneck successit, et obiit anno 1233. -- Wharton, p. 788.

Great differences between Richard de Marisco and the monks in this prior's
time. -- Vide M. Paris ao 1221, 1226. -- Camden's Remains, p. 322. -- Grey's
Notes.

MS. lib. iv. 26. D. et Cap.

1214. -- Constitu. est p. Radulfum priorem primo anno prioratus sui q'd viij
equi omnium hospitum habeant quarterium avenae. Et omnes hospites
perhendinantes per duas vel tres noctes habeant eandem assisam. Et quicunq.
fuerit marescallus et qui deliberavit p'bendam jurabit q'd dictam assisam
fideliter tenebit. Et ad hoc assignata est capella de Croxtayl cum omnibus
decimis et oblationibus et obventionibus de Croxtayl et de Sunderland et tota
decima bladi de ultra aquam. -- Item statutum est de eisdem ut in mandato in
coena d'ni sint super quindecies viginti pauperes et viij, quor. singuli
quatuor recipient denarios, qui denarij sunt ita assignati, de decima d'ni de
Heworth iij marc. de terra capellae ejusdem villae et de decima ejusdem terrae
xxx s. viij d. de terra de Cremelington dimid. marc. de terra de capella de
Staynton x s. et per specialem assignationem conversus de terra de Heworth quam
-- xv s. summa denariorum c s. et xxviij d. summa pauperum ut dictum est
quindecies viginti et viij. -- Item statutum est per eosdem postea ut qualibet
die Veneris, et qualibet vigilia p. annu. s. natal. Pasch. Pentec. Joh'is Bapt.
et omnium Apostulorum, et qualibet vigilia Beatae Virg'is et Sancti Cuthberti,
et vigilia omnium Sanctorum tota cervisia que in justiciis remanserit cedat
elemosinario ad usum pauperum qui in elemosinaria sunt fideliter eroganda. --
Item statutum est postea per eosd. ut in anniversario Will'i e'pi primi
singulis annis in nocte precedente totus conventus, scilicet omnes qui
interesse possunt, eant ad S. Cuthb'tum cum verba mea et tribus orationibus s.
Deus qui inter Ap'licos singulariter et postea D'ne qu'is, et Fidelium. Et
eodem die pascantur in curia centum pauperes, et cervisa que in eodem die in
justiciis remanet cedat elemosinario. Haec constitutio facta est per Radulphum
priorem per commune concilium totius capituli Dunelm. quam qui augmentaverit
Deus ei retribuat, diminuere nullus presumat. Si quis autem presumpserit,
indignationem Dei et S'tae Mar. et Sanctorum Oswaldi et Cuthb'ti se incurrere
non ambigat. -- Item statutum est per eosdem quod cum aliquis monachus domi
obierit, sacerdos qui missam matutinalem celebravit, cum crucis et aquae
benedictae portionibus eat ad tumbam fratris desuncti per xxx dies cotidie post
vel ante capitulum cum vj psalmis, s. verba mea, etc. cum voce mea, et oratione
Absolve subjunctis, Deus cujus miseratione. et Fidelium Deus: In redeundo autem
dicant, Miserere mei Deus, cum oratione Satisfaciat. Idem vero sacerdos vel cui
jusserit xiij pauperes per hostium retro chori introducat. quod et siet per
triginta dies pro anima fr'is desuncti. -- Item statutum est q'd per eosdem
quod cum aliquis monachus apud Dunelm. obierit, habeat in die sepulturae suae
xx sol. ad emend. panem ad erogand. pauperibus s. x s. per manum prioris de
camera prioris, et x. s. per manum supprioris de communa.


.

THOMAS MELSONBY
was elected prior in 1233; and on the decease of bishop Richard, in the year
1237, was nominated to succeed him, and with much reluctance submitted to the
choice. He was objected to by the king, who alleged many things against him of
a political nature Vol. i. p. 204.
, and others personal: That he was an infringer of the liberties of the church,
was diseased in body, had broken his vow, and disregarded religious
injunctions, particularly the ordained fasts; that he was guilty of simony, was
illiterate, and such like charges, equally slanderous and untrue. After such an
opposition, unwilling the Sea should longer continue vacant, he renounced his
election, and bishop Farnham succeeded. Fearful of the king's resentment, he
resigned his office in the year 1244, and retired to Farne island, where in
acts of piety and charity he spent the remainder of his life. His body was
brought to Durham to be interred. In the year 1242 the prior, with the
approbation and assistance of the bishop, began to remove the whole of the old
roof from the cathedral church, and gave this noble edifice the additional
elegance of a vault of stone-work. Willis ascribes this work to the bishop in
these words: Bishop Farnham, (temp. Hen. III.) vaulted over the roof of the
church with stone. Whoever pays due attention to the mode of architecture in
this part of the edifice, will easily discover that the roof of the choir and
eastern transept are of similar workmanship. Graystanes, who was a monk of
Durham, and lived within a century of the time we are speaking of, is most to
be credited; and his words are, Anno Domini 1242, incoepit Thomas prior novam
fabricam ecclesiae circum festum S. Michaelis, juvante episcopo, etc. Rob. de
Graystanes. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 737.
The prior also projected an additional work; for it is equally observable,
that the tower of the steeple called in Davies's book the New Work and the
Lanthern, are of the same order and workmanship, and express the same date MS.
lib. iv. 26. D. et Cap.

Radulphus, prior Dun. de consensu et voluntate conventus sui assignavit
redditus omnes subscriptos de terris et domibus de proprio laborae et expensis
suis adquisitis ad saciend. singulis annis conventui festum in die Sanctorum,
Cosme et D^mi^ni, et ad pascend. ccc pauperes eodem die in curia pro anima ejus
similiter et ad festum conventui faciend in die anniversarij ejusdem et ad ccc
pauperes pascendos. Ad quie omnia sacienda assignavit hos redditus s. de
domibus de Novo Castro quas Alanus Gateganger aliquando tenuit de dicto pri^
^s. D^ q^ ^nit de Henrico de Wolvyston ij marc. etc. etc.


. The faciae under the windows of the eastern transept are ornamented with
rose-niches; the gallery of the lanthern is formed of open roses. The gallery
of the tower of Melros abbey is similar to this, and that edifice was built in
the twelfth century For a description of this abbey, vide View of
Northumberland, vol. i. p. 295.

Stevens' Monast. vol. i. p. 351. -- That he began the new fabric of the church
Mich. 1242: The bishop contributing the church of Bedlington and other matters
thereto.

1233. Tho. 2d's de Melsamby, all is Welscomb. etc. -- Grey's Notes.

MS. lib. iv. 26. D. et Cap. -- Hic incipiunt statuta d'in Thomae prioris, etc.

1235. -- Imprimis, propter pericula quae pervenire possent ex ignorantia
reddituum et aliorum ecclesiae proventuum statutum est, ut singulis annis circa
festum Sancti Gregorij convocentur supprior et alij fratres ad hoc vocandi. Et
ostendatur eis status domus in quibus aut quantum creverit annuatim aut
diminuta fuerit. Et ordinatum est etiam et statutum ut scribantur duo rotuli
continentes totus domus, possessiones, redditus, et omnia alia domni
pertinentia. Et sit unus in custodia supprioris, et eorum qui deputantur ad
custodiam ^^gilli unam cum sigillo reponendus. Alius in custodia prioris cum
opus fuerit circumferendus, ut si ^asu contigerit unum amitti, possit ^ieri
recursus ad alium qui in custodia fuerit reservatus.

Item statutum est per eosdem, ut singulis annis dentur conventui 50 tunicae de
longitudine sufficienti et latitudine ita quod capere possit duas pellic. ad
minus de saga vel de sargia p. manum camerarij. Quae tunicae singulis annis
innovare debent. Qui nova recipient reddant priori singulis annis veteres
pauperibus el'ieis caritative distribuendas. Qui veterem non reddiderit, careat
nova donce satisfecerit plenariae. Quae tunicae distribuendae sunt suppriori et
omnibus qui in conventu sunt exceptis novitiis et juvencellis et
obedientiariis, s. domino priore, terrario, camerario, hostilario, sacrista,
clemosinario, qui sibi provideant. Ad has autem tunicas inveniendas assignatae
sunt x marce de pensione ^^^l'iae de Daltona quae reddi solebant ad scaccarium
d'ni prioris.

Item ad reprimendam malignantium temeritatem statutum est per eosdem, ut
secundum antiquam et approbatam consuetudinem ecclesiae Dunelm. excommunicen^ur
in anno in ge^ere acceneis candelis et pulsat^^ ^^impanis solemniter omnes illi
qui scienter et prudenter perturbant pa^em ecclesiae Dunelm et qui ^nfringunt
vel minuunt jura, libertates, et possessiones ecclesiae Dun. ^. d'ni e'pi et
prioris et convent^s Dun. s. d'nica in octab. natal. D'ni, d'nica clausi Pasch.
et d'nica infra octab. S'^i Cuthb^ti in Septe'bri.

Item statutum est p. eosdem, ut nullus liber accommodetur alicui per librarium
vel per alium, nisi ^e^perit memoriale aequipollens nisi fuerit ad instantiam
d'ni episcopi.


. The windows of the lanthern are pointed and ornamented with tabernacle work
in pinnacles, which kind of decoration appears no where but on the buttresses
of the east front. The pilasters to the windows in the lanthern are similar to
those in the eastern transept, and not like any other parts of the edifice. It
is not easy to determine what kind of center tower this church first had; but,
from the uniformity of the outside plan, it may be conjectured it was similar
to the western towers, and without much ornament. Three bells hung in the
center tower, which were rung to give notice of the services of the church;
four bells for other occasions, as rejoicings, etc. were being in the
north-west tower adjoining the Gallilee. The new work or lanthern terminated at
the gallery vulgarly called the bellringers walk. The upper tower was added
some years after, in bishop Stichill's time. It is impossible prior Thomas
should, in the two years preceding his resignation, complete so great and
expensive a work; but certain it is, he first brought it forward.

BERTRAM DE MIDDLETON
was elected prior on the 22d of September 1244, and resigned that dignity on
the 15th of August 1258. Bishop Kirkham (on his accession in this prior's time)
confirmed to the monastery the grants of his predecessors, and gave them the
church of Heighington for the better support of hospitality, together with a
large tract of land at Horsley-Hope. In this prior's time, the papal grant of
the kingdom of Apulia and Sicily took place, for which the bishop of Hereford
engaged to the holy See, that the clergy of England should pay 38,000 marks, to
be borrowed for that purpose Rob. de Graystanes. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p.
738, 739.
Statutum d'ni Bertrami prioris.
1247. -- Anno incarnationis D'ni Mo. CCo. Xlvijo. statutum est a d'no B.
priore Dun. anno tertio prioratus sui de consensu capituli Dunelm. Ad
exaltationem ordinis et salutem animarum et religionis argumentum quod nullus
frater remaneat extra chorum post completorium nisi tantum hostilarius et
celerarius qui ad hospites recolligendos exterius regulariter deputati sunt;
circa quos ita providendum est, quod si reverenda et autentica persona
suscipiatur in monasterio cum talibus licebit eis si voluerint pro caritate et
exilcratione eorundem potare, dummodo non excedant in mora vel mensura
potationis per quam surripiat nimia satietas aut ebrietas, quae maxim
contraria est viris religiosis, etc. etc. With other rules of sobriety and
moderation.

For the anniversary. Ad pytanciam faciendam annuatim conventui, etc. in die
Sancti Nicholai cujus capella contiguam camerae suae construxit et dedicati
procuravit. Et pariter ad pascendos quingentos paup'es eodem die in cur. Dun.
quorum cc sint mulieres, quae pascantur extra curiam. Item ad unum capellanum
divina in perpetuum celebraturum in capella supra portam, sp'aliter per omnia
dicti Bertrami prioris, et omnium monachor. Dun. obeuntium cum Placebo, Dirige,
et Commendatione, xx^i sol. Et comedet in aula sicut alius capellanus celebrans
pro anima magistri Hen. de Melsonby. -- Item assignavit duas marc. et dimid. ut
qualibet die Ven'is per annum vij scholares literati et intelligentes et
provectae aetatis canant psalteria sua in capella supra portam, sup. quos
ha'eat curam capellanus qui pro t'pore celebraverit pro dicto priore et
monachis ut distinct cantent et compleant. Addito hoc quod omnibus diebus
Ven'is in quadragessima erunt xiij qui recipient singulos den. et h'ebunt
corrodia in aula dictis diebus cum prebendarijs, etc.


. Against this contract our prior appealed, alleging, that he and his convent
were at all times ready to obey the pope in things lawful and practicable; but
to spoil their churches of their goods, to subvert their liberties, and
straiten their maintenance, would be such an indignity to the church, scandal
to the clergy, and reproach to religion itself, that they never could assent
thereto. It cannot be doubted but this reply would prove offensive, as well to
the Sea of Rome as the crown of England; and in 1258 we see the prior resigning
his dignity, though the historians of that time do not immediately express it
to be in consequence of such displeasure. On the 17th of the calends of August
the prior petitioned the convent to admit of his resignation, and that they
would provide a maintenance for his retirement, alleging at once his want of
constitutional abilities to execute the duties of his high office, and also the
services he had undergone in forty years monastic life, fourteen of which he
had been prior; he asserted, he had obtained a bull for his dismission, but
would not use its authority. Messengers were accordingly sent to the bishop
with his requisition, who in return commanded his commissioners to hear the
allegations, and they by virtue of their authority admitted the same, and
committed the care of the spiritualties of the monastery to the sub-prior, and
the temporalties to R. de Waltham, constable of the castle. The convent
assigned to Bertram for his maintenance, the churches of Pittington,
Heighington, etc. Notwithstanding the great work he had carried on in the
church for two years, he left to his successor in the conventual treasury
11,000 marks. He was not only a zealous churchman, giving up his life to acts
of piety, but also a punctual maintainer of the rights of the monastery. He
left to the monastic library many of his compositions and learned works. His
name was held in pious veneration by the cloister. His frugality was manifested
in his management of the revenue allotted him, for therewith he not only
supplied the necessities of life, but was enabled to build at Beaurepaire a
lodge or summer retreat, with a chapel, not inferior in elegance to other
erections of the like nature in the diocese.

HUGH DE DERLYNGTON,
superior of the convent, in the same year Bertram resigned, was elected prior
MS. B. iv. 26. D. et Cap.

1265. -- An'o gr'e Mo.CCo.LXo. quinto, ordinavit et assignavit d'nus Hugo
prior Dun. de volantate et assensu conventus quinq. marc. argenti ad faciendma
pytaneiam conventui in die anniversarij ejus, et alias v. mare. ad comparanct.
species ad opus corundem inperpetuum: Quas quidem x marc. custodes commune
annuatim percipient per manum bursarij Dun. de terra de Herdewyke quam idem
prior comparavit. -- Item ad pascend. M pauperes in die anniversarij sui.
Similiter de voluntate et assensu conventus assignavit quinquaginta fol.
argenti annua^im in perpetuum percipiendos per manum bursarij Dunelm. de
ecclesia de Ealingtona tempore suo adquisita, etc.


, and possessed that dignity until the 8th day of January, 1272, when he
thought proper to abdicate the office, alleging his infirmities Rob. de
Graystanes -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 741.
. During the wars of the barons, he conducted himself so prudently, as to save
the possessions of the church from depredations by either party. He contributed
greatly to the magnificence of his convent. He built the belfry on the summit
of the great tower of the cathedral church, and enlarged the organ: He also
emparked Muggleswick and Beaurepaire. At Wardelau, as one author writes, he
erected a lodge or camera, a hall and chapel, which were afterward destroyed
by the Scots in their incursion: He built a lodge or camera at Muggleswick; the
remains of which, and also that at Beaurepaire, will be described in the
progress of this work Ibid. p. 741.
. In this prior's time, a bull was obtained from the pope for the appropriation
of Hoveden church for an addition of sixteen monks; but, at a considerable
expense, he procured the appointment to be converted into prebends,
apprehending they would prove as honorable and advantageous promotions, and as
acceptable to the clergy whom he wished to serve, as if the original
institution was maintained. This prior was distinguished for his hospitality
and charitable actions: Whenever he came to his house, the poor people, to whom
his kitchen was ever open, danced before him: P^ ^im the scriptures were
fulfilled, in clothing the naked and feeding the hungry. It is said of him,
that the common coinage of a denarius or penny was reduced to five mites, that
he might distribute handfuls of that small money to a greater number of
objects. When advanced in years, and obliged to travel in a chariot, he
constantly threw money from thence to the poor. He was a person of approved
wisdom, as well as of a magnificent mind. Frequent applications were made to
the bishop to receive his resignation, pleading his infirmities and age, which
in the event produced an altercation between the convent and prelate concerning
profession of obedience by the monks MSS. B. iv. p. 24. D and Chap. Lib.

Folio quarto inscribitur haec formula professionis quae a monachis Dunelm,
religionem ingredientibus fieri solebat: "Ego frater N. presbyter vel diaconus
promitto stabilitatem meam et conversionem morum meorum et obedientiam secundum
regulam S'ci Benedicti coram Deo et sanctis ejus in hoc monasterio, quod est
constructum in honorem Sanctae Mariae semper Virginis et Sancti Cuthberti
praesulis in praesentia D'ni. Amen."


, the convent alleging their prior was not of the same rank with others, he
having the privileges of an abbot, and the monk's profession was the right of
an abbot. But at length the convent agreed, that the monks should first make
profession to the prior and then to the prelate, and receive his solemn
benediction: Whereupon they sent messengers to the bishop, that they were
willing to make their profession and receive his benediction; but the business
was still delayed, on account of some formalities which remained unsettled,
until the 10th of January, when the bishop in the chapter house accepted the
prior's resignation, and the manors of Wardelau (according to our author's
words) and Muggleswick were assigned for his maintenance; the bishop added
Ryton thereto. These affairs being settled, a conversation took place between
one of the monks and the bishop, in which the bishop complained with warmth
that "he had suffered greater indignity and disrespect than any of his
predecessors;" but declared, "he would seek satisfaction in God's good time."
He had scarce departed the gates before his senescal, with the constable of the
castle and their officers, entered the convent, pronouncing, that they came at
the prelate's command, in his place, to have custody of the house during the
vacancy of the office of prior. The next day the senescal, calling the
sub-prior and other officers of the household into the hall, commanded the
porters, the marshal, and other secular servants of the monastery, to come
forth, saying, the house was in the custody of the lord bishop, therefore he
desired to see who were proper to take care of it, that he might take their
oaths of fidelity, remove those he did not approve, and substitute others in
their places. He was answered, such proceedings were altogether unprecedented;
and it was with difficulty he was persuaded to wait till (...) next day, to
give the convent time to consult the bishop thereon. Two of (...) ^ethren were
sent without delay to the bishop, with a petition for license to elect a prior;
on perusing which, he rejected it, not being addressed to him as supreme lord
and patron; alleging, if he was not patron, they were under no necessity to
seek a license. When the monks said the instrument was in the usual form, he
contradicted them, asserting, that after the death of prior Thomas, his
predecessor bishop Farnham for the same cause rejected the conventual petition.
On the return of the messengers, many of the convent recollected that the cause
of such precedented rejection was not as alleged by the bishop; for in the
instrument referred to, the bishop was addressed as father and patron in
spiritualties and temporalties, but the seal of the convent by accident had
been separated from the instrument before it came to the prelate's hands, which
occasioned it to be renewed before he granted his license. It was accordingly
set forth in the arguments on this subject, that as the bishop was in fact
patron of the church, no reason appeared why he should not be addressed as such
in their process; which was assented to. On the succeeding day letters were
issued, in which he was styled Reverend father and patron: Messengers being
sent therewith, they were graciously received, and license for the election of
a prior was immediately granted; in consequence of which the bishop's officers
were withdrawn from the convent.

In prior Bertram's time a bull was obtained from the Sea of Rome for quieting
the convent in their privileges, and confirming the same, of which Walter
archbishop of York granted his testimonial and certificate of inspection
Testimonium Walteri Gray archiepi Ebor. de inspectione bulloe Gregorij papoe.
-- Cartaur I. Eccl. Dun. p. 179.
OMNIBUS persons scriptum visuris vel audituris. Walterus, Dei gratia,
archie'pus Ebor. Angliae prim^^, (...) in (...). No^^^i^s ^as privilegium d'ni
Gregorij papae priori et conventui Dunelm. ecclesiae indultum, non abolitum,
non cancellatum, non in aliqua sui part vi^atum, sed integrum et papali bulla
bullatum in haec verba inspexisse: Gregorius episcopus servus servorum Dei,
dilectis silijs priori et conventui Dunelm. salutem et apostolicam
benedictionem. Cum a nobis petitur, quod justum est et honestum, tam vigor
aequitatis quam ordo exigit rationis, ut id per sollicitudinem officii nostri
ad debitum perducatur effectum. Ea propter dilecti in d'no filij, vestris
justis postulationibus grato concurrenses assensu, antiquas et rationabiles
ecclesiae vestrae consuetudines hactenus approbatas, libertates quoq. ac
immunitates per privilegia et indulgentias a Romany pontisicibus,
praedecessoribus nostris, ac caeteris ecclesiarum praelatis; nec non libertates
et immunitates secularium exactionum a regibus, principibus et aliis Christi
fidelibus eccl'iae vestrae concessas, sicut ea omnia just et pacifice
obtinetis, vobis et per vos eidem eccl'iae auctoritate apostolica confirmamus,
et praesentis scripti patrocinio communimus. Nulli ergo omnino homini liceat
hanc paginam nostrae confirmationis infringere, vel ei ausu temerario
contraire: Siquis autem hoc attemptare praesumpserit, indignationem
omnipotentis Dei, et beatorum Petri et Pauli apostolorum ejus se noverit
incursurum. Dat. Lateran. undecimo kal. Decembr. pontificatus nostri anno
tertio decimo. (1239.)

Nos igitur in signum et memoriam sempiternam inspectionis hujusmodi presenti
scripto apponi secimus signum nostrum. Salvis in omnibus auctoritate, jure et
possessione Ebor. eccl'iae in praemissis et quolibet praemissor. Ita quod per
nostri appositionem sigilli novum aliquid dictis priori et conventui, seu
Dunelm. eccl'iae non accrescal, et jus nostrum, successorum nostrorum, seu
Ebor. eccl'iae quantum ad possessionem vel quasi, seu proprietatem, quantum ad
ea vel ipsorum aliquod, nequaquam pereat seu etiam in aliquo minuatur. Dat.
apud Burton, decimo sexto kal. Novembris, pontificatus nostri anno tricesimo
octavo (1254.)


. In prior Hugh's time, the same archbishop certified the pensions due from the
churches belonging to the priory lying within the diocese of York; which was
afterward confirmed by archbishop Nevill Pensiones ecclesiarum prioratui de
Dunelm. de Howdenshir et Alvertonshir.
Universis Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Walterus Dei
gratia, archie'pus Eborum, etc. piam religionis observantiam et laudabilem
vitae conversationem cum hospitalitatis gratia in dilectis siliis priore et
conventu Dunolm. praecipue clarere prospicientes quorum etiam devotionem
approbantes et merita attendentes, simulq. paci et tranquillitati eorum
proficere cupientes, debitas et antiquas pensiones, quas de eccl'ijs ad
donationem eorum spectantibus in dioc. nostra percipere consueverunt, eisdem
pia confideratione concedimus et auctoritate pontificali confirmamus, videlicet.

De ecclesia de Rougeton iij marc. De ecclesia de Kirkeby Siggeston x marc. De
ecclesia S. Petri parvi in Ebor. 1 marc. De ecclesia omn. Sanctor. in Ebor. et
Holteby, med. de una et med. de altera L s. De ecclesia de Skypewyth 1 marc. De
ecclesia de Hemingburgh v marc. De ecclesia de Brantingham cum capel. de
Blaketost x marc. De ecclesia de Wolleton iij marc. De ecclesia de Walkyngton v
marc. De ecclesia de Normanton ij marc.
Quod ut ra^um sore et stabile inposterum perseveretur presenti scripto nostri
munimine sigilli consignat^ confirma^dum duximus et corroborandum, hijs
testibus, etc.

D'nus Alexander Nevylle Alexander Nevill elected archbishop of York 30th May
1374, and succeeded by Thomas Arundel 3d April 1388.
archiepiscopus Eborum omnia antedicta sigillo suo confirmavit, et ecclesiam de
H^^yngburgh in quinq. marcis consirmavit.

Vitera Wickwa^.
archie'pi ad Hugonem de Eversham cardinal sup negotio visitatioris eccl'iae
Dun quae ita incipit Tanner's Biblioth. p 418.
.

Exurge, Pater dilectissime, Ebor. eccl'iae grata proles, exurge in adjuto^m.
hujus matris, quam mutilare inspicitis, et jure suo contra obedien^ia debitum a
subditis apostatantib. defraudari. Et licet, pater, primaria forsan vobis Dun.
eccl'ia monstraverit alimenta, ac sic ei naturaliter teneamini* quod fatemur;
eccl'iae tamen Ebor. cui sacramento estis vinculo alligati, vos structius
attendimus obligatos.

Hugo suit procurator archie'pi in curia Romana ao 1280, et obiit Romae ao 1287.


. About the year 1254 the archbishop made an order, at a visitation held at
York, touching the holy vestments and other church furniture and ornaments. As
the various particulars of this constitution give a light to the customs of the
church, and discover the manner and circumstances of religious exercises, some
of them merit notice in this place. That the habits of the clergy should be
provided at the charge of each respective parish, and be rich in proportion to
the wealth of the inhabitants: That they should be provided with a cross for
processions, and another lesser one for the use of funerals: That they should
have a bier for the corpse, a vessel for holy water, an osculatorium or a
picture (probably of our Savior or the holy Virgin) for the people to kiss, a
candlestick for the paschal taper, an incense pot, a lanthorn, with a small
bell, to use when the host was carried to the sick: A veil to skreen the altar
from sight during Lent; with two candlesticks pro ceroserariis, that is, for
those that lighted up the tapers, and carried them from one part of the church
to another, which was the business of the acolyte. Among the books for divine
service the following were to be provided: Legenda The lives of the saints read
on holidays.
, Antiphonare Hymns and alternate psalms sung.
, Gradale A book for singing mass.
, Psalterium, Troparium Rubric book directing the order of divine service.
, Ordinale Hymns of exultation and rejoicing.
, Missale et Manuale.

The parish was to provide an altar-piece for the great altar, three surplices,
a decent pix for the host, a banner for Rogation-days, bells and ropes; a
baptismal font, with a lock to it; a chrysmatory, or vessel for keeping the
holy oil used in baptism and confirmation. They were likewise to provide
images, particularly a principal figure to the chancel, which was to represent
the saint in honor of whose memory the church was consecrated Annals Monast.
Burton, p. 310. -- Mezeray's Hist. France. Collyer, p. 456.
.

RICHARD CLAXTON,
prior of the cell of Holy Island, was elected prior of Durham on the 26th of
Jan. 1273, and in the 12th of the pontificate of bishop Stichill; on the second
day following he was confirmed at Darlington, was installed by the archdeacon
of Durham on the day of the purification of the Virgin Mary, and three days
afterward confirmed the provision made for his predecessor on his resignation.
Before the above instance, we are not told by any historian of the priors
having the solemnities of confirmation and installation, though it is probable
it was an ancient usage here. The prior abdicated his office on the 27th of
December, 1285: No reason is assigned by our author for this act, who tells us,
that the prior was not only a man of great piety and hospitality, but of strict
circumspection and attention touching the rights of the monastery; and
notwithstanding the great provision made for prior Hugh, and the expensive
litigations prosecuted between the archbishop of York and his church, the
convent abounded in wealth during his whole administration. He had assigned him
for maintenance the cell of Weremouth, with the tithes of Southwick. In May,
1274, pope Gregory IV. held a council at Lions, to which the prior was called,
but did not attend, having only his proctors there: Bishop Stichill dying in
that year, the archbishop during the vacancy of the Sea appointed a visitation
to be held in the chapter house at Durham the day before the vigil of
All Saints, which was submitted to at that time; after which ceremony the
archbishop repaired to the castle, where he was entertained, Henry de
Horncastre, then sacrist of the cathedral church of Durham, bearing the
crucifix before him Rob. de Graystanes -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 742, 743, 788.
. Robert de Graystanes gives an instance of the authority of the prior, which
shows one of the ancient customs of the monastery, viz. That bishop Stichill,
whilst he was resident in the castle at Durham, made it his custom to send wine
to the convent: One day he ordered his butler to carry wine to the sub-prior's
table, which on being presented gave offense to prior Hugh, who presided at the
upper table, and thereupon he struck the table, and put an end to dinner in the
middle of the mess Ibid. p. 746, 747.
.

Bishop Robert de Insula, who succeeded to the Sea, gave to the prior and
convent the advowson of the church of Meldon in his diocese, accepting in
exchange the sole presentation to the church of Waldenestow, in the diocese of
Lincoln, to which the prior and convent had an alternate right with him: He
also granted them Freewarren in Billingham, with the woods there. On prior
Claxton's resignation,

HUGH OF DERLYNGTON
was recalled to that dignity on the 11th of January, 1285; was confirmed by
the bishop on the 31st of the same month, and installed on the 7th day of
February following Ibid. p. 748.
. He continued a short time in office under this second election, his last
resignation taking place on the 11th of March, 1290, or according to Graystanes
1289 Ibid.
. That author tells us, the prior came to an agreement with the archbishop of
York, assenting to his exercise of jurisdiction over the churches of the
diocese during a vacancy of the Sea of Durham, as appears by an instrument in
writing, dated in the year 1286, on which all preceding censures and judicial
sentences touching that matter were rescinded. He says, the prior before his
second abdication was in a superannuated state of mind, yet so obstinate and
resentful, that when application was made for his removal on account of his
incapacity, he sent messengers to the bishop, with a promise of large bribes,
to induce him to deny his suspension, which did not prevail; whereupon he
yielded with great reluctance to a cession of his office.

RICHARD DE HOTOUN
, prior of the cell of Lynche or Latham, was elected on the 24th of March to
succeed Hugh of Derlyngton; was confirmed by the bishop on the 28th of the same
month, and installed on the 9th of April. This prior was of a bold and virtuous
mind, and having to do with the overbearing and proud prelate Bek, was obliged
to exert himself for the preservation of the privileges of his church: A
dispute soon arose between them, which was fermented to a violent height, as
has already been related in the annals of that prelate Vol. i. p. 244.
; the excommunication, suspension, and interdiction of the prior being at
length the consequence of their contest. The bishop thereupon commanded the
convent to elect a prior; and they not obeying, he obtruded upon them Henry de
Luceby, who then presided in the cell of Holy Island: He was accordingly
installed, on prior Richard being dragged from his seat by the violent hands of
a monk devoted to the bishop. Graystanes tells us, that a savage from the wilds
of Tyndale was brought into the church to do this act; but bei^ struck with
awe, he retired from the presence of the man, and declared no go^ could tempt
him to the outrage; yet what the barbarian abhorred, was perp^trated by one who
had professed his obedience to the superior whom he assisted depose. Thus prior
Hotoun was put under confinement, and Luceby govern^ the convent. In this
situation affairs remained some time; the prior effected h^ escape into
Cleveland, where he remained until the parliament assembled at Li^coln, when he
presented a complaint against the prelate, and obtained recommendatory letters
from the king for relief at the court of Rome. The prior being master of a
persuasive eloquence, with much erudition, and a graceful person gained the ear
of the pope, and a decree of restitution was pronounced in his favor, which
was published in the church at Durham in the month of April, 130^ Luceby had
possession of the prior's apartments, where he retained such friends a^ had
courage to remain with him; in that situation they meanly descended to the act
of spoiling the vessels belonging the house, stripping off the silver ornaments
and taking possession of such plate as fell under their hands; with these
attempting to escape, and being opposed, they threw the valuables over the
walls, and stole out by way of the hog-yard. Luceby, whilst he usurped the
office, retained many of the principal men of the palatinate in his family, and
lived in a splendid manner, that thereby he might win the approbation and
esteem of the people; but such measures did not prevail, for many treated him
with high contempt. He paid great attention to the sacred edifices; the
sacristaria was his first work; he repaired the roof of the nave of the church,
built the vestry room, and at a great expense procured bells, vessels, and
ornaments. Graystanes says, he conducted himself in the office of prior, both
at Holy Island and Durham, with such decorum, that it was the opinion of many,
had he come duly to the latter dignity, a better prior F^l. de Graystanes. --
Whanton's Angl. Sac. p. 750, 788. -- Prior of the cell of Lynche, etc. He was
removed by (...), bi^hop of this See, May 20, 1^^0. for opposing his visiting
the convent without permission of (...), for which he was also excommunicated,
suspended, and interdicted. But the (...) his behalf, it was agreed that he
should be prior for life. However, the bishop (...) three months ordered the
convent to elect another in his stead, and sent his (...) etc. He was
reinstated again by decree dated 29th Nov. 1^^^; after (...) of this priory
till his death, which happened in Jan. 1309. -- Stevens, p. 351.


had not been for a long time.

In the year 1303, on the day of St Peter ad Vincula, prior Hotoun returned to
Durham, and was received most cordially by the convent, who held a festival on
the occasion: An inquisition was afterward taken by men of the county of
Northumberland touching the damages sustained by the convent under the bishop's
persecution, by the seizure of their revenues and destruction of their parks,
in which the bishop employed the most able advocates the kingdom afforded,
whilst the prior's cause was managed by one only, whose name was William de
Herle, and whom Graystanes perpetuates; when the bishop was justly condemned in
a large sum of money. The pope dying soon after, the bishop obtained from his
successor a bull, requiring the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester to visit the chapter of Durham, on an accusation lodged
against the prior for dilapidations and diverse offenses, touching which the
prelates were commanded to enquire; but pope Benedict departing this life, the
bishop's purpose was frustrated, till pope Clement, who created B^k patriarch
of Jerusalem, at his suggestion suspended the prior from all administration, as
well in spirituals as temporals. The prior, on his journey to Rome for redress,
passed the winter near Canterbury, sending from thence two monks of his
convent, as proctors: Whilst he remained there, the bishop committed the care
of the monastery to Luceby; and the abbot of Leicester with the pope's
mandatory letters accompanied him to Durham, to give him possession; but on
their arrival, they sound the gates shut against them, and their admittance
refused; on which, they pronounced an excommunication against the whole
society: This brought on a litigation, at the instance of the prior, for an
offense against the crown, on their presuming to execute the powers of the Sea
of Rome in matters temporal, and a grievous sine was imposed upon the offenders.

The prior returned from the South to meet the king at Durham, and on the
festival of St Oswald the martyr, celebrated mass in the royal presence at the
altar of St Oswald. The king granted him license to visit Rome, and
recommendatory letters to the pope for redress, with which he passed into
Italy, but did not live to return: He met with a favorable reception from the
pope and college, and on the 24th of October obtained a sentence of
restitution, but was decreed to pay one thousand marks to the apostolical
chamber for the same. On the 9th of Jan. (Graystanes says in the year 1307, but
from other authorities in 1308) the prior departed this life; and that the Sea
of Rome might be indemnified for the loss of the fine, all his goods, plate,
books, horses, and effects then in Italy, were confiscated.

Prior Hotoun was not deficient in public works, notwithstanding the troubles
in which he was embarrassed: He completed the manor-house of Houghhall; with
the bishop's license he purchased Oxford Place, afterward called Durham
College, and made the first erections there The account we have of this
foundation is, That the monks of Durham might have a receptacle set their
novices in the university, as Gloucester had lately obtained before for theirs
in Stockwell-street ^, (...) begin to lay their first foundation in Canditch.
We read in a certain book, entitled 'Historia Ecclesia Dunelmensis et
Successio Episcoporum,' that one Hugo de Derlyngton, chosen prior of Durham A.
D. (...) monachos misit Oxoniam ad studendum, et eis satis laute expensas
ministrabut: This the author, who was Ga^fridus, sacristan of Coldingham, and
continued by one Robertus: But of the college-hall or ^a^^on-place therein, he
makes no mention; and therefore I will not aver, that he was the ^^st so under
of this college. ^ In the next chapter, viz. 155, (Bib. Cotton, vol. ix. p.
497) speaking of Richard de Hotoun Derlyngton's successor) some time sub-prior
of Lytham, and chosen prior of Dunham A. D. 1289, says the, Isle prior b^ cum
Oxon. comparavit. et aedificare fecit: that is, that prior (speaking of Richard
de H^ton^) purchased ^ place at Oxford, and began there to build. This was, I
suppose, about the year 1290; for I had, that thereabouts, the prior and
convent of St Frideswides Register Major S. Frideswida, p. 451.
did by their charter confirm to the monks of Durham, for ever, two plots of
ground in the suburbs, in Magdalen parish, Oxon, paying yearly for the same, to
them and their successors, 2s. per ann. The witnesses to this, as I find in the
original charter, (...) being no^ in the register here quoted) were, Henry
Owen, mayo^; Will. de Wodeston, and Andrew Culbert, provosts; who, I find, were
officers of this city about that time. Thus, from the said Anthony Wood, it is
evident that this college was before Richard de Bury.

Furthermore, for the greater enlargement of their enclosure, Mabile Was^ (...)
of Godstow^ with the convent, about the same time willed and granted to them
diverse lands and tenements, and among the r^ whatsoever of right they had in
void ground near to Perilous-hall, in Horse (...)-street, part of which had
stood where now Kettle-hall stands, and belongs to Trinity College, the place
where this cost (...) now spoken of stands. After this, or about the same
time, viz. 1291, follows the (...) of (...) other (...): ^^^l, etc. by which
Lit. Pat. 19 Edw. I. m. 20.
it appears, that here was a college or receptacle for the (...) of Dunham
before Richard de Bury was bishop, forty three years; all which time, and till
bishop Ha^^^ld his (...) these monks were maintained by the prior and convent
of Durham out of the public treasury, and were sort thither, as those of
Gloucester priory to Gloucester (...), to be trained up in grammar, philosophy,
and divinity. -- Stevens' Mon. vol. i. p. 341.

MS. Wood.
: He also built the chapel De Belio Loco, afterward called Beaurepaire or
Bearpark. The convent received a grant of freewarren in their territories at
Winston about this time.

During this prior's office, the dispute which arose between Ralph lord Nevill,
of Raby, and the convent, in the time of prior Claxton, was continued, and did
not subside for several years. The account we have of it is to the following
effect, as given by Dugdale in his Baronage, vol. i. p. 292.

"About the 13 Edw. I. 1285, there was much variance between the inhabitants of
the bishopric of Durham and Anthony Beke (that great prelate) then bishop of
Durham, by reason he had compelled them to go twice into Scotland with horse
and arms, which they alleged to be contrary to right, in regard they held
their lands to defend the body of St Cuthbert; and that they ought not, either
for king or bishop, to go beyond the rivers of Tyne and Tees. Ralph Nevill,
then lord of Raby, was the chief countenancer of those who opposed the bishop.
Not long after, another dispute arose between this Ralph and Hugh de Derlyngton
then prior of Durham, about the offering of a stag every year upon St
Cuthbert's day in September; which (in truth) was rather a rent than an
oblation, in regard he held Raby with the eight adjoining townships, by the
yearly rent of four pounds and a stag. For contrary to the custom of his
ancestors, he not only required, that the prior of Durham, at the offering of
the stag, ought to feast him and all the company he should bring, but that the
prior's own menial servants should for that time be set aside, and his peculiar
servants and officers put in their stead. Whereupon amongst other of his guests
he invited John de Baliol of Barnard Castle, who refused to go with him,
alleging, that he never knew the Nevills to have such a privilege there; Sir
Wm de Brompton, the bishop's chief justice, likewise acknowledging, that he
himself was the first who began that extravagant practice; for being a young
man, and delighting in hunting, he came with the lord Nevill at the offering of
the stag, and said to his companions, "Come let us go into the abbey and wind
our horns," and so they did. The prior farther adding, that before the time of
this Ralph, none of his predecessors ever made any such claim, but when they
brought the stag into the hall they had only a breakfast; nor did the lord
himself ever stay dinner, except he was invited.

In the 5 Edw. III. 1331, Ralph Nevill (son of the former) doing his fealty to
William de Couton then prior of Durham, upon Lammas-day, for the manor of Raby,
he told him he would offer the stag as his ancestors had done; saving that,
whereas his father required, that the prior's servants should be set aside at
that time, and his own serve in their stead; he would be content, that his
should attend together with those of the prior: And whereas his father
insisted, that his servants should only be admitted at dinner; he stood upon
it, that his should be there entertained the whole day, and likewise the morrow
at breakfast.

Whereunto the prior made answer, that none of his ancestors were ever so
admitted, and that he would rather quit the stag, than suffer any new custom to
the prejudice of the church. But to this Ralph replied, that he would perform
the whole service or none, and put the trial of his right upon the country. The
prior, therefore, knowing him to be so powerful, and that the country durst not
displease him, declined the offer. However, at length to gain his favor, (in
regard he had no small interest at court, and might do him a kindness or a
displeasure) was content for that one time he should perform it as he pleased,
so that it might not be drawn into example afterward; and for that purpose
proposed, that indentures should be made between them.

Whereupon the Lord, Nevill brought but few with him, and those more for the
honor of the prior than a burden, and so shortly after dinner took his leave,
but left one of his servants to lodge there all night, and to take his
breakfast there on the next day; protesting, that being both a son and tenant
to the church, he would not be burdensome to it, in respect it would be no
advantage to himself, but might much damnify it, if he should bring with him as
great a train as he would, saying, What does a breakfast signify to me?
Nothing. And likewise, that if the prior would show, that he had no right to
what he so claimed, he would freely recede therefrom; and if he had a right, he
would accept of a composition for it, rather than be burdensome to the
convent; but if they should put him to get his right by law, then he would not
abate any thing thereof.

Whereupon enquiry being made amongst the oldest monks of the house, they
affirmed, that being of eight years standing when his father was before
repulsed, they had often seen the stag offered, and that he never staid dinner
but when the prior invited him; and some ancient men of the country testified
as much; as also, that as soon as the stag was brought, they carried him to the
kitchen, and those who brought him were taken into the hall to breakfast, as
they that brought their rents used to be.

Moreover, when it happened that any of the lords Nevill were desired to stay
dinner with the prior, his cook was admitted into the kitchen to prepare a dish
for him; so likewise another servant in the cellar to choose his drink, and in
like manner some other at the gate, who knew his servants and followers, merely
to let them in, and keep others out, who, under pretense of being his servants,
might then intrude; but this was only done by the prior out of courtesy and
respect, and not at all of right.

Hereupon Henry le Scrope, one of the justices, affirmed, that he had been of
counsel with Ralph Nevill (father of this Ralph) when he brought his writ of
Novell Disseisin against the prior; and told him that he had no right at all:
Whereupon Ralph let fall his suit.

Some said, that making this claim out of his own see, he ought there, (viz. in
the priory) to show some special evidence to assert his claim. Others, that as
the prior did challenge nothing of him, but what was reserved by the grant; so
could not he, unless he showed a charter for it. And besides, claiming to be
entertained with as many as he should bring, and not specifying the number,
there could be no lawful reason for it; because the stag was always offered on
Holy Rood day, whereupon grew an old song in rhyme, as a lamentation for Robert
de Nevill, his great grandfather.

Well I wa, sal is Horns blaw
Holy Rode this Day;
Nou es he deed, and lies law
Was wont to blaw tham ay.
Moreover, it was further said, that it never had been the custom of the prior
to make a feast on that day, when the servants of so great a person was to
offer; and that the prior usually on St Cuthbert's day had wont to dine with
the bishop at some of his own manor-houses; therefore, who should compel him to
make a feast at home? Likewise, that those lands were given to the ancestors of
this lord Nevill, when they were not such great men as to have a marshal, a
butler, and other servants of state; for in those days, they had no more than
Raby with its appurtenances, which was not then of so much worth as it is now;
for Brancepeth and Raskelfe came to them since by marriage; as also other lands
in Yorkshire and Richmondshire: Therefore it could not be thought that the
prior of Durham did give lands of such value, and purchase the service to be
done for them at so high a rate, especially considering, that in the prior's
land book, not only all the services are exactly registered, but whatsoever
others ought to receive of him. And lastly, that there is not so much as
mention made of this service in any of their chronicles."

During the vacancy of the priory, the bishop seized the temporalties of the
convent, and by Stephen Mauley (de Malo-lacu) his vicar general, displaced the
subprior, the priors of the cells, and many who were adherents of the deceased
prior, appointing others in their places: The prior of Coldingham alone was
continued in his office. This Graystanes exclaims against as a flagrant breach
of the privileges of the convent, though the bishop alleged the members of the
house were not capable of holding offices, by reason of the sentence of
excommunication, which remained unpurged. In this period much perplexity arose
touching presentations to vacant churches, till it was determined they should
be made jointly, under the title of Anthony bishop of Durham and the convent of
Durham, the office of prior being vacant. In the year 1308, on the morrow of
the Purification, the bishop visited the chapter in the order prescribed by
pope Boniface, when, for no other irregularity or offense than their attachment
to the prior in his struggles against the prelate's oppressions, he suspended
the following members of the society for ten years: -- Richard de Aslakby, who
was sub-prior in prior Hotoun's time; Galfridus de Burdon, prior of Finchale;
and Nicholas de Rothbury, almoner of Durham. But archbishop Greenfield, in his
visitation during the vacancy of the Sea, after the prelate's death, annulled
the sentence Rob. de Graystanes. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 753, 754, 788.
.

The king, jointly with the patriarch, applied to the pope in favor of

WILLIAM DE TANFIELD,
then prior of Wederhall, and he was accordingly appointed Hotoun's successor
on the 24th of February, 1308: In this act we have a flagrant instance of the
corruption of the holy See; for the price of his collation was not less than
3000 marks to the pontiff, and 1000 to the cardinals. He was installed on the
feast of St Cuthbert in September following, many of the nobility with several
prelates being present at the ceremony.

Under the oppressive spirit of the prelate, the priory suffered greatly; being
not only much impoverished by the expenses incurred, and heavy debt contracted
on account of their litigations with him; but also greatly embarrassed and
distressed by the defection of the prior of Coldingham, who renounced his
obedience and subjection to the monastery: The prior of Durham visited that
convent, and displaced the prior for his offense, appointing another in his
room: After having received the homage and fealty of the terr-tenants of the
shrine, he followed the deposed prior to Stamford, whither he hastened to lay
his complaint before the parliament, hoping the king and his ministers would
support him against his superior, as he was personally known to them, having
carried the banner of St Cuthbert in the Scotch war; but in this was
disappointed, for the countenance of the court was denied to such injurious
proceedings.

The prior of Durham obtained permission to visit Rome, where he staid till the
prelate's death. On the accession of bishop Kellow, the convent experienced a
happy change of circumstances, and received repeated marks of that prelate's
countenance and favor; he reversed all the oppressive acts of his predecessor,
and restored the ancient privileges of the monastery, especially in the
material point, that during the vacancy of the priory, none save the sub-prior
and chapter should intermeddle with the spiritualties or temporalties of the
convent; the bishop retaining to the Sea the right of having one clerk in the
house as a nominal guardian thereof, with three horses and three servants,
without claiming to have any further concern with the goods of the house. By
the gift of this prelate, the convent had Wastrophead, with a fishery in the
river Were.

In the year 1313 R. de Graystanes. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 755, etc. --
Grey's MSS.
, the prior finding his health decline, and the attacks of old age hasten upon
him, resigned his office, and had allotted for maintenance the cell of Jarrow
and the manor of Wardle It is difficult to ascertain what place this was; it is
wrote different from the Wardlau and Wardlawe before noted: Probably it is
Wardale near Jarrow, at this day part of the prebendal corpse land of this
church.
; he lived in retirement until the month of February, 1342, when he departed
this life: He is described to us as a man of good stature, a graceful
countenance, and pleasing carriage; lavish and diffusive, he was remarked to be
improvident of his resources, delighting in a numerous retinue, repeated and
splendid feasts. We hear of no public works by this prior; and, indeed, under
the unhappy circumstances in which he was involved during the patriarchs time,
together with his own expensive mode of life, we cannot wonder at the neglect
Obligatio pr. et conventus de Lanercost prior et conventui Dun. sacta de 100l.
solvend. eisd. nisi secerint quamcunq. securitat, quam dicti prior. et conv.
Dun. duxerint ordinand. super ecclesia de Meldon postquam dicti pr. et conv. de
Lanercost, adepti fuerint possessionem ecclesiae de Mitsord. -- E. Cartuar. II.
eccl. Dun. p. 38.

Pateat universis quod nos Hen. pr. de Lanercost et ejusdem loci conventus Karl
dioc. per licitam stipulaco'em si^el'r promittimus quod obtenta possessione
eccl'iae de Mitteford nobis in proprios usus concessie religiosis viris d'nis
pr. et conventui eccl'iae Dun. faciemus quamcunq. securitatem et immunitatem,
duxerunt ordinand. super eccl'ia sua de Meldon quatenus de jure, possumus et
debemus alioquin fatemur nos eisd. religiosis viris pr. scil. et conventui Dun.
teneri et acrius obligari nomine damnor. interesse et expensar. in cc. libris
sterlingor. solvend. eisd. apud Dun. infra duos menses a tempore, quo seceremus
in possessione pacifica eccl'iae de Mitleford p'd'cae et nihilominus in cc.
libris argenti in subsidium terrae sanctae solvend. In cujus rei testimon.
sigillum commune capituli nostri presentibus duximus apponendum. Datis apud
Lanercost, xij kal. October. anno D'ni mill'imo trecentesimo decimo. -- Randal's
MSS.


.

License in a short time being obtained for electing a prior,

GALFRID DE BURDON,
then sub-prior of the convent, was placed in the chair, about the time of the
festival of Peter and Paul, 1313, and soon afterward received confirmation,
and was installed: In 1316 Graystanes says, in the octav. of St John Bap. 1315.
, he had the mortification to have his sweet country retreat at Beaurepaire,
which was embellished with every ornament known to the taste of those times,
pillaged and defaced by a party of marauding Scots. He is spoken of by ancient
authors in the most honorable manner: Graystanes remarks of him, as a special
singularity, Viros diligens habere in familia et non pueros, equos pro vectura
et non equulos: This prompts disagreeable conjectures touching a monastic life,
on which an inference arises, that the custom of entertaining boys had grown
scandalous; or otherwise the historian, a monk of that church, would not have
marked that part of the prior's character with the eulogium, Iste in familia
erat honorificus, viros diligens, etc. etc. Singularity of character, even in
the exercise of virtue, occasions enmity; for the reformation of any vice is a
public reproach to those immersed in the practice of it: The prior, with all
his good qualities, was the object of much wrath; he was accused with virulence
at bishop Beaumont's visitation, and many misdemeanors were laid to his charge
by his brethren Wharton, p. 758.
, which induced him to resign his important office on the 25th of January,
1322; he having the cell of Weremouth, with the tithes of Weremouth and
Fulwell, assigned for maintenance: Graystanes says, that though he had good
grounds for defense, he was induced to submit, rather than involve the house in
litigation and expense Ibid. p. 759.
. Soon after this resignation,

WILLIAM DE GUISBURN
was elected prior, a man equally esteemed for his learning and religious life;
but on the following Lord's Day, when every one expected he should receive
confirmation of the holy office, he entered the chapter house, and renounced
his election Rob. de Graystanes. -- Wharton, p. 759. -- Grey's MS. Notes.
: Whereupon the chapter proceeded to a new election, and

WILLIAM DE COUTON
was chosen prior; he soon afterward received confirmation, and was solemnly
installed on Holy-rood-day: Graystanes says Wharton, p. 759.
, he was Vir utique Deo et hominibus amabilis. In this prior's time, a
disagreeable controversy was determined, touching a claim made by Goldesburgh,
archdeacon of Durham, of jurisdiction in right of his office over the churches
appertaining to the monastery lying between Tyne and Tees: It had been usual
for the archdeacon Ibid.
to exercise archidiaconal jurisdiction in the name of the prior in the
churches of the convent, by virtue of an agreement made between them, for which
an annual sum was paid as an acknowledgment; on Goldesburgh's refusing payment
of the composition money, and persisting in the exercise of jurisdiction, the
dispute arose; by compromise it was settled, that the prior should enjoy
archidiaconal jurisdiction in the churches of Jarrow and Weremouth, and
Goldesburgh throughout the rest for life. The convent had a dispute of the like
nature with the archdeacon of Northumberland, which was compromised in the year
1331 on the like terms; but on his death, new disturbances arose, and his
successor claimed the like privilege.

A mortality raged among the horned cattle, and made a dreadful havoc during
this prior's time. After presiding nineteen years, he departed this life at
Pittington, on the 26th day of February, 1342, and was buried in the
cemetery-yard of the cathedral church among his predecessors Graystanes. --
Wharton, p. 767.
. It appears he was a monk of the abbey of Fountains Ibid. p. 788.
. His memory was much revered in his monastery; for with a truly pious life, he
displayed much benignity of heart, in a humble carriage toward his brethren,
which softened the rigours of the cell, and rendered the cloister cheerful: To
strangers, and those received at his table, he appeared easy of access, and
pleasant in conversation; always affording a liberal, or rather magnificent
entertainment: Religion fixed its genuine impression on his countenance,
benevolence in smiles. He was succeeded by

JOHN FOSSOUR,
formerly a monk of Durham, and prior of the monastery of Weremouth, who was
elected the 16th of March, 1342, and confirmed and installed on the last day of
the same month: Chamber speaking of him, says, he was a man of much wisdom,
with a prevailing eloquence, so that many took the habit in his time Chamber.
-- Wharton, p. 767. -- Grey's MS. Notes.
: He caused an account to be had of the goods and possessions of the monastery,
for the better management and protection thereof; and appointed a burser of
great providence and discretion, by whose care and assiduity, during the course
of six years, 758 l. 3 s. 6 d. of the old debts of the convent were discharged,
492l. 7s. 7d. was expended out of the treasury in public works, and 209l. 5s.
3d. in contributions: He caused all the missals of the church to be removed,
one of which, lying at the altar of St Nicholas and St Giles, cost him 22 l. At
the north end of the middle transept of the cathedral church, he made a large
window of six lights, with three lesser windows, near the altar of St Nicholas
and St Giles, which was the third and last altar in that aile to the north, in
the masonry of which he expended 100 l. and 25 l. in glazing. Stevens seems to
confound Chambre's account Vol. i. p. 35^.
; and the great window made by our prior is named twice, saying, he made
another large and sumptuous window of six lights, whereas on a view of the
church the error is easily discovered. He ordained, with consent of the
chapter, that a daily mass should be said for his soul at the abovementioned
altar by one monk, for whose pension, with the maintenance of the windows, and
for provision for his anniversary, he appropriated lands to the convent. He
provided a rich vestment with three copes, for the ceremonies of his
anniversary. He instituted a chantry at the aforesaid altar, which was called
the chantry of the Holy Trinity, for the celebration of divine service for
ever; and under the bishop's license purchased lands in North Pittington,
Wolviston, and Billingham for its endowment, for which he expended 66l. 10s.
9d. and for the erection thereof 20l. Chamber. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 768.
He gave for the use of the altar a chalice of the value of 6l. 13s. 4d. with
three albes chasubles and palls; also images in alabaster of the holy Trinity
and blessed Virgin, with tabernacles and other ornaments, of the price of 22l.
He expended in other edifices and ornaments about the church 402l. 6s. 8d. and
made a window at the south end of the common hall, which cost him 40l. In his
time many reparations and new works were made, as well within the church as
without, particularly in the kiln Torrale. -- Chamber. -- Wharton, p. 768.
, granary, and kitchen, the great window of seven lights at the west end of the
nave, three other windows in the north side of the nave, two on the north side
of the choir by John de Tickhill, and two on the south by the feretory: Also,
in this prior's time, the lord Ralph Nevill presented to the church a vestment
of red velvet, and obtained permission that he and his lady Alicia should be
buried within the walls of the church, which had not been granted before to a
layman. John lord Nevill his son, at the instance of Richard de Birtley and
John de Cornvall, then feretraries of the church, caused to be made a new work
of marble and alabaster for St Cuthbert's tomb, which cost upwards of 200l. and
at the prior's request, the elegant tabernacle work, which divides the feretory
from the high altar, was procured, toward the expense of which lord Nevill
gave 600 marks. It was made in London, and sent down by sea; but before our
munificent prior could see it erected, attacked by various infirmities, he
departed this life at Beaurepaire, on the 12th day of November, in the 90th
year of his age, and 33d of his priorship, A. D. 1374. He was buried at the
north end of the middle transept, before the altar of St Nicholas and St Giles,
his tomb being covered with marble prepared in his lifetime and curiously
wrought Chamber. -- Wharton's Ang. Sac. p. 768. -- Stevens' Mon. vol. i. p.
352. -- Grey's MS. Notes.
; Robert de Syreston, a monk of the house, well acquainted with his virtues,
inscribed it with the verses Hic prior ecclesiae praesentis, dux politiae,
Et splendour patriae, suerat lux vera sophiae, etc.
Hic centenorum fuit effector monachorum He was the first prior interred within
the walls of the church.
,
Ac vicenorum; numerus fit tantus eorum,
Corpore tam mundus non vixit in orb secundus, etc.
In 1729, when the workmen were repairing the flags in that part of the church,
they opened prior Fossour's grave, and found the body quite decayed, but the
hides wherein it had been wrapped were tolerably fresh. These were taken away
by the workmen, cut into small pieces, and distributed among the curious. A
very large piece was in the possession of the late Basil Forcer, of Elvet, esquire


in the notes, as given by Brown Willis, p. 225.

In this prior's time was fought the great battle of the Red-Hills, in which
David Bruce was taken prisoner. The victory was announced to the people of the
city by the ecclesiastics singing a solemn hymn or Te Deum on the top of the
steeple of the cathedral church, in consequence of a signal from the monks at
Maiden Bower. This custom was continued on the anniversary, till the times of
general confusion in the 16th century. The restoration of king Charles was a
matter of such great joy to this church, that the ceremony was revived on the
29th of May, on which day it is still annually performed. This prior had
license in 1344 to purchase lands in Monketon and Monkhesleton Vid. Ann. bishop
Bury, vol. i. p. 296. -- Rot. Bury, sch. 18.
; and certain articles of agreement between the bishop and the convent were
ratified whilst he presided E rotu^is Ric'i Bury e'pi in cancellar. Dunelm.
sched. xvij. anno undecimo.
RIC'US, Dei gra. etc. vic. Dunelm. salutem. Cum in quadam compositione dudum
inter predecessores rostros e'pos Dunelm. et predecessores nunc prioris Dunelm.
inita et sirmata inter cetera contineatur, quod si aliquis liber homo de terra
vel feodo prioris convictatur de felonia, vel nolit stare judicio ita q'd
debeat terram amittere per feloniam, e'pus habebit terram illius in manu sua
per unum annum et unum diem, et de exitibus terrae illius et catallis et vasto
felonis vel felonum, in omnibus e'pus habebit unam medietatem et prior aliam
medietatem per manum ballivi e'pi. Post annum vero et diem elapsum prior vel
capitalis d'nus d'ei felonis habebit dictam terram tanquam escaetam suam et
omnia amerciamenta et prosicua de placitis corone provenientia et de assisis,
et omnibus alijs placitis quae terminabuntur per judicium vel finem vel
concordiam in curia e'pi de terra vel de feodo prioris dimidiabuntur sine
difficultate et dilatione inter episcopum et priorem, pront in compositione
predicta before continctur. Nos compositionem volentes inviolabiliter
observari tibi precipimus, etc. Dat. Dunelm. per manum Roberti de Calne clerici
nostri octavo die Decembris, anno supradicto (1344). Per literam domini ipsius
episcopi. -- Randal's MSS.

Md. quod die Jovis proxima ante festum Sancti Ambrosii (A. D. 1350) Joh'nes de
Thorppton executor, testamenti mag'ri Gill'i de Midilton deliberavit d'no
Rob'to de Bamburgh, unam aquietanciam de arreragiis cujusdam annue pensionis
dicto mag'ro Gill'o debit. per priorem Dunolm. in cuj. resignacione et
deliberacione acquietancie fuerunt presents d'n's Joh'nes prior eccl'iae
Dunolm. d'n's Rob'tus de Bamburgh, d'n's Will. de Masham, terrar. et d'n's
Joh'nes de Neuton Burs. monachi. Et seculares Joh'nes de Menneville, Joh'nes de
Haliden, et Thomas de Salcock, et Joh'nes Abell, cl'icus. -- Bibl. Dec. and
Cap. MSS. B. iv. p. 26, 86.


.

On the petition of Ralph lord Nevill for a burial place within the church, the
prior and convent granted their license for making a sepulcher on the south
side of the nave, to which the conventual seal was affixed, then bearing the
impression of the head of St Oswald: Et concesserunt cis cum litera sub sigillo
capitis Sancti Oswaldi Chamber. -- Whart. Ang. Sac. p. 768.
. This was thought the most proper place to present to the reader the drawing
of that seal, where it is so indisputably authenticated. The cross side or
reverse is remaining at present in the dean and chapter's library, from whence
Mr Allan took several impressions in wax, but the head side is lost Adeo
celebris erat crux illa S. Osualdi, ut conventus Dunelm. olim ea in sigillo suo
utebatur. Ex una enim istius part, caput S. Osualdi, et crux ejus ex altera
exhibebatur, etc. -- Appendix, No 13, Smith's Life of Bid.
.

depiction of seal

Application was made to the Sea of Rome by king Edward III. that the church of
Hemingburg in Yorkshire should be appropriated to this church, which the pope
in the year 1372 refused, because of the populousness and other excesses
thereof. The epistle of pope Gregory II. Rymer, tom. vi. p. 759.
shows the state of the monastery at that time. The king's letter prayed the
appropriation to be made propter necessitates eis incumbentes; to which the
pope replied, he was informed the religious body consisted of 150 persons, with
four dependent abbeys, where priors had been instituted; besides which they
held, appendent to the monastery, thirteen parish churches, and to many others
they had the right of collation: That, by reason of their opulence, they were
guilty of great enormities; when they traveled, they were each attended by
three or four horsemen, and made an appearance inconsistent with religious
humility; and that in their expenses, as well in provision for their table as
apparel and other ordinary matters, they were guilty of great excess.

ROBERT DE WALWORTH
, alias Benington, alias Berrington, succeeded to the office of prior, he being
elected on the 11th of December 1374, and confirmed on the 24th of the same
month. The elegant work which his predecessor Fossour and lord John Nevill gave
to this church, this prior was at the expense of erecting, employing therein
seven artists near a year. In the year 1380 the high altar was completed and
solemnly dedicated to the holy Virgin, St Oswald the royal martyr, and St
Cuthbert, the whole convent appearing in procession and assisting at the
ceremony Chamber. -- Whart. Angl. Sac. p. 769, 788.
.

The convent was greatly enriched by him: In 1378 he obtained license to
purchase lands Rot. Hatfield, sch. 4, No 6.
, and in 1379 received a charter of confirmation of various purchases made in
Wolviston, Billingham, Great Burdon, Aycliff, Fery, Monkhesildon, Edmundbyers,
Durham, Hett, Heburn, Spennyngmore, Rayley, Aldernage, Elvet in Durham, and the
old borough of Durham Ibid. sch. 2, No 3, dated April 28, 1379.
. In 1380 he had confirmation of the exchange of Henknowl for lands in
Wolviston, made with John de Belasys Ibid. Sched.
. In the same year a license was procured for the purchase of other lands, of
the annual value of 200 marks, for the maintenance of eight monks, and eight
secular scholars to study in Durham college, Oxford Thomas Dei gra. e'pus, etc.
O'ib's, etc. sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali concessimus et licentiam
dedimus, etc. dil'cis filiis n'^is in Christo priori et conventui eccl. nostrae
Dunelm. quod ipsi terras tenementa et redditus cum pertinentiis ad valorem
ducentarum merearum per annum, etc infra regiam nostram libertatem Dun. etc.
adquirere possint. Habend. et tenend. sibi et successoribus suis in puram et
perpetuam elcemosinam ad manu. tenend. et sustentand. octo monachos capellanos,
et octo pauperes scholares in collegio nostro Dun. apud Oxon. per nos de novo
fundato scolatizantes imperpetuum, etc. etc. Rot. B. Hatfield, sch. 2, A. D.
1^82. -- Vid. Smith's Annals of Univ. Col. p. 375. -- Ang. Sac. p. 772. --
Chamber.


. In 1388 another license was granted for the purchase of lands at Helay, and
lands and tenements in Gateshead Whyckham, the old bridge at Durham, Clayport,
Sadlergate, the North-Bailey, Fleshhewer-Raw, Framwelgate, Pipewellgate, West
and East Merrington, Aycliffe, Fery, Wolviston, Hesledon, Le Brom, North
Pittington, East Rainton, Hebern, Burdon, Billingham, Edmundbyers, St Giles's
or the street of St Egidius, Alertongate in Durham, the old borough of Durham,
Elvet and Cocken Rot. Fordham, sch. 10, No 13, dated May 1, 1388.
. In 1390 Wm de Scrope presented, at the feretory of St Cuthbert (in
satisfaction for certain offenses by him committed against the rights of the
church) a jewel of the value of 50l. Rymer, tom. vii. p. 654. -- An. 13 Rich.
II 1390.
This prior obtained from pope Urban VI. a bull, that he and his successors
should be invested with the mitre, pastoral staff, rings, sandals, and other
pontifical insignia, and was the first prior in this church authorized to use
the same Dimissio Ebor. archiepiscopi super impetitione de usu pontificalium.
UNIVERSIS s. matris eccl'iae filijs ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint,
Alexander (Nevill) permissione divina Ebor. archie'pus, Angliae primas, ac
sedis apostolicae legatus, salutem in omnium salvatore. Ad nostram nuper
devenit notitiam quod religiosus vir frater Robertus de Walworth, prior
ecclesiae cathedralis Dunelm. cum mitra et baculo pastorali, annulo et
sandalijs et aliis insignijs pontific. indutus missas et alia divina officia
infra nostram dioces. Ebor. ac nostram jurisdictionem absq. auctoritate
sufficient temere celebrare praesumpsit in nostrae jurisdictionis contemptum
manifestum. Unde nos Alexander archie'pus supradictus, de auctoritate sive
potestate praemissa faciendi si quae eidem priori competerent in hac part
volentes effici certiores, eundem priorem infra nostram dioces. Ebor.
praedictam personaliter apprehensum ad exhibend. coram nobis privilegium sive
auctoritatem et potestatem si quae habuerit in praemissis ad certos diem et
locum competentes peremptory fecimus evocari. Quibus die et loco praefatus
prior per procuratorem suum legitime constitutum coram nobis in judicio
comparens literas apostolicas sanctiss. in Christo patris et d'ni nostri d'ni
Urbani divina providentia papae Sexti vera bulla plumbea isipus d'ni papae more
Romanae curiae bullatas, sanas et integras, ac omni vitio et suspicione
carentes, dicto priori per eundem d'm papam ad praedicta faciend. concessas
nobis exhibuit et ostendit; quarum tenor est talis, Urbanus episcopus servus
servorum Dei dilectis filijs Roberto priori et capitulo ecclesiae Dun. ordinis
S. Benedicti salutem et apostolicam benedictionem exposcit vestrae devotionis
sinceritas et religionis promeretur honestas, ut tam vos, quos speciali
dilectione prosequimur, quam etiam ecclesiam vestram dignis honoribus et
gratijs attollamus. Hinc est quod nos vestris in hac part supplicationibus
inclinati ut tu fili prior et successores tui priores dictae ecclesiae qui pro
tempore fuerint, mitra, baculo pastorali, annulo et sandalijs et alijs
pontific. insignijs libere possitis uti, si et in quantum aliqui alij priores
cathedralium ecclesiarum ordin. S. Benedicti in regno Angliae consistentium
illis utantur. -- felicis recordationis Alexandri papae quarti predecessoris
nostri, quae incipit Abbates, et alijs quibuscunq. constitutionibus apostolicis
in contrarium editis nequaquam obstantibus, vobis et eisdem successoribus
auctoritate apostolica de speciali gratia tenore praesentium indulgemus. Nulli
ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae concessionis et voluntatis
insringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attemptare
praefumpserit. indignationem omnipotentis Dei et beator. Petri et Pauli
apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum. Dat. Romae apud S. Petrum xijo kal.
Augusti, pontif. nostri ao secundo. Quibus quidem literis apostolicis coram
nobis, ut praefertur, exhibitis, et per nos diligenter inspectis, nos Alexander
archiep. supradictus eidem priori ac successoribus suis dictae eccl'iae Dunelm.
prioribus imperpetuum, quod ijdem priores omnes et singuli in celebrationes
divinorum officiorum infra nostram provinciam Ebor. ubilibet faciendorum in
nostra et successorum nostrorum quorumcunq. Ebor. archiepiscopo: Praesentia
mitris tantummodo aurifrisiatis, aureas vel argenteas laminas ac gemmas
habentibus, una cum annulo, baculo pastorali et aliis pontific. insignijs
supradictis, secundum formam et tenorem privilegij eis super hoc per sedem
apostolicam concessi, et prout eis videbitur licite uti valiant absq.
contradictione nostra, vel successor. nostrorum praedictorum ad requisitionem
et specialem rogatum dictorum prioris et conventus, quantum in nobis est,
licentiam tenore praesentium concedimus et liberam facultatem. In cujus rei
testimonium sigillum nostrum secimus his apponi datis in manerio nostro de
Thorp. vjo die mensis Augusti, ao D'ni 1382, et nostrae consecrat. nono -- II.
Reg. antiq. D. C. D. Part 2d, p. 32.

Confirmatio privilegior, de usu mitrae et baculi pastoralis priori Dunelm.
MARTINUS V. episcopus, servus servorum Dei ad perpetuam rei memoriam; idq. ad
ecclesiar. praesertim cathedralium decorem et laudem gratiose concessa sunt ut
amplioris obtineant roboris firmitate tum a nobis petitur nostrae solicitudinis
parts libenter adhibemus eaq. favoribus prosoquimur opportunis. Exhibita
siquidem nobis nuper pro part dilector. filiorum prioris et capituli eccl'iae
Dunelm. ordinis S. Benedicti petitio continebat quod olim quondam Urbanus in
sua obedientia de qua parts illae tunc erant vio nuncupatus, ut idem prior et
successores sui priores dictae ecclesiae qui pro tempore forent, mitra, baculo
pastorali, annulo ac sandalijs et alijs pontisicalibus insignijs libere posuit
uti, sic et in quantum aliqui alij priores cathed. eccl'iar. dicti ordinis in
regno Angliae consistentium illis uterentur, eisdem priori ecclesiae Dunelm. et
successoribus ac capitulo auctoritate apostolica de speciali gratia per suas
literas duxerat indulgendum, prout in eisdem literis dicitur before contineri.
Cum autem sicut eadem petitio subjungit nonnulli in Anglia consistentium
ecclesiarum dicti ordinis priores hujusmodi mitra, baculo pastorali, annulo,
sandalijs et alijs pontificalibus insignijs. tempore concessionis hujusmodi
uterentur, prout ipsi et praefatus prior Dunelm. utuntur etiam de praesenti pro
part corund prioris eccles. Dunelm. et capituli nobis fuit humiliter
supplicatum ut concessionem hujusmodi pro ipsius substantia firmiori nostrae
confirmationis robur adjicere de benignitate apostolica dignaremur. Nos, igitur
volentes eandem Dunelm. ecclesiam ad earundem ecclesiar. instar honorari ac
priorem ejusdem Dunelm. ecclesiae et capitulum praefatos favoribus apostolicis
prosequi gratiosis hujusmodi supplicalionibus inclinati praesatam eisdem priori
eccl'iae Dunelm. et successoribus suis ac capitulo ut praemittitur factam
concessionis gratia ratam habentes et gratam, eadem auctoritate apostolica,
confirmamus et praesentis scripti patrocinio communimus Nulli ergo omnino
homini liceat hanc paginam nostrae confirmationis et communitionis infringere,
vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Siquis autem hoc attemptare praesumpserit,
indignationem omnipotentis Dei et beator. Petri et Pauli apostolor. ejus se
noverit incursurum. Dat Florentiae 7o kal. Octobr. pontificatus nostri anno
secundo anno D'ni MCCCCXIX.


. He appeared rigidly attentive to the rites of the church in the ceremonies of
bishop Hatfield's interment. Chamber tells us Whart. Aug. Sac. p. 771.
, the executors applied to the convent to permit the chariot on which the
remains were brought to enter the church, and that the same with the horses
might be returned; or otherwise they should be obliged to take the body from
the vehicle on the outside of the churchyard, and carry it on men's shoulders
into the church, because the chariot and horses were not the late prelate's
property at the time of his death, he having previously disposed of them. To
this the prior, with the assent of the convent, replied, that he would not
consent on any consideration to the infringement of any of the privileges of
his church; but that the sacrist should have the chariot, horses, and all the
vestments, with which the remains should enter the north gate, together with
the chapel, and all other the episcopal ornaments used at the interment. The
lord Nevill and four others of distinction were chosen to determine upon this
claim; who adjudged, that by ancient custom all these matters appertained to,
and were the right of the church; but they compromised the same in the present
instance, and the executors consented to pay 200l. in lieu of the articles
demanded, in order that the splendour of the interment might not be diminished,
or the intended ceremony disturbed O ineffabilis miseria hujus mundi! Dum
vixerat erat episcopus sine comparatione ditissimus hujus regni; et idem
mortuus non habuit unde honorifice sepeliri posset; nec unde faceret ecclesiae
sponsae suae relictae, quomodo alii episcopi multo pauperiores omnes facere
solebant. -- Chamber. Wh. Ang. Sac. p. 771.


.

After presiding in the monastery seventeen years, the prior died, and was
buried before the altar of St Benedict, being the first of the three altars in
the north limb of the middle transept. His tomb was covered with marble, and
ornamented with his effigies in brass and other curious work Grey's Notes. --
Stevens' Mon. -- Fuller's Chapter Hist. etc.
.

JOHN DE HEMMINGBURG
succeeded in the same year, and held this important office twenty-five years
Anno hujus 19o erat reformatio ordinis nigri monachorum -- Chamber. -- Whart.
Angl. Sac. p 775. -- J. de H. sic enim dicitur in ipsius chartulario anno 1408
scripto; de Giningburgh in judiculo saepe dicto cognominatus. -- Wharton, p.
788. -- Append. to Wake's State of the Church, p. 79. -- Grey's Notes. --
Stevens' Mon. etc.


. In his time the bishop's right to receive profession of the monks was
re-claimed, and, after much litigation and an appeal, the bishop withdrew his
suit. The jurisdiction of the convent's churches within the diocese of York was
again agitated during this prior's office, and was determined against the
archbishop Commissio Henrici Bowet archiepiscopi Ebor. Richardo Pyttes ad
inquirend. de titulis et juribus ecclesiae Dun. in dioc. Ebor.
HENRICUS permissione divina Eboracen. archie'pus, Angliae primas, et
apostolicae sedis legatus, dilecto nobis in Christo mag'ro Richardo Pyttes
canonico ecclesiae nostrae Ebor. et cancellario nostro, salutem, gratiam et
benedictionem. Qui nuper nos nostram dioc. ac archidiaconatus Eborum,
Estrydding et Cliveland, ac ecclesias, personas et loca de Hovedon et
Hovedonshire, Alverton et Alvertonshir, annis D'ni 1409 et 10 visitantes,
accepimus quod prior et conventus ac capitulum eccl'iae Dun. ordinis S.
Benedicti de Northalverton, Estryngton, Gygleswyk, Bosall, Fysshelake et
Rodyngton, eccl'ias parochiales nostrae Eborum dioces. ac pensiones annuas ab
ecclesijs infra ipsam nostram dioc. constitutis ac ecclesiasticis personis,
videlicet, de ecclesia de Hemyngburgh quiuq. mareas, de eccl'ia de Brantyngham
december marcas, de eccl'ia de Welton tres marcas, de eccl'ia de Walkyngton centum
solidos, de eccl'ia de Skypwith unam marcam, de eccl'ia de Holtby viginti et
quinq. solidos, de vicaria de Alverton viginti libras sterlingorum, de eccl'ia
de Syggeston december marcas, de eccl'ia de Rungeton quadraginta solidos, et de
eccl'ia de Normanton unam marcam, in suos proprios usus sine titulo canonico
occuparunt et tenuerunt, occupantq. et tenent, fructusq. redditus, proventus et
decimas quarundem earundem eccl'iarum de facto in suos usus et collegij sui
Oxon. converterunt et convertunt. Ipsiq. prior, conventus et capitulum, per se
et custodes suos ac ministros omnimodam jurisdictionem spiritualem in eccl'ijs
de Hovedon, Estryngton, Brantyngham, Hemyngburgh, Welton, Walkyngton, Holtby,
Northalverton, Siggeston et Rungeton supradictis, ac prebendis, vicarijs et
capellis suis, parocliijsq, clero et populo earundem villisq. personis et locis
suis alijs infra Hoveden et Hovedonshir, Alverton et Alvertonshir, nostrae
dioc. predictae constitutis, temere exercere usurparunt et usurpant, absq.
nostris auctoritate et consensu; aliaq. ibidem a jure communi exorbitantia, et
nobis praejudicialia etiam fecerunt et faciunt pro suae libito voluntatis.

Nos igitur volentes, prout ad nos pertinet ex pastoralis officii debito,
effici de praemissis certiores, dictos priorem et conventum ac capitulum
eccl'iae Dun. omnesq. alios quorum intererat in hac part, ad comparend. coram
nobis vel com'issario nostro super praemissis de justitia responsur. ac
ulterius processur. et procedi visur. factur'q. et receptur. quod justum fuerit
in hoc casu, ad certos diem et locum nunc futur. competentes fecimus
peremptory evocari. Verum quia sumus multipliciter praepediti quo minus super
praemissis personaliter procedere valeamus ad ulterius inquirend. procedend.
statuend. decernend. terminand. definiend. et exequend. ac plenarie justitiam
faciend. in praemissis cum omnibus et singulis incidentibus, emergentibus,
dependentibus et connexis, vobis magistro Richardo canonico et cancellario
nostro praedicto, de cujus fidelitate et industria plenam in d'no fiduciam
obtinemus, com'ittimus vices nostras et plenatiam in d'no potestatem, cum
cujuslibet coercionis canonicae potestate. In quorum omnium test. sigillum
nostrum praesentibus est appensum. Datis in castro nostro de Cawood vicesimo
sexto die mensis Julij, anno D'ni 1410, et nostrae translationis tertio. -- I.
Reg. Eccl. Dun. p. 186.

Sententia definitiva pro'jure eccl'iae Dunelm. contra archiepiscopum Eborum.
CHRISTI nomine invocato, et habentes prae oculis solum Deum per hanc nostram
definitivam sententiam quam in his scriptis fecimus de consilio et consensu
jurisperitorum nobis assidentium, nos Richardus Pyttes canonicus ecclesiae
Eborum, ac venerabilis in Christo patris et d'ni Henrici, Dei gratia, Eborum
archie'pi, Angliae primatis, et apostolicae sedis legati cancellarius, et per
eundem venerabilem patrem in hac part commissarius, specialiter deputatus,
pronunciamus, decernimus et declaramus eccl'ias parochiales de Northalverton,
Estryngton et Gygleswyk religiosis viris priori et conventui ac capitulo
ecclesiae Dunelm. ecclesiasq. de Bossall, Fisshelake et Rodyngton Eborum
dioces. collegio dictorum prioris et conventus Oxon. fuisse et esse rite et
canonice unitas, appropriatas, annexas et incorporatas, cum suis capellis,
juribus et pertinen. universis, ipsasq. ecclesias cum capellis ab eisdem
dependen. juribusq. et pertinentiis suis: Necnon portiones et pensiones annuas
ab ecclesijs parochialibus dictae Eborum dioc. videlicet, de ecclesia de
Hemyngburgh quinq. marcas, de ecclesia de Brantyngham december marcas, de ecclesia
de Welton tres marcas, de ecclesia de Walkyngton centum solidos, de ecclesia de
Skypwyth unam marcam, de ecclesia de Holteby viginti quinq. solidos, de vicaria
de Alverton viginti libras sterlingorum, de ecclesia de Siggeston december marcas,
de ecclesia de Rungeton quadraginta solidos, et de ecclesia de Nomanton unam
marcam sterlingorum, jusq. et liberam potestatem, ac jurisdictionem spiritualem
ad forum ecclesiasticum de jure vel consuetudine spectantia, ac visitationem
solit. in Hoveden et Hovedenschir, Alverton et Alvertonschir, ceteraq. jura
sua, prout in compositione inter bonae memoriae Willielmum quondam Eborum
archie'pum praefati venerabilis patris d'ni nostri d'ni Henrici Eborum
archie'pi praedecessorem ac praefatos priorem et conventum Dunelm. de et super
jurisdictione sua hujusmodi in Hoveden et Hovedenschir, Alverton et
Alvertonschir, inde facta memoratur before, quam compositionem et contenta in
eadem hic haberi volumus specialiter pro justis habend. ac per se et suos
custodes et ministros clericos seculares deputatos et deputandos exercend. ad
praesatos religiosos viros priorem et conventum ac capitulum Dunelm.
persinuisse pertinere et pertinere debere, ipsosq. in praemissis omnibus et
singulis suisse et esse tisulo sufficienti et canonico munitos ac in eisdem
sufficiens jus et titulum competentem habuisse et habere, ac ea just et
canonice tenuisse ac tenere, exerouisse et exercere, ac possidisse et
possidere, percepisseq. et sic in futurum debite percipere, et de eisdem libere
per se et suos disponere debere. Necnon ipsos priorem et conventum Dun. ac suum
colleg. Oxon. absolvendos fore et absolvimus ab ulteriori impetitione ossicij
dicti verab. patris et nostri in hac part, ac in pace dimittimus judicialiter
in his scriptis. -- I: Reg. Eccl. Dun. p. 260.


. He sent his proctor to the convocation at York in the year 1398. The prior
departed this life in the year 1416, and was interred in the south limb of the
middle transept of the cathedral church, before the altar of the holy Virgin,
being the first from the south aile of the choir. His tomb was covered with
marble, wrought with his effigies and those of the twelve apostles in brass
ECCE! marmoreus lapis hic tegit ossa Johannis,
Quem residere Deus coelis cunctis det in annis.
Hemmingburgh natus fuit hic et honorificatus
Sede prioratus, virtute probus monachatus.
Qui legis haec, pro me Pater unum supplica, pro me
Un' dirigas, et ave Deus, ut me liberet ave.

. To him succeeded

JOHN DE WESSYNGTON,
who was elected the 5th of November, 1416. This learned prior wrote many
tracts, particularly one, De juribus et possessionibus ecclesioe Dunelm. Bibl.
Cotton. Vitell. A. 9.
wherein he proves, that the priors of Durham were always invested with the
dignity of abbots Volo etiam et praecipio ut omnes priores Duelmensis
ecclesiae, qui futuri sunt, omnes libertates, consuetudines, dignitates, et
honores abbatis obtineant, etc. -- Cart. Wm I. -- Dugd. Mon. vol. i. p. 45.


. There are some of his MSS. in the dean and chapter's library, B. 5, N. 1. The
account of the paintings in the windows, and of the ornaments and ceremonies of
the church, now extant, is by some attributed to him. He renewed the dispute
with the bishop touching the profession of the monks, which was determined in
the prior's favor; and presided at the general chapter held for the order of
St Benedict, at Northampton, in the year 1426. In his time, several licenses
were obtained for acquiring lands by the monastery Rot. E. Langley, No 43, 69.
Rot. A. Nevil, No 112. Rot. M. Nevil, No 53.
, in Coupan, Billingham, Burdon, East-Rainton, and Fery on the Hill, and also
in Barmeton, East, West, and Middle-Merrington, the barony of Elvet near
Durham, and the old borough of Durham; and also a license to receive the manor
of Heworth near Aykley, according to the disposition and ordinance of prior
Hotoun. We have a correct list of the fraternity of this monastery, resident at
the time of the visitation of John Marchall, L. L. B. vicar general to the
bishop, in the month of January 1437 Nomina confratrum et commonachorum ad
visitationem Joh. Marchall LL. B. citatorum Dunelm. Jan. 4o 1437.
[From Wilkins' Concilia, vol. iii. p. 462.] John Wessyngton, prior
[The prior had lodgings by himself, with all offices thereto belonging: The
rest took precedence according to the topical statutes of the convent.]

Steph. Handey, sub-prior
[The sub-prior was next, whose office was to assist the lord prior when he was
present, and to act in his stead when absent.]

Will. Poklingeton, infirmat. John Durham, sen. Robt Emildon Will. Baroy, prior
de Finkhale John Gisborne Will. Ebchester, sacrista Hugh Warworth, infirmat.
Will. Durham Rog. Langchester, mag. infirm.
[ Infirmarius was the curator of the infirmary, wherein sick persons, not to
be lodged in the dormitory, had the benefit of physic and attendance: No Lent
or fasting days were kept therein, sickness being a dispensation to eat flesh.]

John Swineshed, infirm. Tho. Moreby Tho. Witton Hen. Fereby John Gonerton,
altus decan. ord. John Durham, mag. celloe de Jarowe. Robt Moreby John
Wayckcliff Rich. Barton, tertius prior et feretrar.
[As for the third-prior (for such a diminutive appears) he might have some
other office joined to it.]

Tho. Nisbite, hostillarius John Dorwarde, alter dec. ordin. Geo. Sither, mag.
Galilee John Bailey, camerarius Will. Lyhame, mag. celloe de Warmoth monachorum
John Ell, senesc. d'ni prior Tho. Laneson, bursar. Tho. Hexham, sen. John
Gaitesende John Harome Tho. Ward, cancellar.
[ Cancellarius was the registrary, auditor, and secretary of the convent; it
being his proper business to write and return letters, and manage the most
learned employments in the monastery.]

Robt Ergehowe Tho. Foord, refectar. Will. Dalton, offic. cancellarioe et
elemosinar. Will. Eden Will. Clifton, infirm. John Bertley, granatar. Robt
Westmerlande John Warrener, precentor Tho Sewyn Rich. Blakburne, capellanus
d'ni n'ri p'ri John Wheldrike Tho. Bradbury in Cella Robt Scremestbie. Will.
Kirkeby John Midleham Nich. Bolton John Rippon Robt Park Will. Kellowe Hen.
Rackett John Bradburie Will. Fig Robt Wrakes Will. Rodburne John Rihahall
Will. Cutherte. Rich. Shierburne Will. Burden John Eden Tho. Culve
For explanation of other officers, see Fuller's Church History, p. 284.


. Prior Wessyngton presided thirty years, and departed this life in the year
1446 Chamber. -- Whart. Angl. Sac. p. 776, 719. -- Grey's Notes. -- Bernard's
Catal. (MSS.) tom. ii. pl. 1. p. 12. -- Smith's Catal. of Cotton MSS. p. 82, 89.
. He was buried before the door of the north aile, near to St Benedict's altar:
On his tombstone was an inscription on brass, now totally lost.

WILLIAM DE EBCHESTER
was elected prior on the 30th of June Chamber. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 777,
789. -- Stevens' Mon. p. 352. -- Grey's Notes. -- Willis's Cath.
1446, holding the chair ten years and three months. He resigned in the year
1456; and surviving that act but a short time, was interred under a marble
stone in the south aile of the middle transept, before the altar of the holy
Virgin, called our Lady of Bolton, which was erected by the Nevills: This was
the second altar in that place. His tomb, Willis says, was inscribed as in the
notes EN! tegit haec petra venerabilis ossa Wilhelmi
Ebchester; justos consumit terra sepultos.
Ingenio pregnans fuerat, coelestia pandens,
Oeconomus verbi fidelis dogmata sacri.
Egenti largus, sitienti pocula praebens,
Nudatis vestes; peregrinis hospes amoenus.
Rexerat ecclesiam prudenter jure prioris,
Accumulans praemiis eandem valde decoris.
Naturae cessit post partum virginis anno,
Mill CD. quingento adjuncto postea sexto.
Corpore defuncto, ejus in secula virtus
Durabit, superis oblatio maxima divis.
Australi ecclesiae sub marmore part sepultus,
Cum Christo dormit, vivit, regnatque beatus:
Pro quo, metra legis haec qui, ora mente fideli,
Ut sit semper ovans cum sanctis culmine coeli.

. He was succeeded by

JOHN DE BURNABY, D. D.
who was elected the 25th of October Stevens, 9th Nov. -- Chamber. -- Wharton's
Angl. Sac. p. 778, 789. -- Grey's Notes. -- Davies, etc.
1456, and presided eight years. He died in the year 1464, and was buried on
the 15th of October, in the middle aile of the nave, opposite the cloister
door. On the marble which covered his tomb was his effigies in brass.

RICHARD Called Ranulphus in a MS. given by him to the library of the convent.
-- Grey's Notes. -- Stevens' Mon. -- Chamber. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 778,
789.
BELL, B. D.
was elected the 26th of November 1464: He presided here thirteen years and
twenty weeks, and was consecrated bishop of Carlisle on the 6th of March 1478.
Whilst prior of Durham, we find him named several times in the commissions of
Edward IV. on treaties with the king of Scots. He died in 1496, and was
interred in the middle of the choir of Carlisle cathedral; his tombstone, with
the effigies in brass, and other ornamentals, are still in good preservation.
His successor

ROBERT EBCHESTER, D. D.
was elected the 26th of November 1478; presided only six years, and during
that time obtained several licenses to increase the possessions of the convent
Rot. A. Dudley, No 77. Dat. 1st Apr. 1483. Rot. B. Dudley, No 67. Dat. 20th
Jan. 1482, touching lands in Cleatlam, Little Heswell, the barony of Elvet, the
borough of Elvet, the old borough of Durham, the street of St Egidius or St
Giles, Wolviston, Ferie, Bellyngham, Aykley, Morton, Tinmouth, Heburn, borough
of Durham, and South Bailey.
. He departed this life on the 29th of June 1484, and was interred in the south
aile of the middle transept, before the altar called our Lady of Bolton's,
under a marble tombstone, ornamented with his effigies in brass, the
inscription (given by Willis) as in the notes MARMORE Robertus jacet hic sub
jure disertus
Ebchester, certus sibi sit Deus ipse misertus.
Extiterat castus corpus prior hic probitatis,
Doctus, non fastus, studio fungens veritatis,
Largus, amans, hilaris, subtilia dogmata pandens,
Sacra suis meritis virtutem carmina clangens.
Die Pater infer Ave cum Credo postulo pro se
Christo, sicq. vale repetens mea metrica just
Mill CD. quaterno L. ter deno quoque quarto.

. His successor

JOHN AUCKLAND, D. D.
was elected on the 16th of July 1484; presided ten years; and, departing this
life in the year 1494, was interred within the church W. de Chamber. --
Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 779, etc. -- Grey's Notes.
. He was succeeded by

THOMAS CASTLE, D. D.
who was elected the 4th of May 1494, and held his office twenty-five years.
The church was not purged, even in this age, of its grossest superstition; for
we find an account in Chamber of a healing performed on one Richard Poell, a
courtier of king Henry VII. at the tomb of St Cuthbert Wharton's Angl. Sac. p.
781.
. In this prior's time we have a list of the brethren of the monastery, as
given in the notes Nomina confratrum et commonachor. eccli'oe cathedral.
Dunelm. 1501. -- Randal's MSS.
Tho. Castle, prior Will. Brown, sub-prior Will. Yondale, mag. infirmar. John
Steel John Corneforthe, sacrista John Claxton T. Lowsan, decan. ord. Will.
Howkwell, bursar. Robt Werdall, feretrar. John Riddall, elemosinar. John
Porter, commoror. Edw. More, decan. ord. alter. Rich. Evenwoode, senesc.
hospicij p'ri ^obt Rock, camerar. Robt Strother, hostillar. Robt Todd,
granatar. John Blenkarne Rich. Lowson Will. Derneton Robt Mody, celerar. John
Thirkill Will. Burghe, mag. Galilee Rich. Hevington Rich. Denamide John Lowson,
precentor John Crissow, succentor John Swalwell John Wrake, capellan. prioris
Tho. Cliff Tho. Barnes, sub-sacrista Rich Poole Robt Batle Rich. Ganlesbie
Will. Elvett Will. Winter Robt Beverley Rich. Kendall Cuth. Marshall Will.
Hertilpoole Rich. Willy Ben. Beck Will. Young

. Much friendly intercourse appears between bishop Fox and the convent, and
many special marks of favor were shown by the prelates. The prior was made
master of the bishop's game, with a grant of venison from his forests and parks
at pleasure Rot. C. Fox, No 46. -- RICHARD by the g'ce of God busshop of
Duresme to all and every our foresters and kepers of our parkis chasis and
forestys within our busshopprick of Duresme and to theur deputeis and to every
of them gretyng. Whereas we for the special luff and favo'r that we bear unto
our will belovyd brother the p^yor of our cathedral chirch of Duresme has
made him the master of our gam within our busshopprick of Duresme we woll
and charge you and every of you that the same our brother ha^ from hensforth
fre lib'tye to hunt and chase in his own p'son as ofte' and when so ev' hit
shall pleas lrym with you or any of you. And in likewise to ha^a deer of the
season as ofte' and when so ev' he woll send therefore at his pleasor he sendyng
you a byll of co'aundemente from him for the same which byll we woll shall be
unto you a sufficyant warraunt and discharge in that behalf against us and our
officers any restreynte or other our co'aundemente to the contrary hertofore
gevyn in any behalf notwithstondyng. In witness hereof to the present writing
we haf put our signet and syne manuell to endure during our pleasour. Writyn
at our castle of Norh'm the first day of Aug. the year of our transsacyon the
fourth, p. ipsum e'pum. -- Ibid.


. Bishop Bainbrigg also showed great attention to the monastery: In 1508 he
granted his charter of confirmation, with an inspeximus of the grant of bishop
Pudsey of Muggleswsck in exchange for Hardwick, with the pasture of
Horsleyhope, Histerhope, and Baldinghope; of the grant of bishop Kirkham of the
woods and wastes in Horsleyhope, by metes and bounds 13th July, 1260.
; also of the grant of bishop Kellow of all the waste and moorlands from the
west gates of the priory of Finchale, by metes and bounds 20th Nov. 1311.
; and also granted license to the monastery to purchase in mortmain, in which
instrument is comprised a general indemnity Rot. B. Bainbrigg, No 66.
. The same prelate granted to the prior and convent all the waste lands lying
between the bridge of Framwelgate and the bridge of Elvet, and between the
walls of the castle and the cathedral church and the water of the Were,
rendering 13s. 4d. rent Rot. B. Bainbrigg, No 61.
. He also granted free warren in the prior's parks at Muggleswick, Helay-field,
Bear-park, and Raynton-park, and in the woods of Strathowe, Witton, Mayner,
Sacristonheugh, Hayning-wood, Herber-close, and Ferycliff, Baxtenford-wood,
Raley with Raley-wood and the fields and meadows thereto appertaining,
Oldingrege with the fields and meadows thereof, Alton-field, and Moreby-bank
28th Sept. 1508, Rot. B. Bainbrigg, No 64.
. The east gates of the abbey, now called the College Gates, having gone to
decay, prior Castle rebuilt the same in a sumptuous style, with a porter's
lodge thereto; above the gateway he erected a chapel in honor of St Helen,
where the laity twice a day were admitted to the celebration of mass, for which
two priests were assigned by the convent, who had their chamber adjacent to the
chapel. He also restored the great north window of the middle transept of the
church, in which he caused to be represented, in painted glass, the figures of
the four Evangelists, together with the holy Virgin and St Cuthbert; under
which his own figure was depicted, kneeling, with elevated hands, and a label
bearing this petition, Virgo, tuum natum fac nobis propitiatum, or, as Davies
has it, Virgo matter Dei miserere mei. He purchased and gave to the convent two
mills, from thenceforth called Jesus' Mills, and covered them with lead; for
which he obtained the pious memorial of being commemorated in Jesus' mass This
mass and Jesus' altar are mentioned in the description of the church.
. The tower on Farn island was built by him Lel. Itin. vol. v. p. 95. -- For an
account of this tower, see View of Northumberland.
. Prior Castle departed this life on the 2d of April 1519, and was interred in
the middle aile of the nave before Jesus' altar, his effigies in brass being
wrought on his tombstone, with the inscription in the notes MORTUUS hoc tumulo
Thomas sub marmore duro
Castellus recubat, pietatis turris ahena,
In literis doctor divinis, munere prior,
Moribus excomptis, et miti pectore charus.
Statura mediocris erat, virtute procerus;
Dapsilis hospitibus, structuris tum probe notus.
Pauperibus laxo praebebat munera sinu.
Nulli clausa bono sua janua, mensa, crumena.
Suppliciter pro se dicas, Credo, Pater, Ave,
Qui legis haec, quo sit coelesti civis in aede.

, as given by Willis.

The office continued vacant near five years, during which period, Wharton says
Chamber. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. p. 782. -- Grey's Notes. -- Stevens' Mon. etc.
, the bishop received the revenues; but Stevens contradicts this assertion in
these words, What Mr Wharton says of the bishop's assuming the priory revenues
before the election of prior Hugh, is, as I am informed by my honored friend
Mr Thomas Baker, a mistake. We must not depend too much on this bare
contradiction; for near the close of bishop Ruthall's episcopacy, and on
Wolsey's advancement to the Sea, we cannot wonder at such a misapplication Ang.
Sac. p. 789. -- Stevens' p. 352.
. Before we proceed to prior Hugh's life, the records in the notes may perhaps
be esteemed worthy of notice Advocationes sive promotiones nuper monasterio
Dunelm. assignatae.
Vicaria ecclesiae parochial. S'ti Oswaldi Dun. xvj l. Rectoria eccl. de
Dittinsal all is Dindesdale x l. Vicaria eccl. de Aikeliff xx l. -- de
Heighington xiij l. vj s. viij d. -- de Merrington xiij l. vj s. viij d. -- de
Billingham xvj l. -- de Hesledon x l. -- de Pittington xij l. -- de Dalton in
Valle x l. Rectoria de Edmonbiers x l. -- de Kimblesworth lxvj s. viij d.
Vicaria de Barwicke super Twede xx l. -- de Norham xx l. -- de Brankston C s.
-- de Edlingham x l. -- de Ellingham x l. -- de Bedlington xiij l. vj s. viij
d. Rectoria de Meldon viij l. Vicaria de Bywell Peter x l. -- de Fishhale xiij
l. vj s. viij d. -- de Brantingham xiij l. vj s. viij d. -- de Northallerton xx
l. -- de Bossal xv l. -- de Frampton xx l. -- de Ruddington xiij l. vj s. viij
d.
Nominationes Curatorum, Contaristarum, et Capellanorum.
Salarium curati de Witton-Gilbert in com. Dun. vj l. per annum. curati de
Muggleswick in etc. vj l. curati de Whitworth in, etc. c s. curati de Wallesend
in com Northumb. c s. curati de Croxdaile in com. Dun. c s. curati de S'ta Ilda
juxta Shelea iiij l. curati beat Mariae in eccl'ia S'ti Oswaldi Dun. c s.
Cantar. S'te Marie in capella S'te Margarete Dun. c s. S'ti Jacobi super pontem
de Elvet Dun. lxvi s. viij d. Beat Marie in eccl'ia de North-Pittington iiij
l. B. Marie in eccl. de Dedinsall iiij l. S'ti Joh'is Baptist. in eccl. de
Biwell Peter iiij l. In capella de Havverton iiij l. xiij s. iiij d. In capella
de Harrington iiij l. xiij s. iiij d. B. Marie in eccl'ia de Easington iiij l.
B. Marie in eccl'ia S'ti Nich'i Dun. iiij l.

.

HUGH WHITEHEAD
succeeded to the priory, in the year 1524. He was custos of Durham college,
Oxford Ath. Oxon.
, and is spoken of by historians in a very respectable manner. Chamber tells us
Whart. Ang. Sac. p. 782.
, he was uniformly religious, and his whole spirit breathed divine love. He
retained in his household persons of distinguished character, by whom he was
most honorably served; kept a liberal table; made great repairs at
Beaurepaire; built a new hall at Pittington, called the prior's hall, with
various other edifices; was not only munificent, but excellently charitable,
and in his private life truly exemplary. He held the office eighteen years; and
on the 31st day of December 1540, joining with the convent, surrendered the
monastery into the king's hands SURRENDER of the MONASTERY.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Nos Hugo
Whitehedd prior ecclesiae cathedralis sive monasterii Sancti Cuthberti de
Durham in com. Dunelm. et ejusdem loci conventus salutem in Domino sempiternam:
NOVERITIS, nos praefatos priorem et conventum unanimi assensu et consensu
nostris, animisque deliberatione, certa scientia, et mero motu nostris, ex
quibusdam causis justis et rationalibus, nos, animas, et conscientias nostras
specialiter moventibus, ultro et sponte dedisse et concessisse, ac per
praesentes damus, concedimus, reddimus, deliberamus, et confirmamus
illustrissimo et invictissimo principi et domino nostro Henrico Octavo, Dei
gratia, Angliae et Franciae regi, sidei defensori, domino Hiberniae, ac in
terris supremo capiti ecclesiae Anglicanae, totum dictum monasterium nostrum,
ac etiam totum scitum, fundum, circuitum, et praecinctum, ac ecclesiam ejusdem
monasterii, cum oneribus, debitis, catallis, et bonis nostris mobilibus, nobis
seu dicto monasterio nostro spectantibus sive pertinentibus; tam ea quae in
praesenti possidemus, quam ea, quae obligatione vel alia quacunque de causa
nobis vel dicto monasterio nostro quoquo modo debentur: Nec^on omnia et
singula, maneria, dominia, messuagia, gardina, curtilagia, tosta, terras, et
tenementa nostra, prata, pascuas, pasturas, boscos et subboscoa, redditus,
reversiones, et servitia, molendina, passagia, ^eoda militum, wardas,
maritagia, nativos villanos cum eorum sequelis, communias, libertates,
franchesias, privilegia, jurisdictiones, officia, curias letas hundredas, visus
franci plegii, se^ias, mercata, parcos, warrennas, vivaria, aquas, piscarias,
vias, chiminos, wharfas, vacuos, ^undos, advocationes, nominationes,
praesentationes, et donationes ecclesiarum, vicariarum, capellarum,
cantariarum, hospitalium et aliorum ec^lesiasticorum beneficiorum quorumcunque,
rectorias, vicarias, cantarias, pensiones, portiones, annuitates, decimas,
oblationes, et alia omnia et singula emolumenta, prosicua, possessiones,
haereditamenta, et jura nostra quaecunque tam infra dictum comitat. Dunelm. ac
in com. Ebor. Lincoln. Northampt. Staff. Lancastr. et Northumbr. quam alibi
infra regnum Angliae, Walliae, et marchias earundem, eidem monasterio nostro
praedicto quoquo modo spectantia, pertinentia, appendentia, sive incumbentia;
ac omnia et omnimoda cartas, evidentias, obligationes, scripta et munimenta
nostra qua^cunque, nobis seu dicto monasterio nostro, terris vel tenementis
nostris, aut ceteris praemissia cum suis pertinentiis, seu alicui inde
parcellae quoquo modo spectantia sive pertinentia: Habendum, tenendum, et
gaudendum dictum monasterium nostrum ac praedictum scitum, sundum, circuitum,
et praecinctum; ac ecclesiam nostram praedictam cum omnibus d^bitis, bonis, et
catallis nostris; ^enon omnia et singula maneria, dominia, messuagia, terras et
tenementa, rectorias, pensione^, ac cetera praemissa quaecunque, cum omnibus et
singulis suis pertinentiis praesato invictissimo principi et regi nostro
praedicto haeredibus, successoribus, et assignatis suis, ad usum ejusdem domini
regis, haeredum, et succestorum suorum imperpetuum in hac part: Ac ad omnem
juris effectum, qui exinde sequi poterit aut potest; nos et dictum monasterium
nostrum cum omnibus et singulis praemissis, ac jura nobis qualitercunque
acquisita, ut decet, subjicimus et submittimus, dantes et concedentes, ac per
praesentes damus, concedimus, ^ed simus, deliberamus, et confirmamus eidem
regiae majestati, haeredibus, successoribus et assignatis suis, omnem et
omnimodam plenam et liberam facultatem, authoritatem, et potestatem nos
dictumque monasterium nostrum, una cum omnibus et singulis maneriis, terris et
tenementis, redditibus, reversionibus, et serviciis, ac sing^lis praemissis,
cum omnibus suis juribus et pertinentiis quibuscunque disponenda, et pro suo
libero regio voluntatis libito, ad quoscunque usus majestati suae placentes
alienda, donanda, commutanda, vel transferenda, ac hujusmodi dispositiones,
alienationes, donationes, commutationes et translationes per praedictam regiam
majestatem suam quovis modo siendam extunc ratificamus, promittentes nos
insuper rata, grata, ac firma perpetuo habituros omnia et singula praemissa per
praesentes. Et ut omnia et singula praemissa suum de ^itum fortiri valiant
effectum, electionibus There seems some omission here.
-- insuper nobis et successoribus nostris, necnon omnibus qu^relis,
provocationibus, appellationibus, actionibus, litibus, et instantiis aliis
quibuscunque juris, remediis, et beneficiis, nobis forsan et successoribus
nostris in ea part praetextu dispositionis, alienationis, donationis,
commissionis, et translationis praedict et ceterorum praemissorum
qualitercunque competend. et competitur omnibusque doli, erroris, metus,
ignorantiae, vel alterius materiae sive dispositionis, exceptionibus,
objectionibus, et allegationibus prorsus semotis ac depositis palam, public et
express ex certa scientia nostra, animisque spontaneis renuntiamus et
cessamus, prout per praesentes renuntiamus et cessamus, et ab eisdem recedimus
in hiis scriptis. Et nos praesati prior et conventus successoresque nostri
dictum monasterium nostrum, ac etiam totum scitum, sundum, circuitum,
praecinctum, mansionem, et ecclesiam nostram praedictam, ac omnia et singula
maneria, dominia, messuagia, gardina, curtilagia, tosta, terras, et tenementa
nostra, prata, pascuas, pasturas, boscos et subboscos, redditus, reversiones,
et servitia, ac cetera omnia et singula praemissa, cum omnibus suis juribus et
pertinentiis, praesato domino nostro regi, haeredibus, successoribus, et
assignatis suis, ad usum praedictum, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus et
imperpetuum defendemus per praesentes. In quorum testimonium, nos praefatus
prior et conventus, huic praesenti scripto nostro nomina nostramanibus propriis
subscripsimus, sigillum que nostrum commune apposuimus. Dat. in domo nostra
capitulari ultimo die mensis Decembris, anno regm praedicti regis invictissimi
principis et domini nostri regis Henrici Octavi tricesimo primo.


, the revenues whereof were then rated at 1366l. 10s. 5d. according to Dugdale,
but by Speed at 1615l. 14s. 10d.

On the 12th of May 1541 the king granted his Foundation Charter The Foundation
Charter of the Cathedral Church of Durham by King Henry the Eighth, 12th May,
1541.
HENRICUS Octavus, Dei gratia, Angliae et Franciae rex, fidei defensor, dominus
Hiberniae, et in terra supremum caput Angli^anae ecclesiae; Omnibus ad quos
praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem. Cum nuper ^^nobium quoddam sive
monasterium quoddam existit ecclesia Beatae Mariae Virginis et Sancti Cuthberti
episcopi vulgo vocabatur, atque omnia et singula ejus maneria, dominia,
messuagia, terras, tenementa, haereditamenta, dotationes et possessiones,
certis de causis specialibus et urgentibus, per Hugonem ipsius nuper ^enobii,
sive monasterii priorem, et ejusdem loci conventum nobis et haeredibus nostris
imperpetuum jamdudum data fuerunt et concessa, prout per ipsorum prioris et
conventus cartam sigillo suo conventuali sive communi sigillatam, et in
cancellaria nostra irrot^latam manifest liquet: Quorum praetextu nos de
ejusdem nuper cenob^^ sive monasterii scitu, septo, et praecinctu, ac de
omnibus et singulis praedictorum nuper prioris et conventus maneriis, dominiis,
messuagiis, terris, tenementis, haereditamentis, dotationibus et possessionibus
ad praesens pleno jure ^^isiti sumus in dominico nostro ut de ^^odo; nos utique
sie de eisdem seisiti existentes, divinaque nos inspirante clementia, nihil
magis ex animo affectantes quam ut vera religio, verusque Dei cultus inibi non
modo ut [non] aboleatur, sed in integrum potius restituatur, et ad primitivam
seu genuinae sinceritatis normam reformetur, correctisque enormitatibus in quas
monachorum vita et professio longo temporis lapsu deplorabiliter exorbitaverat,
operam dedimus, quate^^s humana prospicere potest infirmitas, ut imposterum
ibidem sacrorum eloquiorum documenta et nostrae salutiferae redemptionis
sacramenta pure administrentur, bonorum morum disciplina observetur juventus in
literis liberalibus instituatur, senectus viribus defecta eorum praesertim qui
vel circa personam nostram vel alioquin circa regni nostri negotia publica been
et fideliter nobis servierint, rebus ad victum necessariis condign soveantur,
ut denique elemosinarum in pauperes Christi largitio, et viarum pontiumque
reparationes, et cetera omnis generis pietatis officia illine exuberantia, in
omnia vicina loca long lateque demanent ad Dei omnipotentis gloriam, et ad
subditorum nostrorum communem utilitatem felicitatemque. -- Id^i^co nos infra
praelibatum scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum, et praecin^^um dicti nuper
cenobii sive monasterii ad gloriam et honorem sanct^e et individuae Trinitatis,
Patris, et Filii, et Soi^^^us Sancti, quandam ecclesiam cathedralem de uno
decano presbitero et duodecim praebendariis pre^biteris, ibidem omnipotenti Deo
^^^ino et imperpetuum servituram, ^^eari, ^rigi, fundari, et ^^abili^i
dec^evimus, et eadem ecclesiam cathedralem de uno decano presbitero et duodecim
praebendariis cum aliis ministris a^l divinum cultum necessariis, tenore
praesentium realiter et ad plenum ^r^^mus, ^rigimus, fundamus, stabilimus, et
stabiliti, ac imperpetuum inviolabiliter observa^i jubemus per praesentes.

VOLUMUS itaque et per praesentes ordinamus, quod ecclesia cathedralis
praedicta ad gloriam Christi et honorem Beatae Mariae Virginis matris ejus per
nos erecta et fundata, cathedralis ecclesia Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis,
imperpetuum vocetur, nuncupetur, et appelletur, ut quod ecclesia cathedralis
praedicta sit et imperpetuum erit ecclesia cathedralis et seeds episcopalis
reverendi in Christo patris Cuthberti permissione divina Dunelmensis episcopi,
et successorum suorum Dunelm. episcoporum; eandemque ecclesiam cathedralem
Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis honoribus et insigniis sedis episcopalis et
cathedralis ecclesiae per praesentes decoramus, et eandem sedem episcopalem
infra scitum et praecinctum dicti nuper cenobii seu monasterii praefato
episcopo et successoribus episcopis Dunelmensibus damus et concedimus per
praesentes: Habendam et gaudendam eidem episcopo et successoribus suis
imperpetuum.

ET ut ecclesia cathedralis praedicta de personis congruis in singulis locis et
gradibus suis perimpleatur, et decoretur, dilectum nobis Hugonem Whithed sacrae
theologiae professorem primum originalem et modernum decanum praedictae
ecclesiae cathedralis, ac Edwardum Hyndmers sacrae theologiae professorem
primum presbiterum praebendarium, ac Rogerum Watson sacrae theologiae
professorem secundum presbiterum praebendarium, ac Thomam Spark suffraganeum
Berwicensem in sacra theologia baccalarium tertium presbiterum praebendarium,
ac Willielmum Bennett sacrae theologiae professorem quartum presbiterum
praebendarium, ac Williemum Todd sacrae theologiae professorem quintum
presbiterum praebendarium, ac Stephanum Marley in sacra theologia baccalarium
sextum presbiterum praebendarium, ac Robertum Dalton in sacra theologia
baccalarium septimum presbiterum praebendarium, ac Johannem Towton in sacra
theologia baccalarium octavum presbiterum praebendarium, ac Nicholaum Marley in
sacra theologia baccalarium novenum presbiterum praebendarium, ac Radulphum
Blaxton decimum presbiterum praebendarium, ac Robertum Bennet undecimum
presbiterum praebendarium, ac Willielmum Watson duodecim presbiterum
praebendarium praedictae ecclesiae cathedralis, tenore praesentium facimus,
per^i^imus, constituimus, et ordinamus per praesentes.

VOLUMUS etiam et ordinamus, ac eisdem decano et praebendariis concedimus per
praesentes, quod praedicti decanus et duodecim praebendarii de cetero sint de
se, et in re, et nomine, unum corpus corporatum, habeantque successionem
perpetuam, et se gerent, exhibebunt, et occupabunt, juxta et secundum
ordinationes, regulas, et statuta cis per nos in quadam indentura imposterum,
faciendas, specificandas, et declarandas; et quod idem decanus et praebendarii
ac successores sui decanus et capitulum Dunelmensis cathedralis ecclesiae
Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis imperpetuum vocabuntur et appellabuntur, ac
in praesenti vocentur et appellentur: -- ET quod praefati decanus et
prebendarii ecclesiae cathedralis praedictae et successores sui, sint et
imperpetuum erunt capitulum episcopatus Dunelmensis: Sitque idem capitulum
praesato Cuthberto nunc Dunelmensi episcopo, et successoribus suis episcopis
Dunelmensibus perpetuis futuris temporibus annexum, incorporatum, et unitum;
ipsosque decanum et praebendarios unum corpus corporatum in re et nomine
^acimus, ereamus, et stabilimus, ac eos pro uno corpore facimus, declaramus,
ordinamus, et acceptamus, habeantque successionem perpetuam. -- ET quod ipsi
decanus et capitulum, corumque successores, per nomen decani et capituli
Dunelmensis cathedralis ecclesiae Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis, prosequi,
clamare, et placitare possiat, et implacitari, ac defendere et defendi,
respondere et responderi, in quibuscunque curiis, locis, legum nostrarum et
alibi ubiqunque, in et super omnibus et singulis -- actionibus, ^^ctis,
demandis, brevibus, et querelis, realibus, spiritualibus, ecclesiasticis,
personalibus et mi^tis, ac in omnibus aliis rebus, causis, et materiis
quibuscunque: Et per idem nomen, maneria, dominia, terras, tenementa,
possessiones, haereditamenta, pr^^^^^a (...) et emolumenta, tam spiritualia
sive ecclesiastica, quam tempotalia, et alia quaecunque per nos, per literas
nostra^ patentes haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, seu per aliquam aliam
personam vel personas quas^unque (...) et successoribus suis, vel aliter
secundum leges nostras vel haeredum seu successorum nostrorum danda seu
concedenda, capere, recipere, perquirere, dare, alienare, et demittere, ac
sacere et exequi valiant et po^^^^t, prout ^^^^rae ecclesiae cathedrales infra
reg^^m nostrum Angliae capere, recipere, perquirere, dare, et demittere, ac
sacere consueverint, aut exequi possint quoquomodo. -- ET quod decanus et
capitulum ecclesiae cathedralis Dunelmensis Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis
praedictae, et successores sui imperpetuum habeant et habebu^^ commune sigillum
ad omnimodas causas, evidentias, et cetera scripta, vel ^acta sua ^acienda cos
vel Dunelmensem cathedralem ecclesiam Christi et Beatae Marie Virginis
praedictae, aliquo modo tangentia sive concernentia sigilla^da, per quod se et
successores suos astringere et obligare possint et valiant ad tempus vel
imperpetuum, juxta et secundum senorem ejusdem scripti sic per illa sigillati.
-- ET quia volumus dictam Dunelmensem ecclesiam cathedralem Christi et Beatae
Mariae Virginis, ad laudem et honorem ommipotentis Dei honorifice dolare; de
ampliori gratia nostra dedimus et concessimus, ac per praesentea damus et
concedimus pr^fatis decano et capitulo Dunelmensis cathe^ralis ecclesiae
Christi et Beatae Mariae praedicta^, totum praedictum scitum septum, circuitum,
ambitum, et prae^^ctum supradicti nuper ceno^ii, seu monasterii, cum omnibus
antiquis privilegiis, libertatibus, ^c liberis consuetudinibus ejusdem nuper
cenobii sive monasterii, ac ^o^^m ecclesiam ibidem, una cum omnibus capellis,
pluribis, campanis, campanilibus, claustris, cimiteriis, ^^ss^agiis, domibus,
aedificiis, tectis, curtilagiis, ortis, gardinis, pomariis*, ^^agnis, v^a^is,
et ceteri^ omnibus locis, terris, et territoriis infra eandem scitum circuitum,
ambitum, et precinctum supradicti nuper cenobii, ^ive monasterii existentibus,
et quae ut pars partis vel parcella ejusdem nuper scitus, sive monasterii
communiter fuerunt reputata seu existimata, quae nuper fuerunt praedicti nuper
prioris et conventus in jure nuper monasterii praedicti, simul cum omnibus et
omnimodis vasis, jocalibus, ornamentis, bonis, catallis, et implementis ejusdem
nuper cenobii sive monasterii, cum suis pertinentiis universis: Habendum,
tenendum, et gaudendum, praedictum scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum, et
precinctum supradicti nuper monasterii, una cum omnibus antiquis privilegiis,
libertatibus, ac liberis consuetudinibus supradictis, ac cum praedicta
ecclesia, capellis, campanis, campanilibus, claustris, messuagiis, domibus,
aedificiis, curtilagiis, ortis, gardinis, pomariis stagnis, vivariis, terris,
et territoriis, infra dictum scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum, et precinctum
praedicti nuper cenobii sive monasterii, simul cum praedictis vasis, jocalibus,
ornamentis, bonis, catallis, et implementis ejusdem nuper cenobii sive
monasterii, ac cum ceteris omnibus et singulis praemissis superius expressis et
specificatis, cum suis pertinentiis praefatis decano et capitulo Dunelmensis
cathedralis ecclesiae Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis praedictae et
successoribus suis imperpetuum, de nobis haeredibus et successoribus nostris in
puram et perpetuam elemosinam.

VOLUMUS etiam, et per praesentes concedimus praesatis decano et capitulo
dictae Dunelm. cathedr. ecclesiae Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis et
successoribus suis, quod decanus ecclesiae cathedralis illius pro tempore
existens, omnes et singulos ejusdem ecclesia cathedralis inferiores officiarios
et ministros, et alias praedictae Dunelm. cathedr. ecclesiae Christi et Beatae
Mariae Virginis quascunque personas prout casus seu causa exiget, faciet,
constituet, admittet, et acceptabit de tempore in tempus imperpetuum, ac eos et
eorum quemlibet sic admissos vel admissum, ob causam legitimam non solum
corrigere, sed etiam deponere, et ab eadem ecclesia cathedrali amovere et
expellere possit et valeat, salvis nobis haeredibus et successoribus nostris,
titulo, jure et auctoritate decanos, prebendarios, et omnes pauperes, ex
liberalitate nostra ibidem viventes de tempore in tempus nominandi, assignandi,
et perficiendi, qualitercunque et quotiescunque ecclesia cathedralis praedicta
de decano praebendariis vel pauperibus praedictis, vel eorum aliquo per mortem,
vel aliter vacare contigerit, aliquo in praesentibus suprascriptis in
contrarium inde non obstantibus.

VOLUMUS insuper, et per praesentes concedimus prefatis decano et capitulo
Dunelm. cathedr. ecclesia Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis praedictae, quod
ipsi pro se et successoribus suis habeant et habebunt has literas nostras
patentes sub magno sigillo nostro Angliae debito modo sactas et sigillatas,
absque aliquo fine seu feodo magno vel parvo, nobis in Hanaperio nostro seu
alibi ad usum nostrum proinde quovis modo reddendo, solvendo, vel faciendo: Eo
quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo, aut de certitudine praemissorum, aut
de aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos vel per aliquem pregenitorum
nostrorum praefatis decano et capitulo et successoribus suis ante haec tempora
in praesentibus minime facta existit, aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione,
provisione, sive restrictione, inde in contrarium fact. edit. ordinat. sive
provisis, aut aliqua alia re, causa vel materia quacunque in aliquo non
obstante. -- IN cujus rei testimonium, has literas nostras fieri secimus
patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium duodecimo die Maii, anno regni
nostri tricesimo tertio.

The following is a Representation of the CHAPTER SEAL, cut pursuant to the
above Charter* It has been gilt, and is still in being.
depiction of seal


to this church, instituting therein a dean and twelve prebendaries, and
ordaining, that instead of the title of the cathedral church of the blessed
Mary the Virgin, and St Cuthbert the bishop, that the same should for ever
thereafter bear the denomination of the cathedral church of Christ and blessed
Mary the Virgin. He thereby nominated Hugh Whitehead the first dean; Edward
Hyndmers, D. D. first prebendary; Roger Watson, D. D. the second; Thomas
Spark, B. D. suffragan of Berwick, the third; William Bennet, D. D. the
fourth; William Todd, D. D. the fifth; Stephen Marley, B. D. the sixth; Robert
Dalton, B. D. the seventh; John Towton, B. D. the eighth; Nicholas Marley, B.
D. the ninth; Ralph Blaxton, the tenth; Robert Bennet, the eleventh; and Wm
Watson, the twelfth. He made them and their successors a body corporate, by the
name of The dean and chapter of the cathedral church of Christ and blessed Mary
the Virgin; empowering them, under that denomination, to do all legal acts, and
plead and be impleaded. He granted them all the site of the monastery, and the
ancient rights, liberties, and privileges thereof. The Endowment The Endowment
of the Cathedral Church of Durham by King Henry the Eighth, 16th May 1541.
HENRICUS Octavus, Dei gratia, Angliae et Franciae rex, fidei defensor, dominus
Hiberniae, et in terra supremum caput Anglicanae ecclesiae. Omnibus ad quos
praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis, quod de gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia et mero motu nostris, dedimus et concessimus, ac
per praesentes damus et concedimus, decano et capitulo Dunelm. cathedr.
ecclesiae Christi et beatae Mariae Virginis, totum illud manerium nostrum de
Beaupere, in comitatu nostro Dunelm. cum suis juribus, membris, et pertinentiis
universis, ac totum illud parcum nostrum vocatum Beaupere Park in Beaupere
praedicta; ac omnia illa maneria nostra de Witton-Gilbert, Elvett alias
Elvett-hall, Sager^tanheigh, Wardley, Hedworthe, Pytingto^, Hasylden, Holme,
Beulye, Wolston, Bellacies, Billingham, Ketton, Akley, Hett, Muggleswick,
Houghwall, et Sh^keley, in dicto comitatu nostro Dunelm. cum little juribus,
membris, et pertinentiis universis, quae quidem maneria et cetera premissa cum
suis pertinentiis universis nuper monasterio Sancti Cuthberti Dunolm. infra
civitatem nostram Dunolm. modo dissoluto dudum spectabant et pertinebant, aut
parcella possessionum ejusdem nuper monasterii extiterunt. -- DAMUS etiam, ac
per praesentes concedimus, praefatis decano et capitulo, totum illud scitum,
septum, ambitum, circuitum, et precinctum, nuper manerii ac cellae de Fynkeloo,
necnon ecclesiam, campanile, et cimiterium ejusdem cellae, cum omnibus domibus,
aedificiis, orto et solo, tam infra quam extra, ac juxta scitum, ambitum, et
precinctum ejusdem nuper cellae. Ac totum illud clausum pasturae vocatum
Godriche-close continens per aestimationem sexdecim acras; ac totum illud
clausum pasturae Querci continens per aestimationem duodecim acras terrae; ac
totum illud clausum vocatum Lambe-close continens per aestimationem quatuor; ac
totum illud clausum vocatum Hughden continens per aestimationem duodecim acras;
ac totum illud clausum pasturae vocatum Towermer, continens per aestimationem
december acras; ac totum illud clausum terrae vocatum Coneygarth et
Netherco^eygarthe, continens per aestimationem octo acras; ac totum illud
clausum terrae arabilis vocatum West-close, continens per aestimationem quatuor
acras; ac totum illud clausum vocatum Middle-close, continens per testimationem
octo acras; ac totum illud clausum pasturae vocatum Horse-close, continens per
aestimationem t^es acras; ac totum illud clausum vocatum Oxe-close; ac alterum
clausum vocatum Cowe-close; ac totum ill^d clausum vocatum Pompe-close; ac
totum illud molendinum aquaticum bladarum jacens juxta, et prope partam manerii
et cellae praedictae; ac totam illam piscariam, et piscationem salmonum, ac
liberam piscationem in aqua de Wire juxta scitum manerii ac cellae praedictae
jacentem et existentem, in dicto com. nostro Dunolm. quae dicto nuper
monasterio dudum spectabant et pertinebant, aut parcellae possessionum ejusdem
nuper monasterii extiterunt.

DAMUS etiam, ac per praesentes concedimas praesatis decano et capitulo, totum
illud scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum, et precinctum nuper cellae de insula
sacra, ac totum ecclesiam, campanile et cimiterium ejusdem nuper cellae, cum
omnibus domibus, aedificiis, columbariis, orto et solo, tam infra quam extra,
ac juxta scitum, ambitum et precinctum ejusdem nuper cellae, ac quindecim
cotagia ibidem, duo ortula, unum vocatum B^ggtts, alterum vocatum
Coldingham-walls, ac tresdeeim parva ortula ibidem jacentia, et existentia, in
parochia de Insula Sacra in comitatu nostro Northumbr. Nec non totam illam
insulam nostram de Farne in^a mare ibidem, ac omnia terras, et tenementa nostra
infra eandem insulam, cum omnibus aedificiis infra eandum insulam, cum uno
tenemento ibidem vocato Monke-house, jacente et existente in dicto com. nostro
Northum. quae dicto nuper monasterio dudum spectabant et pertinebant, aut
parcellae possessionum ejusdem nuper monasterii extiterunt.

DAMUS et per praesentes concedimus praesatis decano et capitulo, omnia et
singula messitagia, terras, tene^^a, p^^t^, pascuas, pasturas, boscos,
subboscos, redditus, reversiones, servitia, redditus oneris redditus (...), ac
(...) super quibuscunque dimissionibus, seu concessionibus reservatos,
ana^itate, annuale, redditus, firmas (...), firmas redditus, et firmas
tenentium et firmariorum nostrorum, mole^dina, ^^uas, pisea^^, ^^as, ma^nces,
stagna, vivaria. seoda tailitum, wardas, maritagia, ^scaetas, relevia,
h^rietta, nativas ^ilianos cum little seq^elis, ferias, marcatus, nundinas,
tolneta, passagia, warrenat communias, ja^pna, vasta, brueras, mineras
carbonum, pensiones, portiones, decimas, oblationes, curias letas, visum
franci-plegii, ac omnia que ad visum franci-plegii pertinent seu imposterum
spectare possint aut debent, assisam et assaiam panis, vini et cervisae,
catalla, waviata, extrahuras, ac caetera omnia et singula hereditamenta,
commoditates, et prosicua nostra quaecunque, cum omnibus et singulis suis
pertinentiis, jacentibus sive existentibus in villis, campis, parochiis seu
hamletis, de Beaupere, Witton-Gilbert, Elvett alias dict. Elvett-hall,
Sagarstaneheigh, Hedworth, Wardeley, Pytington, Hasylden, Holme, Bewlye,
Wolston, Bellacies, Billingham, Ketton, Akley, Hett. Muggleswick, Houghwall, et
Shinkley in dicto com. nostro Dunelm. seu alibi ubicunque in eodem com. ac
alibi ubicunque infra regnum nostrum Angliae, dictis maneriis seu eorem alicui
quoquo modo spectantia vel pertinentia, aut ut membra vel parcellae eorundem
maneriorum, seu eorum alicujus antehac habita, cognita, seu reputata
existentia, aut cum eisdem maneriis, seu eorum aliquo, vel eorum aliquorum
parcellis, locata, occupata, vel dimissa existentia; ac etiam omnia et singula
maneria, dominia nostra, seoda militum, redditus, revertiones et servitia,
wardas, maritagia, relevia, escaetas, jura, possessiones, ac omnia et singula,
et cetera haereditamenta nostra quaecunque, in villis, campis, hameletis, et
parochia de Fell^ig et Fallansby in parochia de Jarrow, et Hauthorne in
parochia de Kello, Sylkisworth in parochia de Wermoth episcopi, Blaxton in
parochia de Norton, Barneton in parochia de Gaynsford, Skrymingham in parochia
de Haughton, Wynston, Somerhouses, Steyndropshire in parochia de Steyndrop,
Woodhome et Cotone in parochia de Aykley, et Bromehall in parochia Sancti
Oswaldi, in dicto com. nostro Dunolm.

DAMUS etiam, et per praesentes concedimus praefatis decano et capitulo, omnia
illa maneria, messuagia, terras, tenementa, redditus, reversiones, servitia,
prata, pascuas, pasturas, boscos, subboscos, communias, aquas, piscarias,
mariscos, sirmas seodi, firmas redditus, super quibuscunque dimissionibus seu
concessionibus reservatis, seoda militum, escaetas, relevia, curias letas,
visum franci-plegii, ac omnia quae ad visum franci-plegii pertinent, catalla,
waviata, extrahuras, libertates, minera carbonum, pensiones, portiones et
decimas quascunque, ac cetera haereditamenta, commoditates et proficua nostra
quaecunque, situata, jacentia, sive existentia in villis, campis, parochiis,
seu hamletis, de Beaupere, Witton-Gilbert, Elvett, Rillie, Sagerstanbeigh,
Gatty side, Over-heworth, Tyne, Hubberb alias Hebborne, Wardley, Monkeby,
Nether-heworth, Hedworthe, Symondsyde, Harton, Weston, Southe-Sheles, Jarro,
Southwick, Wermouth monachorum, Fulwell, Sunderland, Dalton in vale, Moreton,
Dalton, Thorpe juxta Hesington, Easte-Raynton, West-Raynton, Houghton,
Moresley, Morehouse, North-Pytington, South-Pytington, Pytington, Eden,
Hasylden monachorum, Holam, Hasylden, Brometost, Billingham, Hertilpole, Heart,
Holme, Cowpon, Newton, Beuley, Bellaeyes, Wolston, Benton magna, Sadberie,
Cleteham, Stayndrope, Morton, Tynmoth, Heighington, Newton, Ketton, Aklye,
Ketton Newhouse, Cotte super moram, Nunstaynton, Bradberie, Sedgfeld, Chilton
magna, Est-Merrington, Maynsforth, Fery super montem, Marington, Mid-Marington,
West-Merington, Hett, Merington, Spenemore, Hunwick, Hasylwell in Hillhouse,
Awkland, Landewe, Helton, Wolsingham, Shipleigh, Wakerseld, Burnenoppe,
Rocoppe, Edmundbyers, Muggleswick, Grenecrofte, Cornesaw-raw, South-Lynthes,
Lanchester, Londhouse, Rowligillet, Underside, Iveston, Busblade, Keyo, Peeth,
Fulsurthe, Brom, Aldingrange, Houghall, Shinekley, Crokesdale, Hunter-banks,
ac in parochia Sancti Oswaldi in dicto com. nostro Dunolm. ac in Shoreswoode in
parochia de Norham, Herbottell in parochia de Halystane, Walesend in parochia
de Jerro, ac in Pilgram-streete, et in parochia Omnium sanctorum infra villam
Novi Castri super Tynam, et in Prudehoo in parochia de Ovinghame in com. nostro
Northumbr. Quae quidem maneria, ac cetera promissa, dicto nuper monasterio
Sancti Cuthberti Dunolm. dudum spectabant et pertinebant, aut parcellae
possessionum ejusdem nuper monasterii extiterunt; ac omnia illa messiragia,
burgagia, domos, aedilicia, sheppas, celaria, sola^ia, terras, tenementa,
redditus, reversiones, servitia, molendina, tofta, cotagia, gardina, pentioner,
portiones, decimas, ac cetera hereditamenta nostra quaecunque scituata,
jacentia, seu existentia in parochia Sancti Nicholai, Sancti Egidii, Sancti
Oswaldi, Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae, et Sanctae Margaretae, ac in parochia de
North-balye, et South-baylye infra dictam civitatem nostram Dunolm. aut in
suburbiis ejusdem civitatis, seu alibi ubicumque in cadem civitate, vel in
suburbiis ejusdem civitatis, quae dicto nuper monasterio Sancti Cuthberti dudum
spectabant, et pertinebant, aut parcellae possessionum ejusdem nuper monasterii
^^titerunt.

DAMUS et per praesentes concedimus, praesatis decano et capitulo omnes illas
rectorias, et ecclesias nostras Sancti Oswaldi, ac de Pytington, Hasylden,
Dalton in valle, Billingham, Akley, Heighington et Merrington in dicto cum.
nostro Dunolm. Ac etiam omnes decimas granorum et soeni infra et de villatis de
Shinkley, Aldurham, How ^h^ll, Brom, Aldingrange. Bornehall, Bellaeyes,
Crokehall, Nerthwastes, Newton, H^g^ouse, H^bethouse, Bysshopmea^low, Elvett
grange, Aldurham et Durham; ac omnes minutas decimas cum decinus ortulorum et
alteragiis infra villatas praedictas, et infra dictam parochiam Sancti Oswaldi;
ac omnes ^^im ^^^rum in villatis de North-Pytington, South-Pytington,
Shaldforth, Hepton super montem, Haswell-grange, South-Shurburn,
Northe-Shurburn et Ludworth infra parochiam de Pytington praedictam; (...)
^^^rum in villatis de ^^sylden, Hardwick, Shoreghton, Eden, Huton, et Holome
infra parochiam de Hasylden praedictam; ac decimas garbarum in villatis de
Acley, Brafferton, Preston, Rickwell magna et parva, Ketton, Nun-Staynton et
Trimdon infra parochiam de Acley praedictam; necnon decimas granorum et soeni
de Billingham, Newton, Cowpon et Wolston, et Beuley infra parochiam de
Billingham praedictam; ac etiam decimas granorum in villatis de Heighington,
Walworthe, Newbigging, Middrig-grange, Killerbye, Redworth, Scole-acley,
Thickley infra parochiam de Heighington praedictam; necnon decimas granortum in
villatis de East-Merington, Chilton parva, et Chilton magna, Ferye super
montem, et Hett infra parochiam de East-Merington praedictam; ac decimas
garbarum de villatis de Wallefend, Willington, Wardley, Nether-heiworth,
Felling, Monkton, Harton, Westow, Sheldheugh, parcellas rectoriae de Jarro; ac
decimas garbarum in vill. de Southwick, parcellas rectoriae de Wermouth
monachorum: Necnon illam annuam pensionem sex solidorum et octo denariorum
annuatim exeuntem de rectoria sive ecclesia de Dynssall; ac totam illam
pensionem, sive annualem redditum quadraginta solidorum exeuntem et annuatim
percipiendam de vicaria de Midleham; ac totam pensionem sive annualem redditum
viginti solidorum exeuntem de collegio de Stayndropp pro ecclesia de
Stayndropp; ac totam illam pensionem sive annualem redditum quinquaginta trium
solidorum et quatuor denariorum exeuntem et annuatim percipiendam de vicaria de
Heighington; ac totam illam pensionem sive annualem redditum december solidorum
exeuntem et annuatim percipiendam de capella de Whitworth; ac totam illam
pensionem sive annualem redditum trium solidorum et quatuor denariorum exeuntem
et annuatim percipiendam de magistro hospitalis Sancti Edmundi in Gayttiside in
dicto com. nostro Dunolm. quae dicto nuper monasterio Sancti Cuthberti Dunolm.
dudum spectabant et pertinebant, aut parcellae possessionum ejusdem nuper
monasterii extiterunt.

DAMUS etiam, ac per praesentes concedimus, praesatis decano et capitulo totam
illam rectoriam sive ecclesiam nostram de Berwick super Tweede, cum decimis
piscium salmonum captorum in aqua de Tweede ibidem, ac omnes illas rectorias
nostras de Norham, Ellingham, Edlingham, Bedlington, et Bywell-Peter in dicto
com nostro Northumbr. ac decimas granorum et foeni in villatis de Orde,
Spittell, Twedmouth, Morton, Edmondhill, Heton juxta Twysell, Shoreswood,
Hornecliff, Thornton, Duddo, Berington, Corwell, Tylmouth, Twysell,
Newbigginge, Norham, Felkington, Trimdon, Grindon rigge, Tindall-house,
Longrig, Unthank et Castlefeldes: ac decimas agnellorum, lanae, lini, canapii,
ac decimas piscariae cum decimis libri quadragesimal. ibidem infra parochiam de
Norham praedictam, ac etiam decimas garbarum in villa de Ellingham, Preston,
Doxforth, Northe-Charleton, et Southe-Charleton infra parochiam de Ellingham
praedict. ac decimas granorum in villa de Edlyngham, Lamethon, Bolton,
Aberwick; cum decimis minutis in Bolton praedict. infra dictam parochiam de
Edlyngham praedictam ac decimas granorum et foeni in villatis de Ancrofte,
Al^erden, Bowlsden, Gatherwick, Barmore, Lowick, et Kylay, parcellas rectoriae
de Insula sacra, quae dicto nuper monasterio Sancti Cuthberti Dunolm. dudum
spectabant et pertinebant, aut parcellae possessionum ejusdem nuper monasterii
extiterunt.

DAMUS et per praesentes concedimus praefatis decano et capitulo, totum illud
scitum, circuitum, ambitum, et praecinctum ruinosum nuper collegii vocat.
Duresme college infra villam Oxon. in comitatu nostro Oxon. ac totam illam
ecclesiam sive capellam, campanile, et cimiterium ejusdem nuper collegii, una
cum omnibus domibus, aedificiis, pomariis, gardinis, ortis et solo, tam infra
quam extra, juxta ac prope scitum, ambitum, et praecinctum ejusdem nuper
collegii; ac totum illud tenementum in Hanbarow in dicto comitatu nostro Oxon.
ac totam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nostram de Frampton in comitatu nostro
Lincoln. ac totam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nostram de Ruddington in
comitatu nostro Nottingham; ac omnes illas rectorias et ecclesias nostras de
Fishelack, Bossall, Brantingham in comitatu nostro Ebor. ac quandam annuitatem
sive annualem redditum quatuor librarum exeuntem et annuatim percipiendam, de
rectoria sive ecclesia nostra de Northallerton in dicto comitatu nostro Ebor.
ad festum Annuntiationis Beatae Mariae Virginis, et Sancti Michaelis Archangeli
annuatim solvendam; ac totam illam pensionem, sive annualem redditum sexdecim
librarum, exeuntem et annuatim percipiendam de vicario de Northallerton
praedict. pro tempore existente: Quae quidem rectoriae, annuitates, ac
pensiones praedictae, dicto nuper collegio, ac praedicto nuper monasterio
Sancti Cuthberti Dunolm. praedict. dudum spectabant, et pertinebant, aut
parcellae possessionum ejusdem nuper collegii et dicti nuper monasterii
extiterunt.

DAMUS etiam, et per praesentes concedimus, praesatis decano et capitulo, omnia
et singula maneria, dominia, messuagia, aedificia, terras, tenementa, redditus,
reversiones servitia, glebas, grangias, prata, pascuas, pasturas, boscos,
subboscos, feoda militum, escaetas, relevia, wardas, maritagia, herietta,
communias, vasta, jampna, brueras, decimus, oblationes, obventiones, pensiones,
portiones, ac cetera omnia et singula prosicua, possessiones et hereditamenta
nostra quaecunque, scituata, jaccutia, et existentia in villis, paroch^is,
campis, seu hamletis Sancti Oswaldi, ac de et Pittington, Hasilden, Dalton in
valle, Billingham, Acley, Heighington, Merington alias East-Merington,
Shineley, Aldurham, Houghall, Brom, Aldingrange, ^^rne-hall, Bellacies,
Croke-hall, Northwaysles. Newton, Haghouse, Herber-house, Bushopp-meadow,
Elvett-grange, Aldurham, Durham, North-Pittington, South-Pittington,
Shaldforth, Hepton super moutem, Haswell-grange, South-Shurburne,
North-Shurburne, Ludworth, Hardwick, Sheroton, Eden, Hutton, Holam,
Coldhaiselden, Dalton, Dalden, Brafferton, Preston, Reckwell magna et parva,
Ketton, Nun-Staynton, Grindon, Newby, Cowpon, Wolston, Beauley, Walworth,
Newbigging, Middrigg-grange, Killerbie, Redworth, Schole-Acley, Thickle,
East-Merington, Chilton parva, Chilton magna, Ferry super montem, Hett,
Wallesend, Willington, Wardley, Nether-heiworth, Felling, Monkton, Harby,
Westow, Sheldheugh et Southwick, praedictis in dicto comitatu nostro Dunolm. ac
in Berwick super Twede, Norham, Ellingham, Edlyingham, Bedlington,
Bywell-Peter, Ord, Spittile, Twedemouth, Morton, Edmundhills, Heton juxta
Twysell, Shoreswood, Horne-cliff, Thornton, Duddo, Berington, Corwell,
Tylmouth, Twysell, Newbigginge, Felkington, Grindon, Grindonrigg,
Tindall-house, Langrig, Unthank, Castlefeldes, Preston, Doxforth,
North-Charleton, South-Charleton, Lamethon, Bolton, Aberwick, Ancroft,
Allerden, Boulsden, Gatherwick, Barmore, Lowick, et Kylaw praedictis in
comitatu nostro Northumbr. necnon in Frampton praedict. in dicto comitatu
nostro Lyncoln, ac in Ruddington praedict. in dicto comitatu nostro Nottingham;
ac etiam de et in Fishelak, Bossall et Brantingham praedict. in dicto comitatu
nostro Ebor. sive alibi ubicunque infra regnum nostrum Angliae, dictis
rectoriis, grangiis, et ecclesiis, seu earum alicui quoquo modo spectantia, vel
pertinentia, aut ut pars vel parcella carundem rectoriarum, grangiarum, et
ecclesiarum, sive earum alicujus antehac cognita seu reputata existentia.

Damus etiam, ac per praesentes concedimus praesatis decano et capitulo omnes
et omnimodas advocationes, donationes, nominationes, collationes,
praesentationes, liberas dispositiones, et jura patronatus, omnium et
singularum vicariarum ecclesiarum de Dedinsall, Acliff, Heighington, Merington,
Billingham, Pittington, Hasilden, Dalton in valle, Edmundbyers, et
Kymblesworth, in dicto comitatu nostro Dunolm. ac vicariae ecclesiae
parochialis Sancti Oswaldi infra civitatem Dunolm. in eodem comitatu; ac etiam
de Berwick super Twede, Norham, Branxton, Ellingham, Edlyngham, Bedlington,
Meldon, et Bywell-Peter, in dicto comitatu nostro Northumbriae; necnon de
Fishelake, Brantingham, Northallerton et Bossall praedictis in dicto comitatu
nostro Ebor. ac de Frampton praedict. in dicto comitatu nostro Lyncoln. ac de
Ruddington praedict. in comitatu nostro Nottingham; ac advocationes,
nominationes, donationes, et liberas dispositiones, omnium et singulorum
curatorum, cantaristarum et capellanorum in ecclesiis de Witton-Gilbert,
Mugleswick, Whitworth, Croxdaill, et Sanctae Hildae juxta Shelles in dicto
comitatu nostro Dunolm. in ecclesia de Wallesend in dicto comitatu nostro
Northumbriae; ac etiam advocationes, nominationes, donationes, presentationes,
et liberas dispositiones omnium illarum cantariarum, et cantaristarum in
cantariis Beatae Mariae in ecclesia Sancti Oswaldi in dicta civitate nostra
Dunolm. Sanctae Mariae in capella Sanctae Margaretae in eadem civitate, Sancti
Jacobi de Elvett in eadem civitate, Beatae Mariae in ecclesia Sancti Nicholai
in eadem civitate, ac in cantariis Beatae Mariae in ecclesia de
Northe-Pittington in dicto comitatu nostro Dunolm. Beatae Mariae in ecclesia de
Dedinsall in eodem comitatu, in capella de Haverton in eodem comitatu, in
capella de Herington in eodem comitatu, ac Beatae Mariae in ecclesia de
Hesington in eodem comitatu, necnon Sancti Johannis Baptistae in ecclesia de
Bywell-Peter Northumbriae; ac advocationes, nominationes, donationes, et jura
patronatus cujuslibet vicariarum, curarum, sive cantariarum praedictarum; ac
etiam omnes et omnimodas advocationes, nominationes, donationes,
praesentationes, liberas dispositiones, et jura patronatus omnium et singularum
vicararium ecclesiarum, cantariarum, curarum, sive capellarum dictis maneriis,
sive eorum alicui quoquo modo spectantium vel pertinentium, aut in dicta
civitate Dunolm. vel in suburbiis ejusdem civitatis existentium, quae dicto
nuper monasterio Sancti Cuthberti Dunolm. dudum spectabant et pertinebant, aut
parcellae possessionum ejusdem nuper monasterii existentiis, adeo plene et
integre, ac in tam amplis modo et forma, prout ultimus prior et nuper conventus
dicti nuper monasterii Sancti Cuthberti Dunolm. vel little aliquis, aut aliquis
vel aliqui praedecessorum suorum, in jure nuper monasterii illius, alio tempore
ante dissolutionem ejusdem nuper monasterii, vel ante quam nuper monasterium
illud ad manus nostras devenit, seu devenire debuit, praedictum ^a^ria, terras,
tenementa, ac cetera praemissa, vel aliquas inde parcellas habuerunt, tennorum,
vel gavisi fuerunt, habuit, tenuit, vel gavisus suit, seu habere, tenere, vel
gaudere debuerunt aut debuit, et adeo plene et integre, ac in tam amplis modo
et forma, prout ea omnia et singula ad manus nostras ratione vel praetextu
dissolutionis dicti nuper monasterii, aut ratione vel praetextu alicujus cartae
donationis, concessionis, vel con^^nationis per dictum nuper priorem, et nuper
conventum dicti nuper monasterii sub figillo suo, conventu^i nobis inde
consect^e, vel aliter quocunque modo devenerunt, seu devenire debuerunt, ac in
manibus nostris jam existuat, seu existere debent, vel deberent; habenda,
tenenda, et gaudenda, omnia et singula praedicta maneria, messuagia, gardina,
terras, tenementa, redditus, reversiones, servicia, curias letas, libertates,
rectorias, c^ntarias, capellas, advocationes ecclesiarum, jura patronatus,
decimas, pensiones, portiones, ac c^tera omnia et singula praemissa superius
expressa et specificata, cum omnibus et singulis suis juribus, membris, et
portinentiis universis, praefatis decano et capitulo Dunolm. cathedralis
ecclesiae Christi et (...) Mariae Virgi^^, et eorum successoribus imperpetuum,
tenenda de nobis haeredibus et successoribus ^^lus^it. p^^^ et perpetuam
demotinam.

Ac etiam redditus nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus nostris ad curiam
nostram augmentationum, reventionum coronae nostrae annuatim, extunc
imperpetuum ducentas octodecim libras legalis monetae Angliae ad festum Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli, in plenam recompensationem et satisfactionem servitiorum,
et singularum pecuniarum summarum, et cujuslibet pecuniae summae annualis
redditus, sive decimae partis nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus ratione
praemissorum, per decanum et capitulum praedict. et successores suos, seu little
aliquem sive aliquos, vel per aliquem sive aliquos successorum suorum, aut per
aliquam personam, seu aliquas personas quascunque, quae ad decanatum ecclesiae
cathedralis praedict. seu ad aliquam praebendam in eadem ecclesia, sive ad
aliquod beneficium, officium, dignitatem, vel aliquam promotionem quamcunque in
ecclesia cathedrali praedicta, nunc nominat. seu appunctuat. vel imposterum
nominand. vel appunctuand. virtute seu ratione vel vigore cujusdam actus
parliamenti in anno regni nostri vicesimo sexto editi pro primis fructibus,
reversionibus et proficuis, aut nomine primorum fructuum, reversionum et
proficuorum, maneriorum, terrarum, tenementorum, et ceterorum praemissorum
unius anni, vel pro uno anno, vel pro primis fructibus, reversionibus et
proficuis decanatus, praebendae, vel alterius beneficii, officii, dignitatis,
vel alius promotionis dictae ecclesiae cathedralis praedictae, vel annui
valoris alicujus annualis redditus, pensionis, sive annuitatis, aut alterius
pecuniae summae cujuscunque, de vel pro praedictis maneriis, terris,
tenementis, rectoriis, ac ceteris praemissis, sive de aliqua inde parcella
exeunt. nobis, haeredibus et successoribus nostris faciend. solvend. vel
reddend. aut parcel. proficuorum praedictorum, maneriorum, et ceterorum
praemissorum, seu alicujus inde parcellae existentis, ac assignat. vel limitat.
aut assignand. seu limitand. dictis decano et praebendariis, vel eorum alicui
aut alicui alii personae, seu aliquibus aliis personis, et eorum successoribus,
aut successorum eorum alicujus ad aliquod beneficium, officium, vel dignitatem,
in dicta ecclesia nunc promot. aut assignat. seu imposterum promovend. seu
assignand. pro annuali redditu, seu pensione, vel nomine annualis redditus,
sive decimae partis perpetuae, seu pensionis existen. ad decimam partem annui
valoris maneriorum, terrarum, tenementorum, et ceterorum praemissorum, aut
decanatus ecclesiae cathedralis praedict. aut praebendarum, beneficiorum,
officiorum, et dignitatum praedict. aut aliorum beneficiorum quorumcunque in
eadem ecclesia, aut alicujus praebendae, beneficii, officii, dignitatis, vel
promotionis in dicta ecclesia, vel eorum alicujus, vel ad annualem redditum,
pensionem, sive ad decimam partem annui valoris de praedictis maneriis, terris,
tenementis, rectoriis, ac ceteris praemissis, sive de aliqua inde parcella
exeunte seu solvend. aut parcel. proficuorum praedictorum, maneriorum, ac
ceterorum praemissorum, seu alicujus inde parcellae existen. aut assignat. vel
limitat. aut assignand. vel limitand. dictis decano et praebendariis, vel eorum
alicui, aut alicui alii personae, sive aliquibus aliis personis et eorum
successoribus, aut successorum eorum alicujus ad aliquod beneficium, officium,
seu dignitatem in dicta ecclesia nunc promot. aut assignat. seu imposterum
promovend. sive assignand per aliquam personam quamcunque, vel aliquas personas
quascunque modo, vel ad aliquod tempus imposterum, aliquo modo solvend.
faciend. et reddend.

SCIATIS insuper, quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, pro nobis, haeredibus, et
successoribus nostris per praesentes, pardonamus, remittimus, et relaxamus
praefatis decano et capitulo et successoribus suis imperpetuum, ac omnibus et
singulis personis, ac unicuique personae, qui nunc sunt, aut est, vel
imposterum erunt, sive erit decanus ecclesiae cathedralis praedictae, vel
prebendarius in eadem ecclesia, seu promotus ad aliquod beneficium, officium,
vel dignitatem in eadem ecclesia, omnes et singulas pecuniarum summas, et
quamcunque pecuniae summam, nobis haeredibus, aut successoribus nostris, per
praefatum decanum et capitulum aut successores suos, vel per quemcunque decanum
ecclesiae cathedralis, seu per quemcunque praebendarium in eadem ecclesia, aut
per aliquam personam quamcunque, seu aliquas personas quaseunque, quae nunc est
aut sunt, vel quae imposterum erit vel erunt promota vel promotae, ad aliquod
beneficium, officium, dignitatem in ecclesia praedicta, tam pro primis
fructibus, reversionibus et proficuis, aut nomine primorum fructuum,
reversionum et prosicuorum, praedictorum, maneriorum, terrarum, tenementorum,
et ceterorum praemissorum vel eorum alicujus, seu alicujus inde parcellae, aut
annui valoris decanatus ecclesiae praedictae vel prebendae, aut alterius
beneficii, officii, vel dignitatis cujuscunquem ecclesia cathedrali praedicta,
ad quem, quam, vel ad quod promotus, assignatus, vel appunctuatus est, vel ad
aliquod tempus imposterum erit, vel ad quem, quam vel ad quod promoti,
assignati, appunctuati, vel collati erunt, pro annuali redditu decimae partis
sive pensionis, vel annui valoris alicujus annualis redditus, pensionis, sive
annuitatis, aut alterius pecuniae summae cujuscunque de praedictis maneriis,
terris, tenementis, rectoriis, ac ceteris praemissis, aut de aliqua inde
parcella exeunt. seu solvend. aut parcel. proficuorum praedictorum maneriorum
et ceterorum praemissorum, seu alicujus inde parcellae existent. aut assignat.
vel limitat. aut assignand. vel limitand. dictis dec. et praebendariis, vel
eorum alicui, aut alicui aliae personae, seu aliquibus aliis personis et eorum
successoribus aut successorum eorum alicujus, ad aliquod beneficium, officium,
vel dignitatem in dicta ecclesia nunc promot. seu assignat. aut imposterum
promovend. seu assignand. vel nomine annualis redditus decimae partis sive
pensionis, extendentis ad annuum valorem decimae partis, vel ad decimam partem
omnium et singulorum praedict. maneriorum, terrarum, tenementorum, et ceterorum
praemissorum, vel eorum alicujus, vel alicujus inde parceliae, vel decanatus
ecclesiae cathedralis praedictae, vel alicujus praebendae, beneficii, officii,
dignitatis, aut alius promotionis cujuscunque in eadem ecclesia, vel ad decimam
partem annui valoris, redditus, pensionis. sive annuitatis, aut alterius summae
cujuscunque praespecificatae, aut annui valoris eorum alicujus, aut virtute,
seu ratione actus parliament: editi praedicto anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri,
nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus nostris solvendas, reddendas, vel
faciendas; praedicta summa ducentarum octodecim librarum per nos, ut
praemittitur, reservata tantummodo excepta, et nobis haeredibus et
successoribus nostris annuatim reservata.

ET praeterea, de uberiori gratia nostra pro nobis, haeredibus et successoribus
nostris, per praesentes pardonamus, remittimus, et relaxamus Hugoni Whiteheade
sacrae theologiae professori nunc decano ecclesiae cathedralis praedictae, ac
Edvardo Hyndmers sacrae theologiae professori, Rogero Watson sacrae theologiae
professori, Thomae Spark in sacra theologia baccalario, Willielmo Bennet sacrae
theologiae professori, Willielmo Todd sacrae theologiae professori, Stephano
Marley in sacra theologia baccalario, Roberto Dalton in sacra theologia
baccalario, Johanni Towton in sacra theologia baccalario, Nicholao Marley in
sacra theologia baccalario, Radulpho Blaxton presbitero, Roberto Bennet
presbitero, Willielmo Watson presbitero, modo praebendariis in ecclesia
cathedrali praedicta, et eorum cuilibet, omnes et singulas pecuniarum summas,
et quamcunque pecuniae summam, per praefatos Hugonem Whiteheade, Edwardum
Hyndmers, Rogerum Watson, Thomam Spark, Willielmum Bennet, Willielmum Todd,
Stephanum Marley, Robertum Dalton, Johannem Towton, Nicholaum Marley, Radulphum
Blaxston, Robertum Bennet, et Willielmum Watson, vel eorum aliquem, nobis pro
primis fructibus, reventionibus, et proficuis, aut nomine primorum fructuum et
proficuorum, seu nomine primi fructus decanatus praedicti, et praebendarum in
ecclesia praedicta, vel eorum alicujus, vel alicujus annualis redditus,
pensionis, sive portionis, aut alterius summae cujuscunque eis pro separalibus
portionibus suis, in ecclesia cathedrali predicta limitae aut assignatae, vel
limitandae seu assignandae, vel pro annuali redditu decimae partis, seu nomine
pensionis extendentis ad decimam partem valoris decanatus praedicti, vel
prebendarum praedictarum, vel earum alicujus, vel alicujus redditus, pensionis,
sive portionis, aut eorum alicujus, eis seu eorum alicui pro part, seu
pensione sua limitat. aut assignat. vel limitand. aut assignand. in eadem
ecclesia solvendas, faciendas, vel reddendas.

ET de habundantiori gratia nostra pro nobis, haeredibus et successoribus
nostris regibus hujus regni Angliae, per praesentes damus et concedimus
praefatis decano et capitulo et successoribus suis imperpetuum, omnes et
singulas pecuniarum summas, et quamcunque pecuniae summam per praedictum
decanum et capitulum et successores suos, aut aliquem vel aliquos successorum
suorum quemcunque seu quoscunque, vel per decanum ecclesiae cathedralis
praedictae, et praebendarios, et alias personas in eadem ecclesia, vel per
eorum aliquem, aut aliquam personam quamcunque, seu aliquas personas
quascunque, quae ad aliquod tempus imposterum erit vel erunt nominata,
assignata, seu appunctuata vel nominatae, assignatae, seu appunctuatae ad
decanatum praedictum, vel ad aliquam praebendam in eadem ecclesia, seu ad
aliquod beneficium, officium, dignitatem, vel promotionem in eadem ecclesia,
vel praefactum decanum praedictum, vel praebendarium in dicta ecclesia, vel
promot. aut promot. ad aliquod beneficium, officium vel dignitatem in ecclesia
cathedr. praedicta, nobis, haeredibus aut successoribus nostris regibus hujus
regni Angliae, virtute aut ratione alicujus actus parliamenti editi in
praedicto anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri pro praemissis, vel aliquo
praemissorum solvendas vel reddendas; praedicta summa ducentarum octodecim
librarum per nos, ut praefertur reservata, tantummodo excepta. Habend. et
gandend. omnes et singulas dictas pecuniarum summas, et quamlibet pecuniae
summam praedicta, excepta tantummodo prae-excepta, praesatis decano et
capitulo, et successoribus suis imperpetuum, de dono nostro speciali, absque
compoto, seu aliquo alio proinde nobis, haeredibus, aut successoribus nostris
reddend. solvend. vel faciend.

ET ulterius volumus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus
nostris concedimus praesatis decano et capitulo et successoribus suis, ac
cuilibet personae quae nunc est vel imposterum erit decan. ecclesiae
praedictae, aut praebendarius in eadem ecclesia, vel nominatus, appunctuatus,
seu promotus ad aliquod beneficium, officium, vel dignitatem in eadem ecclesia,
quod nos, haeredes, et successores nostri non habebimus, petemus, clamabimus,
vel vindicabimus aliquos primos fructus, reventiones seu proficua, vel aliquam
quamcunque pecuniae summam, pro primis fructibus, reventionibus et prosicuis
praedictorum maneriorum et ceterorum praemissorum vel eorum alicujus, vel
alicujus inde parcellae, aut pro primis fructibus alicujus annualis redditus
pensionis, sive annuitatis, aut alterius summae prae-specificatae, aut nomine
primi fructus eorundem, vel eorum alicujus inde parcellae, aut aliquam
pensionem, sive annualem redditum, extendentem ad decimam partem, annui valoris
praedictorum maneriorum. ac ceterorum praemissorum, vel eorum alicujus, aut
alicujus inde parcellae, vel ad decimam partem alicujus annualis redditus,
pensionis, sive annuitatis, aut alterius summae cujuscunque prae-specificatae,
necnon aliquam quamcunque summam, vel aliam rem quamcunque, virtute seu ratione
dicti actus parliamenti editi in praedicto anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri
praedicti, per praedict. decanum et capitulum, aut successores suos, vel
aliquam personam quamcunque, que nunc est, aut ad aliquod tempus imposterum
erit decanus ecclesiae predictae cathedralis, aut praebendarius in eadem
ecclesia, aut promotus ad aliquod beneficium, officium, sive dignitatem in
eadem ecclesia proinde reddendam, solvendam, vel faciendam; praeter praedictam
summam ducentarum octodecim librarum superius per nos, ut praemittitur,
annuatim reservatam; sed quod tam praedicti decanus, praebendarii et capitulum,
et successores sui, quam omnes et singulae personae et persona, qui nunc sunt,
aut est, aut imposterum erit decanus ecclesiae praedictae, aut praebendarius in
eadem ecclesia, aut promotus ad aliquod beneficium, officium, aut dignitatem in
eadem ecclesia, erunt et erit exonerat. et acquiet. erga nos, haeredes et
successores nostros per praesentes, de omnibus et singulis denariorum summis,
et qualibet pecuniae summa nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus nostris, virtute
seu ratione dicti actus parliamenti editi anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri, pro
decanatu dictae ecclesiae, vel pro aliqua praebenda, vel aliquo beneficio,
officio, dignitate, vel promotione in eadem ecclesia, ac qualibet re
concernenti eadem decanatum, praebend. beneficia, officia, dignitates, et
promotiones, seu eorum aliquod, aliquam, vel aliquae reddendis vel solvendis;
aliqua clausa, materia, sententia, re, articulo, ordinatione, promotione,
donatione, concessione; aliqua clausa quacunque, in dicto statuto contenta,
sive specificata, in contrarium non obstante.

AC etiam volumus pro nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus nostris, ac per
praesertes concedimus praefatis decano et capitulo et successoribus suis
intrare in omnia maneria, terras, tenementa, redditus, servitia, et cetera
praemissa, ac in quamlibet inde parcellam, ac ea gaudere, habere, et tenere, et
successoribus suis, juxta tenorem vim, formam, et effectum harum literarum
nostrarum patentium, ac quibuscunque personis, et cuicunque personae, quae nunc
sunt, aut est, vel imposterum erunt, sive erit decanus ecclesiae praedictae,
aut praebendarius in eadem ecclesia, vel promotus ad aliquod beneficium,
officium, vel dignitatem, in eadem ecclesia, quod licitum erit eis et eorum
cuilibet intrare, capere, et habere actualem et realem possessionem de hoc, ad
quod nominatus, appunctuatus, aut promotus fuerit in ecclesia cathedrali
praedicta, ac habere, capere, et percipere exitus, reventiones, et proficua
inde, ad usum suum proprium, absque aliqua alia satisfactione, vel solutione ad
usum nostrum, haeredum, et successorum nostrorum, pro aliquibus primis
fructibus, reventionibus, aut proficuis illius, ad quod est vel erit nominatus,
appunctuatus, vel promotus in ecclesia cathedrali praedicta, et absque aliqua
licentia, concordia, secta, commissione, aut prosecutione alicujus
liberationis, haeredibus, aut successoribus nostris, aut officiariis nostris,
in quibuscunque curiis nostris, proinde fienda, praeterquam de praedicta
annuali summa ducentarum octodecim librarum nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus
nostris, pro decimis et primis fructibus, omnium et singulorum maneriorum,
terrarum, et tenementorum prae-concessorum, ut praefertur, reservata.

ET insuper volumus, et pro nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus nostris regibus
hujus regni Angliae, per praesentes concedimus praefatis decano et capitulo, et
successoribus suis, ac quibuscunque personis, aut cuicunque personae, qui nunc
sunt, aut est, seu imposterum erunt, vel erit decanus ecclesiae cathedr. praed.
aut praebendarius in eadem ecclesia, aut promot. nominat. sive assignat. ad
aliquod beneficium, officium, vel dignitatem, in eadem ecclesia, quod licet
eis, et eorum cuilibet, ut intraverint, ceperint, et habuerint, intraverit,
ceperit, et habuerit actualem et realem possessionem de tali praedicto
decanatu, praebend. beneficio, officio, vel dignitate, ad quem, quam, vel ad
quod nominat. appunctuat. aut promot. fuerit vel fuerint in ecclesia cathed.
praedicta, necnon habuerint, ceperint, et perciperint, habuerit, ceperit, et
perciperit exitus, proficua, redditus, reversiones, et emolumenta hujusmodi
decanatus, praebendae, beneficii, officii, dignitatis, sive promotionis in
eadem ecclesia, vel little alicujus, absque aliqua satisfactione vel solutione
ad usum nostrum, haeredum, aut successorum nostrorum, pro aliquibus primis
fructibus, reventionibus, et proficuis praemissorum, aut eorum alicujus, aut
pro aliquibus primis fructibus decanatus, praebendae, aut beneficii, officii,
vel dignitatis in eadem ecclesia cathedr. ad quem, quam, vel ad quod nunc sunt
aut est, aut ad aliquod tempus imposterum erit, vel erunt, nominatus,
appunctuatus, aut promotus, vel nominati, appunctuati, aut promoti, absque
aliqua compositione aut agreamento proinde siend. Tamen nos, haeredes, aut
successores nostri, aut aliquis alius, pro nobis, haeredibus, aut successoribus
nostris, aut nomine nostro, haeredum, aut successorum nostrorum, ea de causa
non inquietabimus, impetiemus, perturbabimus, nec molestabimus praedictum
decanum et capitulum aut successores suos, aut aliquam personam quamcunque ad
decanatum in ecclesia cathedral. praedicta, vel ad aliquam praebendam in eadem
ecclesia, aut ad aliquod beneficium, officium, dignitatem, seu promotionem in
eadem ecclesia nominat. assignat. aut appunctuat. vel nominand. assignand. vel
appunctuand. de pro vel concernenti aliquam introisionem, vel aliam offensam,
sive sorisfacturam quamcunque malignam praemissorum, sed quod tam decanus et
capitulum et successores sui, ac omnes et singuli personae quaecunque, quae ad
decanatum ecclesiae cathedr. praedictae, vel ad aliquam praebendam in eadem
ecclesia, aut ad aliquod beneficium, officium, dignitatem, aut aliam
promotionem quamcunque in eadem ecclesia, nunc nominat. assignat. aut
appunctat. vel ad aliquod tempus imposterum nominand. assignand. seu
appunctuand. erunt et erit penitus exonerati, acquietati, perdonati, el
relaxati, ac exoneratus, acquietatus, perdonatus, et relaxatus, ergo nos,
haeredes, et successores nostros, et quemlibet nostrum de fine pro omnibus et
singulis hujusmodi ingressionibus, intrusionibus, offensis, penalitatibus, et
sorissacturis, et aliis quibuscunque limitatis aut specificatis in aliquo
statuto aut actu parliamenti edito praedicto anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri,
concernente solutionem primi fructus, et solutionis annualis redditus, aut
pensionis extendentis an annuum valorem alicujus beneficii, dignitatis,
officii, vel promotionis, seu eorum alicujus, aliquo statuto, ordinatione,
provisione, aut actu edito in eod. anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri in
contrarium non obstante.

VOLENTES insuper, et per praesentes firmiter injungendo praecipientes omnibus
et singulis archiepiscopis et episcopis infra noc regnum nostrum Angliae, ac
cancellario curiae decimarum et primorum fructuum nostrorum, necnon omnibus et
singulis officiariis, ministris nostris, haeredum, ac successorum nostrorum, et
eorum cuilibet, quod ipsi, aut eorum aliquis, aliquo modo non impetient,
perturbabunt, vexabunt, inquietabunt, aut molestabunt, nec impetiet,
perturbabit, vexabit, inquietabit, seu molestabit praedictum decanatum et
successores suos, seu eorum aliquem, aut aliquam personam quamcunque, quae nunc
est, vel ad aliquod tempus imposterum erit decanus ecclesiae cathedr.
praedictae, aut praebendarius in eadem ecclesia, seu nominat. assignat.
appunctuat. aut promot. ad aliquod beneficium, officium, seu dignitatem in
eadem ecclesia, de, pro, aut concernent. solutionem alicujus summae, aut rei
cujuscunque pro primis fructibus, reventionibus, aut proficuis, aut nomine
primi fructus praemissorum, aut eorum alicujus, vel decanatus ecclesiae
cathedr. praedictae, aut alicujus praebendae, officii, beneficii, aut
dignitatis in dicta ecclesia cathedr. vel de, pro, aut concernen. solutionem
alicujus summae aut rei cujuscunque pro aut nomine annualis redditus, sive
pensionis extendentis ad decimam partem valoris, aut annui valoris
praemissorum, aut eorum alicujus, aut decanatus ecclesiae cathedralis
praedictae, aut alicujus praebendae, beneficii, officii, aut dignitatis in
eadem ecclesia, aut ratione, vel praetextu alicujus statuti editi in praed.
anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri; sed quod omnes et singuli praedict,
archiepiscopi, episcopi, cancellarii, officiarii, et ministri nostri, haeredum,
aut successorum nostrorum, super solam demonstrationem harum literarum
nostrarum patentium, permittant et fieri causabunt pradictum decanum et
capitulum et successores suos, et quamlibet personam praedictam, de, pro, aut
concernen. praemissor. fore quietos et in pace.

ET ulterius de uberiori gratia nostra, damus et concedimus eisdem decano et
capitulo et successoribus suis, quod idem decanus et capitulum ac successores
sui, habebunt, tenebunt, et gaudebunt, ac habere, tenere, et gaudere valiant,
et possint, infra maneria et dominia praedicta, et cetera omnia et singula
praemissa, et infra quamlibet parcellam, tot, talia, tanta, hujusmodi et
consimilia, curias letas, visum franci plegii, necnon omnia quae ad visum
franci plegii pertinent, assaiam et assisam panis, vini, et cervisiae, catalla,
waviata, extrahuras, liberas warrenas, ac omnia quae ad liberam warrenam
pertinent, wreccum maris, minera carbonum, ferias, nundinas, mercata,
libertates, franchesias, privilegia, et jurisdictiones quascunque, quot,
qualia, quanta, et quae praedicti nuper prior et conventus dicti nuper
monallerii Beatae Mariae Virginis et Sancti Cuthberti Dun. sive eorum aliquis,
aut aliquis vel aliqui praedecessorum suorum habuerunt, tenuerunt, vel gavisi
fuerunt, habuit, tenuit, vel gavisus fuit, seu habere, tenere, vel gaudere
debuerunt aut debuit, in praedictis maneriis, rectoriis, terris, tenementis, et
ceteris praemissis, aut in aliqua inde parcella, et adeo plene et integre, ac
in tam amphs modo et forma, prout ea omnia et singula ad manus nostras, ratione
vel praetextu dissolutionis, sive sursum-redditionis vel concessionis dicti
nuper monasterii, seu alio quocunque modo devenerunt, seu devenire debuerunt,
ac in manibus nostris jam existunt, seu existere debent, vel deberent.

DAMUS etiam, ac per praesentes concedimus, praesatis decano et capitulo, omnia
et singula hujusmodi, talia, tanta, et consimilia jura spiritualia, et
privilegia ecclesiastica, ac onmem et consimilem ordinariam authoritatem,
potestatem, et jurisdictionem quamcunque, infra precinctum dicti nuper
monasterii sive prioratus, ac etiam apud et infra maneria de Heminborough,
Howenden, et Alverton infra com. nostrum Eborum. Necnon infra episcopatum
Dunelm. quot, quanta, et quae dicti nuper prior et conventus dicti nuper
monasterii Beatae Mariae et Sancti Cuthberti Dunelm. aut eorum aliquis, sive
aliquis vel aliqui praedecessorum suorum, aut aliquis alius nomine ejusdem
prioris sive aliquorum vel alicujus praedecessorum suorum in jure nuper
monasterii aut prioratus illius, aliquo tempore ante dissolutionem ejusdem
monasterii sive prioratus habuerunt, tenuerunt, vel gavisi suerunt, habuit,
tenuit, vel gavitus suit, seu habere, tenere, vel gaudere debuerunt, aut
debuit; exceptis, et omnino reservat. nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus
nostris omnibus illis libertatibus, jurisdictionibus, franchesiis et
privilegiis, quae modo aliquo statuto sive ordinatione sunt adnihilata,
revocata, vel evacuata.

ET ulterius de ampliori gratia nostra, volumus, ac per praesentes concedimus
pro nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus nostris, quod idem dec. et cap. et
eorum successores de cetero imperpetuum habebunt, tenebunt, et gaudebunt, ac in
usus suos proprios convertent, et habere, tenere, et gaudere, ac in usus suos
proprios convertere possint et valiant, omnes et singulas praedictas rectorias,
quae nuper aliquo modo fuerunt appropriatae; ac omnia et omnimoda terras,
tenementa, ac decimas, commoditates, prolicua, et emolumenta quaecunque eisdem
rectoriis, seu eorum abcui quoquo modo spect^ntia, sive pertinentia praesatis
dec. et cap. aut eorum successoribus praeconcess. cum suis pertinentiis
universis; ac quod eadem rectoriae cum eisdem pertinentiis de cetero
imperpetuum dicto dec. et cap. eorumque successoribus erunt appropriat. in tam
amplis modo et forma, prout nuper prior et conventus dicti nuper monasterii
Sancti Cuthberti Dunelm. vel eorum aliquis, aut aliquis vel aliqui
praedecessorum suorum, in jure nuper monasterii illius praedicti rectorias sive
earum aliquas vel aliquam, cum suis pertinentiis habuerunt, tenuerunt, vel
gaviti fuerunt, habuit, tenuit, vel gavisus suit, seu habere, tenere, vel
gaudere debuerunt aut debent, ratione aut modo quocunque; aliquo actu, statuto,
ordinatione, lege, consuetudine, prohibitione, vel restrictione antehac habit,
fact. edit. usitat. provisis. vel aliqua alia materia, re vel causa quacunque
in contrarium aliquo modo, non obstante, sine impedimento; et hoc absque aliqua
praesentatione, admissione, seu inductione alicujus incumbentis, seu aliquorum
incumbentium, ad dictas restorias aut ad earum aliquam, ut praefertur, dictis
dec. et cap. eorumque successoribus per praesentes concessas.

AC etiam volumus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus
nostris concedimus dec. et cap. et successor. suis, quod nos, haeredes, et
successores nostri imperpetuum, et de tempore in tempus acquietabimus,
exonerabimus, et indempnes conservabimus, tam eosdem decanum et capitulum ac
eorum successores quam praedicta maneria, terras, tenementa, ac caetera omnia
praemissa cum pertinentiis universis, versus quascunque personas, et quamcunque
personam, haeredes, assignatos et successores suos, de et pro omnibus et
omnimodis pensionibus, portionibus, redditibus, feodis, corrodiis,
annuitatibus, oneribus, et denariorum summis quibuscunque, de aut pro praedict.
maneriis et ceteris praemissis, seu de aut pro aliqua inde parcella, oneratis,
seu onerandis; praeterquam de praedict. reddit. ducentarum octodecim librarum
nobis, haeredibus, et successoribus nostris superius reservatum; ac praeterquam
de foedo trium librarum, novemdecim solidorum et sex denariorum annuatim
solvend. Thomae Tempest militi, et Nicholao et Roberto Tempest conjunctim
officiar. parcarii de Beaupere per literas patentes eisdem inde confectas; ac
de feodo quadraginta sex solidorum et quatuor denariorum annuatim solvend.
Thomae Forster paliciat. dicti parci per literas patentes; ac praeterquam de
feodo quatuor librarum, tresdecim solidorum et quatuor denariorum annuatim
solvend. Jaspero Horsleye ballivo itinerant sive cursor. scaccarii dicti nuper
monasterii per literas patentes eidem inde consectas; ac praeterquam de feodo
viginti sex solidorum et quatuor denariorum annuatim solvend. ballivo de
Shoreswood cum diversis villat. ibidem, et collectori redd. et decimar. ibidem;
ac de feodo viginti sex solidorum et octo denariorum annuatim solvend. ballivo
de Est-Merrington pro tempore existente; ac de feodo triginta trium solidorum
et quatuor denariorum annuatim solvend. ballivo de Heworth pro tempore
existente; ac de feodo quinquaginta trium solidorum et quatuor denariorum
annuatim solvend. ballivo de South-Shelies pro tempore existente; ac de feodo
viginti solidorum annuatim solvend. ballivo de Framwelgate pro tempore
existente; ac de feodo trium librarum et sex solidorum ballivo et collectori
redd. de Elvet et Shinkleye pro tempore existente; ac de feodo viginti
solidorum annuatim solvend. ballivo villatis de Est-Rainton, West-Rainton, et
North-Pittington, pro tempore existente; necnon de feodo viginti septem
solidorum et quatuor denariorum annuatim solvend. Nicholao Blaxton ballivo de
Billingham per literas patentes eidem inde confectas; ac praeterquam de quinque
libris, sex solidis, et octo denariis annuatim solvend. curato capellae Sanctae
Margaretae infra praedictam parochiam Sancti Oswaldi Dunelm. pro salario suo;
ac de quinque libris annuatim solvend. curato capellae de Cornell infra
parochiam de Norham praedict. pro salario suo; ac de quinque libris annuatim
solvend. curato parochiae Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae Dunelm. praedict. pro
salario suo; ac etiam de tribus libris, sex solidis, et octo denariis annuatim
solvend. curato de Mugleswicke praedict. celebrant. in ecclesia de Mugleswicke
praed. pro salario suo; ac praeterquam de tresdecim solidis et quatuor denariis
annuatim solvend. pro pane et vino tempore Paschali in ministratione corporis
Christi parochianis in ecclesia de Notham praedict. ac de triginta quinque
solidis et quatuor denariis annuatim solvend. pro consimilibus expensis tempore
praedicto in ecclesia Sancti Oswaldi Dunelm. fiend. ac praeterquam de duobis
solidis annuatim solvend. magistro collegii de Fryswith in villa nostra Oxon.
ac etiam december solidis solvend. capellano capellae de Ferry super montem pro
tempore existente; ac de viginti solidis annuatim solvend. capellano capellae
de Hilton pro tempore existente; ac de quinque solidis annuatim solvend.
capellano cautariae de Bradburia pro tempore existente; ac de tribus solidis et
quatuor denariis annuatim solvend. clerico cantariae Sanctae Trinitatis in
ecclesia Sancti Nicholai in burgo Dunolm. ac de octodecim solidis et quinque
denariis annuatim solvend. cantaristae Beatae Mariae in ecclesia praedicta; ac
de viginti octo solidis et octo denariis annuatim solvend. cantaristae Sanctae
Mariae in ecclesia praedicta; ac de quinque solidis annuatim solvend.
cantaristae Sancti Nicholai in dicta ecclesia; ac de duodecim denariis annuatim
solvend. capellano Beatae Mariae in ecclesia Sanctae Margaretae; ac de
quindecim solid^s annuatim solvend. capellano cantariae Sancti Cuthberti in
Galilea in ecclesia cathedr. Dunolm. ac de viginti quatuor solid. annuatim
solvend. capellano cantariae sive gildae corporis Christi in ecclesia Sancti
Nicholai; ac de quadraginta solid. annuatim solvend capellano capellae de
Nether-Heworth praedict. pro tempore existente; ac de quadraginta solid.
annuatim solvend. cantaristae in ecclesia Sanctae Margaretae in veteri Dunolm.
de viginti solid annuatim solvend. rectori ecclesiae parochialis Beatae Mariae
in ballivo australi infra dictam civitatem Dunolm. ac de separalibus redd.
viginti quatuor solid. ac novemdeeim denariis annuatim solvend. capellano
cantariae Beatae Mariae in ecclesia Sancti Oswaldi; ac de novem solidis
annuatim solvend. capellano cantariae Beatae Mariae in ecclesia Sancti Nicholai
in Dunolm. ac de quatuor solid. annuatim solvend. capellano cantariae Sancti
Jacobi juxta Elvet; ac de duobus solid. annuatim solvend. capellano cantariae
Beatae Mariae in ecclesia Sancti Nicholai in Dunolm. praedict. ac de quodam
annuali redditu, annuitate, sive pensione, viginti librarum exeunt. de ecclesia
de Berwick. annuatim solvend. vicario de Berwick praedicta; ac de quodam
annuali redditu, sive pensione, sexdeceim librarum exeunt. de ecclesia Sancti
Oswaldi praedicti in Dunolm. praedict. ac de quodam annuali redditu sive
annuitate viginti librarum exeunt. de ecclesia de Notham praed. annuatim
solvend. vicario de Norham praedict.

ET ulterius de uberiori gratia nostra, damus, ac per praesentes concedimus,
praefat. decano et capitulo, omnia exitus, redditus, reventiones, et proficua,
omnium et singulorum praedictorum maneriorum, terrarum, tenementorum,
rectoriarum, pensionum, decimarum, ac ceterorum omnium et singulorum
praemissorum, superius expressorum et specificatorum, a festo Sancti Michaelis
Archangeli ultimo praeterito huc usque provenientia sive crescentia. Volentes
insuper, et per praesentes firmiter injungendo, praecipientes tam cancellario
et consilio curiae augmentationum, reventionum, coronae nostrae pro tempore
existent. quam omnibus receptoribus, auditoribus, et aliis officiariis et
ministris nostris quibuscunque, quod ipsi, et eorum quilibet, super solam
demonstrationem harum literarum patentium, absque aliquo alio brevi seu
warranto, a nobis, haeredibus, seu successoribus nostris quoquo modo impetrand.
obtinend. seu prosequend. plenam, integram, debitamque exonerationem,
allocationem, defalcationem, et deductionem manifestam, praed. dec. et capitulo
et successoribus suis, de omnibus et omnimodis hujusmodi annuitatibus,
redditibus, et denariorum summis quibuscunque de praemissis, ut praefertur,
exeuntibus seu solvendis, vel superinde oneratis, seu onerandis; praeterquam de
illis redditibus, feod. et denariorum summis, quae superius nominat. et
expressat. excipiuntur, facient et fieri causabunt; et hae literae nostrae
patentes, erunt tam dict. cancellario et consilio curiae nostrae augmentationum
reventionum coronae nostrae pro tempore existen. quam praedict. auditoribus,
receptoribus, et aliis officiariis et ministris nostris quibuscunque,
sufficiens warrant. et exoneratio in hac part.

ET praeterea de ampliori gratia nostra volumus, et concedimus pro nobis,
haeredibus, et successoribus nostris per praesentes, quod hae literae nostrae
paten. et quodlibet verbum, sententia, et clausa in eisdem content. seu
specificat. interpretabuntur, exponentur, capientur, intelligentur,
adjudicentur, et determinentur, ac interpretabitur, exponetur, capietur,
intelligetur, adjudicetur, et determinetur, tam coram nobis, haeredibus, et
successoribus nostris, et in quibuscunque curiis nostris, et cur. haeredum et
successorum nostrorum tam spiritualibus quam temporalibus, ac in omnibus aliis
locis, et coram quibuscunque judicibus, justiciariis, et aliis personis
quibuscunque, aut alia persona quacunque, ad maximum commodum et proficuum
praedict. decani et capituli et successorum suorum, ac cujuslibet personae,
quae nunc est, aut ad aliquod tempus imposterum erit decanus ecclesiae
cathedralis praedict. aut praebend. in eadem ecclesia, aut nominat. appunctuat.
assignat. seu promot. ad aliquod beneficium, officium, vel dignitatem in eadem
ecclesia, et arctissime erga nos, haeredes, et successores nostros, et hoc
licet nomina et cognomina, aut nomen et cognomen illorum seu illius, qui
imposterum erunt, aut erit decanus ecclesiae praedictae, aut praebendar. vel
praebend. in eadem ecclesia, vel nominat. assignat. appunctuat. seu promot. ad
aliquod beneficium, officium, seu dignitatem in eadem ecclesia, vel certitudine
valorem decan. ecclesiae praedict. et praebendar. in eadem ecclesia, aut
ceterar. dignitat. et promotionum in eadem ecclesia, aut eorum alicujus
specialiter et certitudinaliter in hiis literis nostris paten. non exprimuntur,
declarantur, seu specificantur; aut aliquo omissione, defectu, negligentia,
repugnantia, seu contrariositate in praesentibus, aut eorum aliquo, aut eo quod
expressa mentio de vero valor annuo, aut de certitude praemissorum, aut de
aliis donis, sive concessionibus per nos praefat. decano et capitulo, antehac
tempora factis in praesentibus minime fact. existet; aliquo statuto, aut actu
parliamenti edit. seu fact. in praedicto anno vicesimo sexto regni nostri, aut
aliquo alio statut. actu, ordinatione, seu restrictione in contrarium
praemissorum, seu eorum alicujus, antehac tempora edit. fact. seu ordinat. vel
aliqua causa, re, seu materia quacunque, in aliquo non obstante.

VOLUMUS etiam, et per praesentes concedimus, praefat. decano et capitulo, quod
habeant has literas patentes sub magno sigillo nostro Angliae debito modo fact.
et sigillat absque fine, seu feod. magno vel parvo, nobis in hamperio nostro
seu alibi, ad usum nostrum proinde quoquo modo reddend. solvend. vel faciend.
Eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo, aut de certitudine praemissor.
sive eorum alicujus, aut de aliis donis sive concessionibus, per nos praesat.
dec. et capit. antehac tempora in praesentibus minime facta existit, aut aliquo
statuto, actu, ordinatione, provisione, sive restrictione inde in contrarium
fact. edit. ordinat. sive provis. aut alia re, causa, vel materia quacunque, in
aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus
patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium sexto decimo die Maii anno regni
nostri tricesimo tertio.

Per breve de privato sigillo, et de data praedicta, auctoritate parliamenti.

MARTEN.


made by the king bears date the 16th of May 1541: These two instruments, being
of much consequence, are inserted at length in the notes.

The establishment, besides the dean and prebendaries, consisted of twelve
minor canons, a deacon, subdeacon, sixteen singing-men, a master of the
choristers, ten choristers, a divinity reader, eight almsmen, two masters of
the grammar school, eighteen scholars, two vergers, two porters, two sextons,
two barbers. Willis says, The king converting the priory into a college of
seculars, assigned his new dean and prebends their respective apartments out of
the old monastery, within the precincts of which the bishop, dean,
prebendaries, and other members, have very good houses, the best of any
cathedral in England, according to the dignity of the prebends, which are
reputed more richly endowed than any other church, owing, as I hear, to the
members allotting themselves, at first, their respective dividends or shares
out of the chapter lands, and not leasing them in common, by which practice (in
this sole church of the new foundation) some prebends are of more value than
others, whereas in the rest they are all equal, as they might be here possibly
at first, though the improvements of estates have made a disproportion, as it
now continues. The ancient Valor, etc.
L. s. d. Deanery 284 4 8 Twelve prebendaries 32 5 10 each Twelve minor canons
10 0 0 each Deacon 6 6 8 Subdeacon 6 6 4 Sixteen lay-singingmen 6 6 8 each
Schoolmaster 11 0 0 Usher 6 6 8 Master of the choristers 9 15 0 Divinity reader
20 0 0 Eight almsmen 6 13 4 each Eighteen scholars 3 6 8 each Ten choristers 3
6 8 each Two vergers 6 0 0 each Two porters 6 0 0 each Two cooks 5 0 0 each Two
barbers 5 0 0 each Two sacristaries 6 0 0 each


.

Dean Whitehead, Chamber informs us, sell under the displeasure of the court,
and, being accused of misdemeanour against the state, together with bishop
Tunstal and Hyndmers his chancellor Burnet's Reformation, vol. iii. p. 205. --
Kennet's Hist. vol. ii. p. 323.

These be the assignments of lands and possessions for the corpse of the deanrye
and prebends within the cathedral church of Durham, as hereafter follows.

The Corpse of the Deanrye.
Imprimis, ye manor and demaines of Beauparke xv l. xv s. 4 d. Three little
clausures lying nyghe ye Stotyate -- xiij s. iiij d. The Harber close -- xx s.
-- Holm pasture xij l. -- -- North-ravelling Flatt -- South-ravelling Flatt --
with the Summer pasture viij l. -- -- One tenement called the Whitehall -- xxx
s. -- One tenement called Allansford -- xij s. -- One tenement called Shipleigh
-- xiij s. iiij d.

With claus. commons and pastures belonging to the premises paying furthe
yearlie of the said corpse unto the said cathed. church of D. the some of x l.
xiij s. And the woods and mines within the possessions of the said corpse to be
reserved and excepted for the common use and necessaries of the said cathed.
church and other the manors, milnes, buildings and tenements appertayning and
belonging to the same.

Randal's MSS. N. B. The residue of this assignment is carried forward to each
respective prebend.

The tithes of Merrington and Billingham were also then assigned to the deanery.
L. s. d. Decimae rectoriae de Billingham 13 13 4 de Newton Bewley 7 0 0 de
Cowpen 6 0 0 de Wolvestan 13 6 8 de Merrington 8 0 0 Decimae rectoriae de
Chilton Magna 6 13 4 de Chilton Parva 2 8 0 de Fery-Hill 6 13 4 de Hett 2 6 8 L
105 13 4

Solvit etiam capitulo pro bladijs Aegidij 4 s. Et pro 48 le rent henns, etc. 4
s. Decanus nunc solvit capitulo quotannis 106 l. 1 s. 4 d.


, was summoned to appear before the council; being much agitated under such
circumstances, and distressed by unusual fatigue and traveling, he fell sick
soon after his arrival in London, and dying, was interred in Trinity Church in
the Minories, in the year 1548, having enjoyed the office of dean only six
years. Willis says Vol. i. p. 252.
, The History of Durham says he died at London in 1548, and was buried in the
Minories there; which A. Wood in his Athenae also mentions, and tells us this
epitaph was placed over his gravestone, though it is now perished, as I found
when I searched that church: Here lies the Body of Hugh Whitehead, the last
Prior of Durham, and first Dean thereof, who died at London -- and was buried
in the Church of the Minories, Anno --

The office of dean appears to have remained vacant three years from the death
of Hugh Whitehead, or that he did not die in the year 1548; for it was not till
the 18th of November, 1551, that

ROBERT HORN, D. D.
succeeded, it being expressly said in the patent (5 Edw. VI. part 3) that the
king presented him on the vacancy occasioned by the death of Whitehead. Some
authors have asserted he was born in the bishopric of Durham Collyer's Eccl.
Hist. vol. ii. p. 569. -- Fuller's Eng. Worthies.
, but the more probable account is Fasti Oxon. Wood, vol. i. p. 101.
, that he was the son of John Horn, son of William Horn, of Cletor in Copeland,
in the county of Cumberland, was educated in St John's college, Cambridge,
where he commenced doctor in divinity, and went out ad eundem 9th July 1567. It
is said he was nominated to the bishopric of Durham in 1552, bishop Tunstall
being then living, who declined accepting it, as the conditions were such he
could not approve: Grey's Notes. -- Kennet's Hist. vol. ii. p. 323. -- Burnet's
Res. vol. ii. p. 64. -- Strype's Ann. vol. ii. p. 656.
It is certain there was much disagreement between him and that prelate. Soon
after the accession of queen Mary, Horn was ejected, and became a voluntary
exile for the cause of faith, living abroad the whole of her reign. At the head
of the episcopal party at Frankfort he greatly distinguished himself, being
chosen Hebrew-reader to the English society there Fuller's Chapter Hist. lib. 8, p.
31.
. In a bitter contest with one Ashley, his bigotry rather than his tolerant
spirit was displayed Ibid. lib 8, p. 32.
. On the accession of Elizabeth, being restored to his deanery, he continued but
a short time before his appointment to the bishopric of Winchester, which
happened in the year 1560. At the conference at Westminster, he was chosen one
of the disputants concerning the services of the church Ibid. lib. 9, p. 56.
. A suit was prosecuted against him by bishop Bonner, touching the supremacy
oath Ibid. p. 79. -- Collyer's Eccl. Hist. vol. ii. p. 493.
, which was superseded by the fortunate interposition of the statute on
consecrations. He departed this life on the 1st day of June 1579. The place of
his interment is variously spoken of; most probably it was in the church at
Winchester, near the pulpit; but Willis and Stevens say in the Minories church,
London. The inscription on his tomb has been given us in the History of
Winchester, published in 1773 Robertus Horn, theologiae doctor eximius,
quondam Christi causae exul, deinde episcopus Winton, pie obiit in Domino June
1, 1580, episcopatus sui anno 19.
. Under the Life of John White Ath. Oxon. vol. i. p. 110. (last edit.)
he is thus mentioned: He was reported by a certain author Parker's Antiq.
Eccl. Brit.
to be a man of great mind and profound ingenie, and no less sagacious in
detecting the crafts of his adversaries, than prudent in preventing and
avoiding them. He was also a frequent preacher, and an excellent disputant, and
wrote in the mother tongue an Answer to John Fackenham's Scruples Ath. Ox. vol.
i. p. 222. That he dealt falsely and uncivilly with abbot Feckenham when
committed to his custody. -- See also p. 196.
concerning the oath of supremacy. He gave way to fate in 1579, leaving this
character behind him, given by one belonging to the church at Durham, who,
speaking of his demolishing several ancient monuments of that church while dean
thereof, tells us, that he could never abide any ancient monuments, acts or
deeds, that gave any light of or to godly religion." His character, as given by
Fuller Eng. Worthie^.
, is to this effect: "A worthy man ground betwixt papists and sectaries, who
sported with his name, and twitted his person as dwarfish, carping at the case,
when they were not able to find fault with the jewel. Whatever his mould might
be, he was made of good metal, as being of a sprightful and fruitful wit. He
published two of John Calvin's sermons in English, to which he prefixed his
Apology, wherein he gives an account of himself, and the reasons for his
flight. There are many things in this Apology worthy remarking Strype's Ann.
vol. ii. p. 659. The apology in the appendix, No 30.
, especially the complaints of hard and unjust dealing toward him, by bishop
Tunstall, and by Gardener bishop of Winchester, and of the sad change there was
on the accession of queen Mary. Strype says, This Apology is well worthy the
preserving; therein he relates at large how he was summoned up from Durham to
the privy council: And thereby the bishop of Durham and the bishop of
Winchester accused him of diverse things that were merely false, on purpose to
bring him into trouble; as that he, being dean of the church, took upon him to
meddle in the bishop's office; that in his new learning he preached heresy;
that he was a Scot; that he brought a wife into that church, where never woman
came before: Of all which, with sundry other charges, he acquits himself in
this Apology Grey's Notes. -- Mon. p. 118, 122. -- Strype, Eliz. c. 3 and 45,
etc. etc. -- By his will he left 40 l. to the poor of Durham. -- Strype's Ann.
p. 656.
. On dean Horn's cession,

THOMAS WATSON, D. D.
was appointed by queen Mary, the 18th of November 1553. He was rector of
North-Crawley in the county of Bucks, and master of St John's college,
Cambridge. Soon after his advancement to this deanery, an act An Act of
Parliament empowering Q. Mary to make Statutes for Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, 2d April, 1554.
[From Randal's MSS. No 1 p. 91.] In parliamento inchoato et lento apud
Westmonasterium secundo die Aprilis, anno regni serenissimae et
excellentissimae dominae nostrae Mariae Dei gratia Angliae Franciae et
Hiberniae reginae fidei desensoris primo, et ibidem continuato usque in quintum
diem Maii dicto anno, quo die dissolut. erat, communi omnium procerum et populi
consensu, ac regiae majestatis tunc praesent. assensu, sancit. edit et ordinat.
fuerunt haec subsequent. statuta.

Exhibita est regiae majestati in parliamento praedicto, billa quaedam formam
actus in se continens:

WHEREAS the late noble prince of famous memory, king Henry the Eighth, father
to our most gracious sovereign lady the queen, amongst other his godly acts
and doings, did erect, make and establish diverse and sundry churches, as well
cathedral as collegiate, and endowed every of the same with diverse manors,
lands, tenements and possessions, for the maintenance of the deanes,
prebendaries and ministers within the same, and for other charitable acts to be
done and executed by the same deanes, prebendaries and ministers: And also did
incorporate the same deanes, prebendaries and ministers, and made them bodies
politic in perpetual succession, according to the laws of the realm of
England.

And where also, as the late king, for the better maintenance and preservation
of the said churches, in a godly unity and good order and governance, granted
unto the several corporations and bodies corporate of every of the said
churches that they should be ruled and governed for ever, according unto
certain ordinances, rules and statutes, to be specifyed in certain indentures
then after to be made by his highness, and to be delivered and declared to every
of the bodies corporate of the said several churches, as by the several
erections and foundations of the said churches more plainly it does and may
appear: Since which said erections and foundations, the said late king did
cause to be delivered to every of the said churches, so as is ^esaid erected
and incorporated, by certain commissioners by his highness appointed, diverse
and sundry statutes and ordinances, made and declared by the same
commissioners, for the order, rule and governance of the said several churches,
and of the deanes, prebendaries and ministers of the same; which said statutes
and ordinances were made by the said commissioners, and delivered unto every of
the corporations of the said several churches in writing, but not indented,
according to the form of the said foundations and erections, by reason
whereof, the said churches, and the several deanes, prebendaries and ministers
of the same, have no statutes or ordinances of any force or authority, whereby
they should be ruled and governed, and therefore (...) as yet not fully
established, in such sort as the godly intent of the said late ^ing Henry the
Eighth was, to the great imperfection of the same churches, and the hinderance
of God's service, and good order and regiment to be had and continued amongst
the ministers of the same.

And for as much as the authority of the making of the said statutes,
ordinances and orders was reserved only unto the said late king, and no
mention made of any like authority to be reserved unto his heirs and
successors, the same orders and statutes cannot now be provided, without
authority of parliament.

May it therefore please the queens highness, that it may be established and
enacted by her highness, by the assent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons of this present parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that our said sovereign lady the queen from thenceforthe duringe her
natural life (which our Lord long preserve) shall have by virtue of this act,
full power and authority to make and prescribe unto every of the said churches,
and the deanes, and prebendaries, and ministers of the same, and to their
successores, such statutes, ordinances and orders, for the good governance,
rule and order of every of the same churches, deans and prebendaries, and
ministers of the same, and of the lands, manors, tenements and possessions of
every of the same churches, as shall seem good to her highness; the same
statutes and ordinances to be made by her highness by writing sealed with the
great seal of England, and to be delivered to the deanes, prebendaries and
ministers of every of the said churches for the time being.

And that it may be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that our said
sovereign lady the queen, duringe the time aforesaid, by writing sealed
with the great seal of England, shall and may alter, transpose, and change,
augment, or diminish the said orders, statutes and ordinances of every of the
said churches, from time to time, as occasion shall serve, and as it shall
seem good to her highness; and that all and every of the said statutes and
ordinances and orders to be made, altered, transposed, changed, augmented, or
diminished, as is aforesaid, shall be and remain good and effectual, according
to the making, alteration, transposinge, chaunginge, augmentinge, or
diminishinge of the same.

Be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the queens
highness may have like power and authority to make, ordeine and establish
statutes, ordinances and foundations, for the good order and government of such
grammar schools as have been erected, founded, or established in any part of
this realm, by the most noble princes king Henry the Eighth or king Edward the
Sixth, and of the ministers and scholars of the same schools, and to alter and
transpose such other statutes and ordinances there made heretofore, from time
to time, as to her highness shall seem most convenient.

Cui quidem billae prelecte, et ad plenum intellecte per dictam dominam reginam
ex authoritate parliamenti praedicti, sic responsum est. La Reign le veult.
was passed to enable the queen to make statutes and ordinances for the
government of collegiate churches and their possessions, the former law of
Henry VIII. having become obsolete for want of being duly carried into
execution, as appears by the preamble. This power, as we observed before The
first head or chapter sets forth this commission, etc. Vid. Annals of the
Bishops, vol. i. p. 437.
, was as much confined to the queen as the other was to Hen. VIII. so that
statutes constructed, or reformations of such statutes, not done by queen Mary,
and without authority of parliament, are void and of no validity.

The present statutes of this church were drawn up by Nicholas Heath
archbishop-elect of York, Edmund Bonner bishop of London, Cuthbert Tunstall
bishop of Durham, Thomas Thirlby bishop of Ely, and William Armistead chaplain
to their majesty's, who were commissioned for that purpose; and they received
confirmation Et magni sigilli nostri Angliae appensione confirmamus, ac pro
veris et indubitatis ecclesiae chathed. Xti et beatae Mariae Virginis Dunelm
statutis haberi volumus, ac denique tam vobis decano et capitulo ceterisque
ministris ecclesiae praedictae quam successoribus vestris, quatenus eisdem
omnino vos conformetis, prescribimus, ac perpetuo observanda tradimus, etc.


under the great-seal the 20th day of March, in the first and second years of
the reign of Philip and Mary The corrections or additions noted under each
statute were made 30th Dec. 1556, but by what authority is not known.
.

STATUTES.
CHAP. I. -- The Bishop's Pre-eminence.
The prelate takes place of the dean, canons, and ministers of the church; and
is to be received, upon his first coming, with the following ceremonies: The
dean, with the whole choir in their proper habits, shall meet him in procession
at the north door, the bells ringing, the dean on his right hand, the next in
dignity on his left, conducting him to the high altar, where, kneeling, the
prayers prescribed shall be used. He is to be received in the same manner when
he comes to visit; but on other occasions by the ringing of bells, and without
procession. When the bishop preaches, or performs divine service, the person
whose turn it should be, is excused. On his reading any of the offices on great
festivals, the dean on his right hand, and the person next in dignity on his
left; or, in their absence, the two next superiors shall assist, and attend him
from the vestry to the altar or the throne; and on other occasions the
sub-dean, or the person next in dignity, shall minister to him and support his
book. The dean and the whole choir, coming in or going out, shall bow to him,
whether he is seated in his stall or throne. When the bishop institutes the
dean or prebendaries, he is to send his letters to the dean and chapter, for
induction and possession.

CHAP. II. -- Induction and Installation of the Dean.
The dean is to be installed and placed in his seat in the chapter house by the
subdean or senior residentiary, where, having taken the prescribed oath, both
major and minor canons shall promise canonical obedience to him in these words:
Domine decane, promitto tibi canonicam obedientiam tanquam decano. The dean's
power and jurisdiction is supreme, touching the government of the church. He
shall hear all causes relative to the chapter, and, assisted with their
opinions, determine therein; correct excesses, and reprehend all obstinate
offenders. He shall invest the prebendaries in the presence of their brethren,
and in his and the chapter's name receive the oath prescribed. Being superior
in authority, all shall stand when he enters or departs the choir or
chapter house. He is first in place and voice. The ringing of the bells must
wait for him morning and evening on festivals, when he is to perform the
offices; but not at other times, unless he officiates Nisi cum executor officii
suerit.
. On the like days he is to chant the anthems, or such of the canons as he
shall appoint for that purpose. On reading the service he is not to quit his
seat. If the bishop is not present, it is the dean's office, or, in his
absence, the next in dignity, to pronounce the confession. All the ministers of
the church shall bow to him in his stall as they enter or depart the choir. In
correcting excesses, such is the prerogative of the dean and prebendaries, on
account of their prebends, that they shall not be convened out of chapter,
because such causes as relate to the prebends shall be determined in chapter,
by the judgment of the dean and chapter. Prebendaries' servants ought to be
corrected by their proper masters, unless their offenses are heinous, and their
masters neglect that duty. Leave of absence shall be given by the dean to the
minor canons and other officers of the church for one day, or at most not
exceeding eight days; and in his absence, by the sub-dean or senior resident:
Absence for any greater time shall not be given without consent of the chapter.

CHAP. III. Induction and Installation of a Prebendary.
The new prebendary is to produce, and cause to be read in chapter, his
presentation from the bishop; and if nothing be objected to him, he is to be
habited and presented to the dean and chapter; and the dean, or senior in his
absence, admits him, by the ceremony of delivering a loaf of white bread placed
on the book of statutes, saying, Nos recipimus te in canonicum et investimus,
et tradimus tibi regularis observantioe formam in volumine isto contentam pro
cibo spirituali, et in remedium laboris refectionem in pane et vino corporalem.
The bread is to be given to the poor Decanum sordide parcum castigabit
episcopus Dunelm.
. Then the dean or precentor proceeds to install him, by placing him in his
seat in the church; after prayers, he returns to the chapter house, and takes
the oath prescribed; and then is saluted by the dean and canons, before which
ceremony he is not permitted to act in chapter. There are many secrets of the
chapter, which are not to be divulged, not even to an absentee when he returns;
particularly those which in discovery might prejudice the rights of the church,
the chapter, or any member thereof. Disputes among the prebendaries, on any
chapter matters, are to be determined by the chapter; and they are to submit to
such determination, without going to law.

CHAP. IV. -- Persons to be supported by the Church.
One dean, twelve prebendaries, twelve minor canons, one deacon, one subdeacon,
ten clerks (who may be either priests or laymen), one master of the choristers,
ten choristers, one master and one under-master of the grammar school, eighteen
grammar scholars, eight poor men, two sub-sacrists or vergers, two to ring the
bells and look after the clock, two porters (one of whom shall be a barber),
one baker, one under-baker, one cook, and one under-cook; -- the whole number
eighty-six.

CHAP. V. -- The Dean's Qualifications.
The dean shall be a priest, doctor in divinity, bachelor in divinity or doctor
of laws, of sound faith, good life, and under no imputation of heresy; to be
nominated by the crown by letters patent under the great seal, and presented to
the bishop, on whose mandate he is to be received and installed, and put in
possession of his deanery by the prebendaries present, the sub-dean or senior
residentiary giving him the following oath.

CHAP. VI. -- The Dean's Oath.
Ego (A) qui in decanum hujus ecclesioe cathedralis Dunelm. electus et
institutus sum, Deum testor, et per hoec sancta Dei evangelia juro, quod pro
virili mea in hac ecclesia been et fideliter regam et gubernabo, juxta
ordinationes et statuta ejusd. et quod omnia illius bona, terras, et tenementa,
redditus, possessiones, jura, libertates et privilegia coeterasque res
universas, tam mobiles quam immobiles, et alias omnes commoditates ejusdem
ecclesioe been et fideliter custodiam, defendam, et servabo, atque ab aliis
similiter fieri curabo, ad hoec omnia et singula statuta et ordinationes hujus
ecclesioe quatenus me concernunt been et fideliter observabo, et ab aliis
quatenus eos concernunt, studiose observari procurabo; sicut me Deus adjuvet,
et hoec sancta Dei evangelia.

CHAP. VII. -- The Dean's Duty.
As the eye of the body, he is to look after all the members of it, that they
do their respective duties; he is to keep a regular family, and live according
to his dignity, or be reproved by the bishop Biscuits are distributed to the
populace, the remains of the ancient custom of sweet bread on high festivals,
perhaps originally derived from heathenish rites.
, if he lives sordidly; of which fault if any of the prebendaries are guilty,
he is to reprove them, and also touching other duties required by the statutes.
He is to take care of the treasure Jocalia ornamenta ecclesiae vasa aurea et
argentea supellectilem omnem, etc.
, ornaments, utensils, writings and records of the church ( FIRST CORRECTION,
-- "In a place which, in his and the chapter's judgment, shall be thought most
secure."
ac in oerario locisque aliis ad ea specialiter deputatis, prout illius judicio
pro tempore tutissimum videbitur) that they may be all preserved for his
successor. His consent is to be had, in all elections to offices and places, in
setting fines and letting lands, in bestowing benefices, in the confirmation of
any deeds of indenture and other writings, if he is within the realm; if not,
then by his deputy lawfully constituted, who must be a member of the chapter
CORRECTION, -- "That none of the writings may be lost, if the dean or any of
the prebendaries take any charters. etc. out of the treasury (which is not to
be allowed but upon urgent necessity for the use of the church) they ane to
leave a note under their hand for what they take out, and restore it at the
time appointed, otherwise they are punishable by the loss of their quotidians,
or in a greater degree if obstinately refusing.


.

CHAP. VIII. -- Survey of the Lands, and holding Courts.
The dean, or, being prevented, one deputed by him and the chapter, shall once
a year, or if need require, more frequently, survey all the manors, lands,
tenements, houses, buildings, appropriated churches, woods, underwoods, and
trees, belonging to this church, and order necessary repairs or new houses to
be built; and the condition of such estates and houses is to be reported in
writing within eight days after such survey, wherein the receiver (if
convenient) shall be one, or, in his absence, one of the prebendaries to be
deputed; also the senescal or clerk of the courts shall attend and hold the
courts, and assist with their counsel. The courts are to be kept once a year,
beginning after Easter, and again (if occasion) after Michaelmas. The dean upon
such survey to be allowed six shillings and eight-pence a day for his expenses,
and the receiver four shillings. As in these statutes mention is often made of
the Chapter, we declare, that under that title shall be understood one half of
the prebendaries at least; and those only shall be deemed acts of the Chapter
where at least that number, who are intra septum ecclesioe, are present at the
making thereof. The votes of absentees shall not be admitted; but if any one is
sick within the college, he shall not be deemed absent, but under his hand may
give his suffrage on being consulted by the dean or one of the prebendaries.

CHAP. IX. -- Concerning the Woods, and letting the Lands, etc. to farm.
The dean shall not sell or give away any wood fit for timber CORRECTION, --
"The dean, on his visitation, with the consent of the receiver and treasurer,
or one of them, shall assign wood to the tenants for the necessary repairs of
their tenements."
, or let or lease out for term of years any of the lands, tenements, tithes,
etc. without the advice and consent of the Chapter CORRECTION, -- "The dean may
let out those lands and tenements (sive bondagia sive cottagia ^disi^a in
urbibus) which anciently were not demised by indenture, but at will only, after
the old made, for which such advice and consent is not requisite; so as the
ancient tenure and custom of the premises be not altered, or their annual
rents diminished.


; but he may, on his visitation, assign to the tenants, wood for necessary
repairs of their tenements; and also let or lease out the lands, tenements,
tithes, etc. from year to year, and at will, according to the custom of the
manors; for doing which, such advice and consent are not requisite. Care is to
be taken that the several woods be sufficiently fenced, that they may not be
cropped by cattle: And as (this article declares) great part of the riches of the
church consists in woods, when there is a fall of wood for the repair of the
church or any other bu^dings, it must be conducted under the inspection of the
supervisor (the dean or receiver) or one of the prebendaries, or some person
specially deputed and sworn to that duty, and no part thereof shall be sold,
except the bark and tops not fit for timber; and the felling of such wood shall
be at a proper season, to cause a new spring, unless occasion requires it to be
cut at another time. Tallies or a written account shall be kept by the wood
bailiff of the number of trees felled, and for what use, so that, at the annual
audit, the Chapter may see the state of their woods. If by agreement any wood
is given to the tenants for firing, it shall be that which is decayed, dried,
and unfit for timber. No lands or tenements shall be leased for a longer term
than twenty-one years, and no reversion granted, till within seven or eight
years at the furthest of the expiration of the existing lease, and then the
demise is not to exceed twenty-one years at most. There shall be no leasing
from three years to three years, or from term to term, beyond twenty-one years;
neither shall there be any covenant or agreement for renewing such lease when
it expires. And all collusion and fraud in demising the church lands is
prohibited CORRECTION. -- It is ordained, that no manors, lands, etc. (salinoe,
molendina, mineroe carbonum vel metallorum rectorioe ecclesiarum appropriatarum
decimoe, etc.) shall be demised to any person beyond the term of 21 years, nor
any reversion granted until within two or three years at the utmost of the
expiration of the former lease, and if the existing lease is not delivered up
to be cancelled, the remaining years therein shall be deducted from the new
term. If any money is received from the tenant on such demise, besides seal
sees, all such mon^y, and other casual profits arising from the premises,
which are not specially ordered by these statutes to be otherwise applied,
shall go to the common use of the church, in support of the ordinary expenses,
and shall not b^ ^o^ted to the private benefit of the dean and chapter or any
of them.


. But it is allowed, that all houses in towns and villages may be leased for
fifty or sixty years at most. The tenants shall pay their rents to the receiver
or his deputy within the precincts of the church, find one or more sureties for
performance of the covenants and agreements in their leases, and on the death
of any such surety to provide a new one, within one month, upon pain of
forfeiting the lease. The body are totally prohibited alienating, mortgaging,
selling, changing or pledging any of the manors, lands, rents, tenements, or
other immovable possessions of the church, pinguescere enim hanc optamus
ecclesiam, non macrescere, is the expression of the commissioners. No suit
shall be commenced or prosecuted touching the possessions of the church,
without consent of the chapter. The dean, or his procurator if absent, with the
chapter Sine, etc. What is the intention of this Sine, etc. is not in our power
to construe^; or whether it should be Sive, etc. In several of the English
entries it stands thus, but in the Latin copies of the statutes it stands, et
^p^po.
, shall present to their livings and ecclesiastical preferments. The granting
of the next turn to any living before the same is become vacant, is prohibited,
unless on some very urgent occasion, or in favor of some person of
distinguished worth, to whom the grant shall be personal and not general, so
that if he dies before a vacancy, the right of presentation shall revert to the
chapter.

CHAP. X. -- Delivery of the Goods, etc. to the Dean.
This chapter prescribes the manner of delivering over to the dean all the
jewels, plate, treasures, ornaments, and other valuable effects belonging to
the church, the care whereof are committed to him, and which are to be
specified by inventory and indenture.

CHAP XI. -- The Dean's Attendance.
It is ordained, that the dean shall constantly reside at the deanery, without
some lawful excuse; such as attendance on the king or queen as chaplain, and
that so long only as the duty requires; on any negotiation of the crown,
business of the church, attendance on parliament or the convocation,
involuntary imprisonment, and great sickness, whereby he is prevented returning
to the church The like indulgencies are extended to the prebendaries, by chap.
xiv. But the modern custom of spending half their days in London, etc. and
squandering their revenues at a distance from their estates, was not in fashion
in those days -- Pan curat oves -- otium cum dignitate! -- See Angl. Sacra, vol
i. p. 7^9.


: During such his absence, he is to be deemed present with regard to profits
and emoluments "In omnibus tamen commodis et emolumentis ratione corporis
decanatus sui et quotidianarum distributionum, etc."
, on informing the chapter of the cause; but shall not be entitled thereto, if
absent on any causes than those assigned, and for longer time than prescribed
by this statute. The dean may be absent one hundred days in the year, in the
whole, together or at separate times, on his private affairs.

CHAP. XII. -- The Prebendaries' Qualifications, etc.
In this statute the right of nominating prebendaries is reserved to the crown
See vol. i. p. 436, where this patronage is granted to the bishop.
. Each shall be a priest, of sound faith, without any imputation of heresy, of
fair character and good life; either doctor or bachelor in divinity, doctor of
laws, or master of arts, or at least bachelor of laws. To take the following
oath before the dean or sub-dean and chapter: Ego (B) qui in canonicum hujus
ecclesia cathedralis Christi et Beatae Mariae Virginis Dunelm. nominatus,
electus et institutus sum, (tactis sacrosanctis Dei evangeliis) Juno, quod pro
virili mea, terras, tenementa, redditus, possessiones, jura, libertates et
privilegia, caeterasque res universas hujus ecclesiae tucbor, servabo et
servari procurabo; et omnia singula statuta ac ordinationes hujus ecclesiae
(quatenus me concernunt) fideliter observabo; et ab aliis, quantum in me
fuerit, observari curabo: Nec quod ad utilitatem et honorem hujus ecclesiae
legitime fieri potest, sciens impediam, sed illius commodo et honori semper
studebo. Approbatas et approbandas hujus ecclesiae consuetudines (prout eas
didicero) observabo. Praeterea, obediens ero decano et capitulo in mandatis
licitis et canonicis, et quod secreta capituli illicite non revelabo. Et si me
posthac officium aliquod in ecclesia hac gerere contigerit, illud been et
fideliter pro viribus exequar. Haec omnia et singula praestabo, sicut me Deus
adjuvet, et haec sancta ejus evangelia. The dean shall take his oath before the
chapter, the major and minor canons before the dean and chapter, and all the
inferiors before the dean and treasurer.

CHAP. XIII. -- Obedience to the Dean.
All ministers, etc. of the church shall be obedient to the dean as their head
and leader, in his absence to the sub-dean, and in both their absence to the
senior residentiary.

CHAP. XIV. -- The Prebendaries' Attendance.
They are allowed eighty days absence to look after their livings and other
business, and the same indulgencies as before granted to the dean. See chap. xi.
If any of them shall preach within twelve miles of the cathedral, he is to be
allowed the emoluments of one day, as if present; and if above twelve miles,
two days, or at the most three. If he is longer absent, without the excuse of
preaching or the causes before stipulated, he shall forfeit his profits
CORRECTION. -- These one, two, or three days, are by this correction extended
without limitation, if the preacher satisfy the dean and chapter every quarter
how often and where he preached, so that at the end of the year it may appear
whether each has performed his statutable duty. -- The dean may preach his
sermons, either on the statutable days, viz. Easter Day, Corpus Christi, and
Christmas Day, or on their octaves, if there happens a greater concourse of
people.


. A third part of the prebendaries at least shall be constantly resident; or
those who are absent, without the causes allowed, shall not have their share of
quotidians and dividends for the time of such absence By a note to the MS. copy
before us, it is observed, "By this it seems to be implied, that those present
should have all forfeitures of quotidians divided among them: And this appears
to be the foundation of the custom of those who are present the whole year
(saving statutable days of absence) having the forfeitures divided amongst
them. If there are four prebendaries constantly here, and whilst there are so
many, the forfeiture (...) to be divided amongst all, in proportion to their
days of being resident.


.

CHAP. XV. -- The Dean and Prebendaries' Preaching.
The dean and prebendaries shall be diligent in preaching, as well in the
country as in the cathedral church. The dean shall (per se aut per alium)
preach in English in the cathedral on Easter Day, Corpus Christi and
Christmas-days The observation of Corpus Christi-day being laid aside, the
other two are only days of duty.
; and likewise twice in the year within the diocese, at different places. The
prebendaries shall each preach four times at least in the year, in the
cathedral, on Sundays or other festivals, if agreeable to the dean; that is to
say, once a quarter, between the respective quarter-days of Christmas, the
Annunciation, John Baptist, and Michaelmas-day, according to the priority of
their stalls; under a mulct of 20s. to be paid toward the common stock. When
the bishop chooses to preach, the dean or canon whose turn it was shall be
excused.

CHAP. XVI. -- Residence of the Prebendaries.
All the prebendaries shall live in the college distinct, and lodge there. If
any of them has not 40l. a year clear income, besides the stipends of this
church, he shall not be obliged to keep house or observe hospitality; but may
live privately at his own house, or eat at the table of the dean or some of the
prebendaries, whether in or out of residence, or at the table of the minor
canons within the precincts of the church: If there should happen to be three
of this condition, they may keep one table amongst them, and using hospitality,
shall be reckoned only as one holding residence, and out of the common stock
are to receive the share but of one. CORRECTION. -- Two prebendaries having
between them 60l. a year clear income, besides the stipends of this church, may
hold residence, be deemed one residentiary, and as such have the portion of one
out of ^e co^^^ stock.


Those who have not a common table, but live either privately or at the tables
of others, are prohibited having any share of the common stock, which accrues
from the absence of the dean and others, and the seal-fees. The deans and
canons, who, exclusive of the stipends of this church, have 40l. a year clear
yearly value, for the time they stay are obliged to maintain a family and keep
residence and hospitality; otherwise they shall be deemed absent, and bear the
mulct of an absentee, in forfeiting the quotidians. Those who do not live
within the precincts, or when they come do not continue twenty days together,
are excused keeping house for so short a time. In division of the common stock,
the dean shall receive double the portion of a prebendary. At the end of each
year, about Michaelmas, a dividend is to be made to the resident dean and
prebendaries, according to the number of days they were resident, and not
otherwise, as before prescribed. Whoever designs to keep residence, shall come
to the chapter and declare the day he begins such residence, which is to be
entered in the registry, that there may be no dispute among the brethren about
time. Those who keep residence, are such as for twenty-one days together in
every year are present at divine service, as the statutes direct, and keep
house. They shall give notice to the chapter when they begin their twenty-one
days, during which time they shall entertain in a more liberal manner than the
rest of the year, receiving the choir, and inviting the citizens and strangers
to their table, as becomes those that keep hospitality. Two or more must not
hold residence together, but one after another, and when it is most convenient
to each, unless some urgent cause (approved by the dean or sub-dean and
chapter) prevents. Every residentiary who holds residence for the whole year,
shall twice a year entertain the whole choir, and the eight poor men belonging
to the church at different times, not more than six together et semel tantum in
die. But if he is not resident the whole year, then it shall suffice that he
entertains the choir only once a year, in manner before mentioned. If any one
is invited and does not come, the residentiary is excused asking him again; for
whoever is invited is presumed to be at the table. Those that neglect the
performance of any of these ordinances may be punished by the dean, or in his
absence by the sub-dean, by withholding the monthly allowance, or by an
arbitrary mulct. As to the three allowed to hold residence together, they shall
all be present; unless on some urgent occasion one is obliged to be absent, and
that not above ten days: And they shall keep their table at a joint expense,
otherwise they shall not be deemed as one residentiary, except only where any
of them is so ill he cannot possibly attend Morbo laboret soatico, morbus
sonticus, verbum Plinii. -- A grievous, dangerous disease, such as in the Roman
laws was sufficient excuse for nonappearance.
. The dean, for the benefit of the country air or refreshment, or other cause
to be approved by the chapter, shall have liberty to retire to his manor of
Beaurepaire for forty days in the year, over and above the days of absence
before allowed by these statutes See chap. xi p. 123.
, without losing his usual perquisites, in case he attends the business of the
chapter, and holds his residence within the precincts of the church for
twenty-one days, as before stipulated.

CHAP. XVII. -- The Dean and Prebendaries' Stipends.
That the dean and prebendaries may be better enabled to keep hospitality, the
dean shall annually receive from the treasurer pro corpore decanatus, 40l. 1s.
3d. and each prebendary 8l. 4s. 9d. The dean shall further receive from the
treasurer for every day he attends prayers morning and evening, and the
statutable days of absence 12s. 5d. and each prebendary 16 d. Those are deemed
to be present at prayers who come into church before the end of the first
psalm, and do not depart (but on urgent necessity) before the service is
concluded. All stipends are to be paid quarterly, at the four great quarter
days, except the money which accumulates in each year, from forfeitures by
absentees, mulcts, and seal fees, which shall be collected in the following
manner: The precentor is to mark the days of the dean's and each prebendary's
absence above the statutable allowance; for each day the dean shall forfeit 12
s. 5d. and each prebendary 16 d. to be retained by the treasurer; which
accumulation appellavimus communam dividendam. Further to enable them to keep
hospitality, (rem Deo et hominibus long gratissimam) particular lands, etc.
are assigned, as set forth in the next chapter, which they may occupy or let as
they think expedient, so as they pay the reserved rent at the usual times, and
keep the houses in repair at their expense, except main-timber: The dean and
chapter shall be judges of the repairs wanted, and on neglect cause them to be
repaired at the parties expense. None of the canons shall CORRECTION, --
Neither the dean, nor the dean and chapter, shall let to farm, either from year
to year, or for a term, the lands, etc. assigned to the dean and prebendaries
in augmentation for their residence; but they shall remain in his occupation to
whom they were assigned, or his assignees to his use, whether he is resident in
the college or not, so that he pay the out-rent as before mentioned, and keep
the tenements in repair; so that the same prebendary or his successor, when
ever afterward he thinks proper to reside, may not lose the profits of the
lands, etc.


sell or let to farm any of the possessions belonging to the church to any one,
even a brother canon, without consent of the dean and chapter, under the
penalty of forfeiting the whole value of the thing sold, or the profits of the
land when lawfully convicted. On the death or removal of the dean or
prebendaries, from the day of that event to Michaelmas next following, the
profits of the corpse lands, etc. and all movables, shall be at his, or his
executors disposal. If any such prebendary does not reside, and keep
hospitality, the dean, with the consent of the chapter, may let the lands, etc.
so assigned from year to year and at will; so that the said prebendary or his
successor afterward keeping residence, may not be deprived of the profits of
those lands, etc. longer than a year Here is no mention made of the stipends or
dividends belonging to the executor of the deceased till Michaelmas; and
therefore according to the 16 Cha. they are to be divided a vacatione from the
time of his death, inter residentes, though before he died he kept the
twenty-one days residence: But if he did not keep residence, his stipends and
share of the dividends belong to the rest. It was moved in full chapter, 1725,
whether the successor keeping residence, the predecessor had omitted, had not a
right to the stipends and dividend for the whole year till Michaelmas; upon
which they came to no resolution, being equally divided, -- four that he had a
right, and four e contra.
.

CHAP. XVIII. -- Lands, etc. assigned to the Dean and Prebendaries.
Lands assigned to the deanery are, the manor and park of Bear-park
(Beaurepaire), with Herber-close, and three arable closes near Stotgate,
Alansford, with Shipley and Whitwell, North and South Revensflat, with Summer
Pasture and Holme; the tithes of the rectories of Billingham and Merrington,
and of the villages belonging to them CORRECTION, -- Since the tithes of two
churches are assigned to the dean, by way of augmentation for hospitality, and
none are given to the prebendaries, therefore we consent, that the dean and
chapter, on consideration of this matter in the chapter house, may assign one
or two portions of tithes to each prebend, which portion the prebendary for his
time shall retain to himself, for his own use, on the same condition that he
holds the other lands belonging to his prebend.

Acts in Domo Capitulari Dun. xxo. die Julij, 1567.
MEMORAND. -- The day and year above written, it was and is ordained in the
chapter house, That whereas in the days and time of Mr Raphe Skynner, deane,
it was agreed by the said Skynner and the chapter, that everrie prebendarie
should have certain tiethes and certain other lands annexed to him for the
augmentinge of there several prebends, the same articles shall be furthwith
noted in some book of register or memory.

William Bennett, sen. resident. Rob. Swift. Adam Holyday. Joh. Rud. Wm.
Stevenson. Joh. Pilkington. Geo. Cliff.
Per annum. 1mo. Canonicatui assignatae sunt Decimae Garbarum de North
Sheereburne infra parochiam de Pittington vij l. Decimae de North Pittington
ibidem ivj s. viij d. Decimae de Hett super montem xxxiij s. iiij d. Decimae de
Crokehall infra parochiam Sti. Oswaldi liij s. iiij d. Summa xiiij l. iij s.
iiij d. 2do. Canonicatui assignatae sunt Decimae de Coldhesseldon infra
parochiam de Dalton, per annum v l. Decimae de Eden infra parochiam de
Hesseldon iij l. iij s. iiij d. Decimae de Hardwicke infra parochiam de
Hesseldon xl s. Decimae de Redworthe infra parochiam de Heighington iiij l.
Summa xiiij l. iij s. iiij d. 3tio. Canonicatui Decimae Garbarum de Aikliff
assignatae ix l. Decimae Garbar. de Brafferton in par. de Aikliff iij l. vj s.
viij d. Decimae de Scholl Aikliff infra par. de Heighington per ann. xl s.
Summa xiiij l. vj s. viij d. 4to. Canonicatui Decimae Garbarum de South
Pittington xl s. Decimae Garbarum de Shandforth in par. praed. vij l. vj s. 4
d. Decimae de South Shereburne ibidem iij l. x s. Decimae de Hagghouse infra
par. Sti. Oswaldi per ann. xxvj s. viii d. Summa xiiij l. iij s. iiij d. 5to.
Canonicatui Decimae Garbarum Faeni et Canabi de Shinkliff x l. Omnes Decimae de
Ald Durham infra ead. paroch. iiij l. iij s. 4 d. Summa xiiij l. iij s. iiij d.
6to. Canon. Decimae Garbar. ville de Hesseldon una cum Decimis Manerij ibidem
viij l. xiij s. iiij d. Decimae de Sheraton ibid. iiij l. Decimae de Dalton in
par. de Dalton xl s. Summa xiiij l. xiij s. iiij d. ^mo. Canonicatui Decimae
Garbar. de Harton infra par. de Jarrowe ix l. x s. Decimae de Wallsend infra
eand. iij l. xiij s. iiij d. Decimae de Wardley et Felling infra ead. xx s.
Summa xiiij l. iii s. iiij d. 8vo. Canonicatui Decimae Garbarum de Walworth
infra parochiam de Heighington per an. vij l. Decimae Garbar. de Preston infra
paroch. de Aikliff iij l. xiij s. iiij d. Decimae Garbarum de Ketton ibidem iij
l. vj s. viij d. Decimae de Magna Ricknell ibid. xiij s. iiij d. Summa xiiij l.
xiij. iiij d. 9no. Canon Decimae Garbarum de Heighington per ann. xiij l. vj s.
viij d. Decimae de West Thickley ibidem xx s. Summa xiiij l. vj s. viij d. xmo.
Canon. Decimae Garbarum de Huton et Hulam infra parochiam de Heseldon per ann.
viij. Decimae de Netherheworth infra par. de Jarrow per ann. xxx s. Decimae de
Suddicke infra par. de Weremouth x l. vj s. viij d. Summa xiiij l. vj s. viij
d. ^^mo. Canon. Decimae Garbar. de Morton infra par. de Dalton v l. vj s. viij
d. Decimae Garbarum de Bedlington in Northum^r. ix l. Summa xiiij l. vj s. viij
d. xiimo. Canon. Decimae de Westo infra par. de Jarrow per ann. vj l. xviij s.
vj d. Decimae de Willington in cadem iij l. xiij s. iij d. Decimae de Monkton
ibid. l s. Decimae de Shelhughe ibid. xxj s. Summa xiiij l. iij s. iiij d.

[See the ^^nfirmation in Dean Whittington's time.]


.

The lands assigned to the first prebend are, half of the manor, etc. of
Elvet-hall, commonly called Hall-garth.

To the second prebend, the other half of the manor of Elvet-hall.

To the third, the manor of Sacriston-hugh, and a close called Holcrofte.

To the fourth, the manor, house, and farm of Witton-Gilbert, Newhouse, and
Underside.

To the fifth, the third part of the house, manor, and park of Muggleswick.

To the sixth, another third part of that manor and park.

To the seventh, the house and demesne lands of the manor of Finkell, with the
mill and pond there called the Dam.

To the eighth, the remaining third part of the house, manor, and park of
Muggleswick.

To the tenth, the mansion house, garden, farm, lands, and tenements of South
Pittington, the close called Pond Garth and Pulter Close.

To the eleventh, the manor of Houghall.

To the twelfth, the manor house of Bewley, with the demesne lands and farm
thereto belonging.

All woods, mines, and quarries within each corpse lands, are excepted and
reserved for the common use and necessaries of the church, and each pay thereto
the annual sums following, (viz.)

l. s. d. The deanery 10 4 0 First and second prebend 0 13 4 third 0 15 10
fourth 0 10 0 fifth and sixth 0 15 7 seventh 1 9 8 eighth prebend 0 7 9 ninth 1
0 4 tenth 0 13 4 eleventh 5 0 0 twelfth 2 3 4

CHAP. XIX. -- Election of Officers.
Commanding belongs alone to the dean, or in his absence to the sub-dean or
senior residentiary; and to the canons present the power of reproving Modesta
admonitio.
. The dean, or, he being out of the realm, the sub-dean, with the chapter
assembled, shall yearly on the 20th day of November, with the consent of the
chapter, elect out of the body a vice or sub-dean, a treasurer and receiver;
which officers the nominees shall not refuse under the penalty of losing all
his emoluments for that year. The dean shall be present at such election, if
within the realm; but if any lawful cause prevent his attendance on the 20th of
November, he shall have power to change the day of election, and appoint
another between Michaelmas and the end of the audit, giving a week's notice to
the absent canons that they may attend. If upon the first or second scrutiny
the members cannot agree in the choice, the election shall fall upon such as
the dean, or, he being out of the realm, the vice-dean, and five of the canons
present shall nominate CORRECTION, -- "If there be but ten prebendaries, and no
more present, then be shall be elected whom the dean or (he being out of the
kingdom the sub-dean and five of the prebendaries present should (...)


; but if only eight of the canons or fewer be present, then the dean or
vice-dean and four canons shall make the election: But if they cannot still
agree, the dissension shall be ended by the bishop's visitorial authority, who,
under canonical censure, shall compel them to finish the election "Concorditer"
in orig.
. The same order is to be observed in the annual choice of a precentor and
sacrist out of the minor canons.

CHAP. XX. -- The Sub-Dean's Duty.
The sub-dean, in the absence of the dean, or the deanery being vacant, shall
preside and have the care of the church, and see that divine offices are duly
performed, correcting all omissions and negligencies, and discharging the
dean's duty, touching the affairs and rules of the church, as if he was
present, except only in such matters where the dean's special assent (or of his
proctor in his absence) is required. The deanery being vacant, the sub-dean and
chapter shall not put the common seal to leases of lands or other things "Am
saeoch concessionibus" in orig.

(...) that if all the prebendaries are present, the dean must have six with
him to make an election and so has only ^ng vote.


; or to benefi^ advowsons, donations, or offices; or to confirmations of any
deeds, except letters of proctorship and attorneys, where the affairs of the
church or lawsuits require the same to prevent injury and delay. The sub-dean
shall take the pre-eminence due to the dean, and as being superior, he shall be
more diligent and circumspect in the affairs of the church; that, together with
the dean, he may appear like the father of the house: And when the deanery is
vacant, he shall have full power to regulate and govern the church, and do all
things therein (save those excepted) according to the statutes, until a dean is
elected and installed, he being first sworn duly to perform his office.

CHAP. XXI. -- The Receiver-General's Duty.
He is to collect and receive all money, rents, and revenues of the church, as
well of spiritualties as temporalties; and the same, when received, is within
twenty-eight days after to be duly paid over to the treasurer for the time
being. He shall diligently look after the estates of the church, and direct the
necessary repairs of houses, unless some fitter person be particularly
appointed. He shall do all things prescribed by the dean relative to the lands,
tenements, and courts. His stipend being 6l. 13s. 4d. yearly, he shall put the
church to no further charge, except 4s. a day allowed him when keeping courts,
and such charges as are before stipulated touching the conduct of other affairs
of the church. He shall be sworn duly to execute his office, and faithfully
observe all things ordered by the dean and chapter touching the collection and
receipt of arrears, the churches security, indemnity, and advantage, and due
paying over the money belonging thereto.

CHAP. XXII. -- The Treasurer's Duty.
The treasurer shall pay all the stipends as by the statutes are appointed, and
also the dividend. It is his duty to repair the church and houses of the
ministers (except those of the dean and prebendaries) within the limits thereof
"Infra septum ecclesiae."
, with the consent and appointment of the dean, or in his absence, of the
sub-dean, in case the houses are gone out of repair, without the wilful default
of the party to whom they respectively belong "Hoc si propter diuturnitatem and
antiquum, rei vitium (usum) and non per culpa illorum sint ruinosae."
: But if they are become ruinous by default, the party shall be compelled to
repair them. He shall provide necessary ornaments for the church and choir:
Shall take care of the wood and other materials which are prepared for repairs.
When the houses of the dean and chapter are out of repair, if on notice the
party does not do what is necessary thereto, the treasurer out of the parties
stipend, and at his expense, at the instance of the dean and chapter, shall
cause the same to be repaired. The houses of the dean and prebendaries shall
not be demised, sold, or changed; any such demise, sale, or exchange, if made,
being altogether void; and each person shall be content with the house which
was first allotted to him or his predecessor. Each new elected prebendary shall
succeed to the house, stable, garden, and other appurtenances, together with
the stall in the church and seat in the chapter which his predecessor held. And
no dean or prebendary shall take away from his house in the college or country
house belonging to his prebendal lands, any fixtures therein "Seamna, bancos,
mensas, tripodes, caelaturas, aut vasa plumbea, et alia utensilia solo
tabulata, aut pr^ietibus sixa amoveat," -- so in the orig.
, but shall leave them to the successor: And the like in respect to the minor
canons houses The minor canons had houses, infra septum ecclesiae; the
precentor and sacrist had each a house, which still remain, and are called by
their names: So the minor canons had probably one house among them, each having
a camera or cubiculum assigned.

The answer of the dean and prebendaries to Bishop Cosin's articles of inquiry
in his second visitation, A. D. 1665.

For the houses of the petty canons we certified your lordship in your first
visitation, that they were all in these late bad times destroyed. That they
were formerly but little houses or chambers, made only for unmarried persons,
and who had their diet in common. That we had already made their places better
than when they had their old houses and stipends: to which notwithstanding, we
have of our own accord, and upon public cost, added so much, that we hope in a
little time, to see three good houses built for them this year, and have sound
out a good way for supply of a fourth; and as soon as Mr Dury can be removed,
of a fifth also, though with some charges to repair this. The petty
canons'-hall and the guest-hall, since the method of hospitality and diet were
changed, were of long time useless and ruined in these last destructive times:
But yet our design is, by some reparation of walls, to render the place of the
petty canons'-hall more seemly. We found no school-house standing, but have
built a large one, with addition of diverse rooms. In this article it appears,
that the second, sixth, eighth, and ninth prebend houses were a little before
rebuilt in whole, or great part.

One of Bishop Cosin's injunctions at the close of his visitation, 1668, was,
that no one should carry any thing through the church; but that victuals, or
any thing of that sort should be seized, and carried to the gaol, to be
distributed among the prisoners.

It appears both by the visitation papers of Bishop Cousin and Bishop Crewe,
that sackbuts and cornets were then used in the church music.


. It belongs also to the treasurer to attend to the repairs of the houses
belonging to the chapter within the city of Durham; which repairs shall be made
between the 1st day of March and Michaelmas, according to the dean or
sub-dean's orders; and not later in the year, unless in cases of great
necessity, and where, in the dean's judgment, delay would be materially
detrimental. Bills for repairs and other affairs of the church shall not be
allowed, unless the dean, or, he being absent and not objecting, the sub-dean
shall certify the same. The treasurer shall have charge of the plate,
vestments, and muniments, least the sacrist should be negligent; and shall
examine them every quarter with the register, etc. that nothing be wanting. He
shall likewise take an oath faithfully to discharge his office.

CHAP. XXIII. -- The Qualification, Election, and Admission of the Minor
Canons, etc.
The twelve priests or minor canons, the ten clerks, the deacon and subdeacon,
(called the gospeller and the epistler) are to be of good name and
conversation, of sound faith, and men of erudition, with voices and sufficient
skill in music to serve in the choir. They, with the ten choristers, and
eighteen grammar scholars with their masters, and others the officers of the
church, are to be chosen by the dean, with the advice of the chapter "Cum
consilio capituli." CORRECTION, -- All these to be chosen by the dean and
chapter, after the same manner with the sub-dean and treasurer. The grammar
scholars are to be chosen according to their progress in learning.


, as before prescribed; all whom (except the choristers and grammar scholars)
shall take the following oath: -- Ego (A) in hujus ecclesiae Cath. Christi and
beatae Mariae Virg. Dun in numerum cooptatus, juro, quod quandiu in hac
ecclesia morabor, omnes ordinationes and statuta ejusdem (quatenus me
concernunt) pro meo virili inviolabiliter observabo erga decanum et singulos de
capitulo in gestu et verbis debitam obedientiam and reverentiam exhibebo,
commodum and honorem hujus ecclesiae diligenter procurabo, sicut me deus
adjuvet and haec sancta dei evangelia.

CHAP. XXIV. -- The Attendance of the Minor Canons and others.
The minor canons, singing-men, and all others bearing office in the church,
shall not be absent a whole day and night, without leave of the dean, sub-dean,
or senior residentiary, under pain of an arbitrary sine. If any of them leave
the church, without giving three months notice to the dean or sub-dean, he
shall forfeit three months stipend: And if absent from morning service, shall
forfeit a penny; if from evening service, a halfpenny; if he comes not in
before the first psalm, a farthing. If any one refuse contemptuously to perform
the part the precentor enjoins, he shall be fined twopence. The amount of the
forfeitures, at the end of every quarter, or at farthest at the end of the
year, shall be divided by the treasurer, among those who attended duly,
according to the days of their attendance. The minor canons and priests
belonging to the church, shall enjoy only (quantum in nobis de juri situm est)
one benefice, and that within twenty-four miles of Durham: And so long as they
attend the church service, are not obliged to residence.

CHAP. XXV. -- The Precentor's Duty.
He is to be chosen out of the minor canons, of superior age and distinguished
conduct and erudition: He shall regulate the order of the whole choir; and boys
introduced for the purpose of singing shall be examined by him, and others
instructed; and he shall direct what shall be performed, and by whom, to
prevent discord. Not only the minor canons and singing-men are to obey his
directions, but also the prebendaries, when the solemnity of any festival
requires them to perform part of the service. He is to note all absentees
without partiality, which is to be laid before the chapter every fortnight. The
power of punishing belongs only to the dean and chapter. He is to take care of
the books belonging to the choir, and in his absence to have a deputy, who
shall be approved by the dean or sub-dean. He shall also take an oath duly to
perform his office By Bishop Crewe's injunctions in 1685, the dean was not to
have above thirty loads of fire wood, nor each prebendary above five. None to
dry linen in the churchyard, or to suffer horses to graze there. The
treasurer's book, after every audit, was to be kept in the treasury, and the
treasurer to have a discharge under the chapter seal. Sermons in the cathedral
every Wednesday and Friday in Advent and Lent. That the weekly communion be
continued, with jubilation. (This last consented to but by four prebendaries.)
The statutes to be read over once a year at each great chapter. -- Visitation,
1687. It is left to the liberty of the prebendaries to pray before sermon: To
pray for the mayor or aldermen, or not to pray for them. They are to read
prayers on Sunday when in residence, and when my lord is in church.

By the chapter's answer to Bishop Crewe's injunctions, 1696, it appears their
treasury chest had lately been broken open.


.

CHAP. XXVI. -- The Duty of the Sacrist, Vergers, and Bell-ringers.
The SACRIST shall be an industrious and faithful person, and chosen out of the
minor canons. Shall have in charge all the vestments, vessels, and ornaments of
the church, to be scheduled and examined therewith quarterly; with the advice
of the treasurer he shall provide wine, oil, wax, and necessary lights for the
church. To visit the sick Et little confessiones audiet!
, and administer the sacrament to them, as well as those in health, when need
or times require. To receive oblations, and pay them over to the treasurer for
the use of the church. To take care of the linen, that it be neat, whole, and
clean, and that the books be well bound and preserved: That there be no
disturbance during divine service. To take care of the school books, that they
may be produced yearly before the dean, to prevent their being lost or
destroyed. Also of the books in the library, which are not to be lent to any
canon or stranger without the dean or sub-dean's consent; and in that case, the
person to give a note of his name and the book borrowed, and engage to return
it at a time fixed. He is to have under him two careful, honest men, called
SUB-SACRISTS or vergifers, sworn to be faithful and obedient to him: They are
to fold up the vestments, light the candles, cover the altar, and with a verge
go before the bishop, choir, and dean in procession, at their going in and out
of church; and to perform all such other duties as vergers do in other
cathedral churches. Every year upon the day of election of officers, the
vergers are to deliver the verge to the dean in the chapter house, which he is
to retain till enquiry is made of their past behavior; and if found culpable,
to remove and place fit persons in their room, so that there may be no pretense
of perpetuity in the office. The same rule to be observed in respect to other
officers of the church. He shall also have under him two other honest men, to
keep the floor and walls of the church clean; to ring or cause to be rung the
bells, at the hours appointed by the dean; to take care of the clock, and look
after the church. They are to open the church doors in the morning before six
o'clock, and shut them in winter time after service, but in summer not till
after the ringing of the curfew See vol. i. page 102.
; and not open them again after that time unless upon some urgent occasion,
least any thing criminal should be committed there. They are to search the
church after the doors are shut. To take care that the cloisters and other
places through which any procession is to be made, be perfectly clean; and to
dig the graves in the churchyard. When the sacrist, sub-sacrist, or
bell-ringers, are absent on their lawful occasions, they shall be allowed
deputies, to be approved by the dean or sub-dean: And all be sworn faithfully
to perform their respective duties.

CHAP XXVII. -- The Choristers and their Master.
There shall be ten young boys as choristers, with good voices, to serve in the
choir; to teach whom (as well in singing as in good manners, besides the number
of clerks) a person shall be appointed, of good fame and conversation, skilful
in singing and in the management of the organ: And to encourage his greater
attention, he shall have leave of absence on ordinary days; but he must
constantly attend upon Sundays and holidays to perform the service: When he has
leave of absence, the precentor shall appoint one of the minor canons or
singing-men who understands playing on the organ, to do that office. If the
master is negligent of the boys' health or education, after a third admonition
to be removed. He shall likewise be sworn to perform his duty.

CHAP. XXVIII. -- The Grammar Scholars and their Teachers.
There shall be constantly maintained eighteen poor boys of apt parts, whose
friends are not able to give them education, but not to be admitted till they
have learned to read and write, and in the dean's judgment, are sufficiently
grounded in the first rudiments of grammar: After admission to be maintained by
the church, until they competently understand grammar, and can read and write
Latin, for which they shall be allowed four years, or with the dean's assent
five at the most: None shall be admitted above fifteen years of age. The
choristers shall not be limited to that age, but may be admitted scholars if
they are fit; in case they have proved themselves particularly serviceable to
the choir, and skilful in music, they are to be preferred before any others. If
any one is found dull, and without a taste for literature, the dean shall
remove him, and appoint another in his room ne veluti fucus apum mella devoret.
The upper master is to be learned in the Greek and Latin languages, of good
fame, found faith and pious life: He shall not only teach the eighteen boys,
but also all others that shall resort to his school. The under-master shall
bear the like character: They shall teach such books and rules, and follow such
order as the dean and chapter (with the bishop's assent) shall prescribe. If
they prove negligent, or incapable of teaching, after a third admonition, to be
displaced. They are also to be sworn faithfully to perform their duty.

CHAP. XXIX. -- The Eight Poor Men and their Duty.
Eight poor men, such as are disabled by war or age, or otherwise reduced to
poverty, are to be appointed by royal mandate, and maintained by the church,
and whose duty is to attend divine service daily, so long as their infirmities
will permit them; to be assistant to the sub-sacrist and other officers, in
lighting and extinguishing the candles, and ringing the bells, if able; and to
be obedient to the dean or sub-dean and sacrist in all things which relate to
their duty in the church: For default, subject to the dean or sub-dean's
reprehension. If they are absent (unless prevented by infirmities) they shall
be punished by withdrawing the stipend, and which shall be divided among those
that attend. The dean or sub-dean may grant them twenty days leave of absence,
but not more, without some urgent occasion, to be allowed of by the dean and
chapter. To take an oath for the due performance of their duty.

CHAP. XXX. -- Of inferior Persons belonging to the Church.
The dean, or sub-dean in his absence, (with his consent) shall appoint two
industrious men of good name and approved conduct, to be butler and
under-butler: Who, with a cook and under-cook, are to provide meat and drink
for the minor canon's table, and those other ministers who eat together in
common. The porters to keep the keys of the church and college gates; and never
to open them in the night time without the express order of the dean, or
sub-dean in his absence: One of them to be a barber, who must shave and cut the
hair of all persons belonging to the church, gratis. They shall all be sworn to
perform their duty faithfully and personally.

CHAP. XXXI. -- Of the Commons.
The minor canons, deacon, and subdeacon, and clerks, not having wives, shall
mess together in the common hall, where the precentor (or in his absence the
senior minor canon) shall preside, and the rest shall sit without distinction
of place. The following monthly allowances to be made: To the minor canons, the
upper-master of the grammar school, and master of the choristers, six shillings
each, -- to the deacon, subdeacon, singing-men, or clerks and usher, four
shillings and eight-pence, -- to each of the grammar scholars and choristers,
three shillings and four-pence, -- to the sub-sacrist, ringers, butlers,
porters, and cooks, four shillings. They had two stewards, one to serve the
whole year, the other one month; the first procured wood, coals, salt, etc. for
the year's store; the other, the necessaries for every month: the first
examined the stewards accounts at the end of every week, and reported the same
to the major part of those who lived together, at the conclusion of the year,
by a statement of the whole expense. Both the stewards to be sworn to the due
performance of their office.

CHAP. XXXII. -- The Minister's Vestments, commonly called Liveries.
The minor canons, clerks, and other ministers of the church, choristers,
grammar scholars, cooks, and poor men, shall use an upper vestment of the same
color. Each minor canon, and head master of the grammar school, shall receive
four yards of cloth for his gown, of the price of five shillings a yard; the
master of the choristers, three yards of the same; the deacon and subdeacon,
four yards at four shillings and sixpence; each clerk, and the under grammar
master, three yards at four shillings and six pence: The other ministers, as
the sub-sacrists, bell-ringers, butlers, porters, and cook, three yards each at
three shillings and four pence; the choristers, grammar scholars, and
under-cook, two yards and a half, at three shillings and four-pence; the poor
men, three yards at three shillings and four-pence. The dean, or in his absence
the sub-dean or treasurer, to give the same against Christmas, to be made up by
the several parties. The poor men to wear a rose of red silk upon the left
shoulder, and never appear in public without their livery gowns.

CHAP. XXXIII. -- The Ministers' Stipends.
Besides their commons and vestments, the treasurer shall pay quarterly to the
minor canons and head-master of the school, 5l. 2s. -- Master of the
choristers, 5l. 7s. -- Under-master, 2l. 19s. 2d. -- Deacon, 2l. 14s. 8d. --
Subdeacon, 2l. 14s. 8d. -- Each clerk or singing-man, 2l. 19s. 2d. -- Each
sub-sacrist, 2l. 18s. -- Each bell-ringer, 1l. 18s. -- The butler who buys the
provisions, 3l. 6s. 8d. -- The porter who is barber, 2l. 18s. -- The other
porter, 1l. 18s. -- The under-butler, 1l. 18s. -- The cook, 2l 18 s. --
Under-cook, 1l. 18s. -- Each chorister, 15s. -- Each scholar, 15s. -- Each poor
man yearly, 6l. 3s. 4d. -- Sub-dean, 2l. 13s. 4d. -- Receiver, 6l. 13s. 4d. --
Auditor, 6l. 13s. 4d. -- Treasurer, 2l. 13s. 4d. -- Precentor, 2l. 10s. --
Sacrist, 2l. -- Steward or clerk of the courts, 5l

CHAP. XXXIV. -- Of Divine Service.
All the minor canons, the deacon and subdeacon, the singing-men and master of
the choristers, (except when he has leave of absence to teach the boys) are to
assist every day at divine service. They are excused singing the evening
service. The dean shall perform the service in festis principalibus; the
sub-dean in majoribus duplicibus; the other prebendaries in festis duplicibus,
unless there happen some lawful impediment to any, when his turn shall be
supplied by some one as near the same rank as possible: None shall officiate
without his proper vestment; the dean and canons with their surplices and other
habits; the rest of the choir and the boys in surplices. Upon holidays both the
upper and under-master are to attend morning and evening prayer in their proper
habits, the first to sit above the minor canons, the other below them. The
grammar scholars are to be at church on festivals in their surplices, under the
direction of the precentor. The dean or prebendaries shall not detain any of
the minor canons, singing-men, or other ministers of the church, from divine
service upon any account In this chapter mass is appointed to be celebrated
every 27th day of January, for the souls of the king and queen's progenitors,
and all the founders and benefactors of the monastery. And a solemn procession,
with the mass, on the 1st of October, the queen's coronation day. The day of
her death was likewise to be observed with masses, etc.
.

CHAP. XXXV. -- Of the Treasury, the Seal, and Custody of the Writings.
In the treasury are to be lodged all writings, evidences, books of accounts,
inventories, and rentals; and also a chest for the security of the church
money, wherein shall remain at the end of each year, 200l. to answer all
incidental occasions, and therein shall be kept a small box for the public
seal, which is not to be put to any writing until the same is fairly
transcribed into the register, and therewith examined. The seal fee shall be
six shillings and eight-pence. The seal shall not be put to any blank or
writing, without the consent of the dean, under the pains of perjury and
perpetual exclusion of him that either does, or consents to the doing thereof.
In this place shall be lodged the statutes, letters patents of foundation and
endowment, and other muniments and writings of the lands and possessions of the
church. There shall be three locks to the chest, of different wards, one key to
be kept by the dean, another by the sub-dean, and a third by the treasurer;
also two keys to the door of the treasury, one to be kept by the dean, the
other by the treasurer, who are all, or their deputies, to be assenting and
present at the opening thereof. If one or two refuse sealing such instrument as
is agreed to by the chapter, he or they shall be subject to such arbitrary
penalty as shall be adjudged by the dean and chapter, which if he refuses to
submit to, is to be declared guilty of perjury. No one is to have two keys; and
a key-bearer going abroad is to leave his key with some canon who is not a
key-bearer.

CHAP. XXXVI. -- Of the yearly Accounts.
There shall be a place assigned within the limits of the church where the
accounts shall be made up; here the bailiffs, collectors, wood-keepers,
officers, and other ministers are to give in their accounts: At the same time
the receiver and treasurer shall deliver in their accounts, before the dean and
prebendaries, and pay up their balance under the penalty of losing their
quotidians until the whole is paid; or a severer mulct, if the offense appear
to merit it. The receiver and treasurer's accounts shall be inspected by the
dean and chapter twice a year, about Lady Day and after Michaelmas, some time
before the audit. They may, if they think proper, have an auditor, whose
salary, besides entertainment for himself and one servant, is at most to be 6l.
13s. 4d. The auditor is to take an oath to discharge his office faithfully. The
gathering in of the arrears may be assigned by the dean to any one of the
chapter beside the receiver: And he is to pay what he receives within one month
to the treasurer, and make up his accounts at the end of the year; and is to
take an oath for doing his duty. He is to do this business gratis, or may have
a salary assigned by the dean, with the advice of the chapter. The account of
the goods in use belonging to the church, at the same time shall be laid before
them; that if need requires they may be removed, and the state of the church be
known to the dean, or vice-dean and the chapter.

CHAP. XXXVII. -- Of correcting Offenses.
If any of the minor canons, singing-men, or other ministers and servants of
the church, shall be guilty of a small fault, he may be punished at the
discretion of the dean, or in his absence, of the sub-dean; but if of a heinous
offense, he shall be expelled at the bishop's visitation, and by his judgment
and censure corrected or deprived, and thenceforth shall be immediately
removed; and previous to the visitation his stipend shall stand sequestered. If
any of the prebendaries are guilty of any heinous crime, as heresy, adultery,
theft, perjury, or the like, by which the church may come under great scandal,
he shall be accused before the bishop at his visitation, and under his judgment
and censure shall, if the offense appears to merit it, be deprived and
expelled. Whilst the cause is depending before the visitor, the dean and
chapter shall sequester all the offender's stipends and revenues. If any of the
poor men offend, he is to be corrected by the dean or sub-dean; and if he
remains incorrigible, may be expelled by the dean and chapter.

CHAP. XXXVIII. -- Of Alms.
Besides what is allowed to the eight poor men, there is given to the church,
the annual sum of 86l. 13s. 4d. for the relief of the poor, and making and
repairing the public bridges and highways See Rymer's Foedera, vol. xv. p. 78.
; of which the sum of 66l. 13s. 4d. shall be distributed partly among the poor
upon the church estates, least we should seem, omnia metere and nihil seminare,
and partly by the dean or treasurer, or one appointed by the dean out of the
canons, amongst the poor and indigent neighbors of the church, or any other
the dean shall judge necessitous, whose conscience is charged coram Domino
servatone, with the faithful dispensing this charity; and the visitor is to
enquire particularly about it at his visitation. The special causes which
influence the distribution shall be shown at the audit. The remaining 20l.
assigned for making and repairing of the public bridges and highways By
inquisition taken and returned the 4th of May, 1594, upon a commission to
enquire of charitable uses within this county, the jurors find, that there is
assigned, limited, and appointed upon the foundation or end^^ment of the
cathedral church of Durham, the sum of one hundred marks, by the name of
alms-money, yearly to be allowed by the dean and chapter there, to be given to
the poor; and likewise twenty pounds toward the repairing of highways and
bridges within the county and bishopric of Durham, which sum has been
distributed by the Right Worshipful Dr Matthew, now dean of the church, as by
his books, containing the particular distribution thereof, yearly does and may
appear; a brief whereof containing the gross sum by him so yearly distributed,
together with the examinations thereof, made by certain her majesty's justices
in the said county, (as a statute in that behalf requires) was exhibited to
her majesty's commissioners, and by them collated with the said books, and to
the jurors delivered, the tenor whereof is then set forth for several preceding
years, and in particular in the year 1592 is the following:

A note of places as by the dean and chapter are appointed, whereon the
arrearings of money allowed for repairing of highways and bridges shall be
bestowed before the feast of St James the apostle, next coming after the date
hereof.

First, to the bridge lying in the West Oxes Pasture, in the way to
South-Sheels, forty shillings. -- Item, to the causeway at Nevill's Cross,
twenty shillings. -- Item, to the Waiste nigh the east end of Framwellgate
bridge, the ground is in decay, thirteen shillings and four-pence. -- Item, to
the high street in Southfield to Darlington, on this side Cotton Mundeville
from the old causeway, northward about three hundred yards, forty shillings. --
Item, to the street in the North Bailey, called Kingsgate, as it lies down by
the North Bailey churchyard, to the postern there, ten shillings. -- Item, to
the highway up Crossgate, toward Nevill's Cross, twenty shillings -- Item, to
the highway at Newbridge end, from the causeway there to the causeway lately
made at the bank side toward Barns, one pound six shillings and eight-pence.
-- Item, to the highway toward St Oswald's church, on the far side of the
water, thirteen shillings and four-pence. -- Item, to the stairs of Mount Bath,
thirteen shillings and four-pence. -- Item, to the causeways in Rainton lane,
six pounds thirteen shillings and four-pence. -- Item, to Burdon Wood bridge,
two pounds six shillings and eight-pence. -- To Hedworth bridge, one pound. To
Auckland lane, two pounds. -- To the highway between Cottom and Darlington, one
pound ten shillings. -- To Ketton bridge, one pound. -- To Willington mill
bridge, two pounds -- To the highway between Chester and Birtlie, three pounds
six shillings and eight-pence. -- To the highway by Driburn, one pound. -- To
Skern Oxen bridge, one pound. To Wolsingham bridge, and other places within the
county and bishopric of Durham, where greatest need is, eight pounds nineteen
shillings and five-pence farthing. -- And further the said jurors cannot find
upon this article.

As the county rates run exceedingly high, this seems to be a fit subject of
enquiry by the justices in session, whether this twenty pounds has been duly
applied of late years, for the benefit of the county at large; it being
apprehended to be solely appropriated by the chapter to their new bridge at
Durham, which they will not allow to be a public carriage bridge.


, is to be expended consistent with the judgment of the dean or sub-dean and
chapter, and to be accounted for at the general audit. The bishop is likewise
to enquire after this dispensation at his visitation.

CHAP. XXXIX. -- Of holding the Chapters.
The dean or sub-dean, with the prebendaries present, shall hold a chapter in
the chapter house every fortnight, or oftener if occasion requires, to treat of
the affairs of the church; (pie et prudenter) and every year there shall be two
general chapters, one on the 20th of November, the other on the 20th of July;
in which whatever is done and agreed upon, not contrary to the statutes, shall
be obligatory on all that belong to the church. The dean and every prebendary
is to be present at one of these chapters, (unless absent as before allowed,
upon a reason to be approved of by the dean and chapter) otherwise he loses the
whole money which otherwise would be received pro corpore prebendae suae, for
the whole year.

CHAP. XL. -- The Visitation of the Church.
The bishop of Durham for the time being is visitor, who is required to see
that the statutes and orders are inviolably observed; that the goods and
possessions of the church, as well spiritual as temporal, be in a flourishing
condition, and the rights, liberties, and privileges thereof preserved and
defended. The visitor may be called in by the dean or two of the prebendaries:
And once in three years may visit without being called, either in his own
person, or by his vicar thereto duly deputed, who shall convoke in some proper
place, the dean, prebendaries, minor canons, singing-men, and all other
officers of the church, and interrogate them upon any and every the articles
contained in these statutes, or any other articles relating to the state,
profit, or honor of the church, and oblige them by virtue of the oath they
have taken, to declare the truth touching the matters enquired of; and
according to what is proved, appoint punishment agreeable to the nature and
degree of the offense, and as the statutes require; and reform and do all
things which may seem necessary to the rooting out vice, and which of right
belongs to the office of visitor: And all are hereby required to obey him. No
one by virtue of his oath shall allege any thing against the dean or canons,
or other officers of the church, but what he believes to be true, or is derived
from public fame or report. The bishop or his deputy, with his family or
attendants, when visiting, is to be entertained once, or at the most but twice,
by the dean at the charge of the church. If there appears any ambiguity in, or
any dispute happens between the dean and canons, or amongst the canons
themselves, touching the true sense and meaning of the statutes, which are
always to be understood juxta planum and grammaticalem sensum, it is to he
referred to the bishop, and the parties shall abide by his interpretation, so
it be not contrary to the statutes. The visitor is prohibited making any new
statutes, (hiisce statutis contraria) and shall not dispense with any of them.
The dean and prebendaries are prohibited receiving any new statutes made by
others, or any dispensations, under the pains of perjury and loss of their
preferments for ever. A power is reserved to the crown of altering, changing,
or dispensing with these statutes; and likewise, if thought proper, of making
new ones.

Then follow the prayers to be used in the grammar school, and by the poor men
and others; after, this subscription, NICHOL. EBOR. Electus. EDMUNDUS
LONDINENS. CUTHBERTUS DUNELMENS. WILLM. ARMISTEAD Anthony Salvyn, one of the
prebendaries, was sent up as proxy for the chapter of Durham, to appear before
Cardinal Pole and the queen's commissioners, the 30th of Oct. 3 and 4 Phil. and
Mary, when the corrective statutes were made. It Is said, the originals were
kept by the cardinal, and by him sent to Rome, for they never came back again,
and in all probability are now in the Vatican.

1665, Sept. 12. At a meeting between Bishop Cosins and the dean and chapter,
it was agreed amongst other things. -- That an exemplification of the statutes
of the church should be procured from the Rolls, or the Tower, or any of the
king's courts, within a twelve month after it has pleased God to cease the
present pestilence.

The following is Dr Basire's answer to the chapter, and literally transcribed
from the original.

I took the pains to cause a search to be made in the rolls, but found
nothing. The like I did with Mr Dugdale, when he was searching the records of
the dioceses, and the records of St Paul's church, and to encourage him, gave
him a gratuity from the dean and chapter, but sped no better. What may be found
in the Tower I know not, having had neither time nor opportunity to search
there; Mr William Prynn (no great friend to cathedrals) being the keeper of
these records.


.


Facta collatione concordat cum originali libro, apud reverendissimum dominium
Reginaldum Cardinalem legatum a latere, et archiepiscopum cantuariensem totius
Angliae primatem, remanente.

An Act of Chapter, 20 July, 1556.
Considering that this our church, during the late schism, has been spoiled of
all its ornaments and much wasted; and moreover, that a very small stipend is
assigned by the statutes to the ministers of this church, to alleviate which,
we the dean and chapter, by common and unanimous consent, this 20th day of
July, in the year of our Savior 1556, in a general chapter held at Durham,
have ordained and decreed, that whoever after this day shall be admitted into
the place of canon or prebendary of this church, however becoming vacant before
he be installed, is to pay the precentor three shillings and four-pence; the
register six shillings and eight-pence; the two vergers four shillings; for
bread and wine five shillings; to the bell-ringers one shilling; the chapter of
the resident prebendaries one pound; to the fabric and ornaments of the church
one pound: And this we will to be observed as a local statute of the church for
ever.

The stipends are then stated, as before noted in the 33d chapter, etc.

Analecta Capitularia Ex Archivis Dunelm. An account of the practices of the
church, about the lands and tithes, commonly called corpse and bycorps,
lotteries, dividends, residences, etc. since the erection of the deanery:
Extracted out of the register-books and rentals, etc. supposed to be collected
by Dr Basire. The original signed P. Smith, register.

It has been the custom since the erection, to call the lands assigned to the
dean and prebendaries for augmentation of residence and hospitality their
corpse; although in our local statutes the yearly stipend of the dean is said to
be given him pro corpore decanatus sui, and of the prebendaries pro corpore
prebendae suae; the word corpse being used herein not otherwise, nor bycorps at
all.

Our statutes were made by Queen Mary, in the first year of her reign, she
being enabled thereto by an act of parliament. The former statutes by King
Henry VIII. being defective, as in other things, so in point of law, as appears
by the preamble of that act. We have, I suppose, no copy of the old statutes,
but by some passages in our books, we may think they did not differ much from
the new, in the matter of corpse, and some other particulars: Bishop Tunstall
having, as it is probable, a great hand in both; and there is a traditional
commendation of him for the good service he did the church concerning the
statutes.

But searching into the practice, we find these corpse not so disposed of for a
good while as they are now. At the erection of the deanery, although their corpse
with other lands, were settled upon the dean and prebendaries, they came not
all of them into their hands at the same time, the prior and convent had leased
out some, as Houghhall and Witton-Gilbert, for forty years, and South
Pittington for thirty-five years, some two years before the dissolution; for if
it had been but one year before, the leases had been void by an act of
parliament. And King Henry VIII. in the interval between the dissolution and
erection, had made a grant of more of them to several persons for twenty-one
years, etc.

As the remaining part of this account is in no wise interesting to the public;
and relates to the private management of the chapter, we think it prudent to
proceed no further therein.

DEAN WATSON,
chaplain to Gardener bishop of Winchester, was esteemed a warm Roman Catholic
Coll. Eccl. Hist. v. 2. p. 588.
; and was a great favorite with cardinal Pole Burnet's Reform. 3. p. 264.
: Continuing dean of Durham until the year 1557, he was made bishop of Lincoln
by papal provision, the bull bearing date the 24th of March; and was
consecrated on the 15th of August. There is some doubt whether his deanery was
then resigned, for he wrote himself Bishop of Lincoln, and Dean of Durham, till
the 26th of September, 1558: He was removed from the Sea of Lincoln by
authority of parliament, in the beginning of queen Elizabeth's reign, as being
an enemy to reformation, and the queen's supremacy over the church; having
threatened her majesty with excommunication Ath. Oxon. v. 1. p. 100.
. Becoming highly obnoxious to the new principles, he was imprisoned in the
Tower of London, in 1559 Collier ut sup.
, and there remained, or in some other durance in or about London, until the
year 1580 Collier. Fasti Oxon. 1559. -- Grey's notes MSS. 1582.
; when, together with Jo. Feckenham and others, he was sent prisoner to
Wisbich-castle, in Cambridgeshire, and dying there, was privately buried on the
17th of Sept. 1584, in Wisbich church, without any monument. In his youth he
wrote several poems He was given much to poetry and making plays, and gained
great commendations for his Antigone out of Sophocles by the learned men of his
time, who have further avowed, that as George Buchanan's tragedy called
Jephtha, has, among all tragedies of that time, been able to abide the touch
of Aristotle's precepts, and Euripides' examples, so has also the tragedy of
this Tho. Watson, called Absalon, which was in a most wonderful manner admired
by them, yet he would never suffer it to go abroad. Fasti Oxon. Ath. Oxon. v.
1. p. 82.


; in elder life, being then of a sour disposition, as one writer says Auth. of
Execution of Justice in Eng.
, and learned in deep divinity, but surly, with an austere gravity Camden's
Ann. Rog. Eliz.
: He published several religious tracts, particularly two sermons, preached
before queen Mary, touching the real presence in the sacraments Robert Crowley
wrote against him, A setting open the subtle sophistry of Thomas Watson, D. D.
which he used in his two sermons, preached before Queen Mary, in Lent, 1553,
concerning the real presence in the sacraments. Ath. Oxon. v. i. p. 190.


. Pitts gives him the character of a famous preacher, a solid divine, and a
good poet Pitts de illust. Aug. Scriptr. p. 783.

Vide also Willis. -- Burnet's Reform. 3. p 264. -- Godwin de Praesulibus, etc.


. -- On the 23d of July, 1558 Ath. Oxon. says 23 July, 1357.
, he was succeeded by

THOMAS ROBERTSON,
who was born either at, or in the neighborhood of Wakefield, Yorkshire; was
originally of Queen's College, Oxford, and afterward of Magdalen College,
wherein he had a fellowship: Was master of the adjoining school; and about the
year 1539, was treasurer of the church at Salisbury. It is said the
congregation of Regents were supplicated by him, for admission to the reading
of the sentences, being then esteemed Flos and decus Oxonii. In 1540, by the
interest of Langland, bishop of Lincoln, he was made archdeacon of Leicester,
and enjoyed that office till the year 1560: Was some time rector of St Laud's
church, at Sherrington, in the county of Bucks; and in 1546, was instituted
vicar of Wakefield, on which he resigned his treasurership: His character was
that of a correct grammarian, and that he greatly exceeded his predecessors in
the education of his pupils; he added Quae genus to Lilly's grammar: In the
year 1549, we find him named among those who were appointed by King Edward VI.
to compose the church liturgy. At the time the deanery of Durham was given, the
queen greatly respected him for his piety and learning, would have nominated
him to a bishopric, which was modestly refused. He was the author of several
grammatical works; was ejected from his deanery in 1559, to make room for Dr
Horn's restoration. On Horn's promotion to the Sea of Winchester, he might have
been replaced, on taking the supremacy oath, but refused: He resigned his
archdeaconry to avoid the disgrace of an ejection, and though a better
adversary to reformation, and busy in spreading his arguments in Yorkshire, was
overlooked, as some thought, because of his lameness Strype Ann v. i. p. 278.
; but Willis V. i. p. 213.
says, he was taken into custody: What afterward became of him, our
authorities are silent Ath. Oxon. v. i. p. 103. -- Strype Eliz. p. 244. --
Fuller's Chapter Hist. cent. 16. p. 385. -- Collier's Eccl. Hist. v. ii. p. 348. --
Grey's Notes, MSS.
.

ROBERT HORN,
in 1559, was restored to this deanery, but remained a very short time, being
made bishop of Winchester, the 16th February, 1560 Willis. v. i. p. 253.

He was one of the compilers of the liturgy, v. Sparrow Collect. 137. Heylin's
Eliz. 130. -- He was restored after September 14. Reg. D. and Cha. D. p. 110.
-- He is frequently taken notice of in his register, as in remotis agens. He is
styled in the register Permissione Divina Decanus, p. 114, 116. The first time
he appeared in the registers, as dean a second time, was January 28, 1559. Reg.
etc.


. In the same month

RALPH SKYNNER
was appointed dean, and installed on the 5th of March following: He was a
student of New College, Oxford; whether he took the degree of master of arts,
or of any other faculty, in that university Wood's Fasti Oxon. 688.
, is not known, but being elected warden of that college in May, 1551, was on
that occasion styled master of arts: Wood and others note him as a member of
the House of Commons in the year 1554 His speech in Q. Mary's third parliament.
v. Burnet's Ref. p. 277, 278, etc.
: Archbishop Parker recommended him to this deanery, and gave him the character
of being "learned, wise, and expert Stryp. Life of Archbishop Parker, p. 87.
." On the 22d of June, 1561, a recantation sermon was preached by him at Paul's
Cross, wherein he gave warning of a note book he had printed, bidding every man
take heed of it, as very heresy Stryp. Eliz. p. 235.
. In 1559, he was appointed master of Sherburn hospital in this county: In
1561, was made temporal chancellor; and being rector of Sedgfield, in the same
county, died there, and was interred on the 21st of January, 1562-3.

In this dean's time, it was agreed in Chapter, that certain tithes should be
annexed to each prebend; the same was confirmed under dean Whittingham, and the
augmentation has continued to this time, (see page 127.) To him succeeded

WILLIAM WHITTINGHAM,
on the 19th of July, 1563, who was installed on the 8th of October Reg. p. 186.
. He was born in the city of Chester, son of William Whittingham, Esquire by a
daughter of -- Haughton, of Haughton Tower: Became a commoner of Brazen-Nose
College in Oxford, in the year 1540, being then 16 years of age, where he made
great proficiency in literature Ath. Oxon. v. i. 2 edit. p. 57.
: Having become bachelor of arts, he was elected fellow of All Souls', in 1545:
And two years afterward, was made one of the seniors of Christ-Church, on its
foundation by K. Henry VIII. who endeavored to replenish the same with the
first scholars of the university. On the 17th of May, 1550, having obtained
leave to travel for three years, his time was spent chiefly at the university
of Orleans, where he married the daughter of Lewis Jacquiene Gray's notes, MSS.
He married the sister of John Calvin.
. He returned to England in the latter end of the reign of K. Edward VI. but on
the accession of Q. Mary, was one of the fugitives to Frankfort, and afterward
became a member of the church of Geneva: On John Knox's leaving that society,
to return to Scotland, Whittingham was prevailed upon by Calvin to become a
minister of the church: He engaged, with other learned men of that society, in
an English translation of the Bible; but it was not finished before several of
those employed therein returned to England, on Q. Elizabeth coming to the
crown: Whittingham remained near eighteen months at Geneva, to perfect the
work; during which time, he reduced into meter five of David's psalms,
(inscribed W. W.) of which the 119th was one; together with the ten
commandments, and a prayer, now placed at the end of the version. Soon after
his return to England, he was employed to accompany Francis, earl of Bedford,
on his embassy of condolence for the death of the French king, in 1560: And he
attended Ambrose, earl of Warwick, to Newhaven, to be preacher there, whilst
the earl defended it against the French; on which occasion he showed a
reproachable disposition, in spiriting the people against uniformity: The earl,
either to be rid of him, or through an esteem, which even his improprieties
could not wean, obtained this deanery of the queen, on Skynner's death, although
the same had been promised by her majesty to Dr Wilson, then one of her
secretaries of state. Whittingham enjoyed the deanery sixteen years; was a
violent opposer of measures touching the sacerdotal vesture, and used all his
influence with the earl of Leicester therein; supporting Bishop Pilkingtru's
arguments to the utmost of his power: He wrote to the earl, and, as Collier
observes Eccl. Hist. v. i. p. 493.
, Wrought the point with more heat than his bishop, and made the colors more
glowing: He cited several of the fathers, though wide of his purpose, and at
length fell into vehemence and coarse language.

Notwithstanding all applications to the contrary, the order touching
sacerdotal vestments issued in 1564 See a succinct account in Collier's Eccl.
Hist. v. ii. p. 495.
, and was urged in such a manner, that they that refused the same were not
permitted to exercise their ministry; on which the dean submitted thereto. It
was not long before he was severely upbraided, for this compliance, by one who
was with him at Geneva: But finding an apt reply, answering, that he and others
knew, and had heard John Calvin say, That for external matters of order, they
might not neglect their ministry, for so should they, for tithing of mint,
neglect the greater things of the law. He was a great advocate for singing in
the church, and provided the best anthems used in the queen's chapel, being
himself skilful in music For the same degree (bachelor of divinity, 22d March
1566) did William Whittingham, M. A. dean of Durham, supplicate, but whether he
was admitted appears not.

On the 17th of February, W. Whittingham beforementioned, who that day had
supplicated for the degree of bachelor of divinity, did also supplicate for
that of doctor; but it does not appear that he was admitted to either.

Fasti. Oxon. Wood. v. i. ed. 2d.
. Whittingham did essential services to government in the rebellion, 1569, and
was a warm defender of the privileges of his church, in opposing the
archbishop's visitation, in 1577 Strype Ann. v. 2. p. 48.
. Richard Bancroft, in his writings, called him, the false and unworthy dean of
Durham Ath. Oxon. Will. Whittingham, the unworthy dean of Durham.
: He rendered himself obnoxious at court, by a zealous preface, wrote by him,
to Christopher Goodman's book See an account of this book, with its preface.
Stryp. 2 Eliz. vol. i. p. 125, 327. -- Id. Parker. -- Id. Grindal.
, which professedly denied the right of governing to belong to a woman: This
occasioned him to become the mark of public reprehension. Archbishop Sandys, in
the visitation of this province, having heard of some irregularities in the
church of Durham, (that See being then void) begins a visitation thereof: The
dean whereof, he understood, was no ordained minister, according to the order
of the church of England, having received his orders at Geneva, in the English
congregation there. But that church refused his visitation; which caused a
contest between the said church and the archbishop, which proceeded even to an
excommunication: And for the better searching into the merits of the cause, and
for putting some good conclusion to this difference, a commission was at
length, by the lord keeper, issued out, to some persons to hear it Strype Ann.
v. ii. p. 181.
. -- This commission we have in Rymer's Foedera, vol. xv. p. 785, dated 14th of
May, 1578. It was directed to the archbishop of York, the lord president, the
bishop of Durham, the dean of York, and others, to enquire into dean
Whittingham's orders. Upon the examination it did not appear, that he was
ordained according to the order of Geneva, as then established; nor according
to the law of this realm; for the ordination of K. Edward VI. was repealed by
Q. Mary, and that repealed 1st of Q. Elizabeth; and that of K. Edward, restored
the 8th of Q. Elizabeth. The dean's certificate produced, was, that it pleased
God, by lot and election, of the whole English congregation, to choose him to
the office of preaching, etc. But this being objected to, he produced another
certificate, viz. That it pleased God, by the suffrages of the whole
congregation, orderly to choose W. Whittingham into the office of preaching: It
was objected, that there was no ordination by election or lot, in any church in
Europe: The archbishop was for depriving him, but the dean of York and lord
president were against it; and said, it was not fit to allow popish orders, and
refuse orders of reformed churches. The dean soon after departing this life,
nothing was determined Strype Ann. v. ii. p. 520. Dr Birch's Life of Archbishop
Tillotson, 171.

See Bishop Nicholson's Eng. Hist. lib. 141. -- Mon. p. 44, 67, 101. --
Barnard's Cat. MSS. tom. i. pt. i^. p. 367.


.

Dean Whittingham was guilty of much profanation on the pious monuments and
sacred remains in this church. The account given by Wood Ath. Oxon. v. i. p.
154.
, of those acts of violence and irreligion, is shortly stated to the reader;
but antecedent thereto, we beg leave to observe, that in all ages, and with all
people, where civilization and the true spirit of religion prevailed, things
applied to pious offices and religious ceremonies were held in such veneration,
that defiling and employing them in mean and contemptuous uses, was forbidden
and punished. The example of Balthazar, in holy writ, is tremendous; though the
superstitious rites of the Jewish temple might render the vessels he abused, as
odious to those who stripped them from the sacred places, as ever dean
Whittingham held the vessels of the church at Durham. Disturbing the ashes of
the dead, is an offense to human nature, such as the most ignorant of savages
refrain from; polished nations of antiquity held such remains in the highest
veneration, and did not conceive the most depraved mind capable of their
profanation: The Egyptian who left his father's corpse unredeemed, was denied
the privileges of society. In profane history, the story of Cambyses affords us
reflections of the like nature. The learned Dr Prideaux is a sufficient
authority to quote this instance Prideaux's Connection, etc. v. i. p. 244.
; and his words are, As he mounted his horse for the march, his sword falling
out of the scabbard, gave him a wound on the thigh, of which he died a few days
after. The Egyptians remarking, that it was in the same part of the body, where
he had before wounded the Apis, reckoned it as an especial judgment from Heaven
upon him, for that fact, and perchance they were not much out of it: For it
seldom happening, in an affront given to any particular mode of worship, how
erroneous soever it may be, but that religion is in general wounded thereby;
there are many instances in history, wherein God has very signally punished
the profanations of religion in the worst of times, and under the worst mode of
heathen idolatry." Wood proceeds thus, "The works of impiety that Whittingham
performed, while he sat dean of Durham, were very many, among which I shall
tell you of these. Most of the priors of Durham having been buried in coffins
of stone, and some in marble, and each coffin covered with a plank of marble,
or free stone, which lay level with the paving of the church, (for anciently
men of note that were laid in such coffins, were buried no deeper in the ground
than the breadth of a plank to be laid over them, even with the surface of the
pavement) he caused some of them to be plucked up, and appointed them to be
used as troughs, for horses to drink in, or hogs to feed in. All the marble and
free stones also that covered them, and other graves, he caused to be taken
away and broken, some of which served to make pavement in his house. He also
defaced all such stones as had any pictures of brass, or other imagery work, or
chalice wrought, engraven upon them; and the residue he took away and employed
them to his own use, and did make a washing house of them, at the end of the
centery garth; so that it could not be discerned afterward that ever any were
buried in the said centery garth, it was so plain and straight. The truth is,
he could not abide any thing that appertained to a goodly religiousness, or
monastical life Davies' Rites and Monuments. -- This book was written by Anon.
(one that had belonged to the choir of Durham), and published by John Davies of
Kidwelly, in 1672.
. Within the said abbey church of Durham, were two holy water stones, of fine
marble, very artificially made and engraven, and bossed with hollow bosses,
upon the outersides of the stones, very curiously wrought. They were both of
the same work, but one much greater than the other. Both these were taken away
by this unworthy dean, and carried into his kitchen, and employed to profane
uses by his servants, steeping their beef and salt fish in them, having a
conveyance in the bottoms of them, to let forth the water, as they had when
they were in the church, to let out holy water, etc. He also caused the image
of St Cuthbert, (which before had been removed from its proper place by dean
Robert Horn, who also had a hand in such impieties) and also other ancient
monuments to be defaced and broken all to pieces, to the intent that there
should be no memory of that holy man, or of any other who had been famous in
the church, and great benefactors thereto, (as the priors his predecessors
were) left whole and undefaced. I say it again, that he did this to the end,
that no memory or token of that holy man, St Cuthbert, should be left, who was
sent and brought thither by the power and will of Almighty God, and was
thereupon the occasion of the erection of the monastical church of Durham,
where the clergy and servants have all their livings and commodities from that
time to this day. At length, after his many rambles in this world, both beyond
and within the seas, and his too forward zeal for promoting his Calvinistical
(if not worse) opinions, whereby much mischief happened to the church of
England, he did unwillingly (being then full of worldly troubles) submit
himself to the stroke of death, on the 10th day of June, 1579, and was buried
in the cathedral church of Durham; soon after was a tombstone laid over his
grave, with an epitaph of twelve long and short verses, engraven on a brass
plate, fastened thereto; which, with most, if not all of the monuments, which
were set up after his time, were miserably defaced by the Scots, when they
invaded England, in 1640. So that as he had before in a woeful manner, violated
the monuments of his predecessors and others, so was his, by invaders; and
nothing now left to preserve his memory, or person to show the place where his
carcass was lodged. After what Wood has said of our dean, it is justice to his
character to gather up the sentiments of other authors Oldmixon's, Q. Eliz.
429. sub. anno 1571. -- Archbishop Grindal's life, 170, 477. Wood, Williams,
Whittingham, and Sutton, Valued the prayer book not a button: The liturgy they
grudged to say, And threw the surplice quite away; Altered confession, changed
the hymns, For old Jack Hopkin's pithy rhimes.
Ward's Reformation, cant. i.
. The Lord Burleigh being advanced to the white staff, his place of secretary
of state, if we believe A. Wood, was likely to be given to dean Whittingham, so
noted a Puritan, that he has many an ill word from that Oxonian, who however
says of him, had he stirred in it, and made interest with his friend Robert,
earl of Leicester, he might have obtained it. Bancroft, another such rigid
doctor as Whitgift, in a treatise of his, styles Whittingham the false,
unworthy dean of Durham, for taking upon him that deanery, when he was only
master of arts, and, by the statutes of the church at Durham, he should have
been a doctor or bachelor of divinity: With such straws are these men's heads
stuffed. It gave also great offense, that he should content himself with a
Geneva ordination, and for this they did not forbear injuring him, in saying he
encouraged Knox and Goodman, in setting up sedition in Scotland; for the
settlement made by Knox in Scotland, was the reformed religion, and not
sedition. Dr Sandys, now archbishop of York, suspecting that the gentle hand of
Dr Pilkington, late bishop of Durham, had given the Puritans too much
encouragement in that diocese, resolved to visit it himself, Dr Barnes, the new
bishop, having complained to him, of the number of non-conformists, whom he
could not reduce to the orders of the church. But whatever his pretense was for
this grand visitation, the real design was supposed to be against Whittingham,
whom Sandys valued not the more for having been a fellow exile with him in
Germany, in the bloody reign of queen Mary. He was a divine of great learning,
an admirer of Calvin and the church of Geneva, which the late honorable and
reverend Dr Compton, bishop of London, styled his brethren, in a letter he
wrote to them, and which the Laudeans treat with contempt or indignation, as
schismatics. It seems dean Whittingham had only had Geneva ordination, which I
believe as much, as that the sun is now shining in a very fine day, is by the
bulk of the inferior clergy, and younger academics, at this time looked upon to
be no more an ordination than that of a vestry would be. There were thirty-four
other articles against him; but that was like an ignorant rustic's insisting to
have a fellow hanged for stealing his goose, when he had just been convicted of
burglary: The latter was sufficient to hang him, and the goose afterward not
worth mentioning. If he was no priest, as archbishop Sandys urged, on account
of his foreign ordination, that would have outed him of course, and then what
signified the other roll of articles: But the dean, instead of answering the
charge, stood by the rights of the church of Durham, and denied the
archbishop's power of visitation; upon which the archbishop excommunicated him,
that is, denied him the privilege and benefit of receiving the Lord's supper.
The dean appealed to the queen, who directed a commission to the archbishop, to
the lord president of the North, and to the dean of York, to hear and determine
the validity of his orders, and to enquire into the other misdemeanors
contained in the articles: The lord president was a favourer of the Puritans,
and Dr Hutton, dean of York, of Whittingham's principles, and boldly averred,
that the dean was ordained in a better sort than even the archbishop himself;
so that the commission came to nothing. Sandys, vexed at the disappointment,
and at calling in question his right of visitation, the reader sees how it
goes, the power, the denomination, the self ever uppermost, obtained another
commission, directed to himself, to the bishop of Durham, the lord president,
(he must come after notwithstanding his precedence) the chancellor of the
diocese, and some others, whom he could depend upon, to visit the church of
Durham: The aim of Sandys and Barnes was to deprive Whittingham of his deanery,
as a layman. When the dean appeared before the commissioners, he produced a
certificate under the hands of eight persons, for the manner of his ordination;
upon which the lord president rose up, and said, I cannot in conscience agree
to deprive him for that cause only, for it will be ill taken by all the godly
and learned, both at home and abroad, that we should allow of the popish
massing priests in our ministry, and disallow of ministers made in a reformed
church; upon which the commission was adjourned sine die. -- One cannot help
observing here, how the noble and the wise abhorred persecution, and how
enlarged their minds were in comparison with the lordly ecclesiastics. These
proceedings of the archbishop against the dean were invidious, and lost him his
esteem, both in city and county. Besides the calling the dean's ordination in
question, was contrary to the statute 13th Elizabeth, by which the ordinations
of foreign reformed churches were declared valid; and those that had no other
orders, were made of like capacities with others, to enjoy any place of
ministry within England. It is strange the archbishop of York, and the bishop
of Durham, among other articles against the dean, did not think of that
mentioned by Wood, the Oxonian, who doubtless thought it of the highest
importance, which was, that he was only graduated master of arts, whereas the
statutes of the church of Durham required, that the dean should be a bachelor
of divinity Chap. v. p. 120.
. What trifles do they hoard up for treasures! He is charged with horrid
impieties by Wood, etc. etc. sure I am that all these, and other the like
impieties, as the Oxonian calls them, are in no degree so impious, as what
himself says of that idolatrous monk Cuthbert's being brought to Durham, by the
power and will of Almighty God, to set up a church full of idols, and priests
almost as stupid as the wooden images they worshipped Gyll's Notes and MSS.
penes G. Allan.
. The reader now has both sides of Mr Whittingham's character.

The agreement entered into in Dean Skynner's time See page 126.
, touching an augmentation of the prebends, was confirmed on the 20th of
November, 1573 All and singular the which premises, touching the same division
or proportion of tithes, we William Whittingham, dean, and the Chapter of the
cathedral church of Durham, etc. being this 20th day of November, 1573. in the
sixteenth year of the reign of our sovereign Lady Elizabeth, etc. lawfully
congregated, deliberately treating of the same in our chapter house, on this
great or general chapter day, do, by our common or general assent and consent,
for us and our successors, by these presents, enact, ratify, and confirm, and
allow the said division, proportion, and assignments of tithes, for ever to
stand and continue to every one of the twelve prebendaries, and their
successors, as they be before rated. In witness whereof, to these presents, we
the said Dean and Chapter, have put to our chapter seal, and subscribed our
names, the said 20th day of November, in the said sixteenth year of our said
sovereign Lady Elizabeth, etc.


.

In 1577, the disturbances between the chapter and their tenants, became so
serious, as to require the interposition of the state, and thereupon the
queen's privy council in the north were ordered to hear the parties, and make
determination thereon; on which occasion an adjudication was made, as a
perpetual ordinance to be observed between them The ORDER set down by the
Right Honorable the Lords of the Queens Majesty's Privy Counsel in the
North Parts, between the Deane and Chapter of Durham, and their Tenaunts,
the 17th Day of August, 19th Year of Queen Elizabeth, 1577.
WHERE heretofore great contentions have arisen between the Deane and Chapter
of Duresme on the one party, and sundry of their tennants in the country
palatyne of Duresme, clameinge to hold their fermeholdes by tenant-right on
the other party, as well before the Right Honorable the Lords and others of
the Queens Majesty's Privy Counsel, and before the Lord President and
Counsel in the North Parts, as also at the common laws of this realm; for
the endinge of which troubles, and for a quietness hereafter to be had, and for
the continuance and maintenance of the service of the inhabitants of that
country due to the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, and successors, It is now
ordered and decreed, by the Right Honorable Privy Council, as by certain
articles hereafter ensuethe.

First, wherein their former suites and troubles, the said tenaunts claimed
to hold their sermeholdes by tenant-right, and that the Deane and Chapter
alleged them to be only their tennaunts at will, because some of them had
taken no leases by a long time, and yet it appeared by an ancient book and
register of the leases made by the predecessors of the said Deane and
Chapter, showed to the said president and council in the north parts, that
the lands in contention belongeinge to that house, had many times been letten
for years by lease: and also by a trial at the common law by which it should
seem the said lands and tenements should not be holden by tenant right.

Therefore it is ordered and decreed, that all the same tenaunts at will, and
tennants clameinge by tenant right, shall relinquishe and give over for them,
their heirs and assigns for ever, all their titles, rightes and clames of
tennant right in the premises and every part thereof.

And forsomuche as upon debaitinge of the matter, it appeared and could not be
denied by the said Deane and Chapter, but that the said tennants be bound by
the custom of that countreye, and the orders of the borders of England for
anenst Scotland, to serve her majesty, her heirs, and successors, at every
time when they be commanded in warrelike manner upon the frunturs, or elsewhere
in Scotland, by the space of systene days without waiges, which they shall
not be able to do, if they should be overcharged with great synes, or raising
of rents: Therefore, and for other godlike charitable and lawful
considerations, it is further ordered and decreed,

That every of the said tenaunts shall from henceforthe have and enjoye
their several fermeholdes with chapter tennurs according to the intent of
these said articles and draught of an^ indenture or lease hereafter set
down and expressed, and accordingly shall take leases of the said Deane and
Chapter, and shall pay their rents at the days and times accustomed, and
that every tennant shall pay, do, and make all other rents, services, and
reparations, and customs, as the tennaunts of every such tenement or
fermeholde has heretofore done, paid, or made, for the said fermeholde, or of
right ought to have done, paid, or made.

And it is further ordered, that the eldest son of every tennaunt, if he sue
for the same within one year next after the death of his father, and for
defalt of such son, the son and heir of the eldest son, the brother of
the eldest son, if he be livinge, or else his son; and for defalt thereof,
the brother of the last tenant, if he be then livinge, or else his son
sucinge for the same as before shall be admitted tenant of the said tenement
and fermeholde that the father or other last tennaunt had at the time of his
death, dureinge his liffe, paieinge only three years fine at the most, to the
said Deane and Chapter, and their successors, and paieinge, doeinge, and
makeinge yerelie, the rents, services, reparations, and customs, due to the
said tenement and fermeholde, and this order to be observed for ever: And if
the tenant fortune to have no son nor sonne's son, nor brother, nor
brother's son as is aforesaid; that then it shall be in the election of the
said Deane and Chapter for the time being, to choice their tennant, and to
let him the same for his lyffe, in form aforesaid. The true meaning of this
article is, that if the son, brother, or other be within age at the time of
the death of the tennaunt, then if he by his gardeyne, tutor, or friend make
suit for the said tenement, he shall be thereunto admitted tennant.

Notwithstanding the said former order, it is ordered, that if any of the
said tenaunts be married, and his wife lyvinge after his death, that then she
shall have and enjoye the fermeholde her husband died possessed of dureing her
wydoweheed, without paieinge any fine, paieing and doeinge the rents,
reparations, and customs due for that fermeholde; and if she marie, then her
husband to pay two years fine, and he and she to have and enjoye the said
fermeholde dureinge the wife's liffe, she, and also her husband yerelie
paieinge and doeinge the rents, reparations, and customs due for that
fermeholde; and that then after her death, the son of her former husband,
that was tenant of the said fermeholde; and for defalt of such son, such
other persons as are before named, according to the true meaning of the
limitation before mentioned in the third article, shall be admitted tenant for
his liffe, if he sue for the same according to these orders.

And further it is ordered, that no forfeiture of any of the said tennaunts
so to be letten for term of liffe as is abovesaide, shall be taken but only
for treason, rebellion, wilful murder, or fellonie committed by such
tennaunts, whereof he shall be lawfully attainted or outlawed by the laws of
this realm; and the same so forfeited to be letten in form aforesaid.

And it is also ordered and declared, that these articles abovesaide, are meant
and to be intended only for such tenaunts and tenements as be accounted
tenaunts at will, and tenements occupied or clamed, to be holden or occupied by
the custom of tenant right, and not to such tenements as heretofore are or
have been occupied and clamed by lease for term of years, or for term of
liffe or liffes, within the space of thirty years paste.

And it is further agreed and ordered, that all theife present articles and
orders, together with the draught of the said indenture, shall be entered and
remain as of record, as well in the book of orders of the privy council,
as also the book of orders and decrees of the said lord president and council
of the north parts, and also in the chauncerie court of Duresme, to the
intent the same may remain and be manifest to such of the tenaunts as shall
have cause or need to sue for the same.

And it is further ordered and agreed, that for the more full ratifieinge and
confirmeing of theife articles and orders, to abide and continue for ever, and
that the said Deane and Chapter has assented to the same: In testimony and
approbation thereof, the said Deane and Chapter, shall unto this order,
articles, and draught of the said indenture set their common seal. Yeoven
at York, the day and year above-written.

THIS INDENTURE made the -- day of --, in the -- year of the reign of our
sovereign Lady Elizabethe, by the grace of God, queen of England, France,
and Irelande, defender of the faith, etc. Between William Whittingham, deane,
and the Chapter of Duresme, of the cathedral church of Christ, and blessed
Marie the virgin, of the one party, and A. B. of --, etc. in the county of
Duresme, husbandman, of the other party. Witnessethe that the said Deane and
Chapter, for diverse good considerations them moveing, by their full assent
and consent, have demised, granted, and to serme letten; and by these
presents, for them and their successors, do demise, grant, and to ferme
let unto the said A. B. and his assigns, all that their tenement and
fermeholde, with all the howses and grounds, being reputed and taken for part
or parcel of the said tenement or fermeholde, and grounds with chapter
tenurs, as it is, or lately was in the tenure of W. K. in the said county of
Duresme, (the woods, mines, and quarries in and upon the same, with convenient
ways for the useinge and enjoyeinge of the same, except and reserved.) To have
and to hold the said tenement, fermeholde, and grounds, withal and singular
their appurtenances. (except before excepted) to the said A. B. his executors
and assigns, from the making and date of these presents, unto the end and
term of twenty and one years then next followinge, fully to be complete and
ended in as large and ample manner, as the said W K. or any other fermor
tenant or occupier of the premises heretofore has holden or occupied, etc.
the same, (if he, the said A. B. do so long live) yeldinge and paieinge
therefore yerelie, during the said term, to the said Deane and Chapter, and
their successors, or to their receivor for the time being, in the exchequere
over the east gate, within the precinct of the said cathedral church of
Duresme, the some of --, of lawful English money, at two terms in the year,
that is to say, at the feasts of St Martyne in winter, and Penticost, by even
portions, or at such usual feasts or days as the same has been used and
accustomed to be paid, or within one monethe next after either of the said
feasts and days. And the said A. B. for himself, his executors, and assigns,
does covenant and grant to and with the said Deane and Chapter, and their
successors, to pay, do, and perform all manner of lawful and reasonable
customs, services, and duties yerelie, hereafter to be due for the said
tenement, to the said Deane and Chapter, and their successors, as other the
tenaunts, fermeors, and occupiers, and their assigns, have heretofore done,
or of right ought to have done. And the said A. B. for him, his executors, and
assigns, covenantethe and grauntethe by these presents, to and with the
said Deane and Chapter, and their successors, that he the said A. B. his
executors, and assigns, all the said tenement and premises, by these
presents demised and letten, in all manner of reparations, necessary (great
timber only excepted) at all time and times, dureinge the said term, shall
repair, upholde, and maynteine, and at the end of the said term shall have
the same so sufficiently repaired at the sight of some indifferent persons,
whereof two to be chosen by the Deane and Chapter, the other two by the
tennaunt: And that he the said A. B. and his assigns shall, at all and every
time and times when occasion of service shall be, dureinge the said term be
ready and well furnished with horse and furniture, either by himself or some
other able person, to serve the queene's majesty, her heirs and successors,
upon the borders or elsewhere, after the rate of his said tenement, as other
like tenaunts of the said Deane and Chapter, within the said bushopricke of
Duresme, have heretofore used to do, and been furnished withal. And also that
the said A. B. etc. his assigns, shall not dureinge the said term, alien,
fell, or set over, his interest or years, or any part thereof in the
premises, or any part thereof to any person or persons, without consent and
agreement of the said Deane and Chapter, or their successors, first therein
obtained, (except to his eldest son.) And if it fortune the said yerelie
rent of --, or any part or parcel thereof, by the space of forty days after
either of the said feasts, to be behind and unpaid to the said Deane and
Chapter, and their successors, that then the said A. B. his executors, and
assigns, shall forfaite to the said Deane and Chapter, and their successors,
(nomine penae) over and besides his said rent, such some of money as the
said rent does or shall amount unto. And the said Deane and Chapter, for
them and their successors, do grant by these presents, to and with the
said A. B. that the same A. B. his executors, administrators, and such his
assignees as before be rehearesed, shall and may, dureinge all the said term,
have such sufficient hedgeboot, fierboot, plougheboote, and wayneboote, and
cartboote, in and upon the premises, as other tenaunts, fermeors, and
occupiers of the same, have heretofore had, taken, and used in, upon, and about
the said tenement, and other the premises before demised, and not elsewhere.
-- In witness whereof, etc.

15th Elizabeth, -- 1st December, 1572.
Henry Hastings, earl of Huntington, lord president of the north, and so
continued until his death in 1595.

THE COUNCIL.
KNIGHTS. Sir Thomas Gargrave Sir William Fairfax Sir Thomas Fairfax Sir Henry
Gates Sir George Bows Sir Christopher Hildyard.
ESQUIRES. Francis Wortley John Rookby Humphrey Purefoy Ralph Huddlestone
William Cardinal Laurence Meers Bryan Bridges Laurence Bramston Edward Stanhope
George Gibson, LL. D. John Rookeby, LLD.
SECRETARYS. Charles Hales, Esquire Thomas Ennys John Bennet, LL. D. Henry Cheek
John Fearns.




Dean Whittingham died at Durham, on the 10th of June, 1579, and was interred
in the cathedral church: The inscription In obitum doctissimi viri Gulielmi
Whittingham, decani olim Dunelmensis, Mariti Catherinae sororis Johannis Calvin
theologi, qui obiit anno 1579.

Quae Whittinghami cernis monumenta sepulti,
Et vitae and mortis sunt monumenta piae.
Anglia testis erit, testis quoque Gallia vitae;
Exulis haec vidit, Praesulis illa decus.
Nobilitas sua nota domus, notissima doctis,
Cognita pauperibus mensque manusque suit.
Dum vixit summos populi persensit honores,
Mortuus ast populi vivit in ore sui.
Forsitan et posthaec optabit serior aetas,
O vivant cineres, docte, decane, tui.
Crux veritatis comes -- Willis, vol. i. p. 253.


given in the notes was placed upon his monument, which, soon after its
erection, met with the same fate as he had treated others.

THOMAS WILSON, LL. D.
was appointed dean on the 5th day of February next following Whittingham's
death, and was installed the 28th, by Ad. Holyday his proxy. He was born in
Lincolnshire, and elected a scholar in King's College, Cambridge, in the year
1541: Was tutor to Henry and Charles Brandon, dukes of Suffolk, and domestic
chaplain to Charles, and Katharine, his duchess, and afterward to queen
Catherine Parr Strype's Ann. vol. ii. p. 233.
. He was a voluntary exile in the time of queen Mary, and traveling to Rome in
1558, was put into the Inquisition there, on a charge of heresy, said to be
contained in his writings on logic and rhetoric: He suffered the torture, and
would have been put to death on refusing to deny his faith, had not a fire
happened, which induced the populace to force open the prison, that those
consined might not perish; by which accident he escaped See a full account of
this transaction, Strype's Ann. vol. ii. p. 511, 512.
. Queen Elizabeth made him master of the hospital of St Catherine, near the
Tower, and master of requests; after which he became secretary of state and
privy-counsellor. He was on many occasions sent abroad as ambassador, and his
residence as dean was much dispensed with Register, p. 21, 23.
. After Whittingham's death, we hear no more of that vile character, the Augean
stable, given to the cathedral church of Durham, in bishop Barnes' writings.
The dean died on the 16th of June, 1581, and was buried at St Catherine's. He
wrote a much approved book against usury Strype's Ann. vol. ii. p. 234. --
Willis, vol. i. p. 254. -- Lloyd's Statesman, p. 209.


.

The deanery continued vacant two years, and on the 31st of August, 1583,

TOBIAS MATTHEW,
rector of Bishop-Weremouth, in this county Inducted the 28th of May, 1580.
Vide Annals of Bishops, vol. i. p. 1112.
, was appointed dean, then thirty-seven years of age. Strype speaks of him thus
Ann. vol. ii. p. 347.
: -- A great preacher, and a pious, holy man: This venerable prelate first
entered into orders by the motion and counsel of Dr Calfhill, a learned
dignitary of the church in those times, and his cousin; though his father and
mother, persons of good quality, who seemed to be disaffected to religion, were
not inclinable thereto, as I have seen in a letter of the said Calfhill, soon
after written to Sir William Cecil, That he was bound by all honest means to
prefer his cousin, as well in respect of his rare abilities, as also for that
he had followed his advice, in entering into the ministry, against the good
will of father and mother, and other his able friends. Matthew was soon sent
for to court by the earl of Leicester, having been recommended to him by his
said kinsman; as also the said secretary Cecil, who by soliciting the queen,
obtained for him the deanery of Durham, though she stuck a good while, because
of his youth and his marriage. -- When he departed from court to Durham, Cecil,
(now lord Burleigh) according to his grave and godly way, gave him much good
counsel for his wise and good behavior of himself, and discharging of his duty
in that place; and die next year sent him a letter of the same import, by Mr.
Tonstal going down thither.

Matthew anxiously solicited the lord-treasurer to dispatch him quickly to
Durham, after he was appointed dean 3. Stryp. Ann. p. 178.
, as in case of his non-residence, twenty-one days before Michaelmas, the whole
crop of hay and corn, and other fruits, belonging to the tithe and glebe,
appropriated to his deanery, would go to the prebendaries who did reside See
Statutes, chap. xvi. p. 124.
. It seems the great men then in power had an eye to selfish gains, from
ecclesiastical preferments, for the lord treasurer sought to obtain a lease of
Pittington, from Dean Matthew, on which there were at that time two unexpired
leases for long terms, which obliged the dean to draw an unfavourable picture
of his possessions Ibid. App. No. lxi.
. An attempt was made by Mr Carey, son to the lord Hunsdon, to disseize the
church of Billingham and Holme, part of the dean's corpse, upon pretense of
concealed lands, given to superstitious uses; and a fuit was also projected by
one Brackenbury, touching those places. -- Matthew was made Bishop of Durham
See vol. i. p. 471.
in 1594; and after a vacancy of two years,

WILLIAM JAMES
was appointed dean, on the 5th of June, 1596, and was installed by Clement
Colmore, his proxy: He was born at Sandbach, in Cheshire; son of Mr John James,
of Ore Osborn, -- Gray's Notes, MSS.


, in Staffordshire, by Ellen his wife, of the family of Bolt, of Sandbach See
pedigree in vol. i. p. 479.
: He was admitted student in Christ-Church, Oxford, in 1559, and took the
degree in arts: Afterward entering into holy orders, was admitted to the
reading of the sentences in 1571, being then divinity reader in Magdalen
College. The next year, was elected master of University College; and on the
27th of August, 1577, became archdeacon of Coventry: In 1584, was made dean of
Christ-Church, Oxford; and in 1606, succeeded bishop Matthew in the Sea of
Durham Willis, vol. i. p. 254. -- Gray's Notes, MSS. -- Ath. Ox. vol. i. p.
356, etc. He was three times vicechancellor.
. After him

ADAM NEWTON,
a Scotchman and a layman, obtained the deanery, and was installed the 27th of
September, in the same year, by his proxy, Mr Ewbanke: He was tutor to prince
Henry, eldest son of king James I. and wrote his life MSS. now in the British
Museum. -- Gent. Mag. 1760, p. 78, 81. -- Birch's negotiation between England
and France, 527, 333.340. -- Heylin's Examen. History. 178.
. Newton held the deanery till the year 1620, when a resignation was made in
consideration of a large sum of money Ath. Oxon. vol. i. p. 356. Camden's
Annal. Ja. I.
: About that time he was created knight and baronet: Was a man of learning, and
wrote several things of note Sir Edward Newton's Compl. Book, Lat. collected
from Classics and Philolog. Bern's Catalog. MSS. part ii. p. 102. He translated
the first four books of Father Paul's Hist. of the Council of Trent. Bishop
Bedel translated the other four. Gray's Notes, MSS. -- Sir H. Puckering, alias
Newton, was his son, who gave his lib. to Trinity Col. Came. Ibid.


. He died on the 13th of September, 1626, and was interred at Charleton, near
Greenwich, in Kent Willis says, Having, after taking upon him his secular
honors, renounced his ecclesiastical preferments. Vol. i. p. 254. -- Bayle's
Dict. vol. iv. p. 360.

Bail, in l. c. says he died dean of Sarum.


. -- By the means before noted, a vacancy took place for the admission of

RICHARD HUNT, D. D.
who was presented on the 3d of May, admitted the 8th, and installed the 29th
of the same month, 1620 Reg. Neile, p. 23.
. He had been rector of Fobsham; also vicar of Terrington, on the presentation
of king James I. 1603, and rector of the same place, on the presentation of Sir
John Stanhope, knight, 1609 Parkin's Hist. Norf. vol. iv. p. 378, 704.
: Was made a prebendary in the second stall of Canterbury cathedral, in the
year 1613 or 1614 Somner.

An answer for the Ld Walden, (to the vice-deane and chap. of Duresme) touching
the lead of the ruinated cell in the ileande by Barwick.

While some of the chapter of Duresme do complain of the Lord Walden, for
taking off of the lead of the cell, in the ileande a p'ish church, yet there
remaininge for prayers, and the cell chapel never used, but for garners and a
storehouse, since the suppression of the abbyes in K. H. 8 time. It may be
demanded of them with more offense is given, or with other satisfaction more should
be made by the now Ld Walden, then by those who took of the lead, took down
the timber, and utterlie demolished ye walls of the church of St Goodrick, and
of a goodly manor house, Mr Blakiston the now vice-deane is prebendarie
thereof.

Similit'. fact, p' prebendaries.

Pittington chapel manor house pulled down by Mr Tonstall, now p'bendarie in
the church, and sold it to Mr Henry Anderson; both these within 2 miles of
Duresme.

Dr. Barnes, now p'bendarie, pulled of and sold at Newcastle, all the leads
of the prebend. manor house of Muggleswick, 10 miles from Duresme.

Dr Colmore spoiled 2 p'sonages, St Oswalds' in Elvet, and St Mary's in the S.
Bailey.

Mr Clyff, Mr Ewbank's predecessor, unleaded the church and manor house of
Buly-grange, and sold away the lead, iron, stone, and timber thereof, and
never made any penny satisfaction to the church, or to him the now prebendary.

The woods and timber of the church being by statute the principal treasure of
the church, to be p'served, and has lately by his maj. princely care expressed
by his l'rs under his hand and privy seal, commanded with great care the
p'servation thereof, for the general benefit of the common wealth, and the
p'ticular good of the church tennaunts, by want whereof their tenements and
houses fall into utter ruin: It would theirfore be inquired, what prodigal
wastes have been made, and not to the necessary repara'ions of the tennants'
houses or fabric of the church. As namely out of these woods: Beer-p'ke,
Muggleswick-p'ke, Haymeing wood, Raynton-wood or p'ke, Shinckliffe-wood,
Aickliffe-wood, Baxter-wood, Bewly-wood, utterlie consumed. -- Hough-hall-wood
consumed by Dr Colmore. -- Fenckla-wood consumed by Mr Blakiston. -- The Hall
Garth-wood consumed by Mr Rand's predecessor and himself. -- Kella-wood wasted.
-- Muggleswick, the goodliest wood in the north of England, wasted by the
prebendarys.

Dr. Colmore is the b'ps spiritual chauncellor or commissarie: He is also this
year the treasurer to the D. and Cha. and deals in all their money matters;
and therefore has a desire to have the fingering of the lead in the cell of
the ileand, etc. etc. [The rest sca'dalous reflections on Dr Colmore and his
eldest son.]

He holds the p'sonage house of Branspeth, worth above 200l. p' an. whereof
my lord of Somerset is patron; at whose devotion he stands, having neither
good title to it, nor well deserving of the house of Brancepath, etc. -- From
an original paper in the hands of T. Gyll, Esquire Randal's MSS.


; and was chaplain to king James. In 1633, the dean and chapter petitioned the
king, (then at Durham) for a confirmation of their charters and endowments, as
in the notes To the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble PETITION of the
DEAN and CHAPTER of DURHAM.
Shows,
THAT whereas your majesty's royal progenitors, founders and patrons of this
church, have in former times been graciously pleased at the humble petition of
the poor members thereof, to confirm unto them, by the sacred authority of
their letters pattenta, the ancient charters and pious endowments belonging
unto the some, for the honor of God, and the better performance of his service
in this place;

MAY it therefore please your most sacred majesty, to grant unto your humble
petitioners, the like royal confirmation of the same charters and donations
under your majesty's great seal, for the better strength and preservation of
the estate and inheritance of this church, wherein your majesty's most loyal
and devoted petitioners shall daily pray (as they are most bound) for your
majesty's long, happy, and peaceable reign, etc.

At the CORT at DURISME, the 2d of June, 1633.

HIS majesty for the honor of God, and the better performance of his service
in this place, is graciously pleased to grant to the petitioners, his royal
confirmation of their charters and donations as here is desired: And his
attorney-generall is required to prepare for his royal signature, a book for
letters pattents to that effect.

JOHN COKE.


. The dean died on the 1st of November, 1638, and was buried in the cathedral
church of Durham, under the seat set apart for the prebendaries' wives: His
epitaph was inscribed on a tablet of wood, fixed to the adjoining pillar, which
not being esteemed ornamental, was taken down and thrown into the vestry-room.
Willis gives the inscription as in the notes RICHARDI HUNT, decani ecclesie
cathis D. beatam animam e coelo reducem ad tubam, olim Arch-Angeli; hic
expectat socium corpus RICHARDI HUNT, decani hujus eccl. per 20 annus. Qui
placide Obdormivit in D'no Jesu, redemtore, cui animam On a wooden tablet, in
golden characters: Hic jacet orborumque pater, viduaequae maritas
Faelix qui proprio fovit utrosque sinu.
Spes columenque inopum; pes claudis lumina caecis,
Hospitium exulibus; praesidium miseris.
Cur tabulas rogitas, legate bona nulla supremis,
Quod semper solitus non moriturus agit?
In promptu ratio est; donaverat omnia vivens,
Scilicet et tandem non habet unde daret.
Ad caelum ad Christum praemiserat omnia prudens,
Ut fieret tuta and mollis ad astra via.
Caelorum portus reserat, claudisque gehonnae,
Omnia qui Domino, datque dicatque Deo.
Advena dives inops, omnes uno ore precemur,
Molliter ossa cubent, sit tibi terra levis
In this dean's time the bells in the great tower of the cathedral church were
cast and hung; and the present elegant clock made.

From the parish register of Bow church.

Tho. Bartlett (a bell-founder) was buried 3 Feb. 1632-3. This man did cast the
abbey bells ye summer before he dyed 1632. E computo thesauraij eccl'ae cathed.
Dun.

L. s. d. For casting and hanging the bells 128 12 7 For the new clock and
dyall 18 9 6

Randall's MSS. One Chapter Hodson re-cast the bells in 1693, and placed the
present eight melodious bells in the great tower. -- He was a Londoner, and
much noted in his business; in the year 1680, having been employed to re-cast
the great bell called Tom. ^. Christ-Church, in Oxford.

In the chapter accounts of 1632 and 1633, are the following remarkable
particulars.

12 Mar. 1633. Solut. Gul. Bellasis mil. p' emendatione viae publicae in
monasti. egidij. juxta Dunelm. 5 l.

Wm Osten, medicus, x l.

Nov. 5. Given to the quire by appointment of the chap. for singing on the
steeple ye king's day, 1 l.

Paid Chapter Bailes the painter, for gilding the 8 stands and coloring, which
bore up the canopy over the king's head the last year, 1 l.

A bill for two curtains at b'p Hatfield's tomb and matts, 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Curtain rods, 12 s. 4 d.

Acta in domo capitulari.

9th July, 1621. That a survey be taken of the lands and possessions of the
church, with an exact terrier of them all to be kept upon record.

Paid for two pictures of the king and queen, for the library, 4 l.

Nov. 1633. Ut apud acta in domo capitulari.

Memorandum. That the sums of money here following, to be paid by 120 l. per
ann. returned to Mr James, treasurer, last year.

L. s. d. For the rich cope given the king 116 8 1 For the king's
entertainment, etc. 232 18 1

Randall's MSS.
.


.

WALTER BALCANQUALL
was appointed dean, and installed on the 14th of May, 1639 Rymer, vol. xx. p.
328.
. He was by birth a Scotchman; educated at Pembroke Hall, and there took the
degree of bachelor in divinity: Was appointed the king's chaplain; and on the
16th of December, 1617, made master of the Savoy, which he resigned the
succeeding year, in favor of the able, but desultory Marc Antonio di Dominis,
archbishop of Spalato, a refugee, in reward for his conversion to
Protestantism: That year he was sent to the synod of Dort, to represent the
church of Scotland. In February, 1621, Marc Antonio left England, and recanted,
whereupon Mr Balcanquall was restored to the mastership of the Savoy: In 1624,
having obtained naturalization Rushworth, vol. i. p. 150.
, and taken the degree of doctor in divinity, he was installed dean of
Rochester on the 12th of March. A short time after his becoming dean of Durham,
those commotions arose in the state, which forced him from his mastership and
deanery, when he was plundered, sequestered, and obliged to fly for personal
safety. The Scotch troops vented their spleen on the cathedral church; and
defaced all the monuments in the nave: The dean fled to the king at Oxford, and
afterward shifted from place to place, to escape the fury of the rebels: Being
the mark of much inveteracy, as they attributed to him the writing of the
king's declaration, in 1639. His epitaph expresses, that he escaped from the
siege of York, and in the extremity of a bad season, through inexpressible
danger, took refuge at Chirk Castle, in Denbighshire; but sinking under the
fatigue of the journey, and severity of the weather, died there on
Christmas Day, 1645, and was interred in the parish church of Chirk; where,
some years afterward, a small mural monument was erected to his memory, by Sir
Thomas Middleton, of Chirk Castle, at whose request, Dr Pearson, then bishop of
Chester, composed the epitaph Hic situs est vir eximius Gualterus
Balcanquallus, S. S. theol. professor, qui ex scotia oriundus, ob singularem
eruditionem aulae Pembrochianae in acad. Cantabr. socius sactus est, et inter
theologos Brytannos synodo Doidracensi intersuit, mox regiae majestati a
sacris, Xenodochij subaudiensis Londini praepositus and decanus primo Rosensis,
deni Dunelmensis, omnia haec officia sive dignitates magnis virtutibus ornavit;
tum vero in Scotianae rebellionis areanis motibus observandis atque detegendis
solertissime versatus est, in rebellione Anglicana regi maxim sidus; obsidione
Eboraci liberatus, et in has oras se contulit, ubi perhumaniter exceptus, sed
ab hostibus cupidissime quaesitus et exturbatus hiemali tempestate mire
saeviente tutelam castelli in proximo confugit, and morbo ex infesti itineris
taedio corruptus ipso die nativitatis Christi ad Dominum migravit, an. aerae
Christianae, 1645.

Haec in memoriam defuncti scripsit Johannes Cestriensis, rogatu viri
nobilissimi Thomae Middleton, baronetti, qui ex pio animi proposito sua cura
atque sumptu hoc monumentum posuit. Willis, vol. i. p. 255.

Ath. Oxon. vol. i.

See Hale's papers concerning the synod of Dort, several of his epistles. --
Walker's account of suffering clergy, vol. ii. p. 19. -- Rushworth's Col. vol.
ii. 1270. -- His petition concerning the king's declaration. -- Pennant's Tour
in Wales, vol. i. p. 269.

His daughter married Sir Thomas Thynne, and had by him Thomas Thynne, of
Longleat, who was murdered by Count Coningsmark, in Pall Mall, February 12,
1681.


.

Disputes subsisted between the chapter and their tenants, when the dean first
came to this church, which were laid before the council, and an order made
thereon, dated the 11th March, 1639, which shows, that innovations were
renewed, and fresh attempts had been made against the leaseholders, which
government would not encourage 11th March, 1639.
Walter Belcanqual, dean of Durham, complained of George Gray and Anthony
Smith, two of the tenants of the Dean and Chapter of Durham, for misdemeanors
committed by them, in getting diverse of the tenants of the said Dean and
Chapter to set their hands and seals to diverse papers and petitions of
complaint, against the said Dean and Chapter their landlord, and to contribute
money for prosecution of their complaints; and as the said Dean did allege,
they did not make known to the Dean and Chapter their grievances, before they
came up to complain.

The said Gray and Smith appearing before the lords of the council, did
acknowledge, that what was alleged against them was true as to the subscribing
the petition; but declared they had cause to complain against the Dean and
Chapter, for that contrary to a decree entered in the court of York and
elsewhere, in the time of queen Elizabeth, which did ascertain their right in
the renewing their leases, with savyor to them in respect of their tenant
right; and that a small fine (in comparison of what the Dean and Chapter now
required of them) had wont to be paid, of which, they said, they often
complained as a grievance, but never obtained hopes of relief from them.

The council board, after hearing the business, declared themselves
dissatisfied with the tenants' proceedings, and the archbishop of Canterbury
moved, that the Dean and Chapter might do well to proceed against them in the
Star Chamber, and never to renew their leases to the tenants, or the children
of them who did complain; and that it were fit they should be committed to
prison till they did produce the schedule of grievances subscribed by the
tenants, to discover their names; and that they should pay so much money as
they received from those tenants (who empowered them to prosecute this their
complaint) to one of the clerks of the council, and that nothing should be
deducted out of the same, to allow the said Gray and Smith any thing toward
the defraying of their charges or moneys laid out about the prosecution of this
business; for, said the archbishop, he was confident it was a practice against
the church, and did believe there was some further design in the business.

Hereupon the council board ordered, that Gray and Smith be committed to the
gatehouse, and there to lie in prison, until they produce a schedule of the
names of the subscribers, and that they did pay the money they had confessed to
have received, (which was about the sum of eighty pounds) unto the hands of Sir
William Beecher, one of the clerks of the council; which they paid accordingly,
but continued in prison many weeks, because they would not deliver up the list
of the tenants names that subscribed the petition; but a parliament meeting
April 13 next following, they were set at liberty by the council board, without
delivering up the list of the tenants' names, and the paper of subscription
containing their grievances.


.

CHRISTOPHER POTTER, D. D.
was nominated in January 1645 Rymer's Foed. vol. xx. p. 328.
, to this deanery, but died in March following, and before he was installed: He
was born in the barony of Kendal, in Westmoreland; was educated in Queen's
College, Oxford, and became a fellow thereof. In 1626, he succeeded Dr Barnard
Potter, his uncle, in the provostship of his college, and the next year
proceeded in divinity. When Dr Laud became a favorite at court, he was induced
to be his follower, and thereupon esteemed an Arminian: In the latter end of
the year 1635, then being chaplain in ordinary to the king, he was made dean of
Worcester; and in 1640, executed the office of vice chancellor of Oxford, not
without much trouble from the puritanical party: In the rebellion, he suffered
much in the royal cause: Was a person greatly esteemed by all who knew him, for
learning and piety: Was exemplary in his manners and discourse; of a courteous
carriage, a sweet and obliging temper, and a comely presence Ath. Oxon. vol.
ii. p. 46. -- Willis's Cath. vol. i. p. 255, 659. -- Grey's Notes, MSS. etc.


.

This period of time must not be passed over without observing, that archbishop
Laud was very urgent for the establishment of decent regulations in the church
service, and particularly for placing the communion table at the east end of
the church, and enclosing it with a rail, to secure it from profanation and
common business: But in 1641, the commons interposing their authority in those
matters, the table was ordered to be removed, the rails taken away, the chancel
levelled, ornaments to be disused, as basins, tapers, candlesticks, etc. and
that bowing at the hallowed name, toward the east, should be forborne. In
short, the hour was come, when religious veneration was extinguished, and
slovenliness, disorder, and irreverence, similar to the rudeness of a Jewish
synagogue, were tolerated in the churches The charges brought against Cofins
(which in the annals of that bishop, p. 1178, were referred to this period of
the work) were, That he set up a marble altar with cherubims, in the cathedral
of Durham; that this with the appurtenances, cost two thousand pounds; that
this ornamental furniture, which he calls appurtenances, was a cope, the
representation of the Trinity, and God the Father in the figure of an old man.
There was likewise said to be a crucifix, with a red beard and blue cap. The
dean was likewise accused for lighting two hundred wax candles about the altar
on Candlemas-day: For forbidding the singing any psalms before or after
sermons: For making an anthem to be sung of the three kings of Cologn, Gaspar,
Balthazar, and Melchior; and for procuring a consecrated knife, only to cut the
bread at the communion." -- The answer Cofins gave in upon both, was to this
effect, "That the communion table in the church of Durham, was not set up by
Cofins, but by the Dean and Chapter, many years before he was prebendary of
that church; and that Smart, the accuser, was one of that chapter; that by the
public accounts standing upon the register, the charge did not amount to above
a tenth part of what was pretended. That the copes used in that church, were
furnished long before Cofins' time; and that Smart was prebendary when they
were bought, and allowed his share of the charge. That Cofins never approved
the picture of the Trinity, or the image of God the Father in any figure; and
that to his knowledge, there was no such representation in the church of
Durham. That the crucifix, with a blue cap and a golden beard, was nothing but
the top of bishop Hatfield's tomb, which had stood in the church above two
hundred and fifty years; and that there was no such figure upon any of the
copes, as is reported in Fuller's History. That by the statutes of the church,
to which Smart was sworn no less than Cofins, the treasurer was to provide a
sufficient number of wax lights for the service of the quire during the winter
season; that there was never above two fair candles set upon the communion
table; that there was no more candles used upon Candlemas-night than in the
Christmas holidays; and that the number of them was lessened or increased in
proportion to the congregation. That he never forbad singing the meter psalms
in the church, but used to sing them himself, with the people at morning
prayer. That he was so far from directing the singing an anthem to the three
kings of Cologn, that at his first coming to Durham cathedral, he ordered this
superstitious hymn to be cut out of the old song books belonging to the
choristers' school: That no such anthem had been sung in the choir during his
being there, nor, as far as his enquiry could reach, for threescore years
before and upwards. That the knife used for cutting the bread at the communion,
was never consecrated, etc. etc. -- Coll. Eccl. His. lib. ix. p ^98, etc.

The answer of the dean and prebendaries of Durham, setting forth the reasons
why they could not possibly produce their book of charter acts, as ordered by
the Right Honorable the Lords of the Upper House of Parliament. Sans date, but
probably about 17 April, 1646.
First, they supposing, that the said book might be in one of the trunkes
which were sent to Hull, at the time of the distraction upon the entringe of
the Scottish army, did send an express messenger to Hull, with a letter to
Sir Thomas Glemham, governor of the town entreating him to open the said
trunkes before good witnesses, and to search for the said chapter book; as
appears by their letter unto the said governor.

2. That the said governor did find but one trunck of the churches there, in
which the book of their chapter acts was not to be found, as appears by the
letter and testimony under the hands and seals of those who opened and searched
the said truncke, by the govenor's appointment.

3. That the dean and prebendaries immediately after, sent another express
messenger to Durham, with letters to their chapter clerk, requiring him at his
peril to find out the said book, (whose charge properly it is) or else to come
up himself in person, and give satisfaction to their lordships, why it could
not be produced; as appears by their letters to the said chapter clarke.

4. That their chapter clarke is not come up, but has sent his servant, who
has deposed before their lordships some things, wherein he may be deceived;
because it is certain that he is mistaken in deposing, that Dr Duncon was
present at the making up of that trunk at Dr Clarke's house, in which the said
book was supposed to be.

5. And therefore they do suppose, that that trunckeis lost, either by the
negligence of the said chapter clarke, (he being in the ship where it was, and
it being his proper charge to look after it) or by the avarice of marrinets,
who finding it weighty, (as being full of books) might suppose it was filled
either with money or plate; or, if it were left behind in the registry, (where
usually it remained) it might be torn and destroyed by the Scottish soldiers,
who broke open both their treasury and registrie, defacinge and destroying
therein many evidences; and, in all probability, would have done so with all
the rest, if they had not been restrained and severely punished by their
officers, especially by serieant major general Bailie.

6. All these things are ready to be deposed by the dean or prebendaries, which
they well hope their lordships will easily believe for these two reasons:

7. First, that the loss of the truncke is most prejudicial and
disadvantagious to them as having in it many of their leiger books,
counterpanes of seal, and other evidences and chartularies, which must be of
invaluable loss to the church of Durham; and they are confident, that the
book of acts would have cleared them very much concerning their proceedings
with Mr Smart.

8. Secondly, to show that they have used their utmost diligence, they shall
produce unto your lordships all the warrants, which possibly could be found in
their registrie, for entering their acts into the said book. Which warrants
contain the sum of all things that have been entered into that book for
almost twenty years; which is before the time that any difference has been
concerning Mr Smart.


. -- On the 6th of March, 1645,

WILLIAM FULLER, D. D.
was appointed dean of Durham; but it is doubtful was never installed: He was
born at Hadleigh, in Suffolk, the son of Andrew Fuller; received his education
in Cambridge, and was much noted for his learning, piety, and prudence: Was
chaplain in ordinary to king James I. and king Charles I. and esteemed an
excellent preacher; having preached several times before the king at Oxford. In
1636, he was made dean of Ely, and had the vicarial church of St Giles, near
Cripplegate, London. -- In the beginning of the rebellion, 1642, he was
sequestered from his church preferment, imprisoned, and spoiled of all, for his
loyalty to his prince, by the impetuous and restless Presbyterians Ath. Oxon.
vol. ii. p. 729.
. After Oxford was surrendered, the dean retired to London, where he lived in
obscurity and poverty, in an advanced age, and full of sorrows, till death
released him from misery and fears, though not from persecution; at the age of
seventy-nine, he departed this life, on Holy Thursday, the 12th of May, 1659;
but the vengeance of those days of confusion followed him to the tomb, for his
remains were denied interment in his own church of St Giles, so that his body
was stolen to the grave, to the church of St Vedast, in Fosterlane, where it
rests in the south aile. His daughter Jane, (who married Dr Brian Walton,
bishop of Chester) on the restoration of peace and government to this country,
caused a monument to be erected to his memory Ath. Oxon. vol. i. and ii. Eccl.
Hist. 752. -- Walker's Hist. part ii. p. 19. -- Newcourts Repert. vol. i. p.
357. -- Peck's Desiderata Curiosa, lib. xiv. p. 32. -- Willis's Cath. vol. i. p
256

William Fuller, D. D. vicar of St Giles's, Cripplegate, first dean of Ely,
afterward dean of Durham, chaplain to king James, and afterward to king
Charles I. famous for learning, prudence, and piety, spoiled of all for his
loyalty to his prince, lived obscurely, and when denied rest in his own church,
he found it here. Born at Hadley, in Suffolk, died on Holy Thursday, May 12,
1659. Put up by his daughter Jane, wife of Brian Walton, bishop of Chester.


.

In the Annals of the Bishops are fully related, the circumstances which befell
this church during the usurpation; and to which, for avoiding prolixity and
repetition, we must refer the reader.

On the commission of survey, issued, relative to the possessions of the
church, the commissioners returned the certificate into the register office of
the court of chancery at Durham, dated the 1st of October, 1649, stating the
nature and tenure of the dean and chapter's lands The certificate of the
commissioners appointed to survey the manors, lands, and tenements of the late
Dean and Chapter of Durham, by virtue of a commission, grounded upon an act of
the commissioners of England, assembled in Parliament, for abolishing of Dean
and Chapters; returned into the register office of the court of chancery, at
Durham, 1st October, 1649.
We, the commissioners of survey, appointed and authorized for the survey of
the several manors, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, of the late Dean and
Chapter of the cathedral church of Christ and blessed Mary the Virgin of
Durham, by virtue of a commission to us granted, grounded upon an act of the
commissioners of England, assembled in Parliament, for abolishing of deans, and
deans and chapters, under the hands and seals of five or more of the trustees
in the said act nominated and appointed; having deliberately perused several
very ancient records, ledger books, halmot court books, court rolls and
accounts, belonging to the said Dean and Chapter, and yet remaining at Durham,
and having also heard the deposition of many witnesses produced, touching the
customary estates in reversion, claimed by the present tenants of the said late
Dean and Chapter, thereby, and by all other lawful ways and means to inform
ourselves of the truth of the said claim, do in all humbleness certify as
follows.

Imprimis, We do find, that the several manors, townships, and villages of
Belsis, Billingham, Wolviston, Newton Bewly, Bruntoft, Coopon Bewly, etc. were
part of the possessions of the prior and convent of Durham abovesaid, and very
anciently belonging to the same. -- And we do hereby find, that it manifestly
appears from the year of our Lord 1500, that there were constantly (till the
dissolution of the said prior and convent, which was about the 28th year of
king Henry the 8th) several Halmott courts holden for the said prior at several
times in the year, of and for the all or most of the said manors and premises,
at which courts, the several tenants of and within the said manors, townships,
and villages, came and entered their purchases, took admissions as heirs or
widows respectively, as the case required, and the entries thereof, were and
are made cepit de Domino, etc. such and such lands, faciendo Domino et
vicinisque incumbent. etc. reddendo et faciendo in omnibus prout, etc. Such an
one the last tenant, reddidit et facit and the like, as in copyholds and
customary estates is usual, and as by exceeding many ancient and constant
precedents and entries, does and may appear.

That afterward, after the said prior and convent was so dissolved, and their
possessions, reversions, privileges, and inheritances, vested and settled by
act of parliament, in the said king Henry the 8th and his successors, and
conferred over amongst other lands and possessions, to a Dean and Chapter by
him newly erected, and their successors, by his letters patents, bearing date
the 16th day of May, in the 33d year of the reign of king Henry the 8th.

That after that, all the tenants of the said prior and convent, with all the
said manors, villages, and townships, becoming tenants of the said new erected
Dean and Chapter, did continue their holds and possessions in their said
farmholds and land, and could not be prevailed withal by the said Dean and
Chapter, to take leases for twenty-one years in writing, though but at the old
rents, howbeit much labored and endeavored by them, as appeared by some few
inconsiderable leases, made by them to strangers of their lands, in the nature
of concurrent leases, and of the reversions thereof, which yet were constantly,
and are to this day enjoyed by the then present tenants, or their assigns, or
such as do derive their interest, or have descended from them; the said lessees
being employed, as it seems, to terrify the said tenants from their old way of
holding into new leases, who yet continued in that manner, paying and
performing the ancient yearly rents and services accustomed, and very few
leases were taken, till the 15th or 16th year of the late queen Elizabeth's
reign, as by the receipt books and rentals plainly appears.

That then many and great differences ensuing betwixt the said Dean and Chapter
and their tenants, concerning their estates, customs, and services, and the
manner of the holds, which the said Dean and Chapter endeavored to have
altered, the then honorable lords of her majesty's privy council, and the
lords president and council of the north, who from her majesty was authorized
to hear and determine all differences of that nature in the northern counties,
called before them the said parties concerned; and upon full and deliberate
hearing and consideration had of the several demands, objections, and answers,
of all the said parties, and by and with the consent of the said Dean and
Chapter; did for the further and quiet settlement of the said estates, customs,
holds, and services, make, decree, declare, and set down their order, which
was entered, as well in the books of orders and decrees of the said president
and council, and of the privy council, as in the court of chancery at Durham,
bearing date the 17th of August, in the 19th year of the reign of the said late
queen Elizabeth; thereby ordering amongst other things, that the said tenants
should hold their lands and tenements from the said Dean and Chapter by lease
for twenty-one years, and so from twenty-one years to twenty-one years for
ever, paying only three years fine at the most for renewing a lease for
twenty-one years as aforesaid; and in consideration thereof, the said tenants
to continue the performance of their ancient and accustomed service in the
wars, with horse, man, and furniture, upon the borders and marches of England
toward Scotland, for the space of fifteen days without wages, when the said
Dean and Chapter or their successors should require.

That the then Dean and Chapter in approbation thereof, and consenting thereto,
did confirm the same under their Chapter seal, bearing date the 27th day of
February, in the 20th year of the reign of the late queen, and in observation,
and pursuance of the said order, in relation to the three years fine therein
specified; the said Dean and Chapter did, by their chapter act or grant,
bearing date the 12th day of April, Anno Domini, 1626, order and appoint, that
the said tenants should have their leases renewed from time to time without
difficulty or delay, paying a year's fine every 7th year, without any other
exaction or demand, which by true account, is three years fine for a lease for
twenty-one years, as by the aforesaid order is limited and appointed.

And it does also appear unto us, by the oaths of several persons produced and
sworn thereby, and by all other lawful means, to inform ourselves of the truth
of the claim made by the said tenants of a customary estate in reversion, in
their tenements and farmholds after the expiration of their present leases:
That the said tenants have accordingly had their leases renewed from twenty-one
years to twenty-one years, and their fines never exceeded above three years
rent at improvement, from time to time for twenty-one years, paying three years
rent at the improved value, clear profit, ultra old rent and service, as a fine
for a lease for 21 years, and to pay and perform their ancient yearly rents and
services accustomed: And the said tenants have always had their leases renewed
from twenty-one years to twenty-one years, and their fines never exceeded above
three years rent at the improvement as aforesaid.

And it also appeared by the evidence, upon oath of diverse witnesses sworn and
examined, that the said tenants right or trust in any estate in reversion so
claimed as aforesaid, of and in the premises, was so considerable in the
general repute of the inhabitants of that county and the parts adjacent, as
that the said lands and tenements was usualy alienated and sold within three
years value at the most, of freehold and fee simple lands; and that the said
tenants did usualy alienate and sell their said tenant right or customary
estates for five years purchase at the least; and that the said Dean and
Chapter themselves, even when all the term of years in several leases of the
said tenants were expired, did offer five years purchase, and sometimes more,
to such tenants for their tenant right, or customary estate so claimed as
aforesaid, in case such tenants were not willing or able to pay the usual fine
for renewing their said leases.

And it does further manifestly appear unto us, that the livelihood and
subsistence of many hundred families in the said county, do solely depend upon
the said tenements and farmholds, and the benefit they expect by their said
claim of a customary estate and tenant right as aforesaid; and that diverse of
the said tenants and their ancestors have continued some hundreds of years in
the possession of their tenements, as it appears by the court rolls of the said
late Dean and Chapter aforesaid.

Wm Hopkins, Thomas Canby, Hen. Lamby, Anth. Wilson, Gilbt Marshall, Wm
Feilden, Wm Parkinson.



.

The year following dean Fuller's death

JOHN BARWICK, D. D.
was appointed to this deanery: He was born at Weatherslake, in Westmorland, in
the year 1612, was educated at Sedbergh school, in Yorkshire, and admitted of
St John's College, Cambridge, in 1631, of which he became a fellow: Was
incorporated bachelor of divinity at Oxford, in February, 1661; and was
chaplain to bishop Morton, who, in 1645, collated him to a prebend in this
church, and when that prelate fell in the political confusion of the times, Dr
Barwick was turned out of his fellowship and prebend: It is said he assisted Dr
Hewitt in the melancholy duties of the scaffold; and was highly instrumental in
king Charles II.'s restoration Each. Hist. 751.
. On the king's return, he became doctor in divinity By the king's mandate sent
to Camb. dated 21 June, 1660.

It is the Author's intention only to give a general character, -- where he
goes into particulars it is relative to offices in the church. In Biograph.
Brit. vol. i. p. 523, the reader will find this person's history at large.


, and chaplain in ordinary to his majesty; and in consideration of his great
sufferings, imprisonment, and persecution in the royal cause, had the deanery of
Durham conferred on him, and was installed on the 1st of November, 1660, by his
proxy, Dr Carlton: He preached at the cathedral on the occasion of Dr Cosins'
election to the Sea: In the same year, he had the rich rectory of
Houghton-le-Spring, which he held till December, 1661. Whilst he held the
deanery, he caused the cathedral and all the prebendal houses to be repaired;
erected the grammar school from the ground, and made it a nursery of good
literature. He brought water into the college, to supply the occasions of all
the prebendaries' houses; reformed the manners of his clergy, and augmented the
salaries of the poorer sort; and did many other public acts for the benefit of
his church See the life of dean Barwick, wrote by his brother, Peter Barwick,
M. D. in Latin, and afterward published by him in English, with notes, etc.
1724. -- Wood's sasti Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p 50, 2d edit. -- Willis's Cath. vol.
i. p 256. -- Kennet's Reg 524. -- Ibid. 302. -- His behavior at Durham, ibid.
629. -- Newcourt's Rep. vol. i. -- Walker's Hist. of Suff. Clergy, part ii. p.
20.


. The chapter not only gave their consent to all these matters, but did all in
their power to promote them; yet they were so far from exacting in the fines on
their leases, and were so beneficial to all the poor, that, in an age very
little favorable to the clergy, they are mentioned with honor for their
humanity, candor, and piety. Nay, in many cases, they were so bountiful as to
recede from their own right, in favor of their successors, that the revenues
of the church might descend to them with some augmentation. -- Tempora mutantur!

On the 19th of October, 1661, he was removed from Durham, and made dean of St
Paul's; and in the same year, on Dr Fearn's being made bishop of Chester, was
chosen prolocutor of the convocation, and held the same till his death, which
happened on the 22d of October, 1664, aet. 53. His remains were interred at St
Paul's, and an elaborate epitaph was inscribed on his monument Amori et
aeternitati.
Quisquis es viator,
Oculum, animum huc adverte, lege, luge.
Jacent sub hoc marmore
Tennes exuviae non senttis animae
JOHANNIS BARWICK, S. S. Th. D.
Quem suum
^atalibus gloriatur ager Westmoriensis,
S^^diis academia Cantabrigiensis,
Admissum socium in S. Johannis collegium,
Indeque, quod magis honori est,
Pulsum a rebellibus.
Qui nec perduellium rabiem,
Nec haemoptysm, quamvis aeque eruentam,
Et certius heu! tandem percussuram,
Quiequam moratus,
Pro rege et ecclesia sum ardua molitus,
Diro carcere perquam inhumana passus,
(Inconcussa semper virtute)
Renatum denuo vidit et diadema and insulam,
Etiam sua non parum obstetricante manu.
Qui deinde functus
Decanatu Dunelmensi paucis mensibus,
Decanatu Paulino vero triennio,
Parum diu utroque, sed sideliter;
Tandem (post caelibatum
Cum primis ceste cum primis sancte cultum)
Labe pulmonum, et curis publicis confectus,
Heic requiescit in Domino,
Atque inter sacras Aedis Paulinae ruinas
Reponit suas,
(Utrasque resurrecturas securus)
Anno Aetatis LIII.
Anno Salutis MDCLXIV.
Caetera scire si velis,
Discede, et disce
Ex illustri primaevae pietatis exemplo,
Etiam sequiore hoc seculo,
Quid sit esse very nominis
Christianum.

. He wrote and published many sermons and other things, among which was the
Life and Character of Dr Morton, before mentioned. Upon being informed of his
intended removal from the deanery of Durham, he instantly put a stop to all
leasing of farms, (even some, where the fine had been already agreed upon
between the chapter and the tenants) that the revenue of the deanery might come
more entire to his successor, who was soon to take possession of it The chapter
lands, such as belong to the body in common, are let here, as in other
churches, by a lease for twenty-one years, on a fine payable every seven: But
each corpse is let, as gentlemen let their estates, or parsons their glebe, at a
rack rent, without any fine, and at as high a yearly value as they can.


. This and other acts of severity, occasioned the tenants to petition the king,
setting forth their grievances, especially a breach of those ordinances which
were made in the reign of queen Elizabeth See page 149.
. The petition was referred to commissioners; an answer was given in by the
dean and chapter, in 1662, and an interlocutory order was made in the matter;
but whether any final determination was had, we cannot at present ascertain The
proceedings of the Dean and Chapter of Durham, against their rebellious
tenants, before the king's commissioners. 1661.
To the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble PETITION of several ancient
tenants to the Deane and Chapter of Durham, on behalf of themselves and others.
Shows,
That for diverse hundreds of years before the dissolution of the pryor and
covent of Durham, your petitioners ancestors, and those under whom they
claim, held their lands to them and their heirs, under certain rents,
services, and customs, by copy of court roll, as by the entries thereof in
the court rolls of the said pryor and covent may appear.

That the Deane and Chapter imediately after the dissolution, endeavoring
generally to break the said customs, prevayled with some, and constrained
others to take leases, whereupon in the time of queen Elizabeth, upon
complainte made to her majesty and privy council, and upon reference to, and
heareing of the said cause before the lord president and council in the north,
and upon heareing both parties in the 19th year of her reign: It was decreed
See this in page 149.
, that the tenants and their heirs forgoeing their customary estates. should
have their leases renewed from twenty-one years to twenty-one years for ever,
according to a precedent thereunto annexed, with certain provisoes of widows
estates, and other agreements in the said decree, confirmed by the Deane and
Chapter of Durham the 20th of Elizabeth, and entered in their register, and
enrolled in the chauncery of Durham, as by an exemplification thereof, under
the countye palatyne seal may appear.

That the said Chapter, consisteing of a deane and twelve prebends, designeing
to break this way of holding also, devyded the whole deanery amongst them by
lottery, and for raiseing fines, some prebends let leases to kinsfolks and
servants, over the tenants heads, menaced others, and by such like artifice,
got some to submitt to leases according to the lords' order, and others to
accept of leases for twenty-one years, (simply as they termed it) and so to
destroy the lords order; but for the most part at three years old rent for a
fine or little more; and afterward, the said Chapter insisted upon three
years racke-rent for a fine of twenty-one years, and afterward demanded a
seven penny, (that is) a full years value every seven years, and half a
years value for a renewall every three years and a half; thus by their power
and greatness overswaying the tenants into what terms they pleased, contrary to
the true intent, meaneing, and judgment of the said decree.

That wearied and impoverished in their livelyhoods and estates by these
doeings; the late powers exposing these lands to fail, your petitioners, as
well throwgh necessity to secure them, being all in lease for years then
generally expireing, as also to reduce their poor perplexed selves and
estates to some kind of certainty, did purchase the same.

That notwithstonding their ancient holdings as aforesaid, your majesty's
declaration from Breda, and letters to the archbishops in behalf of old
tenants and purchasers, whereby your petitioners were encouraged and hoped to
renew leases without fine, being in a better and different condition (the
customs of their holdeings considered) from most of the tenants in England, but
on the contrary, the Deane and Chapter demand greater fines of your petitioners
than ever were paid in the worst of times, and before they were purchasers.

But findeinge that the said Deane and Chapter have as little consideration of
your majesty's said declaration and letters, as of the just desires of your
petitioners;

Your petitioners are bound in all humility to have recourse to your majesty's
grace and favor as their last refuge, and humbly to beseech your majesty,
either by recommending your petitioners condition to the consideration of the
two houses of parliament, or otherwise, as to your majesty's princely wisdom
shall seem meet, to render your most gracious intentions manifested in your
majesty's said declaration and letters, effectual for the relief of your
petitioners.

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, shall pray, etc. Nich. Hall, John
Hobson, Richard Newton, Nich. Wood, Mich. Robinson, John Brough, Geo. Gray.
Ralph Adamson, John Welsh, John Watson, John Cooper, Ralph Suddicke, Tho.
Tailor, John Hopper, John Ingleby, Wm Shepperdson, Tho. Todd, Anth. Daile,
Philip Brough.


At the Court at Whitehall, the 4th March, 1661.
His Majesty is graciously pleased to refer this petition to the lords, and
other the commissioners, authorized for the examination of the late pretended
sails of crown and church lands, to examyne the allegations herein mentioned,
and to give such order for the petitioners relief, as shall be fit.

RA. FREMAN.
Vera Copia -- Isa. Troughton, Tho. Marsh.


Friday, April 4th, 1662.
Inner Starr Chamber. By the lords and others his majesty's commissioners,
authorized for examination of the late pretended sails of crown and church
lands.

Upon readeing the humble petition of the ancient tenants to the Deane and
Chapter of Durham, directed to the kings most excellent majesty, and by his
majesty referred to the said commissioners: It is ordered, that a copy of the
said petition and reference aforesaid, be showed unto the said Deane and
Chapter, who are desired to consider of the allegations therein contained, and
to agree the matters in difference betwixt them and the petitioners, if they
can; if not, to return their answer in writeing to the said petition; and how
the matter of fact stands, to the said commissioners, upon Friday the thirtith
day of May next; and the said Deane and Chapter are desired to do noe act to
the prejudice of the petitioners, or any of them, by granting any new or
concurrent lease or leases, whereby the petitioners present interests or
possessions in the premises may be hurt or disturbed, whilst the same is
under their lordships consideration, and until his majesty's pleasure be
further known herein.

Signed in the name, and by order of the said commissioners. ISA. TROUGHTON,
THO. MARSH.


The ANSWER of the Deane and Chapter of Durham, to a petition exhibited against
them to his majesty, by some of their tenants, and by his majesty referred to
the lords and other commissioners authorized for examination of the late
pretended sails of crown and church lands. IN obedience to your lordship's
order of the 4th of April, 1662, these respondents say;
That the petition which is not only against the present Deane and Chapter,
but against all their predecessors from the first foundation, has not any
thing in it, which is not either impertinent or false, as we are ready to
prove in every particular.

I. Whereas they call themselves the ancient tenants of the Deane and Chapter
of Durham, the first of them is not so much as a tenant, but only a purchaser
of a farm belonging to the said Deane and Chapter, which he purchased of one
that had formerly purchased the said farm from the trustees of the laite
usurpers, but was never the tenant of that farm to the Deane and Chapter: And
as for all the rest of the petitioners, who were formerly tenants to the Deane
and Chapter, and do still possess their lands, there is not one of them that
we know that has any lease in being, or has made any application to the
respondents for the renewing of his lease, neither has any one of them paid
any rent to the church since the late pretended dissolution of deanes and
chapters, and some of them being required to pay their rents, answer, that
they have purchased their rents.

II. Whereas they allege, that their ancestors, and they under whom they hold,
held their lands to them and their heirs under certain rents servyces, and
customs by copy of court roll, alledgeing for proof thereof our book of
entries; these respondents say, that they have searched their book of entries,
and have not found any one tenant that ever held any of their lands to him and
his heirs, but only for a term of years, sometimes six sometimes nine, but
for the most part but three, with condition to be obedient to the pryor and
covent, and provisoe (that if they dyed before that term were expired) the
grant to be void.

III. Whereas they allege, that ymediately after the dissolution of the priory
and covent, the Deane and Chapter endeavoureing generally to break the said
customs, prevayled with some, and constrained others to take leases; we
answer that it is true, that ymediately after the dissolution of the priory
and covent, the Deane and Chapter did let almost all their lands by leases,
some for sixty years, some for eighty and some for more, but generally for but
one and twenty years, which way of holding, being much better for the tenants,
then that which they had before, we cannot understand, what need there was of
any artifices or constrainte to bring the tenants to that way of holding their
lands.

IV. Whereas they allege an order of the lord president and council of the
north in the time of queen Elizabeth, we answer, first, that there is a
provisoe in that order that nothing therein contained, should extend to such
tenants as formerly held their lands by lease, but only to such as called
themselves tenants by customs, and were reputed by the Deane and Chapter to be
only tenants by curtisy: Secondly the order of the lords concerning those
tenants, was made in consideration of border service, which is long since
ceased: Thirdly, that the order of the lords was so little in favor of the
tenants, that some of them refused to take leases, according to that order, and
others choose rather to take leases simply: Fourthly, that all the leases for
diverse years since, are without any referrence to such order, and as if there
never had been any such order.

V. Whereas it is alleged that the Deane and Chapter designeing to brake this
way of holding, also devyded the whole deanery among them by lottery; we
answer, First, that the Deane and Chapter for diverse years before the order
of the lords, did divyde many leases among themselves by lottery, but never
since that order, and therefore it could not be with design to break that
order: Secondly, that if the Deane and Chapter devyded the whole deanery by
lottery, the petitioners cannot derive their succession beyond those lotteryes,
and therefore have not reason to complain of them, nor pretense for holding
from their ancestors before there was any Deane and Chapter as they allege in
the beginning of their petition.

VI. Whereas they allege that such tenants as were brought to accept of leases
from such prebendaries as they sell unto by lot, paid but three years old
rent for five or little more; it is false that they paid but three years rent
or little more, for compareing the fines with the old rents, we find the
fines oftentimes above tenn times so much as the old rent, and sometimes above
twelve time so much, as for 2l 6s. 8d. rent, 30l. fine for a farm in
Ayckliffe, in the name of Edward Thompson; and for 33s. 4d. rent, 20l. fine to
Richard Hutchinson for a farm in Burdon; and for a tenement in Westow, 2l.
15s. 4d. rent, 38l. fine, which is near fourteen times the old rent, which
considering the proportion that was then between the rent and the true value
of the lands, and the great disproportion, which is now by reason of the great
increase of money, may be thought as great fines, as those which have been
demanded since.

VII. Whereas they accuse these respondents of not regarding his majesty's late
gracious declaration and letters, and the just desires of the petitioners,
which are to renew their leases without fine: We answer, that we conceive
they have made this accusation general, because they are not able to instance
any one particular; and we desire them to name any one tenant that has made
application to be, who has not been offered more in consideration of his
purchase, and demanded less for fine, then is usualy offered and demanded by
any church in England in treateing with their tenants.

We therefore humbly desire your lordships, that the petitioners may be
required to make proof of their allegations, which we know they cannot; and
although we conceive we are not bound to disprove them, we are ready to show
the falsehoode of them, and the truth of every thing we have affirmed, that it
may appear to your lordships, how impudently they have abused his majesty,
with a complicacion of many false allegacions, troubled your lordshipps, and
slandered their landlords, by whose favors they have enjoyed their
livelyhoods at so easy a rate, as ought to have been acknowledged by them
with much thankfulness.

Friday, June 6th, 1662.
Inner Star Chamber. By the lords and others his majesty's commissioners
authorized for examination of the late pretended sails of the crown and
church lands.

Whereas the cause upon the peticion of several ancient tenants who subscribed
the peticion on behalf of themselves and the rest of the tenants of the Deane
and Chapter of Durham, presented to the king's most excellent majesty, and by
his majesty referred to the said commissioners, and the answer of the said
Deane and Chapter of Durham to the said Peticion, was by order of this board of
the 30th May last, in behalf of the said Deane and Chapter, appointed to be
heard this day; and the said deane and his council appeared, and Mr Hooper,
solicitor, in behalf of the petitioners, who alleged, he had noe notyce of
the aforesaid order, and that the witnesses to make good the allegacions of the
peticioners in their said peticion, lived remote, and could not be ready
against this day, and therefore prayed further time; but the deane and his
council pressed for the present heareing of the said cause, being by order of
this board of the 4th of April last, tied up from leting or leasing any of the
lands belonging to the said Deane and Chapter (all the said tenants in the
mean time refuseing to make payment of the reserved rents) till the said cause
be determined by this board, and his majesty's pleasure further known; and
therefore alleged, that the peticioners and the rest of the tenants on whose
behalf relief is prayed by the said peticion, being many, and in effect
tenants of all the said lands belonging to the said Deane and Chapter; the
delay of heareing of the said cause will tend very much to the prejudice of the
said Deane and Chapter: The commissioners upon debate and consideration had of
the said case, and prejudice which may accrue to the said Deane and Chapter,
by the delay of heareing of the said cause prayed by the peticioners: do
order, that the clause of their said former order of the 4th of April last
aforesaid, whereby the said Deane and Chapter are desired to do noe act to the
prejudice of the peticioners or any of them, by granteing any new or concurrent
lease or leases whereby the peticioners present interests or possessions in the
premises may be hurt or disturbed, whilst the same is under their lordshipps
consideracion, and until his majesty's further pleasure were known herein, be
vacated and discharged: And further order, that the peticioners have liberty to
appoint their own day for heareing the merrits of the cause upon their said
peticion, they first paying all the arrears of the reserved rents from them due
to the said Deane and Chapter, and producing a certificate under the hands of
the sa^d Deane and Chapter of the receipte thereof, which certificate upon
their said payments, the said Deane and Chapter are hereby required to sign
and deliver to the said peticioners.

Signed in the name and by order of the said commissioners, ISA. TROUGHTON,
THO. MARSH.


A bill was filed the 10th November, 1662, to which the Chapter answered, and
exceptions were taken thereto, but reported sufficient.


.

On Dr Barwick's promotion,

JOHN SUDBURY, D. D.
succeeded to this deanery, and was installed on the 25th of February, 1661. He
was born at St Edmondsbury, and before his coming to the deanery, was one of the
prebendaries of Westminster: He suffered all the distresses attending the
distracted state of the church during the usurpation, with great magnanimity
and virtue of mind; retaining his loyalty, and supporting the clerical
character with dignity and fortitude: Was a great benefactor to his native
place; and showed an exalted and munificent spirit while dean of Durham: He
began to build the present library in the cloister where the refectory stood,
and expended thereon 1500l. or as others say, 1000l. but died before it was
completed: The vicarage house of Billingham, in this county, was built by him.
The dean departed this life in the year 1684, aet. eighty, and was interred in
the cathedral church, before the dean's stall in the choir: His tombstone was
inscribed with the epitaph given in the notes He left 1500l per annum to Sir
John, and gave 5 or 6000l. portion to his niece. Gray's Notes, MSS. Epitaph. --
The tombstone is removed.

Quicquid mortale habuit, Heic deposuit In spe beatae resurrectionis JOHANNIS
SUDBURY, S. T. P. Pietate, eruditione antiquis moribus, Gravitate, integritate
vitae, and sancta canitice, Vir vere reverendus; Qui in sunestissimis magnae
rebellionis temporibus Magno animo, and inconcussa in regem fidelitate Multa
perpessus Regno and ecclesia (numinis savore) restauratis, Prebendarius primum
Westmonasteriensis, Dein Decanus Dunelmensis Factus Eo munere per annos XXII.
Et quod excurrerat integre, cum laud sunctus Decessit an. Aet. 80. salutis,
1684 Abi lector and aeternitatem cogita.
. Possessed of a considerable estate, he devised the same to his nephew Sir
John Sudbury Created a baronet 25 June, 1685, by the name of Sir John Sudbury,
of Eldon, in the county of Durham

In dean Sudbury's time the archbishop of York claimed the guardianship of
spiritualties, during the vacancy of this See, and it came to a solemn hearing
when a determination was made in favor of the Chapter.

The articles of evidence, etc. are collected in Rudd's MSS.


; after his own death and that of his lady, it was limited to the dean's neice,
who married Mr Tempest, of Old Durham, and with whom the dean gave a large
portion. -- He was succeeded by

DENIS GRANVILLE So he writ his name, and sometimes Grenville. See his works,
to which is prefixed a portrait.
, D. D.
a younger son of the loyal and valiant Sir Bevil Granville, and brother to
John, the first earl of Bath of that family. After a suitable education, in
September, 1657, he was admitted a fellow commoner of Exeter College, in
Oxford. On the 28th of September, 1660, was created master of arts; and soon
after, marrying Anne, youngest daughter of bishop Cosins, was collated by his
lordship on the 16th of September, 1662, to the archdeaconry of Durham; and to
the first prebend in the cathedral church, which he exchanged for the second,
April 16, 1668. He had also, of his gift, the rectories of Easington and
Elwick; and in the room of the latter, the living of Sedgefield. But he took a
very regular and exemplary care of them, in the due discharge of all
ministerial functions, as appears by the directions given to his curates,
printed among his works, On the 20th of December, 1670, he was created doctor
in divinity, being then chaplain in ordinary to his majesty, as he had been for
several years before; and on the 14th of December, 1684, was installed dean of
Durham. Thus possessed of such great preferments, he might have long enjoyed
them with much profit and honor to himself and friends; and have continued to
be an ornament to his function, and a general benefit to the world: But some
absurd notions entertained of the unlimited extent of the prerogative, together
with his strict adherence to the doctrines of passive obedience and
non-resistance, involved him in inextricable difficulties. For, possessed with
the indispensableness of their obligation, upon the prince of Orange coming to
rescue this nation from the dangerous attempts made upon our religion and
liberties, the dean opposed the measures taken for our common safety to the
utmost of his power; by preaching, delivering charges to the clergy, sending up
an address to king James, and subscribing a sum of money for his service. And
when all his endeavors proved ineffectual, he was so entangled with those
absurd doctrines, that, rather than submit to king William, he chose to lose
his great preferments, and go into a voluntary exile; and, quitting Durham the
11th December, 1688, he arrived the 19th of March following, at Honfleur, in
France. In February, 1689, he took a hazardous journey to England, whereby he
got a small supply of money, to subsist abroad. His brother, the earl of Bath,
(who was warm in the interest of the prince of Orange) endeavored for some
time to secure his revenues; but as no considerations whatever could induce him
to swear allegiance to king William and queen Mary, he was at length deprived
of all his preferments, February 1, 1690. He not only refused himself, but
likewise did all in his power to deter, or rather to terrify others from taking
the oaths, by representing the revolution as a rebellion and usurpation. Having
no prospect, after the late king James's defeat in Ireland, of recovering his
benefices, he repaired to the abdicated monarch's court, at St Germain; where,
though he had reason to expect an uncommonly kind reception, yet, because he
was a protestant, he was soon obliged to retire, not only from court, but also
from the town. It Is said, that upon the death of Dr Lamplugh, he had the empty
title of archbishop of York conferred upon him by king James. In 1695, he came
incognito to England, where he found no encouragement to make any stay. Having
for some years enjoyed but an indifferent state of health, he died at his
lodgings in Paris, the 8th of April, 1703, aged 64, and was buried at the lower
end of the churchyard of the Holy Innocents in that city. His nephew, lord
Lansdown, draws his character to great advantage in the following words: --
Sanctity sat so easy, so unaffected, and so graceful upon him, that in him we
beheld the very beauty of holiness. He was as cheerful, as familiar, as
condescending in his conversation, as he was strict, regular, and exemplary in
his piety; as wellbred and accomplished as a courtier, and as reverend and as
venerable as an apostle. He was indeed apostolical in every thing, for he
abandoned all to follow his lord and master. From this man's example, we may
learn the great danger and mischief of propagating absurd and unreasonable
doctrines. Since there will always be found some person or other, that will
embrace and stiffly defend them, though never so much to their own, or others
prejudice: All not being equally endowed with the same penetrating genius, or
not having a yielding conscience alike See Biog. Britan. vol. iv. p. 2259. --
Willis, vol. i, p. 260, etc. Wood's Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p. 959, 2d edit. --
Kennet's Hist. England, vol. iii. -- General Dict. vol. v. p. 557. -- Birch's
Life of Tillotson, p. 202.


.

THOMAS COMBER, D. D.
was installed dean on the 15th of June, 1691, on the deprivation of Granville:
He had his education in Sydney College, Cambridge; in 1677, was made prebendary
of York, and had the stall of Holme; and in 1681, was removed to the prebend of
Fenton in that cathedral: In 1683, he was collated to the precentorship there,
by archbishop Dolben: After the revolution, was made chaplain in ordinary to
king William and queen Mary, and obtained the deanery of Durham by the
recommendation of lord Fauconberg and archbishop Tillotson Dr Birch's Life of
Tillotson, p. 378.
: There was allowed him 160l. for dilapidations in his deanery, which was never
received; yet he expended in reparations about 400l. He departed this life on
the 25th of November, 1699, aet. 55, and was interred at Stonegrave in
Yorkshire MS.
Siste, viator, gradum; Morae non erit dispendium scire, quanti viri venerandos
premis cineres. Exuvias mortales (perenni felicitati maturos) heic deponi
voluit Thomas Comber, S. T. P. grande nomen, pluribus hand opus; vir pietate,
eruditione, ingenio, judicio ceterisque animi dotibus clarus; majora vero
singentem non audis panegyrin ob sanctae matris ecclesiae Anglicanae causam;
quoad doctrinam, cultum, disciplinam contra novatores omnes scriptis feliciter
defensor, dignus haud simplici marmore; Gulielmo and Mariae, principibus
illustrissimis a sacris; ecclesia Dunelmensis per decennium, breve nimis,
decanus; ad maxima quaeque capessenda idoneus adque altiora munera promovendus,
nisi publicis votis obstitisset mors invida. Plura licet meritis debita, non
capiet marmor: Probis omnibus luctum, et sui desiderium relinquena, decessit 25
die Novembris, 1699, an. salutis, aetatis 55, provectiore semo, modo visum Deo,
dignus. Will^. Cath. vol. i. p. 257 --


.

HON. JOHN MONTAGUE, D. D.
fourth son of the earl of Sandwich, was installed the 19th June, 1699. In
1680, he was appointed master of Sherburn hospital, in this county. In 1683, he
was made master of Trinity College; and in 1687, chosen vice chancellor, and
prebendary of the fourth stall in Durham cathedral, and after of the eleventh.
He died on the 23d of February, 1727, aet. 73, and was interred at Barnnoll,
the burying place of the family.

On Dr Montague's decease,

HENRY BLAND, D. D.
was appointed to this deanery, and installed the 6th of May, 1728, by his proxy
Mr Walter Ostley: He was a native of Yorkshire, and received the first
rudiments of literature at Eton school, where he contracted a friendship with
Sir Robert Walpole: Was admitted scholar in King's College, Cambridge, in 1695,
in which year Sir Robert also took his admittance: Was made rector of Harpley
Parkin's Hist. of Norfolk, vol. iv. p. 561.
, on the death of Dr Henry Colman, in the year 1715, by the presentation of
William Hooks, Esquire and Elizabeth his wife, which living he held to the time of
his death: Was made chaplain to the king, and also of the royal hospital at
Chelsea, in 1716; took his degree of doctor in divinity in 1717; and was
appointed master of Eton school 1719: On the 13th of December, 1723, was
installed canon of Windsor, and admitted dean of Durham the 12th of March,
1727: In February, 1732, he resigned his stall in Windsor, on being made
provost of Eton College: Died at Eton on the 24th of May, 1746, and was
interred in a vault in the antichapel there; leaving two sons and three
daughters. -- To him succeeded

THE HON. SPENCER COWPER, D. D.
a son of lord chancellor Cowper: He was installed on the 21st of July, 1746,
by his proxy Mr Wadham Knatchbull: Was rector of Fordwich in Kent, and also one
of the prebendaries of Canterbury, which he resigned on this promotion: He died
at the deanery house on the 25th of March, 1774, aet. 62, and was interred in
the east transept of the cathedral church called the Nine Altars, where a
monument is erected to his memory This marble is erected To the memory of the
honorable and reverend SPENCER COWPER, D. D. Youngest son of William earl
Cowper, Lord high chancellor of Great Britain, In the reign of queen Anne, and
king George I. He was made dean of this cathedral, In the year 1746: And, after
a life spent in a steady uniform practice Of unaffected piety, friendship,
humanity, and charity, Died at the deanery, in the 62d year of his age, On the
25th day of March, 1774.
.

THOMAS DAMPIER, D. D.
was installed dean on the 17th of June, 1774: Was prebendary of Canterbury,
which he exchanged for a canonry at ^indsor. Installed in the second prebend at
Durham, the 20th of April, 1771; and exchanged it in March, 1773, for the
mastership of Sherburn hospital, wherein he was inducted the 10th of the same
month, and afterward resigned it in favor of his son, the present dean of
Rochester. Died at Bath the 31st of July, 1777.

HON. WILLIAM DIGBY, LL. D.
dean of Worcester, and canon of Oxford, was installed dean of Durham the 20th
of September, 1777, and now enjoys that dignity.

PREBENDARIES OF THE FIRST STALL Lands assigned to the first prebend.
Statutis. Dimidium manerij de Elvet Hall, vocat. Hall Garth, (with a close
called Swallop Leys.) 8 6 8 Capitulo antiq. solvend 6 8 (The woods and mines
reserved.) Act. capituli Decimae assignat primo canonicatui. Decimae Garbarum
de North Sherburn, infra parochiam de Pittingdon 7 0 0 Decimae de North
Pittingdon 2 16 8 Decimae de Hett sup' Montem 1 13 4 Decimae de Crook Hall,
infra parochiam St Oswald 2 13 4

Gray's and Randall's MSS. The sums stated are paid by the respective
prebendaries, out of the appropriated premises, to the chapter's treasury


.
EDWARD HYNDMERS, D. D. was nominated in the foundation charter: He was a
Benedictine monk, and spiritual chancellor to bishop Tunstall; took his
bachelor's degree at Oxford, 1513; made warden of Durham College about 1527,
and proceeded doctor in divinity in July, 1535. He died in 1543, and was
succeeded by

JOHN CRAWFORD, or CRAWFORTH, D. D. who was presented by king Henry VIII. the
7th of September, 1543 Tunstall's Reg, p. 16.
. Was vicar of Midford, in the county of Northumberland, the 12th of June,
1546, which he resigned before the 16th of July, 1561. Was spiritual chancellor
to bishop Tunstall, and probably held both his prebend and chancellorship till
his death: He gave St Augustine's works, edition 1529, to the library. By his
will, dated the 4th of January, 1561, he ordered his body to be buried in St
Michael's church, Witton, if he died there; otherwise, before Boulton's altar,
in Durham cathedral, nigh the clock.

ROBERT SWYFT, LL. D. was collated the 28th of March, the mandate to induct him
dated the 29th of March, and he was installed the 8th of April, 1562. He was
born at Rotheram, in Yorkshire; educated at St John's College, Cambridge;
studied the law, and took his degrees at Louvain. Having obtained a fellowship
in St John's, and being rector of Sedgefield, void by the decease of dean
Skynner, was ordained deacon and appointed prebendary by bishop Pilkington, the
5th of October, 1563, ad titulum ecclesiae suae de Sedgefield: Was spiritual
chancellor during bishop Pilkington's prelacy, and for a short time after
bishop Barnes came to the Sea; and was rector of Sedgefield above forty years:
He married Ann, daughter of Thomas Lever, master of Sherburn hospital; and
departing this life about the year 1599, was interred under the organ loft of
the cathedral church, on the north side of the choir door Skynner's Reg. p.
161. -- Monum. Durh. p. 154. -- Willis's Cath. vol. i. p. 262.

Epitaph.

Robertus Swyste, Rotheramiae oriundus, Cantabrigiae in collegio Johannis
^ocius, Lovanii impensis mercatorum Angliae ordinis adventuriensis antuerp^ae
comorantium, juris utriusq. bachalaurius, Jacobi Dunolm. e^^ in eclesis
cancellarius, qui postquam annos 40, et Segfeldense. Ovile curaverat, and una
cum Anna conjug^ vixerat -- caetera erasa.


.

JAMES RAND, A. M. an. 1599, was prebend of Litchfield, and half brother to
bishop Neile; collated to Norton vicarage, the 29th of October, 1578: Resigned
his prebend the 4th of October, 1620, and died at Norton, where he was interred
the 19th of November, 1621.

ROBERT NEWELL, D. D. was installed the 20th of October, 1620: Was half brother
to bishop Neile, and his chaplain: He was a Cambridge man, but incorporated
doctor in divinity at Oxford, 1600: Was made treasurer of Chichester the 25th
of November, 1610: Prebendary in the ninth stall of Westminster, 1613: Subdean
of Lincoln, the 14th of May, 1613, which he quitted the same year: Installed
archdeacon of Bucks, the 24th of April, 1614: Prebendary of Clifton, in Lincoln
church, the 26th of April, 1614: Rector of Islip, in the county of Oxford, and
of Crawley, in the county of Bucks; and had some preferments in Winchester
cathedral, where he is supposed to be buried; having departed this life in the
year 1643. He resigned his prebend in 1638 Ath. Oxon. vol. i. -- Heylin's Life
of Laud, p. 55. -- Willis's Cath. vol. i.
.

GABRIEL CLARK June 1, 1633. He was one of the eight prebendaries who supported
the canopy over the head of king Charles I. when he was at Durham, in his way
to Scotland. -- ^^et's Reg. 6^1. -- Wa'k. Suff. Clergy. -- Ath. Oxon. vol. i.
s. 191. Epitaph. I. II. S. Hic jacet D'nus. Gabriel Clarke, S. S. theologiae
professor, Archidiaconus Dunelm. Et hujus ecclesiae, Subdecanus, qui Mortuns
est Anno 1662. Maij decimo.


, D. D. was collated and installed the 1st of August, 1638, being removed from
the third stall in this church: He was of Christ-Church, Oxford, and chaplain
to bishop Neile: Was collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland, the 7th of
August, 1619, which he resigned two years after: Was collated to the
archdeaconry of Durham, the 11th of October, 1620, and to Elwick the 6th of
September that year: Was made master of Gretham hospital, the 24th of July,
1624: Was inthroned as proxy for bishop Cosins, but died before the bishop made
his first visit the 19th of July, 1662: The 20th of May, 1637, was appointed by
the chapter, with two others, (by letter of attorney) to prosecute their suits:
The 4th of September, 1661, was chosen proctor to the convocation. He was
prebendary here forty-two years in the whole, viz. in the sixth stall three
years, the third stall twelve years, and in this stall twenty-seven years; and
it is very remarkable, was installed the same day of the same month, into each
prebend. He died at Durham the 10th of May, 1662, and was buried in the
cathedral near the clock Ath. Oxon. vol. i. -- Walker's Suss. Clergy, p. 2, 19.
-- Kennet's Reg. 681. Heylin's Life of Laud, 5^.
, being that year subdean.

DENNIS GRANVILLE, D. D. installed the 24th of September, 1662; afterward dean
of Durham See more of him among the deans, p. 167.
.

THOMAS SMITH, D. D. was removed from the fourth prebend; collated the 21st of
April, and installed the 1st of July, 1668. He was born at Whitewall, in the
parish of Ashby, in Westmorland; was educated at Appleby school, and thence
sent to Queen's College, Oxford, where he obtained a fellowship, and was
employed as a tutor: Was nephew to Dr Barlow. August 2, 1660, he was created
bachelor of divinity; and the 14th of November in that year, installed a
prebendary of Carlisle: In November or December following, obtained the degree
of doctor in divinity by diploma: On the 23d of March, 16^0, was made
prebendary of Litchfield. During the rebellion he lived in retirement, in
Cumberland, and there married. After the restoration, was made chaplain in
ordinary to the king: On the 4th of March, 1671, was made dean of Carlisle; and
in 1684, was elected to that bishopric, and quitted his stall at Durham. He
died at Rose-castle, on the 12th of April, 1702, aet. 78 Kennet's Reg. 327. --
Ath. Oxon. 877. -- 2 Ath. Ox. 1^81.

D. S. Thomas Smith, S. T. P. Hujus ecclesiae primum canonicus Dein decanus,
tandemque episcopus Placide Domino requiescit Vixit annos, LXXVIII. Obiit
duodecimo die Aprilis, MDCCII.
, and lies buried in the cathedral at Carlisle, before the high altar.

WILLIAM GRAHAM, D. D. was installed the 16th of August, 1684 He was son of Sir
George Graham, of Netherby, and younger brother of Richard, lord viscount
Preston: Was educated at Christ-Church, Oxford, where he took the degree of
master of arts, the 11th of March, 1680, and was diplomated doctor in divinity,
the 14th of June, 1686: Was chaplain in ordinary to the princess Ann of
Denmark: Collated to the rectory of Whickham, and inducted therein the 10th of
August, 1685: Installed dean of Carlisle, the 23d of June, 1686, and of Wells
the 28th of July, 1704. He died the 5th of February, 1711, and was buried at
Kensington Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p. 229.
.

JOHN BOWS, D. D. was removed from the fifth stall, collated the 1st of May,
installed the second of that month, 1712: He was the fifth son of Thomas Bows,
of Streatlam-castle, Esquire and next brother to William Bows, many years member
in parliament for this county: Was rector of Elwick, 1701, but resigned for the
rectory of Bishop-Weremouth, to which he was inducted the 6th of September,
1715. He expended in rebuilding and ornamenting his prebendal house, about
1000l. toward which he had an allowance of wood from the chapter, to the value
of 250l. He died unmarried, the 14th of January, 1721.

THOMAS RUNDLE, LL. B. was presented the 23d of January, and installed the 14th
of February, 1721, but quitted it the same year for the twelfth stall: Was of
Exeter College, Oxford, where, on the 26th of June, 1710, he obtained a
bachelor's degree, and on the 27th of July, 1723, that of doctor of laws: Was
chaplain to bishop Talbot, archdeacon of Wilts, and treasurer of Sarum, in
1720: Was collated to the rectory of Sedgefield, 1722; and, in 1727, was made
master of Sherburn hospital, both which he resigned in 1735, on being
consecrated bishop of Derry, in Ireland. He departed this life in April 1743
Whiston's Life, 268, 271.
.

THOMAS MANGEY, first LL. D. afterward D. D. was removed from the fifth stall:
Collated the 22d of December, and installed the 16th of January, 1722: Was son
of Arthur Mangey, a goldsmith, at Leeds; fellow of St. John's College,
Cambridge, afterward chaplain to Dr Robinson, bishop of London: He was deputy
to Dr Lupton, as preacher at Lincoln's Inn, and chaplain at Whitehall: Was made
rector of Ealing, in Middlesex, which he resigned in 1754; had the living of
Guildford, and was rector of St Mildred, Bread-street, London, to the time of
his death. When Dr Robinson, at the request of bishop Crew, consecrated
Sunderland church, on the 4th of September, 1719, Dr Mangey preached the
sermon, for which he was rewarded with a prebend in the cathedral church: He
married one of the daughters of archbishop Sharp By whom he had one son, John
Mangey, M. A. of Cambridge; who was collated by bishop Secker, to D^mow, in
Essex.
. When treasurer of the chapter at Durham, he greatly advanced the fines upon
the tenants, and improved the rents of his prebendal lands near 100l. a year.
He died at Durham on the 6th of March, 1755, and was interred in the eastern
transept of the cathedral church H. S. E.
THOMAS MANGEY, S. T. P. hujus ecclesiae canonicus,
Qui in agro Eboracensi natus,
Et Cantabrigiae academicis disciplinis innutritus,
Inter doctiores aetatis suae juvenes adhuc emicuit.
Favore tandem and praesidio
JOHANNIS ROBINSON, episcopi Londinensis
(Cujus a sacris fuit domesticis)
Auctus ecclesiis parochialibus de Ealing, in Middlesexia,
Et St. Mildredae, in Bread-street, Land.
Tot ingenii praecellentis.
Tot simul eruditionis variae
Protulit specimina,
Ut virorum opibus et gratia pollentium
Amicitiam sibi facile conciliaverit.
Nec male, in publico versatus existimationi suae consuluit.
Nam in negotiis obcundis solers,
Propositique semper tenax.
Nihil parce timide aut cunctanter egit.
In concionibus pros^uens, argutus and elegans:
Veritatisq. Christianae fidissimus assertor
De limato ejus judicio, and linguarum peritia,
Necnon de ratione studiorum ejus; in quae indefinenter incubuit.
Consulantur quae scripsit ipse.
Quaeque edidit, transtulit, adornavitque aliena.
Filius ejus unicus Johannes,
Ne deesset patri etiam mortuo pietatis suae testimonium.
Hoc marmor et posuit,
Marmoriq. hoc elogium inscribi curavit.
Obiit sexto die Martij, A. D. 1755.
Aetatis suae 71 This epitaph was composed by Dr Sharp, then a prebendary and
archdeacon of Northumberland.
.

.

WILLIAM WARBURTON, D. D. was installed by proxy, the 11th of April, 1755. He
served some years as clerk to an attorney at Newark upon Trent, and afterward
was a schoolmaster Grey's Notes, MSS.
there, but never received a university education. He was a great flatterer of
Sir Robert Sutton, afterward of archbishop Potter's son, and Mr Allen, of
Prior Park, near Bath, whose niece he married, with a large portion Ibid. MSS.
. He was preacher of Lincoln's Inn, and was made dean of Bristol in October,
1757: On the 20th of January, 1760, was consecrated bishop of Gloucester at
Lambeth, and had leave granted to hold this prebend and Briante Broughton
rectory, in the county of Lincoln, in commendam: Was chaplain to king George
II. He wrote much, particularly A Treatise on the Divine Legation of Moses Mr
Peter's, author of an excellent Comment upon Job, examined and exposed his
Divine Legation, so far as related to Job's history.
. -- After using Mr Pope very grossly, in a letter to Dr Birch, by his power in
the arts of adulation, he insinuated himself at last so far into that poet's
good opinion, that all his manuscripts were left to his care. In 1768, he
transferred the sum of 500l. bank 4 per cent. annuities consolidated, to Lord
Mansfield, Judge Wilmot, and Mr Cha. York, upon trust for the purpose of
founding a lecture in the manner of a sermon, to prove the truth of revealed
religion in general, and of the Christian in particular, from the completion of
the Prophecies in the Old and New Testament, relative to the Christian church,
especially directed to arraign the apostasy of Rome. Bishop Warburton died at
Gloucester, the 7th of June, 1779, upwards of fourscore years of age, and lies
buried in the cathedral there See his literary charcter, Gent. Mag. July 1779,
-- and memoirs in same Mag. August, September, and October, 1780.

To the memory of WILLIAM WARBURTON, D. D. For more than xix years bishop of
this see. A prelate Of the most sublime genius, and exquisite Learning. Both
which talents He employed through a long life, In the support Of what he firmly
believed, The CHRISTIAN RELIGION. And Of what he esteemed the best
establishment Of it, The CHURCH of ENGLAND. He was born at Newark upon Trent,
Dec. 24. School. Died at his palace, in this city, June 7, 1779, And was buried
near this place. Beneath the entablature is the head of the bishop, in a
medallion.
.

CHARLES COOPER, D D. was installed the 30th of August, 1779: He was a
prebendary of York, and now holds the rectory of Kirby-over-blow, in Yorkshire.

PREBENDARIES OF THE SECOND STALL Lands, etc. assigned to the second stall.
Statutis. Dimidium manerij de Elvet Hall, vocat Hallgarth, etc. 8 6 ^ Capitulo
antiq. solvend. 0 6 8 Act. capituli Decimae assignat Decimae de Cold Hesleden
infra parochiam de Dalton, p' ann. 5 0 0 Decimae de Edon infra paroch. de
Hesledon 3 3 4 Decimae de Hardwick infra paroch de Hesledon 2 0 0 Decimae de
Redworth infra paroch. de Heighington 4 0 0 Lib. Receptoris. Solvit etiam
capitulo pro decimis de Swallop leeses 0 4 0


.
ROGER WATSON, D. D. a monk of this church, appointed May 12, 1541: He was
instituted to the rectory of Rothbury, in Northumberland, the 2d of September,
1550; and to the vicarage of Pittington, the 25th of October, 1560 Horn's Reg.
p. 124, 131.
. Was ferrarius at the dissolution of this house; and died in September, 1561.
By his will, dated the 7th of that month, he ordered his body to be buried in
the cathedral church, before the choir door, as nigh Mr Castle, (formerly
prior it is supposed) as might be convenient.

JOHN PILKINGTON, D. D. (frater et sacellanus episcopi) collated the 1st of
October, and installed the 8th, 1561. He was born in Lancashire; ordained a
priest by bishop Grindal, the 25th of January, 1559, being master of arts, and
fellow of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge Preb. of Mapesbury, in the church of St
Paul's, the 10th of February, 1559.

The Dean and Chapter of Durham were summoned to attend at Westminster, the
11th of June, 1562, when the thirty-nine articles were agreed on, and Dr John
Pilkington, and Adam Holyday, were by the Chapter appointed to be their
proctors. -- 8 D. and Chapter Register, p. 183, 186.


. On the 5th of December, 1563, was collated archdeacon of Durham. He died in
1603, and was buried in this church without any monument.

JOHN BROWN, A. M. 1603, resigned the 1st of August, 1620.

AUGUSTINE LINDSELL, D. D. was removed from the tenth stall, and installed here
5th of August, 1620. He was born at Burnsed, in the county of Essex; was a
fellow of Clare Hall, and made a prebendary of Lincoln, the 6th of November,
1612, and Melsworth, in the county of Hants, and was collated to
Houghton-le-Spring, by bishop Neile the 7th of June, 1623; made dean of
Litchfield in 1628, and elected bishop of Peterborough, the 22d of December,
1632, when he resigned his deanery: He was translated to Hereford, the 7th of
March, 1633, and died suddenly in his study Peck's Desid. lib. 8. p. 52.
, the 6th of November, 1634, and was buried there Ath. Oxon. vol. i. and ii. --
Dr Hicks' pref. to Biblioth. Scriptor. Eccles. Anglic. -- Archbishop Laud's
Troubles, 366. -- Heylin's Life of Laud, p. 215, etc.

Epitaph. D. O. M. S. AUGUSTINUS LINDSELL, Primo PETRIBURGENSIS mox
HEREFORDENSIS ecclesiae Gubernaculis admotus, tandem ex motu requiem Invenit.
Calculo extinctus est die sexto Novembris, MDCXXXIV. Vir omni literatura
excultissimus, pietate egregia et candore animi singulari, et per omnia saeculo
suo major de quo si Forte sileat ingrata posteritas, sat erit Compendio dixisse
Theologiae oraculum hic jacet. On the monument the effigies of Aug. Lindsell,
in his sacerdotal habit; and over him the representation of a city.


. He composed a register of the church of Durham, which is cited in Reyner's
Apostol. Benedict. Tract. I. p. 78.

JOHN WEEMES, A. M. was installed the 7th of June, 1634: Was a Scotchman, and
minister of Laythaker, in Scotland; promoted at the special recommendation of
king Charles I. and was a learned writer in divinity: He died in the year 1636
His works were printed in the year 1637, in 4 vols. 4to. -- According to
Rymer's Foedera, vol. xix. p. 609. he was presented the 4th of May, 1634.
.

JOSEPH NAYLOR, D. D. was collated the 10th of November, 1636: Was born at
Wakefield, in Yorkshire, fellow of Sidney College, Cambridge, and chaplain to
bishop Morton; was collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland, the 25th of
February, 1632, and to Sedgefield rectory, the 19th of January, 1634. He
applied to Mr Lever, for his assistance in procuring the payment of the dues of
the living of Sedgefield in Oliver's time, and afterward wrote Mr Lever a warm
letter of thanks for what he did therein Calam. Contin. of Ejected Members, 652.
. On the 3d of May, 1661, he was chosen a proctor for the chapter, at the
convocation of York: His prebendal house was in effect wholly ruined, which he
rebuilt and enlarged in 1662. He was the author of Additions to the History of
Bishop Morton's Life, wrote by his father-in-law, R. Baddely, the bishop's
secretary Walker's Suff. of Clergy, part ii. p. 20.

His daughter, Dulcibella, married Thomas Dalton of the 5th prebend, to her
first husband, and Dr Morton of the sixth, to her second husband.


. Dr Naylor died the 6th of January, 1667, and was buried in the chancel of his
church at Sedgefield Hic in Dno. requiescit JOSEPHUS NAYLOR, S. T. P. eccle
Christi, 1667. Aetatis 73.
Optimi and charissimi conjugis, conjux moestissima DULCIBELLA NAYLOR, hocce
posuit.


.

DENNIS GRANVILLE, A. M. removed from the first prebend, and installed the 16th
of April, 1668; afterward was made dean Held both Sedgefield and the
archdeaconry of Durham with his deanery, yet ran into very great debts. Grey's
Notes, MSS. -- See page 167.
.

Sir GEORGE WHELER, knight, and D. D. was collated the 1st, and installed the
9th of December, 1684, by his proxy: Was descended of the family of Whelers, in
Kent, and born at Breda, in Holland: Was of Lincoln College, Oxford, 1667,
where he entered as a commoner, and afterward as gentleman commoner, under the
tuition of Dr Hicks: He obtained the degree of master of arts, 1683, but
previous thereto had traveled over the greatest part of Greece: On his return,
presenting a journal of his travels to king Charles II. was knighted. He took
his doctor in divinity degree by diploma on the 18th of May, 1702: Held the
vicarage of Basingstoke, in Hampshire; was curate of Whitworth, in this county,
1703, rector of Winston, 1706, of Houghton-le-Spring, 1709, and had the
appointment of official to the dean and chapter of Durham: His temporal estate
amounted to 1400l. a year, or thereabouts. He died on the 15th of January,
1723, aet. 74, and was interred at the west end of the nave of Durham
cathedral, near the tomb of the Venerable Bede, where a handsome monument is
erected to his memory The Epitaph.
Hunc post parietem conditur
Quod mortale suit GEORGII WHELER
Equitis curati S. T. P.
Rectoris vigilantissimi ecclesiae de Houghton
Hujusce ecclesiae canonici meritissimi
E stirpe generosa inter cantianos oriundus
Bredae tamen inter Batavos natus
Parentibus ob regiam causam egregie exulantibus
Prima literarum tyrocinia
Inter Lincolinenses Oxonij posuit.
Dein doctissimo medico sponio comite
In Italiam, Gr^eciam, Asiamq. profectus
Antiqua rerum monumenta Christiana profana
Tantum non exhausit.
Reversus ex illustri Granvillorum stirpe natam
Filiam Tho. Higgons mil. ad Venetos legati,
Forma, virtute, pietate insignem
Duxit; e qua numerosam suscepit sobolem.
Post brevi a serenissimo principe Carolo iido.
Equestri titulo ornatus
Contranitentibus licet suis
Sacros ambivit ordines
Maluitq. in ecclesia servire
Quam in aula splendescere.
Per totum vitae cursum
Munificentiae in literatos
Humanitatis in hospites,
Charitatis in pauperes,
Singular dedit exemplum,
Pietatis diviniq. amoris rarissimum.
Ecclesiae christianae ritus, mores, and dogmata
Haud quisquam vel laboriosius indagavit,
Vel studiosius sectatus est
Vel melius calluit,
Fidei primaevae in scriptis assertor,
Disciplinae in vita aemulus
Obiit 18 call. Feb. anno Domini 1723-4,
Anno aetatis 74.
Hoc marmor extrui curavit
Filius unicus supersles Granville Wheler.
Sepult 23 Jan. 1723. E. Reg. Cath.
.

MARTIN BENSON, A. M. was collated the 25th of January, and installed the 5th
of February, 1723, by his proxy, Mr Stonhewer, of Washington. He was of
Christ-Church, Oxford, and attended Lord Pomfret in his travels, as tutor: Was
chaplain to king George II. 1727, a prebendary of Salisbury, archdeacon of
Berks, and rector of Blechley, in Bucks; was created doctor in divinity at
Cambridge, in 1730, when the king visited that university, and was consecrated
bishop of Gloucester, the 19th of January, 1734, being permitted to hold this
prebend in commendam. He died at Gloucester, on the 30th of August, 1752, and
was buried in the cathedral there.

JAQUES STERN, LL. D. was collated to this prebend by king George II. it having
fallen void during a vacancy of the Sea, by the death of bishop Butler, and was
installed by proxy, the 31st of May, 1755. He was collated to the prebend of
Absthorpe, in York cathedral, and resigned the same for Ulleskelf, 1731: Was
made precentor of York, the 24th of November, 1735; afterward canon
residentiary and prebendary of Driffield, and chaplain to archbishop Blackburn,
by whom he was collated to the archdeaconry of Cleveland, the 24th of November,
1735, which he resigned for that of the East Riding, April 1750. He was also
rector of Rise, and vicar of Hornsea cum Riston, both in the East Riding: On
being presented to this stall, he resigned the archdeaconry of the East Riding:
Died at his house in York, the 9th of June, 1759, and was buried at Rise He
made a will in deprivation of his relations, leaving his real and personal
estate to Mrs Benson his house keeper. Grey's Notes, MSS.
.

WILLIAM MARKHAM, LL. D. master of Westminster school, was installed the 20th
of July, 1759. Was of Christ-Church, Oxford, where he took a master of arts
degree, the 20th of March, 1745; on the 20th of November, 1752, a degree of
bachelor of civil law, and on the 24th of the same month, a doctor's degree was
obtained. In the month of January, 1764, he quitted the mastership of
Westminster school: In February, 1765, was made dean of Rochester: Was chaplain
to king George II. and king George III. and vicar of Boxley, in Kent. On the
12th of October, 1767, he was promoted to the deanery of Christ-Church, in
Oxford; consecrated bishop of Chester in January 1771, and in the succeeding
month, was appointed preceptor to the Prince of Wales: In 1777 he was
translated to the archbishopric of York.

THOMAS DAMPIER, D. D. was installed the 20th of April, 1771: He was canon of
Windsor. In 1773, he resigned this stall for the mastership of Sherburn
hospital, and succeeded to the deanery of Durham in 1774 See page 170.
.

HENRY EGERTON, D. D. brother to the present lord bishop of Durham, succeeded
to this stall in the year 1773. He was rector of Whitchurch, in the county of
Salop, archdeacon of Derby, residentiary of Litchfield, and prebend of Holme,
in York cathedral, which he resigned in May 1773. He now holds the rectory of
Bishop-Weremouth, in this county.

PREBENDARIES OF THE THIRD STALL Lands assigned to the third stall.
Stat. Manerium de Sacristan Hugh, cum Pasturis Peatis and Herbagio 6 15 10
Holcroft 2 0 0 Capitulo antiq. solvend. 15 10 Act. capit. Decimae assignat.
Decimae Garbarum de Aicliff p' ann. 9 0 0 Decimae Garb. de Brafferton, in
paroch. Aicliff 3 6 8 Decimae schole Aicliff, infra paroch. Heighington 2 0 0


.
THOMAS SPARK, B. D. appointed by the foundation charter, May 11, 1541. He was
of Durham College, Oxford, and took his bachelor of divinity's degree in 1528,
being at that time prior of the cell of Lindisfarne: In the year 1529, he left
the university cum pannis suis, to come to the monastery of Durham, and was
chamberlain there at the dissolution. He was consecrated suffragan bishop of
Berwick, June 1537, in which dignity he continued during the remainder of his
life; the royal mandate to archbishop Lee for his consecration, bears date the
12th of June, 1537, and the 20th of June following, bishop Tunstall empowered
him to exercise his chorepiscopal authority through the whole diocese of
Durham; and likewise granted him, by letters patent under his palatine seal, an
annuity of forty pounds out of his manor of Auckland, to be paid half yearly,
until he should be presented to an ecclesiastical benefice of the yearly value
of fifty pounds: He was collated to Gretham hospital September 6, 1541, and to
Wolsingham rectory the 14th of June, 1547; and departed this life in the year
1571. Though by his will, dated the 25th of January, 1563, he ordered his body
to be buried in Durham cathedral, before our Lady's or Houghwell's altar, yet
he was interred in the choir of Gretham chapel, near the sepulcher of William
Estfield, a former master there.

JOHN FOX, A. M. the martyrologist, was collated the 2d of September, and
installed the 14th of October, 1572. This person, averse to the habits of the
church of England, which were here kept up in great strictness, quitted his
stall within the year, probably on that account: He was born at Boston, in the
county of Lincoln: Was fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and took the degree
of master of arts in 1543. Holland says he never had any ecclesiastical
preferment; and Wood, that he was only prebend of Shipton His family enjoyed
the income of Shipton prebend until Sir Richard Willis married the heir of the
family, viz. the daughter of Robert Fox, M. D. Grey's Notes, MSS. -- He
resigned this prebend 1573.
, in Salisbury, and vicar of St Giles', Cripplegate. He wrote an epitaph on
bishop Pilkington, his benefactor: Died the 18th of April, 1587, aet. 70, and
was buried in the chancel of his vicarial church of St Giles Willis's Cath.
vol. i. -- Ath. Oxon vol. i. p. 230, 690. -- Fuller's Chapter Hist. lib. ix. p. 76.
-- Strype Eliz. p. 137. Strype Ann. vol. i. p. 201, 202, 248. -- Genesis Dict.
vol. v. p. 299. -- His character Strype vol. iii. p. 501, and family. -- An
account of his book of martyrs, Strype Ann. vol. i p. 207, 250, etc. Defense of
it, ib. 252.
.

ROBERT BELLAMY, M. D. was installed the 13th of October, 1573: Was of St
John's College, Oxford, and admitted doctor in physic the 23d of June, 1571;
was collated to Egglescliff, in this county, the 6th of February, 1577;
instituted to Whalton, in Northumberland, the 9th of August, 1579, which he
resigned: Was collated rector of Houghton, the 25th of January, 1584; and was
chaplain to bishop Barnes. He quitted his prebend and Houghton living for
Sherburn hospital, to which he was collated in November 158^, and died
possessed thereof in 1606.

ROBERT HUTTON, B. D. was installed the 13th of December, 1589: Was senior
fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge; and collated to Houghton le-Spring, the
4th of December, 1589, where he purchased an estate, and built a house, now
possessed by his descendants: He was younger brother to bishop Matthew Hutton,
and married a daughter of bishop Pilkington: Was prosecuted in the high
commission court in 1621, for reflecting, in a sermon preached at the
cathedral, on the king, the bishop, the church and its ceremonies. He died at
Houghton in 1623, and lies buried in the choir of the church there Grey's
Notes, MSS. He bore the same arms with bishop Hutton. -- Stryp. Ann. vol iv. p.
15. -- Fuller's Chapter Hist. cant. xvii. lib. 10. p. 38, 39. -- From this Robert
the family of Huttons of Houghton are descended. -- See his pedigree, vol. i.
p. 470, -- and Thoresby's Leeds, 173. -- Also Houghton-le-Spring in the sequel.
.

GABRIEL CLARK, A. M. installed the 1st of August, 1623, was removed to the
first stall See page 171
.

JOHN NEILE, A. M. afterward D. D. was collated the 1st of August, 1635: Was
nephew to the bishop. On the 27th of October, 1638, he was made archdeacon of
Cleveland; the 20th of September, 1660, prebendary of Strenshall, in York
cathedral; instituted vicar of Northallerton, the 2d of May, 1669, and
appointed dean of Ripon in May, 1674. He was rector of Beeford, in Holderness,
and exchanged for Sigston near Northallerton; in 1661, was prolocutor in the
convocation at York, when the common prayer book was revised. He died the 14th
of April, 1675, and was buried at Ripon Walker's Suff. Clerg. part ii. p. 83.
.

THOMAS MUSGRAVE, D. D. was installed the 12th of July, 1675. He was of Queen's
College, Oxford; and on the 5th of May, 1662, took the degree of master of
arts, and bachelor and doctor in divinity in October, 1685: Was collated to the
archdeaconry of Carlisle, the 25th of March, 1668, and to the third stall in
that church, 1669: On the 22d of August, 1675, was collated to the rectory of
Whitburn, in this county: In 1676, he resigned his prebend in Carlisle
cathedral, and the 13th of October, 1684, was admitted dean there. He departed
this life the 28th of March, 1686, and was buried in the cathedral church at
Durham, near the clock His only daughter married Mr Ralph Shepperdson, of
Pittington. He recovered dilapidations of his predecessor Dr Speed, at
Whitburn, and built the south point of the parsonage house there: Was the first
prebendary made by bishop Crewe. He was prebendary of Chichester, Nov. 10, 1681.

Grey's Notes, MSS. "Here lies interred THOMAS MUSGRAVE, D. D. Dean of
Carlisle, and late Prebendary of this cathedral. He was ye 5th son of Sr Philip
Musgrave, Of Hartley castle, in ye county of Westmorland, Bart. who dyed ye
28th of March, 1686, in ye 47th year of his age. He first married Mary, ye
daughter of Sir Thomas Harrison, of Allerthorpe, in the county Of York, Knight. by
whom he had issue Margaret: His second wise was Ann, the daughter of Sir Jo.
Cradock, of Richmond, in ye sd county, Knight." The 29th of May, 1669, he had a
dispensation to hold two livings.


.

JOHN CAVE, A M. was installed the 15th of May, 1686: He was son of John Cave,
vicar of Great Milton, in Oxfordshire, and educated at Tame school: In 1654 he
was of Magdalen College; on the 24th of September, 1660, was chosen a fellow of
Lincoln College; and on the 30th of April, 1661, had a degree of master of
arts: He was chaplain to bishop Crew, had the rectory of Gateshead, and
exchanged with Mr Richard Werge, for Nailston, in Leicestershire; also held the
rectory of Cole Orton, in that county, where he died in the month of October,
1690, aet. 52, and was interred there Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p. 854.
.

SAMUEL AIR, D. D. was installed the 10th of November, 1690. He was of Lincoln
College, Oxford, and on the 8th of July, 1687, took his degree of doctor in
divinity: In April 1686, he was collated to the rectory of Whitburn. Died in
1694, and lies buried in the cathedral church at Durham, near Dr Swyfte, on the
north side of the choir door, under the organ-loft 2 Ath. Oxon. Fast. 230.
.

JAMES FINNEY, D. D. was installed on the 27th of November, 1694: Was of St
John's College, Oxford; on the 5th of July, 1676, took a master of arts degree;
and on the 14th of April, School, was diplomated doctor in divinity. He held the
vicarage of Kirklington, belonging to the college, and was chaplain to lord
Burlington: In the year 1689, was made prebendary of Husthwaite, in the church
of York, and was rector of Long Newton, in this county, in 1690, and built the
parsonage house, which cost him 700l. afterward had the rectory of Ryton, also
in this county, and built an elegant house there, which cost him about 1200l.
On taking this stall he resigned the prebend of Husthwaite; died on the 10th of
March, 1726, and was buried in the eastern transept of this church Inscribed on
his tombstone "I. F. D. D. obiit. 10th Martij, 1726." -- There is a long
account of the Finney family in the Gentleman's Magazine for 1785 and 1786.
.

THOMAS SECKER, A. M. was collated the 3d of June, and installed, by proxy, the
16th, 1727. He was born in 1693, at Sibthorp, in Nottinghamshire; took the
degree of doctor in physic at Leyden, in March 1721, and in April following,
became a gentleman commoner of Exeter College, Oxford: Was ordained deacon,
being bachelor of arts in 1722, in which year he was chaplain to bishop Talbot:
On the 12th of February, in the same year, he was collated to
Houghton-le-Spring: On the 4th of February, 1723, he took his master of arts
degree; and on the 17th of June, 1727, was inducted to Ryton rectory; and in
July, 1733, took his doctor's degree in law at Oxford, having in the preceding
month of May been instituted to the rectory of St James's, Westminster, when he
resigned Ryton. On the 19th of January, 1734, he was consecrated bishop of
Bristol; and on the 13th of April, 1737, was translated to the Sea of Oxford:
He was installed prebend of Purpool, and then dean of St Paul's, the 11th of
December, 1750: Held this prebendary in commendam with his bishoprics, but
resigned it, and the rectory of St. James, on his receiving the deanery: In
April, 1758, he was confirmed archbishop of Canterbury; died on the 3d of
August, 1768, aet. 75 He was the last prebendary promoted by bishop Talbot. --
He obtained a dispensation for non-residence. Grey's Notes, MSS. -- Whiston's
Life, 438. He left 11,000l. to charitable uses.
; and was buried in the passage from the garden door of his palace to the north
door of his church at Lambeth, and forbad any monument or epitaph to be placed
for him any where.

THOMAS CHAPMAN, D. D. was presented by the king sede vacant, and installed
the 1st of January, 1750. Was the son of John Chapman, of Billingham, in this
county, where he was born See his epitaph under title Billingham.
: Was educated at Richmond school, in Yorkshire; entered of Christ College,
Cambridge, and became fellow thereof: In 1746 was master of Magdalen College,
and on the 4th of November, 1748, was appointed vice chancellor: He was
chaplain to king George II. In 1749, was rector of Kirby-over-blowers, in
Yorkshire: In 1758, was appointed official to the dean and chapter of Durham;
and on the 9th of June, 1760, departed this life at Cambridge, aet. 43, and was
buried in the college chapel there In 1750, he published an Essay on the Roman
Senate, and also wrote two pamphlets on the university squabbles.
.

THOMAS BURTON, D. D. was installed the 18th of August, 1760, and was removed
to the twelfth prebend: Was the son of Dr Thomas Burton, of Christ-Church,
where he was student, and obtained a master of arts degree on the 28th of June,
1731: Was vicar of St Mary's, Oxford, and resigned for the rectory of Batsford,
in Gloucestershire: Was prebendary of Gloucester, and archdeacon of St David's.
He died the 17th of July, 1767, at Batsford.

GIDEON MURRAY, D. D. was installed the 20th of August, 1761: Was the second
son of lord Elibank, in Scotland; was of Baliol College, Oxford, where, on the
6th of June, 1735, he obtained a master of arts degree: Was prebendary of
Lincoln, and vicar of Gainsborough, in Lincolnshire, which he resigned, and
afterward had the rectory of Carlton, in Nottinghamshire. He died at London in
the month of June, 1778.

RICHARD FAWCETT, D. D. was installed the 13th of July, 1778: He was the son of
an eminent counselor, recorder of the city of Durham, and had his education at
the grammar school there: He was fellow of Corpus-Christi College, Oxford; had
the rectory of Gateshead, and master of K. James's hospital there; chaplain in
ordinary to king George II. and III. and vicar of St Nicholas', in Newcastle
upon Tyne. He died at Durham, the 29th of April, 1782, and was interred in the
cathedral, near to dean Cowper.

HENRY CHAYTOR, LL. D. second son of Henry Chaytor, of Croft, in the county of
York, Esquire. Had his education at Appleby school, in Westmoreland, and afterward
entered of Magdalen College, Cambridge, and became fellow of that society. In
1759, was presented by his father to the vicarage of Kirkby-Stephen, in
Westmoreland: In 1767, took his doctor's degree: In 1773, presented to the
vicarage of Catterick; and in 1778, to the rectory of Croft, by the king. He
resigned Kirkby-Stephen, and had his stall conferred on him by the present
bishop of Durham, the 24th of July, 1782, and was installed the same day.

PREBENDARIES OF THE FOURTH STALL Lands, etc. assigned to the fourth stall.
Statutis. Domus Manerij et firma de Witton Gilbert, Newhouses, and Underside.
Witton Gilbert estimat. per ann. 5 0 0 Newhouse 2 13 4 Underside 0 16 8
Capitulo antiq. solvend. 0 10 0 Ad. capituli Decimae assignat. Decimae Garbarum
de South Pittington 2 0 0 Decimae Garbarum de Shandforth infra paroch. predict.
7 6 1 Decimae de South Sherburn, ib'm 3 10 0 Decimae de Haghouse, infra paroch.
S. Oswaldi 1 6 8


.
WILLIAM BENNET, D. D. a monk of Durham on the foundation, the 12th of May,
1541. He was collated to Kellow vicarage the 4th of March, 1547, but resigned
the same, together with his prebend, in the same year, and retired to Aycliff
vicarage, where he died, and was buried the 20th of February, 1583 His great
grandson was living at Aycliff in 1717, and was a tenant of this prebend. He
was vicar of Aycliff to his death, (see Wilson's Reg. p. 19) and was succeeded
by Robert Throgmorton, 1584. Dean Matthew's Reg. -- Grey's Notes, MSS.

One of the same name and time mentioned Ath. Oxon. vol. i. Fast. 57, 42. --
Mon. 153. New. Rep. vol. i. p. 146.


.

HENRY NAUNTON, A. M. rector of Egglescliff, in this county, was installed on
the 3d of November, 1579. He was instituted to Gainford church, also in this
county, the 27th of October, 1575, and was collated to Bedlington, in
Northumberland, on the 14th of April, 1581. The time of his death is uncertain,
he was buried in Durham cathedral, near to chancellor Swyfte.

EMANUEL BARNES, D. D. was removed from the fifth prebend to this stall, in the
year 1607. He was a near relation to bishop Barnes, and was collated to the
rectory of Houghton-le-Spring, on the 5th of March, 1583. In 1587, was rector
of Wolsingham Matthew's Reg. p. 172. -- Ath. Oxon. vol. i. -- He took his
doctor in divinity degree at Basil, in Germany. Grey's Notes, MSS.
: He had the prebend of Fenton, in York cathedral, and the rectory of Craike;
and died in the year 1614.

PETER SMART, A. M. was removed from the 6th prebend to this stall, the 10th of
July. 1614. He was born in Warwickshire, a minister's son: Was educated at
Westminster school, a batteler at Broadgate Hall, aet. 19, in the year 1588, in
which year he was elected a student in Christ-Church, Oxford, and on the 9th of
July, 1595, took the degree of master of arts: He was master of Durham school
in 1598, was ordained deacon and priest the 30th of November, 1609, and was
chaplain to bishop James, by whom he was collated the 30th December, 1609, to
the sixth prebend in this church: In the year 1614, he had the rectory of
Bolden, and was appointed master of Gateshead hospital, the 2d of March, 1612.
Bishop James was instrumental in promoting him to be one of the high
commissioners for the province of York. On the 7th of July, 1628, he preached
in the cathedral that seditious sermon, whereof we have given an extract in the
life of bishop Cousin, (vol. i. p. 534) and for which he was degraded and
dispossessed of all his ecclesiastical preferments, and fined five hundred
pounds, for the non-payment of which he suffered eleven years imprisonment in
the King's Bench, and at length was set at liberty by the House of Commons in
1640. He was in London the 31st of October, 1648, as appears by the date of one
of his letters. On Dr Carr's death, who succeeded to this stall on his
deprivation, he was restored to his prebend by the Lords, and lived to the year
1652, or near it, having passed his 82d year. At the like instance of the
Lords, he was presented by the dean and chapter to Aycliff, the 20th of
November, 1641, but refused; petitioning, it might be given to one Carwardine,
who enjoyed it a considerable time Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p. 51 -- Diurnal
occurrences of Parl. 1640, 1641, p. 21, 41. 48, 219. -- Rushworth's Col. 3.
part. vol. i. p. 41. Pryn's Canterb. Doom, p. 93, 353, 360, 481, 493, 530.
Kennet's Hist. Eng. vol. iii. -- Fuller's Chapter Hist. l. 11, p. 173. -- Heylin's
Examen. Hist. p. 284. -- Collyer's Eccl. Hist. vol. ii. p. 798, 799. --
Thoreshy's Ac. of Leeds, p. 539. -- Nalson's Collect. vol. i. p. 518, 733, 734,
789. vol. ii. 406. Peck's Desid. Curiosa l. 9, "the chapter registers were sent
for by the parliament and lost." -- Heylin's Exam. Hist. 283, "A very
particular account of him." -- Biographia Brit. vol. iii. p. 1475.

He was a witness against archbishop Land.

His famous libel is in few hands. London, printed by Jo. Hall, 1643.

The inscription begins, Do, dico, consecro, hoc libellum poematum in 5 parts
divisum, de superstitiosis ceremoniis, and idolatrio cultu ecclesiae Romanae
ejusque filiarum, maxim Dunelmensis, mihi notissimae, doctissimis veris
concionatoribus Londinensis, etc. dated the 16th of February, 1643, aet. 76.

Prima pars.
"Enarrabo quibus Christo servitur in alto
"Fano Antichristi formis and ritibus: unum
"Quod nuper nostris, imitari cepit in annis.
"Templum Dunelmense, reformatore Cosino, etc.
"Nulla catachesis cathedrali auditur in Aede;
"Concio negligitur, legitur sacra pagina parce:
"Mystica vilescunt, ea sacramenta, dicatas
"Vestibus auratis, quae non celebrantur ad aras.
"Cum candelabris ibi polubra bina duobus.
"Atq. crucifixi stat servatoris imago.
"Nec panis solito benedictus frangitur usu,
"Christus ut instituit, christiq. ecclesia sanxit:
"Sed consecrato cultello in frusta secatur,
"Frusta minutatim morsus divisa per aequos.
"Ritus in auditus patribus puperq. repertus
"Audacis selice superstitione Cosini.
This short extract shows the poet's vein. The whole poem contains 1490 verses.

In the library of Geo. Spearman, Esquire of Eachwick.


.

THOMAS CARR, D. D. was installed the 30th of March, 1631. He was born in
Yorkshire, and educated partly at Peterhouse, and translated to Jesus' College,
Cambridge: Was instituted the 7th of April, 1632, to the vicarage of Aycliff:
Was chaplain to Thomas earl of Strafford, and attended him on the scaffold when
beheaded; by his interest the doctor was preferred to the rectory of Hugge^, in
the county of York. He was sequestered, and went beyond seas in the time of the
rebellion, and died at Leghorn after the Restoration, in his way to England,
where he was honorably interred by the duke of Tuscany. Brown Willis says, I
met with the will of Dr Thomas Carr, dated the 13th of July, and proved the
13th of November, 1641, in which he gives his wife his effects at Aycliff, with
orders to be buried in the Black Friars, London Walker's Suff. Clergy, vol. ii.
p. 20, 218. -- Brown Willis, p. 266.
.

JOHN BARWICK, B. D. about 1642, was removed from the eighth prebend, but never
installed: Was made dean of Durham See page 161. Hilkiah Bedford wrote his
life, 1721.
.

THOMAS SMITH, D. D. prebendary of Litchfield, was installed the 20th of July,
1661; and in 1668 was removed to the first stall See page 172.
. Was presented also by king Charles II. in majorem corroborationem tituli.

JOHN DURELL, D. D. was collated the 21st of April, and installed by proxy, the
1st of July, 1668. He was born in Jersey, was of Merton College, Oxford,
retired to France, and took a master of arts degree at Caen, in Normandy: Was
ordained at Paris, by the bishop of Galloway, at the chapel of the English
resident: In the year 1661, he was one of the French preachers in the Savoy
chapel: In 1663, was made prebendary of Northaulton, in the church of Sarum,
and chaplain to the king; in the next year, was made prebendary of Windsor, and
on the 26th of July, 1677, was appointed dean there, and had the rectory of
Witney, in the county of Oxford. He died on the 8th of July, 1683, aet. 58, and
was buried at Windsor. His wife translated the Whole Duty of Man into French.
His son was a brigadier general and governor of Dunkirk Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p.
731. Collier's Supplement.
.

JOHN MONTAGUE, D. D. was installed the 10th of November, 1683: Was master of
Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1683, which he resigned, and was made master of
Sherburn hospital; in 1692, was removed to the eleventh prebend; and
afterward, in 1699, made dean of Durham See page 169. Anno 1686. He was
appointed lord Crew's commissary for visiting this chapter, and determining an
appeal made to him by two of the body; accordingly he sat as such in the
chapter house, the 2^th of July, and also the 19th of November following, when
he determined the difference by the bishop's directions.
.

THEOPHILUS PICKERING, D. D. was installed by proxy, the 3d of June, 1692. He
was the 7th son of Sir Gilbert Pickering, of Tichmarsh, in the county of
Northampton, baronet, and born the 10th of May, 1663: Was fellow of Sidney
College, Cambridge, 1687; chaplain to lord Crew, the 13th of November, 1690;
rector of Gateshead, the 5th of December, 1695, and of Sedgefield, the 31st of
August, 1705, where he died the 20th of March, 1710, and was interred in the
chancel of that church He was the seventh son of Sir Gilbert, who was a baronet
of Nova Scotia; his mother was Elizabeth Montague, sister to the first earl of
Sandwich. -- Sir Gilbert is named one of the judges of king Charles I. (Rush
Col. vol. ii. p. 1380,) though I do not find he acted. -- Stat. 12. ^ar. 2. c.
11. If Sir Gilbert Pickering accept of or exercise any place or employment in
England, after the 1st of September, 166^, he is to be excepted out of the act
of indemnity. He kept a dissenting minister. -- The doctor left 300l. for the
endowment of a charity school at Gateshead. In 1708, he gave the organ to
Sedgefield church, which, with the clock and gallery, cost him 500l. -- He
altered and improved his prebendal and parsonage houses and gardens: He
expended the whole income of his preferments and private fortune, which was
1700l. a year, in acts of hospitality, generosity, and charity. His only sister
Elizabeth, married John Creed, of Oundle, Esquire and was mother to major Creed,
who was slain at the battle of Blenheim. Antiq. St Peter's, Westminster. 253.

For his epitaph, see Sedgefield in the sequel.


. He quitted this prebend for the eleventh stall.

PHILIP FALL, A. M. was installed the 1st of February, 1699: Was born in the
island of Jersey, of which he wrote the history, in 1694, much quoted by bishop
Gibson, and greatly enlarged and reprinted in 1734. He was a commoner of Exeter
College, in Michaelmas term, 1669, aged 14; and took a master of arts degree at
Albion-hall, the 8th of July, 1676: Was minister of St Savior's, in Jersey,
and rector of Shenley, in Hertfordshire, at which latter place he built an
elegant house, which cost him 1000l. At the Revolution, he was sent by the
states of the island of Jersey to king William and queen Mary, and by them was
recommended to a prebend in Durham. The golden prebend was then vacant; but the
bishop removed Dr Pickering to it, and gave Dr Fall this stall, of which he
afterward complained. The repairing of the prebendal house cost him 200l. He
died at Shenley, in the year 1742, aet. 87, and left his excellent library,
(except a collection of sacred music, which he gave to the library at Durham)
to the island of Jersey Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p. 962.
.

JAMES GISBURN, A. M. was collated the 22d of May, 1742, and installed the 21st
of July following. He was born at Loughborough, in Leicestershire; was of
Jesus' College, Cambridge, and afterward obtained a fellowship in Queen's
College. He had the rectory of Stavely, in Derbyshire, by the gift of lord
James Cavendish; and departed this life on the 7th of September, 1759, aet. 72.

JAMES DOUGLAS, D. D. was installed the 11th of October, 1659, being removed
from the fifth stall. He was by birth a Scotchman, of the Tiviotdale family;
was educated at Eton, and an exhibitioner of Baliol College, Oxford: Had a
small living near Bridgewater; afterward was vicar of Kellow, 1735, and rector
of Long Newton, 1742, which he resigned for this prebend, and the rectory of
Great Stainton, in this county; was also curate of Witton Gilbert. He departed
this life on the 29th of July, 1780, and was interred in the eastern transept
of Durham cathedral.

FRANCIS EGERTON, A. M. second son of the present bishop of Durham, was
installed the 13th of November, 1780. He was made rector of Whitchurch in
February, 1781.

PREBENDARIES OF THE FIFTH STALL Lands, etc. assigned to the fifth stall.
Stat. Tertia pars Domus Manerii and Parci de Muggleswick 8 7 9 Capitulo antiq.
solvend. 0 7 9 Act. capit. Decimae assignat. Decimae Garbarum Poeni and Canab.
de Shinkliff 10 0 0 Omnes Decimae de Old Durham, infra ^andem parochiam 4 3 4

N. B. Grey's Notes, MSS. Dr Ellison, who had this stall, says he only paid to
the chapter 22l. 11s. 1d.

Particulars in receiver's book.
Lib. Recept. solvantur hodie capitulo pro decimis Garbarum de Shinkliff 9 6 0
10 0 0 Pro decimis Foeni 0 9 0 10 0 0 Pro decimis Canab. 0 5 0 10 0 0 Pro
decimis Foeni and Garbarum de Old Durham 3 13 4 4 3 4 Pro decimis Lanae et
Agnorum and aliis minutis D. 0 10 0 4 3 4


.
WILLIAM TODD, D. D. by the foundation the 12th of May, 1541. He was admitted
doctor at Oxford, the 13th of April, 1537; was vicar of Northallerton, in the
county of York, 1553, and resigned the same the 5th of September, 1561: Was
also archdeacon of Bedford: He was deprived of this prebend in the year 1567,
for which no reason appears in the authorities before us Brown Willis, 267. --
Skynners Reg. 140. -- Strype Eliz p. 290, 318. Mon. 152. -- Ath. Oxon. vol. i.
p. 60.

Quere. If not deprived for nonconformity, it being so many years after the
queen's accession.


.

RALPH LEVER, A. M. was collated the 14th of October, and installed the 17th,
1567. He was admitted scholar in King's College, Cambridge, from Eton school,
1558, and took the degree of doctor in divinity, in St John's College, 1577:
Was tutor to Walter earl of Essex, in 1564; was collated to Washington in 1565,
and to the archdeaconry of Northumberland, the 21st of August, 1566, which he
resigned in 1573: He was collated to the rectory of Stanhope, the 17th of
November, 1575, and to Sherburn hospital, the 16th of July, 1577: Was chaplain
to bishop Pilkington, and one of the commissaries for the dean and chapter in
the consistory, upon the vacancy of the Sea, by the death of that prelate. He
was a troublesome nonconformist, and very disobedient to his patron in trifles
and srivolous matters. He died in 1585 Reg. Whittingham, p. 238.

He moved in convocation, 1562, to have the canon law regulated. Strype 3 Eliz
c. 31. p. 318. His assertions about the canon law at large. Strype, Ann. vol.
i. p. 357. -- Willis's Cath. 267.


.

EMANUEL BARNES, D. D. was installed the 29th of July, 1585. He was presented
to this prebend by Robert Tailbois, gentleman, patron inter alios pro hac vice
tantum, the 26th of July, 1585, and was admitted by the bishop on the 27th: Was
removed to the fourth stall See page 183.
.

JOHN CALFHILL, A. M. was presented on the resignation of Barnes. He was
chaplain to bishop Matthew, and was inducted to Redmarshall, in this county, in
July, 1599, where he died, and was buried in 1619. By the register of dean
James, it appears that Henry Naunton was vicar of Bedlington, and that Thomas
Colmore was presented to that vicarage by the dean and chapter, the 23d of
August, 1603; therefore it is probable, that Barnes succeeded Naunton in the
4th stall that year, and consequently Calfhill succeeded Barnes in this stall
the same year Doctor Sharp says, that it was certain Calshill was prebendary
at the election of bishop James, 1606. --

Grey's Notes, MSS.


JOHN CRADOCK, A. M. was collated tho 7th of August, and installed the 18th,
1619. He was collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland in the year 1619,
and resigned it the 6th of August the same year, being appointed the bishop's
spiritual chancellor, and vicar general that day. Was presented to
Northallerton, the 23d of February, 1624, and had the rectory of Gainford, in
this county, and vicarage of Woodhorn, in Northumberland, at which latter place
he died in 1627, and was buried in the church there. There was a complaint
against him in parliament for extortion Journal of the House of Commons, vol.
i. f. 709. b. 9.
. He died by poison, for which his wife was accused and tried, but was
acquitted He was the father of Sir Jo. Cradock, commissary of Richmond.
.

ELEAZAR DUNCAN, B. D. was installed the 8th of January, 1627. He was of
Pembroke Hall, Cambridge; had a fellowship, and, in 1633, obtained a degree of
doctor in divinity. He was ordained deacon by bishop Laud, the 13th of March,
1624 Laud's Diary. p. 15.
; and received priest's orders from bishop Neile, the 24th of September, 1626,
whose chaplain he was. On the 13th of November, 1629, was installed a
prebendary of Winchester; on the 1st of May, 1640, prebendary of Knaresborough,
in York cathedral; and on the 10th of April, 1633, was collated to the rectory
of Haughton, near Darlington, in this county. He was chaplain to king Charles
I. and died in exile, 1649 or 1650 He writ de adoratione Dei versus altar,
which was his determ. for doctor's degree, the 15th of March, 16^3. It was
printed 1661, with Dr Richard Watson's preface.

He died in exile, according to some in 1642.

Walker's Suff. Clergy, vol. ii. p. 20. 84. -- Kennet's Reg. 489, his character


.

THOMAS DALTON, D. D. was promoted by king Charles II. and installed the 2d of
November, 1660: Was rector of Berwick, in Elmet, in the county of York, and of
Dallam, in the diocese of Ely. He resigned this prebend.

THOMAS CARTWRIGHT, D. D. on Dalton's resignation, was collated the 6th of
November, 1672, by king Charles II. the Sea being vacant, and was installed the
15th of the same month. He was the son of Thomas Cartwright, of Broxwood, in
Essex, and was born at Northampton, the 1st of September, 1634: Was first of
Magdalen College, then of Queen's College, Oxford; had the vicarage of
Walthamstow, in Essex; was preacher of Mary Magdalen, in Milk-street, London;
vicar of Barking, in Essex; minister of St Thomas the Apostle, London; a
prebendary of Westminster, and of Twiford, in St Paul's; also prebendary of
Shalford, in Wells; chaplain in ordinary to the king, and dean of Ripon. He was
ecclesiastical commissioner, and one of the delegates to enquire into the
affairs of Magdalen College. To conclude all his ecclesiastical promotions, in
the year 1686, he was consecrated bishop of Chester. At the Revolution he fled
into France, and came with king James into Ireland, where he departed this life
on the 15th of April, 1689, at the city of Dublin, aet. 55 Ath. Oxon. vol. ii.
p. 829. -- Newcourt's Rep. vol. i. p. 218. -- Contin. Supplem. to Collier's
Dictionary.

He made an agreement for the tithe of Old Durham for his life, at a rent which
continued till 1713. -- He preached at St Paul's the 5th of September, 1658, on
Genesis iii. 9. -- He preached at Ripon, the 6th of February, 1685. upon king
James Hd's inauguration, on 1 Kings, viii. 66, which Dr Battely (afterward
archdeacon of Canterbury) refused to license, and Sir J. Jennings went on
purpose to return Dr Battely thanks for such refusal. Grey's Notes, MSS.


, and was interred in Christ-Church.

CONSTANS JESSOP, D. D. was installed the 15th of November, 1686, descended
from Constantine Jessop, a remarkable presbyterian preacher: On the 27th of
June, 1666, he obtained a degree of master of arts in Magdalen College, Oxford,
and on the 4th of June, 1685, that of bachelor and doctor in divinity. He had
the rectory of Brington, in the county of Northampton, where he died, and was
interred, on the 10th of March, 1695, aet. 55 Laetam hic praestolatur
resurrectionem
CONSTANS JESSOP, S. T. P.
Ecclesiae Dunelmensis prebendarius,
Et hujus ecclesiae rector;
Caetera sama dabit,
Sed nec monumento perenniori carebit
Vir desideratissimus;
Quoad usque successores gratos
Aedes rectoris sustentare non piguerit,
Quas elegantissimas, modestas tamen,
(Animi sui quam simillimas!)
Propriis sumptibus condidit,
Et ecclesiae dicavit:
Decubuit 10o. Martij
An. Dom. 1695, aetat. suae 55.
Willis Cath.
.

JOHN BOWS, D. D. was installed the 21st of April, 1696, and was removed to
the first stall See page 173.
.

NATHANIEL ELLISON, D. D. was collated the 30th of September, and installed the
1st of October, 1712: Was of Edmund's-hall, Oxford, and from thence chosen
fellow of Corpus-Christi College; on the 22d of February, 1678, he obtained the
degree of master of arts; and on the 7th of May, 1702, that of bachelor and
doctor in divinity: Was made archdeacon of Stafford, the 14th of July, 1682 Of
Litchfield, and prebend of Litchfield. Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. s. 209.
, collated to the vicarage of Newcastle, 1694, and rector of Whitburn, 1704. He
died at Newcastle, in May 1721, aet. 63, and was interred in St Nicholas'
church there He raised the tithes of Old Durham from 13l. 6d. 8d. to 20l. clear
of all taxes, anno 1714, and let a lease of them during his own life.

He collected a valuable library, which he left to his eldest son, except a few
books, which he gave to the libraries of the dean and chapter of Durham, and St
Nicholas', Newcastle. Grey's Notes, MSS.


.

THOMAS MANGEY, LL. D. was installed the 20th of May, 1721, and removed to the
first stall See page 173.
.

JONATHAN HALL, A. M. afterward D. D. was installed the 21st of January, 1722.
He was the son of John Hall, a draper and alderman of Durham: Was a fellow of
St John's College, Cambridge, where, from his mean principles, he became
disagreeable to the society, and, in order to get rid of his company, they
presented him to the rectory of Cockfield, in the county of Suffolk: He was
chaplain to the lord Cadogan, when ambassador to the States General, and
chaplain to the garrison at Berwick. He died, after a long illness, on the 12th
of June, 1743, and was privately interred in the eastern transept of this
cathedral, without any monument, though it is said he left his nephew 20,000l.

ROBERT STILLINGFLEET, A. M. afterward D. D. was installed the 20th of July,
1743, was the son of Dr Stillingfleet, dean of Worcester, and grandson of the
great bishop Stillingfleet: Was of Wadham College, Oxford, where he took a
master of arts degree, the 1st of July, 1729, and bachelor and doctor in
divinity the 6th of May, 1748: He was chaplain to bishop Talbot, and afterward
to bishop Chandler: He was collated, in 1731, to the rectory of Gateshead, to
Ryton in 1732, and was made master of Sherburn hospital in 1738, and held the
same, with this prebend, to the time of his death, which happened at Bristol,
on the 3d of August, 1759 He held Bishop-Weremouth after the death of Mr
Lawrence, till Mr Wadham Chandler was of age to take it. Grey's Notes, MSS.
.

JAMES DOUGLAS was installed the 17th of August, 1759, and was removed to the
fourth stall See page 186.
.

SAMUEL TERRICK, A. M. installed the 8th of December, 1759. He was son of
Samuel Terrick, prebendary of York, the elder brother of bishop Terrick, and
was of Clare Hall, Cambridge. He died suddenly at Stilton, on the 8th of
August, 1761, aet. 55, and was buried at Peterborough.

JOHN MOORE, A. M. afterward D. D. was installed by proxy, the 26th of
September, 1761. He was fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford, where, on the 28th
of June, 1751, he took a master of arts degree; in 1763, was made canon of
Christ-Church, where he took the degrees of bachelor and doctor in divinity,
the 1st of July, 1763: Was chaplain to his majesty king Geo. III.; in 1771, he
was appointed dean of Canterbury; and consecrated bishop of Bangor, in 1775. In
1783, he was advanced to the Metropolitan See of Canterbury, which he now
enjoys.

THOMAS FOTHERGILL, D. D. provost of Queen's College, Oxford, was installed the
27th of May, 1775, on Dr Moore's resignation.

PREBENDARIES OF THE SIXTH STALL Lands assigned to the sixth stall.
Statutis. Tertia pars Domus manerij and Parci de Mugleswic 8 7 9 Capitulo
antiq. solvend 7 9 Act. capit. Decimae Garbarum villae de Hesledon una cum
decimis manerij ib. 8 13 4 Decimae de Sherraton ibidem 4 0 0 Decimae de Dalton,
infra parochiam de Dalton 2 0 0


.
STEPHEN MARLEYE, B. D. a monk of Durham, appointed on the foundation, the 12th
of May, 1541. He was sub-prior, and master of the frater-house, at the
dissolution. The place allotted for his lodging was the refectory of the
almerey children, north of the abbey gates, which he altered into a
dwelling house. He was deprived in the year 1572, but no reason appears.

PETER SHAWE, A. M. was installed the 12th of August, 1572, -- when he died is
uncertain In the register of installment of Hugh Broughton, 1578, in the 10th
stall, those of the chapter then present were dean Whittington, R. Swift, L.
Pilkington, Francis Bunny, Peter Shaw, G. Cliff, and R. Fawcit. He is not
mentioned in the register books after 1607, at which time he is named among the
prebendaries who answered to bishop Matthew's citation in the chapter house.


.

WILLIAM SELBY, A. M. was collated on the 12th of July, 1608. In 1607, he was
presented by the chapter to the vicarage of Berwick upon Tweed, and on the 1st
of March, 1608, to the vicarage of Kirk Merrington, -- when he died is
uncertain.

PETER SMART, A. M. was collated the 30th of December, 1609. He was removed to
the fourth stall See page 183.
.

ROBERT COOK, A. M. and afterward D. D. was collated the 20th of July, 1614.
He was the son of William Cook, of Beeston, in the parish of Leeds, and was
baptized there the 23d of July, 1550: Was a student of Brazen-Nose College, and
elected probat fellow in 1572: In 1576, he obtained the degree of master of
arts; was made proctor of the university in 1582, and took a bachelor in
divinity's degree in 1584. In June 1590, he resigned his fellowship, and was
instituted to the vicarage of Leeds in December following: Was much esteemed as
a learned man, and pious preacher: In January, 1614, he died at Leeds, and was
interred at St Peter's church there He was author of Censura Patrum, and a good
antiquary. Grey's Notes, MSS. -- Ath. Oxon. vol. i. p. 396. -- Thoresby's
Leeds, 210. -- Dr James in his Treat. of Corruption of Fathers, p. 397, gives
him an excellent character.


.

FERDINANDO MOORCROFT, A. M. was collated the 6th of January, 1614: Was master
of Gretham hospital, in this county, which he resigned on his removal to the
eleventh stall, the 13th of July, 1619: On the 6th of November, 1608, he was
collated to Stanhope, and, in 1625, to Heighington; died about the year 1641,
and was buried at Goswick, in the county of Lancaster The first time he is
mentioned in the register is 1609, as attesting an instrument of bishop James.
June 1617, mentioned as one of the three commissioners for inthronization, etc.
appointed by bishop Neile, and in 1618, at a visitation of Neile's.
.

DANIEL BIRKHEAD, D. D. collated the 14th of July, 1619; was removed the 3d of
August, 1620, to the 10th stall. He had the rectory of Winston; in 1610, was
collated to Egglescliff; died in 1624, and was interred in the cathedral at
Durham, on the 27th of November Monumenta quisquis and semesa marmora.
Viator oculis curiosis aspicis
Et literarum validae notas
Hic siste gradus and minore taedio
Perdisce quod respicere te interest tua
Et vile marmor claudit exemplum
Birkheadus hic sepultus est
Isto scpulero dives urna conditur
Caeli minister fidus, interpres Dei
Scientiarum viva dum vixit domus
Honestitudo sed prioris saeculi
Sublime acumen sed modeste sentiens
Infastuosum judicium, sed perspicax
Docti lepores innocens prudentia,
Et tot per annos vitae inoffensus tenor,
Haec intus sunt omnia
Hoc te viator scire refert si quidem
Magister vitae mortuorum memoria est.
N. B. He occurs in this stall at the primary visitation of bishop Neile, the
21st of June, 1618, which is a year sooner than the date in the text.


.

GABRIEL CLARKE, A. M. was installed the 5th of August, 1620, and removed to
the third stall the 30th of July, 1623 See page 171 and 180.
.

JOHN ROBSON, A. M. was installed the 1st of August, 1620. He was rector of
Morpeth in 1611; was instituted to the rectory of Whalton, in Northumberland,
the 1st of June, 1615; was returned a member in parliament for Morpeth, in the
third parliament of king James I. but not allowed to sit, as being in holy
orders: He was one of the chapter proxies to the convocation held at York in
May, 1625: He was buried in Durham cathedral in 1645 Willis, 269, says he was
vicar of Heart and Hartlepool, -- an error; there was another of the same name
curate of Auckland, in queen Elizabeth's reign. -- Walker makes him to have
been archdeacon of Northumberland. This prebendal house was much ruined in the
late times.
.

RICHARD WRENCH, B. D. was collated about the 14th of February, 1645, by bishop
Morton, but not installed for some years, on account of the war: Was born in
the city of Chester; chaplain to bishop Morton, and fellow of St John's
College, Cambridge, from whence he was ejected by the earl of Manchester.
Bishop Cosin's mandate to induct him was dated the 18th of March, 1660, and his
installation on the 20th of that month. He was instituted to Heighington
vicarage, the 25th of November, 1661; was collated to Boldon the 16th of
October, 1665; departed this life on the 26th October, 1675, and buried in this
cathedral He is said in the register to have been first collated by bishop
Morton on Maxton's death. Query.

He was buried near the entrance into the choir. His widow married Dr Thomas
Smith, prebendary of the first stall, afterward dean and bishop of Carlisle.

Walker's Suff. Clergy, part ii. p. 149. Kennet's Reg. 524.

M. S. RICHARDUS WRENCH, S. T. B. Hujus ecclesiae dum vixit: Canonicus Placide
hic in Domino Requiescit. Obiit xxvj die Octobris Anno Dom. MDCLXXV. ANNA ejus
relicta Maerens posuit.
.

RICHARD KNIGHTLEY, A. M. was installed by proxy, the 17th of November, 1675,
and was removed to the seventh stall. He was son of Thomas Knightley, rector of
Byfield, in the county of Northampton; had the livings of Charwelton and Aston,
the latter of which he resigned on the death of his father, 1688, when he was
presented to Byfield, where he died the 17th of September, 1695, aet. 59, and
was interred there Ath. Oxon. 2 fo. 20. -- Bridges' Hist. Northampton, p. 116.

In Byfield church, against the south wall, on a white marble compartment,
(under the arms of Knightley impaling, gules, a lion ramp. argent) is the
following inscription: Hic
Moriture lector,
Subter sepulchrale marmor.
Jam juxta parents accumbit
(Una omnes resurgent)
Cognata compositus terra and secura simul requie
Nominis non ita magni,
Sed quod majus est, honesti,
RICHARDUS KNIGHTLEY, sacerdos,
Filius Thomae Knightley hujusce olim gregis
Pastoris perdiu fidelis.
Ipse tamen, favente Deo and adspirante semper coeptis,
In sacram Charwelton curam institutus prius
Et solenniter inductus
A reverendo in Christo Patre ac nob. D. D.
NOT. CREW,
Dignissimo Dunelmensi praesule,
Prebendae ejusdem ecclesiae honores humilime accepit,
Et in hac aede successit demum patri,
Patri pietate quam simillimus,
Quique aliis usque majora meruisse visus est,
Sibi semper minus.
His itaque officiis egregie pariter perfunctus,
Et laboribus plusquam annis gravis,
Severiore correptus morbo, morti citius concessit,
Melioris vitae securus,
Sep. 17o. Ao. 1695. Aetat. suae 59.



.

JOHN MORTON, D. D. was installed November 29, 1676: He moved from the seventh
to this stall, the revenue of which is much inferior, to oblige bishop Morton,
who wished to place his chaplain, Knightley, therein: Was of Lincoln College,
where he took the degrees of master of arts the 27th of June, 1667; bachelor of
divinity, the 11th of November, 1674; and doctor in divinity, by diploma, the
6th of April, 1692. He was made rector of Boldon upon Mr Wrench's death, in
1676, and afterward had Egglescliff. In October, 1685, was collated to the
archdeaconry of Northumberland, and to the rectory of Sedgefield, in 1711,
where he died, the 16th of November, 1722, and was interred See Sedgefield
church for his epitaph.

His prebendal house cost him 600l. and he recovered of his predecessor 80l.
for dilapidations. His daughter Dulcibella, the only child that survived him,
was married to William Davison, of Beamish, Esquire Morton, the last male of that
family, being called after this lady's family name.


. He built his prebendal house whilst in the twelfth stall, to which he was
removed in 1685; he also built the parsonage house at Egglescliff, and made
great improvements at Sedgefield. In 1685, there was a controversy between him
and Sir George Wheler, concerning precedence; the question being, whether the
seniority was to be accounted from admission to any new stall, or admission to
the church and chapter by the first installment; and the bishop, as visitor,
determined in favor of Dr Morton.

FITZHERBERT ADAMS, D. D. was installed the 11th of August, 1685; was removed
to the tenth stall in 1695; and from that to the eleventh, in 1711: Was of
Lincoln College, Oxford, where he took the degree of master of arts in June,
1675; bachelor in divinity, the 2d of January, 1682; and doctor in divinity,
the 3d of July, 1685: Was inducted to Washington rectory, the 29th of
September, 1683, and elected rector of Lincoln College, the 2d of May, 1685.
Was vice chancellor of Oxford in 1695, where he departed this life, the 17th of
June, 1719, and was interred in All Saints' church, Oxford. He received 1500l.
for renewing the lease of Twiford, and laid out that sum in beautifying the
chapel of Lincoln College, and the rector's lodging: Was a benefactor to
All-Hallows' church, and left 200l. to purchase a parsonage house: He left his
library to the college Ath. Oxon. part ii. 785. f. 227. -- Willis's Cath. 274.

M. S.
Fitzherbert Adams, S. T P. coll. Lincoln per annos 34 rector
Quem satis commendabant oris gestusq. decor and majestas
Plus tamen animi dotes and antiqua morum simplicitas,
Delicata cura et eleganti nitore perpolita.
Omnium placendi artium mirifice solers, magnatum gratiae licet,
Non captator, facile compos suit Nathan. Dom. Crew, ornatissimo
Praesuli Dunelm. imprimis charus qui prebendae Dunelm.
Dignitate auxit, illumque et colleg. cui prae^rat
Quotidianis beneficiis sovit and accumulavit.
Obiit 27 Junij, A. D. 1719, et aetatis suae 68.

.

HENRY DOBSON, D. D. was installed the 8th of June, 1695. He was collated to
the rectory of Boldon in 1692; was of Magdalen College, where, on the 3d of
June, 1677, he took a master of arts degree; bachelor in divinity the 17th of
December, 1689; and doctor in divinity the 23d of January, 1693: He died at
London, the 23d of March, 1717, aet. 67, and was buried in St Margaret's
churchyard, Westminster.

JOHN DOLBEN, D. D. was installed the 17th of April, 1718, and removed to the
eleventh stall. He was the grandson of archbishop Dolben, and son of Sir
Gilbert Dolben, baronet Sir Gilbert was a judge in Ireland in queen Ann's
reign. He was vice president of the society of clergymen's sons, and left
thereto 500l.
. Was born at Bishop Thorpe, near York; received the first rudiments of
literature at Westminster school, from whence he was removed to Christ-Church,
Oxford, where he took the degree of master of arts on the 8th of July, 1707,
and bachelor and doctor in divinity the 6th of July, 1717. He was sub-dean of
the Chapel Royal in the reign of queen Anne, and had the rectory of Burton
Latimers, and vicarage of Fyndon, in the county of Northampton. On the death of
his father, in October, 1722, he succeeded to the baronetage and estates;
departed this life at Durham on the 21st of November, 1756, aet. 73, and was
interred at Fyndon He wrote a character of Dr Sibthorp formerly parson of
Burton Latymers. Kennet's Reg. 669. -- When sub dean of Durham, he addressed
bishop Butler in a speech, as is customary at his first coming to the diocese,
the 28th of June, 1751. -- The living of Fyndon he augmented greatly, by
granting tithes to it. He was chosen visitor of Baliol College, Oxon, by the
fellows, a privilege which no other college in Oxford or Cambridge enjoys.
There is a good portrait of Sir John, done in mezzotinto, by Faber, after a
painting by Tailor.


.

WILLIAM WATS, D. D. was installed on the 18th of August, 1719. He was born at
Barnshall, in the county of York, and was fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford,
where, on the 17th of June, 1708, he took the degree of master of arts; on the
11th of July, 1719, that of bachelor in divinity; and, on the 21st of October
following, of doctor in divinity; and was a noted tutor in his college: In
1721, he was collated to the rectory of Wolsingham: Died at Durham on the 5th
of February, 1736, aet. 50, and was buried at the West end of the nave of
Durham cathedral, below the font Bishop Crew recommended Dr Lupton (preb. 9.)
to succeed Dr Adams, as rector of Lincoln College, Oxon; and Mr Wats was the
only fellow who voted for him, for which the bishop gave him this prebend, and
the rectory of Wollingham. Grey's Notes, MSS.

M. S.
GULIELMI WATS, S. T. P.
Qui in villa de Barns Hall in agro Eboracensi natus,
Oxonij ingenuis artibus innutritus,
Et in numerum sociorum coll. Lincolniensis cooptatus,
Per annos complures juventuti
Academica literatura eradiendae,
Et disciplina sormandae,
Sedulo and seliciter incubuit.
Exinde tandem a Domino Dom. Crew,
De quo optime jam in collegio promeruerat Evocatus,
Ut primo in hanc ecclesiam ascisceretur,
Dein paroeciae de Wolsingham praeesset,
Pastorem se praestitit sidum, benignum, pacificum,
^anonicum vero tum dignitati muneris, quam oneri parem
Quippe qui sibi assiduo studio comparasset
Quaecunq. vel faciunt theologum vel ornant
Erat animo constanti et invicto licet valetudine
Quam pro spectabili corporis compage infirmiori:
Improborum censor impavidus, bonorum promptus fautor,
A recto, quatenus innotuit neutiquam dimovendus,
Apostolicae veritatis assertor.
Ecclesiae Anglicanae jurium vindex, rituum observans.
Hisce virtutibus
Licet ipse satis, adhuc superstes, memoriae suae consuluerit,
Non sustinuit tamen vidua ejus moestissima
Quin hoc marmor, aliquod saltem elogium optimi mariti praeferens,
In amoris mutui testimonium poni curaret.
Obiit nonis Februarij, Anno Dom. MDCCXXXVI. Aetat. L.
Conduntur reliquiae post parietem Composed by Dr Secker, preb. of Durham, and
bishop of Bristol.
.

.

HENRY BLAND, A. M. was installed August 2, 1737. He was the eldest son of
Henry Bland, dean of this church; received the first rudiments of literature at
Eton, from whence he was removed to Christ-Church College, Oxford; admitted a
gentleman commoner, and took a bachelor of arts degree; he obtained an honorary
degree of master of arts at Cambridge; and in 1747; a degree of doctor in
divinity. On the 23d of August, 1735, he was inducted to Washington, and also
held the rectory of Bishop Weremouth. He was formerly beneficed in Lincoln.
Died at his prebendal house on the 7th of May, 1768, aet. 64, and was interred
in the eastern transept of this cathedral H. S. E.
HENRICUS BLAND, S. T. P.
Henrici Bland, S. T. P
Hujus ecclesiae nuper decani
Filius natu maximus
Vir excellenti ingenio praeditus
Et, quod eo patre natum, eodem praeceptore institutum, decuit,
Eximie eruditus:
A reverendo admodum patre
Edwardo Chandler, episcopo Dunelmensi,
Ecclesiarum de Washington and Weremouth episcopi
Rector constitutus A. D. MDCCXXXVto.
Ad VItum in hac ecclesia canonicatum
Ab eodem promotus A. D. MDCCXXXVII^o.
Quibus muneribus pro virili exequendis
Quod reliquum erat vitae impendit,
Obiit VIImo. die Maij. A. D. MDCCLXVIIIvo.
Aetatis suae LXVto.
Fratri carissimo benemerenti
Sorores superstites
Posuerunt Composed by Dr Lowth, preb. of Durham, and bishop of Oxford, and now
bishop of London.
.

.

CHARLES WESTON, A. M. was installed the 2d of August, 1768, being removed from
the ninth stall: Was a grandson of the bishop of Exeter, and son of Edward
Weston, of the city of Lincoln, Esquire writer of the Gazette for many years, and
one of the chief clerks of the signet office: Was a student of Christ-Church,
and took a master of arts degree on the 18th of April, 1755: Rector of
Thirfield, in the county of Hertford.

PREBENDARIES OF THE SEVENTH STALL Lands, etc. assigned to the seventh stall.
Statutis. Domus and terrae Dominicales manerij de Finkalo cum Molendino and
Stagno ibidem vocat. le Dam. 9 18 8 Capitulo antiq. solvend. 1 19 8 Act.
capituli Decimae Garbarum de Harton, infra paroch. de Jarrow 9 10 0 Decimae de
Walsend infra candem 3 13 4 Decimae de Wardly et Felling infra candem 1 0 6
Solvit canon. 7mus singulis annis pro quart. part. nov. improv. 0 5 0


.
ROBERT DALTON, B. D. appointed on the foundation, the 12th of May, 1541. In
the year 1560, he was deprived for recusancy, and committed to the custody of
lord Dacres, of the north; was instituted to Billingham in 1547; and esteemed
rich, but arrogant and unlettered. The place allotted to him, at the
suppression of the convent, was the granary for wheat and malt, which he
converted into a handsome dwelling.

THOMAS SAMPSON was installed the 9th of September, 1560, by proxy, at which
time he had no degree. He was presented by queen Elizabeth, and admitted, by
her commissioners for spiritualties, sede vacant: Was one of those concerned
in translating the Bible. He was dean of Chichester, 1552; rector of All
Hallows', Breadstreet; and made dean of Christ-Church, Oxford, 1561, of which
he was deprived in 1565; afterward was made master of Wigstan's hospital, in
Leicester, where he died the 9th of April, 1589, and was buried Memoriae and
honori Thomae Sampson, theologi; hierarchiae Romanae, papaliumq. rituum hostis
acerrimi; sinceritatis evangelicae assertoris constantissimi; hujus hospitalis
per 21 annos custodis fidelis; de republica Christiana optime meriti, patr.
chariss. hoc monumentum posuerunt Johannes and Nathanael filii.
. He was succeeded by

WILLIAM BIRCH, A. M. installed the 4th of July, 1562: Was rector of Gateshead,
and deprived for nonconformity, 1567 Reg. Skynner, p. 175. ib. 160. ib. 231.
. He was warden of Manchester College, 1560; rector of Stanhope, the 25th of
August, 1564; and also of Gateshead.

LEONARD PILKINGTON, D. D. was collated the 1st of August, and installed the
6th of September, 1567: He was brother to the bishop and Joseph Pilkington, and
rector of Middleton, the 20th of March, 1560: Was admitted master of St John's
College, Cambridge, the 19th of October, 1561, which he resigned in 1562; was
regius professor of divinity there in 1561; was rector of Whitburn, where he
built the house now Sir Hedworth Williamson's, and the great parsonage barn. In
1592 he was treasurer of this church D. Skynner's Reg. d. 135, 239. -- Fuller's
Hist. Camb. p. 95. -- Monum. p. 153. -- Query when he died. -- by the Register^
appears, Marm. Blakiston had this stall, Ao 1601. Bishop Matthew's visitation.


.

MARMADUKE BLAKISTON, A. M. was the son of J. Blakiston, of Blakiston, Esquire was
installed in 1601, and was vicar of Woodhorne, and treasurer of this church in
1606: On the 14th of October, 1585, was collated to Redmarshall; and in July,
1599, to Sedgefield: On the 25th of November, 1615, was collated to the
archdeaconry of the East Riding of Yorkshire; and the 6th of March, 1617, was
installed prebendary of Wistow, in York cathedral. In 1623, he resigned his
stall at York in favor of his son, Thomas Blakiston; in 1625, he did the same
touching his archdeaconry, in favor of J. Cousin, afterward bishop, who
married his daughter Ath. Oxon. vol. i. f. 125.
; and in 1631, he resigned this prebend and Sedgefield, in favor of his son,
Robert Blakiston. He died at Newton, near Durham, the family seat, and was
interred in St Margaret's church, Crossgate, the 3d of December, 1639 He was
father of Jo. Blakiston, of Newcastle, who was one of king Charles I. judges.
Marmaduke, his son, sold Newton Hall estate, near Durham, to Sir H. Liddell's
family.
.

ROBERT BLAKISTON, A. M. was collated the 27th of November, and installed the
14th of December, 1631. He married bishop Howson's daughter, and died the 17th
of January, 1634, before his father, but survived the bishop: He was one of the
eight prebendaries that supported the canopy over the head of king Charles I.
when he came to visit the cathedral Ralph, his brother, was rector of ^yton.
Brown Willis says, Robert was rector of Bromstede in Norfolk. He attended
bishop Morton's visitation, the 15th of November, 1633.
.

MATTHEW LEVET, A. M. was collated the 24th of January, 1634: Was fellow of St
John's College, Cambridge, and pupil to bishop Morton: He had a prebend, and
was subdean in Ripon Church, and held his preferments in 1641, but how much
longer does not appear Morton's Life. p. 67. -- In the Register Dr Basire's
collation to this stall is dated the 24th of November, 1643. -- Rymer's
Foedera, vol. xix. p. 611, says Levet was collated the 24th of February.
.

ISAAC BASIRE, D. D. was installed the 12th of August, 1643. In the Biogra.
Brittannia, we are told he was born in Jersey, from the authority of Wood
Fa^^i, vol. i. f. 285.
, which the annotator contradicts, but without telling us the certain place of
his nativity. Gray, in his MS. Notes, says, he was born at Rouen, in Normandy,
but quotes no authority; the place of his education is equally uncertain. The
first of his being noted to us is under the patronage of bishop Morton, who
ordained him deacon and priest whilst bishop of Litchfield, and made him his
chaplain: In September, 1636, he was collated to the church of Egglescliff; in
July, 1640, he had the degree of doctor in divinity conferred upon him at
Cambridge, by mandate, and was incorporated in the same at Oxford, in November
following; about which time he was made chaplain in ordinary to king Charles I.
On the 24th of August, 1644, was appointed to the archdeaconry of
Northumberland; and, on the 7th of July, 1646, was inducted to the rectory of
Stanhope, on the presentation of king Charles I. On the breaking out of the
rebellion, he was sequestered, plundered, and obliged to abscond, and after
flying to the king at Oxford, and sharing in the distresses of his sovereign,
he fled the kingdom, and went to propagate the doctrine of the church of
England among the Greeks and Arabians, traveling through Apulia, Naples,
Sicily, Morea, etc. into Syria and Palestine. During his travels he collated
the several confessions of faith of the different sorts of Christians, Greeks,
Armenians, Jacobites, Maronites, etc. which he kept by him in their own
languages: In his travels he endured many hardships, particularly in 1653, he
passed from Aleppo to Constantinople by land, being 600 miles, without either
servant, or Christian, or any man with him, that could speak the Frank
language; yet, by the help of some Arabic acquired at Aleppo, he performed that
journey in the company of twenty Turks, whose courtesy was purchased by his
dispensing to them in the physical line, he having studied medicine at Padua.
On the Restoration, he was recalled to England, and put in possession of his
ecclesiastical benefices. He was the author of many religious tracts and
discourses, as also the Life of Dr Cousin, bishop of Durham, published with his
funeral sermon. He departed this life on the 12th of October, 1676, aet. 69,
and was interred in the cathedral churchyard at Durham Ath. Oxon. vol. i. --
Biogr. Brit. vol. i. -- Vide Ger. Vossius's Epistle to him, 178; and two of his
epistles to Vossius, in the same collect. -- Walker's Suff. Clergy, vol. ii. p.
19, 20. -- Kennet's Reg. 228, 526, 709.

Depositum IS. BASIRE, S. T. D. Archidiaconi Northumbr. hujus Eccl'iae canonici
and regibus augg. Carolo Imo and Carolo IIdo a Sacris, qui ob dormivit 12 die
October. Ao D'ni, 1676, Ao aetat. suae 69, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14. Deus eos qui
dormierunt per Jesum adducet cum eo.
.

JOHN MORTON, B. D. was installed the 16th of October, 1676, and soon after
removed to the sixth stall See page 193.
.

RICHARD KNIGHTLEY, A. M. was installed the 29th of November, 1676, removed
from the sixth stall See page 192.
He died at Byfield, in the county of Northampton, 1695.

JOHN SMITH, D. D. was installed the 26th of September, 1695. He was the eldest
son of Mr William Smith, rector of Lowther, in Westmoreland; was admitted a
minor canon of this church on the 20th of July, 1682, and had the office of
precentor: On the 20th of July, 1683, he was appointed to Croxdale curacy; and
the 1st of July, 1684, to Witton-Gilbert curacy. On the 12th of June, 1695, was
collated to Gateshead rectory and hospital; and in July, 1696, took the degree
of doctor in divinity: And on the 28th of July, 1704, was collated to
Bishop-Weremouth, having previously resigned Gateshead. He repaired and altered
his prebendal house at the cost of 200l. and expended 200l. in repairs of the
chancel at Weremouth. He rebuilt the parsonage house at no less cost than 600l.
receiving of Dr Grey's executors for dilapidations not above 100l. and in his
asserting and recovering the rights of that church, he expended 600l.
notwithstanding which he died rich He was the only instance of ascending from a
minor canon's seat to a prebend. -- He left a considerable estate to his eldest
son George, who lived at Burnhall, near Durham, a non-juror and said to be
nominal bishop of Durham with that society. -- In personal and real estate, he
died possessed of upwards of 15,000l. -- He had 4500l. portion with his wife,
and got 1100l. for the colliery of Prior Close, part of the corpse land of his
prebend, of which he let a lease. Grey's Notes, MSS.


. At the time of his death he was printing a most correct edition of Venerable
Bede's works, the preparing of which cost him fourteen years labor: This was
published by his son after his decease, in April 1722. He died at Cambridge in
the month of July, 1715, and was interred in the anti-chapel of St John's
College chapel M. S.
JOHANNIS SMITH, S. T. P.
Lowtheriae in agro Westmariensi nati:
Qui Juvenis
In hoc celeberrimum collegium cooptatus est;
Ubi bonis moribus informatus, et ingenuis artibus
Eruditus, ejusdem collegii decus
Totiusq. ecclesiae ornamentum evasit:
Quem
Mira facilitas morum et elegantia, comitati
Adjuncta semper gravitas, animi candor et modestia
Ornatum;
Ingenii faecunditas, acumen judicii, memoriae vigor,
In re literaria promovenda fatalis industria
Doctum.
In adversis rebus animi magnitudo, in secundis
Continentia, in Deum denique suosque singularis pietas
Optimum fuisse demonstrarunt.
Ob haec merita, quibus Hon.tissimi et Rev.di admodum episcopi
Gratiam sibi conciliavit, in numerum canonicorum
Dunelmensium prius adscitus, dein in ecclesiam
Weremuthae epi. parochialem promotus est.
Hisce sacerdotis honestis auctus, ea non minus digne,
Quam ipsa ilium, exornavit.
Antiqua ecclesiae jura et privilegia nemo fortius
Defendit. Eloquentiam cum theologia omnesque
Bonas arts cum sacris literis adeo conjunxit;
Ut orator copiosus, philologus eximius, theologus
Absolutus merito audiret.
In historicis, Anglicis praesertim, evolvendis
Fuit maxim assiduus; advertensque animum,
Quod polita Venerabilis BAEDAE operum
Historicorum desideraretur editio, id laboris
A nullo potius, quam a canonico Dunelm. BAEDAE
S^t compresbytero et populari, subeundum duxit:
Huic igitur muneri se accinxit; sed, proh dolor!
Dum non vulgari studio praelo insudaret;
Morte in medio opere immatura praereptus est:
Et intra sacram hujus collegii aedem, cujus in gremio se
Nutritum non sine pia voluptate saepius jactavit,
Humatus est
Natus, Anno D'ni. 1659,
Obiit 30 Julii, 1715.

.

THOMAS EDEN, LL. D. was installed the 23d of August, 1715, being removed from
the ninth stall. He was the fourth son of Sir Robert Eden of West-Auckland,
baronet; was educated at Newcastle school, under the famous Thomas Rud, and
admitted of Trinity Hall, Cambridge: He was chaplain to lord Crew; collated to
the rectory of Winston in 1709; and to Brancepeth, 1749. Upon Sir Geo. Wheler's
death, he was appointed official to the dean and chapter, the 12th of February,
1723. He died on the 3d of March, 1754, aet. 71, and was buried in the
cathedral churchyard, by his will expressly prohibiting his remains being
interred in any church Here lie interred,
The remains of the Rev. Tho. Eden, LL. D.
Forty-two years prebendary of this cathedral,
And rector of Winstone.
By the donation of the late Lord Crew,
Ld bishop of Durham,
Rector also of Brancepeth;
Whose life and conduct,
Labors to promote true religion,
Extensive charity to the poor,
Cheerfulness amongst his friends,
And good will toward all mankind,
Endeared him to all.
Who had the happiness of knowing him,
And made his loss to be universally lamented.
He died in the college,
March ye 3rd, 1754, aged 71.
This monument was erected to his memory
By his affectionate nephew
Sir Robt. Eden, Ba^t.
Burd. 6 Mar. 1754. E. regist. Cath.
.

JOSEPH SPENCE, A. M. was installed the 24th of May, 1754: Was born of poor
parents in Northamptonshire; educated at Winchester school; was of Trinity
College, Oxford, where he continued two years; and afterward of New College,
where he held a fellowship, and took a degree of master of arts, the 2d of
November, 1727: Was instituted to the rectory of Birchanger, in Essex, the 10th
of August, 1728, which he resigned about December, 1742; was presented, by the
warden and fellow of New College, to the rectory of Harwood Magna, in the
county of Bucks; and was made professor of modern history at Oxford, in the
room of Dr Holmes, who was appointed dean of Exeter in 1742. He died the 20th
of August, 1768, at Byfleet, in Surry, aet. 65 He fell into a pond, where he
was found dead. -- He was the author of a celebrated publication, styled
Polymetis.
.

NEWTON OGLE, D. D. installed the 27th of October, 1768, the son of Nath. Ogle,
M. D. of Kirkley, in the county of Northumberland, physician to the army under
the duke of Marlborough. Dr Newton Ogle was made archdeacon of Surry, in 1761,
and installed dean of Winchester the 21st of October, 1769.

PREBENDARIES OF THE EIGHTH STALL Lands assigned to the eighth stall.
Stat. Tertia pars domus Manerij and Parci de Mugleswick 8 7 9 Capitulo antiq.
solvend. 0 7 9 Act. capit. Decimae assignat. Decimae Garbarum de Walworth,
infra paroch. de Heighington 7 0 0 Decimae Garbarum de Preston, infra paroch.
de Ackliff 3 13 4 Decimae Garbarum de Ketton, ib'm 3 6 8 Decimae Garbarum de
Magna Ricknel ib'm 0 13 4 Lib. recept. Solvit capitulo octavus canonicus
quotannis pro decimis de parva Ricknole 0 6 8


.
JOHN TOWTON, S. T. B. appointed at the foundation, the 12th of May, 1541. He
was deprived for recusancy on the royal visitation, 1560.

ADAM SHEPERDE was installed the 18th of July, 1560, being presented by the
queen, the Sea vacant: He was admitted by Dr Watson and Dr Crawforth,
prebendaries of this church, who were guardians of the spiritualties, by virtue
of a commission from the chapter of York, their archbishop being deprived, and
the dean absent Vid. Reg. Horn, 122. 2 Reg. f. 123. -- Quere how this
circumstance happened? -- The mandate for installment bears date the 18th of
July, 1560.
. He died in the year 1563.

THOMAS LEVER was installed the 21st of February, 1563. He was born in
Lancashire, and was preacher to king Edward VI. was elected master of St John's
College, Cambridge, the 10th of December, 1551; was contemporary and fellow
collegian with bishop Pilkington, archdeacon of Coventry, and on the 28th of
January, 1562, made master of Sherburn hospital, in which year he subscribed
the articles. He changed his religion in queen Mary's reign, and was deprived,
in 1567, of his prebend for refusing to comply with ecclesiastical orders, but
kept the hospital to the time of his death, which happened in July 1577, and
was interred there. Reg. p. 190. -- He was brother to Ralph Lever in the fifth
stall; preacher to the English exiles at Yarrow, in Switzerland. -- His sermons
printed in 1573. Another publication entitled The Right Way from Danger of Sin
and Vengeance, 1575. -- Strype's Ann. vol. i. 218, and Life of Parker, 275. --
Strype's Eliz. p. 105, 131, 132, 290. -- Grindal, lib. ii. c. 4. p. 170, 189.
-- Parker, lib. iii. c. 8. p. 22, and lib. iv. c. 6. -- Fuller's Hist. of Camb.
p. 95. -- Fuller's Worthies. -- See a short account of his sermon at Paul's
Cross, in Wood's Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. -- See his concern for preserving coll.
and hospitals, 2 Strype Ann. 512, etc.




RICHARD LONGWORTHE, D. D. was collated the 9th of November, and installed the
3d of January, 1567. He was born at Bolton, in Cheshire, and ordained deacon
the 9th of March, 1560, being master of arts, and fellow of St John's College,
Cambridge, at the age of twenty-seven: Was admitted master of St John's, the
11th of May, 1564, which he resigned in December, 1569; was installed prebend
of Worcester, the 3d of June, 1568; and promoted to the deanery of Chester, the
28th of February, 1572, upon which he resigned his prebend in this cathedral.
He departed this life in 1579; and by his will, dated the 19th of April in that
year, gave a legacy to his host at the Red Lion, in Holborn, so that it is
probable he died there.

FRANCIS BUNNEY, A. M. was installed the 13th of May, 1572. He was the third
son of Richard Bunney, of Newland, near Wakefield, Esquire born on the 8th of May,
1543; was fellow of Magdalen College, in 1563; chaplain to the earl of Bedford;
collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland, the 20th of October, 1573,
which he resigned for the rectory of Ryton, to which he was inducted the 13th
of September, 1578. He died on the 16th of April, 1617, aet. 75, and was
interred in Ryton church Ath. Oxon. vol. i. Dav. Mon. 153. -- Strype's Ann.
vol. ii. 482. -- Was called a precise man by bishop Sandys, p. 525. -- Student
in Oxford, 1558; perpetual fellow of Magdalen, 1582: He preached two sermons on
Romans iii. 28, at Durham, which he printed, 1616, and dedicated to the bishop.
He left 30l. to the chapter library. -- For his epitaph, see Ryton church.


.

FRANCIS BURGOYNE, D. D. was installed the 6th of May, 1617. He was collated to
Bishop-Weremouth in 1595; was rector of Spofforth, in the county of York; and
collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland, the 13th of September, 1631. He
died in 1633 He was one of the proxies mentioned in the commission for
inthronization of bishop Neile, the 13th of October, 1617 in which he is
expressly called a canon of this church. -- His dividend was paid him by
William James, treasurer Mich. 1633, so he survived that time. Grey's MSS.
.

ANTHONY MAXTON, A. M. was collated the 23d of May, 1633. He was a Scotchman by
birth, and recommended to bishop Morton, by king Charles I. he took deacon's
orders in 1608; and was ordained priest in 1609: Was collated to Wolsingham
rectory the 21st of June, 1614; and instituted to the rectory of Middleton in
Teesdale, on the 10th of July, 1619, on the presentation of Charles, then
Prince of Wales. He died about the year 1641, and was interred at Wolsingham He
left no sons. -- Married his youngest daughter to Bows of Streatlam; another
to Sir Joseph Cradock; and another to Thomas Fetherstone of Stanhope. -- He was
not master of Sherburn hospital, but managed it for Mr Murray, and thereby
enriched himself. Grey's Notes, MSS. -- Walker's Suff. Clergy, vol. ii. p. 21.
-- His life wrote by Baddeley.


.

JOHN BARWICK, D. D. was collated by bishop Morton, but never installed, as he
resigned this stall for the fourth prebend See page 185 and 161.
.

ROBERT GRAY, D. D. was collated the 10th of May, 1652, but not installed till
the 2d of November, 1660. He was the brother of lord Gray, of Wark; was
collated to the rectory of Bishop-Weremouth, the 15th of March, 1652: His
parsonage house being greatly injured in the turbulent times, he was obliged to
rebuild the front of it. In July, 1660, he was made bachelor of divinity at
Cambridge, by mandamus, and in September following, was in like manner created
doctor in divinity: He departed this life the 9th of July, 1704, aet. 94, and
was buried at Bishop-Weremouth.

ROBERT OSTLY, A. M. was collated the 28th of July, 1704. He was rector of
Abinger, in Surry, was of Trinity College, Cambridge, and many years chaplain
to bishop Crew. He died on the 11th of May, 1743, at his rectory, where he was
interred He had a dispensation from the crown. He died a bachelor, and
bequeathed to pious uses 70l. a year, leaving Sir John Evelyn his trustee.
Grey's Notes, MSS. -- 8. Aubrey's Antiq. Surry, vol. iv. p. 112.


.

JAMES LESLEY, A. M. was installed the 20th of July, 1743. He was a native of
Ireland, curate of St. Nicholas', Dublin, married a niece of bishop Chandler,
to whom he was chaplain: Was collated to Wolsingham in 1741, and resigned it
for Sedgefield, to which he was collated in May, 1747, being at that time
doctor in divinity, an Irish degree of Trinity College, Dublin: Was a man of
little learning. He accepted the bishopric of Limerick, in Ireland, for a
resignation of this stall, and the rectory of Sedgefield, in favor of Dr
Lowth, then archdeacon of Winchester, who declined the bishopric of Limerick,
but had liberty to exchange the appointment for English preferments. He died at
Dublin.

ROBERT LOWTH, D. D. was installed the 29th of October, 1755, on Lesley's
resignation. He was a son of William Lowth, prebendary of Winchester; educated
at Winchester school; became scholar and fellow of New College; took the degree
of master of arts, on the 8th of June, 1737; and that of doctor in divinity, by
diploma, the 8th of July, 1754. In 1750, he was made archdeacon of Winchester,
which he resigned: Was instituted to the rectory of Sedgefield, the 23d of
October, 1755; was chaplain to lord Huntington, lord lieutenant of Ireland, and
to their majesty's George II. and III. On the 17th of May, 1766, he was
consecrated bishop of St David's; and translated to Oxford, in 1767, holding
this prebend, and his rectory, in commendam. In March, 1777, he resigned
Sedgefield, and was removed to the Sea of London, where he now sits.

RICHARD KAYE, LL. D. was installed the 10th of July, 1777, sub-almoner to his
majesty. He resigned this stall in 1783, on being appointed dean of Lincoln.

CHARLES POYNTZ, D. D. was educated at Christ-Church, Oxford, where, he took
his master of arts degree, the 4th of May, 1759; bachelor in divinity, the 25th
of November, 1769; and doctor in divinity, the 7th of December, 1769: Was
installed in this prebend the 24th of January, 1784. He holds some
ecclesiastical preferments in Norfolk and Wales.

PREBENDARIES OF THE NINTH STALL Lands, etc. assigned to the ninth stall.
Stat. Manerium de Rylly, et Almner Barnes 8 0 4 Capit. antiq. solvend. 0 0 4
Act. capit. Decimae assignat. Decimae Garbar. de Heighington, p'ann. 13 6 8
Decimae de West Thickley 1 0 0 Lib. recept. -- Solvit capitulo non. canonicus
pro decimis Garbar. de Bracks quotannis 0 5 0


.
NICHOLAS MARLEY, B. D. the 12th of May, 1541, by the foundation. He was
instituted to Pittington vicarage, the 9th of April, 1548; was deprived thereof
in 1560, and sentenced not to come within eight miles of Durham. He was also
deprived of this stall, for recusancy.

THOMAS HORTON, clerk, was presented by queen Elizabeth, the 15th of January,
1560, the Sea being then vacant: It is probable he was never installed, as he
resigned the same month Rymer, vol xv.
.

WILLIAM STEPHENSON, B. D. was presented by queen Elizabeth, and installed the
28th of January, 1560. The queen appointed him preacher at Berwick, and
dispensed with his residence, allowing him the full profits of his prebend Reg.
Horn, p. 132. -- Skynner's Reg. p. 144. -- Wharton's Angl. Sac. vol. i. p. 784.


. He was appointed official to the dean and chapter, for Northumberland, the
24th of May, 1561; was vicar of Gainford, and also vicar of Hartburn. He died
in the year 1575, and was buried before the choir door of this cathedral.

RICHARD FAWCETT, B. D. was installed the 10th of January, 1575. He was
inducted to the rectory of Boldon, the 14th of April, 1575. By his will, he
ordered his remains to be interred in the chancel of Boldon church In the
treasurer's book for 1609-10, it appears that Fawcett was paid to Christmas,
1609, his executors to Lady Day following, and Moorcroft to Midsummer, 1610. --
And there is a memorandum that Fawcett died the 5th of February, 1609. --
Grey's Notes, MSS.


.

GEORGE MOORCROFT, A. M. In a list of the prebendaries who answered at the
visitation of bishop James, 1610, it appears he had this stall. He was rector
of Stanhope and Wolsingham, and died in 1648 In the registers he appears at all
visitations, till the time of the rebellion; the register being discontinued
from 1643 to 1660. -- In a lease let to one Edward Moorcroft, the 18th of
November, 1611, of the corpse of this prebend, is a provisoe, if Geo. Moorcroft
so long live. -- When king Charles visited this church, the 1st of June, 1633,
one of the Moorcrofts, but it is not said which of the two, was among the
prebendaries who held the canopy. -- Dr Sharp says this lease of Moorcroft's
corpse to Edward, was made by the dean and chapter for 2^ years, provided the
said Geo. Moorcroft so long live. Grey's Notes, MSS.


.

THOMAS TRIPLETT, D. D. was collated to this prebend the 20th of March, 1648,
by bishop Morton, though not installed till the 2d of November, 1660. He was
born at or near Oxford, and was student in Christ-Church; had Whitburn in 1631;
was rector of Washington in 1640; held a prebend in York cathedral, 1641, and
another in Sarum 1645; and within those periods was vicar of Woodhorn, in
Northumberland. He exchanged his stall in this church with Dr Sancroft, for one
at Westminster. Died the 18th of July, 1670, aet. 70, and was buried in
Westminster abbey See a letter of his to lord Falkland, in Dr Hammond's works,
vol ii. p. 629. Ath. Oxon. vol. i. and ii. -- Walker's Suss. Clergy, vol ii p.
68.


.

WILLIAM SANCROFT, D. D. was installed the 11th of March, 1661. He was born the
30th of January, 1616, at Fressingfield, in the county of Suffolk, the family's
place of residence for three hundred years. At the age of eighteen he was
placed at Emanuel College, Cambridge, and matriculated in the year 1634: In
1637, was admitted to the degree of bachelor of arts; and master of arts in
1641; the year following, was elected a fellow of his college; and took the
degree of bachelor in divinity in 1648, but, refusing to take the covenant, was
ejected from his fellowship in the year 1649; upon which he went abroad, and
became intimately acquainted with the most considerable English loyalists then
in exile. In 1660, he was chosen one of the university preachers, though it
appears he was at Rome when king Charles II. returned to England A MS. of Mr
Henry Wharton. -- In a MS. vol. of collections now in St John's College
library, Oxford, by Dr Rawlinson, the following is observable: -- Wm Sancroft,
at Padua, entered a student as appears by a testimonial, signed by the
pro-rector and Syndik, 10th March, 1660. Pres. to Coll. Curio. Oxf 1781.


. Soon after the Restoration, Dr Sancroft came home, and bishop Cousin, who knew
him abroad, appointed him one of his chaplains; and on the 7th of December,
1661, he was collated to the rectory of Houghton-le-Spring, in which year he
assisted in renewing the liturgy. By mandamus, he was created doctor in
divinity in the month of March, 1661-2; and on the 14th of August following,
was elected master of Emanuel College, which he governed with great propriety.
In the beginning of the year 1663-4, the doctor was promoted to the deanery of
York, which he held but a short time, yet long enough to expend 200l. more than
the revenue produced, in repairs and other incident charges; during that short
period bringing the church accounts into excellent order. On the death of Dr
John Barwick, in 1664, he was removed to the deanery of St Paul's, soon after
which he resigned Houghton, and the mastership of Emanuel. He now gave much
attention to the repairs of his church, till the fire, in 1666, occasioned all
his thoughts to be employed in rebuilding that fabric, to which he contributed
1400l. besides unwearied endeavors to promote a subscription: He rebuilt the
deanery house, and improved the revenue thereof, as well as other livings in his
gift, as dean. In 1668, he was admitted archdeacon of Canterbury, on the king's
presentation, which he resigned in 1670. In 1677, being then prolocutor of the
convocation, he was advanced by king Charles II. to the archbishopric of
Canterbury, in which most conspicuous character, surrounded with the perils and
errors of the times, he conducted himself with singular prudence, perspicuity,
and religious virtue: His revenues were not dissipated in luxury and
ostentation, but disposed in works of charity, munificence, and hospitality. He
resigned this stall in 1674, having rebuilt the prebendal house. He attended
king Charles II. on his death bed, when it is said, he made some remonstrances,
and pressed sundry exhortations on the sovereign, toward which the complexion
of the court had warmed his spirit. In 1686, the doctor refused to act in the
commission issued by king James II. for ecclesiastical affairs; and in 1688,
was committed to the Tower, with six other bishops, for presenting a petition
to the king, against reading his majesty's declaration of indulgence. The court
pronouncing this petition libellous, on the 29th of June the prelates were
tried for a misdemeanour, but, to the general satisfaction of the nation, were
acquitted. He engaged his good offices for the dissenting Protestants,
foreseeing the revolution that was approaching. On the 3d of October,
accompanied with eight bishops, he attended the king, who had demanded their
counsel, and then, with a freedom virtue only inspires, urged the most serious
and important advice to his sovereign, touching the unhappy situation of the
state. A few days after, though very earnestly pressed by his majesty, he
refused to sign a declaration of abhorrence of the Prince of Orange's designs;
and on the 17th of November, he joined in another petition, for a free
parliament. On the king's abdication, he signed, and concurred with the lords
spiritual and temporal, assembled at Guildhall, in a declaration to the Prince
of Orange for a free parliament, security of our laws, liberties, and
properties, and of the church of England in particular, with a due indulgence
to Protestant dissenters: But when that prince and his consort were declared
king and queen, he refused to take the oaths to their majesty's, was suspended
the 1st of August, 1689, and deprived the 1st of February following. The above
fact counteracts all the principles he appeared to have adopted, and leaves his
character under suspicion, or marked with duplicity, insincerity, and want of
truth. The editor Mr Gutch.
of the Collectanea Curiosa, embarrassed at this point, says, As for the
archbishop's character, let it be learned from his actions; for if we go for it
to the writers of opposite parties, it will appear, in different hands, as
different as possible. He certainly gave the strongest instance possible of
sincerity, in sacrificing the highest dignities, and other the greatest
advantages, to what he thought truth and honesty. He continued at Lambeth till
June, 1691, and then retired to his native place, where he spent the remainder
of his life in strict retirement, and died on the 24th of November, 1693, aer.
77. The before mentioned editor says, His grace left behind him a vast
multitude of papers and collections in MS. and therein more perhaps wrote with
his own hand, than any man either of this or the last age ever did write Mr
Wharton's Preface to archbishop Laud's Hist. of his Troubles and Trial, p.
penuit.
. Upon his decease they came into his nephew's hands, and after his nephew's
death, they were purchased by the late bishop Tanner, who gave them, with the
rest of his valuable MSS. to the Bodleian library, Oxford Kennet's Reg. 647.

Complaint was made in bishop Cosin's prim. visit. that little or nothing had
been done to the repair of the prebendal house by the last possessor. He was
made prebendary of Oxgate, and residentiary. Grey's Notes, MSS. -- His
character. -- Godwin de Praeful. etc. -- Kennet's Reg. 641. -- Vide bishop
Burnet's Defense of Tillotson's Funeral Sermon -- Also in the Life of archbishop
Tillotson, by Dr Birch. p. 143, etc. -- Genesis Dict. -- Supplem. to Collier's
Dict.

He had made several notes and collections touching the history and antiq. of
the county of Durham, which I have applied in the various branches of this
work. -- W. H.

In the churchyard of Fressingfield, in Suffolk, against the south wall of the
church, on the right side of the tomb.

P. M. S.
Lector, Wilhelmi nuper archi-praesulis
(Qui natus in vicinia)
Quod morti cecidit, prope hunc murum jacet;
Atqui resurget. Tu interim
Semper paratus esto, mam qua non putas
Venturus hora Dominus est.
Obiit 24 Nov. Ano. Not. Dom. 1693. Aetat. suae 77.

On the left side.
P. M. S.
William Sancroft, born in this parish, afterward, by the providence of God,
archbishop of Canterbury, at last deprived of all, which he could not keep with
a good conscience, returned hither to end his life, and professes here, at the
foot of his tomb, that as naked he came forth, so naked he must return: The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, (as the Lord pleases so come things to
pass) blessed be the name of the Lord.

Over his head.

St Math. xxiv. v. 27, etc. etc.


.

THOMAS HOLDSWORTH, A. M. was installed the 1st of June, 1675, on the
presentation of king Charles II. in these words, Ad nostram donacionem
spectant. virtute prerogativae regiae, racione temporalium ejusd. episcopatus
in manibus nostris existent. He was rector, or dean as he is styled, of
Middleham, in the county of York: The time of his death is uncertain The king's
presentation is dated the 23d of October, 1674. -- It appears by the register,
he paid the pension for Thickley, part of his corpe, to Mich. 1681, and Dr
Bagshaw to Mich. 1682, so that he died after 1680, and before July 1681. Grey's
Notes, MSS.
; Willis says 1680.

HENRY BAGSHAW, D. D. was installed the 20th of July, 1680. He was born at
Broughton, in Northamptonshire; received his first rudiments at Westminster
school, from whence he was elected student of Christ-Church in 1651: He was
chaplain to Sir Richard Fanshaw, ambassador in Spain and Portugal; after his
return was made chaplain to archbishop Stern, who gave him the prebend of
Southwell, and rectory of Castleton, in Synderick: In 1667, he held the prebend
of Barneby, in York cathedral; and in 1668, that of Friday Thorp. He took a
bachelor of divinity's degree on the 7th of July, 1668; and on the 28th of
November, 1671, that of doctor in divinity: In 1672, was made chaplain to the
lord-treasurer Danby, and rector of St Botolph's church, near Bishopsgate,
London, which was exchanged for Houghton-le-Spring, where he departed this life
on the 30th of December, 1709, aet. 77, and was interred in the chancel of the
church there For his epitaph, see the church of Houghton in the sequel. -- Ath.
Oxon. 1041, 1657. 2 Ath. Oxon. 491.

He was youngest brother of Edw. Bagshaw, of the Middle Temple, Esquire whose
reading in the Middle Temple Hall, February, 1639, upon Statutum de Clero, was
prohibited proceeding at the instance of archbishop Laud. Grey's MSS. -- He is
represented as a very turbulent clergyman. Kennet's Reg. 603; and had been
second master of Westminster under Dr Busby, 784. V. Baxter's Life, vol. i. 378.


.

WILLIAM HARTWEL, D. D. was installed the 7th of February, 1709, and removed to
the tenth prebend See page 210.
: In 1681, he was instituted to the rectory of Whickham; and in 1685, to that
of Stanhope, where he made great improvements in his parsonage house and
gardens. He departed this life on the 1st of June, 1725, and was buried at the
north end of the middle transept in this cathedral He had been secretary to
lord Crew, when bishop of Oxford. He was fifteen years a prebendary, and forty
years rector of Stanhope. He had written his own epitaph, but it was not
thought proper to be put on his monument. Grey's Notes, MSS.

Dr Hartwell's will bears date the 9th of March, 1724, with a codicil thereto
of the same date.

"Whereby," Article 4th. "Item I leave 20l. p' aun. to be divided into two
exhibitions of 10l. each, toward the maintenance of two scholars to be sent to
either of the universities, out of the schools of Durham and Newcastle; these
exhibitions to continue for four years, with a year of grace to take a degree,
if the trustees think fit.

"Art. 5. Item. I give for the relief of two ministers poor widows, in the
communion of the established church, and whose husbands had either benefice or
curacy in the diocese of Durham, 5l. each, to be paid half-yearly during their
widowhood, and so long only as they shall continue objects of charity, and no
longer. -- Upon death or other vacancy, this number to be kept up for ever.

"Art. 6. Item. I give to the goal of Durham, for the use and benefit of
insolvent debtors there, 20l. p' ann. to be disposed of under the same
restrictions and limitations with the charities of like kind left by bishop
Wood; and that in the application of it, respect be first had to the
parishioners of Stanhope.

"These charities from Art. 3, inclusive, are to be paid out of the rents of
Fishburn estate; and having a presumption that I shall not be denied in a cause
of charity, I do appoint the Dean and Chapter of Durham, or any three of them,
my trustees herein, with the assistance, if need be, of the mayor and aldermen
of Durham, or any part of them, to receive the rent of the said estate at
Fishburn, and to see it applied according to the directions before expressed.

"Art. 12. Item. I leave to Dr Thomas Eden, one of my executors, 50l. to whom I
leave the crimson network purse, with the silver medals in it.

"CODICIL. Art. 4. I desire my funeral may be as private as possible; and,
therefore, I appoint ten o'clock at night for the ceremony, only a velvet pall,
without escutcheons, no more than six bearers, with rings, scarfs, and gloves.
-- Dr Eden one of the six. -- I can go no further at present, considering the
impotence I am reduced to by prosperous villainy.

"Art. 5. I humbly move my executors after my interment, to cover my grave with
a blue or black stone, and to fix a modest monument of white marble against the
wall of the cross aile of the cathedral to the north, opposite to the clock,
the cost not to exceed 50l. if less, the better; the inscription to be an oval
or square, etc.

"Lastly. I beg there maybe no alteration in the style, words, or sentiments of
the epitaph, which is enclosed in my will, and which I expect my executors will
perform for me, and have it cut in the oval or square erected for me. Upon my
gravestone is only to be written, Hic jacet Gulielmus Hartwel, S. T. P.

"Art. 7. I leave to Mr Hen. Pereth, my family pictures, viz. Sir John Marlay,
his son Mr Marlay, and his grandson Hen. Marlay, etc.

"Art. 11. I leave to Sir John Eden, my fine Lucretia cut in stone, by the son
of Bernini, the famous statuary at Rome," etc. etc.

Proved at Durham, the 26th of August, 1725. (...)
Sub marmore infra posito recumbit
Venerabilis vir Gulielmus Hartwel, S. T. P.
Et hujus ecc'ae canonicus;
Qui spe in Xto stabilita,
Coluit justitiam, pacem, charitatem, sidem,
Mansuetudinem, misericordiam, benevolentiam,
Et sine suco, cor mundum.
Quos animi affectus promisit Deus opt. max.
Vita aeterna insignire, and gaudio nunquam
Interituro afficere.
O munus divinum! omni laud majus,
Omni cogitatione sublimius.
Benedictus benedicatur, qui tanta mercede
Affectiones nostras inanes, et nil ei profuturas,
Decorare dignatus est.
Obiit 1o. Junij, Anno salutis n'rae 1725o.
Aetatis suae 70mo
On a small square blue stone on the floor.
Hic jac^^
GULIELMUS HARTWEL,
S. T. P.

.

THOMAS EDEN, LL. D. was installed the 24th of July, 1711, and was removed to
the seventh stall See page 199.
.

WILLIAM LUPTON, D. D. was installed the 20th of September, 1715. He was fellow
of Lincoln College, Oxford, lecturer of St Dunstan's, in Fleet Street, London,
morning preacher in Lincoln's Inn, and afternoon lecturer in the Temple: Was
vicar of Richmond, in Yorkshire, for one year, and resigned in the spring,
1706. In a sermon preached on Prove. iii. 16. he complimented bishop Crew very
highly on the fiftieth anniversary of his consecration. He preached lady
Moyer's lectures, but an indifferent performance; at his death, he desired none
of his discourses might be published, acknowledging he was not that great man
the world thought him Birch's Life of Tillotson, 218.
. On the 1st of July, 1700, he took a master of arts degree; that of bachelor
of divinity the 14th of February, 1708; and doctor in divinity the 13th of
February, 1711. He died at Tunbridge Wells the 14th of December, 1726.

JOHN JOHNSON, LL. D. was installed on the 18th of January, 1726. He was curate
to Mr Bruce, vicar of Middleton-Tyas, in Yorkshire, in the year 1700. He had no
university education, but on the 13th of January, 1731, was admitted in
Brazen-Nose College, to a degree of bachelor of civil law, by diploma; and on
the 16th of June, 1726, to that of doctor in civil law. He professed a
knowledge of surgery, and attempted many desperate cases, in one of which
succeeding with lady Clayton, one of the maids of honor, by her interest at
court, was appointed domestic chaplain to the lady Caroline, then princess of
Wales; and by king Geo. II. was presented to the vicarage of Manfield, in the
county of York: He afterward had Hurworth rectory, by presentation of Charles
Pinkney, Esquire 1714; and died in possession of that living, the 14th of October,
1761, aet. 84, where he lies interred For his epitaph, see the church of
Hurworth in the sequel. -- Dr Johnson purchased an alternate turn in this
rectory.
.

CHARLES MORGAN, A. M. was installed by proxy, the 25th of February, 1762. Was
student of Christ-Church, where he took a degree of master of arts on the 24th
of March, 1757: Was chaplain to bishop Trevor, and resigned this prebend for
the rectory of Haughton, near Darlington, into which he was inducted the 9th of
June, 1764: He died at Scarborough, on the 26th of the same month, aet. 32, and
was interred in the porch of his church at Haughton For his epitaph, see
Haughton church in the sequel.
.

CHARLES WESTON, A. M. was installed the 11th of August, 1764, and removed to
the sixth stall See page 195.
.

JOHN SHARP, D. D. eldest son of Thomas Sharp, prebendary of the tenth stall,
vicar of Hartburn, and archdeacon of Northumberland, was installed on the 11th
of August, 1768.

PREBENDARIES OF THE TENTH STALL Lands, etc. assigned to the tenth stall.
Stat. Firma capitalis terrarum and tenement. de South Pittington, cum domo
manerij ejusdem and Horto and Clausura vocat. Pondgarth and alia Clausura
vocat. Puller close. Lib. Recept. solvuntur capitulo quotannis Pro tenement de
South Pittington 8 13 4 Pro Manerio ibidem 0 1 8 Pro bladis Aegidij 0 2 0 Pro
Puller close 3 6 8 Act. capit. Decimae assignat. Decimae Garbar. de Hutam and
Hulam infra parochiam de Hesledon 8 0 0 Decimae de Nether Heworth, in paroch.
Jarrow 1 10 0 Decimae Garbar. de Suddick, infra paroch. Monkweremouth 5 6 8


.
ROBERT BLAKISTON, on the foundation, the 12th of May, 1541. He died in the
year 1550.

JOHN RUD, B. D. chaplain in ordinary to king Edward VI. and was presented by
him on the 20th of June, 1550, ex avisamento and consensu privati consilii sui,
and was installed on the 22d of July following: He was also installed a
prebendary of Winchester, in 1551, but on the accession of queen Mary, was
deprived in 1553 He was the only person presented by king Edw. VI. or in his
reign.
.

GEORGE BULLOCK, D. D. was presented by queen Mary, and installed on the 9th of
May, 1554. On the 12th of May, in the same year, he was admitted master of St
John's College, Cambridge. On the presentation of Philip and Mary, was
instituted vicar of St Sepulcher, London, the 11th of February in that year,
but resigned that church before the 2d of October, 1556: In the year 1559, he
was deprived, fled beyond sea, and lived at Antwerp, in the monastery of St
Michael, where we presume he died in 1580 Rymer, vol. xv. p. 350. -- Fuller, p.
130. -- Stryp. Ann. vol. i. p. 244, 278. -- Stryp. Eliz. 244. -- Pit's de
Scriptoribus, p. 773.
.

JOHN RUD, restored in 1559. He died in the year 1578 Isabel, his wife, by
will, dated the 28th of October, 1582, orders her body to be buried in the
cathedral, so neyre to her husband, late prebendarye, as may be. He was
dispensed with for two years absence to go abroad Skynner's Reg. 134.


, and was buried in this cathedral.

HUGH BROUGHTON, A. M. was collated the 13th, and installed the 14th of
November, 1578. He was a fellow of Christ College, Cambridge, and learned in
the Eastern languages, but was esteemed arrogantly opinionative: Was collated
to Washington rectory the 6th of May, 1580, and resigned his prebend that year.
He died the 4th of August, 1612 See a list of his works in the Bodleian
catalogue. -- Strype's Aylmer, 12, p. 248. -- Whitgift, ^. 2, (...). l. 4. c.
14, 19, 21, 23, 25, 33. -- Clarke's Lives, p. 1.


.

RALPH TUNSTALL, A. M. was installed the 9th of November, 1580. He was domestic
chaplain to archbishop Grindal, prebendary of Knaresbrough, in York cathedral,
the 15th of March, 1571; master of St Mary Magdalen's hospital, at Ripon, the
24th of September, 1572; and collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland,
the 29th of October, 1581. He departed this life in March, 1618 Ath. Oxon. vol.
i. p. 487.

He was chosen along with the chancellor of York, John Pilkington, and Henry
Ewbanke, of the twelfth stall, as proxies for the dean and chapter, to appear
at York, the 11th of October, 1586. His name often occurs in the chapter books,
as at bishop Matthew's visitation, 1607: Bishop James, 1610 and 1613: But at
the visitation of bishop Neile, the 21st of June, 1618, Lindsell, his
successor, occurs in this stall, so that probably he died in March, 1618.
Grey's Notes, MSS.


.

AUGUSTINE LINDSELL, D. D. was installed the 8th of April, 1619, and removed to
the second stall See page 176.
.

DANIEL BIRKHEAD, D. D. was removed from the sixth prebend See page 191.
, and installed the 5th of August, 1620. He died in 1624.

JOHN COUSIN, D. D. was collated the 4th of December, 1624, and consecrated
bishop of Durham, 1660 Vide, his annals in the first volume of this work, page
532
.

DANIEL BREVINT, A. M. was presented by king Charles II. sede vacant, and
installed the 15th of March, 1660: Was born in the island of Jersey, and
educated at Jesus College, Oxford, where he was incorporated master of arts,
and was the first fellow of the French fellowship, founded by king Charles I.
Was made master of arts at Saumur, in France, where he was a voluntary exile,
minister of a church in Normandy, and chaplain to the Prince of Turin. In 1661,
he was created doctor in divinity at Oxford; was instituted to Brancepeth, the
10th of September, 1662; and was dean of Lincoln, where he died the 5th of May,
1695, and was interred in the cathedral there Heylin's Life of Laud, p. 336. --
Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. p. 927. -- Kennet's Reg. 395. -- He wrote several treatises
both in Latin and English, with great learning and piety. -- Falle's Account of
the island of Jersey, 2d ed. introduction, p. 28, 29. -- A letter to him by
Mons. De l'Angle. Kennet's Reg. 466.

On the floor, behind the high altar.

"Here lies the body of Daniel Brevint, D. D. late dean of this cathedral
church of Lincoln, who departed this life May 5, 1695. I have waited for thy
salvation, O Lord."


.

FITZHERBERT ADAMS, D. D. was installed the 8th of June, 1695, being removed
from the sixth stall See page 193.
: He was also removed from this stall to the eleventh.

WILLIAM HARTWELL, D. D. was installed the 14th of June, 1711, being removed
from the ninth stall See page 206.
. He died the 1st of June, 1725.

GEORGE SAYER, A. M. was installed the 30th of June, 1725. He was the son of
George Sayer, of Doctor's Commons, and brother of Dr Exton Sayer, spiritual
chancellor of Durham Grievous charges are brought by Mr Spearman, in his
Enquiry, against both these persons, for their violent exertions of the
bishop's rights.
: This family sprung from Croft in Yorkshire. Mr George Sayer, the prebendary,
was of Oriel College, where he took a master of arts degree, the 14th of
December, 1719; and that of doctor in divinity, the 5th of May, 1735. He was
chaplain to bishop Talbot, and married a daughter of archbishop Potter: Was
collated to the vicarage of Witham, in Essex, by bishop Robinson, in 1722,
which he resigned in 1732: In 1730, was collated to the archdeaconry of
Northumberland, with Easington, on which he agreed to resign this stall, but
bishop Talbot's death intervening, it was not surrendered till the 26th of
September, 1732, to bishop Chandler, he having applied to the crown for
confirmation of the above preferments: He died at Brussels in 1761, having
retired thither on account of his embarrassed circumstances.

THOMAS SHARP, D. D. was installed the 1st of December, 1732. He was a younger
son of archbishop Sharp; was admitted of Trinity College, about the year 1708,
aet. 15; where he obtained the degree of doctor in divinity, In 1729, and was
fellow: He was chaplain to archbishop Dawes; and on the 19th of July, 1720, was
collated to the rectory of Rothbury, in the county of Northumberland: He held
the prebend of Southwell, and afterward that of Wistow, in York cathedral: In
1722, was collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland; and in 1755,
succeeded Dr Mangey, in the officialty of the dean and chapter: He departed
this life on the 16th of March, 1758, and was interred in this cathedral, in
the place called the Gallilee Installed by proxy, the 1st of October, but not
in full chapter; installed personally the 1st of December following. He made a
speech the 6th of July, 1753, to Richard lord bishop of Durham, on his first
visiting his diocese. -- He married Sir George Wheler's daughter: She died the
2d of July, 1757.
.

Sir HENRY VANE, Bart. LL. D. was installed the 5th of April, 1758. He was the
third son of George Vane, Esquire of Long-Newton; educated at Durham school, from
whence he was entered of Trinity College, and there had a fellowship: Was
chaplain to bishop Trevor, and on the 21st of April, 1754, was inducted to
Stainton, in this county; on the 7th of July, 1761, was admitted to the degree
of doctor of laws: He exchanged Stainton for Long-Newton, which he now enjoys.
In 178 was created a baronet.

PREBENDARIES OF THE ELEVENTH STALL Lands etc. assigned to the eleventh stall.
Statutis. Firma Manerij do Howghall 16 0 0 Act. capituli Decimae Garbarum de
Morton, infra paroch. de Dalton 5 6 8 Decimae Garbarum de Bedlington, in
Northumb. 9 0 0 Lib. Recept. solvuntur capitulo quotannis ab undecimo canon.
pro decimis Garbar. and Foeni de Houghall 2 0 0 Et pro decimis privatis omnibus
preter decimas servientium 1 0 0


.
ROBERT BENNET, a monk, and bursar of this convent at the dissolution,
appointed by the foundation, the 12th of May, 1541. He was instituted to the
vicarage of Gainford on the 18th of December, 1558, and departed this life in
August, 1558.

ANTHONY SALVIN, B. D. was installed the 12th of October, 1558, being removed
from the twelfth stall, in which year he was made vicar general on Dr Hyndmers'
death: He was a younger son of Gerrard Salvyn, of Croxdale, in this county; was
collated to a prebend in Norton church, the 10th of May, 1544; master of
Sherburn hospital, in 1552; and held the rectories of Winston and Ryton, which
he resigned on being collated to Sedgefield, on the 20th of December, in the
year 1558; but was soon after deprived of all his ecclesiastical preferments,
and sentenced not to depart five miles northward of Kirby-moor-side, in the
county of York, or to go to the city of York: He is noted as a person well
esteemed in the country, but a man of mean erudition Deprived by royal
visitation, 1559. Reg. Horn. -- He is called Sabryn. Strype's Eliz. p. 242.
Stryp^^ Ann. vol. i. 242, 276. -- Brown Willis, 273. -- One of his name was
chosen master of University College, Oxford, 1^^7. Le Neve, 480. -- Rector of
Winston, the 23d of September, 1545. -- Master of Sherburn hospital, the ^^th
of August, 1552. -- Rector of Ryton, the ^8th of April, 1558. -- He was sent up
as proxy for the chapter, appeal before cardinal Pole and the queen's
commissioners, the 30th of October, 1556, when the correct statutes of the
cathedral were made.


.

JOHN HENSHAW, or HENNESHEY, clerk, was presented by queen Elizabeth, sede
vacant, and installed the 29th of November, 1559. He died the next year Per
visit. D'me Eliz. reginae. Reg. Horn, p. 119. Instituted by Dr Edwin Sandys,
and Dr Henry Har^y bishop Tunstal being dead. His proxy for installment, dated
the 2d of May, 1559, under the seal of William Rokeby, archdeacon of the East
Riding of Yorkshire.
.

ADAM HOLYDAY was installed the 3d of January, 1560. He was presented by queen
Elizabeth, sede vacant, and admitted by Dr Watson and Dr John Crawforth, who
were guardians of the spiritualties of this See, by a commission from the
chapter of York, that See being then vacant by the deprivation of the
archbishop, and the dean being abroad in foreign parts. The same year the queen
presented him to the rectory of Bishop-Weremouth; and in 1561, he was appointed
by the chapter to collect the queen's tenths It is remarkable, that Holyday, as
well as Adam Shepherd of the eighth stall, and Stevenson of the ninth stall,
were admitted by commission from the chapter of York; this must have been owing
to the difficulties of those times. The queen had deprived the archbishop, and
Tunstall was dead, and the chapter here obnoxious to the queen, and probably
fearful of doing any thing that might create dispute with the chapter of York,
it was complied with as a compromise on both sides.


. His successor was

CLEMENT COLEMORE, LL.D. who was installed the 9th of May, 1590. He was
ordained a deacon by bishop Barnes, the 22d of December, 1583; and received
priest's orders the 20th of December, 1584, then being spiritual chancellor and
vicar general of this diocese The 7th of February, 1582, I meet with him as
spiritual chancellor.
: He was fellow of Brazen-Nose College, and proctor in 1578; and on the 5th of
July, 1582, was admitted to the degree of doctor of civil law: Was instituted
to Brancepeth on the 15th of April, 1584; was made prebendary of Gaia Major, in
Litchfield church, the 13th of February, 1586; and departed this life on the
18th of June, 1689, aet. 69, and was interred in this cathedral He was made
spiritual chancellor by bishop Barnes, 1579, and continued so forty years. --
His wife died in childbed, 1592, and dean Matthew preached her funeral sermon
on Genesis xxxv. 16 and 21, as appears by his diary.

EPITAPH.
Pie memoriae clarissimi viri Clementis Colemore, legum doctoris, Aenca
nasensis olim collegij socij, and almae academiae Oxoniensis procuratoris, dein
legum doctoris and episcopatus Dunelmensis cancellarij per 37 annos, etiam
invidia favente, integerrimi ejusdem eccl. prehendarij doctissimi, hoc
monumentum moestissimi filij posuerunt. Obiit A. D. 1619, Aetatis suae 69,
Junij 18, suorum, patriae, pauperum, omniumque Quibus tam rara probitas,
pietasque non potuit, non innotescere, longus dolor. Scio quod redemptor meus
vivit. Dom. Jesu veni cito.


.

FERDINANDO MOORCROFT, A. M. was collated the 14th of July, 1619, being removed
from the sixth stall See page 191.
. He died about the year 1641.

RALPH BROWNRIGG, D. D. succeeded about 1641. He was chaplain to bishop Morton,
who gave him the archdeaconry of Coventry, in 1631; was prebendary of Ely, in
the fifth stall, 1621; rector of Baily, and master of the Temple; and elected
to the bishopric of Exeter, the 31st of March, 1642. He departed this life on
the 7th day of December, 1659, and was buried in the Temple church He paid to
the library 6l. 13s. 4d. -- His life was written by bishop Gauden. -- Ath.
Oxon. vol. i. f. p. 245. -- Newcourt's Rep. vol. i. p. 547. -- Lloyd's Memoirs,
p. 404. -- Collier's Eccl. Hist. vol. ii. p. 772, etc. -- Fuller's Worthies,
780 -- Baxter's Life, 172, 174. -- Walker's Suff. Clergy, vol. ii. p. 23. -- Dr
Gauden preached his funeral sermon, 2 Kings. ii. 12. -- Brown Willis says he
was master of Catherine Hall, but Dr Ellison makes him master of Pembroke Hall.
-- He had no enjoyment either of his prebend or bishopric.

EPITAPH.
Sumptibus and auspiciis honorab. societat. Templi, subtus positas sunt
reliquiae Radolphi Brounrici, S. T. D. cant. reverendiss. episc. exon. quem
honorem optime meruit, and per annos xix tenuit, malo tamen seculi sato
(bellis, schismatibus, sacrilegiis and regicidibus ferocien) nunquam exercuit.
Tandem anno aetatis lxvii. provinciam terrestrem nondum visam deserens, ad
caelestem migravit era Christi MDCLIX. illucescente Car. II. faelicissimo
reditu.

L. M. P. J. G. Episc. Exon. electus.
.

THOMAS WOOD, D. D. was presented by king Charles II. sede vacant, the 7th of
July, and installed the 10th of December, 1660. He was born at Hackney, and
received his first rudiments, at Westminster school, from whence he was elected
student of Christ-Church, Oxford, in 1627; and was admitted to the degree of
doctor in divinity, in 1641: Was made chaplain in ordinary to king Charles I.
when he was twenty-eight years of age, and collated to the rectory of Whickham
on the 2d of July, 1635. He traveled to Rome during the Rebellion, and soon
after the Restoration was made chaplain to king Charles II. In 1663, was
appointed to the deanery of Litchfield; and in 1671, was consecrated bishop of
that diocese, and held this prebend in commendam: He died at Astrop Wells, in
Northamptonshire, on the 18th of April, 1692, and was interred at Ufford, in
Suffolk Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. -- 1176. His petition to the House of Lords at the
Restoration, Kennet's Reg. 161, 183, Archbishop Sancroft suspended him for not
repairing to his diocese.

Bishop Wood, by his will dated the 11th of November, 1690, devised certain
lands in the county of Huntingdon, to trustees upon trust, that they, etc.
should from time to time, dispose of the rents of the said lands to all the
senior masters, students for the time being for ever thereafter, of and in
Christ-Church College, in Oxford, equally to be divided amongst them, share and
share alike for their respective maintenances, during all such time as they
should continue students in the said college, and profess the Protestant
religion of the church of England, etc. He also bequeathed to the same trustees
3000l. to be paid out of the arrears of his High Suffolk estate, or other his
personal estate, upon trust, to lay out the same in the purchase of lands, etc.
and after the purchasing thereof, to pay the rents of such lands to all the
junior masters, students for the time being in Christ-Church College, Oxon,
during all such time as they should profess the Protestant religion of the
church of England, etc. and should continue in the college, etc. etc. -- For
charities given by this will to the city of Durham, see this volume, page 58;
and to Chester and Whickham, vide the sequel.

He was compelled in Michaelmas term, 1685, by decree in Chancery, to pay to
Charles Fitz-Roy, duke of Southampton* who married Mary, the sole daughter and
heiress of his elder brother, Sir Henry Wood, 30,000l. as part of his lady's
fortune. Collins's Peerage, vol. i.


.

JOHN MONTAGUE, D. D. was installed the 3d of June, 1692, being removed from
the fourth stall See page 169 and 185^.
.

THEOPHILUS PICKERING, D. D. was installed the 1st of February, 1699, being
removed from the fourth stall See page 185.
. He died the 20th of March, 1710.

FITZHERBERT ADAMS, D. D. was installed on the 14th of April, 1711, being
removed from the tenth stall See page 193 and 210.
. He died the 12th of June, 1719.

JOHN DOLBEN, D. D. was installed the 18th of July, 1719, being removed from
the sixth stall See page 194.
. He died the 21st of November, 1756.

WADHAM KNATCHBULL, LL. D. was installed the 8th of January, 1757, being
removed from the twelfth stall. He was the third son of Sir Edward Knatchbull,
of Mershamhatch, in the county of Kent, Bart. a fellow of Trinity Hall,
Cambridge, and took a degree of doctor of laws in July, 1741; was chaplain to
bishop Chandler; and in 1738, inducted to the family living of Chilham, in
Kent. He departed this life on the 27th of December, 1760, and was interred in
the Galilee of this cathedral M. S.
WADHAMI KNATCHBULL, I. C. D.
D'ni Edwardi Knatchbull, de Mershamhatch, in com. Cant. Baronetti,
Filij natu tertij
Ecclesiae de Chilham in eodem com. vicarij,
Et canonicatus ximi. in hac ecclesia canonici;
Viri pij, probi, erga omnes benevoli;
Excellenti ingenio, multiplici doctrina,
Moribus candidissimis et integerrimis praediti;
Corpore infirmo, animo aequo et imperturbato,
Per omnem fere vitae cursum cum adversa valetudine conflictatus
Ad aeternam requiem migravit xxvijmo. die Decembris
Anno D'ni MDCCLX, aetatis suae LIVE.
Uxorem duxit Harriottam
Caroli Parry de Oakfield, in com. Berks, armi filiam
Quam cum tribus filiis, et filiabus duabus reliquit superstitem.
Post hunc parietem in capellae adjacente
Conduntur reliquiae Composed by Dr Lowth, preb. of Durham, bishop of Oxford,
and now bishop of London.
.

.

SAMUEL DICKENS, D. D. was installed the 19th of March, 1761, being removed
from the twelfth stall: Was a student of Christ-Church, Oxford, and chaplain to
bishop Trevor: On the 9th of July, 1743, was admitted to a degree of master of
arts, and bachelor in divinity, on the 25th of October, 1752; and that of
doctor in divinity, the 20th of June, 1753: In the year 1752, he was proctor of
the university; and in 1754, was made the king's Greek professor: He was made
official to the dean and chapter of Durham, in 1760; and on the 8th of January,
1762, was appointed archdeacon of Durham, with the rectory of Easington annexed.

PREBENDARIES OF THE TWELFTH STALL Lands, etc. assigned to the twelfth stall.
Statutis. Domus manerij de Bewly, cum firma mansionis firmarij ibidem cum
terris Dominicalibus, etc. 10 3 4 Capitulo antiq. solvend. 2 3 4 Act. capituli
Decimae de Westoe, infra paroch. de Jarrow, p' ann. 6 18 6 Decimae de
Willington in eadem 3 13 4 Decimae de Moncton, ib'm 2 10 6 Decimae de
Sheelheugh, ib'm 1 1 6 Lib. receptoris. Solvit duodecimus canonicus capitulo
quotannis per le rent hens, viz. 6 galin. 6 capon. 6 anser. 0 7 0


.
WILLIAM WATSON, a monk of Durham, by the foundation, the 12th of May, 1541: He
died in the year 1556.

ANTHONY SALVIN, B. D. was collated the 12th, and installed the 16th of
October, 1556, and removed to the eleventh stall See page 211.
.

GEORGE CLIFFE, B. D. was collated by queen Mary, the 13th of September, 1558.
Was instituted to the vicarage of Billingham, the 29th of May, 1560, whereof he
was deprived in 1565: Was collated to the rectory of Elwick, the 17th June,
1562; and instituted to Brancepeth rectory, the 29th of March, 1571, which he
resigned in 1584; and was again instituted to Billingham, the 11th of January,
1684. He died in 1695 Dr Roger Watson, and Dr Jo. Crawforth, during the vacancy
of the Sees of York and Durham, were guardians of the spiritualties of Durham,
by a commission granted to them from the chapter of York. -- Dean Horn's Reg.
p. 120, 122. -- Whittingham's Reg. p. 214. -- He was joined with Dr W. Todd, in
the patent or commission of officialty, by Dr Horn and the Chapter, the 10th of
December, 1560. 2 reg. s. 131. -- He was appointed by D. Skynner and the
Chapter, to collect the tenths and subsidies exacted by queen Elizabeth, the
24th of May, 1561.


.

HENRY EWBANKE, A. M. was installed the 8th of September, 1596; and resigned
the same, the 5th of October, 1620: Was collated to Washington, the 24th of
December, 1583; and to Winston in 1588; was instituted to St Mary's hospital in
Newcastle, the 15th of March, 1585, which he resigned in 1615: He was
prebendary of Gaia Minor, in Litchfield church, in 1581; and was removed to
Weeford prebend, in the same church, 1586; and resigned the latter, 1612: Was
collated to the rectory of Whickham, on the 5th of September, 1620; and
departed this life in 1628 In the south aile of Durham cathedral, was an
inscription for one Ewbanke, who died rector of Ryton, about 1620. Willis's
Cath.

It is said he left 500l. per ann. at his death. -- He married his daughter to
William James, in whose favor he resigned his stall. -- He had the next
presentation to this prebend, granted him in 1589. Matthew's Reg. 236, 469.
James's Reg. 89. -- On presentation to St Mary's hospital, he gave bond to the
mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, in the penalty of 100l. with a condition that
he should, at his own expense, maintain a school^ master for freemen's
children, without salary, save 6d. a quarter; to preach yearly twelve sermons;
and to keep the hospital, chapel, and buildings in repair: For nonperformance,
a suit was instituted, and the penalty ^ecovered. Grey's Notes, MSS.


.

WILLIAM JAMES, A. M. was installed the 6th of October, 1620. He was nearly
related to bishop James, and was public orator at Oxford, in 1601; was collated
to Craike, on the 10th of July, 1614; to Washington, on the 12th of September,
1616; to Ryton, in May 1617; and to Merrington, in August, 1629. He rebuilt his
prebendal house; was one of the proxies for the chapter, at the convocation at
York, 1625; and one of the prebendaries who supported the canopy over the head
of king Charles I. when at Durham. He died in the month of January, 1659, and
was interred in this cathedral Ath. Oxon. vol. i. p. 421. -- Hunt's Reg.
.

GUY CARLETON, D. D. was presented by king Charles II. sede vacant, and
installed the 2d of November, 1660: Was born at Brampton Foot, in Gilsland, in
the county of Cumberland, and was educated at Carlisle, from whence he was sent
to Queen's College, Oxford; was fellow thereof, and proctor of the university,
in 1635: He held the vicarage of Bucklersbury, in Berkshire: Was collated to
Wolsingham, in November, 1660, and the same year had the deanery of Carlisle: In
1671, was consecrated bishop of Bristol; and, in 1678, was translated to the
bishopric of Chichester, holding this prebend in commendam: He departed this
life on the 6th of July, 1685, aet. 80, and was buried in his cathedral church
Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. 1168. -- Kennet's Reg. 303. -- Walker's Suff. Clergy, part
ii. p. 214.


.

JOHN MORTON, D. D. was installed the 18th of July, 1685, being removed from
the sixth stall See page 19^.
. He died in 1722.

THOMAS RUNDLE, LL. B. was installed the 3d of December, 1722, being removed
from the first stall See page 173.
. He died in 1743.

WADHAM CHANDLER, A. M. was installed the 21st of July, 1735: Was the youngest
son of bishop Chandler; received his first rudiments at Eton school, from
whence he was admitted in Clare Hall, Cambridge: Was appointed spiritual
chancellor of this diocese, in September, 1731; collated to Bishop-Weremouth,
in May, 1732: In July, 1733, was inducted to Washington; and made master of
Sherburn hospital, in 1735, whereby he vacated his two rectories: He died at
Aix, in France, the 2d of June, 1737, and his remains were brought over to be
interred in the Gallilee of this cathedral.

WADHAM KNATCHBULL, LL. D. was installed the 17th of June, 1738, and removed to
the eleventh stall See page 213.
.

SAMUEL DICKENS, D. D. was installed the 8th of January, 1757, and removed to
the eleventh stall See page 214.
.

THOMAS BURTON, D. D. was installed the 11th of May, 1761, being removed from
the third stall See page 182.
. He departed this life in 1767.

EDMUND LAW, D. D. was installed the 8th of August, 1767: Was of St John's
College, Cambridge, but invited to Christ's, and chosen a fellow of that
society: Was one of the Zodiac, as a set of learned and ingenious young men in
the university were then called, and distinguished himself very early by
writing on the Being and Attributes of God; and especially in his notes on his
translation of archbishop King's Origin of Evil; wherein our ideas of space,
time, and immensity, and the self-existence, necessary existence, and unity of
God, are more accurately enquired into, and discussed with greater clearness
and precision, than by any writer before or since, on such abstruse
metaphysical subjects. He was also principally concerned in publishing an
excellent edition of Stephens's Thesaurus. In 1739, he accepted the rectory of
Graystoke, to which he was presented by the university. When Mr Howard, now
duke of Norfolk, sold the advowson, he stipulated with the purchaser in favor
of Mr Law, for a presentation from a Protestant patron. Mr Law accordingly
resigned this rectory, and had a new presentation from Dr Askew, the purchaser.
This allowed him to remove to Salkeld, the corpse of the archdeaconry of
Carlisle, a much more healthy situation, given him by bishop Fleming. While in
Cumberland, he published Considerations on the Theory of Religion, which has
gone through several editions; Litigiousness repugnant to the Laws of
Christianity, an assize sermon, at Carlisle, and a charge on the Nature and
Necessity of Catechizing. In 1747, he proceeded to doctor in divinity: The
divinity school was unusually crowded, and the rigidly orthodox were so alarmed
at his question, that it gave occasion to much altercation afterward, in a
variety of publications; but he himself, unwilling to give further offense,
thought it a part of Christian prudence not to be more explicit on the subject,
till men appear more willing to submit their vain philosophy to the authority
of God's word, and are disposed to examine things with greater attention and
impartiality; concluding in the words of honest bishop Tailor, that he had been
so pushed at by herds and flocks of people, that follow any body that whistles
to them, or drives them to pasture, that he was grown afraid of any truth that
seemed chargeable with singularity. In 1755, he returned to Cambridge, having
been chosen master of St Peter's College, when he resigned the archdeaconry,
but kept the rectory. He served the office of vice chancellor, in 1756, and,
having a numerous family, he afterward accepted the office of principal
librarian, and that of casuistical professor; and had also the archdeaconry of
Stafford, and a stall in the church of Lincoln, given him on his promotion to
the Sea of Carlisle, in 1769; he kept the headship of his college, and had the
rectory of Greystoke in commendam. -- He published only two or three sermons
afterward; but, though advanced to a great age, such was his veneration for
the great Mr Lock, and his love for freedom of enquiry, that he surprised the
world with an excellent edition of the works of that great philosopher in four
volumes, folio. -- He is still living.

JOHN ROSS, D. D. was installed the 17th of March, 1769. He was born at Ross,
in the county of Hereford, and was fellow of St John's College, Cambridge; was
preacher at the Rolls chapel, and private tutor to Thomas viscount Weymouth,
who presented him to the vicarage of From Zalwood, in Somersetshire: He was
chaplain to the king, by whom he was presented to this prebend, on the 28th of
February, preceding his installation. In 1777, was consecrated bishop of
Exeter, when he resigned this stall, and was succeeded by

THOMAS DAMPIER, D. D. (son to the late dean) who was installed the 26th of
February, 1778; succeeded his father as master of Sherburn hospital; and is now
dean of Rochester.

ARCHDEACONS OF DURHAM The value of this dignity, with the rectory of Easington
annexed, was rated for first fruits, A. D. 1534, at 1000l.
.
LEOBWIN, or LEOFWYN, seems to have been the first archdeacon, by whose
misconduct the murder of bishop Walcher was occasioned. Le Neve says, thence
the very name of archdeacon grew so mighty odious to the people, that the
succeeding bishop thought proper at that time to sink the title, and vest the
power in the prior of Dunholme; but, after some time, the memory thereof being
pretty much worn away, the title and office were resumed, and this seems to be
about the year 1188.

ALDWIN, who dying the 12th of April, 1087, was succeeded by

TURGOT, on whose being made bishop of St Andrew's, in Scotland, in the year
1108 Nich. Hist. Libr etc. He was preferred to this dignity by William de
Carilepho, qui Ao. 1094 decrevit, ut prior monasterij Dunelm. totius dioceseos
archidiaconus esset in p'petuum, et episcopi in spiritualibus vicarius and in
temporalibus, etc.


,

MICHAEL succeeded in bishop Ralph's time, and resumed the title and office, as
a distinct person from the prior of Durham Ab eo tempore quo Turgotus,
consecratus erat quando Algarus priorat. accepit. hic postea suit archiep.
Cant. -- He is a witness to a deed of bishop Ralph's. Hist. Dunelm. Claudius D.
4.
.

ROBERT DE ST AGATHA occurs Ao 1129, and 1131 Tempus incertum sed videtur quod
ex p'te Will'mi Common stetit annis 1140, 1141, 1142, ut narrat. monachus
anonymus scriptor. Hist. Dunelm.
.

WAROW, or WAZO, succeeded in the year 1147 Contraversiam inter hunc and
priorem Rogerum de tenenda episcopi dextra diremit Will. de S'ca Barbara, data
charta, 1 Dec. 1147. Hist. Dunelm. Claudius, D. 4.
. As did

RANNULPH, about 1150 Quere, Whether archdeacon of Durham or Northumberland; he
was nephew to bishop Ranulph. -- Ranulphum and Wasonem archidiaconos simul
extitisse constat, 1153. Quare potius Catalago archd. North. adjudicandus est.
. And

LAWRENCE, D. D. An. 1153. He and Laurence the prior went to Rome, to defend
the election of Hugh Pudsey to this See. Obiit 11th of April, 1176. After him
occurs

WILLIAM, in the year 1174 Cartular S. Albani, MSS. Cotton, Tiberius, s. 6. f.
116.
.

JOHN, subjoined by this title as witness to a deed of bishop Hugh's, about
1180 Mon. Ang. tom. i. p. 513.
.

BURCHARD DE PUDSEY occurs about 1109, and died possessed of this dignity, the
6th of December, 1196 Burchard archd. is witness to a charter of bishop Hugh
Pudsey. MSS. Eccl. Dun.

Hugh Pudsey, made a second natural son of his archdeacon -- He was also
chancellor to the king of France. Goodw. Finchale was given him by the prior
and convent of Durham, which he afterward resigned. Lel. Col. vol. i. part ii.
p. 533.


.

AIMERICK DE TALBOYS, nephew to bishop Philip de Poictiers, whom I find
possessed in 1198 and 1214, next year after which he is said to be appointed
high sheriff of Northumberland Annal. Dunelm. MSS. Cotton. The same person by
this title had a prebend in the church of Litchfield, conferred on him by the
king, 18th of February, 1213. Le Neve. -- Fuller's Worth. North.
.

SYMEON occurs archdeacon of Durham, with Alanus, archdeacon of Northumberland,
witnesses to a grant of bishop Richard, the 6th of May, 1218.

WILLIAM occurs in 1219. Willis says, I take him to be the same with William de
Lanim, whom I meet with in 1226 and 1236; he died, as I find by a note, An.
1249. Le Neve tells us it appears, he Was archdeacon of Dunholme, in 1219, by
an ancient inscription in a window, in the hall of University College, Oxford:
He adds, I believe this was the same with W. de Lanim, if so, I hear of him
again 1234 Claus, 19. K. ^. 3. m. 13. -- Wood's Ath. Oxon. part ii. p. 53, 56.
-- Fuller's Worth. p. 29. -- Univers. Col Ox. caepit sub Aluredo rege
restaurat. p' Gul. archd. Dunelm. circa An. 1249. Camb. Brit. vol. i. 308. --
Ayliff's ancient and present State of Oxford, vol. i. p. 248.
.

THOMAS DE ANESTY was possessed in 1250. Le Neve says, he was also archdeacon
of Northumberland Newcourt's Rep. vol. i. p. 125.
.

RICHARD or ROBERT DE SANCTA AGATHA, archdeacon of Durham, was collector of the
tenths in the diocese of Durham, the 7th of September, 1266 Angl. Sac.
(Richard) vol. i. p. 740.
; he occurs as witness to a charter in 1271, by the name of Robert In charta
Dec. et capit. Dun. 1271. Hic in capella de Aukland coram ep'o Rob'to de
Stichil recognovit priorem Dunel. fuisse archidiaconum in ecclesijs sibi
appropriatis infra Aquas Tyne and Tees, and archidiac, predecessores suos
nomina prioris and non proprio jurisdictionem in illis eccl. exercuisse and
propter hoc priori penc'onem annuam exolvisse, etc.


.

ANTHONY BECK held this dignity in 1275 and 1283, in which latter year he was
consecrated bishop of Durham Rymer, vol. ii. p. 49, 237. -- See vol. i. p. 228.
, and was succeeded by

WILLIAM DE LUDA, anglice Lowth, who held it in 1284; and being made bishop of
Ely, in 1290 Collect. Fr. Clarke, f. 333, B. -- Decanus Sti. Martini London.
and regis Edwardi Camerarius, Thesaurarius, et Clericus Garderobae. Ob. 25 Mar.
1298.
, was succeeded by

S. DE FARLINGTON, who held it in 1296.

WM DE S. BOTULPHO occurs in 1300 and 1308 Randal's Notes to Le Neve. -- Is
witness to a deed of confirm made by the dean and chapter of Durham, the 14th
of August, 1208.
.

THOMAS DE GOLDESBURGH occurs in 1311 Reg. Greenfeld Ebor.
: He died in 1333, whereupon the bishop conferred this dignity on his nephew
Aumerick de Bellomonte, but the king disapproving of this appointment,
nominated thereto

ROBERT DE TAUNTON; but whether he enjoyed the office seems uncertain, though
the king repeated his patent by way of confirmation: He dying in 1335 Can.
Eccl'iae Sti Pauli, London. -- Pat. 7. K. Ed. 3. p. 2. -- Pat. 8. K. Ed. 3. p.
1. -- Newcourt, vol. i. p. 220.


, the next who occurs is

AUMERICK DE BELLOMONTE, in 1336 and 1338. His successor was

THO. DE NEVILL, who occurs in July 1340 and 1356. He died in the year 1362;
was prebendary of Bole, in the church of York; a prebendary of Hoveden; and
also of Darlington, in this diocese, and rector of Thorp-Basset, in the county
of York.

WILLIAM DE WESTLEE next occurs, in 1362; he was temp. chancellor Vid. Reg.
Hatfield, f. 57.
.

ALEXANDER DE NEVILL occurs the 12th of January, 1370. It seems doubtful
whether this was the same person who was preferred to the Sea of York, in 1374,
as Willis tells us; -- no such person is named by Le Neve Dissentionem orta
inter regem Richardum 2dum et Barons, hic patriam reliquit and secessit
Brabantiam ubi obiit exul circa Majum in Lavantia. Grey's Notes, MSS.
.

GABEVAN is the next on the list, a Roman cardinal, noted by Fox in his
Martyrs, vol. i. p. 563, who informs us he held the office in 1378: But this is
an error of our author, for by the Parliament Rolls, 50 king Edward III. an.
1376, it appears, Communes in Parliamento inter alia regni gravamina queruntur
quod Jacobus de Ursinis cardinalis quidam Romanus, archidiaconatum Dunelm.
tenuit.

WILLIAM DE BASINSTOKE, otherwise called Mundy de Basingstoke, was collated the
13th of August, 1379 Hatfield's Reg. 160 and 167. Ao. 1379, vocat. archid.
.

AGAPITUS DE COLUMPNA CARDINALIS S. PRISCAE held it in 1380, as we learn from
Rym. Foedera, vol vii. p. 276: In which authority

PILEUS Cardinalis S. Praxedis is mentioned the 11th of July, 1381 Page 320.
. He being presented by the king during a vacancy of the Sea.

THOMAS DE WESTON, prebendary of Grindal, in the church of York, and one of the
prebendaries of Hoveden, held this office in 1393; and dying in the year 1408
An. 1^97. p' resign. T. de la War, canonicus factus est in ecclesia Ebor. and
tenuit prebendam de Grindall.
, was succeeded by

ALAN DE NEWARKE, who resigned on the 15th of February, in the same year.

JOHN HOVINGHAM, LL. D. was collated the 16th of February, 1408; and occurs
possessed of this office, the 4th of May, 1416 Rymer, vol. ix. p. 80, 343.
.

JOHN KEMPE succeeded the 13th of October, 1417; on whose promotion to the Sea
of Rochester, an. 1419 Afterward successively bishop of Chichester, London,
York, and Canterbury, and tavice cardinal. Fuller's Worth. Kent.
,

ROBERT GILBERT was promoted by the crown, and we find him possessed thereof in
1420. In the year 1436, he was consecrated bishop of London, but who succeeded
him here is uncertain: One Robert Rollinson is named, but no authority appears.

WILLIAM LE SCROOPE was promoted to this dignity in 1437, and held it
twenty-six years: He died the 5th of May, 1463, and was buried in York
cathedral EPITAPH.
Hic jacet Mr Will de Scroop, archid. Dunelme ac residentiarius in Eccl. Coll.
Sancti Johannia Beverlace and Sanct. W^^idi, R^pon, qui obi^t xxij die Maij,
1^63, cujus animae propitietur Deus.


.

RALPH BOOTH, prebendary of Norton, occurs in 1463: It is probable that bishop
Booth, who was consecrated in 1457, before his translation to York, collated
Ralph to this dignity, as he did to the archdeaconry of York, in 1477: He held
both to the time of his death, which happened in 1497: Was temporal chancellor
of Durham.

THOMAS COLSTON, LL. B. next occurs; nephew to bishop Fox, who collated him the
20th of April, 1497 Reg. Fox, p' M. Bo^^i^.
. He resigned, and

ROGER LEYBOURNE succeeded the 24th of January, 1499. He Was temporal
chancellor of Durham, master of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, a prebendary of York,
and occurs archdeacon of York, on the 10th of September, 1503; and in the
succeeding year, was consecrated bishop of Carlisle.

JOHN BOERNIUS, a Genoese clerk, was obtruded into this dignity by the pope: He
resigned in 1515, but reserved to himself a pension of 50 l. per ann.

WILLIAM FRANKLEYN, B. D. occurs in 1531. He was both temporal and spiritual
chancellor to the bishops Ruthall, Wolsey, and Tunstall; held the rectory of
Houghton, in the fourteenth year of king Henry VIII. In the year 1538, was made
dean of Windsor; and about the same time rector of Chalfonte, in the county of
Bucks: In 1545, being master of St Giles's hospital, at Keypier, he surrendered
the same into the king's hands, as also great part of the revenue of Windsor
deanery; but being complained of for concealment, was obliged to surrender the
entire deanery in 1553, keeping all his other preferments to the time of his
death, which happened about the year 1555: The place of his interment is
uncertain, but it is probable he was buried obscurely at St Giles's, Chalfonte
Ath. Oxon. vol. i. p. 703. Fast. 74.
.

BERNARD GILPIN, B. D. succeeded in this archdeaconry, in 1556, but quitted it
in about four years; -- the particulars of his life will be inserted under the
head of Houghton parish, in the sequel.

JOHN EBDEN, B. D. and prebendary of Ely, was appointed by queen Elizabeth,
during a vacancy of the Sea, on the 22d of May, 1560: Was proctor of the
university of Cambridge, and had rich benefices in the diocese of Ely and
Winchester, in the latter of which he was archdeacon: Did not hold his office
in this church long Newcourt, vol. i. p. 175. -- Ath. Oxon. vol. i. Fast. 74.
-- Rymer, vol. xv. p. 564.

In the chapel of Magdalen hospital, near Winchester, on a small plate of
brass, fixed against the south wall of the chancel.

Corpus Johannis Ebden, sacrae theologiae professoris pii, ecclesiae
cathedralis Winton, prebendarij docti, hujus hospitij magistri reverendi, qui
inter alia dona in alios charitatis usus collata 200l. in augmentationem
stipendiorum ibidem libere dedit, hoc tegitur tumulo.

Obiit 16 Novembris, 1614, aetatis suae 98.
He that both God and good men feared and loved,
Which by example cherisht or reproved,
Here lies entered. He living was, dead is,
A preacher whom the church loved, the people mys
His life for length, learning for truth was great,
His doctrine pure, his deeds without deceit,
And in his life time was, and at his end
To rich and poor a father and a freinde.
John Ebden, S. T. B. Proctor of the University, 1550.

Archdeacon of Durham, 22d May, 1560.
Coll. to the preb. of Mapesbury, in St Paul's chapter 13 Nov. 1563.
He exchanged his archd. with J. Pilkington.
Installed preb. 7 stall, Winch. 7 Dec. 1563.
Archd. of Winchester, 1571, resig. 1575.
Preb. in the 4th stall, Ely, 19th Dec. 1559.
Contd preb. of St Paul's till 1596.
Randall's MSS.
, for we find

JOHN PILKINGTON, B. D. brother and chaplain to bishop Pilkington, succeeded
the 5th of December, 1563. He was interred in this cathedral, without any
monument, Ao 1603 Strype's Eliz. p. 237. -- Wood's Ath. Oxon. vol. i. f. 147.
-- Stryp. Ann. vol. i. p. 248. vol. ii. 482, 525. -- Math. Reg. p. 133.
.

WILLIAM MORTON, B. D. was collated the 19th of November, 1603: Was rector of
Long Newton, in 1588; and vicar of St Nicholas' church, in Newcastle, where he
was interred, the 18th of July, 1620.

GABRIEL CLARKE, D. D. was collated the 9th of September, 1621. Died in 1662,
and was buried in this cathedral Vid. Prebendaries of the first stall, p. 171.
.

DENNIS GRANVILLE, D. D. succeeded, being collated the 16th of September, 1662:
Was deprived in 1691 Vid. Deans, p. 167.
; and succeeded by

ROBERT BOOTHE, B. D. the 15th of May, 1691: Was dean of Bristol, where he
died, and was interred the 18th of August, 1730.

GEORGE SAYER, A. M. succeeded on the 3d of November, 1730. He died in 1761
Vide Prebendaries of the tenth stall, p. 208.
, and was succeeded by

SAMUEL DICKENS, D. D. on the 8th of January, 1762 See page 214.
.

ARCHDEACONS OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
This dignity, with Howick rectory annexed, was valued, in 1534, at 36l. 13s.
4d.

RANULPH NEPOS E'PI RANULPHI, witness to the bishops charter, sans date, occurs
in 1131.

ROBERT held this office in 1140, as did

RALPH, in the year 1141 and 1153, and John Hagulstad.


WILLIAM, 1160.

DURAND enjoyed it in 1174 He was witness to a deed of bishop Pudsey's, in
1174, Cartul. S. Albini. MS. -- Cotton. -- Tiberius. f. 6. f. 116.
; we have then a great vacancy, for the first nominee that occurs is

RICHARD DE MARISCO, archdeacon of Richmond, and afterward bishop of Durham,
and lord chancellor, an. 4 Joh. regis, 1212; occurs again in 1223. He
administered the oath to king John, which the sovereign took to the pope Vide
Sir R. Atkyn's State of Gloucestershire, p. 92. -- Spelm. Gloss. p. 110. -- By
this title he had the king's letters of pres. to the church of Kemesey, diocese
Wigorn, dated July, 1212. Pat. 14 Joh. m. 5. n. 12.
.

ALAN DE LENN is the next that occurs, in 1219 Rymer, vol. i p. 177, 196 --
Camden's Rem. 323. -- Was appointed one of the king's proctors to treat about
differences with the king of Scotland, the 21st July, 1219. -- Rymer, vol. i.
p. 228.


.

THOMAS DE ANESTY was preferred thereto by the king, during the vacancy of the Sea, the 5th of April, 1248; and quitted it for the archdeaconry of Durham, in
1250.

THOMAS DE HEREFORD died possessed of the office, in August, 1253 Mat. Westminster.
; and the next we find is

RICHARD DE MIDDLETON, the 23d of September, 1270; and after him

ROGER DE HERTBURN, in 1288; and

NICHOLAS DE WELLS, in 1310, and 1311 Reg. Grenefield Ebor.
.

ROBERT DE PICKERING, on the 12th of June, 1312: Was made dean of York Vic.
Genesis W. A'epi. Ebor. Rymer, vol. iii. p. 374.
, and it is probable quitted the archdeaconry in 1314, in favor of

THOMAS CHARLTON, LL. D. who was consecrated bishop of Hereford, in 1327 Rymer,
vol. iii. 600, 617, 637.
, upon whose resignation

JOHN DE CHARLETON was presented by the king, the 16th of February, 1328 Rot.
A. Hatfield, sch. 8.
.

EDMUND HOWARD occurs in the year 1343; and

WILLIAM DE SHREWSBURY, in 1353 and 1355 Pat. 2 Ed. III. p. 1.
: Was prebendary of Longden, and archdeacon of Salop, in Litchfield cathedral.

JOHN DE BAMBURGH occurs in 1361 Reg. Hatfield, p. 55. Rymer, vol. vi. p. 373.
; and was succeeded by

RICHARD DE BARNARDCASTLE, who was collated the 10th of September, 1362: Was
temporal chancellor of this palatine, and seems to be the same person that
erected the shrine of Saint Bede, and was interred near thereto. He resigned for
the deanery of Auckland, in 1369.

THOMAS DUFFIELD was collated the 19th of August, 1369 Pat. 44, king Ed. III.
p. 2, 3. -- Hatfield's Reg. f. 68. -- He was dean of Chester-in-the-Street.
139^.
.

WILLIAM DE BEVERLEY succeeded by exchange, in January, 1369: Was prebendary of
Stillington, in York cathedral.

JOHN DE DERBY was presented by king Edward III. during a vacancy of the Sea,
the 9th of February, 1370, and William de Beverley was ejected Reg. Hatfield,
p. 67.
.

JOHN REFAME occurs in 1386 and 1397 Reg. Land.
.

JOHN DE DALTON, in 1409.

JOHN RICHARDSON resigned in 1410.

HENRY ELTON succeeded, and soon after resigned Reg. Langley, f. 51.
to

JOHN RICKENGALE, who possessed it a very short time; for we find he resigned
it in favor of

JOHN AKUM, in 1411; and on his resignation

JOHN RICKENGALE again had this office: Was made bishop of Chester Vide Cart.
etc. Libellus prior and conventus. John de Rykenhale, and ibi multa notabilia
de jurisdic'one officialis prior and con. Grey's Notes, MSS.
, 1426.

ROBERT BURTON, D. D. occurs in 1421 Randall's MS Notes on Le Neve.
.

MARMADUKE LUMLEY occurs in 1422 and 1427: Was precentor of Lincoln, rector of
Stepney, in Middlesex, and of Charius, in Kent: In 1430, was consecrated bishop
of Carlisle; and in 1450, was translated to the bishopric of Lincoln. He died
in 1451 Vide Hist. West. and Cumb. vol. ii. p. 273.
.

ROBERT BURTON occurs again in 1427, on the resignation of Lumley Grey's Notes,
MSS.
; and

WILLIAM GRAY occurs in 1448 Ibidem.
.

JOHN BURN occurs in 1464.

ROBERT MASON, LL. D. occurs in 1481. He was precentor of Lincoln, master of
Trinity Hall, Cambridge Grey's Notes, MSS.
, and prebendary of Farendon; was also one of the prebendaries of Norton in
this county; died possessed of this dignity in 1493, and was interred in
Lincoln cathedral EPITAPH.
Orate pro anima magistri Roberti Mason, legum doctoris, archidiaconi
Northumbriae, et precentoris hujus ecclesiae qui obiit, Anno Dom. 1493.


.

RALPH SCROPE instituted the 23d of February, 1493: Was prebendary of North
Kelsey, or Ailesbury, or perhaps both successively, in Lincoln cathedral, and
rector of Hambledon, in Bucks: Was succeeded by

ROBERT DAVELL, or DOVELL, LL. D. who appears possessed of this dignity in 1518
and 1541: Was a canon of Exeter, and had Holm prebend, in York, the 29th of
May, 1541. He died in the year 1557 Ath. Oxon. vol. i. p. 671.
.

WILLIAM CARTER, D. D. was collated the 3d of November, 1558: He was deprived,
and sentenced to remain at Thirsk, or within ten miles, on account of his
recusancy Stryp. Eliz. p. 241. Stryp. Ann. vol. i. 275.
: Died at Mechlin, in Brabant, in the year 1578.

WILLIAM KING, B. D. of King's College, Cambridge: Was presented by queen
Elizabeth, the 1st of January, 1560, being her chaplain Rymer, vol. xv. p 563.
: Was prebendary of Canterbury and Windsor, at the latter of which places he
died, and was interred the 23d of September, 1590 Somner's Antiq. Canterb. p.
128.

In St George's chapel, at Windsor.

Hic jacet Gulielmus King, clericus, sacrae theologiae baccalaureus regiae
majestatis capellanus ac prebendarius sive canonieus infra ecclesiam
collegiatam sive liberam capellam regiam sancti Georgij in Castro de Wyndsor,
qui obiit 23 die September. Anno D'ni. 1790.

W. King, B. D. preb. of Canterbury, (tenth stall) pres. 19 Jan. 1564.

Vicar of Appuldore.

Installed canon of Windsor, 1573.


: Was deprived of this archdeaconry for non-residence, some time before his
death.

RALPH LEVER, A. M. was collated the 21st of October, 1566: Was a prebendary in
the first stall of this church, resigned this dignity in the year 1573, and was
succeeded by

FRANCIS BUNNEY, A. M. who was collated the 20th of October, 1573; resigned on
being inducted to the rectory of Ryton.

JAMES BOLD, D. D. was collated the 25th of September, 1578: Was of
Corpus-Christi College, Oxford, and admitted to the degree of doctor in
divinity, in April, 1576: He resigned in 1581 Ath Oxon. vol. i. f. 113.
; and was succeeded by

RALPH TUNSTALL, A. M. who was collated the 29th of October, 1581: Was rector
of Croft, in Yorkshire, and prebendary of this church, in the tenth stall The
registry is deficient; and who was the immediate successor of Tunstall is not
known. He died before the 6th of March, 1618.
.

JOHN CRADOCK, A. M. vicar of Gainford: Was collated in 1619, and resigned on
being appointed to the fifth stall in this church Ath. Oxon. vol. i. p. 740,
813.
.

GABRIEL CLARKE, D. D. was collated the 7th of August, 1619. In September,
1621, was appointed archdeacon of Durham, and resigned Northumberland. He was
also prebendary of this church.

FRANCIS BURGOINE, D. D. was collated the 13th of September, 1621: Held the
eighth stall in this church, and died in 1633.

JOSEPH NAYLOR, D. D. rector of Sedgefield: Was collated the 25th of February,
1633: Held the second prebend in this church.

WILLIAM FEATHERS, B. D. was collated the 24th of November, 1636, on the
resignation of Naylor: Was chaplain to bishop Morton.

EVERARD GOWER, B. D. was collated the 9th of May, 1638. In 1640, was vicar of
Norton; in 1641, rector of Stanhope, and chaplain to bishop Morton Ath. Oxon.
vol. i. p. 902.
.

ISAAC BASIRE, B. D. his successor, was collated the 24th of August, 1644: Was
a prebendary of this church, in the seventh stall. Died in 1676; and

WILLIAM TURNER, D. D. succeeded, the 30th of October, 1676: Was rector of
Stanhope: Departed this life at Oxford, the 20th of April, 1685, aet. 45, and
was interred in St Giles's church there Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. Fast. 222. B.
Willis's Cath. In St Giles's church, Oxford, on a gravestone in the south aile,
adjoining to the chancel. Gulielmus Turner, S. T. P. Archid. Northumbr. ecc'l.
parochialis De Stanhope, in agro Dunelm. rector. Obiit April 20, 1685.
.

JOHN MORTON, B. D. succeeded the 5th of October, 1685: Was a prebendary of
this church in the 12th stall, and died in 1722.

THOMAS SHARP, A. M. was collated the 27th of February, 1722. A prebendary of
this church, in the tenth stall: Died in 1758; and was succeeded by

THOMAS ROBINSON, D. D. who was collated in August, 1758: Was prebendary of
Peterborough and Landaff, and vicar of Ponteland, in Northumberland. Died in
1761 He was a very learned and good ^^n, and an active justice of peace. Grey's
Notes, MSS.
.

JOHN SHARP, D. D. was collated the 21st of April, 1762. Inducted to the
vicarage of Hexham, in Northumberland, the 1st of January, 1749-50; collated to
the ninth stall in 1768; and nominated to the perpetual curacy of Bamborough,
in 1773.

AFTER a tedious arrangement of the several ecclesiastics who sat in this
church, the reader's attention is required to a description of the sacred
edifices, with a comparative view of their ancient state and ornaments.

The traveller is conducted to this cathedral by the Place or Place-Green,
where the whole north front lies open to the view. The situation is singularly
grand and noble, the building stretching along the crown of an eminence, about
eighty feet perpendicular from the surface of the river, which washes its base;
on the east side the Bailey intervenes between the church and the brink of the
hill; and on the west this venerable pile rises on the points of rocks, which
show themselves on the summit of the mount, and almost overhangs the stream: On
this elevated ground the whole edifice has the most striking and august
appearance. The towers to the west were anciently crowned with spires, covered
with lead; the windows of the nave are under circular arches, of the original
model; in the other parts (excepting the upper tier of the choir) most of them
are of a different form and age. This front is now under repair, the stones
being all chisseled over, and the decayed parts restored; the towers will
receive new decorations, very different from the ancient ones, and the niches
be supplied with new sculptures; the expense is estimated at thirty thousand
pounds, to be paid out of the Chapter's treasury: -- A distinguished act of
public munificence!

As the proposed changes will effectually remove from the traveller's eye the
ancient appearance of this edifice, it was thought expedient to present the
public with a representation of the church in the state it was before the
repairs began; and notwithstanding the elegance of the present design, it is
apprehended some of the ornaments might have been chosen with greater
propriety: Above the great window of the middle transept, in two roundels, were
the figures of Benedictine monks, cut in relief; by the mode of the sculpture,
expressive of the age of the building. They led the judicious eye immediately
to the era, and gave an example of the state of that art: These roundels are
now supplied with two fine new figures -- the one a prior, seated in his
installation chair; the other, an effigy of bishop Pudsey, cut from the figure
on his episcopal seal, as given in the plate of his charter to the city of
Durham See page 13.
. A century after this the figures will betray the spectator into an error, and
lead him to determine, that this part of the structure was erected, or at least
rebuilt, by that prelate. On the west corner tower of the east transept, were
the effigies of those personages who attended the propitious cow, by which the
monks discovered this seat of ease and magnificence; the cut shows the recess
and sculptures in their decayed state, the figures being now restored and
finished with much art. The great tower of the church, as remarked in the
preceding part of this work, is much more modern than the rest, being built as
high as the gallery, by prior Melsanby, who acceded in the year 1233, and his
successor, prior Middleton: Prior Hugh, of Darlington, who was elected in 1258,
finished the work, by building the belfrey or upper tower. The tabernacle work,
pointed arches, and ornament on the outsides of the building, confirm those
dates; for then the Gothic style was in general acceptance: The buttresses of
the tower are graced with niches canopied and finished with tabernacle work, in
which are statues representing the great patrons of the Sea, in tolerable
sculpture. The height of this tower, Willis says, is two hundred and
twenty-three feet, describing the lanthern to be one hundred and sixty-two
feet, and the belfrey sixty-one feet; but Mr Nicholson's admeasurement, which
is most to be depended upon, makes the whole height two hundred and fourteen
feet, that is, the dome or lanthern one hundred and sixty, and the belfrey
fifty-four feet.

It appears that the Place-Green, before prior Algar's time, in 1109, was
crowded with houses, and to him we owe that great elegance of an open area
between the cathedral and castle, giving the two edifices at once to the
spectator's view; he having caused the buildings to be removed, and the ground
to be reduced to a plain. The entrance to the church was by a portico, of much
more modern work than the rest of the building, formed by pilasters and
circular arches, the upper structure supported by flanking buttresses, from
whence sprung a pointed arch, the whole terminating at a point in the center:
The arms of queen Elizabeth, in stucco work, were placed on the division of two
circular arches, where formerly were the windows of a small chapel: The
portico, during the late repairs, was rebuilt and highly ornamented: There were
anciently two chambers above the north door, where persons were lodged to hear
the call of such as came to claim sanctuary, and who rang the bell to give
notice thereof; after which the fugitive was secure from secular authority In
ancient time, before the house was suppressed, the abbey church, the churchyard,
and all the circuit thereof, was a sanctuary for all manner of men that
committed any great offense, as killing of a man in his own defense, or any
prisoners who had broken out of prison, and fled to the church door, knocking
to have it opened: Also certain men lay in two chambers over the north door for
that purpose, that when any such offenders came and knocked, they instantly let
them in at any hour of the night; and run quickly to the galilee bell, and
tolled it, that whosoever heard it might know that some had taken sanctuary
When the prior had notice thereof, he sent orders to keep themselves within the
sanctuary; that is, within the church and churchyard, and that every one should
have a gown of black cloth, with a yellow cross, called St Cuthbert's cross, at
the left shoulder, that every one might see the privilege granted to St
Cuthbert's shrine, for offenders to fly unto for succor, and safeguard of
their lives, till they could obtain their prince's pardon: And that they should
^^ within the church or sanctuary, on a grate, made only for that purpose,
adjoining to the galilee south door. They had likewise meat, drink, bedding,
and other necessaries, at the cost of the house, for thirty-seven days, being
only such as were necessary for such offenders, until the prior and convent
could get them conveyed out of the diocese. This privilege was confirmed not
only by king Guthrid, but by king Alured like (...). -- Cont. from Davies. --
Sir John Lawson's MSS. and Mr Hogg's Roll.


. There was also an ancient chapel, dedicated to the holy cross, in this place;
and in prior Kerneck's time, viz. 1214, we find an assignment of twenty
shillings yearly out of the mills of Browney, or Bruna, given to the house by
Alan and Henry de Melsanby, with fifty acres of land in Pitenden, for a
chaplain to celebrate mass for the soul of Alan de Melsanby, which chaplain was
allowed his corrody in the house Item. Quod unus capellanus celebret missam pro
anima magistri Hen. de Melsanby.

Item. Assignantur viginti sol. de dicto Molendino de Bruna ad mercedem unius
capellani qui omnibus die^s s^ialabus it, capella sanctae crucis supra portam
abbathie missam celebrabit specialiter pro anima magistri Al^i de Melsanby cum
placebo and dirige and commendatione animarum qui habebit corrodium suum
honorifice an ca^a ^^ ^hctos viginti sol. de scaceario prioris recipiet.

Item memorand. Quod Molendinum de Bruna emptam suit de dictorum magistrorum
Alani and Henrice, et quaquaginta acras terrae in territorio de Pitendum. --
Conventiones Eccl. MS. B. iv. 26. p. 3.


. The entrance down into the church is by three shallow steps.

It is unnecessary to present to the reader a dissertation on the ancient modes
of architecture, to elucidate a description of the work, in the various parts
of this edifice; the age of it is known, and the alterations made therein are
almost critically ascertained: What we commonly call the Saxon architecture in
such edifices, is in fact Roman; for those who constructed the religious
buildings which arose in the earliest era of the Norman accession, formed them
after the models of workmen procured from the continent, (spoken of by Richard,
prior of Hexham, l. i. cha. 3.) and came over to construct our capital
buildings, expressly "according to the Roman manner." This style prevailed till
about the conclusion of king Henry the First's reign, when, what we now call
Gothic was instroduced into Britain, so that in this church we find some
strokes of the improved style; for as the building was begun in 1093, so it was
many years before it was completed: The walls were lest unroosed by bishop
Flambard at his death; and the reader will recollect that bishop William
brought the design with him from Normandy (...) vol. i. p. ^8.
. The ingenious traveller Mr Pennant, says, "In the inside is preserved much of
the clumsy, yet venerable magnificence of the early Norman style." The gateway,
which is ten feet wide, is ornamented within on each hand with pilasters; the
inner one, or that nearest the gate, very richly embossed with foliage, and
figures in a light and elegant style; the other plain: The inclining arches are
semi-circular; the inner members carved in the zig-zag figure; the outward one
embatteled or dentelled. The venerable pile strikes the visitor on his entrance
with an awful solemnity not to be expressed; the stately and massive columns,
the long extended ailes, the gloom which shadows the succession of arches, all
contribute to affect the mind with an attention best known by being
experienced: Ideas arise replete with the distant antiquity of the place, the
piety of those from whom the structure had its origin, and the devotion which
warmed the breasts of the religious whose characteristic virtues shone forth in
the holy places. The plan or design of this building is more regular than
generally to be found in structures of the like age: The length of the whole
church within, exclusive of the gallilee, is four hundred and eleven feet; that
of the nave, from the west window to the center of the columns which support
the tower, is two hundred feet, and its width seventy-four feet, of which the
center aile, from base to base of the pillars, is twenty-eight feet. The
superstructure is supported on two rows of columns. Mr Pennant says, the
pillars are vast cylinders twenty-three feet in circumference: The two extreme
columns to the west rise from bases of the form of a complicated cross, having
pointed projections from the interior angles; the dimensions of each base are
fifteen feet every way, being exactly similar to those which support the
columns of the tower and dome, vulgarly called the lanthern; the pillars are
clustered, having three semi-circular pilasters in each front, divided by an
angular projection: The next column eastward rises from a base of the form of a
cross, twelve feet each way, supporting a clustered pillar, the pilasters of
which, toward the center aile, run up to the roof through the facia, between
the upper windows; the next rises from a square base of eight feet, and is
richly fluted, terminating with a plain capital, which supports the gallery
above the side aile: Each intermediate pillar is clustered like those described
in the second place, stretching up to the roof, and those in the intervals are
circular, making the succession consist of a clustered pillar, and a round one
alternately; the first round pillar is fluted as before described, the second
covered with the zig-zag figure, and the third grooved with the figure of a
net. The pillars opposite to each other are exactly similar in ornaments and
dimensions: It is also to be observed, the clustered and round pillars through
all the building have their bases of the dimensions before set forth: All the
side walls are decorated with pilasters opposite to the columns, and the
interior spaces under the windows are filled with double pilasters and
intersecting round arches throughout the whole building, except only in the
east transept. The arches between the great columns are all semi-circular, the
outward members dentelled, the interiors zig-zag'd: The under gallery opens to
the middle aile, with one round arch divided within into two arches, supported
on a center pillar. There is an upper gallery of single arches. At the west end
of the nave is a short cross aile or transcept, in length ninety feet, and
eighteen feet wide from the centers of the columns, over the ends of which rise
the west towers; according to Willis, one hundred and fifty-eight feet in
height, but by Nicholson's admeasurement only one hundred and thirty-eight
feet. At the end of each side aile is a gateway, which opens into the gallilee.
The ancient ornaments of the north aile are pointed out to the reader in the
notes At the entrance of the north aile was a trellice door from pillar to
pillar, which opened and shut with two leaves, like a folding door. Above it
was likewise trelliced almost to the height of the vault, and on the top of the
said trellice were iron pikes, that none should climb over it: It was never
opened but on holidays, and at processions; and the north rood on the other
side of the same pillar, at the north end of Jesus' altar, was likewise never
opened but to admit some procession.

There were two holy water stones belonging the church, of a fine blue marble;
the best stood within and opposite to the north church door, fixed in the
corner of the pillar adjoining to the Lady of Pittie's altar, on the left hand
as you turn into the gallilee, having a beautiful screen of wainscot, finely
painted with blue and little gilt stars: It was kept very clean and fresh water
always provided against Sunday morning, hallowed before divine service by one
of the monks.

The other stood within the south door, and supplied with fresh water every
Sunday morning. That at the south door, served the prior, the convent, and the
whole house; the other being for the use of those who came that way to hear
divine service.

There was between two pillars, on the left hand, in the north aile, as you go
into the gallilee from the north door, our Lady of Pittie's altar, enclosed on
each side with wainscot, with the picture of our lady supporting our Savior on
her knee, as he was taken from the cross.

And on the right hand of the said north aile, at going into the gallilee,
under the belfrey, called the gallilee steeple, was St Savior's altar.

In the west end of the church, and of the north aile over the gallilee door,
is a belfrey, called the gallilee steeple, wherein hung four great bells, which
were never rung but at principal feasts, or when the bishop came to town.

Every Sunday a sermon was preached in the gallilee, from one to three in the
afternoon; previous to which, at twelve, the great bell of the gallilee tolled
three quarters of an hour, and rung the fourth quarter. There were certain
officers of the said house, who were always charged, whenever the bells were to
be tolled, to be in readiness to ring them: But after the house was suppressed
the bells were never rung. In queen Elizabeth's reign dean Whittingham intended
to have them taken down and broken; when Thomas Spark, the bishop's suffragan,
having notice of the dean's purpose, sent directly into Yorkshire for a
workman, and caused three of the bells to be taken down, and hung up in the new
work, called the lanthern, where he made a set of chimes, which cost him thirty
or forty pounds.

The lowest window toward the lanthern had three lights divided with stone
work. The picture of Christ crucified was in the middle of the first light; and
in the second was the picture of our blessed Lady; on the other side that of St
John the Evangelist: On one side of Christ was a monk in a blue habit, kneeling
and holding up his hands. And above were six turret windows in plain glass.

The second window had two long lights divided with stone work, and in white
glass, with colored glass about it.

In the third were two long lights, divided with stone work, having in the
first light the picture of St Catherine, and underneath her St Oswald, and
below, that of St Cuthbert. In the second light was pictured the blessed
Virgin, with Christ in her arms, and underneath Saint Bede, and below him St
Osmond, bishop, and the arms of St Cuthbert and St Oswald; and four turret
windows without pictures, in colored glass.

The fourth window was plain, and as the second, with colored glass about it.

In the fifth window were two long lights, divided as aforesaid, in white glass
without pictures, but having round about colored glass; and five turret
windows; first four, and one at the top.

The sixth window had two long lights, with a stone work partition: In the
first light was the picture of St Oswald, and under him St Paul; and in the
second light was that of St Peter, and underneath him St James, in fine
colored glass: And above four turret lights, with bishop Skirlaw's arms on the
top.

Within the church were two marble holy water stones, bossed with hollow
bosses, on the outsides thereof curiously wrought: That at the north door was
twice as capacious as the other at the south, both of the same workmanship.
These were taken away by dean Whittingham, and removed into his kitchen, and
employed to profane uses. They stood there during his life: his servants
steeped their beef and salt fish in them, there being a conveyance in the
bottoms to let out the water, as they had when in the church. After that dean's
death the greater was removed to the lower end of the dean's buttery, where the
water conduit is, and next unto the wine cellar, for the servants to wash their
pots and cups in, before they served them at table. The base of the great holy
water stone was laid without the north church door, and afterward placed in
the earth, in the shop of one Lamb a blacksmith, upon Framwellgate bridge. --
Con. from Davies, Sir John Lawson's MSS. and Mr Hogg's Roll.


. There are six large windows to give light to this aile, but all the old
painted glass is destroyed. The vaultings of the side ailes are semi-circular,
and crossed with groined arches in plain rolls, intersecting each other in the
center. The middle aile of the nave is sixty-nine and a half feet in height;
the roof was vaulted with stone about the year 1242, by prior Melsonby; the
ribs intersect each other in pointed arches, ornamented with zig-zag workin the
fillets: There are seven upper windows to the north, and six to the south. At
the east end of the nave, between the pillars which support the great tower,
anciently stood Jesus's altar, with all its decorations, no traces of which
remain In the body of the church, between two of the highest pillars supporting
the west side of the lanthern, opposite to the choir door, was Jesus' altar,
where mass was sung every Friday in the year; and on the backside was a high
stone wall, at each end whereof was a door, and called the two rood doors, for
the procession to go forth and return at: Each end of the altar was closed up
with fine wainscot, like to a porch, adjoining to each rood door, finely
varnished with red varnish. In the wainscot, at the south end of the altar,
were four grand almeries, to preserve the chalices and silver crewets, with two
or three suits of vestments, and other ornaments belonging to the said altar,
for holy and principal days: And at the north end of the altar, in the
wainscot, was a door to come into the said porch. There was also standing on
the altar, a most curious fine table, with two leaves to open and shut,
comprehending the Passion of our Lord, richly set in fine lively colors, all
like burnished gold; which table was always locked up, but on principal days.
Also the forepart of the said porch, was a door with two broad leaves, to open
from side to side, all of fine through-carved work: On the principal days, when
any of the monks said mass at the said altar, the table was opened, and the
door, which composed the forepart of the said porch, that every man might come
in and see the table.

There was also in the height of the wall, from pillar to pillar, the whole
story and passion of our Lord, wrought in stone, and curiously gilt: And above
was the whole story and pictures of the twelve apostles, very artifically set
forth, and finely gilt, extending from one pillar to the other. And on the top
above all, a border artificially wrought in stone, with fine colors, and gilt,
with branches and flowers. And likewise above the top of all, upon the wall,
stood the most famous rood that was in all the land, with the picture of Mary
on one side of our Savior, and that of St John on the other, with two
archangels.

Also on the back of the said rood, before the choir door, there was a loft,
and the clock stood in the south end thereof.

Every Friday, after evening prayer, an anthem was sung in the body of the
church, before St John's altar, called Jesus' anthem, which was performed by
the master and choir, who sung another anthem sitting on their knees before
Jesus' altar, one of the gallilee bells tolling. -- Davies, etc.


. Behind the altar, and between the two round pillars, were interred priors
Aukland and Castle, and nearer to the font prior Burnaby Thomas Castle, prior
of Durham, lies buried under a handsome marble stone in the body of the church,
before Jesus' altar, being pictured in brass from the waist up, with his
epitaph: Opposite to which, between two pillars on the north side, was a loft,
containing a pair of organs for the use of the master and quiristers, at
singing Jesus' mass and anthem every Friday, with a desk to lay the books on in
time of divine service.

John Aukland, prior, lies buried within the abbey church of Durham.

John Burnaby, prior of Durham, lies buried under a handsome stone, pictured in
brass from the waist upward, in the midst of the church, beneath the north
door, not far distant from the marble cross, with his epitaph. -- Davies, etc.


. In the center of the four west pillars, is the font, an elegant marble basin,
over which is a fine piece of tabernacle work in red oak, of an octagon form,
richly ornamented, and of excellent workmanship, supported by four columns
about eight feet in height, the whole being about thirty feet high, terminating
in a pinnacle, and decorated with a dove extending her wings. To the east of
the font, between pillar and pillar, is a cross of black marble laid in the
pavement, beyond which women were strictly prohibited advancing toward St
Cuthbert's shrine There is, betwixt the pillar on the north side wherein the
holy water stone stood, and the opposite pillar on the south side, a row of
blue marble in the midst whereof is a cross of the same colored marble, in
token that all women who came to hear divine service, should not be suffered to
come above the said cross: And if it happened that any woman came above it, she
was instantly punished for certain days, because no woman presumed to come
where the holy man St Cuthbert was, for the reverence they had to his sacred
body.

Also if any woman happened to come within the abbey gates, or within the
precincts of the house, she was punished as an example to deter others from
doing the like.

The reasons why women ought not to come to St Cuthbert's seretory, nor enter
the precincts of the monastry.

Diverse books of the life and miracles of St Cuthbert have been written, which
set forth, That St Cuthbert, for a long time, led a most recluse life, in the
borders of the Picts; in which time it happened that the daughter of the king
of that province was got with child by some young man in her father's house.
The king perceiving her pregnancy, diligently examined her who was the cause of
that fact; whereupon she made this answer: That solitary young man who dwells
hard by, is he who has overcome me, and by whose beauty I am thus deceived.
Whereupon the king repaired to the hermit's place, with his deflowered
daughter, attended by diverse knights, where he instantly accosted the servant
of God in this manner: What art thou he, who, under the color of religion,
prophanest the temple and sanctuary of God? Art thou he, who, under the cloak
and profession of an hermit, exercisest thyself in all filthiness? Behold my
daughter, whom thou by thy wile^ have corrupted, not fearing to destower her:
Therefore now at last confess this thy fault, and plainly declare here, before
this company in what sort thou have seduced her. The king's daughter marking
the fierce speeches of her father, very impudently stepped forth, and boldly
affirmed, that it was he who had done that wicked fact: At which the young man,
greatly amazed, perceiving that this calumny proceeded from the instigation of
the Devil, applied his whole heart unto Almighty God, saying: My Lord, my God,
who only know, and art the discoverer of all secrets, make manifest also
this work of iniquity, and by some token disprove the same, which, though it
cannot be done by human policy, make it known by some divine token. When the
young man had spoken these words, suddenly, and in the same place where the
stood, the earth making a hissing noise, presently opened, and swallowed her up
in the presence of all the spectators. This place is called Corwen, where she
for her corruption was conveyed down into Hell. As soon as the king perceived
this miracle, he began to be greatly tormented in his mind, fearing le^^ for
his furious threats he should ^^m the same punishment. Whereupon he, with his
company, humbly craving pardon of Almighty God, with a further petition to that
good man St Cuthbert, that by his prayers he would crave of God to have his
daughter again: Which petition the holy father granted, upon condition, that
from thence no woman should come near him. Whence it came to pass that the king
did not suffer any woman to enter into any church dedicated to that saint.
Davies, etc.

Mandatum ad vocand. certas mulieres de Novo Castro ad peenas eis injunctas,
pro quod attemptaverint transire ad feretrum S. Cuthberti. Domini Dunelm.
episcopi officialis, capellanis, etc. sal. cum nuper Matildis Burgh, et
Margareta Ushar, servientes, etc. ex instigatione diabo^ica inductae, and ausu
temerario ad ecclesiam cathedralem Dunelmen. accessissent vestibus virilibus
inductae, eo animo and intention, ut ad feretrum sanctiff. confessoris
Cuthberti personaliter accederent, scientes hoc esse prohibitum mulieribus
quibuscunq. sub peena excommunicationis majoris, and violationis ecclesiae
libertatis. Cumq. de hoc gravi facinore coram nobis pro tribunali sedentibus
convictae fuissent and confessatae, and cum talibus etc. de consensu magistri
Johannis Houteman Dom. nostri episcopi Dunelm. vicarij genesis etc. dictis
mulieribus in forma juris juratis paenitentias injunximus pro comisso, viz.
quod utraq. earum incedat coram processione tribus diebus festivis circa
ecclesiam S. Nicholai and aliis tribus diebus festivis circa ecclesiam omnium
sanctorum proedictas (N Cast.) in eisdem vestibus virilibus, eisdem modo and
forma quibus ad dictam ecclesiam cathedralem Dunelm. tam temerarie accedebant.
Vobis igitur injungmus and mandamus, quatenus dictas mulieres ad agend. dictas
paenitentias, ut premittitur alternis diebus in vestris ecclesiis convocetis,
and causam quare talem peragunt paenitentiam populo public and solemniter
nuncietis, ne aliae mulieres de caetero in tantam prorumpere audaciam
delinquendi valiant. etc. Dat. Dunelm 18 die Mensis September. Anno Dom. 1417.

The reader will find a certificate of this penance being performed, in
Bourne's History of Newcastle.


. In the middle of the south aile, opposite to the second pillar from the
cloister door, was the tomb of bishop Nevil; between the second and third
pillar stands an altar tomb of John lord Nevil, and between the next adjoining
pillars, the tomb of Ralph lord Nevil. Ralph lord Nevil died in the year 1347,
and, as I observed before, was the first layman suffered to be buried within
the walls of this church. His remains were brought in a chariot drawn by seven
horses, as far as the gates of the churchyard, and then borne on the shoulders
of his knights into the church: The abbot of St Mary's, of York, performed the
funeral offices, and he was interred before the altar of the holy cross, where
he obtained a mass to be daily said: His wife Alicia was afterward buried near
him. It was then a custom to make offerings at the interment of great men, and
eight horses, four for war, with four men armed and caparisoned, and four for
peace, were on this occasion the holy gift; together with three vestments of
cloth of gold, interwoven with flowers. His son, John Nevil, redeemed four
horses by the payment of one hundred mares: But Mr Pennant observes, This
favor was not done gratis by the holy men of the place: Ralph had presented
them with a vestment of red velvet, richly embroidered with gold, silk, great
pearls, and images of saints, dedicated to St Cuthbert She also gave to the
church one vestment, two tunicles, one cape, three albes, two stoles, and three
maniples of black satin, with the arms of the said lord Nevil, and of Hugh
lord Audley, her father, embroidered on the borders thereof.

The other monument contains the bodies of John lord Nevil, who died at
Newcastle, the 17th of October, 1389, and his first wife Maud, the daughter of
Henry lord Percy, at whose funeral six cloths of gold were offered to St
Cuthbert; of which were made two vestments for the high altar, one chalice, and
two tunicles.


. His widow also sent to the sacrist one hundred and twenty pounds of silver,
for the repairs of the cathedral, and several rich vestments for the
performance of the sacred offices Dugdale's Baron i. 295.

Et iterum rogavit eosdem priorem and conventum, ut concederent sibi and uxori
suae unam missam qualibet die pro perpetuo ad illud altar; ita quod monachus
celebrans celebraret de quo vellet, habendo in memoria animas ejus and uxoris
suae and omniu^ fidelium defunctorum; and concesserunt ei sub hac condition,
quod acquireret vel appropriaret domui communi little unum annuum redditum 10l.
pro perpetuo duraturum.

W. de Chamber, Wharton's An. Sac. 768.
. This was the nobleman who was so instrumental in gaining the victory of
Nevil's Cross; or the Red Hills. The tomb of John, his son, is also an evidence
of the convent's favor obtained by rich gifts. These monuments were ornamented
with the recumbent effigies of the great personages there interred, and
surrounded with small figures of ecclesiastics in alabaster, finely wrought,
but now mutilated and almost totally defaced: When the general disregard for
religious edifices took place of old veneration, this church was thought the
properest place of confinement and security for the Scotch prisoners after the
battle of Dunbar; and they pillaged and destroyed every thing within their
reach, -- fulfilling the scriptures literally, making this holy place, in
truth, a den of thieves Robert Nevil, bishop of Durham, lies buried in his
ancestor's porch, near to the cloister door, which is to the south, and Jesus'
altar to the north of the porch, containing three pillars; and so much of the
angle having in it an altar, with a fine alabaster table above it, where mass
was daily celebrated for their souls, and therein a pew, where the prior used
to sit to hear Jesus' mass. The east end of the porch, where the altar stood,
was closed up with a little stone wall higher than the altar, and wainscotted
above the wall; and the west end with a little stone wall, and an iron grate on
the top of it, and the north side toward the body of the church was environed
with iron.

Also on the back part behind Nevil's altar, to the midst of the pillar behind
the church door, in compass from pillar to pillar, there was a chamber, where
one that kept the church, and rung the bells at midnight lodged: And over the
church door, the compass of four pillars, two on either side, when one entered
within the church door, was all covered above head with wainscot, very finely
painted, and varnished azure, and set out with stars of gold. And in the
forepart of the wainscot, from pillar to pillar, within the church, over the
holy water stone, there was a brattishing on the fore part of the wainscot or
roof, very curiously wrought, and gilt with gold* and in the midst of the
brattishing was a star of great compass, like the sun, very curiously wrought
with gold, and enamelled; so there could no dust or filth fall into the holy
water stone.

In the west end of this south aile, between the two nethermost pillars
opposite to our Lady of Pittie's altar, was an altar with a rood, representing
Christ's Passion, being commonly called the bonny rood, enclosed on each side
with wainscot, as was the altar of our Lady of Pity. -- Davies, etc.


. At the north end of the west transept was St Savior's altar; and at the
south end, the grate, on which those who were under sanctuary lay; the remains
of all which, with the Lady of Pity's altar, and the holy water basins, are
totally effaced. In the south aile are six windows, in which are some broken
remains of painted glass In the first, over the church door, going into the
cloisters, were three fine lights, divided with stone work, having in the first
the picture of St Oswald, in the second the virgin Mary, and underneath her
bishop Langley, in his episcopal attire, on his knees, with his arms in an
escutcheon, and these words, orate pro anima D. Thomae Langley, quondam
episcopi hujus ecclesiae: And in the third light St Cuthbert, in fine colored
glass: And above were three white turret windows.

In the second window were five fine long lights divided with stone work,
having in the first the picture of St George in armor, and a red lion under
his feet: In the second St Oswald: In the third our blessed Lady: In the fourth
St Cuthbert, in his episcopal robes: And in the fifth St Christopher with
Christ on his shoulders, having a staff flourishing in his hand, and the
instruments wherewith Christ was crucified. There were ten knots in colored
glass* five above and five below; and six turret windows in white glass.

In the third window were two long lights, having in the first light the
picture of God the Father, and on his breast Christ hanging on the cross: In
the second was St Cuthbert, with arms of the Nevils finely done; and four
turret windows on the top, having in them all the Nevils' arms, as they were
joined in matches.

In the fourth window were two long lights, divided with stone work, having in
the first the picture of our blessed Lady, St John Baptist, and St Paul and in
the second St John the Evangelist, with the chalice in his hand. St Anne* and
other pictures, with the Nevils' arms, and the arms of those that were joined
with them in ^^^age: And above were four turret windows, with the Nevils' arms
in them all.

In the fifth window were two fine long lights, having in the first the picture
of the angel Gabriel saluting the b^^ ^ad^: In the second the virgin Mary, and
two other angels with escutcheons of the arms of the Nevils, and others with
whom they have married on their breasts.

In the sixth window above the south great door of the church were two lights,
having in them no pictures; and above were four tower lights, having in them
the arms of four several noblemen.


. Over the two gates of the gallilee are shields of arms of bishop Langley. The
west window of seven lights, was made in prior Fossour's time, by John
Tickhill, under which are the monuments of Sir George Wheeler, Dr Knatchbull,
and Dr Watts See inscriptions in pages 177, 195, and 214.
. There is a little door by which the officiating priest passed to the altar of
the virgin in the gallilee. The fine paintings in the west windows are all
defaced Over the south gallilee door was the seventh window, having no
pictures; but four turret windows in white glass.

In the west end of the church, over the gallilee, was a fine large window,
containing the whole story of the root of Jesse, in colored glass, with Mary
and Christ in her arms on the top of the said window

In the end of the church toward the west, over the north gallilee door, was a
window with two lights, divided with stone work, having in the south the
picture of our blessed Lady with Christ in her arms, and a scepter in her hand;
and the second or north light was in white glass: And above were four turret
lights, with bishop Skirlaw's arms on the top. -- Davies, etc.

Inscriptions on gravestones. D. S. Hic jacet Depositum Dulcibella Morton, Quae
obiit vigilia St Matthaei. MDCLXXXVIII. Cum vixisset annos XLIV. Juxta
conduntur Filius Georgius Filiae Elizabetha et Anna.

Georgius Morton, Obiit vicesimo die Januarie, 1691.

Ositha Morton Obiit vicesimo primo die May, 1702.

This (...) now ^es between the two easternmost arches, on the south side of
the body of the church.

The monument of Robert Swyfte formerly lay on the north side of the choir
door. It is now entirely taken away, but the brass plate is still preserved in
the vestry.

Near this monument was that of Richard Stobert, who died in 1610, but now
totally defaced; and also an description to the memory of Thomas Blak^ston, Esquire
who died in 1710, which has shared the same fate.


. In the south aile, opposite to the north entrance, is a large gateway into
the cloister, highly wrought and decorated, with a range of three inclining
pilasters, supporting semi-circular arches; the pilasters are variously cut in
squares and circles, embossed with flowers, figures of animals, and the zig-zag
ornaments: Their capitals are finished with figures of animals; and the outward
arch is decorated with grotesque figures in circles. At the east end of this
aile is another gateway into the cloister, but not so large as the last
described, forming a portico in the thickness of the wall, by inclining
pilasters and arches; the outward bow is ornamented with a band of thorns, the
second a rich cordage, the third embattled or dentelled, the next a fillet of
roses, and the last a double zig-zag.

The great cross aile, or middle transept of this church, has an aile toward
the east at both ends; the entrance into the choir, projecting in the center,
equal thereto. This transept is one hundred and seventy feet in length, and
fifty-seven feet in width, including the aile; without which it is only forty
feet from the centers of the great columns which support the dome. The clock
anciently stood behind Jesus's altar, in the middle of the nave, fronting the
choir door, but is now placed at the south end of the transept, and was built
in its present elegant form, in 1632, in dean Hunt's time. The body of this
transept is separated from its ailes at each end by two round pillars, and one
clustered one; one of the round pillars is grooved in a spiral form, and the
other in the zig-zag figure: Those ailes are now enclosed with a wood screen;
that on the south end being fitted up for the morning service at six o'clock;
the other to the north not of present use: Each aile is lighted by three
windows to the east, and one at the end, and anciently had three altars: In the
south limb, Howell's, or the altar of the holy virgin, next to the choir; the
lady of Boulton's altar, also dedicated to the holy virgin, and the altar of St
Fides, and St Thomas the Apostle, the last: Before Howell's altar, prior John
de Hemingburg was interred, and the priors William de Ebchester, and Robert de
Ebchester, before the lady of Boulton's altar There was also standing in the
south pillar of the choir door of the lanthern, in a corner, a square stone,
which has been finely wrought. On every side was a large image, and twelve
cressets, filled with tallow, to give light to the monks at midnight, when they
came to mattins.

John Washington prior of Durham, lies buried under a fine marble stone, with
verses engraven in brass upon it before the porch, over the entrance of the
north aile, as you go to the song-school adjoining to St Benedict's altar.

Robert Berrington, of Walworth, prior of Durham, first obtained the use of the
mitre with the staff. He lies buried under a fine marble stone, being pictured
from the waist upwards in brass, on the north side of prior Washington in the
north plage over against St Benedict's altar, being the first of the three
altars in that plage, or isle.

Next to St Benedict's altar on the north is St Gregory's altar, being the
second altar.

John Fossour was the first prior interred within the abbey church. He was
buried in the north plage before the altar of St Nicholas and St Giles, the
last of the three altars in the plage toward the north; over whom was laid a
curious and sumptuous marble stone, prepared by himself when living, with his
own image, and other imagery work, viz. The twelve apostles, divided and
bordered on either side of him; and three other pictures, all in brass.

John Hemingbrough, prior of Durham, lies buried in the south plage, on the
right hand as you go to the revestry, under a fine marble stone, with his
picture curiously engraven upon it, having the twelve apostles pictured on each
side, six south, and six north, in brass, with other imagery work about his
head; lying before the altar of our lady, or Houghwell's altar, the first of
the three altars in the south plage.

William Ebchester, prior of Durham, lies buried in the south aile-plage, on
the right hand, under a fine marble stone, before the lady of Bolton's altar,
with his verses and epitaph engraven upon the said stone, in brass; which stone
was taken thence, and laid before the choir door: The aforesaid altar is the
second in that plage. Over that altar was a beautiful image of our lady, called
the lady of Bolton; which was made to open with gimmers, from her breast
downwards; and within was painted the image of our Savior, finely gilt,
holding up his hands, and betwixt his hands a fair and large crucifix, all of
gold: Which crucifix was to be taken out every Good Friday, and every man crept
unto it that was then in the church; after which it was hung up again. And
every principal day the image was opened, that every man might see pictured
within, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, most curiously and finely
gilt; and both the sides within very finely varnished with green varnish, and
flowers of gold: And underneath the stone she stood on, was a beautiful cross
upon an escutcheon, called the Nevils' cross, signifying that the Nevils had
born the charges thereof.

Robert Ebchester, prior of Durham lies buried under a fine marble stone, with
his picture and verses, from the waist upwards in brass, before the said lady
of Bolton's altar.

Next to the lady of Bolton's altar, on the south, was St Fides's, and St
Thomas the Apostle's altar; being the third altar in the south plage.

There is a library in the south angle of the lanthern, which is now above the
clock, betwixt the chapter house and the te deum window; it is well replenished
with ancient and modern books.

In the south end of the aile of the lanthern above the clock is a handsome
glass window, called the te deum window, finely glazed, very curiously wrought
in fine colored glass, with the nine orders of angels, viz. thrones,
dominations, cherubims, etc. with the picture of Christ crucified, and the
blessed virgin Mary with Christ in her arms.

Opposite to this, in the north end of the alley of the lanthern, is a large
and beautiful glass window, having twelve long and good lights, built of fine
stone, and glazed, which in old time was gone to decay; and prior Castle,
rebuilding it, called it the window of the four doctors of the church, having
six long and handsome glass lights in the upper part of the said window; and
therein is pictured our blessed Lady, with the figure of our Savior Christ in
her arms, and that of St Cuthbert on the west side, in the midst of the said
window, in fine colored glass: And on the east side of our Lady are two
doctors of the church, and the other two doctors pictured on the west side of
St Cuthbert: And the picture of prior Castle, who bore the whole charge of
building the said window, sitting on his knees (in fine blue glass, in his
habit) and holding up his hands under the feet of the blessed virgin Mary,
whose image stands above his head, saying, Virgo matter Dei, miserere mei: "Holy
Virgin, Mother of God have mercy upon me." There are other six handsome lights
in the same window, very finely glazed, with all the instruments of Christ's
death, wrought in fine colors; a stone gallery the breadth of the thickness of
the wall, at the division of the superior lights from the inferior, affording a
passage into the roof of the sacrists exchequer, supported by the partitions of
stone in the window work. -- Davies, etc.


. In the north limb, St Benedict's altar stood next the choir; the next St
Gregory's; and the altar of St Nicholas and St Giles the last to the north:
Before St Benedict's altar were interred priors Berrington and Wessington; and
prior Fossour before the altar of St Nicholas and St Giles, he being the first
prior buried within the walls of this church. The windows of this transept were
elegantly glazed with painted glass, of which little remains. The picture of Saint Bede, an elegant figure in a blue habit, is yet perfect, and part of the
representation of the crucifixion, as described in the notes In the north aile
of the lanthern.
On the west side of this aile, above the staircase door, was only one window,
having three long lights: In the first light was the picture of St John the
Baptist, with the Lamb of God in his hands: In the second the picture of our
blessed Lady, with a monk in a blue habit upon his knees; and above his head
written, Matter Dei, miserere mei. And in the third light was the picture of St
John the Evangelist, with a reed in his hand, and underneath him the Nevil's
cross and bull's head; with two tower windows above; and the picture of God in
the highest, in fine colored glass.

And further, in this aile were three altars, and behind every altar one glass
window, having three long lights separated from each other by stone work.

The first altar was called St Giles's; and in that window, in the first light,
was pictured St Nicholas, having under his feet written, "Sanctus Nicholas,
episcopus." In the second light is pictured Nicodemus, or, as others say,
Joseph of Arimathea, bearing Christ on the cross in his arms: And in the third
light was pictured St Giles in a blue habit, with a hind at his feet shot with
a shaft.

The second light was called St Gregory's altar, and behind it a window of
three lights, divided with stone work: In the first light of that window was
the picture of St Gregory: In the second the picture of our blessed Lady, with
Christ in her arms; and one W. Seaton, sub-prior, pictured in his blue habit,
kneeling and holding up his hands, with these words underneath him, "W. Seaton,
sub-prior." And in the third light was a bishop with a cross on his shoulder,
called St Ambrose.

The third is called St Benedict's altar, having the like window: In the first
light was the picture of St Benedict in a blue habit, with a crosier staff in
his hand; underneath him the picture of St Hierome, with a cardinal's hat on:
And in the second light, Christ as he arose from the dead and a prior in a blue
habit, kneeling and holding up his hands before the altar, with a mitre set
upon it: In the third light was the picture of St Catherine, with the wheel in
her hand; underneath her the picture of Mary Magdalen, with an alabaster box in
her hand, as she anointed Christ: And above were three tower windows, with
angels in fine colored glass.

The orders of St Benedict were set forth in their pictures about the altar in
wainscot, with a partition, the friars within, and the monks without.

In the south aile of the lanthern.
In this aile were three altars, called Houghwell's, the lady of Bolton's, and
St Fides's altar toward the south, each having a window behind it.

The first altar had a ^ine glass window with three long lights: In the first
was the picture of St Catherine: In the second our blessed Lady, with Christ in
her arms; and under her a monk in a blue habit, kneeling and praying: In the
third was St Margaret, and under her St Christopher, bearing Christ on his
shoulders over the water, having a staff flourshing in his hand: And three
turret windows, with the picture of St John the Baptist in prison, having a
grate before him, and a book in one hand, with the Lamb of God upon it,
pointing unto it with his other.

The second altar had a window with three like lights, having in the first St
John the Evangelist; and under him the picture of St Nicholas: In the second
light our lady of Bolton, with a golden mace in her hand, and a crown of gold
on her head; and a monk under her feet kneeling and praying: In the third
light, St Stephen, with stones in his hands, wherewith he was martyred; and
under him the picture of St John the Baptist, with the lamb in his hand; with
three towers in colored glass, with angels pictured in them.

The third altar had the like window: In the first light was the picture of the
blessed Virgin, with Christ in her arms; and under her St Fides: In the second
light God the Father, with Christ in his arms, as proceeding from the Father;
under him was St Thomas, and under St Thomas, a monk in a blue habit, holding
up his hands and praying: In the third light was St Leonard; under him St
Laurence, and in the high part of the window, in a little turret, was Saint Bede
in a blue habit, and the other two little turrets had two angels.

In the end of the said altar, southward, was a fine glass window with three
long lights: In the middle or first light was the picture of Christ crucified,
and underneath a monk in a blue habit, kneeling and holding up his hands,
having written above his head, "Christ Jesu Thomae des Gaudium:" And in the
second light, the picture of the virgin Mary on one side of Christ: And in the
third light, St John the Evangelist, on the other side of Christ: And above
all, three lights, the picture of God, with a globe in his hand, in the middle
lights; and the pictures of two angels on each side of God, in either of the
other two lights.

There was a window toward the cloisters, west of the clock, which had three
lights: In the first was the picture of our Lady; under her, the picture of St
Cuthbert, with St Oswald's head in his hand: In the second light, our Savior
Christ on the cross, with INRI over his head, and angels receiving blood and
water from his feet, and the picture of the sun and moon wanting their light
above his head; under the picture of Christ was our Lady, and under her a monk
in a blue habit, kneeling and holding up his hands, having above his head,
"Matter Dei miserere mei:" And in the third light, was the picture of St John
the Baptist, and St Oswald under him, in his princely attire. -- Davies, etc.


. The north window was made by the munificent prior Fossour, under a pointed
arch, as also three windows in the aile; but the great window going soon after
to decay, was restored by prior Castle, who acceded in 1494, and ornamented it
with much painting: There is a large window on the west side of the transept,
near the end. The south window, before described in the notes, is called the Te
Deum window. The choir is now enclosed with a screen of oak, covered in a bold
style with festoons of fruits and flowers, and an entablature of a rich foliage
pattern. This takes place of the old pannelled work, on which were painted the
images of the great patrons and benefactors of this church; under each of which
was an historical inscriptions in letters of gold The cross aile of the
lanthern before the choir door, going north and south.
In the former part of the choir, on either side the west door, or the chief
entrance thereof, without the choir door in the lanthern, were placed, in their
several rooms, one above another, the most excellent pictures, all gilt, and
extremely beautiful, of the kings and queens, as well of Scotland as England,
who were devout and godly founders and benefactors of this church, and sacred
monuments of St. Cuthbert, in their several successions and kingdoms; whose
names follow: Edgar, king of Scotland. Catharine, queen of England. David
Bruce, king of Scotland. Richard II. king of England. Alexander, king of
Scotland. Henry IV. king of England. Richard II. king of England. Alexander,
king of Scotland. Matilda, queen of England. David, king of Scotland. Edward
III. king of England. Henry II. king of England. Edward I. king of England.
Henry V. king of England. Alexander, king of Scotland. Sybil, queen of
Scotland. William Rufus, king of England. Richard III. king of England. William
the Conqueror, king of England. Harold, king of England. John, king of England.
Edward II. king of England. Athelstan, king of England. Stephen, king of
England. Matilda, queen of England. Canute, king of England. Malcomb, king of
Scotland. Duncan, king of Scotland. Henry III. king of England. Eleanor, queen
of England. Henry I. king of England. Eleanor, queen of England. Malcomb, king
of Scotland. William, king of Scotland.


In the same place were the images of many more benefactors and founders of
this See, under whom, as also under the kings and queens, were historical
inscriptions.


. (The screen at Hexham, described in the View of Northumberland, and by Mr
Pennant, gives an idea of what our cathedral paintings were.) The ailes are
enclosed by handsome gates, carved with foliage and open work: Above the
screen, stands an excellent organ The ORGANS.
There were three pair of organs belonging to the said choir, for maintenance
of God's service, and the better celebrating thereof. The grandest of the three
stood over the choir door, only opened and played upon on principal feasts, the
pipes being all of the finest wood and workmanship, partly gilt upon the
inside, and the outside of the leaves and cover up to the top, with branches
and flowers, finely gilt, with the name of Jesus gilt with gold. There were but
two pair more of them in England of the same make; one pair in York, and
another in St Paul's.

Also there was a lettern of wood, like unto a pulpit, standing and adjoining
to the wood organs, over the choir door, where they used to sing the nine
lessons in the old time on principal days, standing with their faces toward
the high altar.

The second pair stood on the north side of the choir, being never played upon,
but when the four doctors of the church were read, viz. Augustine, Ambrose,
Gregory, and Jerome, being a pair of fair large organs, called the cryers.

The third pair were daily used at ordinary service. -- Davies, etc.


, richly ornamented The first organist at the Reformation, was, as I presume,
John Brimlies, oc. 7 Sep. 1561. Ob. 13 Oct. 1576, and lies buried in the
western part of the church. Will. Brown, oc. 1587. Edw. Smythe, buried at this
church 4 Feb. 1611. Rich. Hutchinson, oc. 2 Jul. 1615, in Cath. Reg. ob. 20
Jan. 1634, in comp. thesaur. Leo. Calvert, oc. 30 Sep. 1634, in comp. these.
Joh. Foster, oc. 27 Feb. 1661, buried in this church 20 Ap. 1677. Will. Gregs,
1677, oc. 25 Aug. 1685, died 15 Oct. 1710, buried in Little St Mary's
churchyard. James Hesletine, aged 19 years, 1710, ob. 20 Jun. 1763, buried in
the gallilee. Thomas Ebdon, 1763, a pupil of Mr Hesletine's, and a native of
Durham, is the present organist.



. There are brackets for statues against the pillars of the transept, on each
side of the entrance into the choir. In the center of this transept is the
great dome or lanthern, supported on four clustered pillars, from the floor to
the center of the roof one hundred and sixty feet in height The admeasurement
is here taken from without, but as the pavement of this church was new laid,
and the tombstones removed about the year 1660, and you descend into the church
by three steps, the addition may make 161 feet, 6 inches.

In the lanthern, called the new work, hung three fine bells, rung always at
twelve o'clock at night; the monks going to mattins at that hour; four men were
appointed to ring these bells at midnight, and at such times of the day as the
monks went to serve God; two of the said men belonged to the revestry, and kept
the copes, the vestments, and five pair of silver censers, with the other
ornaments pertaining to the high altar, and lay in the chamber over the west
end of the revestry: The other two men lay in a chamber in the north aile, over
against the sacrist's exchequer; they swept and kept the church clean, and
filled the holy water stones every Sunday morning, and locked the church doors
every night.

The steeple of this cathedral, a stately fabric, is remarkable as well for its
height as strength and just architecture, having on the inside a gallery of
stone work around it, above the turn of the arches of the pillars upon which it
is founded; above which are eight long windows, two on each front of the
steeple, divided in the middle by a cross bar of stone, and handsomely glazed
with plain glass. Above the windows, on the outside, is another gallery, and
above that a superstructure, having two windows on each front, wherein hang
eight melodious bells. In the eight buttresses, on the sides of the lower
windows, also in the stone work betwixt each window, are niches, containing the
statues of the founders, protectors, and benefactors. -- Davies, etc.

As I noted before, these eight bells were cast in 1632, from the metal of the
gallilee bells, and those of the lanthern, and cost 128l. 12s. 7d. and were
recast in 1693.

The inscriptions on the several bells are as follow: 1. Camp. Christi and B.
Mariae virginis Chr. Hobson, artifice Dec. and Cap. Dunelmensis, fieri
fecerunt, A. D. MDCXCIII. 2. Campana S. Margaretae refecit. 3. Sit nomen Domine
benedictum Dec. and Cap. refecerunt, A. D. MDCXCIII. 4. Olim Campana S.
Benedicti. Fieri fecit R. Tonnor. 5. Olim Campana S. Michaelis Decanus and Cap.
refecerunt, A. D. MDCXCIII. 6. Olim Campana boni Bedae Chr. Hobson, art. Dec.
and Cap. Dunelm. refecerunt A. D. MDCXCIII. 7. Olim Camp. S. Oswaldi. quam
fieri fecit R. de Dunelm. Dec. and Cap. Dunelm. refecerunt A. D. MDCXCIII. 8.
Camp. S. Cuthberti olim Galalea Dec. and Cap. Dunelm. refecerunt, A. D.
MDCXCIII. T. Comber, S. T. P. Dec. S. Air, S. T. P. thesaur. Chr. Hobson,
artifice.


Amongst other ornaments of this church the brazen desk is not the least, which
was the joint guifte of a reverend prebend, Dr Robt. Swyfte, and his son, who
added the globe and eagle to that sumptuous basis and column, the guifte of
his father, which was the twelfth part of a great candlestick found hid in a
vault; who both lie buried under two marble stones, inlay'd with brass, as you
enter the quire door on the left side. -- Hegge's Legend, p. 27.


. This being built in the beginning of the thirteenth century, has many marks
of a refined taste: Round the bottom of the dome is a hanging gallery supported
on corbles, each intermediate one sculptured with a human figure; the breast
work or battlement of the gallery is formed in open rose work: The
superstructure is ornamented in pannels with pilasters, terminating in
tabernacle work: There are two long windows in each front, separated by a round
pilaster, whose capital is pierced in flowers and foliage; pilasters of the
same order are placed in the angles, and from the eight pilasters spring the
groins of the arched roof or vault of the dome, which are braced at intervals,
and finished with a circle in the center, in a light and beautiful taste.

The ascent from the transept is by two marble steps to the choir, entering
which, the visitor is struck with the magnificence and solemnity of the scene.
The choir is one hundred and twenty feet in length, and in width equal to the
center aile of the nave, the chief pillars running parallel through the whole
building. The side ailes are not so wide as those of the nave, the width of the
choir being only seventy-six feet. The floor is laid with black and white
marble The CHOIR.
In the east end of the choir, joining upon St Cuthbert's feretory, stood the
high altar, with many precious and costly ornaments appertaining to it, as well
for every principal day, as for every of our Lady's days. Betwixt the said high
altar and St Cuthbert's feretory, was all of French Pierre, curiously wrought
both on the outside and the inside, with images of alabaster, and gilt; being
called in the ancient history Lardose. The said French Pierre or Lardose,
reaching in height almost to the middle vault, and containing the breadth of
the choir in length. In the midst whereof, right over the high altar, were
placed, in very fine alabaster, the picture of our Lady standing in the midst,
and the picture of St Cuthbert on one side, and of St Oswald on the other, all
richly gilt. And at either end of this altar was a wand of iron fastened in the
wall, whereon hung curtains or hangings of white silk daily. The daily
ornaments that were hung both before the altar and above, were of red velvet,
with flowers of gold, in embroidered work, and many pictures besides very
finely gilt: But the ornaments for the principal feast, the assumption of our
Lady, were all of white damask, beset with pearls and precious stones.

Within the said choir, over the high altar, hung a rich and most sumptuous
canopy, for the blessed sacrament, which had two irons fastened in the French
Pierre, finely gilt; which held the canopy over the midst of the said high
altar, that it could not move or stir; whereon stood a pelican of silver, upon
the height of the said canopy, very finely gilt, giving her blood to her young
ones. And the pix was of pure gold, curiously wrought; and the white cloth that
hung over the pix was of very fine lawn, embroidered and wrought with gold and
red silk; and four great round knobs of gold curiously wrought, with tassels of
gold and red silk hung at them, and the four corners of the white lawn cloth;
and the crook that hung within the cloth, that the pix hung upon, was of gold;
and the cord that drew it up and down was made of fine strong white silk. And
when the monks went to high mass, they put on their vestments in the revestry,
both the epistler and gospeller; And when the office of the mass began to be
sung, the epistler came forth out of the revestry, the other two monks
following him, at the south choir door, and there stood till the Gloria Patri
or the office of the mass began to be sung; and then with great reverence and
devotion, they went all up to the altar; and one of the vergers that kept the
revestry went before them, with a large tip-staff in his hand. The gospeller
carried a fair book, which had the epistles and gospels in it, and laid it on
the altar; which book had on the outside of the covering, the picture of our
Savior, of silver, of goldsmith's work, parcel-gilt; which book did serve for
the pix in the mass. The epistler, when he had sung the epistle, laid the book
again upon the altar; and afterward when the gospel was sung, the gospeller
did lay it down upon the altar likewise, until the mass was done.

Also there was pertaining to the high altar two chalices, one was of gold, the
other of silver, double gilt, and the foot of it set full of precious stones;
that of gold was for principal days, and the other was to serve every day:
Likewise there was pertaining to the said high altar, two great basins of
silver, one for principal days, double gilt; and the other for every day, not
so large, being parcel-gilt, and engraven all over; and two great crewets of
silver, containing a quart a-piece, parcel-gilt, and engraven all over; and two
lesser crewets for every day, all of silver; one pair of silver censers for
every day, and two pair of silver censers for every double feast, double gilt;
and two pair of silver censers, parcel-gilt, and the chains also for every
principal day; and with two ships of silver, parcel-gilt, for principal days;
and other two of silver, ungilt, for every day, to carry frankincense in; and
two silver candlesticks, double gilt, for two tapers, very finely wrought, of
three quarters height, to be taken in sunder with wrests; and the other two
silver candlesticks, for every day's service, parcel-gilt; with sumptuous
furniture for every festival day, of changeable suits. Diverse of the vestments
were set round about with pearls, both stoles and stannels. There were also
other very rich jewels and ornaments pertaining to the said high altar.

There were also two crosses to be borne on principal days for procession; one
for gold, and the staff it stood in was of silver, of goldsmith's work, very
curiously wrought, and double gilt. The other cross was of silver, double gilt,
and the staff was of wood, of the same workmanship, and double gilt. Also there
was another cross of crystal that served for every day in the week. There was
borne before the cross every principal day, a holy water font, of silver, very
finely engraved, and parcel-gilt, which one of the novices carried.

In the north side of the choir there is an almery nigh to the high altar,
fastened in the wall, to lay any thing in, pertaining to the high altar.

There is likewise another almery in the south side of the choir, nigh the high
altar, enclosed in the wall, to set the chalices, basins, and the crewets in.

At the north end of the high altar there was a very fine lettern of brass,
where they sung the epistle and the gospel, with a great pelican on the height
of it, finely gilt, billing the blood out of her breast to feed her young ones,
and her wings spread abroad, whereon lay the book, in which they sung the
epistle and gospel; it was thought to be the finest lettern of brass in this
country. It was all to be taken asunder with wrests, every joint from the other.

Also there was lower down in the choir another lettern of brass, not so
curiously wrought, standing in the midst against the stalls, a very beautiful
one, with an eagle on the height of it, and her wings-spread abroad, whereon
the monks laid their books when they sung their legends, at mattins, or other
times of service.

Before the high altar were three fine silver basins hanging in chains of
silver, one on the south side of the choir, above the steps going up to the
high altar; the second on the north side, opposite to the first; the third in
the midst between them both, just before the high altar. These three silver
basins had latten basins within them, having pricks for serges or great waxen
candles to stand on; the latten basins being to receive the drops of the three
candles, which burned day and night.

There was also another silver basin hanging in silver chains before the
sacrament of the aforesaid high altar, but nearer to the said altars than the
others, hanging almost over the priest's back, which was only lighted in time
of mass, and that ended, extinguished.

Also there was a handsome monument belonging to the church, called the
paschal, which used to be set up in the choir, and there to remain from the
Thursday, called Maunday Thursday before Easter, till the Wednesday after
Ascension-day. It stood upon a apiece thick plank of wood, against the
first grees or step, behind the three basins of silver that hung before the
high altar: At every corner of the said plank was an iron ring, whereunto the
feet of the paschal were adjoined, representing the pictures of the four flying
dragons; as also the pictures of the four evangelists, above the top of the
dragons, underneath the nethermost boss, all supporting the whole paschal; and
the four quarters have been four crystal stones, as appear by the holes: And
on every side of the four dragons there is a curious antique work, as beasts,
men upon horseback, with bucklers, bows, and shafts, and knots, with broad
leaves spread upon the knots, very finely wrought, all being of the finest and
most curious candlestick metal, or latten metal, having six candlesticks or
flowers of candlestick metal coming from it, three on either side, whereon
stood a taper of wax: And on the height of the said candlestick was a large
pretty flower, being the principal flower, which was the seventh candlestick.
The paschal in latitude contained almost the breadth of the choir, in longitude
it extended to the height of the lower vault, whereon stood a long piece of
wood reaching within a man's length to the uppermost vault or roof of the
church, upon which stood a great, long squared taper of wax, called the
paschal; having a fine convenience through the said roof of the church to light
the taper. The paschal was esteemed to be one of the rarest monuments in
England.

The PASSION.
Within the church of Durham, upon Good Friday, there was a most solemn
service; in which two of the eldest monks took a large beautiful crucifix, all
of gold, laying it upon a velvet cushion, having St Cuthbert's arms upon it,
embroidered with gold, bringing it betwixt them upon the said cushion, to the
lowest steps in the choir, and there betwixt them, held the said picture of our
Savior, sitting on either side of it. And there one of the said monks rose and
went a pretty space from it, sitting down upon his knees, with his shoes put
off, crept upon his knees unto the said cross, and kissed it; and after him the
other monk did so likewise; and they sat down on either side of the said cross*
holding it betwixt them; after that the prior came out of his stall, and sat
down upon his knees with his shoes off: And in like manner crept unto the said
cross, and all the monks after him, one after another in the same order; in the
mean time the whole choir singing a hymn. The service being ended, the said two
monks carried the cross to the sepulcher with great reverence; (which was set
up that morning on the north side of the choir, nigh unto the high altar,
before the service time) and there laid it in the said sepulcher with great
devotion, with another picture of our Savior Christ, in whose breast they
enclosed, with great reverence, the most holy and blessed sacrament of the
altar; setting two tapers lighted before it, which burned till Easter day in
the morning that it was taken forth.

The RESURRECTION.
There was in the church of Durham very solemn service upon Easter day, between
three and four o'clock in the morning, in honor of the resurrection, where two
of the eldest monks of the choir came to the sepulcher set up on Good Friday,
covered with red velvet, and embroidered with gold, and then censed it, each
monk with a pair of silver censers, sitting on their knees before the
sepulcher. Then they both rising came to the sepulcher, out of which, with
great reverence, they took a beautiful image of our Savior, representing the
resurrection, with a cross in his hand, in the breast whereof was enclosed in
crystal, the holy sacrament of the altar; through which crystal the blessed
host was conspicuous to the beholders. Then after the elevation of the said
picture, carried by the said two monks upon a velvet cushion embroidered,
singing the anthem of Christus Resurgens, they brought it to the high altar,
setting it on the midst thereof, the two monks kneeling before the altar, and
censing it all the time that the rest of the choir were singing the aforesaid
anthem of Christus Resurgens; which anthem being ended, the two monks took up
the cushion and the picture from the altar, supporting it betwixt them, and
proceeding in procession from the high altar to the south choir door, where
there were four ancient gentlemen, belonging to the prior, appointed to attend
their coming, holding up a very rich canopy of purple velvet, tassled round
about with red silk, and a gold fringe, and at every corner of the canopy stood
one of the ancient gentlemen to bear it over the said image, with the holy
sacrament carried by the two monks round about the church, the whole choir
waiting upon it with torches and a great number of other lights, all singing,
rejoicing, and praying to God most devoutly, till they returned to the high
altar, whereon they placed the said image, there to remain till Ascension day.

Ludovicus de Bello Monte, bishop of Durham, lies buried before the high altar
in the choir, under a most curious and sumptuous marble stone, which he
prepared for himself before he died; being adorned with most excellent
workmanship of brass, whereon he was most excellently and lively pictured, as
he was accustomed to sing or say mass, with his mitre on his head, and his
crosier staff in his hand, with two angels finely pictured, one on the one side
of his head, and the other on the other side, with censers in their hands
censing him; and containing also pictures and image of the twelve apostles,
divided and bordered on either side of him; and next them are bordered on each
side of the twelve apostles, in another border, the pictures of his ancestors,
in their coats of arms, being of the blood royal of France; he had a white lion
placed upon the breast of his vestment, underneath the verses of his breast,
with flower-de-luces about the lion; and two lions pictured, one under one foot
of him, and the other under his other foot, supporting and holding up his
crosier staff, his feet adjoining and standing upon the said lions; and two
other lions beneath them, in the nethermost border of all, being very
artificially wrought in brass.

The names of the monks who were officers within the abbey church, at the time
of the dissolution.

Dr Richard Crosby, master of the novices.

There was always six novices, who went daily to school within the house, for
the space of seven years together, and one of the eldest and most learned monks
was their tutor. The said novices had no wages, but meat, drink, and apparel,
for that space. The master, or tutor's office was to see they wanted nothing;
as cowls, frocks, stamyne, bedding, boots, socks; and as soon as they needed
any of these necessaries, the master had charge to call at the chamberlain's
for such things. They never received wages, nor handled money in that time, but
went daily to their books in the cloister: And if the master found any of them
more apt to learn, and diligently prosecuting his studies, then he gave notice
thereof to the prior, and he was soon sent to Oxford, there to learn and study
divinity, and the rest of the novices were kept at their books, till they could
understand their service and the scriptures. At seven years of age they sung
their first mass, and from thence the house was no longer charged with finding
them apparel; for then they entered into wages, to find themselves with
apparel, which was twenty shillings a year each, and had no more to supply
themselves withal. -- The eldest monk in the house had no more, except he had
an office. His chamber was in the dorter.

Dr John Porter, alias Smith, sacristan.

The sacrist's exchequer was within the church, in the north alley, opposite to
bishop Skirlaw's altar, on the left hand as you go up to the abbey of St
Cuthbert's feretory.

His office was to provide bread and wine for the church, and wax and lights in
winter. He had always a tun of wine lying in his exchequer, for the use of the
church. He had also sacristan-heugh in his keeping; it was his charge; and St
Mary's cupboard was his office. He was also to see the glass windows repaired,
and the plummer's work of the church done; and mending of bells and bell-ropes,
and all other works necessary to be performed, both within and without the
church, and to see the church kept clean.

His office was also to lock up every night the keys of every altar in the
church, every altar having its several almery, and some two, to lay the said
keys forth every morning between seven and eight o'clock, upon the top of the
almery, which was of wainscot, wherein they were locked, which stood within the
north choir door, that every monk might take the key, and go to what altar he
was disposed to say mass at.

They also went to the chapter house every day between eight and nine o'clock,
where all the bishops in the old time were buried, and there prayed for all
their benefactors, and those who had bestowed any thing upon this church. At
nine o'clock a bell was rung to mass, called the chapter mass, which was always
sung at the high altar; and he that sung the mass had always in his memento,
all those who had given any thing to this church. One half of the monks said
mass in the chapter mass time, and the other half that sung not the chapter
mass, said mass in the high mass time.

There were at every altar two chalices, and two silver crewets appertaining to
it, both with albs and vestments for principal feasts; as also for all other
days beside. Every altar had its double furniture for adorning all parts of the
altar, serving both for holidays and principal feasts.

Their founders and benefactors were prayed for every day, and had in
remembrance in the time of saying mass.

The sacristan's chamber was in the dorter, and he had his meat served from the
great kitchen to his exchequer.

Other officers of the church.

Dr Robert Bennet, bowcer of the house: He was the first prebendary in the
eleventh stall. Anno 1542.

His exchequer was a little stone house joining upon the coal-garth pertaining
to the great kitchen, a little distant from the dean's hall stairs.

Dr Roger Wright, cellerer of the house.

His exchequer was afterward Dr Tod's chamber, joining to the west end of the
great kitchen, having a pair of stairs going up to it, and was the first
prebendary in the eleventh stall. Anno 1542.

Dr Roger Watson, terrer of the house.

His exchequer was as you go into the guest-hall, on the left hand in the entry
at going into the great hall.

Dr William Forster, keeper of the garners.

The master of the garners exchequer was over Mr Pilkington's hall door, all
whose house, and Mr Bunney's, were garners, where their wheat and other corn
lay.

These granaries are at present the houses of the seventh and eighth
prebendaries.

The kiln was where Mr Robert Bennet's lodging was, beyond the conduit. This
lodging was built at his own expense. It is at this time the house of the
eleventh prebendary.

Dr Thomas Spark, chamberlain, the first prebendary in the third stall. Anno
1542.

His exchequer was near the abbey-gates; now the mansion house of the first
prebendary.

The chamberlain's office was to provide stamyne, otherwise called
linsey-woolsey, for sheets and shirts for the novices and the monks, for they
were not permitted to wear linen. He kept a tailor daily at work, in making
socks of white woollen cloth, both whole and half socks; and making shirts and
sheets of linsey-woolsey, in a shop underneath the exchequer. This tailor was
one of the servants of the house. The chamber where he lay was in the dorter.

Dr Henry Brown, master of the common-house.

His office was to provide all such spices against Lent as should be
comfortable to the monks, under their great austerity, both of fasting and
praying; and to have a fire constantly in the common-house hall, for the monks
to warm themselves at when they pleased; and to provide always a hogshead of
wine for the monks; and for keeping his O, called O Sapientia, and to provide
sigs and walnuts for Lent. His chamber was in the dorter.

Dr William Watson, the prior's chaplain.

His exchequer was over the stairs in going up to the dean's hall. He was the
first prebendary in the twelfth stall. Anno 1542.

His office was to receive at the bowcer's hands, all such sums of money as
were payable by him to the lord prior's use for his maintenance, the expense of
his whole household, and his other necessaries. The said chap^ia was to provide
apparel for the lord prior, and to see all things in good order in the hall,
and the furniture for his table to be sweet and clean; and that every man
executed his office diligently as he ought to do; and that no debate or strife
should be within the house. He had in his custody all the lord prior's plate
and treasure, as well for delivering it out, as receiving it again. He was also
to discharge and pay all the gentlemen, yeomen, and all other the servants and
officers of the lord prior's house their wages, and to discharge all other
debts of the house whatsoever. His chamber was adjoining to the prior's chamber.

All these monks were in these offices when the house was suppressed.

The ancient custom of procession in the abbey church of Durham, on certain
festivals.

Upon St Mark's day.

St Mark's day was commonly kept a fast through all the country, and no flesh
eaten upon it: The prior with the monks made a solemn procession, and went to
Bow church, doing very solemn service there; and one of the monks made a sermon
to the parishioners and town's men who came thither.

The procession on the three cross days, by the prior and monks.

On Monday in cross-week they had another solemn procession, going to St
Oswald's church in Elvet, and there did a solemn service: A sermon was preached
by one of the monks, before a numerous audience. -- Tuesday, the day following,
in another solemn procession, they went to St Margaret's church, in Crosgate,
with solemn service, and a sermon. On Wednesday, the next day, they had the
like procession to St Nicholas' church, there doing divine service very
solemnly, and a sermon was preached before a great audience.

The procession on Holy-Thursday, Whit-Sunday, and Trinity-Sunday, by the prior
and the monks.

The next morning, being Holy-Thursday, they had a general procession, with two
crosses borne before them; one, both cross and staff, all of gold; the other of
silver parcel-gilt, with that holy relic St Cuthbert's banner, being carried
first in the procession, with all the rich copes belonging to the church, every
monk one. The prior had an exceedingly rich one of cloth of gold, which was so
massy that he could not go upright with it, unless his gentlemen, who at other
times bore up his train, supported it on every side whenever he had it on. He
had his crosier staff in his hand, which was of silver double guilt, and a rich
mitre on his head: Also that holy relic St Bede's shrine, was carried in the
procession by four monks, upon their shoulders. And other monks carried about
with them in the said procession, several holy relics, as the picture of St
Oswald, of silver gilt, and St Margaret's cross, of silver double gilt. The
procession came out at the north door of the abbey church and through the
churchyard, and down Lidgate, by Bow church end, and up the South Bailey, and
in at the abbey gates, where a great number of people stood, and so proceeded
through the abbey garth, whither no woman was permitted to go; and so through
the cloisters into the church.

Upon Whit-Sunday was a general procession, with the same solemnities as had
been observed on Holy-Thursday, with St Bede's shrine, St Cuthbert's banner,
and all the holy relics; as the image of St Oswald, and the image of St
Aidanus, and St Margaret's cross, and diverse others.

On Trinity-Sunday was another general procession as aforesaid, with all the
above recited relics, going the same circuit.


. The stalls are elegant; the bishop's stall being on the right hand side of
the entrance, the dean's on the other; one for the temporal chancellor on the
dean's left hand, and those of the prebendaries and archdeacons in succession;
the minor canons next; one at the extremity toward the east on the south side,
for the vicar general of the diocese; and others on both sides, for the
reception of the judges of assize, sheriff, mayor, and corporation of the city,
etc. on such accustomed days as they attend divine service there; the whole
finished in a magnificent style with tabernacle work. Beneath the stalls are
seats for the lay-singers, choristers, almshouse-men, and scholars of the
foundation. Advancing toward the altar, where the stalls terminate, the
pavement is elevated one step, and on the right hand is the bishop's throne,
erected by bishop Hatfield, over the vault prepared for his own monument, and
built in a style consistent with the proud idea he held of the dignity of his
mitre. Mr Pennant speaking of it, says, In the choir is the bishop's throne,
elevated to an uncommon height, erected in times of the triumph of
superstition. A painful ascent to the present prelate, whose wish is directed
more to distinguish himself by benevolence and sincerity, than any exterior
trappings or badges of dignity. The ascent to the throne is by many steps; in
the center is a chair of state, richly ornamented, and canopied over head with
tabernacle work, colored and gilt; on each side, the throne is lined with
tapestry, and otherwise handsomely furnished, large enough to receive the chief
temporal officers, with the servants who are about the prelate's person: The
bishop, when he goes to his throne, is always preceded by a person bearing a
massy gilded mace, in distinction of his secular power. Chamber tells us, Novum
ad australem partem chori...juxta stallos monachorum curiosum opus construxit,
in medio cujus stallum episcopale, imaginibus subtiliter sculptis, sumptibus
copiosis in operarios largissime impensis, honorifice circumseptum, fecit and
decenter ordinavit The throne was repaired by Lord Crewe; and in 1772, was new
painted and gilt by bishop Egerton.
. The images are all removed. Below the throne are stalls for the prebendaries'
ladies: On the opposite side of the choir, where bishop Skirlaw's tomb was, are
other stalls for the ladies of the bishops, and dean's families and others; and
close adjoining is the pulpit, finely ornamented with inlaid figures in the
Italian style, representing some of the apostles, the ground Swedish oak; the
figures are almost as large as life, so artfully shadowed as to appear like a
delicate painting in bronze: The sounding board is supported by one column. The
opening into the side ailes to which you descend by five marble steps, is by a
gate, and two side lights of open tracery work, in wood, finely executed and
finished above with tabernacle work. The choir comprehends four pillars on each
side, two of them clustered, and two round, the round ones cut in the spiral
figure: The double gallery above the side ailes is formed of circular arches,
each of the lower openings divided by a single column. The roof was repaired,
or rather new vaulted by prior Hotoun, who acceded in 1289; it is of elegant
Gothic work, the ribs of the arches terminating in points ornamented with
roses, the fillets pierced in roses and crosses: Some of the decorations of the
center roses are singular; one next to the organ contains a human figure, with
three round balls in an apron, not unusual among the heathen emblematical
effigies. From the altar rails eastward, the whole work appears nearly of the
same date, and by the architecture of this part of the edifice, we are led to
conclude that the building originally terminated here, and was opened further
eastward to form a connection with the east transept: The columns which rise at
the altar rail, are little more than the plain facing of a common wall,
ornamented with long small round pilasters, single and belted in the middle,
their capitals pierced, decorated with figures of animals, and finished above
with tabernacle work; the whole appearing like ornaments placed occasionally
there: The opening of the gallery in this part is different from the rest of
the church, consisting of three pointed arches, supported by columns whose
capitals are richly pierced, and the fillets of the arches are pierced and
highly decorated; there is also an interior pillar supporting a groined
vaulting. Here the building appears to have been broken off and the east wall
removed. The vaulting of the roof is continued, and over the altar table
finishes with a fine pointed arch, supported on clustered pillars, ranging with
the side of the east transept; the capitals and the fillets or mouldings of the
arch are highly finished with pierced work, and bear no degree of similitude to
any of the more western parts of this edifice. Within the altar rails eastward,
from the plain columns before described, are four seats on each side of the
altar table, for the officiating priests to rest, formed of pillars, supporting
pinnacle work, of the same materials and design as the work behind the altar,
and most probably erected at the same time: These seats are closed from the
ailes behind with a wall, which proves the occasionality, by being dissimilar
to the rest of the aile The chancel and altar piece are of stone, beautifully
cut into open work A cut of it in Smith's edition of Bid.

Mr Ebdon, an architect, brother to the present organist, published two
excellent views of the choir of this church.

Into this sumptuous new church was the last and great translation of St
Cuthbert, but before the day came, prior Turgot, with some of his brethren,
determined to open his tomb with intent to show his body to the people, if
they found it entire: At night, therefore, they met at his sepulcher, and
reverently taking off the stone, they found a chest well fortified with nails
and leather, and in it another wrapped in cloth thrice double, in which they
found the book of the evangelists which had fallen into the sea, a little
silver altar, a goblet of pure gold, with an Onyx stone, and an ivory comb:
Lastly, opening the third chest, they found the body of the saint (which the
grave in so many years had not digested) lying upon the right side to give room
to the rest of the relics: For in the same coffyn were the bones of Venerable
Beda, the head of St Oswald, part of the bones of Aidanus, Eadfrid, and
Ethelwold, bishops of Lindisfarne: All which relics they placed with due
reverence in other parts of the church; and laying St Cuthbert on his back,
they placed St Oswald's head between his bands. At the day of his translation,
Ranulphus, the bishop, published in his sermon to the people, the incorruption
of St Cuthbert's body, which, after four years was flexible, and now might
plead prescription with the grave to be immortale. And thus in great solemnity
they inshrined him beneath the high altar in the presence of the abbot of St
Albans, the abbot of St Mary's, in York, the abbot of St Germans, prior
Turgot, with thousands of people spectators of the miracle. Hegge's Legend, p.
23.

In 1284, William, bishop of Dumblain, granted an indulgence whereby every one
who visited this saint's shrine were to be excused forty days of their penance.
The original record is still in the chapter library; and a copy of it is
published in the appendix to Dr Smith's edition of Beda, No 26.


, and on each side are two stalls in stone, originally designed for the resting
places of sick votaries. Pennant, 332.

Many travelers have been equally deceived; care was taken to scrape the work,
which proved that the whole is a composition like what is now called plaster of
Paris; and by Davies it is called French Pierre or Lardoise; Chamber calls it
Lavadose.


. The altar screen, which is very beautiful, is thus spoken of by Chamber: The
marble tomb for St Cuthbert's feretory being finished, at the like instance of
the prior and monks, lord John Nevil gave to the church the work above the
altar, called lavadose, which cost him six hundred marks, and was enclosed in
cases, and sent from London by shipping Wharton's Ang. Sac. 769.
. This screen is in pinnacle work, of plaster of Paris, with pedestals for
statues, richly canopied: Was put up at the expense of the convent, and
finished by prior John Berrington, of Walworth, in the year 1380, when the high
altar was dedicated with much solemnity There lay on the high altar a book
richly covered with gold and silver, containing the names of all the
benefactors to St Cuthbert's church, from the first foundation thereof: The
letters of the book being for the most part gilt. The same is yet extant.

There is also another book yet extant, containing the relics, jewels,
ornaments, and vestments that were given to the church by those founders, whose
names were on record in the book that lay upon the high altar. -- Davies, etc.

This book is still preserved in the Cottonian Collection, Domitian VII. 2. It
anciently had a very rich cover, which is lost, it being now bound in red
leather, with the arms of the Cottons in gold: On the first leaf of vellum is
written a distich in the Saxon character, expressing that there was enclosed
under the silver cover a register of benefactors, etc.

St Cuthbert's book of the gospels, with the Saxon version, is also preserved
in this collection. Strutt in his Chronicle engraved a page of that elegant
work. Vol. i. 347.

In a curious MS. in the Herald's-office, are beautifully drawn all the arms in
this church, comprising one hundred and seventeen coats; together with bishop
Hatfield's monument, of which Mr Allan has a trick from the late Ra. Bigland,
Esquire Garter. Dugdale's MS. notat. 6. 41.

The book of the evangelists here mentioned was originally written by Edfrid,
then a monk and afterward bishop of Lindisfarne, who, during his retirement in
that monastery. translated the gospels into Latin. After his decease it was
decorated with gold and jewels by his successor Ethelwold, and curiously
painted by Bilfrid, an anchorite. Prefixed to it are the prefaces and canons of
Eusebius and Hieronymus, besides an inter^^neary Saxon version by Aldred the
priest. At the end of St John's gospel are these lines added in a contemporary
hand.

"Litera me pandat, sermonis sida ministra,
"Omnes alme meos fratres cum voce saluta."
After it is Trinus et Unus Deus Evangelium hoc ante saecula constituit.
Mattheus ex ore Christi scripsit.
Marcus ex ore Petri scripsit.
Lucas de ore Pauli apostoli scripsit.
Johannes in prochemio deinde eructavit verbum,
Deo donante et spiritu sancto scripsit.


Then follows a Saxon writing, signifying it to be the work of the aforementioned
Edfrid, Ethelwold, and Bilfrid; and also of Aldred the priest, author of the
Saxon version.

This truly venerable piece of antiquity after the Reformation fell into the
hands of Sir Robert Cotton, and is yet preserved in the Cottonian Collection,
in the British Museum.


.

By a door at each end of the table, you enter into St Cuthbert's feretory,
thus spoken of by Mr Pennant, Behind the altar stood the shrine of St Cuthbert,
once the richest in Great Britain: The marks of pilgrims' feet in the worn
floor still evince the multitude of votaries: At the dissolution his body was
taken out of the tomb, and interred beneath. It is now stripped of every
ornament; is thirty-seven feet in length, and twenty-six in width, eastward
from the altar screen; raised with stone work about eight feet high, and
surrounded with wainscot, in which no great elegance appears; it is formed with
apertures divided by columns, and ornamented with an entablature: The pillars
are finished with light pinnacles of tabernacle work: In ancient times it is
presumed the wainscot was covered within with rich hangings. The marble
monument which John lord Nevil gave to enclose St Cuthbert's remains, is no
more; a large blue stone is placed in the floor, where his bones rest, and it
is presumed have long testified their corruptibility St Cuthbert's ^eretory.
Next to the nine altars was the monument of St Cuthbert, having the high altar
on the west, in the midst whereof his shrine was exalted with most curious
workmanship, of fine green marble, gilt with gold; having four seats or places
underneath the shrine, for pilgrims or lame men, sitting on their knees to rest
on, in the time of their devout offerings. It was esteemed one of the most
sumptuous monuments in all England, so great were the offerings and jewels
bestowed upon it.

At the west end of this shrine was a little altar for mass to be said on, only
upon the great and holy feast of St Cuthbert's day in Lent: At which solemnity
the prior and the whole convent did keep open household in the frater-house, and
dined all together, and on no day else in the year: And at this feast, and
certain other festival days, they were accustomed to draw up the cover of St
Cuthbert's shrine, being of wainscot, having six very fine sounding silver
bells fastened to the rope; which, at the drawing up of the cover, made a
goodly sound; which said cover on the outside was very finely and artificially
gilded. And on either side were painted four lively images; on the east end the
picture of our Savior sitting on the rainbow to give judgment; on the west end
was the picture of our Lady, and Christ on her knee; and on the height of the
cover from end to end was a fine brattishing of carved work, cut throughout
with dragons, fowls, and beasts; and the inside of the cover was all varnished
and colored with a fine sanguine color; and at every corner of the cover
there was a lock to lock it down.

Also within the said feretory, both on the north side and the south, there
were almeries of wainscot, varnished, finely painted, and gilt over with little
images, for the relics of St Cuthbert to lie in; and within the almeries did
lie all the holy relics that were offered to St Cuthbert; and when his shrine
was drawn, the almeries were opened, that every man might see the holy relics
therein, accounted the most sumptuous and richest jewels in all this land; for
great were the gifts and godly devotion of kings, queens, and other estates, at
that time, toward God and holy St Cuthbert in this church.

Within this feretory were many little pictures of saints, of imagery work, all
of alabaster, set in the French Pierre in their several places, the pictures
being curiously engraved and gilt; and the Nevil's cross and bulls head set
upon the height; and on either side of the two doors in the French Pierre, and
also in diverse other places of the French Pierre besides; which feretory and
French Pierre were made at the charges of John lord Nevil.

At the east end of St Cuthbert's feretory were wrought upon the height of the
irons toward the nine altars, very fine candlesticks of iron, like unto
sockets, which had lights set in them before day, that every monk might have
light to see to read their books at the said nine altars, when they said mass;
and also to give light to all others that came thither to divine service.

The king of Scots' ancient and his banner, with diverse other noblemen's
ancients, were all brought to St Cuthbert's feretory; and there the said lord
Nevil offered the jewels and banners; and there the said banners and ancients
stood and hung till the suppression of the house. The lord Nevil's banner staff
was all wrythen about with iron, from the midst upward, and stood on the north
end of the feretory: And the king of Scots' banner hung over the midst of the
alley of the nine altars, under St Catharine's window, in the east end of the
church; and a little after the suppression of the house, they were all taken
down, spoiled and defaced, that the memory thereof should be clean taken away,
being both a great honor to the realm, and a decent ornament unto the church.

St Cuthbert's shrine defaced.
The shrine of St Cuthbert was defaced at the visitation held at Durham, for
demolishing such monuments, by Dr Lee, Dr Henley, and Mr Blithman, in king
Henry the Eighth's reign, at his suppression of religious houses. They found
many goodly and valuable jewels, especially one precious stone, which was of
value sufficient to redeem a prince. After the spoil of ornaments and jewels,
they approached near to his body, expecting nothing but dust and ashes; but
perceiving the chest he lay in strongly bound with iron, the goldsmith with a
smith's great fore-hammer broke it open, when they found him lying whole,
incorrupt, with his face bare, and his beard as of a fortnight's growth, and
all the vestments about him, as he was accustomed to say mass, and his metwand
of gold lying by him. When the goldsmith perceived he had broken one of his
legs, in breaking open the chest, he was sore troubled at it, and cried, Alas!
I have broken one of his legs; which Dr Henley hearing, called to him, and bade
him cast down his bones: The other answered he could not get them asunder, for
the sinews and the skin held them so that they would not separate. Then Dr Lee
stepped up to see if it were so, and turning about, spoke in Latin to Dr Henley,
that he was entire, though Dr Henley not believing his words, called again to
have his bones cast down: Dr Lee answered, if you will not believe me, come up
yourself, and see him: Then Dr Henley stepped up to him, and handled him, and
found he lay whole: Then he commanded them to take him down; and so it happened
contrary to their expectation, that not only his body was whole and
uncorrupted, but the vestments wherein his body lay, and wherein he was
accustomed to say mass, were fresh, safe, and not consumed. Whereupon the
visitors commanded him to be carried into the revestry, till the king's
pleasure concerning him was further known; and upon the receipt thereof, the
prior and monks buried him in the ground under the place where his shrine was
exalted. Davies, etc.

In 1255. Henry III. being in these parts, visited St Cuthbert, (as they
call it) and while he was at his devocions, a courtyer whyspered in his care,
that dyvers bishops of his had hydden much treasure in St Cuthberte's tomb.
The king made short, and openinge the tomb, sound it to be even foe;
whereupon he devised to borowe the same, least they should charge him with
profanation of the holy relics: But Paris compleneth, that they wear never
half paid again. Lambard's Topographical and Historical Dictionary, page 86.

In this new church was erected a sumptuous shrine, called the feretory, about
three yards from the ground, behind the high altar, at the east end of the
choir, where his body was solemnly placed in an iron chest within the said
shrine, where it lay quietly without molestation, till the suppression of the
church: And the book of the four evangelists which fell into the sea, and was
so miraculously landed and found again, was laid on the high altar, as a fit
monument to preserve the memory of so great a saint.

These holy bishops and monks, for the honor of their holy saint, Aldwinus,
and Ranulph Flamberd, as bishop William Carileph intended at building the new
church, on the outside of the north west turret of the same altars, erected the
monument of a milk-maid milking her cow, in grateful commemoration of that
maid, who so fortunately, in their great perplexity, directed them to Dunholme,
where the body of their great saint was to rest until the resurrection: Which
monument, though defaced by the weather, is visible at this time.

Dr William Watson, alias William Wylome, master and keeper of the feretory,
and vice-prior at the dissolution.
The master of the feretory's chamber was in the dormitory, his office was when
any man of honor or re^^^ was disposed to offer prayers to God and St
Cuthbert, or to offer any thing at his shrine; if they requested to have it
drawn, or to see it, the clerk of the feretory (called George Bates) gave
notice to his master, the vice-prior, keeper of the feretory, who brought the
keys of the shrine, and gave them to the clerk to open it. His office then was
to stand by and see it drawn up. It was always drawn up in mattins time, when
Te Deum was singing, or in high mass time, or at even-song time when Magnificat
was sung. George Bates was register of the house.

There was in the keeping of the vice-prior, a banner belonging to the shrine,
called St Cuthbert's banner, the staff five yards in length; all the pipes of
it were of silver, to be slidden on along the banner staff, and on the
uppermost pipe; on the top of it was a little silver cross, and a goodly banner
cloth pertaining to it, and in the midst of the banner cloth was a white velvet
half a yard square, and a cross of crimson velvet over it; and within the said
white velvet was that holy relic, the corporax cloth, wherewith the holy man
St Cuthbert covered the chalice when he said mass; and the rest of the banner
cloth was of crimson velvet, embroidered with gold and green silk most
sumptuously. The said banner was at the winning of Brankenfield battle, in king
Henry the Eighth's time, and brought home with it the king of Scots' banner,
and many noblemen's ancients of Scotland; which were set up in St Cuthbert's
feretory, where they remained till the suppression of the house; at which time
St Cuthbert's banner, and these ancients of Scotland were defaced. St
Cuthbert's banner was thought to be one of the most magnificent relics of any
in England, and was not carried out but on principal days, in general
processions, as Easter day, Ascension day, Whitsunday, Corpus Christi day, and
St Cuthbert's day, and some other festival days. It was very massy, and set up
at the east end of the shrine. Whenever it was carried in procession, it was
the clerk's office to attend it, with his surplice on, with a fine red painted
staff, having a fork or cleft at the upper end thereof; which cleft was lined
with soft silk, having down under the silk, to prevent hurting or bruising the
pipes of the banner, which were of silver, or in taking it down and raising it
up again, by reason of its great weight. There were always four men to go along
with it, besides the clerk, and the man who carried it.

There was also a strong girdle of white leather, that he who bore St
Cuthbert's banner, did wear whenever it was carried abroad. The banner was made
fast to it with two pieces of white leather, and at each end of the two pieces,
a socket of horn was fastened, to put the end of the banner staff into. Davies,
etc.

The iron-bound chest, which tradition says contained the saint's body, long
lay neglected in the bishop's palace. It is accurately represented in the plate.

The Chest in which St Cuthberts Body was deposited
depiction of chest


. In the choir bishop Beaumont and bishop Pilkington were interred.

The ailes of the choir are vaulted like the ailes of the nave. In the north
aile, opposite to bishop Skirlaw's tomb, is a stone seat with the shields of
his arms. There St Blase's altar stood. What is said in the ancient
descriptions of this church, touching a porch called the anchorage, of which no
remains is to be traced, or of the stairs described to adjoin to the north door
of St Cuthbert's feretory, confirms our judgment that the whole east end of
this edifice was altered in the thirteenth century; and it is to be observed,
that the columns at the ends of the ailes are A PEDIGREE OF THE FAMILY OF
NEVILLS.
A Johannes de Neville, dus Latim. ob. s. p. 9 Hen. VI. A Matilda, fill Tho.
I^ni Clifford. Matilda, Alicia, Philippa, Margareta, Anna, Margeria, et
Elizabetha. B Elizab. C Radulphus N co. Westmer. obiit 4 Hen. VI. Margareta,
fill. Hugonis co. Stafford, ux. 1ma. Radulphus, ob 21 Oct. an. 1426, 5 Hen. VI.
Maria, fill. Tho. Ferrers, de Oversley. Johannes, ob. 2 Hen. VI vivo patre.
Elizabetha. fill. Tho. Holland com. Cant. Johannes Caesus in Praelio de Towton,
1 Ed. IV. Anna, relicto Johannis Nepotis sui. Radulfus, co. West. Margareta,
fill. R. Booth de Barton, co. Lanc. mil. Anna, ux. Will. Coniers, mil. Radulfus
ob. vivo patre. Editha, fill. W. Sands. Radulfus, com. Westmerl. ob. 15 Hen.
VIII. Regist. Antiq. Dec. et cap. Dunelm. vol. V. p. 131. Catharina fill. Edw.
Dux, Buckingham. Eleanora, Maria, Th. Danby, mil. Dorothea, Johi, com. Oxon.
Johanna. Margareta, Hen com. Rut. Elizabetha, Tho d'Dacre. Eleanora, Brianus
Stapilton, mil. Anna. Fulco Greville, mil. Ursula. Henricus, co. Westmer. ob. 5
Elizabetha. Jana, fill. Tho. com. Rutland. Carolus, co. Westminster. attinctus 13
Eliza. Anna, fill. Henrici, co. Surriae. Catharina, Tho. Gray, de Chillingham,
mil. 1 Eleanora, ux. Williel. Polham, mil. Eleanora, ob. innupta. Margareta,
Nich. Pudsey. Anna, David Engleby. 2 Catharina, ux. Johannis Constable, mil. 3
Maria. 4 Adelina. Margareta, fill. R. Chomley, mil. relicta Hen. Gascoin, mil
ux. 2d. Margareta. Elizabetha. Thomas. Edwardus. Christopher. Radulphus.
Cuthbertus. Radulfus. co. Westminster. ob. 2 Rich. III. Elizabeth, fill. H. Perci
Hotspur dicti. Johannes, ob. 29 Hen. VI. S. P. Anna, ux. P. Walliae, et Rich.
D. Gloucest. Johanna, fill. Johan Ganda^. D. Lan. ux. 2d. 1 Ricardus com. Sarum.
2 Wilielmus das Falconbridge. 4 Edwardus dus Bergavenniae. 5 Robertus Episcopus
Dunel. 6 Cuthbertus. 7 Henricus. 8 Thomas. 3 Georgius dus Latimer, ob. 9 Hen.
IV. Elizab. fill. Rich. de Bello Campo, co. Warwick. Henricus Neville Caesus in
Praelio de Edgcote, 9 Ed. IV. vivo patre. **** fill. Domini Berners. Ricardus,
N. dus Latimer, ob. 22 Hen. VIII. Anna, fill. Humf. Stafford. de Grafton, co.
Wig. Johan. N. Dus Latimer. Catharina, fill. T. Parr, de Kendall, mil. relicta,
Hen. VIII. ux. 2d. Margareta. Johannes, D. Latimer. Lucia, fill. Hen. co Wigorn.
1 Catharina, ux. Henr. com. Northumb. 2 Dorothea, ux. Tho. com. Oxon. 3 Lucia,
ux. Will. Coruroallis, mil. 4 **** ux. Johannes Danvers, mil. Dorothea, soror
et cohaeres, Johan. com. Oxon, ux. 1st. Illustrissimum Nevillorum genus hospes
est in Historia Anglicana qui non novit? et si longa proavorum series tam a
regio sanguine Saxonum quam a primoribus Normannorum deducta, summisque cum
honoribus tum et opibus per multa retro secula clarescens quenquam nobilitare
possit palmam omnibus fere regni proceribus familia haec merito praeripere
audeat. Nulla equidem plures aut vegetiores Stirps ramos unquam protrusit: hinc
etenim Comites Westmerlandiae, Sarisburiae, et Warwici; hinc Marchio
Montisacuti; hinc Dux Bedfordiae; hinc Barons Furnivallis, Latimeri,
Falcon-bridgiae, et Bergavenniae Germinarunt; cum vero Richmondiae limitibus
excedere nostri non sit instituti stemmata solum Comitum Westmerlandiae et
Baronum Latinerorum hujus erunt loci. Waltheof. Uctredus, Comes Northumbriae.
Crinan Maldred. Cospatricus, fill. Maldredi. Cospatricus, (vid. Sym. Dun. p. 79,
80.) Waltheof. Dolphin, fill. Maldredi. Robertus, fill. Maldredi dus de Raby.
Isabella, fill. unica et haeres. Galfridus de Neville dus de Raby. Galfridus de
Neville, ob. 13 Ed. I. Margareta, fill. et haeres Johannis de Longvillers.
Johannes. Robertus, ob. 10 Ed. I. Ida, Rob. Bertram, vid. Dugd. Bar. vol. 292.
Robertus iste de Neville membra generationis manibus irati viri cujusdam
ingenue quam carnaliter cognoverat apud Cravon perdidit.
Robertus de Neville, junr. ob. vivo patre 55 Hen. III. June 6th, 1427. Maria,
fill. et una coh. Radulphi fill. Ranulphi. Radulphus de Neville, ob. 5 Ed. III.
Eufemia, fill. John Clavering, ux. 1st. Robertus Pavo Septentrionis, ob. vivo
patre. Margeria, fill. Marmaduci Thweng, ux. 2d. Radulfus de Neville, Dus de
Middleham, ob. 41 Ed. III. Alicia, fill. Hugonis de Audley. Johannes de Neville,
ob. 12 Rich. II. Elizabetha fill. et h. dui Latimer de Danby, ux. 2d. A Matilda
Perci, uxor ejus 1^. B Elgiva, fill. Ethelredi, regis Angl. Aldgitha. Gilbertus
de Neville, Normanus. Galfridus de Neville. Galfridus de Neville, ob. 5 Rich.
I. Emma, fill. et haer. Bertram de Bulmer, Dus de Brancepeth. Isabella, fill.
unica et haeres. Henricus, ob. s. p. 11 H. III.


genealogy clustered, of various small pilasters, like those of the whole east
transept: The arches are pointed, and with the capitals of the columns richly
wrought in pierced work like those of the high altar: This aile is lighted by
four windows, three of which are of pointed arches, and two made by John
Tickhill, in prior Fossour's time. At the east end of the south aile, was also
an ancient porch, described to be similar to that on the north where the rood
of Scotland was placed; of which there are no remains: Under the last window
the wall is ornamented with pilasters and tabernacle work, and there is a
door-way (now shut up) which led into the cemetery garth The north aile of the
choir.
At the east end of the north aile of the choir, betwixt two pillars, was the
grandest porch, called the anchorage; having in it a very elegant rood, with
the pictures of Mary and John, with an altar for a monk to say daily mass,
being in ancient times inhabited by an Anchorite, whereunto the priors very
much resorted, both for the excellency of the place, as also to hear mass,
standing so conveniently unto the high altar, and withal so near a neighbor to
the shrine of St Cuthbert. The entrance to this porch or anchorage was up a
part of stairs adjoining to the north door of St Cuthbert's feretory, under
which stairs the paschal did lie, and in the time of Lent, the children of the
almery were enjoined to come thither daily, to dress, trim, and make it bright
against the paschal feast.

In this north aile of the choir, betwixt two pillars on the south side, before
St Blase's altar, afterward called Skirlaw's altar, lies buried, Walter
Skirlaw, bishop of Durham, under a fair marble stone, very sumptuously beset
with many brazen images, having his own image most artificially portrayed in
brass in the midst thereof.

Right over the entrance of this north alley, going to the song school, which
was heretofore the sacrist's exchequer, there was a porch adjoining to the
choir on the south, and St Benedict's altar on the north; the porch having in
it an altar, and the rood or picture of our Savior, having sumptuous furniture
for the festival days belonging to it.

The south aile of the choir.
At the east end of the south aile of the choir, opposite to the aforesaid
porch in the north alley, was a beautiful rood or picture of our Savior,
called the black rood of Scotland, with the pictures of Mary and John, brought
out of Holy-rood house, in Scotland, by king David Bruce, and won at the battle
of Durham, with the picture of our Lady on the one side of our Savior, and St
John on the other side; which ^ood and pictures were all richly wrought in
silver and were smoaked back over, being a yard or five quarters long, and on
every one of their heads, a crown of pure beaten gold, of goldsmith's work;
with a device to take them off and to put them on. And on the backside of the
said rood there was a piece of work that they were fastened unto, adorned with
wainscot work and curious painting, from the midst of the pillar up to the
height of the vault; which wainscot was red, varnished over, and set full of
stars of lead, gilt with gold.

Thomas Hatfield, bishop of Durham, lies buried over against the revestry door,
in the south aile of the choir, betwixt two pillars, under the bishop's throne,
which he made before he died: His tomb being all of alabaster, whereunto was
adjoined a little altar, which he prepared for a monk to say mass for his soul
after his death; the altar being environed with an iron grate.

Within this south aile of the choir was the revestry, where the bishop or his
suffragan had a peculiar altar, and used to say mass only at such times as they
were to consecrate priests or give any holy orders.

In the north aile of the choir were four colored glass windows
The first had four long lights and a casement: In the first light was pictured
our blessed Lady, with Christ in her arms, with a triple crown of gold on her
head: In the second light, St Anne: In the third light, Mary Magdalen: In the
fourth light St Mary, Cleophas, and Salome: And one tower window.

In the second were four lights: In the first was St Michael the Archancel,
with a sword in one hand, and a staff with a cross thereon in the other hand,
killing the dragon: The second light had St Catherine, with the wheel in her
hand, and a naked sword; above her head Sancta Catherina: In the third light,
our Lady with Christ in her arms; above her head Sancta Maria; under her feet
the picture of a monk in a blue habit, praying; above his head, Matter Dei
miserere mei; and under his feet, Dominus Georgius Comforth: And in the fourth
light, St Cuthbert, with king Oswald's head in his hand, and above him written,
Sanctus Cuthbertus: And above all were seven tower lights of white glass, and
below two knots of white glass.

In the third were four lights: In the first was the picture of St Oswald,
king, with a cross on his breast: In the second light, St Cuthbert: In the
third light, St Gregory: In the fourth light, a monk traveling to the sea
side, and washing his feet, who found St Cuthbert standing in the sea, above
his shoulders, holding up his (...) and saying his prayers: Also another monk
lying on the top of a rock, leaning his head on his hand, (...) beholding St
Cuthbert, where he stood in the sea at his prayers.

^^ove these were seven tower windows, in fine colored glass, having several
pictures in them.

In the fourth window were four lights, containing in the first the picture of
bishop Aidane: In the second, St Cuthbert: In the third, St Mary: And in the
fourth, St Oswald, the king, in colored glass. And three turret windows,
having the pictures of two angels offering incense, with twelve colored knots.

The south aile of the choir.
In the first window were four lights: The first had St Cuthbert, with king
Oswald's head in his hand: The second, St Oswald, the king, with his scepter in
his hand: The third, Mary, with Christ in her arms: The fourth, St George in
blue armor, killing the dragon; and underneath four escutcheons, with the arms
of St Cuthbert, St Oswald, our Lady, and St George: And above all three turret
windows in white glass, with knots finely wrought in colored glass upon them.

The second window had four lights: In the first, the picture of St Peter with
keys in his hand; above his head, Credo in Deum: In the second light, St
Andrew, above his head, Et in Jesum Christum: In the third light, St James,
with a staff and crosier on it in his hand; above his head, Qui conceptus, etc.
In the fourth light. St John; above him, Passus sub Pontio, etc. And thirteen
turrets, and the picture of God, in fine colored glass, above all.

In the third window were four lights: In the first was St Thomas; above his
head, Descendit ad inferos and resurrexit a mortuis: In the second light was St
James, minor; and above, Et sedit ad dextram, etc. In the third light St
Philip; and above Inde venturus, etc. And in the fourth, the picture of St
Bartholomew; and above, Credo in spiritum sanctum. And four fine knots, in
colored glass, and sixteen tower windows, in white glass.

In the fourth window were four lights: In the first was St Barbara, with a
castle in her hand: In the second, St Andrew: In the third, St John the
Evangelist: And in the fourth, St James, with a pilgrim's staff in his hand,
and his scrip about him: And above, three tower windows; and in the highest,
the picture of Christ crucified, with Mary and John on each hand, in finely
colored glass.

In the vestry are four windows.
The first toward the east was the finest window, containing five long lights,
divided with stone work, having in the middle the picture of Christ crucified;
and above his head a pelican pictured, giving her blood to her young ones; on
one side, the picture of our blessed Lady; and the picture of St John the
Evangelist. And the picture of Venerable Bede in a fine blue habit, on the
north side of our Lady; and St Leonard on the south side of St John, all in
colored glass.

In the second window were three proportionable lights: In the first was the
picture of St Oswald, with a ball and a cross in one hand, and a scepter in the
other: In the second, the picture of our Lady, with Christ in her arms: And in
the third, the picture of St Cuthbert, with St Oswald's head in his hand, and
the picture of a monk, called Thomas Moresby, devoutly kneeling, with Matter Dei
miserere mei, written above his head.

In the third window were three lights: In the first was the picture of the
Salutation: In the second, our Lady, with a little pot before her; and
underneath her the prior of Coldingham, named W. Drape, having a crosier staff
in one hand, a book in the other, in a black habit, kneeling, with Matter Dei
miserere mei, written above his head, and under him, W. Drape. prior de
Coldingham: And in the third light, the picture of St Ebba, a prioress, at her
prayers, with these words, Ave Maria gratia plena, Dominus tecum.

In the fourth window were three lights: In the first, the picture of bishop
Aidane, in his episcopal attire, with his crosier staff in his hand. In the
second, the picture of bishop William, in his mass apparel, and a staff in his
hand, with a crosier thereupon; and under him a monk in a blue habit, called
Thomas Rome, having written under him, Tho. Rome Sacrasta, and above him,
Sancte Wilielme ora pro nobis. And in the third light, the picture of Saint Bede
in a blue nabit, all set forth in fine colored glass. Davies, etc.


. In this aile are the sacristaria and vestry rooms built by prior Hotoun, and
opposite thereto the tomb of bishop Hatfield, who died in 1381, ornamented with
as many coats of arms as would serve any German prince Pennant, 332, continues
thus: Multitudes of other prelates and priors rested in this church, covered
with beautiful tombs and brasses, swept away by the hand of Sacrilege in the
time of Henry VIII. or of undistinguishing Reformation in succeeding reigns; or
of Fanaticism, in the unhappy times in the last century.

In the Antiquarian Repertory, vol. i. p. 178, is a plate of this tomb, with a
back view of the upper decorations of the throne.

The large vestry now used by the minor canons, was originally built by Henry
de Luceby, who bishop Beke had caused to be elected prior in the room of prior
Hotoun, whom he had expelled about the year 1300. During the short time he
governed the monastery he was a very great benefactor to it, by repairing the
roof of the body of the church, etc. He gave also bells, vestments, and many
other ornaments. Anglia Sacra.

In this vestry are preserved five very rich copes, four of which are of great
antiquity: The other was given by Charles I. These were used at the communion
service, till the late bishop Trevor, as is said, ordered them to be laid aside.


. Under the vaulting is a recumbent effigy of the bishop in his episcopal
attire, of white marble, the work around it gaudily ornamented with gilding and
green, and every where covered with blazonings of arms Vol. i. p. 311.
; of which we have given remarks in the notes to that prelate's life. A corner
of this superb monument rests on an ancient tombstone, and has preserved it
from the general destruction which swept away the monumental inscriptions, when
the new pavement was laid: A mistaken zeal in all reformations has pressed the
parties headlong into an extreme, in many points as reprehensible as that which
they tried to escape; for a vehement desire of eradicating superstition, urged
sacrilegious hands against the monuments of those whose memories were dear to
the learned, whose examples and virtues were worthy the emulation of succeeding
ages, and with a contempt that was at once irreligious and brutal, reformists
rushed forward to deface memorials which they had not merit to purchase. To
sweep away from the eye the mementos of monks, priors, and prelates of the
condemned church, the tombstones were torn up, lest they should reproach the
living with remembrance of the excellencies of the dead: A new pavement was
laid down in the beginning of the last century. The monument which prompted
this digression, so far as the inscription is legible, covers the remains of
Emery de Lomley, prior of the cell of Lathom, in Lancashire, dependant on this
church; who was one that voted Robert de Graystanes might have the Sea of
Durham Passez pur Lame Dom. Emmeri de Lo'lei jadis prior de Le -- the rest
covered with the building.

Fuit Emerius de Lumley, prior de Lythinne et unus e compromissariis qui
elegerunt Robertum de Graystanes, episcopum Dunelmensem, A. D. 1333 V. Ang.
Sacr. vol. i. Dugd. vol. i. p. 499. Vocatur, idq. ut videtur rectius, Lythom.
oppidulu' est in Agro Lancastriensi, ubi cella suit Caenobij Dunelmensis, quod
hodic etiam Lethum dicitur, juxta aestuarium fluvij Ribble positum. --
Randall's MSS.


. Two windows in this aile were made in prior Fossour's time by the feretory.

At the east end of the side ailes are gates leading into the east transept,
commonly called the Nine Altars In the eastern or highest part within the
church were the nine altars, being placed north and south, one from another,
along the front of the church.

In the middle was the altar of the Holy Fathers St Cuthbert and Saint Bede.

On the south of which were the four following: 1. The altar of St Oswald and
St Lawrence. 2. The altar of St Thomas of Canterbury, and St Catharine. 3. The
altar of St John Baptist, and St Margaret. 4. The altar of St Andrew, and St
Mary Magdalene; being the outermost toward the south.


In the south angle of the said nine altars, next to the Cemetery Garth, there
was an almery, wherein singing bread and wine were usually placed; at which the
sacristan caused his servant or scholar daily to give attendance, from six of
the clock in the morning, till high mass was ended, out of which to deliver
singing bread and wine to those who did assist and help the monks to celebrate
and say mass.

Richard de Bury, Bishop of Durham, lies buried before the fourth of these
altars, under a fair marble stone, whereon his own image was most curiously and
artificially engraved in brass, with the pictures of the twelve apostles
divided and bordered on either side, and other imagery work about it.

On the north side of St Cuthbert's and St Bede's altar were these four
following: 1. The altar of St Martin, and St Edmund. 2. The altar of St Peter
and St Paul. 3. The altar of St Aldanus, and St Helene. 4. The altar of the
holy archangel, St Michael; being the outermost toward the north.


The Rev. dean Graham, prebendary of this cathedral, placed the following
inscription to the memory of his two young sons, interred before the second of
these altars: Hic juxta conduntur
Duo fratres innocentissimi
Alter Richardus Graham,
Natu maximus Wilhlmi S. T. P.
Hujus ecclesiae canonici
Et tunc temporis Carleolensis
Nunc Wellensis decani,
Et Mariae uxoris desideratissimae.
Natus Aug. 30, denatus Dec. 22, 1689.
Alter Georgius, quem tertio partu,
Edidit pia matter tertium filium:
Amabilem, docilem, and ingeniosum,
Quem Deus antiquae prosapiae similem,
Et animo and corpore finxerat;
Cui etiam undecenni
Subvenerat memoria consanguineorum
Montross, Dundee, and Preston:
Qui, si singulis immatura mors pepercerat,
Omnes in uno videramus.
Natus Feb. 14, 1692-3.
Obijt Sept. 14, 1705.


Betwixt the two last altars lies buried Anthony Beke, bishop of Durham, and
patriarch of Jerusalem, in a fair marble tomb, underneath a large marble stone,
being the first bishop that ever attempted to lie so near the sacred shrine of
St Cuthbert, the wall being broken at the end of the alley, for bringing him in
with his coffin His remains were lately disturbed, his scull and several bones
were perfect; his cossin was a vast oak chest, bound with iron: Nothing
valuable was discovered. The cossin had been a covered with cloth; the
impression of the threads remained on the iron and wood.
.

All the altars had their several skreens and covers of wainscot; having
likewise between every altar a partition of wainscot, varnished over with
branches and flowers, and other imagery work, finely gilded; containing the
several lockers and ambryes for keeping the vestments and ornaments belonging
to every altar; with three or four little ambryes in the wall.

There is in the east end of the church, a round window, called St Catharine's
window, the breadth of the choir, all of stone, very curiously wrought and
glazed; having in it twenty-four lights; the picture of St Catharine is on the
right side, as she was set upon the wheel to be tormented.

And in the window there was a frame of iron, whereon stood nine cressets of
earthen metal filled with tallow, which every night were lighted, to give light
to the nine altars, and St Cuthbert's feretory, and burned till daybreak.

In the south end there is a great window, which has in it the whole history,
life and miracles of that holy man St Cuthbert, and curiously set forth in fine
colored glass.

Also in the north end there is another great glass window, called Joseph's
window, having in it all the whole story of Joseph, in fine colored glass.

The nine altars.
In the midst was the altar of St Cuthbert and Saint Bede, above which was a fine
long window, with stone work partitions: In the first light was St Cuthbert,
with king Oswald's head in one hand, and his crosier staff in the other, in his
habit as he used to say mass, viz. his albe and red vestment. In the second
light was St, Bid in a blue habit; under their feet were the pictures of two
bishops, with crosier staves in their hands, kneeling, in their episcopal
attire, with mitres on their heads, one under St Cuthbert, and the other under
St Bedu. In the lower lights were the birth of St Cuthbert; and the picture of
St Oswald blowing his horn, and St Cuthbert appearing to St Oswald: And bishop
Langley's arms in fine colored glass, and four turret windows containing our
blessed Lady with the lilly before her, and the salutation.

The altar of St Oswald and St Lawrence, having above it a window of the shape
of the last, having the picture of St Oswald, with a scepter in his hand, a
golden crown on his head, and a cross and ball in his left hand; under him
bishop Langley in his pontifical habit, and above him written, O sancta matter
Dei ora pro me: And under him, Orate pro Thomas Langley, episcopo Dunelm. There
was also the picture of St Laurence and his gridmon, with the arms and
escutcheon of bishop Langley under him, viz. a crown of gold above his helmet,
and within the crown, the crest, a bush of ostrich feathers, in red and green
painted glass.

The lower lights contain the story of St Oswald's beheading, and being on his
bier accompanied by St Cuthbert and others, and the sunbeams shining on them,
when they laid him on the bier; together with the story of St Laurence's death.
In the cross division are four little lights, bearing four stars or mullets. At
the top, were four turret windows, with our Savior Christ, our blessed Lady,
and other figures.

The altar of St Thomas of Canterbury and St Catherine, above which was a
window with the like lights, containing the martyrdom of St Thomas in one
light: And the story of St Catherine's being brought before the king and
tortured on the wheel, with two angels separating the wheels; and after that
her commitment to prison, and then looking out at a grate, and the beheading
her afterward in the king's presence; with certain arms and escutcheons, in
the four turret windows, under the midst of the said window, divided, and the
pictures of four bishops, in four little turret windows, and the picture of our
blessed Lady above all, in a blue habit.

The altar of St John the Baptist and St Margaret. The window above had St John
the Baptist on the one side, with the lamb and cross in his hand, with these
words, Ecce Agnus Dei. Under him a monk, called Thomas Batterby, in a blue
habit, and these words, Adjuva me divine magister Sancte Cuthberte. Also his
baptizing of Christ in Jordan; his being brought before Herod; and after that
beheaded. Then follows St Margaret overcoming the dragon, with these words,
Sancta Margareta; then being brought before the king, she was condemned, and by
his command was hanged by the hair of the head, and drawn up by a windlass, and
put into a tun of oil, which the fire would not consume, and so she was
beheaded. And above all are four turret windows, containing the picture of our
blessed Lady, and others finely colored.

The fourth altar was surmounted by its window. In the first light was St
Andrew with a cross over his body, and above his head, Sanctus Andreas. On the
other side St Mary Magdalen, and under her Sancta Maria Magdalena; and the
story of her kneeling at her prayers, and being brought before the king, and
sentenced to die; with some part of the story of Christ's anointing and
visiting the sick. In the four turret windows are the pictures of the four
doctors of the church; St Augustine, St Hierome, St Ambrose, and St Gregory, in
fine glass.

The altar of St Martin and St Edmund. In the window above, of the same
architecture, was St Martin in a black habit, with a mitre on his head, and a
staff in his hand, with a cross on the top thereof; above him these words,
Sanctus Martinus archiepiscopus. In the same window were escutcheons charged
with coats of arms; and the picture of a wicked spirit, in the likeness of a
woman, who had got into the chamber and bed of St Edmund, intending to tempt
the holy man to fornication; but she was so abhorred, that he with a rod did
beat her out of his bed. Also the picture of St Edmund in a red episcopal
attire, with a cross, having a staff under it, in his hand, and these words
over him, Sanctus Edmundus episcopus. Above in the turret windows, was bishop
Skirlaw's picture, and an angel finely painted on each side. On the other side,
under St Edmund, were the arms of doctors and noblemen, on the breasts of four
angels in four turret windows.

The altar of St Peter and St Paul, having the like window and lights,
containing the picture of St Peter, with cross keys in his hand, and
underneath, Sanctus Petrus: Here was the miracle of Peter's walking toward
Christ upon the sea. Under the middle stone work were the pictures of four
escutcheons charged with arms. Then was represented St Paul persecuting the
church at Damascus, and his being struck with blindness, and the manner of his
becoming an apostle, having written on his breast. Paul, Paul, quid tu me
persequeris? And afterward his being brought before Caesar, and his being
beheaded. And above were four little turret windows with four fine pictures,
viz. St Cedda, St Cuthbert, St Aidane, and another bishop unknown: And above
all the picture of God.

The altar of St Aidane and St Helena, with the like windows and lights,
presenting the picture of St Aidane in his episcopal attire, with a crosier in
his hand; whose soul after his death was represented to be carried to Heaven in
a sheet by two angels. In this were some part of the history of Christ, and the
picture of a king and other saints; as also the picture of St Helena in a blue
habit; and the picture of our Lady and the angel Gabriel appearing to her, and
the Holy Ghost overshadowing her, with the lilly springing out of the lilly
pot; and underneath the middle stone work were four angels. Above were four
turret windows, with apostles, and the picture of God above all, in another
little window, with Christ in his arms.

The altar of the archangel St Michael. Its window contained the pictures of
eight several orders of angels, in eight several distinct pictures, viz. one
angel, and under him written, Cherubins, Seraphims. A second, and under him,
Arch-angeli. A third, and under him, Angeli. A fourth, and under him,
Principatus. A fifth, and under him, Dominationes. A sixth, and under him,
Potestates. And above all, in four turret windows, the pictures of four
archangels winged, with wheels under their feet, and their names written on
their wings. Above all, in one little tower window, the picture of God. --
Davies, etc.

Mr Pennant says, Beyond this, at the extreme east end stood nine altars,
dedicated to as many saints; above each is a most elegant window, extremely
narrow, lofty and sharply arched: Above these is a round window, very large,
and finely radiated with stone work, called St Catharine's wheel, from the form
of the wheel used at her martyrdom. In this part of the church is another fine
window, divided into circular portions. All the windows in this isle terminate
sharply; and were the work of a later age than that of the body of the church;
probably the time of prior Fossour. Page 333.

It is to be observed that the fine paintings in these windows are almost
totally defaced, or so mutilated and confused by bunglers who have repaired
them, that the histories are not now to be made out, except the story of St
Catherine.


, the descent into which is by several steps: It is one hundred and thirty feet
in length, and in width from the screen of the high altar fifty-one feet,
making the whole length of the church four hundred and eleven feet. St
Cuthbert's feretory projects twenty-seven feet into the transept, and is
elevated about eight feet above the pavement. This transept is lighted by one
large window at each end, under pointed arches, with much tracery, in the glass
of one of which was depicted the history of St Cuthbert, and in the other the
history of Joseph, both now totally defaced: To the east it is lighted by a
double range of windows, the lower tier consisting of nine long windows; in the
center of the upper tier is a large circular window, called St Catherine's
window, having three long windows on each side, the arches of which are all
pointed. By the engraving given from Mr Nicholson's drawing and admeasurement
of the whole east end of the church, the reader will distinguish the similarity
of style in this transept and the tower; and, we hope, will be convinced that
the observation as to their date is not ill grounded: On the projections of
this front are two effigies, in the printed descriptions of the church said to
represent bishop William on the south, who began the present edifice; and on
the north bishop Flambard, who translated St Cuthbert's body to the shrine
prepared for him therein; the first attired in his mitre and episcopal
insignia, the other having his head uncovered: But it is more probable they are
the effigies of bishop Farnham Ob. 1257.
, and his contemporary prior Thomas of Melsonby, for bishop Anthony Beke, who
died in 1310, was interred near the altar of St Michael, and the wall was
broken through to admit his remains; which is a proof this part of the edifice
and its altars were then made. We will conclude these observations by saying,
it is presumed this most elegant part of the edifice was finished by prior
Richard de Hotoun, who, it is certain, roofed the choir, and acceded to the
priory in 1289. The pilasters of this transept, from whence rise the groins of
the roof, are of an angular projection, light and elegant: On each side of the
great window the pilasters consist of a cluster of small circular columns, one
of larger dimension in front, and six on each side to form the projecting
angle, belted in two places at intervals, with a triple roll, the capitals
pierced in flowers; the pilasters between each window are composed of a front
column, and four on each side, in an angler projection, belted and capitalled
as the larger ones; every other column is of black marble, the intermediate
ones of white free stone, which had a beautiful effect before they were, from
the mistaken zeal of reformation, daubed over and concealed as they now remain,
with washing and oker. Under each tier of windows a gallery runs the whole
length of the transept: The nine altars were placed one under each window to
the east, the wall ornamented with short pilasters and open niches in the rose
figure, exactly similar to the gallery of the dome: The vaulted roof is ribbed,
the ribs meet on three circles; the silletings of the ribs are pierced like
those of the choir, with roses and crosses: The circles are beautifully
ornamented, the most northern one being pierced with a rich garland of flowers;
that in the center is sculptured with four figures finely relieved,
representing the evangelists kneeling, with their proper emblems: The southern
circle is of elegant sculpture, exhibiting the revelation of Christ's nativity.

The gallilee at the west end of the church, as was observed before, was by
ancient authors said to be appropriated by bishop Pudsey, for the reception of
women, being originally designed for the service of processions: It is in
breadth from east to west fifty feet, and from north to south eighty feet;
divided into five ailes, by four rows of pillars, running east and west; three
pillars and two pilasters, in each range; the pillars formed of four small
round columns placed together, whose base is only two feet square; the
pilasters consist of two round columns, detached from the walls, their capitals
ornamented with a leaf and mouldings; the arches are circular, and cut
underneath and on the sides with the zig-zag figure; the roof is not vaulted A
plate in Smith's Life of Bid.
: It is lighted with three large windows to the west, with flat or elliptic
arches, and one smaller window at each extremity under pointed arches; to the
south, four windows with pointed arches; the north side is built up, and used
for the register's office: The old entrance was from the north, by a small yard
adjoining to the churchyard, so that the women need not come within the gates
of the church: The door circular, with pilasters and mouldings, greatly
decayed. The gallilee on the south side is now stalled and benched for the
bishop's consistory court SIGIL ROBER SWYFT ^A ET VICAR DVNELM
seal SPIRITUAL CHANCELLORS.
1530. Wilhelmus Clyfton, decretos doctr. vic. genesis in spir. Thomae Card.
Wolsey. Robert Hyndmers LL. D. vide Reg. Horn, p. 13, and Watson, p. 28, 42,
and Robertson, p. 65. Burnet's Reform. vol. iii. p. 205, accused of misprison
of treason. Fuller's Chapter Hist. lib. viii. p. 20. n. 21. -- Rot. Tunstall, c. No
115. -- Gray calls him Edward. 1541. Edward Hyndmers, preb. of Durham, 1st
stall, Ath. Oxon. vol. i. f. 57, 20. Grey's Notes, MSS. 1543. John Crawsurth,
preb. etc. 1st stall. Grey's Notes, MSS. 1558. Anth. Salvayn, S. T. B. Randal's
MSS. 1560. William Garnet, LL. B. Reg. Horn, p. 120, rector of Ryton, 1562.
Skynner's Reg. 183. William Franklin, archd. of Durham, and temp. chanc. rector
of Houghton-le-Spring, and the last master of Kepier hospital, dean of Windsor,
etc. William Clifton. Grey's Notes, MSS. 1561. R. Swyft, in utroq. jur.
cancellar. and official princ. oc. 21 July, 1561. Reg. Pilkington, p. 56. Rot.
Pilk. Lra. A. A. No 5. Oc. 10 Nov. 4. Q. Eliz. 1562. Reg. Barnes, p. 1. --
Again 19 May, 1577. Preb. of Durh. 1st. stall, 1574. Reg. Skynner, p. 146.
1577. John Barnes, preb. of Carlisle, vide Gilpin's Life, 190. 3 Stryp. Ann.
463. Fuller's Chapter Hist. lib. ii. 191. 1578. Tho. Burton, LL. B. (postea D.)
vic. genesis bishop Barnes, oc. again 7 Jul. 1582. -- Preb. of Carlisle. 1582.
Clem. Colmore, LL. B. oc. 7 Feb. again 21 Apr. 1587. -- 27 Jul. 1589, vic. genesis
Math. epi. (Hutton) constitut. durante (epi) suo been placito E. Fo. MS.
church, p. 838. Vic. genesis spir. Tobiae epi (Matthew) ad been placitu' epi, etc.
constitutus 23 May, 1595. 9 Ap. 1578, electus fuit unus procuratoru. univ.
Oxonien. -- Oc. again 21 July, 1598. -- Preb. 11. 8 co. Rep. 68. Ath. Oxon.
vol. i. f. 124. 1619. Jo. Cradock, A. M. vic genesis Rici epi Neile constit. 6
Aug. 1619: There was a compl. in parl. against him, 19 Jac. l. vid. Petit.
Misc. Parl. 152. Journals of the H. of Com. vol. i. p. 710. He died on the 28th
of December, 1687, preb. of the 5th stall, and was buried in the cathedral.
1627. Wm Easdale, LL. D. vic. genesis bishop Neile constit. 2 Jan. 1627, and
confirmed by dean Hunt and Cha. 9 Jan. -- Surrendered 27 Sep. 1631. -- Minute
Book D. and Cha. Durh. He gave 20 l. to Peter-house, Camb. Carte's Hist. Camb.
p. 32. 1631. Thomas Burwell, A. M. vic. genesis bishop Howson constit. 30 Sep.
confirm. 14 Oct. bur. in St Marg. church. Westminster. 25 Mar. 1673. Le Neve's Fasti,
p. 319. 1675. Thomas Ireland, LL. B. vic. genesis bishop Crewe constable. 13 Sep.
confirmed 29th. Vide Ath. Oxon. vol. ii. Fasti, p. 115. ob. 1676. 1676. Sir
Rich. Lloyd, LL.D. constable. 16 Dec. and confirmed 17 Jan. Vide Newcourt, vol. i.
p. 445. -- He was fellow of All Souls' col. Oxon. took the degree of doctor of
law, 15 July, 1662; was an advocate of the arches; afterward chancellor of
Landaff, in the room of Sir Thomas Croft, knt. chancellor of Durham, 16 Dec.
1676; made official of the arches, Sep. 1684; and dean of the peculiars after
the death of Sir Rob. Wiseman, whom he succeeded; and judge of the admiralty in
the room of Sir Leoline Jenkins. He died in Doctors Commons, 28th June, 1686;
and was buried in the churchyard of St Bennet, near Paul's wharf, etc. 1687.
Cha. Montague, Esquire Honoratissimi Sandovicensis Comitis Fill. and A. M. in utraq.
academia, vic. genesis bishop Crewe constit 2 Nov. and confirmed 19th. Vide Ath.
Oxon. vol. ii. Fasti, p. 220. 1690. Wm Wilson, LL. B. bought the office of Mr
Montague: Was drowned at the new bridge, Durham. Grey's Notes, MSS. 1690. James
Montague, A. M. sold it to Dr Brookbank, for 1000gs. Grey's Notes, MSS. 1691.
John Brookbank, LL. D. of Trinity-Hall, Camb. constit. 1 Sep. confirmed 5th.
Died suddenly, 14 Ap. 1724. 1724. Exton Sayer, LL. D. vic. genesis of bishop
Talbot, constit. 20 Apr. and confirmed 22 May. Reg. Montague, pars 6to. -- He
was the eldest son of Geo. Sayer, who was born at Jolby, in the parish of
Croft, in the county of York; fellow of Trinity-Hall, Camb. -- In 1725, he was
chosen member of parl. for Helston, in Cornwall, and appointed commissary of
Surry: In 1730, he was chosen member for Totness, in the county of Devon. -- He
married Catharine, daughter of bishop Talbot. He was made official to the
archd. of Canterbury, 1723; and died in 1731. -- He was counsel for the earl of
Macclesfield, when impeached by the Commons. 1731. Wadham Chandler, A. M. vic.
genesis of bishop Chandler. constit. 25 Sept. and confirmed 27th. -- He was son to
the bishop; educated at Eton school, from whence he was entered of Clare-Hall,
Camb. -- He died at Aix, in Provence, in France, 1737, and was brought to
Durham, and interred in the gallilee. 1737. Richard Chandler, A. M. eldest son
of bishop Chandler, constit. 2 Feb. and confirmed 17 June, 1738. He married
Elizabeth, daughter of lord James Cavendish, of Stayley-Park, in Derbyshire,
and by act of parliament took the name of Cavendish, in compliance with the
will of his father-in-law. -- He was solicitor of the excise, a commissioner of
the customs, and member for Wendover. Ob. 22 Nov. 1769. 1769. William Win,
LL. D. app. for life, 1 Dec. 1769, and confirmed 20 July, 1770. He accepted the
chancellorship of the diocese of London, and resigned that of Durham in
October, 1779, in favor of 1779. George Harris, LL. D. who is the present
chancellor. -- He has published an elegant translation of Justinian's
Institute, with notes.
For the comfort of all women and solace of their soul, there was an ancient
church in the Fern Island, where the church of that town now stands; which
was appointed for women to repair unto for hearing of mass, and receiving the
sacraments. For which purpose here was a chapel dedicated to the blessed virgin
Mary, now called the gallilee.

Hugh, bishop of Durham, considering the diligence of his predecessors in
building the cathedral church, finished but a few years before his time, and no
chapel being then erected to the blessed Virgin, whereunto it should be lawful
for women to have access, began to erect a new work at the east angle of the
cathedral, for which several pillars of marble were brought from beyond sea;
and the work being advanced to a small height, begun, through great clifts
therein, to fall down; whence it manifestly appeared unacceptable to God and
holy St Cuthbert. Whereupon that work was left off, and a new one begun and
soon finished, at the west end of the church for women

It is called the gallilee, by reason, as some think, of the translation
thereof; being once begun, and afterward removed; to which place whosoever
resorted, had the benefit of sundry pardons, as appears by a table there set
up, containing a catalogue thereof.

Within the gallilee, in a chantry made of blue marble, stood our Lady's altar,
a sumptuous monument, finely adorned with curious wainscot work; the wainscot
furnished with pictures, in colors and gilding; there mass was sung daily by
the master of the song-school, with certain deacons and choristers, the masters
playing upon a fine organ in time of mass; wherein the founder, bishop Langley,
was most devoutly prayed for: This bishop magnificently rebuilt the said
gallilee. There belonged to this altar very sumptuous furniture, not only for
principal feasts, but for ordinary service: And for safe-keeping those
vestments, and other ornaments belonging to the said altar, there was at both
ends behind the portal two close almeries of wainscot.

Thomas Langley, bishop of Durham, lies buried under a marble tomb, within the
said chantry, before our Lady's altar.

On the north side of the gallilee was an altar, called the Lady of Pittie's
altar, with her picture, carrying our Savior on her knee, as he was taken from
the cross. This altar was intended for a chantry priest to say mass at every
day, having above the altar on the wall, a part of our Savior's passion in
large pictures, the other part being above St Bede's altar, on the south side.

There was on the south side, between two pillars, a beautiful monument of blue
marble, a yard high, supported by five pillars, one at every corner, and the
fifth under the middle; and above the said marble stone and pillars stood a
second shrine, to St Cuthbert's, wherein the bones of Saint Bede were inshrined:
It used to be taken down every festival day, when there was any solemn
procession, and carried by four monks in time of procession and divine service.
It is not improper to transcribe the following verses from the ancient history.

Hugh, bishop of Durham, having finished the chapel called the gallilee, caused
a feretory of gold and silver to be made, wherein were deposited the bones of
Venerable Bede. In the lower part of the work, the following Latin verses were
engraven: Continet haec Theca Bedae venerablis ossa,
Sensum factori Christus dedit atque datori:
Petrus opus fecit, Praeful dedit hoc Hugo donum:
Sic in utroque suum, veneratus utrumque Patronum.
Anno Milleno ter Centum, septuageno
Postquam Salvator carnem de Virgin sumpsit
Transtulit hoc Feretrum Cuthberti de prope tumba,
Istius Ecclesiae Prior hic, poscente Richardo
De Castro dicti Bernardi, cujus and ossa.
Non procul hinc lapide sub marmoreo requiescunt.


It appears that the bones of Saint Bede were first laid in the monastery of
Jarrow, and afterward brought to Durham, and placed in a golden coffin on the
right side of the body of St Cuthbert.

Egfridus, a priest in that time, viz. 1319, did affirm, that one coffin
contained both the body of St Cuthbert, and the bones of the venerable Dr Bid.

On the south side of the gallilee was St Bede's altar, before which his bones
and relics lay, where his shrine was, to whose memory an elegant epitaph
fairly written on vellum hangs upon the adjoining wall. -- See p. 259.

The reverend Sir George Wheler, knight, one of the prebendaries of this
cathedral, a true admirer of Venerable Bede, had several of his children buried
near him, and ordered his own body to be interred as near Bede's tomb as it
conveniently could, without violating the sacred ashes.

Adjoining to the bottom of the great window, in the west end of the gallilee,
was a fine iron pulpit, with iron rails to support the monks in going up, of
whom one did preach every holiday and Sunday, at one o'clock in the afternoon.

At the west end of the south angle was a font for baptizing children, when the
kingdom was interdicted by the pope; which Thomas Langley, bishop of Durham,
procured as a privilege, upon special favor at the pope's hands.

In the west end of the gallilee are four finely colored windows.

In the first toward the south are three lights; the middle having in it the
picture of Christ crucified, curiously painted, with the sun and moon above the
head thereof; in the highest part of which light is the picture of the star
that appeared to the three wise men; together with the picture of the virgin
Mary, with Christ naked, sitting upon her knee.

In the light toward the north, is pictured in colored glass, the Almighty,
having in his hand a ball or globe: And under that the Salutation; and the
picture of the Holy Ghost appearing in the likeness of a dove.

In the light toward the south is the picture of our blessed Lady, as she was
taken up into Heaven, glorified and crowned; and underneath a lively picture of
our blessed Lady, with Christ new born, naked, sitting on her knee, and sucking
her breast.

In the second, containing six fine lights of glass, severed, three above and
three below.

The middle light above contains the picture of St Cuthbert, in his ordinary
episcopal vestments, the image of St Oswald's head painted on his breast,
supported with his right hand, in fine colored glass. Under his feet is
written, Sanctus Cuthbertus quondam Lindisfarnensis episcopus, hujus ecclesiae
and patriae maximus patronus.

The light on the north side of St Cuthbert has the picture of Saint Bede, in his
blue habit; under his feet is wrote, Sanctus Beda, qui vitam St Cuthberti, and
multa alia, ab ecclesia approbata conscripsit; cujus ossa, in hac capella in
feretro contenta.

The light on the south side of St Cuthbert has the picture of Aidanus the
bishop, in fine colored glass, as he was accustomed to say mass; Under his
feet is written, Sanctus Aidanus episcopus Lindisfarnensis ecclesiae primus;
primus in hac sanctissima Dunelmensi ecclesia, fuit prioratus.

Under which three lights, by partitions, are three very curious and larger
pictures, in fine colored glass, containing the images of Aidanus, Edmundus,
and Eata, three bishops of Lindisfarne, as they were accustomed to say mass.
Under Eata's picture is Sanctus Eata Lindisfarnensis episcopus.

And above, in the highest part of this window, are six little glazed lights,
in tower manner, in fine colored glass, containing part of the history of
Christ's nativity, the marriage in Galilee, and his miracles done upon earth.

In the third window are also six lights parted as before; in the highest part
are three pictures, in fine colored glass; the middle being the image of the
blessed virgin Mary, with Christ in her arms, under whose feet is written,
Sancta Maria.

On the north side of her is the picture of St Oswald, king, in colored glass,
with a beautiful cross in his hand; under whose feet is, Sanctus Oswaldus
fundator sedis episcopalis Lindisfarnensis, quae nunc est Dunelmensis: Cujus
anima in feretro St Cuthberti est humata.

On the south side of her is the picture of holy king Henry, in fine colored
glass, with his scepter in his hand; under whose feet is written, Rex Henricus.

Under those, in three large lights, and first opposite to St Mary is placed
the picture of Thomas Langley, bishop, as he used to say mass, having his arms
excellently blazoned above his head; under whom is written, Thomas Langley,
rector ecclesiae, ad honorem Dei, episcopus Dunelmensis; and duas cantarias in
eadem fundavit and dotavit.

And under St Oswald's, is the picture of bishop Wilfridus, in fine colored
glass, as he used to say mass; under whose feet is, Sanctus Wilfridus primo
Lindisfarnensis monachus, post abbas Ripensis, ultimo archiepiscopus
Eboracensis; uno anno rexit episcopatum Lindisfarnensem.

And under king Henry is the picture of bishop Cedda, in fine colored glass,
as accustomed to say mass; under his feet, Sanctus Cedda, primo Lindisfarnensis
monachus, post abbas in Lestingham, tribus annis rexit archiepiscopatum
Eboracensem, and etiam rexit episcopatum Lichfeldensem.

In this window, above the former, are six little glazed tower windows,
representing the flight of Joseph and Mary with our Savior into Egypt, being
pursued by Herod, together with most part of the story thereof.

In the fourth window also there are six fine lights, severed as before,
containing in the higher part three large pictures in three lights, being the
images of three holy kings, great benefactors to the church, and to St
Cuthbert, viz. Alured, Guthred, and Elfrid, in their royal apparel, with
scepters in their hands, in fine colored glass.

Under them are, in large pictures, in fine colored glass, three bishops of
Lindisfarne, as they used to say mass: Under their feet is to be seen, Sanctus
Egfridus Lindisfarnensis. Sanctus Ethelwoldus Lindisfarnensis.

Under the third, no writing to be seen, but Episcopus.

In the highest part of this window are six little tower windows, finely
colored and glazed, containing the most part of the story of Christ's death,
burial, resurrection, and ascension, most excellently pictured in fine colored
glass.

St Bede's shrine defaced.

The shrine of holy Saint Bede, before mentioned in the gallilee, was defaced by
the visitors, and his bones were interred under the same place, where before
his body was exalted.

There were two stones that belonged to St Bede's shrine in the gallilee, of
blue marble, which after it was defaced, were brought into the body of the
church, and now lie opposite to the east most tomb of the Nevils, joined
together.

Many were the rich jewels and relics appertaining to this church. King
Richard gave his parliament robe of blue velvet, wrought with great lions of
pure gold, an exceedingly rich cope. There was another cope of cloth of gold
given to the church, by another prince.

The vice-prior had the keys and keeping of St Bede's shrine in the gallilee.
-- Davies, etc.


. In the center of the east wall was an altar dedicated to the holy virgin On
the wainscot which was formerly the back of the altar, in gold letters on a
blue ground.

Sta. Maria divina matter: Sta. Maria regina celi. Sta. Maria matter Dei Sta.
matter. Virgo Virginum.

Sta. Maria.

Near the roof in black letters.
Iudicium Iehovae est
Domine Deus da servo tuo cor intelligens ut judicet populu'. tuu'. et
discernat inter bonu'. et malum.

; to the south of which lies the marble stone which covers the remains of
Venerable Bede Inscriptio tabulae quae juxta Baedae tumulum in capella B.
Mariae Dunelmi hodieque ad murum appenditur. BEDA Dei famulus and presbyter Vir
non minus sanctitate quam scientia VENERABILIS Hic jacet Qui natus in
territorio monasterij Girwicensis quod nunc Jaro dicitur Cum esset annorum
septem datus est abbati Benedicto and de inde Ceolfrido ibidem educandus,
cunctumq. ex eo vitae tempus In ejusd. monasterij habitatione peragens omnem
meditandis Scripturis operam dedit, atq. inter observantiam disciplinae
regularis Et quotidianam cantandi in ecclesia curam Semper Aut discere, aut
docere, aut scribere Solebat. Decimo nono autem vitae suae anno diaconatum and
tricessimo Presbyteratum, utrumq. a S. Johanne Beverlaco archiep'o Eborum
Suscepit VIR OMNI LAUD MAJOR De quo doctissimi illorum temporum homines hoc
elogium protulerunt Anglum in extremo orbis angulo natum Ingenio suo universum
orbem superasse Quippe qui omnium pene scientiarum and universae theologiae
arcana Penetravit sicut opera ejus and volumina multa orbi christiano notissima
Abunde testantur. Quae etiam illo adhuc vivente tanti nominis erant and
auctoritatis ut ex ejus Homiliis multa sacris lectionibus sunt addita and ubiq.
in ecclesiastico Officio public and solemniter recitata. Constat eum aliq'do
discipulos habuisse celebratissimos praeclara Paulo post ecclesiae lumina
ALCUINUM Caroli magni Regis praeceptorem and CLAUDIUM atque CLEMENTEM Qui primi
Lutetiae docuerunt and Galliam bonis artibus Illustrarunt Obiit in monasterio
Girwicensi, A. D. DCCXXXIIII. Aetat suae LIX. Die quo ascensionis Domini
memoria celebratur Et ibidem sepultus suit: Sed postea huc Dunelmum primo cum
capite regis OSWALDI Et Corpore S. CUTHBERTI Deinde in ista galilea and seretro
per HVGONEM episcopum Constructo ossa ejus sunt translata Epitaphium de eodem
istud circumfertur Haec sunt in fossa BEDAE VENERABILIS ossa. This is now
preserved in the library.
; his altar being immediately behind Sir Geo. Wheler's monument: Adjoining to
the altar of the holy Virgin is the tomb of cardinal Langley In the fl^or is
the following inscription:
John Brimleis body here doth^ly
Who praised God with hand and voice;
By musickes heavenly harmony
Dull mind he maid in God rejoice:
His soul into the Heavenes is lift,
To praise him still that gave the gift.
Obiit An'o D'ni 1576, Octo. 13.
. From the mode of architecture observed in this place, together with the
circumstance of the arms above the entrances, we are led to conjecture that the
gallilee in the present form is to be attributed to cardinal Langley, in the
beginning of the fifteenth century, who, as was before observed, expended in
reparations and additional works therein, 499l. 6s. 7d. The form of the
pillars, and the center windows, with the various fragments of ornaments which
appear in the outward wall to the west, strengthen the supposition that the
present edifice was the cardinal's. Bid died at Jarrow monastery in 734; was
translated to this church by bishop Pudsey; and in 1340, found his final
resting place under the care of Richard de Barnardcastle in the gallilee, who
was interred near the remains While his remains rested at Jarrow, great resort
was made to his grave, and particularly one Elfrid, a priest of Durham, in the
beginning of the eleventh century, came yearly upon the day of his death, and
spent it in watching and prayer at his tomb; and such veneration he entertained
for his remains, that he stole away his bones, and carried them to Durham.
Being asked by his friends where they lay, he replied; "No one knows but
myself;" and after being further pressed by them, he gave this answer, Believe
me, beloved brethren, and be assured, the same chest that contains the most
holy body of St Cuthbert, our father, holds also that of the venerable doctor
and monk Bid.

In 1054, when St Cuthbert was removed, the bones of Bid were found in the
same chest; and afterward they were enclosed in a separate chest. In 1154,
they were again removed into the shrine made by bishop Pudsey, of pure gold and
silver-smith work, enriched with jewels. Speed speaks of this tomb.


: The like veneration induced cardinal Langley to repair and embellish this
edifice, as he chose to have his body deposited near the saint: The cardinal
also founded a chantry in the gallilee, to the honor of the blessed Virgin,
and "glorious confessor St Cuthbert 1500. Rich. etc. dil'co. nob. in xo Dno
Joh'i Hochonson cap. etc. Cantar. b. M. Virginis and gl'iosi confessoris S'ti
Cuthb'ti ad altar ejusd. V'ginis in Gallilea eccl'e n're Cath. Dun. p'
recolend. memoria Tho. nup' ep'i Dun. p'decessor. n'i devote fundat. p' liberam
resig. mag'ri Tho. Todd ult. cap. etc. dat. xxvijo. die m. Sept. A'n D'ni 1500,
and n're Tr. A'o sexto. R. Fox, p. 34.

1544. Cuthb'tus etc. co'tulit m'ro Rob. Hertborn, A. M. una. c. D'ni Langley,
in eccl. cath. Dun. sundat. etc. R. Tunstall, p. 33.

Langley's chantries in the gallilee 16l. 13s. 4d. St Cuthbert's gild 7l. 15s.
11d.


." Bishop Nevil granted a license for erecting a guild or fraternity to the
honor of St Cuthbert, in the gallilee, with a power to purchase lands not
exceeding ten pounds a year As this is the first guild we have had occasion to
mention, we will in this place insert the form of the license. The privilege of
guilds is little known at this time: The law construction of the word is "A
combination or fraternity of merchants, with liberties and privileges granted
by license of the prince." In our guilds women were admitted. Rot. M. Nevil, Ao
11o. No. 128.

Rob. dei gra. ep. Dun. o'ib's ad quos etc. sciatis q'd nos de gra. u'ra
sp'iali and maxim ut pii operis subsequentis p'ticipes, effici valeamus
concessimus and licentiam dedimus sp'ialem pro nob. and succ. n'ris quantu' in
nob. est Johi Lound, Cli'go, Will'o Raket, Rob'to Rodes, Ric'o Raket, Rob'to
Sotheren cap'no, and Joh'i Bynchester cap'no devocionis zelo ac caritatis
servore accensis ac'divino intuitu varia onera and pietatis opera perpetuo
sustentare and facere defiderantibus q'd ip'i ad landem Dei et honorem S'eti
Cuthb'ti quand. fraternitat. fi'e gildam p'petuam de se ipsis ac de al.
personis tam de hominibus qua. mulieribus incapella b. Marie virginis infra
Gallaleam mo'ast'ii Dun. de novo incipere inire facere fundare ordinare and
stabilire, ac personas illas, ac alias quascu'q grato animo impost'u'
inhaerentes in fr'es and sorores frat'pitat. se'e gildae p'die'ae recipere
admittere and acceptare possint, and q'd fr'es frat'nitat. sive gildae
praedictae sic inceptae initae s'ctae sundatae ordinatae and stabilitae si'glis
annis de se ipsis unu' magistrum si'e custodem qui regimen gubernationem and
supervisum frat'nitat. si'e gildae humo'i ac custodia. oiu. t'rar and ten.
reddit. poss'onu. bonor. and catallor. quae eid. frat'nitati si'e gildae exnunc
adquiri dari et assignati si'e ad eand. pertinere co'tigerit, h'eat fi'glis
annis eligere ordinare et successive constituere ac mag'rum si'e custodem illum
de temp'e in tempus quu' opus fuerit and expediens amovere et exon'are ac aliu'
ejus loco and no'ie prout eis placuit ponere and substituere neenon
com'unitatem inter and de se ip'is facere inire ac sigillu' co'e pro negociis
and agendis frat'nitat. sive gildae p'de'a deserviturum h'ere et exercere
possint. Et quoth mag'r si'e custos p'deus et succ. sui'qui pro temp'e fuerint pro
frat'nitate si'e gilda illa ac pro terr. ten. reddit. possionibus bonis
catallis ejusdem frat'nitat. sive gildae in quibuscu'q. acco'ibus and placitis
^^. realibus et p'sonalibus qua. mixtis cujuscunq. generis sint vel naturae p'
nomen mag'ri si'e custodis frat'nitat. si'e gildae S'ci Cuthb'ti coram
judicibus secularibus ac eccle'iis quibuscu'q. placitent and implacitentur ac
placitare and implacitari possint and debeant. Et quoth ib. mag'r si'e custos ac
si'gli fr'es frat'nitat. si'e gildae p'dcae ac succ. sui co'veniant ac
convenire valiant locis and te'p'ib's oportunis qua'do et quocies eis melius
placiut ad tractand. and ordinand. pro statu and bono regimine d'cae
frat'nitat. si'e gildae ac fr'um and sororu' ejusd. and succ. suor. fine occ'oe
inpetico'e perturbac'oe vl impedime'to n'ri vel succ. n'ror justic. escaetor.
vicecom. aut alior. Ballivoro. seu min. nr'or v'l succ. n'ror quor' cu'q. In
cujus rei T. has L'ras n'ras fieri fecimus pat. dat. xxo. die Julij an. p. n ri
undecimo. P' ip'um ep'um. -- Randal's MS.

Est autem galilea eccl. adjecta occident. parti. mag. eccl. Habet in
latitudine 5 parts distinctas, and unaquaeque pars arcus 4.

Robert Neville, bishope of Durham, lyithe in a high plain marble tumbe in the
galile. As some say, this Nevill made the feretrum St Cuthb'ti as it is now.

There liethe at the hedde of this Neville, Richard de Castro Barnardi, under a
flat stone. There liethe at his head one of the Nevilles. There is also a tumbe
of Bid the noble monk.

Two of the Lomeley's ly at the north side of the church, in the
church-garthe, in vario marmore.

Lel. Itin. vol. viii. fo. 51. b.
.

The cloister The west alley of the cloisters.
In the west alley of the cloisters, a little to the south of the dormitory
door, was a strong house, called the treasury, having a strong door, and two
locks upon it. In the midst of the house was a strong grate of iron fixed in
the groundwork, and in the roof, and fastened in each wall the breadth of the
house, so fast as not to be easily broken. In the midst of the grate was an
iron door, with a strong lock, and two great slots of iron to guard it; and
within the grate was a square table covered with green cloth, for telling their
money. Within this treasury were also kept the evidences of the house, and the
chapter seal; as also the evidences of several gentlemen's lands in the
country, who thought them safer than in their own custody, in three great
chests well locked in the said treasury, but afterward it was altered; their
treasure and money being kept in a strong house over the east gates of the
abbey in the South Bailey, now called the exchequer; but in the said old
treasury the common chapter seal is still kept.

Over Against the said treasury-house door was a stall of wainscot, where the
novices were taught; no strangers or other persons being permitted to molest
the novices, or the monks in their carrels, while at study in the cloisters; a
porter attending for that purpose at the cloister door.

A little south of the treasury was the song-school, for the instruction of
boys, for the use of the choir; the song-school in the south isle of the
lanthern being decently furnished with a reading desk, convenient seats, and
all other requisites, where prayer was daily celebrated at six in the morning,
except on Sundays and holidays.

The dormitory.
On the west side of the cloisters was a large house, called the dorter, where
the monks and novices lay. Every monk had a little chamber to himself. Each
chamber had a window toward the chapter, and the partition betwixt every
chamber was close wainscotted, and in each window was a desk to support their
books. On the west side of the said dorter were the like chambers, with their
windows and desks toward the infirmary and the water; the chambers being all
well boarded.

The novices had likewise their chambers in the south end of the said dorter,
adjoining to the aforesaid chambers, having eight chambers on each side. Every
novice had his chamber to himself, not having any light but what came in at the
foreside of their chambers.

At each end of the dorter was a square stone, wherein was a dozen of cressets
wrought in each stone, being always filled and supplied by the cooks, as they
needed, to afford light to the monks and novices, at their arising to their
mattins at midnight, and for their other necessary uses.

There was a decent place adjoining to the west side of the said dorter,
toward the water, called the privies. Two great pillars of stone supported the
whole floor thereof; and every seat and partition was wainscotted close on
every side.

In the dorter every night a private search was made by the sub-prior, who
called at every monk's chamberdoor, to see good order kept, and that none
should be wanting. The middle part of it was paved with fine tile stones the
whole length: The sub-prior's chamber was the first, as he was to see order
kept.

The sub-prior always dined and supped with the convent, sitting at the upper
end of the table; and supper being ended, which was always at five o'clock,
upon ringing a bell to call one of the novices to say grace, they went to the
chapter house to meet the prior, there to remain in prayer and devotion till
six o'clock. Then upon ringing a bell again they went to the salvi, and all the
doors of the cells, the frater-house, the dorter, and the cloisters, were
locked, even at six o'clock, and the keys delivered to the sub-prior, till
seven o'clock the next morning.

The Loft.
There was a door in the west end of the frater-house, at which the old monks
entered, and then ascended up a pair of stairs, having an iron rail into a loft
which was at the west end of the frater-house, above the cellar, where the
convent and monks dined and supped together. The sub-prior sat at the upper end
of the table, as chief; and they had their meat served from the great kitchen,
in at the dresser-window, and brought through the frater-house: The said
kitchen served both the prior and the whole convent, having two windows into
the frater-house; the one was large for principal days, the other not so large
for every day. At the foot of the stairs was another door, leading into the
great cellar or buttery, where all the drink stood that served the whole
convent.

This loft, since the dissolution of the monastry, was made the dining room of
the fifth prebendary's house.

The monks were accustomed every day after dinner, to go through the cloisters,
in at the usher's door, and so through the entry under the prior's lodgings
into the centry-garth, where the monks were buried, where they all stood
bareheaded a good space, praying among the tombs for the souls of their
brethren who were buried there: And when they had done their prayers, they
returned to the cloister, and staid till three o'clock, that they went to
even-song.

The monks were the only writers of the acts and deeds of the bishops and
priors of the church, and of other chronicles and histories: They likewise
recorded other most valuable things, as what acts, what occurrences, and what
miracles were performed every year. Such were the labors of monks and
religious men in ancient times.

The Common House.
On the right hand at going out of the cloisters into the infirmary, was the
common-house. It was to have a fire constantly by day in winter, for the use of
the monks, who were allowed no other fire; but the master and officers of the
house had their own several fires. A garden and bowling alley belonged to the
said house, toward the water, for the novices to recreate themselves, leave
being first granted; their master attending to see to their good order. In this
house once in the year, between Martinmas and Christmas, the master of it kept
his O Sapientia, a solemn banquet, at which the prior and convent were
entertained with figs, raisins, ale, and cakes, but not to excess, being only a
moderate scholastical congratulation among themselves.

The Infirmary.
Within the infirmary, underneath the master's lodge, was a strong prison,
called the lying-house, ordained for great offenders; as for monks guilty of
felony or adultery, where they were imprisoned in chains a whole year, without
seeing any one, except the master of the infirmary, in letting down their meat
through a trapdoor by a cord, and that at a great distance from the prisoners.
But if any of the temporal men belonging to the house offended in the
premises, they were punished by the temporal law.

The Guest-hall.
A famous house of hospitality was kept within the abbey-garth, called the
guest-hall and was situate on the west side toward the water. The terrer of
the house was master thereof, appointed to give entertainment to all estates,
noble, gentle, or what other degree soever came thither as strangers. Their
entertainment was not inferior to that of any place in England, both for the
goodness of their diet, the clean and neat furniture of their lodgings, and all
things necessary for travelers; and no man was required to depart while he
continued honest, and of good behavior.

The houses belonging to the second, third, fourth and tenth prebendaries, were
erected out of the apartments and other offices belonging to the guest-hall,
the hall itself being wholly demolished, nothing remaining except a part of the
western wall: But nothing remains to let us know what was in the sixth and
twelfth prebendaries houses.

This hall was a stately place, not unlike the body of the church, supported on
each side by very fine pillars, and in the midst of the hall a large range for
the fire. The chambers and lodgings belonging to it were kept very clean, and
richly furnished. They were very pleasant to lie in especially one chamber,
called the king's chamber, well deserving that name; such was the stateliness
thereof.

The victuals the guests were entertained with came from the great kitchen of
the prior, the bread and beer from his pantry and cellars. If they were
honorable, they were served as honorably as the prior himself, otherwise
according to their quality.

The terrer had certain men appointed to wait at his table, and to attend upon
his guests and strangers; and for their better entertainment he had always a
hogshead or two of wines kept in a cellar pertaining to the said hall

The prior (whose hospitality was such as that, in reality there was no need of
the guest-hall, but that the convent was desirous to abound in all liberal and
free almsgivings) kept a most splendid and noble house being attended by the
best gentlemen and yeomen in the country, and the magnificent service of his
house deserved no less; constant relief and alms were daily given, not only to
the poor of the city, but to those of the country round about.

The lord prior had two porters, one at the hall door, called Robert Smith, the
other at the usher door, at going from the great chamber to the church, called
Robert Clark; which two were the last porters to the last prior.

There were certain poor children, called the children of the almery, who were
educated in learning, and relieved with the alms and benevolence of the whole
house, having their meat and drink in a loft on the north side of the abbey
gates, before the suppression of the said house. This loft had a long slated
porch over the stair-head, and at each side of the said porch were stairs to go
up to the loft, with a stable underneath it, and a door into it, under the
stair-head, to go into the said stable. This edifice, at the suppression of the
house, became Mr Stephen Marley's lodging. Soon after the suppression he
altered it, and took down the porch and stairs that went up to the loft, and
made a kitchen where the stable was, and his buttery above where the loft was.
The children went to school at the infirmary school without the abbey gates.
The last schoolmaster was Sir Robert Hartburne, who continued master till the
suppression of the house. He was bound to say mass twice a week at Magdalen's
chapel, near Kepier, and once a week at Kimblesworth. The meat and drink these
children had, was what the monks and novices with their master had left It was
carried in at a door adjoining the great kitchen window, into a little vault at
the west end of the frater-house, like a pantry, called the covie. Within it
was a window, at which some of the children received the meat and drink out of
the covie or pantry window, and carried it to the loft. This clerk waited on
them at every meal to keep good order.

There were four aged women who lived in the infirmary, without the south gates
of the abbey, each having her several chamber to lie in, being supplied and fed
only with the victuals that came from the prior's own table.

In the infirmary was a chapel, where the schoolmaster of the infirmary,
(having his chamber and school above it) or some other priest for him, was
appointed to say mass to these aged women every holiday and Friday. -- Davies,
etc.


on the north side of the church is a quadrangle of one hundred and forty-seven
feet, having eleven windows on each front, which it is said were glazed, but
are now open; the mullions and tracery were lately repaired in a neat Gothic
style. Entering by the west door from the church, the stairs leading to the
dormitory are immediately on your right hand, extending the whole length of the
west cloister, forty feet wide, ill lighted, and a melancholy mansion: The
center is flagged about six feet wide, the sides having been boarded and
enclosed for the monks cells: Under the dormitory was the song-school and
treasury In the collection of records lodged here, there are about ninety royal
charters and grants, fifty-two deeds by nobles and barons, and two hundred and
sixty-six by inferior gentry; about one hundred and thirty-one by popes,
bishops, abbots, priors, and convents, and other religious persons and houses;
and one hundred and thirty other original deeds and copies, amounting in all to
near the number of six hundred and seventy.

The bishop of Carlisle had a list of the charters of several of the kings and
nobles of Scotland, granted to the abbey of Coldingham, kept in the dean and
chapter's treasury here, communicated to him by the Rev. Dr John Smith, preb.
-- In lord Crewe's time, 1703, one Anderson had an inspection of the records,
to obtain evidence touching the dispute of homage from the crown of Scotland;
but as the instruments grow less significant, they are more carefully
concealed. Among others the following deeds are most curious: A charter of
Duncan, k. of Scot. charters of Edgar, Alexander, and David, sons of k. Malc.
Canmore, and Marg. his q. Also of David, whilst styled Comes, and of Henry his
son. Many of Malcolm IV. and k. William, sons of Henry, some of kings Alex. II.
and III. and of Rob. Bruise, and his son David II and of Rob. II. and III. and
James I. of Scot. Grants of the earls of March and Dunbar, Rob. d. of Albany,
earls and countess of Douglass, Mar, and Murray. Two charters of Thor. Longus,
and several others, of W. de Lyndesey, E. de Lastalrig, W. de Veteri Ponte,
Guaterius, and Clarebaldus de Olifard, W. de Mordington, Everardus de
Pancatlaht. Walt de Bois, Rad. de Bonkill, W. de Vallibus, etc. There are two
orig. charters granted by k. David, styled the saint, to the predecessor of
Swintun. Many grants from the kings of England and bulls of popes, the seals
entire, enclosed in wooden cases: Many charters of the bishops of St Andrew's,
the chapter of St Andrew's; and two by the bishops of Glasgow, Jocelin and
William: Many of abbots, priors, and archd. and their officials: Many of the
bishops, priors, and the convent of Durham; and of the priors and convent of
Coldingham. Several ancient rent-rolls, services, and retours, process in Curia
Romana, notorial instruments, missives, indentures, etc. And here only, so far
as is yet known, is to be had a full and complete series of the royal seals of
Scotland undefaced. Here is an old copy of the charter of homage by king Edgar,
testifying to be made that year, That William, the son of William the Great,
made a new castle before Babbenburch, upon Robert earl of Northumberland. Also
another shown by bishop Tunstall, to the protector Somerset, and the lord
Maxwell, whereby Edgar gives lands by license of his superior, to William the
bishop, and Turgot the prior, and the monks of Durham, dated at Norham: Two
charters of k. W. Rusus, confirming the former grant of Edgar.


. The common-house, the infirmary, the guest-hall, and other offices, in use
before the dissolution, are now converted to other purposes, for the
convenience of the prebendaries.

The cloisters were erected at the expense of bishop Skirlaw and cardinal
Langley, the former giving thereto 600l. and the latter 238l. 17s. 6d. Ab An.
Dom. 1408, usq. ad annum Don. 1498, expendebantur ad aedificationem claustri
Dunelmen. 838l. 17 s. and ob. ex quibus Walterus Skirlaw dedit 600l. ex quibus
episcopus vivens 200l. ex mortuo executores 400l.

Skirlaw dedit etiam ad constructionem dormitorij 350 marcas.
Aquaeductus in cellarium derivatus, A. D. 1433.
Lel. Itin. vol. viii.
: They are ceiled in pannels with Irish oak, ornamented, particularly in the
east walk, with shields of the arms of various illustrious personages, patrons
of the church, blazoned in colors Mr Lambert points out the arms of Wycliffe,
Nevil, Hilton, Vere, Graystock, Eure, Ogle, Bertram, and Skirlaw; many others
defaced.
, most of which, from being exposed to the air, are now greatly defaced The
custom of the church of Durham in burying of monks.
The monk, seized with sickness, was conveyed, with all his furniture, etc.
from his chamber in the dormitory, to another in the infirmary, in order to
have both fire and more convenient attendance; no fire being allowed in the
dormitory.

And when his attendants perceived that he could not live, they sent for the
prior's chaplain, who staid with him till he yielded up the ghost: Then the
barber was sent for, whose office it was to put down the cloths and uncover
him, and to put on his feet-socks and boots, and to wind him in his cowl and
habit. Thence he was carried to a chamber called the dead man's chamber, in the
infirmary, there to remain till night. At night he was removed into St Andrew's
chapel, adjoining to the said chamber and infirmary, there to remain till eight
o'clock in the morning, the chapel being a place ordained only for solemn
devotion. The night before the funeral two monks were appointed by the prior to
be mourners, and to sit all night on their knees at the feet of the corpse; and
the children of the almery sitting on their knees, in the stalls on each side,
were to read David's psalms till eight in the morning, when the corpse was
carried to the chapter house, where the prior and the whole convent met it, and
there said their dirge; none being permitted to approach the chapter house
during the time of their prayers for his soul: When ended, the corpse was
carried by the monks from the chapter house through the parlour, the place
where merchants used to utter their wares, standing betwixt the chapter house
and church-door, and so through the said parlour into the centry-garth, where
he was buried and a chalice of wax laid upon his breast, having his blue bed
held over his grave by four monks, during the funeral: Which bed is due to the
barber for his duty aforesaid, and making his grave. At the time of his burial
only one peal was rung.

The priors of the house of Durham, were accustomed in ancient time, to be
buried in their boots, and wound in their cowls by the barber* as the monks
used to be buried.

The priors, in later times, were buried within the church in the same order
and habit, with the mitre and all other furniture, as their predecessors were
buried.

The bishops of Durham used in ancient times to be buried in the chapter house,
they not presuming to lie nearer the holy body of St Cuthbert. Their names are
graven upon the stones under which they lie, with a cross at the beginning of
each name.

Aidanus, bishop of Lindisfarne. Aldunus or Aldwinus. The first bishop of
Durham. Edmund. Eared, under the same stone. Walter, under the same stone with
Aldunus. William I. de Karilepho. Ranulph. Alfrid. William. Hugh Pudsey.
Philip. Richard, of Marisco. Nicholas, of Farnham. Walter, of Kirkham. Robert
Stichel. Robert, of the Isle. Richard, of Kellow.
The last two lie buried before the bishop's seat, under two fine marble
stones, with their images in brass, curiously engraven.

Turgot, prior of Durham.

In the said chapter house, at the upper end, is a fine stall, or seat of
stone, where the bishops have always been, and continue to be installed; it
being also the place where the bishop sits, when he keeps his visitation for
the cathedral church. Next to it a chair of wood is fastened in the wall, where
the priors did, and the deans now fit, at that visitation.

In the south side of the chapter house was a prison, to which such monks were
committed for a certain time, who had committed any slight offenses among
themselves.

In the chapter house, above the great door, is a fine glass window, containing
the offspring of the root of Jesse, in fine colored glass: On the top is the
picture of the blessed Virgin, with Christ in her arms.

The custom of burying bishops in the chapter house.

The bishops of Durham, when they died, were brought to the abbey church to be
interred; and the prior and monks met the corpse at the churchyard gates on
the place-green, where they received and carried him through the church into
the chapter house: Great solemnity and devotion, according to the ancient
custom was used. The custom was, to bury them with their albe, stole, phannel,
and other vestments wherein they used to say mass, a mitre on the head, and a
crosier staff in his hand, and so laid in the coffin, with a little chalice of
silver, other metal, or wax, placed on the breast; which wax chalice, and the
knobs, and the edge of the patten or cover, and the base were gilded.

The prior and monks had the horses, chariot, and all other things that came
with the deceased, due to them by ancient custom.

But afterward the bishops were buried in the church; as their predecessors
were in the chapter house.

At the east end of the chapter house there is a yard, called the centry-garth,
where all the priors and monks were buried. In this garth was a vault made to
be a charnel-house, to put dead men's bones in.

There were many gentlemen of great worth buried in the centry-garth, who
desired to lie near holy St Cuthbert; and among others Mr Racket, who had a
fine tomb of white marble, whereon he was pictured in brass, in his coat of
armor, and his sword girt about him; and at every corner of the marble was an
evangelist in brass.

Mr Elmeden was buried in the said garth, with a fine tombstone upon him: And
diverse others, whose monuments are perished.

The priors buried in the centry-garth had each a tombstone, either of marble
or free stone, which dean Whittingham caused to be pulled down and taken away;
and broke and defaced all such stones as had any pictures of brass, or other
imagery work, or chalices wrought upon them; and the rest he took away, and
employed them in making a washing-house.

Within the church were two marble holy water stones, bossed with hollow bosses
on the outsides, curiously wrought. These were taken away by dean Whittingham,
and removed into his kitchen.

In the centry-garth under the south end of the nine altars, betwixt two
pillars, was a song-school, erected for teaching six children to sing, who had
their meat and drink among the children of the almery, at the expense of the
house. The master had his chamber adjoining to the song-school, and his diet in
the prior's-hall, among the prior's gentlemen. -- Davies, etc.

William, bishop of Durham, before he took down Aldwinus's old fabric,
prepared a beautiful tomb of stone in the cloister-garth, a yard above the
ground, where St Cuthbert was deposited, over which was laid a large marble.
But when his body was translated to the seretory, made a large and curious
marble image, representing St Cuthbert, with beautiful gilding and painting, in
the form he was wont to say mass, which was placed upon the tombstone as soon
as his body was inshrined in the new church, and round the same were set up
wooden stanchels, so close that a man could only look through it, to view that
exquisite picture. It was covered above with lead, not unlike a chapel. This
elegant monument stood opposite to the parlour door, now turned into a
storehouse, having rooms above where the register-office is kept. Soon after
the suppression, dean Horn demolished this fine monument, converting the lead
to his own use; the image of St Cuthbert he left perfect. But when dean
Whittingham began to govern, he caused this image to be defaced and broken.

The east alley of the cloisters.
Bishops Skirlaw and Langley were the builders of the cloisters. The first gave
two hundred pounds in his lifetime, and by will four hundred pounds, for that
purpose. The second gave two hundred and thirty-eight pounds seventeen
shillings and sixpence. These two were at the charge of the building and
workmanship, and caused to be painted on the glass in the windows, from the
cloister door to the church door, the whole story and miracles of St Cuthbert.
In king Edward the Sixth's days, this history was taken down by dean Horn, and
broken to pieces.

There was a godly ceremony practiced by the prior and monks every Maunday
Thursday, viz. the Thursday before Easter. Eighteen aged poor men were
appointed to come to the cloister that day, having their feet first clean
washed, there to remain till the prior and the convent came, which was about
nine o'clock. They sat between the parlour door and the church door, on a long
form, and the prior washed the poor men's feet, one after another, and dried
them with a towel, and kissed them. When he had done this, he bestowed thirty
pence in money, on each of them, and seven red herrings a-piece; and served
them with drink, three loaves of bread, and certain wafer cakes.

At going out of the cloisters, through an entry into the deanery, at the top of
the stairs, behind the door called the usher-door, on the right hand, was
another going into the register, wherein certain old written books of the
records and evidences of the house were laid; as also a copy of the foundation
of Greatham hospital, which was also registered in the said book of records. It
was the register-house, till Tobias Matthew, dean of Durham, removed it into
the parlour before mentioned.

The north alley of the cloisters.
In the north side of the cloisters, from the corner over against the church
door, to the corner opposite to the dormitory door, was all finely glazed; and
in every window were three pews or carrels, where every one of the old monks
had a carrel to himself, to which, after dinner, they resorted, and there
studied till the time of even-song These pews were wainscotted, and very close,
except the sore-side, which was carved work, and admitted light; in each was a
desk to lay books on, and the carrels were not wider than from one stanchel of
the window to another. Opposite to the carrels against the church walls, stood
great almeries of wainscot full of books, etc. Davies, etc.


. In the north walk of the cloisters were cases for books for the use of the
monks: In the east walk was the old library, now converted into offices for the
register, a council chamber, and other conveniences for the chapter's
business: In this walk is the chapter house, in length seventy-five feet, and
thirty-five in breadth, a neat building, in the form of a theater, vaulted with
stone, without any pillars; the side walls are ornamented with pilasters and
intersecting arches, like the church: It is lighted by five windows at the
semicircular end to the east, two side lights, and one to the west: The groins
of the vault spring from corbles supported by human figures, in the manner
Atlas is usually represented; the mouldings of the ribs are cut with the
zig-zag figure: three rows of stone benches, one above another, run round the
building: To the eastward of the center is a stone chair, with much carved
work, the bishop's seat in old times when he visited, and wherein the prelates
are installed. Adjoining to the chapter house, on the south, was a prison for
offending monks; and at the south end of the cloister there is a passage into
the cemetery garth. The building of the chapter house was originally the work
of bishop Rufus, about the year 1136, but it was afterward vaulted and
embellished by succeeding prelates, particularly by bishop Skirlaw, to whom
much of the present edifice is ascribed. In this place were interred at the
east end, bishop Robt de Insula, and bishop Kellow; further to the west,
bishops Rufus, William de Sancta Barbara, and bishop Flambard; near to those
bishop Pudsey, and Philip of Poictiers; westward of those, bishops Richard de
Marisco, Aldune, Walcher, Turgot the prior, and bishop Stichill; and on each
side of the entrance, bishops Walter de Kirkham, and Richard de Farnham: Robert
de Graystanes was also interred here. Davies and the old roll place some other
bishops in the chapter house, but are the only authorities we find. The monks
were buried in the cemetery-garth, and there stood that venerable monument
Ethelwold's stone cross, which was removed from Lindisfarn: Leland saw it there
In repairing the cathedral at Durham, 1779, a stone spout was thrown from the
battlements, on the under side of which was the above inscription. -- The upper
side is hollowed; by being bedded in the lime, the characters have been well
preserved. -- They agree with the time of St Ethelwold, and encourage the idea
that this is the remains of his cross. There has been a raised rib upon the
center of the stone, which the workmen had chisselled down.

In the sanctuary or holy churchyard or sanctuary of Duresme, be very many
ancient tumbes, it stondith on the south side of the minster: And at the hedde
of one of them is a cross of a 7 foot long, that has had an inscription of
diverse rows in it, but the scripture cannot be red: Sum say that this cross
was brought out of the holy chirch-yarde of Lindisfarne I Will.

Leland's Itin. vol. i. p. 64, Hearne's edit. Crux lapidea in coemiterio
Dunelmensi, delata erat a Lindisfarn, cum corpore S. Cuthberti, in quo sculptum
erat nomen episcopi facientis illam S. Ethelweldi, prius erat fracta a paganis,
sed postea a plumbo artificiose parts erant reunitae.

Ex antiquo Codice Dunelmensi. Fecerat iste de lapide erucem artificis opere
expoliri, et in sui memoriam in ea nomen suum exarari. Cujus summitatem multo
post tempore dum ipsam eccl. Lindisfarn, Pagani devastarent, fregerunt. Sed
postea artificis ingenio reliquae parti infuso plumbo, ipsa fractura est
adjuncta: Semperque deinceps cum corpore S. Cutheberti crux ipsa circumferri
solebat, et a populo Northanhumbr propter utrumque sanctum in honor haberi,
quae etiam usque hodie in Dunelmensis eccl. Coemiterio stans sublimis
utrorumque pontificum intuentibus exhibet monumentum. -- Leland's Coll. vol. i.
p. 370.

Mr Pegge is of opinion, that the two upper lines make clearly a Leonine verse,
and afford a full sense, Per crucis hanc formam
Sanctoe crucis accipe normam.
Certainly, some spondee, as sanctoe, veroe or other proper word, is to be
supplied to complete the meter. -- Norma crucis perhaps may mean some
particular order of the holy cross, and not our Christian profession in
general; since, to judge from the character, which is not Saxon, but of a
modern kind, several were probably by this time instituted.

The other two lines formed a verse, no doubt, and a full sense; but the data
are not sufficient for one to guess how to fill them up. -- See Gough's
Sepulchral Monuments. page 48.


: It shared the sacrilegious destruction which deans Horn And Whitehead turned
it over to Horn,
The archest pastor ever was born;
A rogue that played them more false pranks
Than gypsies could, or mountebanks.
Ward's Reformation, cant. i.
and Whittingham impiously committed on our religious antiquities. The south
walk of the cloister has the library, begun by dean Sudbury, on the site of
the old frater-house, and finished by his successor, toward which he charged
his executors with a sufficient sum This fabric retained the name of the petty
commons' hall, till Dr Sudbury erected a beautiful library in its place; but he
not living to finish it, did, by the following clause of his last will, bind
his heir Sir John Sudbury, to complete the same.

Item, Whereas I have lately contracted with several workmen for the building
of a library in the place commonly called the petty canons' hall, in the
college of Durham, for the use of the dean and prebendaries of the said
cathedral church. And if it should please God that I do not live to finish the
same, my will and pleasure is, that my executor, hereafter named, shall pay out
of my personal estate, all such sum or sums of money as shall be necessary for
the finishing thereof, according to such form or model, or in such manner as I
shall leave directions, under my hand, attested by two or more good and
sufficient witnesses. Dated 11 Jan. 1683.


: It is an elegant room, adorned with some tolerable portraits of bishops, and
stored with an excellent collection of books: Here are deposited many Roman
inscriptions, and other remains found in this and the adjoining county of
Northumberland. Such as relate to this county will be noted in the sequel, in
their due place Here is deposited a curious copy of Magna Charta, dated the
12th of November, 1216, 1 Henry III. -- One of the original copies of Magna
Charta which were sent to every county in England, dated the 11th of February,
1224. The great seal very perfect. Also a very curious copy of the Charta de
Foresta, dated the 11th of February, 1224. From these judge Blackstone made his
collations.

In the class of manuscripts, A. 11. fo. 8. Epistolae 7 canonicae; Job,
Proverbia, Ecclesiastes, etc. in initio libri sequntur hae preces, etc. etc. Eo
seculo quo codex hic descriptus est, duo reges in Anglia captivi detenti sunt;
David Scottorum ab anno 1346, ad annum 1357, et Joannes Gallorum ab anno 1356,
ad annum 1360. Videntur hae preces pro rege Scotorum conceptae fuisse et hic
codex e monasterio Coldinghamensi (quod caenobij Dunelmensis cella fuit) ut
alij plures, traditus fuisse.

The Rev. Mr Rud made a catalogue of the MSS. from A. 1, to B. 11. No 36, and
gives as a preface this account of them: "Si aliquot codices minus utiles inter
has inveniantur, quod minime mirum videri debet intanto librorum numero, quorum
multi iis seculis scripti sunt quibus omnes pene literae crassis ignorantiae
tenebris obrutae jacuerunt; multi tamen, sive argumentum, sive antiquitatem,
sive scribendi artificium, et elegantiam spectemus* eximij plane et quantivis
pretij reperientur: Sunt enim in illis qui mill annos superant, et plures
patrum Latinorum libri ante annos 600 exarati sunt, Willielmus enim primus
episcopus, a Sancto Carilepho dictus, monasticae disciplinae in his regionibus
instaurator praecipuus, monachos quos in ecclesiam Dunelmensem primus
introduxit, non religionis modo and pietatis, sed doctrinae etiam et
eruditionis exercitiis impendere voluit. Ejus igitur jussu et impensa multos
bonos libros pulcherrime descripserunt, quorum nomina bibliis quae hinc
caenobio dedit praefiguntur, eorum non pauci liviis etiam supersunt ut in hac
bibliotheca servantur. Idem et de sequentibus episcopis and prioribus observare
liceat."

The finest of all the MSS. is that of the bible, in four volumes folio, having
in the front of the first volume written, -- Liber Hugonis Dunelm. epi, who was
made bishop in the year 1153, and died in 1194, so that this MS. is six hundred
years old, which being the gift of Pudsey, may be reckoned for the grandeur and
beauty of it amongst his other great works. Mr Rud's description, "Est egregius
revera liber Scriptus est si quidem literis majoribus iisq. accurate formatis
atramento nitenti in membranis pulcherrimis, capitulorum principia literis
pictis exornantur Librorum autem singulorum initia literis maximis variis
coloribus et auro depictis illustrantur. Et sane tanta est operis pulchritudo,
tantus nitor (nisi nota apposita et ipsa scripturae ratio et forma testaretur
librum esse 500 annis vetustiorem) vix videri possit ad 100 annos assurgere.
Equidem vix credo pulchriorem S. Bibliorum istam codicem posse in tota Europa
inveniri. Illud vero dolendum quod plures ex literis illis pictis et de auratis
a sacrilega aliqua manu excissae sunt, et literarum gratia integra aliquando
folia (non pauciora etiam quam G. folia) in initiis librorum deesse
animadverti. Habet, vol. i. folia 220, secundum 187, tertium 160, quartum 148.

The cutting out of the gilded letters was done by Dr Dobson's lady or maid,
who having his key of the library, to go and play with his child in rainy
weather, cut out the letters for the child to play with. Randall.

The Rev. John Milner made an alphabetical catalogue of the printed books; and
Elias Smith an index, in classical order, of the MSS. He died in 1677.

Among the MSS. is a written copy of bishop Usher's sermon preached at Oxford,
1641. Henry Wilkinson, who it is supposed took down this sermon in shorthand,
was head of Magdalen-Hall. Codex 21.

There is a MS. of Cassidorus upon the Psalms, in Saxon characters, with this
inscription on the front, -- "Cassidorus sup' Psalterium de manu Bedae,"
written in another hand and letter, not above four hundred years old, which,
though of no great authority, shows the tradition of the cloister.

There is a MS. of Bede's five books of history; another of his life; and
another of the lives of the abbots of Weremouth and Jarrow, Benedict,
Ceolfrede, etc. by Bid, all in the same hand, six hundred years old, and seem
to be the same which were given by Carilepho.

In fine totius Codicis (psalmi glossati ib'm) inseruntur exempla duo
conventionis factae, A. D. 1204, inter Gul. episc. Stae Andreae in Scotia and
priorem and conventum Dunelmensem et eccl'iam de Coldingham super jurisdictione
in eccl'ias quasdam ad Coldingham pertinentes de qua contentio inter eos orta
fuerat.

A. iii. Fo. Min.

In fine adscribitur sententia ex Leone magno, de supremo judicio; et alia ex
Augustini meditationibus, cap. 6, de Xto patientie, cujus partem cum versione
vetusta Anglia hic adscribam.

Candet nudatum pectus
rubet cruentum latus,
tensa arent viscera
decora languent lumina
regia pallent ora.
Procera rigent brachia
crura pendent marmorea
rigat terebratos pedes
beati sanguinis unda.
Anglia versio sequitur, quoe tamen paulo laxior est.
With was his nakede breast, and red of blod his side,
Bleye was his fair handled, his wnd dop and wide,
And his arms ystreich hey up hon he rode,
On fif studes on his body pe stremes ran o blood.
A. iv. Lucas glosatus. 13.

A. iv. 17. 11. Martini epi libellus de 4 virtutibus.

A. iv. 19. 4to. Ecclesiae Dun. lib. pontificalis et ritualis. Multas solemnes
precum and rit. formulas complectitur. Ad. annos 900 assurgere videtur.

A. iv. 25. Liber orationum and meditat.

Scriptus est ante annos circiter 300 quos ut linguae nostrae ea aetate
specimen, hunc transcripsi.

Mine angel that art to me ysend,
Fro God to be my governor,
Fro all yvil thu me defend,
In every dyssese be my succor.
B. 11.

3. Breve Innocentii 6ti. Johanni de Hilto' domicello (i. e.) baronis de Hilton
filio primogenito. Data averrione 16 Kal. Maij 4to anno (A. D. 1356) videtur
confessiori ejus permittere ut ei in articulo mortis, sub certis tamen
conditionibus plenam peccatorum remissionem concedat.

B. ii. 35. 11. Series chronologica cum brevi hist. ep'orum.

B. iii. 30. Volumen hoc duas habet parts; quaru' prior complectitur
collectanea de monachis p' J. Wessington.

B. iv. 18. Alex. iii. Papae bullae 4. Ad Hugonem Pudsey. -- Cum multis aliis.


. The cloister-yard once contained, in a temporary erection, the remains of St
Cuthbert, before his last translation into the feretory of the present church:
His statue was afterward erected in the same place. The whole square of the
cloister is vaulted underneath, supported on short columns, and totally dark,
in its various ailes like a labyrinth, from whence the return is not easily
found; a melancholy recess for religious severity, penitence, or punishment! It
is formed of excellent mason work, and did it not strike the visitor with
horrible ideas of mistaken austerity, is as admirable as many other parts of
the sacred edifices. The only entrance is a narrow and low arched way under the
library, opening into the deanery kitchen court. Hegge says, The subterraneous
passages under this church (as in other abbeys) are many; but what end these
substructions under ground, should have in the makers intent, whether to
conceal their treasures in time of invasion, or for worse purposes, I cannot
determine. One of which cavernes (where sometime stood Ethelwold's cross)
covered with a round stone, leads to the castle.

At the south-east corner of the cloister is a passage into the spacious oblong
square of prebendal houses, about one hundred and forty paces in length, and
ninety in width: It is much broken into by the deanery garden, which spoils its
appearance. There is a fountain of water at the upper end, for the supply of
all the families, brought in pipes from Elvet-moor, the distance of a mile
Inscription on the fountain in the college.
Hujus nympha loci sacri custodia fontis,
Dormio dum blandae sentio murmur aquae
Parce meum quisquis tangis cava mormora, somnum
Rumpere, sive bibas, sive lavere, tace.

; and also a pump well in the square. The prior's hall in the deanery is not
altogether in the ancient state, but yet large enough to receive two hundred
persons at supper, on a late entertainment given by the present dean: The
ancient south window remains: The gateway into the Bailey-street stands in its
original form, built by prior Castle a short time before the dissolution, as
beforementioned Above this gate was the chapel of St Helen, and the old
exchequer where all the rents reserved in the chapter leases are made payable.

Dean Whitehead presented William Watson to it He was vicar of Bedlington.

Capel. Stae Helenae super magnam portam abbathiae ad sustentationem capellan.
praedictae capellae Stae Helenae deservitur, etc. proviso semp. quod in dicta
capella Stae Helenae super portam officium peragas sacerdotis and omnia onera
dictae capellae incumbentia per te vel per alium, quamdiu ipsam obtines, debite
sustincas peragas and supportes.

E. Reg. Whitehead, p. 74. Joh. Bynchester, 3 Dec. 1409, col. cantariae Stae
Helenae supra portam abbathiae.


, in 1541, together with the chapel of St Bartholomew and Leonard, and St Mary
Magdalen.


: The kitchen is curious, being of an octagonal form, vaulted, with a cupola
light, the chimnies concealed, and in other particulars greatly similar to the
abbot's kitchen at Glastonbury.

Adjoining to the college or square is a terrace walk, one hundred and sixty
paces long, raised on arches, commanding a pleasant view of the river and its
delightful banks: This, like other munificent works of the chapter, is open at
all times for the recreation and pleasure of the public.

The Parish of St Mary-le-Bow, or the Great; commonly called the North-Bailey.
Leaving the cathedral church by the north door, you pass to the Place-Green,
through a spacious burial ground On an altar tomb of freestone, in the
cathedral churchyard. If you have any respect for uncommon industry and merit,
Regard this place! in which are interred the remains Of Mr ROBERT DODSLEY, Who,
as an author, raised himself much above what could have been expected from one
in his rank of life; and without learned education. And who as a man, was
scarce Exceeded by any, in integrity of heart, and purity of manners, and
conversation. He left this life for a better Septr 23d 1764, in the 61st year
of his age Composed by Jos. Spence, A. M. prebendary of Durham, and professor
of modern history in Oxon.
.

On a very large altar tomb of blue marble scarce legible.

Christophorus Mickletonus in villa de Mickleton in agro Eboracensi natus,
nuper hospitij Cliffordiensis London, alumnus and attornatus admodum
exercitatus, peritus and fidelis hic requiescit in Domino. Obiit 26 die
Augusti, Anno D'ni 1669. Aetatis suae 56.

Ac etiam Jacobi Mickleton, Ar. J. C. Filii primogeniti praefat. Christophori
ex Prima uxore sua qui obiit 5 die Augusti, Anno D'ni MDCXCIII. Aetatis suae 56
The compiler of many historical notes, preserved by Mr Rud's transcript; and by
the bounty of William Rudd, Esquire interspersed in this work.
.
. and at the west end thereof, facing the church, is the grammar school and
master's house. On the east side of the Place-Green, which is a square of near
one hundred paces, are the school-houses, first erected by bishop Langley Vol.
I. p. 332.
, and afterward restored by bishop Cofin Ibid. p. 538.
; with an hospital in the center, founded by bishop Langley, and particularly
noticed in the sequel. On the opposite side are the sessions-houses, to the
building of which bishop Cofin greatly contributed; we are told he gave 1000l.
toward public erections, and among them the sessions house and exchequer are
named, which latter contains the hall where the chancery-court is held, and
offices for the auditor, cursitor, prothonotary, county-clerk, and register,
originally built by bishop Nevill In bishop Neile's time an order was made for
dividing the office of cursitor and register in chancery, and appointing
distinct officers therein.
. Before the new sessions-houses were erected, the adjoining building was used
for the law courts, under which are stables; the upper chamber is a mean and
melancholy place for so important a purpose: The ornaments of the seat of
justice were removed from thence in 1649 Sess. 11 July, 1649.

Ordered, that the receivers of the bishop's rents shall forthwith pay over to
Mr under sheriff, such moneys as shall be requisite for the necessary repairs
of the sessions house; and the same to be allowed in the said receiver's
accounts, in regard the bishops formerly did repair the same house.

In plena quarterial. sessione pacis ten't. apud civitat. Dunelm. in com. Dun.
pro com. pred. 14 die Jan. A reg. Will'i and Mariae, regis and reginae etc.
2do. A. D. 1690.

It is thought fit, and resolved by the justices in open court, that from
henceforth their wages go and be employed for and toward the procuring a
plate or plates to be run for on Durham moor. And that it be recommended to Mr
Mayor of Durham, chairman at this sessions, to communicate the same to the
bishop of Durham: And that the same continue until further resolution of the
majority of justices of the peace of this county. Geo. Morland, mayor, Robt.
Eden, Will. Bows, Ly. Vane, Hen. Liddell, Wm Lambton, Ja. Clavering, Jo.
Sedgewick, Rob. Ellison, Rob. Jenison.

Ex original. 18 Apr. 1694. Ordered, that it be referred to Sir Ra. Carr,
knight, Lyonel Vane, Esquire and Wheatley Dobson, mayor of the city of Durham, to
settle the horse race for the city of Durham; and the money due to be paid to
Mr Mayor. Also ordered, that they fix the time when the plates given by the
said justices, shall be run for on High Brasside moor in this county.

3 Apr. 1695. Ordered, that the justices' wages for the future, together with
the arrears hitherto due, be applied to such charitable use or uses, as the
majority of the said justices shall approve of and think fit.

15 Jan. 1695. Ordered, that the silver mottoth be delivered to John Gordon,
Esquire mayor of the city of Durham, to be by him kept during his mayoralty, and
from hence forward to be delivered from mayor to mayor, the said mayor with two
aldermen, giving security to the clerk of the peace for the safe keeping
thereof.

Ordered, that out of the wages due to the justices of the peace for this
county, fifty pounds be paid to Joseph Gedling, fifty shillings to John
Middleton, Esquire and twenty shillings to the clerk of the peace; and that for
seven years next ensuing, the said wages be paid to the said Joseph Gedling,
and the residue of the said money due to the said justices remain in the hands
of Cuth. Hall, gent. till further order. -- From Mr Mann's MSS. penes G. Allan.

The procuring a plate for horse races has been discontinued for some
considerable time, and instead thereof the bishop of Durham allows ten pounds
at every sessions for the entertainment of the justices at dinner.


. Near to the old sessions house is the library, founded and stocked with books
by bishop Cofin; adjoining is the exchequer, which closes that side of the
square up to the gates entering into the outward court of the castle. At the
north east corner of the Green, Queen's-street, anciently called Owen or
Ounsgate, descends to the north gate, now the gaol; and at the south-east
corner Sidgate, vulgarly called Dun Cow-lane, leads to King's-gate, crossing
the North-Bailey: On the north side of the square is the castle: There are few
distinct remains of the wall which defended this part, between the castle and
the church; the name of the broken walls being the chief memorial of that
fortification.

The Place-Green, as before noted, we apprehend was the ground where criminals
were executed; it being the ancient custom to perform such acts of justice
before the walls of castles, and not to carry offenders from their prisons to
distant places, or to delay execution after sentence. In the conventions
entered into between the bishop and prior in the thirteenth century, and
ratified in 1553, are these words Vel cum aliquis in ead. judicatus fuerit etc.
executio judicii fiet. per ballivos pr. libere and sine impedimento ad Placeam,
etc. In other records it is called Virid. Placea, or the Green-Place: A grant
to William de Orchard, 1365, of a garden, sup' Placeam Rot. Hatfield, Sch. 16,
No 3. -- Sch. 14, No 5, ib'm. -- Sch. 4, No 9, ib'm.
: In 1367, a grant of waste ground, sup' Placeam, with many more: 1454, to
Robert Sotheron, part orient. Placei, Dun. boundering to the south, on a
ground called Coneyor-Garth, where the mint-master had his tenements Copyhold
books, D. p. 720, Nevil, 1454. Hal. apud. Houghton, vijo Mar. Ao Tr. xvijo. De
Rob'to Sotheron, cap. pro una parcella terrae de vastaed'ni jacente ex part
orient. Placei Dun. et Man'cois Arch'ni ib'm ex p'te occident. and ex p'te
boreali dom. Cant'ie ib'm et ex p'te australi unius ort. vocatr. Coneyor Garth,
etc.


: In 1395, one Ward took of the lord a house super Placeam, within the castle
of Durham, called the moneyer's house, together with a chamber on the other
side of the gate, called Owenszate, to hold the same until some mint-master
should come, who would carry on his business of coining therein Copyhold books,
Ao. primo usq. 17 Skirlaw, p. 152.
Will's Ward venit hic in Cur. and cepit de D'no unam Dom. sup' placeam in
castro Dun. vocat Moneza house una cul. al. cam'a ultra portam voc. Owaneszate
tenend. quousq. aliquis monitarius venerit qui in ead. monetam vac. volu^^^t.
Ao 1395.

John Killinghall died seized of a new mess. in the Bailey, holden in capite by
service of castle ward, finding a bowman to defend the castle of Durham in time
of war at King's-gate. Inq. post Mort. Ao Xo. Tho. tent. ap. Dun. 19 Oct. W.
Claxton, escaetor.


. We would not have multiplied these proofs, but to deduce from thence the
following observations: It has been apprehended that the mintage of our
prelates was carried on in some strong place within the gates of the castle; or
as others would have it, in Silver-street, from its name; whereas the records
prove the mint-master's house was on the Place-Green; which was styled to be in
the castle, as being within the ballium and fortifications thereof.

There were anciently belonging to the monastery two schools, one in the
cloister where the novices were taught, in a wainscotted hall opposite to the
treasury door. The master was one of the oldest and most learned of the monks,
and the students were supplied, upon his report, with necessaries from the
chamberlain of the house; for they had no appointed salary. If any of them
showed a particular genius and love of literature, he was sent to Oxford; those
of meaner capacities pursued their studies under the discipline of the house,
were taught to perform the service of the choir, and in the end admitted to
sing mass; at which stage they had twenty shillings a year as wages: They had
commons at a table at the east end of the frater-house, and during the mess one
of them read a portion of the holy scriptures. Their lodging was at the south
end of the dormitory. The other school was in the infirmary out of the abbey
gates, where the boys of the almery were taught; they messed after the novices,
and had the remains of their table: Their master had ecclesiastical duty,
saying mass twice a week at St Mary Magdalen's chapel, near Kepier, once a week
at Kimblesworth, and every holiday and Friday in the infirmary chapel, where
four women constantly attended, who dwelt in the infirmary, to take care of the
sick, and were supplied with provisions from the priors table Vide auditor's
office.
. These appointments, with the rest of the monastic dispositions, were
extinguished by the dissolution, and perhaps occasioned the institution of the
other schools after the settlement of the chapter. John Newton, master of St
Edmond's hospital, in Gateshead, and John Thoralby, rector of Gateshead, and
afterward of Whitburn, clerks, by bishop Langley's license, dated the 14th of
June, 1414, founded two chanteries at the altars of the blessed Virgin and St
Cuthbert, in the gallilee, and appointed two chaplains, one of whom was to
teach poor boys grammar, and the other singing, in such place as that prelate
or his executors should appoint: Their stipend of forty shillings yearly each,
issued out of lands in Hardwick, nigh Norton, Ryton, Boldon, Cassop, and
Owengate, in the North-Bailey. The boys, it is presumed, from the instrument of
confirmation by the prior and convent were to consist of thirty of the
monastery almery: The song-master, with some of his scholars, were to come to
church on the principal festivals in a surplice, and sing; the others to be
present on the like occasions; and no women were to be permitted among them:
The chantry clerks were not suffered to lie a night out of their house, without
license of the bishop, or his spiritual chancellor, under the penalty of
forfeiting the chantry; neither might they, (with any license) be absent above
forty days conjunctim aut divisim in a whole year, and then to have a
substitute. They could not be admitted without license of the bishop, or during
the vacancy of the prior and chapter, in which express mention was to be made
of their taking the oath of residence. The bishop had power to add to or
detract from the articles of foundation, to appoint statutes, or alter and
explain them at pleasure 3d Chartulary, p. 284, 285, 286, 287.
.

There appears some confusion touching these chantries; whether only one was
founded by Newton and Thoralby, and the other was the act of bishop Langley;
for in the nomination of some of the clerks, one of them is called bishop
Langley's chantry. Bishop Nevil, in the first year of his episcopacy, granted
license to the executors of bishop Langley, to purchase lands of forty pounds
per annum value, for maintenance of these chantry clerks Vide Rot. Cl. Nevil.
. Mr Thomas Rud, who was master of the chapter school in the churchyard, had
much occasion to look into those matters, and was of opinion, that Newton and
Thoralby were in fact the original founders, giving stipends of forty shillings
each; but that bishop Langley afterward greatly enlarging the foundation, the
chantries took his name There is a long state of controversy between Mr Rud and
Mr Pet. Nelson, in Randal's MSS. and also many letters of bishop Cosin's, on
the subject of these schools.
. The bishop's executors purchased the manor of Kaverdley, in Lancashire, out
of which they allotted 16l. 13s. 4d. in stipends to two masters Annual. Red,
xvjl. xiijs. iiij. exeun. de Keverdley in comitatu Lancastriae solit Willimo
Thewlish magistro libere schole gramatic. ad instruend omnes and omnimodos
pueros et ad crudiend. eos in gramatic. and Grec. Et similiter Willimo Cock
altero magistro scholarum ibidem ad scribendum and legendum prim. rudiment.
gramatic. et ad cantandum usq' tempus, ut apti sint et habiles ad scholam
gramaticam. Et ex dicta summa tenentur solvere annuatim pauperibus in elemosina
13s. 4d.

Praedicti magistri tenent unam domum in qua inhabit. cum uno gardino, et non
hic onerat.


, and which was reserved to them by the statute thirty-seventh of king Henry
VIII. c. 4, and confirmed the first of king Edward VI. by virtue whereof the
endowment survived the dissolution of chantries, and the schools were from
thenceforth called king Edward's foundation, though he did nothing further
relative thereto than save them from the general wreck. After the dissolution,
it is to be apprehended, things of this nature remained some time in confusion;
two new schools were instituted in the second year of queen Mary, under the
protection of the dean and chapter; and the queen appointed stipends to be paid
thereto, out of the revenues of the church: And though it does not appear the
dean and chapter had any right to intermeddle with the money issuing out of
Kaverdley, in Lancashire, yet certain it is, a custom arose in the beginning of
queen Elizabeth's reign, to pay one half of the stipend that belonged to one of
bishop Langley's schools, to the master of the new grammar school, and the same
has been regularly paid by the king's auditor. One reason for this division
might be, that from the time of the foundation of the new school, where the
Latin tongue was to be taught, that language was disused in the other, and it
was appropriated for English rudiments and writing. Bishop Langley's
song-school has long fallen into disuse; the patentee pays no attention to the
institution, and it has become a beneficial sinecure to some of the bishop's
domestics Patents. 26 Aug. 1681. Rot. Crew, No. 30. Tho. Barker, Mag. scholae
ad erudiend. pueros in plano cantu and art scribendi.

19 Feb. 1690. Wm Greggs, gent. master. 14 Oct. 1720. Tho. Baty, gent. master.
Montague's Reg. p. 19. 9 Sept. 1745. Samuel Davies, a servant to the bishop,
master. 22 Mar. 1747. Ra. Hodgson, attorney at law, steward at Auckland castle.
-- Randal's MSS.

.

King Henry VIII. appointed commissioners to set out dwelling-houses for the
master and usher of the new grammar school; and those, with bishop Langley's
school-houses, in times of public calamity and confusion, were suffered to fall
into decay; or, as others say, were destroyed by the Scotch in 1640: After the
Restoration, the dean and chapter rebuilt their school-house; and as was
observed before, bishop Cousin rebuilt bishop Langley's houses, or made new ones
adjoining to the hospital, which he founded on the Place-Green: Unwilling to
arrogate to himself even the appearance of having founded those schools, or to
lead posterity into any error touching them, over the doors of the wings or
school-houses Patents. 26 Aug. 1681. Rot. Crew, No. 30. Tho. Barker, Mag.
scholae ad erudiend. pueros in plano cantu and art scribendi.

19 Feb. 1690. Wm Greggs, gent. master. 14 Oct. 1720. Tho. Baty, gent. master.
Montague's Reg. p. 19. 9 Sept. 1745. Samuel Davies, a servant to the bishop,
master. 22 Mar. 1747. Ra. Hodgson, attorney at law, steward at Auckland castle.
-- Randal's MSS.

he placed bishop Langley's arms, and over the center door his own.

Inscriptions under bishop Langley's arms.

Schola pro plano cantu and art scribendi
Schola pro addiscendis rudim. literarum.
Under the arms of the Sea, with bishop Cosin's arms impaled over the center
door.

Hospitale Ep'i Dunelm. pro viii. pauperibus, fundat. per Joh. Episcop. A. D.
MDCLXVI

Vide foundation and statutes of the cathedral church for the masters' stipend,
etc. in the new grammar school, page 135.

Masters since the Restoration.
1666. Thomas Battersby Thomas Barkas 1690. Tho. Rud, A. B. 1699. Nich. Burton,
A. M. 1609. John Rymer On an altar tombstone in the cathedral churchyard.

Here lies the body of John Rymer, A. M. who was head master of the
grammar school twenty-one-years, and lecturer of the parish of St Nicholas
eleven years. He departed this life Feb. 13, 1732, aged 49 years.


1732. Rich. Dongworth, A. M. On another altar stone there.

Near to this place lies the body of the Rev. Richard Dongworth, A. M. master
of the grammar school, and vicar of Billingham. He departed this life Feb. 23,
Anno 1761, aged 58.


1761. Tho. Randal, A. B. To the indefatigable labors of this gentleman we are
indebted for all the valuable records that enrich these volumes; and who, by
will, dated the 20th of December, 1774, gave them and all his other manuscripts
relating to the antiquities of Durham and Northumberland, to his friend Mr Geo.
Allan, of Darlington, in whose possession they now remain.
1768. Jon. Branfoot, A. M. 178^. J. Bretton, A. M.
Sub-masters.
Sam. Martin John Nichols Wm Greggs Wm Hanby Nich. Fewster Peter Nelson Wm
Randolph Wm Randolph Rob. Simon Tho. Randal No sub-master Vacant Vacant.
Ep'at Dunelm. et ab. In computo receptor. general. ib'd de anno finito ad
festum Sti. Michaelis archangeli ano. reg. D'nae nup' reg. Eliz. iiijo. int. al
continetur and sequitur viz. Stipendia Ludimag'rorum.

Terr. et possession. pertin. manner. de Kaverdley, in co. Lancast. parcel.
possessionum nup' monasterij de Jarvalij. Et in annual. salar. sive stipend
Tho. Reve and Joh'is Person scole mag'ror scole gramatic. sundat. p' nup'
Cantaristis Beatae Virginis and S'ti. Cuthb'ti in eccl'ia cath. Dunelm. ad
xvjl. p' an. and xiijs. iiijd. p' an distribuend per praedict. Thomam Reve and
Johannem Person. ejusd. fundationis dictae Cantar. annuatim sol'. ad term. Sci.
Michaelis archangeli and pasche equaliter viz. in allocatione hujusmodi
stipendiorum p'tempus hujus computi virtute decreti sive warranti D'ni
thesaurarij Angliae signat. and auditor. direct. prout consimilis allocatio
facta suit in diversis computis diversorum annorum praecedentium. -- xvjl.
xiijs. iiijd.

E. scaccario regio.
The Bishop's Almshouse, and Schools on the Green.
Bishop Cosin's deed of foundation of the almshouses on the Place-Green, and
re-establishment of the schools there, is to the following effect:

"John, by God's grace and permission, bishop of Durham: To all the faithful
sons of Christ and holy mother church, that may see or hear these present
letters, or this public instrument, health and blessing. For as much, as among
other works of piety and exercises of Christian religion, which appertain to
the office of a bishop, we were diligently to provide and take care, that our
episcopal castles, and in them especially our chapels, and some other places
and buildings adjoining, destined for public uses, (all which indeed we found
almost quite destroyed either by the violence of the times, or the neglect and
malice of men) might be duly repaired as soon as possible, and where necessary
rebuilt. Know ye, therefore, that we have not only repaired, and brought into
better form, in every part, our foresaid episcopal castles, and the sacred
chapels therein, at our own proper charges, but also have built anew two
school-houses, anciently erected by the appointment of the most reverend
prelate and lord, lord Thomas Langley, our predecessor, on the bishop's
palace-green, in Durham, on the east side of the said green; (lately almost
fallen and left waste by the violence of the times and neglect of men) the one
of which schools was designed for instructing boys in the rudiments of
learning, unto the Latin and Greek grammar; and the other to instruct boys in
the art of writing and plain songs; with a stipend of 8l. 6s. 8d. annexed, for
the master of each school, to be paid yearly by the king's officers; and with a
pension in like manner of forty shillings, to be paid by the officers of us and
our successors, viz. our auditor and receiver, yearly to the same master; which
we have thought good, as much as in us lies, should be ratified and confirmed.
Know ye, furthermore, that we the bishop aforesaid, have built and placed
between the same schools, another building or almshouse, containing in it
eight chambers for the entertainment and dwelling of so many poor people, viz.
four men and four women. And now for the due maintenance and support of the
same poor men and women, and the repairs of the houses aforesaid, when such
shall be needful, we make known unto all, that by this our charter, we give and
grant an annuity of seventy pounds, to issue out of the manor or lands of
Great-Chilton, in the county of Durham, lately bought with our own proper
moneys, to be distributed among the same poor men and women, and duly to be
paid yearly, at four quarters of the year, according to an indenture made
between us on the one part, and the honorable Charles lord Gerard, baron of
Brandon, together with Sir Henage Finch, knight and baronet, the king's
solicitor, Sir Gilbert Gerard, knight and baronet, our high sheriff in the
county palatine of Durham, Sir Nicholas Cole, of Kepier, in the county of
Durham, knight and baronet, and George Davenport, clerk, rector of
Houghton-le-Spring, in the county of Durham aforesaid, our trustees on the
other part; and bearing date the 12th day of August present, as it may appear
more fully by the said indenture. Therefore we will and ordain by this our
charter, that the aforesaid sum of seventy pounds, for the maintenance and
support of eight poor people, living in our hospital or almshouse aforesaid,
and for the repairs thereof, be distributed and paid yearly in this manner as
follows. First of all, shall be paid to each of the eight poor people
aforesaid, by the bishop's auditor and receiver, the yearly pension of 6l. 13s.
4d. at four feasts of the year, specified in the aforesaid indenture, by equal
portions: Secondly, that to each of the said poor people be given yearly, by
the said auditor and receiver, at the feast of St Bartholomew, 15s. for buying
coals or fuel, and repairing their chamber windows, as often as need shall
require: Thirdly, that the sum of 5l. every year be retained in the hands of
the said auditor and receiver of the bishop of Durham for the time being, for
buying gowns (called liveries) for the said poor men and women, every third
year: Fourthly, that the sum of 20s. in like manner be placed in the hands of
the said auditor and receiver, for repairing the said houses when it may be
needful: Fifthly, that the sum of 4l. in like manner, be paid duly at the
feasts aforesaid, by equal portions, unto some honest woman, to be named by us
and our successors, bishops of Durham, that may daily attend upon the aforesaid
poor people, in their sickness and other necessity: Lastly, that the aforesaid
auditor and receiver reserve in their hands yearly 13s. 4d. to purchase gloves,
as a token for their attention and care. Furthermore, we will and ordain, that
all such poor people, being bachelors or widowers and widows, be of honest
repute and good conversation, and sixty, or at least fifty years of age;
whereof three men and so many women shall be natives, or at least inhabitants
of Durham, by the space of twenty years: But the other two, that is, one man
and one woman, shall be chosen out of the village or parish of Brancepeth: The
cure of which church we anciently had; to be nominated by us during our life,
but after our death by our beloved daughters the lady Mary Gerard, the lady
Elizabeth Burton, Mrs Frances Gerard, alias Blakeston, and Mrs Anne Greenvile,
in their turns after the order of their ages, and by the longer livers and
longer liver of them: And after the death of them all, by our successors, the
bishops of Durham in a full See; but by the dean and chapter of our cathedral
church of Durham, in a vacancy, from time to time as often as any place of the
said poor men and women shall happen to be void, for ever. And that this pious
and charitable intention of ours may take better effect, we have chosen, named,
assigned, and constituted, and by these presents for us and our successors, do
choose, name, assign, and constitute our beloved in Christ, William Unthanke,
William Widdrington, Robert Blunt, and Charles Calvert, and our beloved Grace
Hutchinson, Jane Cummin, Eleanor Pearson, and Mary Atkinson, to be the first
poor men and women of the same hospital or almshouse, there to remain to be
maintained and relieved during their natural lives; unless in the meanwhile
they be removed, or that it shall happen that any one of them be removed thence
for some reasonable cause, by us and our successors. We will also, and ordain,
that all such poor people, and their successors, shall reside and lodge in
their own chambers. Furthermore, we appoint that the poor men and women shall
duly say not only the private prayers assigned to them, by us, in their own
chambers; but also frequent the prayers morning and evening, in the choir of
our cathedral church in Durham, unless they be detained at home by some real
sickness: That they all go to church, two by two, both men and women, in their
gowns, modestly, decently, and in order: That they shall sit next after the
king's beadsmen, sounded in the same cathedral church; and there demean
themselves humbly and devoutly. Lastly, we will and constitute, that all such
poor people be subject as well to the ordinary jurisdiction of us and our
successors, as to all decrees, commands, and statutes, duly and lawfully to be
established and ordained by us and our successors, bishops of Durham. And we do
hereby declare, as well the said schools, restored and built by us, as also our
new and peculiar foundation of the said almshouse, shall be established for
ever. We put up our most humble thanks to the Omnipotent and Gracious Divinity,
who has vouchsafed to grant unto us, whilst we sojourn in this mortal life,
and look for his blessed eternity in Heaven, ability to provide for, and
perfect these our works of piety and charity, which we trust will be acceptable
to him. In testimony, etc. we have caused these our letters to be made patent,
and thereto have put our seals, both episcopal and palatine. Witness, Sir
Francis Goodrick, knight, our temporal chancellor. Given at our castle at
Durham, on the thirty-first of August, in the year of the reign of our
sovereign lord Charles the Second, by the grace of God, king of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, the twentieth, and of our
consecration the eighth, and in the year of Christ 1668."

Bishop Cosin's library Foundation charter, dated 20th Sep. 1669. Rudd's MSS.
vol. i p. 538.
is mentioned in his will to this effect, That a great number of his books
valued at above one thousand pounds he had given to the public library of St
Peter's College, in Cambridge; the rest of his books, according to a catalogue
signed by him, he, by a special deed, gave to a public use in a new library
that he had built upon the Palace-Green in Durham, for the common benefit of
the clergy and others that should resort thereto, the whole collection having
cost him near three thousand pounds, and the care of near fifty-five years
together. He, by deed, dated the 20th of September, 1669, granted a stipend for
a librarian, with ordinances therein touching his office There are several old
portraits of the prelates in this place but ill kept. The books which had
remained for several years in confusion, have lately been arranged after the
order of the old catalogue, by Mr Robert Harrison, of Durham. Bishop Trevor
gave several books thereto. Over the door are the arms of the Sea, impaling
those of Cousin, and underneath the following inscription: BIBLIOTHEC. JOH.
DUNELM.
Non minima pars eruditionis est bonos nosse libros.



.

In the exchequer THE COUNTY COURT.
The sheriff is judge of the county court, and all proceedings there are before
him; and yet the office of county clerk has, time out of mind, been granted by
the bishop by patent for life, and such patentee issues all processes, and all
pleadings are in his office, and he receives to his own use all the profits
thereof. And where the debts and damages are above 13s. 4d. the process is
capias I observe in some reasons offered against taking away the county
palatine, it is mentioned, that in 1665, there was some attempt to discourage
the practice of arresting by capias; and that the grand jury made a
representation in writing to the judges at the assizes, of the great
conveniences arising to the county by it, and that the same was also signed by
the mayor and aldermen, and the attorneys, and publicly read at the assizes;
and that the said custom of issuing capias was approved and allowed by the
judges. And in 1666, at the assizes of Durham, one Potter being in gaol upon a
capias, issued out of the county court, moved by Mr Stot, for a habeas corpus
to bring the defendant to the bar; and the sheriff in his return set forth the
custom of arresting by capias, and the defendant was brought to the bar, and
the matter argued by council; the council for the defendant at the bar agreed
the custom was good and the defendant was remanded. There was also a writ of
false judgment brought by Dale at suit of Hall, and the awarding of a capias
was assigned for error. Sir T. Tursden, upon hearing council on both sides,
took time to consider of the error, and afterward declared, he had consulted
with his brethren, the judges, at Westminster, who were of opinion, that the
custom being in the county palatine by prescription might be good, and gave
orders for affirming the judgment. In the year 1668, three writs of false
judgment were brought by Nicholson against Huntley, and the awarding the capias
again assigned for error; after argument before baron Rainsford, he was
attended again at Newcastle, and appointed the same to be further argued at his
chambers in Serjeant's Inn, when he said he had consulted his brethren, who
were of opinion the custom was good, and affirmed the judgment; and ordered Mr
Cook, the associate, to draw a special rule, and set out the custom, which was
done.

In the auditor's office is the petition, called a representation of the grand
jury, dated the 20th of April, 1664.

Rudd's MSS. The office or place of county clerk has, time out of mind, been
disappendant as to the high sheriff's office, who has never received any profit
of the said court, though he has always exercised and enjoyed the office of
judge of and within that court; and that all pleadings within that court have
been held before the sheriff, and not otherwise. The said court has, time out
of mind, had the lawful and unquestioned jurisdiction, in all cases therein to
award a capias upon a justicies, directed to the sheriff, and no other person
whatever, which is done at a small charge. Carthew, 207. Comb. 260.

The court commonly called the county court, in fact is a court holden before
the sheriff of the county, and so it is styled in writs of false judgment;
which distinguishes this court from all other county courts properly so called,
and of which the suitors are judges, and they are said to be holden coram
sectatoribus. See I. Mod. rep. anonym. case, p. 172.

Though it be said commonly, that the suitors are judges, yet by prescription
the sheriff may be judge. -- There is a court called the court of the county in
the county palatine of Durham, and the sheriff is judge; and though in the
county court the suitors are judges, yet by prescription it may be held before
the sheriff. 2 and 3 Edw. VI. c. 25. Mod. rep. 72.


are deposited the bishop's evidences, of which archbishop Sancroft, a
prebendary in the ninth stall of our cathedral, obtained lists or schedules,
which have lately been published from the Clarendon Press in Oxford, with other
miscellaneous tracts, entitled Collectanea Curiosa. They might not be esteemed
of sufficient importance to take up so many pages in this work as their
insertion would necessarily require, therefore we must refer the reader to that
publication, No x. vol. ii. p. 93, etc.

The traveller approaching

THE CASTLE De constabular. castri epor. Dunelm.
Castrum Dunelm. conditum suit p. reg. W. Conq. eodem temp. quo reversus suerat
de Scotia in Dunelm. ubi se cum suis epis tute ab incursantibus habere
potuisset. -- Dicitur in lib. Rub. 47. quod Robertus fill. Will'i Conq. castrum
p'd construxit. -- Sede vac. Claves castri p'd soluti suer. sup' S'cti Cuthb'ti
tumulum suspenderi. -- Mickleton's MSS.



enters by the gateway built by bishop Tunstall.

Before we proceed in the description of the present edifice, it is necessary
to make some few observations on the form and construction of fortresses of the
like date. We remarked, that it was probable there was a place of strength and
defense on the castle hill, before the Conqueror, returning from his Scotch
expedition, thought it expedient in this province, which was so necessary and
natural a barrier against the more northern powers, to erect a castle Vide note
vol. i. p. 113.
. The castle upon Tyne was a work of near the same period of time Hoc anno Gul.
rex misit Robertum silium suum contra Malcolinum regem qui cum pervenisset ad
Eglesbreth nullo consecto negotio, castellum novum super slu. sini condidit. --
Le^. Col. vol. ii. p. 384.


, but the form of that edifice in no wise corresponds with any part of the
fortress now under consideration, and indeed it is difficult to determine what
part of the present castle owes its origin to William the Conqueror. Towers of
an octagonal form, we conceive, were not uncommon with the Normans; yet we do
not apprehend the present tower was of Norman architecture: The lofty mount
most probably attracted the founder's attention: But we have met with very
little evidence to support such a position. The ingenious Mr Gross says Vol. i.
Antiq. of England and Wales, 2d edit. p. 7.

In Leland's Itinerary we have the following description. The close itself of
the minstre on the highest part of the hill is well wauled, and has diverse
fair gates. The chirch itself, and the cloister be very strong and fair; and at
the veryest end of the chirch is a cross isle byside the middle cross isle
the minster chirch. The castelle stondith stately on the north est side of the
minstre, and Were rennith under it. The keep stondith aloft and is stately
buildid of viij square fascion and 4 highes of logginges.

"Bishop Fox did much reparation of this dungeon; and he made beside in the
castelle a new kychen with "the offices and many praty chaumbers.

"Tunstall has also done cost on the dungeon and other places of the castle;
and has buildid a goodly "new galery and a stately stair to it, and made an
exceeding strong gate of iron to the castelle.

"In that part of Duresme town that is almost enclosed with were be 3 paroch
chirches and a chapel; S. "Oswaldes is counted to be ancient. There be a
three paroche chirches mo in the suburb.

"The greatest suburb is by Elvet bridge, and has certain smaul streates.

The suburb over Framagate bridge has 3 parts; the south streate on the lift
hand, the cross streate on the middle toward Akeland, and the 3 on the right
hand bering the name of Framagat, and leding to Chester and to Newcastelle.

"The building of Duresme town is meately strong, but it is another high nor of
costely work.

There appear sum peaces of waules of the town joining to a gate of the palace
waul. But the town itself, withyn the peninsula, is but a smaul thing in
respect of cumpace of all the stately close; so that it alo^ly may be caulled
the waullid tonne of Duresme. -- Lel. Itin. vol. i. fo. 81.

Camd. Brit. Lat. edit. 1594. Gibson's edition in Eng. 950.


, The materials of which castles were built, varied, according to the places of
their erection; but the manner of their construction seems to have been pretty
uniform. The outsides of the walls were generally built with the stones nearest
at hand, laid as regularly as their shapes would admit; the insides were filled
with the like materials, mixed with a great quantity of fluid mortar, which was
called by the workmen grout-work: A very ancient method of building used by the
Romans, and quoted by Palladio, and all the writers on architecture. The angles
were always coigned, and the arches turned with squared stone, brought from
Caen, in Normandy, with which the whole outside was now and then eased.
Sometimes instead of stone the insides of the walls were formed with squared
chalk, as is the castle of Guildford. When the Normans found the ruins of an
ancient building on the site of their intended structure, they either
endeavored to incorporate it into their work, or made use of the materials; as
may be seen by many buildings of known Norman construction, wherein are
fragments of Saxon architecture, or large quantities of Roman bricks, which has
caused them often to be mistaken for Roman or Saxon edifices. The general shape
or plan of these castles depended entirely on the caprice of the architects, or
the form of the ground intended to be occupied; neither do they seem to have
confined themselves to any particular figure in their towers, square, round,
and poligonal, oftentimes occuring in the original parts of the same building.
The situations commonly chosen were steep rocks, cliffs, eminences, or the
banks of rivers. To this observation we must add, that the fortifications on
the ground now under consideration, occupied or enclosed the whole summit of
the hill; the outward wall running along the very brink of the eminence, and
forming an oval figure; at the northern extremity of which the castle stands,
on the neck of land, where the ground descends swiftly to the lower town,
called the borough; the river runs almost round the whole walled or fortified
eminence, except at that part where Claypath or Cluerport gate stands; at which
point, the eastern or western channels drawing nearest together, give the
walled or fortified part of the town the figure of a horse shoe, so that the
river to those fortifications served in lieu of a moat: The natural ascent from
the river to the foot of some parts of the city wall, is upwards of eighty
perpendicular feet. In towns (Mr Gross says, p. 9) the appellation of ballium
was given to any work fenced with palisades, and some times masonry, covering
the suburbs; but in castles was the space immediately within the outer wall.
When there was a double enceinte of walls, the areas next each wall were styled
the outer and inner ballia. The manner in which these are mentioned in the
siege of Bedford castle, sufficiently justify this position: The castle was
taken by four assaults; in the first was taken the barbican, in the second the
outer ballia, at the third attack the wall by the old tower was thrown down by
the miners, where, with great danger they possessed themselves of the inner
ballia, through a chink; at the fourth assault the miners set fire to the
tower, so that the smoke burst out, and the tower itself was cloven to that
degree, as to show visibly some broad chinks, whereupon the enemy surrendered.
-- This receives further confirmation from the enumeration of the lands
belonging to Colchester castle, wherein are specified "the upper bailey, in
which the castle stands, and the nether bailey, etc." The wall of the ballium
in castles was commonly high, flanked with towers, and had a parapet,
embattled, crenellated, or garretted for the mounting of it. There were flights
of steps at convenient distances; and the parapet often had the merlons pierced
with long chinks, ending in round holes, called oillets. Whether, at Durham,
there was an inner and outer ballium, is uncertain; the two streets now called
the Baileys, are sometimes distinguished by the names of the high and low
Bailey, and north and south Bailey, and prompt an idea, that such might be the
original form of the fortification; but when the present cathedral church was
built, the distinction and interior wall perhaps was removed, as no remains
thereof now appear.

Within the ballium were lodgings or barracks, for those whose service it was
to defend the castle personally, either as principals or substitutes; so in the
Baileys the houses were anciently held in capite by the service of castle ward,
and many chief personages had tenements therein for greater security in times
of public danger The families of Alenshelys, and de Le Ley. Inq. p. m. Ao. 6.
Burg. co. ^ de Menvill, vic. The family of Wittonstalls, who were inveniend.
D'mn Jordanum de Darden knt. p' se and suis Cameram and Stabulum sufficient.
t'pe Guerre And the said Jordan held all the tenements aforesaid of the lord
bishop of Durham, in capite, viz. in Baroniam sicut cet. de Ballio. Inq. p. m.
Ao. 4o. Hatfield cor. W. de Mordon, vic. 1348.

John Lam. The lord John Conyers. The lord Thomas Gray. Inq. p. m. Ao. 5.
Hatfield, ib'm vic.

Wm de le Ley. Inq. p. m. Ao. 19. Hatfield cor. Tho. de le Reyner esc.

Tho. Hunter, and Margaret his wife, heiress of Alenshelys. Inq. p. m. Ao. xo.
Skirlaw. R. de Laton esc.

Killinghall. Inq. p. m Ao. xo. Langley cor. Claxton esc.

Hadham. Inq. p. m. Ao. 15. Langley, etc.

Ralph earl of Westminster. two mess. in Owensgate, (by castle ward) infra cast Dun.
Inq. p. m. Ao xxo. Langley*


: Besides the cathedral church and monastery, there were included in the
ballium, two parish churches, St Mary the Great or Le-Bow, and St Mary the
Less. -- The entrance into the ballium was commonly through a strong
machicolated and embattled gate, between two towers, secured by a hearse or
portcullis; over this gate were rooms originally intended for the porter of the
castle: The towers served for the corpse de guard. On an eminence, in the center
commonly, though not always, stood the keep or dungeon, sometimes, as in the
siege of Bedford castle, emphatically called the tower; it was the citadel or
last retreat of the garrison, often surrounded by a ditch, with a draw bridge
and machicolated gate, and occasionally with an outer wall, garnished with
small towers: In large castles it was generally a high square tower, of four or
five stories, having turrets at each angle; in these turrets were the
staircases, and frequently as in Dover and Rochester castles, a well. If
instead of a square, the keep or dungeon happened to be round, it was called a
juliet, from a vulgar opinion that large round towers were built by Julius
Caesar Grose's Antiq. vol. i. 2d edition, p. 11.
. We find mention made of five gates to the ballium: The great north gate,
which flanked the keep to the east, and filled up the space between it and the
wall, which led down into the borough: This was of the greatest strength, as it
commanded the most important and least guarded approach: When it was rebuilt by
bishop Langley, he thought it necessary to make it as strong as the art of
fortification could then render it, not only as a defense to the fortress and
monastery, but as a prison for criminals and captives, without lodging them in
the cells and vaults of the great tower; to those ends he constructed the
gateway Janitores Portae inferioris castri Epor Dun.
Temp. Bury. Feod. 1l. 10s. -- Booth. 1d. p' diem.
De custodib's Gardini ep'i castri Dun.
Pro vita temp. Laur. Ep.
Ballivi Sc'cii and Nuncio Epi Dun.
J. Robinson Ball. and Nuncio Epi, etc. cum feod 40s. (James) feod 50s. (Morton)
Janitores exterioris Januae seu Portae castri Epi Dun. and custodes goalae
castri Dun. and goaletores seu custodes goal Dunelm.
Pro vita cum feod. 100l. and Roba.
Langley Ep, edisicavit novam januam and gaolam juxta castrum Dun. --
Mickleton's MSS.

, with double gates toward the Bailey, an outward gate toward the city, with
a portcullis, an open wall or recess between the gates, with salliports and
upper galleries for the annoyance of assailants who might force the first gate.
What the ancient gateway and tower were, we are ignorant; but it seems that
keeping it was a post of honor, sought after by persons of the first
distinction in antiquity for heroism and family. By the record presented to the
reader, it appears that the lord Thomas Gray, in bishop Hatfield's time, was
possessed of the lodge or chamber in the tower, and the gate is described as
leading ad hospicium Duresmi, to the Durham inn, a place, by the application,
apparently of as much note in 1353, as the north gate of the ballium From the
copyhold books, Ao. 4o usq. 17. Hatfield Epi. p. 79.

Pl. Halmot ap Cestre die Lune ant. fest. S. Petri, Ao. p. 8o.

D'ns Tho. Gray, chev. sinivit hic in cur. p' una Camera hen'd sup' portam que
ducit ad hospicium Duresmi q'd dicitur Turri^ sup' portam borealem sub tali
condition q'd d'cus Epus heat introitum and exitum p' predict. portam que
ducit ad Turrim and manuteneat and sustentet d'cam portam sumptibus suis et
pred. Thom. manuteneat Cameram super aedificatam sumptibus suis p'priis and
reddit p' pred. Camera ad se'em predicti D'ni Epi p' ann. tota vita pred. D'ni
Tho. iiijd. and dat etc. -- Randal's MSS.


. The ancient gate was strengthened with a salliport or postern gate, not now
known, and a round tower at the end of the moat, which is still in being; it is
^o described in bishop Skirlaw's time Copyhold books, Skirlaw, B. p. 465, and
p. 431. Sub mota castri.

Joh. Hyndley, ven. cor. sen. and cep. de D'no unam peciam terre de vast d'ni
extra port. boreal Dun. jac. ex p'te australi die. port. int. le postern ibid'm
and quandam Turrim rotund. scituat. in humo castri, etc.

E. Copyhold book, marked C. on the back, p. 1140.

15 Mar. 1420. Halm. apud Esyngton xv'o Martii Ao. p. Tho. (Langley) xiiij.
Isabell que f. ux. Rob. Femothir v. in cur. et cep. de d'no quand. plac. terr.
vast. jacen. ex p'te australi cujusd. port voc. Kyngeszate in ballio boriali
Dun. etc. -- Randal's MSS.


.

The second gate was called King's gate, now totally removed, which commanded
the ford over the river into Elvet Vide note to p. 138, where King's-gate is
described, as it lies down by the North Bailey churchyard, to the postern
there.
: The third gate was called Owen gate, where Queen Street now is; but it is
apprehended this was an inner gate, and led into the Placea or Place-Green: The
fourth gate was called Sidgate, now Duncow-lane: The fifth gate, called the
Water gate, was anciently styled La Port du Bail Vide convention in the time
of Anthony Beke, notes vol. i. p. 697.
, or the Bailey gate, and was the gate of the outward ballium, if the
fortifications had that distinction, commanding another fording place over the
river. This gate stood, till late years, in its ancient form. Bishop Nevil, in
the twelfth year of his episcopacy, (1449) granted to Robert Rodes and his
heirs, liberty to annex this gate to his mansion house, with the power of
closing and opening the same at pleasure Quandam porticulam in muro exteriori
castri n'ri in ballio australi ad aisament. ip'ius Rob'ti, etc. Et concess^eid.
Rob'to Rodes heredibus et assignatis suis lib'es exitum and introitum, etc. una
cum licentia ap'iend. and claudend. eand'm porticulam ad eor. lib'tum et
voluntatem, etc proviso in omnib's sumptib's suis p'priis and expensis
sufficient. reparent. etc. --

Cursitor's Rolls. Nevil. Rud's MSS.
: This grant was an open violation of the articles of convention before stated,
by which all the bishop's liege people were decreed to have the privilege of
passing that way to and from the shrine of St Cuthbert, except in time of war,
when the exigencies of state required the gate to be closed for security of the
city; the gate was constantly closed at night by the owner of the adjacent
tenement, and no carriages were at any time suffered to pass that way; until
the Rev. Henry Egerton, one of the present prebendaries of Durham, having
purchased the adjacent grounds, widened the street, and promoted the building
of a spacious arch, of Roman architecture, without gates, in the place of the
old gateway: This would have proved little more than an ornament to the city,
had not the dean and chapter, with a munificence which distinguishes that
worshipful body in all their public works, laid it open for the use of
gentlemen's families; whose carriages only are permitted to pass along the
elegant new bridge, lately erected by them: A bounty reserved to this age.

At this gate the ancient wall of the ballium appears, stretching along the
brink of the hill toward the church of St Mary-le-Bow, where King's-gate
anciently stood. The wall is defended at intervals with square projecting
turrets or bastions; but few of them retain so much of their original figure as
to furnish a probable conjecture touching their strength, when in a perfect
state: The wall shows evident marks of a parapet and breast wall or embrazure.

In the first volume, page 113, we offered some conjectures relative to the
castle: It is pretty well established that William the Conqueror ordered a
fortress to be erected here; and it is probable, the works which then defended
the mount, attracted the attention of the Norman; whether those works merited
the name of a castle is not easy to determine, or what they really were; though
from the mode of the Saxons, we may presume they consisted of breast works or
circumvallations, of which the present terraces may be some remains.
Huntingdon's language, touching the sovereigns erecting a castle here de Novo,
prompts an idea, that some considerable edifice stood on this ground before the
Norman times The reader is desired to correct an error in p. 113, touching the
castle, and read encourages for discourages, ^^ase the following and.
.

About the year 1177, the castle of Durham consisted chiefly of a tower; in the
note referred to Rex (Hen. II.) tradidit Gul. de Neville castellum de Norham,
and Gaufrido de Neville castle de Berewie, and Rogero de Coniers turrim de
Dunelmo, qua' rex ab Hugoe E'po Dun. abstulit quoniam sicte ei servierat in
Guerra sua. Et ideo dedit ei epus duo M. Mercaru'. argenti p' suo amore
habenda, and ut castella sua starent. Et ut rex Henrico de Puteaco filio suo
daret manerium regium de Wic'thtun cum pertinenciis suis. Lel. Col. vol. i. p.
134.


, it is only called Turrim de Dunelm, and also in bishop Hatfield's time in the
preceding note, relative to the north gate, in which it is described as leading
to the tower; and indeed many judicious persons, with great probability, have
conjectured, the original fortress was no more than a tower, and was afterward
strengthened with a ballium on the side opposite to Framwellgate bridge,
garnished with bastions and square towers; where the wall was built on the edge
of rocks rising almost perpendicular from the river: On this side several
ancient towers yet remain, of little use to the present mansion These towers
have loop-holes for the discharge of darts from engines.
. When Framwellgate bridge was built by bishop Flambard, in the opening of the
twelfth century, he carried on a strong wall between the castle and the church;
and it is probable he built the last mentioned towers to command the pass: The
bridge had also a strong gateway and tower: Building this bridge necessarily
occasioned a passage to be made from thence into the borough; and on that
account, bishop Flambard strengthened that side of the castle, between the
bridge and the north gate before spoken of, with a moat; which, from the
example before given, was undoubtedly fortified with round towers or bastions.
The method of attack and defense of fortified places practiced by our ancestors
before, and even some time after the invention of gunpowder, was much after the
manner of the Romans; most of the same machines being made use of, though some
of them under different names: They had their engines for throwing stones and
darts of different weights and sizes: For approaching the walls they had
moveable towers Grose's Antiq. vol. i. 2d ed. p. 14 and 17.
. So that the more lofty the fortification, consequently it was more difficult
of assault by the machines used in sieges. "Of the vast force" of the engines,
surprising stories are related; no wall, however thick, was able to resist
their stroke; and in the field they swept away the deepest files of armed men;
with them were thrown not only large milstones, but sometimes the carcases of
dead horses, and even living men The former, according to Froissart, was
practiced by John duke of Normandy, son of king Philip de Valois, when he
besieged the count of Hainhault, in Thyn-Leveque, in the Low Countries, and
whom he thereby obliged to capitulate, on account of the infection caused in
the town; and, as Camden says, it was also done by the Turks in Negroponte. The
other, namely throwing a living man, is also mentioned by Froissart. It
happened at the siege of Auberoche, in Gascoigne, where the English being
closely pressed by the count de Laisle, lieutenant general to Philip de Valois,
they sent out an esquire with a letter, which he was to endeavor to deliver to
the earl of Derby, their general, but being taken, his letter was read, and
afterward tied round his ne^^, and he being put into an engine, was thrown
back into the castle, where he fell dead among his companions. Moveable towers
are repeatedly mentioned as much in use, particularly by the English. Froissart
is very circumstantial in his account of one used at the siege of R^ole, by the
earl of Derby; who, having laid before that place nine weeks, caused two
towers, three sto^^es ^^gh, to be built with large beams: Each tower was placed
on four small wheels or trucks, and toward the town covered with boiled
leather, to guard it from ^ire, and to resist the darts: On every story were
placed 100 archers. These towers were pushed by the force of men to the city
wall, the ditch having been ^^led up whilst they were building: From these the
soldiers placed in the different stages made such (...) us discharges, that
none of the garrison, except such as were well armed, or covered with large
(...), to show themselves on the rampart. -- Gross, vol. i. p. 18, 2d edit.
.

Many of the keeps or dungeons, in the ancient castles, are placed in the same
situation of the ballium, as the castle of Durham, as Connisborough castle,
Tickhill, Portchester, Cambridge, Oxford, Tunbridge, and several others. The
mount on which Durham tower stands is near forty-four perpendicular feet in
height, from the level of the Place-Green, to the foot of the building, and it
appears to have been forced from the level; to the above eminence add the
natural height of the whole hill from the level of the river, and it will be
upwards of one hundred and thirty perpendicular feet. It is the opinion of a
skilful architect Mr Geo. Nicholson, who is director of the repairs now making
at the cathedral.
, that the foundation of this tower goes down to the rock; and by the falling
in of some arches, we discover that the whole erection is vaulted underneath;
but as those vaults, from their apparent depth, do not occupy above a fourth
part of the height of the mount, we are left to conjecture in what manner the
rest of the eminence was forced or supported: It is apprehended, that after the
Norman tower was built, the mount did not remain cut out into terraces
agreeable to the present form, but that the sides were regularly sloped from
the building to the plain, to render it as difficult to be climbed as possible,
forming a regular glacis or talus round the tower; and that the approach to the
gate of the tower was by a long slight of steps, from the inner court, so
narrow that two persons only could pass at a time; and so open on each side
that an assailant opposed might be tumbled headlong to the bottom. Mr King,
describing Coningsborough castle in the 6th volume of the Archaeologia, says,
The first thing that strikes the eye is a very remarkable sloping part of the
foundation walls, rising to a great height like a mount, and having in many
parts, in consequence of its being covered with earth and moss, the appearance
of a small hill exactly of the same dimensions as the castle itself; the bottom
of this sloping part appears almost circular, but higher up are seen more
fully, six vast projecting buttresses, ascending in a still more steep
direction, to prop and support the building. Immediately above this sloping
part the tower rises perpendicularly to a great height: Its inside forms a
complete circle; but on the outside appear six additional square turrets, which
are, however, merely the continuation upwards of the buttresses just mentioned.
Before the present terraces of our tower were formed, perhaps the ribs of the
foundation appeared supporting the buttresses of each angle; and by such a
base, mining, which was much practiced in antiquity, would be impeded or
rendered impracticable: The tower of Coningsborough castle forms an hexagon;
Durham tower an ill-formed octagon of irregular sides; some of the fronts
exceeding others in breadth several feet; the angles are supported by
buttresses, and a parapet has run round the summit of the whole building, with
a breast wall and embrazure: The diameter of this tower in the widest part is
sixty-three feet six inches, and in the narrowest sixty-one feet: It has
contained four stories or tiers of apartments, exclusive of the vaults: The
great entrance is on the west side: There is nothing now left of this edifice
but the mount, vaults, and outside shell; which latter, from its noble
appearance, and the great ornament it is to the city, has been an object of
attention of many of the prelates. -- Chamber tells us bishop Hatfield built a
tower to the castle; In castello Dunelm. aedificiae quae antiquitate and
vetustate consumpta et debilitata fuerant, renovavit; and autam episcopalem and
aulam constabulari cum aliis aedificiis in eodem de novo construxit. Urbem Dun.
licet hanc natura and muri satis munierunt, turre tamen fortiori sumptibus suis
in castello constructa, ipse reddidit fortiorem. Indeed from the whole mode of
architecture, the roses which ornament the summits of the buttresses, and the
form of the windows, we are led to conceive that the present shell was the work
of bishop Hatfield, and repaired and kept standing by his successors On the
east side of the tower, under the arms of lord Crew. H^^C DIU RUTTURI CASTELLI
LATERA CU'. VETUSTATE TANDEM UTRINQ. EXESA NEC NON COLLAPSA DE NOVO NUPERRIME
EXTRUXIT AC CITO CITIUS FIRMIORA OREXIT NATU. D'XUS CREWE, DUNELM. EP'US ET
BARO DE STANE COM. NORTHAM. ANNIS CON^ECR. 4^, TRANSL. 40, SALUTIS 1714.
. The tower was only lined round the outward wall with apartments, so as to
leave an inner area or wall from top to bottom, by which the engines of war,
and necessaries in time of danger and attack, were drawn up and distributed to
the several parts of the building: Those apartments have been approached by
five different staircases or turnpikes in the angles, the remains of which are
yet visible, so that the parapet could be mounted, the galleries lined with
armed men, and the apartments guarded in a very short time, and equally as
quick the garrison could descend, and be ready for a sally. At present the
mount, as we observed before, is formed into terraces, as well for ornament as
recreation: The uppermost terrace is ten feet wide, and laid with gravel,
commanding a prospect not only of the whole city and its beautiful environs,
but also an extensive view of the country as far as Gateshead-fell, Penshaw,
Newbottle, Warden Law, and Quarrington, with the nearer objects, Newton-hall,
Pittington, Sherburn, Aykley-heads, and other places of note: Between this and
the lower terrace is a grass slope, supported by a breast wall, and you descend
by twenty-three steps; the second terrace is of equal breadth with the other,
and laid with gravel, and is in like manner separated from the lowest terrace
by a grass slope and breast wall, to which you descend by twenty-one steps;
this terrace is of like width and form as the others, and is twenty-two steps
above the level of the garden below.

Bishop Pudsey, who acceded to the bishopric in 1153, restored some part of the
castle, which had suffered by fire. To this prelate we are induced to attribute
the building of the first hall to the palace; but with other parts of the
castle going to decay, the present hall, with the constable's-hall, were
afterward erected by bishop Hatfield: This prelate's works were magnificent;
an improved taste prevailed in his time, and much ornament was introduced in
buildings of this kind: The hall erected by him, we are told, was near one
hundred and twenty yards in length, of a proportionable height and width, and
lighted on every side; the roof of wood was ornamented in every rafter, and
other decorations were given to this spacious room. It is described as having
two princely ^eats, one at each end: There were pulpits or galleries on each
side, wherein the trumpeters or wind music used to stand to play while meat was
ushered in Vide vol. i. p. 375, also note.
. On the day bishop Bury was enthroned, A. D. 1333, he entertained in the hall
the king and queen of England, the queen dowager of England, the king of
Scotland, the two Metropolitans, and five other bishops, seven earls, with
their ladies, all the nobility north of Trent, with a vast concourse of
knights, esquires, and other people of distinction, among whom were many
abbots, priors, and other religious Johannes 'othe Orcheyerd held in cap. two
mess. in ^ramw^^^ate, by the service of three (...) of court, and 2d. rent at
the borough of Durham: And also a garden by the service Inveniendi olera po^^^^
and al. herbas p' potagio and c^quina'. D'ni Ep. p' oib's adventib's suis ad
castru. Dun. and constab. qui p' to o^u'it potros olera and herbas p' ^oquina
sua oi'bs dieb's anni. Et p'd Joh. vel. her suis debet p'^^'e de D'no. Ep. ipso
cum familia sua exist ap. D. cotidie duos albos panes, duas legenas c'visie and
duo fere (...) cum uno garmamento q'd voc'r bed^^an. Et eod. modo debet p'cip'e
de constab. castri qui p' t p'e ^u'rit p'vi^^ dies principales Anni rem. ut sa.
Inq. p. m. xo Ao. Bury ^p. ^or. W. de Mandevil, vi^.


. Bishop Fox found it too expensive to keep this spacious hall in repair, or it
was too large for his necessary purposes, and therefore he reduced it
considerably; he took away the seat at the south end, and converted that part
into a kitchen and steward's apartments, so that it was lessened at least
one-third of its original size; yet there remained room enough for the
entertainment of the princess Margaret, and her attendants, in her way to
Scotland; on that occasion, we read, that all the nobility and people of
distinction of the northern parts, as well spirituals as temporals, were
present, and the services consisted of that gorgeous display of provisions,
called by the writers of that time double dinners. This prelate began to repair
the great tower, and built a hall, kitchen, and some other apartments therein,
but before his plan was far advanced, he was translated, and no further
progress was made in that work: We see his arms in the partition wall of the
great hall. Bishop Tunstall made great repairs to the castle, he built the
present gateway and tower, and flanked it with a strong wall on either hand: He
brought water to the palace in pipes, it being supplied before by wells and
reservoirs; he erected the present gallery, and made a new approach to the
apartments there; he also built a beautiful little chapel, which has received
improvements from succeeding prelates, as the arms of Cousin and Talbot placed
therein denote. We should not omit to remark in this place, that on the facing
of the entrance into the stalls, at the west end, is a striking mark of
Wolsey's arrogance; on the oak are carved the cardinal's arms, taking the
dexter side against the arms of his principality and See of Durham. Bishop
Barnes and Neile made great repairs: The latter enlarged the windows, and
thereby gave the apartments a new degree of elegance.

The great tower became an object of encumbrance soon after the Reformation;
and at length, in bishop Morton's time, it was one of those erections for which
the bishops were decreed to be discharged from future dilapidations, so that
nothing but the love of ornament, and the solemn grace it added to the aspect
of the castle in particular, and to this beautiful city in general, has since
that period for a century and a half saved it from utter demolition and ruin.

Bishop Morton had the honor of a royal visit at his castle of Durham, and
then displayed the ancient hospitality and magnificence of the prelates of this
See; he entertained king Charles I. and all his retinue in the hall of this
palace, when he made his tour into Scotland, expending, as it is said, no less
a sum than fifteen hundred pounds a day on the occasion. Bishop Cousin, whose
memory is dear to those that venerate the ancient seats of our prelates, put
the castle of Durham into repair, made a new entrance into the hall, renewed
the fountain, added many apartments, and gave much ornament to the exterior
parts; he again reduced the hall, by taking off an audience room at the north
end, at the foot of the great staircase; and put a screen of wainscot at the
south end, to conceal the passages to the kitchen and offices; he also
wainscotted the hall round about. In its present state the hall is one hundred
and eighty feet in length, thirty-six feet in width, and about fifty feet in
height to the rafters; is lighted by three large windows to the west, and two
to the east. Since bishop Cosin's time, succeeding prelates have made
improvements, which, as well as the work of more remote ages, are distinguished
by the arms placed on various parts of the building. Bishop Trevor did a great
deal, particularly to the north front, which opens upon a terrace eighty paces
long above the moat, terminated by the round tower before spoken of: He
improved many of the apartments by putting in chimney-pieces of stone-work,
highly wrought in the Gothic style, and well adapted to the figure of the
rooms, making very large sash windows in the same order, and stuccoing the
walls and ceilings, in which work he employed the ablest masters We have not
been able to collect from the records before us what number or complement of
men formed the military establishment of this castle. The Inquisitions Post
Mortem, which specify the ward service in the bailies, might be brought into
one view; but the calculation to be drawn from thence would not be conclusive,
as those provided but a small portion of the armed men liable to be brought to
that duty; therefore it would prove a useless labor. Under the succession of
bishops we have shown who were governors of the castle; and the other officers
whose names appear in the patents and appointments, are placed under every
prelate; to repeat them in this place would be superfluous.


.

The church of Saint Mary-le-Bow is said to stand upon the ground where St
Cuthbert's remains were first lodged, in a tabernacle of boughs and wands,
before a proper receptacle was formed, within the limits of the present
cathedral: It is within the deanery of Easington, and under the patronage of the
archdeacon of Northumberland 1664. By an act passed in the 16th and 17th of
king Charles II. for granting a royal aid, and by another (1665) act passed in
the 17th of king Charles II. certain sums were ordered to be levied in England:
In pursuance of which laws, commissioners made out a table or book of rates.

Easington ward book of rates.
Durham. North-Bailey parish, estimated value 2780l. 15s. -- Grey's MSS.

This parish pays to the land tax when 4s. p' pound as rated and divided in
1765, 197l. 9s. 6d.

N. B. The tables thus subscribed by Mr Mann: These sheets contain accounts of
the rates in the county of Durham, and may be properly called the book of
rates, for the county rates were collected in the proportions therein set
forth, during all the time that I was county treasurer, and I believe they are
still collected in the same proportions. J. M. 7 Sept. 1771. -- Penes G. Allan.

Bishops' rents, Durham mills, 8l. 6s. 8d. -- Dean and Chapter's rents, 7l.
14s. 8d.

N. B. It was thought more expedient to divide these matters parochialy, than
to throw them into an appendix, as promised in the first volume.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 64 7 27
1760 to 1779 140 104 141 Increase 76 93 114

Burials in the last year three.

It being found throughout the county that thirty to one is the general
mortality number, the number of inhabitants in this parish is therefore
computed to be ninety.


.

In the beginning of the last century this church became very ruinous, and on
the 10th of December, 1637, the following agreement was entered into, and
written in the parish register: The Bow church at Durham was agreed to be
pulled down, being very ruinous, and to be rebuilt by the parishioners; Mr John
Heath giving that piece of ground which is now the churchyard, and there was
gathered by way of contribution, toward the rebuilding of the said church,
117l. 14s Signed Wm Smith, curate. Tho. Burwell, 20l. John Heath, the ch.-yard
and 5l. Henry Smith, 20l. Mary Smith, 10l. Cuth. Sisson, 6l. 13s. 4d. Ja.
Hilton, 6l. 13s. 4d. Moses Skepper, 6l. 13s. 4d. Jo. Richardson, 3l. 6s. 8d. Jn
Heath, Jn Richardson, churchwardens, with several parishioners. The
subscribers names with the sums. Geo. Kirkby, 3l. Rob. Cooper, 10s. Jo. Heath,
3l. 6s. 8d. Rob. Clark, 1l. Lancel. Hilton, 1l. 10s. Rich. Belt, 1l. 10s. Hen.
Briggs, 10s. Jn Peacock, 2l. Thomas Harrison, 1l. Willfray Lamb, 1l. Jn
Richardson, 10l. Jn Stevenson, 3l. 6s. 8d. Rich. Matthew, 5l. Ja. Watson, 3l.
Chr. Mickleton, 1l.

. Concluded and agreed upon by the minister, churchwardens, and others the
parishioners, that the church being partly fallen down, and the residue that
stands being so decayed and rotten, that it cannot long continue without
imminent danger, shall be pulled down and re-edified, and that sufficient
cessments shall be laid on to that purpose In 1685, it was new stalled by
agreement of the parishioners.
.

The rector's income was anciently very trivial, as it arose by fluctuating
circumstances 1720. Aug. 31. v. also Ecton, second edit. p. 178.

A full account of the clear yearly value of St Mary-le-Bow, as it was then
given in to the commissioners upon oath.

Tho. Cradick's legacy T. Cradock, Esquire commissary of the archdeaconry of
Richmond, gave it by will, dated the 5th of February, 1689:

Fees due for burying, etc.
s. d. s. d. Churchyard 1 1 3 0 Body of the church 6 8 6 0 To the minister.
Choir or chancel 13 4 To the clerk. 7 0 Within the altar rails 16 8 8 0
Mortuary 10 0 0 0 Churching 1 1 0 6 Banns 3 0 1 6 Marriage by license 5 0 2 6
Easter due 2d. per head. -- 1d. reek. Randal's MSS.


precarious, 10l. per ann. -- Easter reckonings computed at 2l. -- Surplice
fees computed at 1l. 10s. -- Chater's close in Sheraton, 1l. 10s.

Signed Sam. Clark, Will. Suddick.


; but by virtue of lord Crewe's will, ten pounds a year was annexed to it for
ever This augmentation was ordered by the trustees, the 4th of March, 1723.

Prope castrum epi and cath. eccl'iam Dun. sunt duae stratae voc. boreale et.
australe Ballivum, quae sunt duae legales paroch. In ballio boreali sunt
King Street and Owengate. Set omnes domus seu major pars earundem fuer.
antiquitus tent. de ep's Dunelm. in capite p' castri sui pred. Wardam; p'
tenuras seu servitia inveniendi sagittarios ad defendend. Castrum temp. Guerrae
seu, 6s. 8d. in pecun. quidam per servicia custodiendi Janua'. borealem castri
temp. Guerrae cum ep'i Janitore. -- Quidem p' servicia and sect. ad cur. castri
and inveniendi olera and herbas ad ep'i Culinam, in cast. pred. -- Mickleton's
MSS.

The archdeacon's inn, leased to Mr Spearman, 1725, sit. in the North-Bailey.


.

It appears that those direful years of anarchy and confusion, which soon after
succeeded the date of the above resolution, prevented the repairs proceeding;
for it was not till the year 1685, the new church was opened for divine
service; and in a note of Randal's, it is said, This was done least the Papists
should get possession of this empty church by some grant from the crown. In the
year 1722, the living was augmented by queen Anne's bounty, and subscriptions
to the amount of 170l. were obtained for that purpose The names of those that
contributed toward the augmentation of St Mary-le-Bow, A. D. 1722.

Tho. Wilkinson, Esquire 20l. John Rudd, Esquire 20l. John Fawcet, Esquire 10l. Jos. Hall,
Esquire 10l. David Hilton, Esquire 10l. Mr Stonhewer, 10l. Rev. Mr Stonhewer, 5l. Mr
Stonhewer, jun. 5l. Mr Tho. Bowlby, 5l. Mr Geo. Dixon, 5l. Tho. Rudd, Esquire 5l.
Mr John Mowbray, 5l. Geo. Bows, Esquire 5l. Mr Garth, 5l. Dr Morton, archdeacon of
North. commutation-money, 50l.
Tho. Boothe, of Duresme, by will, dated the 20th of September, 1563,
bequeathed to the prisoners xvjs viijd. -- To the poor folks in the parish
where he dwelt, (N. Bailey) xiij s. -- To the Bow church his best surplice. --
To the Bow church vj s. viij d. to be for the repairing the same. His sister
Margaret lady Constable executrix. -- E. Lib. Testamentor. p. 102.

Charities given to this parish.
Barnabas Hutchinson, by his will, dated xj. Dec. 1633, gave 20s. yearly to the
poor people of the North and South Bailey, to be paid at the feasts of Mich.
and Easter; and he charged his house wherein he then dwelt, to pay the same for
ever; 13s. 4d. to North, and 6s 8d. to South Bailey.

N. B. Mr Johnson's house in Queen Street is charged with the above payments.

5 Mar. 1687. Mrs Mary Kirkby, relict and executrix of Geo. Kirkby, paid to the
churchwardens 10l. left by him to the poor of this parish.

28 Mar. 1654. Received of Mr J. Heath, of Old Durham, (left by Mr Wm Garrison
xl.) for use for a year and a quarter, ending at Martinmas last, due to the
poor of this parish, 20 s.

Aug. 7. Rec. a half a year's rents of the burgages beneath the goal gates,
ending at May day last, 1l. 3s.

From the churchwardens books.
Extract of the will of John Spearman.
I give to the rector and churchwardens of the Bow church aforesaid, 20l. upon
trust and confidence, nevertheless to be preserved and kept entire, as toward
a stock, and the principal to be put out at interest, etc. in the names of the
minister and churchwardens, and their successors, etc. the interest to be
applied for the teaching or instructing of one or more poor boy or boys of that
parish by birth, etc. in reading, writing, arithmetic, and navigation, to fit
them for the sea or manual trades.

Sheraton close devised on confidence, that the rector shall perform divine
service to the prisoners, etc. especially to prepare and assist poor criminals
under sentence.

E. ch.-ward. books.
1689. Two silver plates given by Mr Kirkby, precentor at the cathedral. 1702.
The steeple was built by the parish cess. 1703. The silver flaggon given by Mr
Spearman, undersheriff, and Sheraton close. 1705. The altar rails given by the
Rev. Mr Nich. Burton. 1707. The skreen by G. Newhouse, registrary. -- Legacy of
10l. and subscription. 1723. The church augmented by subscription. -- Bishop
Crewe's legacy of 10l. per annum. 1731. The chancel wainscotted by Tho.
Wilkinson, Esquire barrister at law. 1734. The larger silver flaggon by Mrs Mary
Wilkinson. -- The carpet given by William Randolph, rector. 1741. The gallery
built in May. 1750. The scarlet cushions and pulpit cloth, etc. by Mrs
Randolph, the rector's sister. 1741. The vestry built. 1759. The new bell.
Randal's MSS.
.

This church is built of hewn stone, in a very neat style, uniform, and without
ailes, and is well lighted. The entrance from the street is at the west end,
under the tower; the ceiling is flat, unsupported by pillars, and is stuccoed
in squares: It is regularly pewed, and wainscotted round, with a gallery at the
west end St Mary the Great, -- Rectory.

King's Book, 5l. -- Tenths, 10s. -- Proc. Ep. 2l. Real value 60l. 70l. King's
Book, 5l. -- Tenths, 10s. -- Proc. Ep. 2l. Lord Crew 10l. 70l.
This living is discharged from the payment of first fruits and tenths, the
certified value of it being 15l. whereof 10l. is precarious.

Rectors. Thomas, 1241. -- Radulphus, 1300. -- Henricus, 1314. -- Will. de
Gawns, 1322. -- Hen. de Donyngton, 1338. -- Adam de Tanfield, 1349. -- Joh. de
Wycliffe, 1354. -- Joh. de Brogham, 1369. -- Reginald de Coventre, 1377. --
Rob. de Herlesey, 1386. -- Geo. Derwentwater, 1410. -- Joh. Burgham, 1433. Rob.
Hawthorne, 1440. -- Will. Bower, 1458. -- D'nus Ed. Chesemans cap. pr. ven. vir.
mag'r Rad. Scrope archd. N. -- D'nus Tho. Dawson, cap. inst. 4 Nov. 1497, p'
res. Cheseman. -- D'nus Geo. Batis, cap. 1520. -- D'nus Ric. Spence, cap. inst.
5 Feb. 1535, p' res. Batis, p' Rob. Davell, LL. D. archd. N. -- Joh. Welche,
cap. 8 Nov. 1544, p. m. Spence. -- Will. Bayles, By will, dated 12 Jan. 1562,
bequeaths to Rich. Johnson his bow and his quiver. -- N. B. The churchwardens
of North Bailysse owe him for his wages there xxvjs. viijd.
cl. 1562. -- Joh. Knightley, oc. 5 Feb. 1577, Extr. from visit. book of bishop
Barnes.
. -- Rectoria vacat. 22 Jul. 1578. -- Joh. Stewenson, diaconus oc. 11 Jan.
1578. -- Joh. Mathews, diac. oc. 13 Jul. 1579. -- Chapter Wright, oc. 20 Jan. 1585
These four last ministers are only called curates in the visit. book, having
never been canonically instituted.
. -- John Todd, 1605. -- Will. Smith, 1630 Rich. Wakelin, clerk, officiated here
in 1646 as appears from the parish register. The church was then in a very
ruinets state, and so continued without any settled minister, till repaired in
1685.
. -- Anth. Kirton, A. M. 1687. -- Chapter Neile, A. M. 20 Dec. 1689. -- Math. Owen,
cl. 23 Jul. 1694. -- Joh. Hartis, A. M. 16 Apr. 1695. -- Fran. Clement. A. B. 9
Jul. 1700. -- Rich. Burton, A. M. 1703 He was the son of John Burton, D. D.
archdeacon of Cleveland, and residentiary of York; was a student of
Christ-church, Oxon, and master of arts the 19th of May, School; appointed
upper-master of Durham school, 1699; rector of this church, 1703, which he
quitted in 1705; in 1709, also quitted the mastership of the school: -- He
published several small works, as sermons, Novus epigrammatum dilectus ex M.
Val. Martiale in usum schole. Dun. 1704, dedicated to dean Montague, a bool. of
rhetoric, etc. Was somewhat disordered in mind before his death, which happened
in June, 1713; and was interred within the altar rails of this church.


. -- Wm Randolph, A. B. 1705, p. k. Geo. I. by lapse Son of a clergyman
beneficed in Wales; was of Christ-church, Oxon, where he took a bachelor of
arts degree; became under-master of Durham school about 1699; rector of this
church, 1705: Being appointed a minor canon, he quitted the school; and dying
in 1749, was buried within the altar rails of this church. Randal's MSS.


. -- Thomas Drake, A. B. inst. 11 Jan. 1750, p. m. Randolph, pr. Tho. Sharp, D.
D. archd. North.


.

The Parish of St Mary the Less, in the South Bailey.
This church is but a mean edifice, considering its antiquity, and that it is
situated within the walls of the ancient city: It is in the deanery of
Easington. The advowson being part of the possessions of the earl of
Westmoreland, on his attainder came to the crown Certified val. 3l. 9s. 4d. out
of which is paid 6s. 8d. -- Dean and Chap. pay 1l. -- Proc. Ep. 3s.

Rectors. Ricardus, 1300. -- Adam de Tanfield, 1354. -- Pet. Postell, 1357. --
Ric'us de Castro Bernardi, 1359. -- Ric'us Damusell, 1366. -- Rob. de
Messyngham, 1371. -- Adam de Seggefield, 1377. -- W. de Cottingham, 1386. --
Ric'us Bourn, 1414. -- Galfrid de Langton, 1415, Joh. Bewmarres, 1440. -- Edw.
Cheeseman, cap. 1470. -- Tho. Dawson, cap. 1497. -- Joh. Hackeforth, cap. --.
-- Geo. Rippon, cap. 29 Jul. 1531, pr. Rob. vir. dn's Rad. Com. Westmerland. --
Joh. Hamsterley, cap. 1 Nov. 1537, p' M. Rippon. p. id. Ra. E. Westminster. -- John
Baxter, clerk. -- Will. Lee, verba Dei minister, 26 Feb. 1572, p. m. Baxter, p.
Eliz. reg. Angl. -- [After Lee we do not find any institution to this church,
but the same seems ever since to have been held by sequestration till 1742, or
rather the profits were so small, that whoever had the key of the church left
him by his predecessor, became minister without any let or hindrance.] -- From
an old visitation of bishop Barnes, Joh. Knightley, oc. 3 Feb. 1577. --
Rectoria vacat. 22 Jul. 1578. -- Tho. Little, oc. 29 Jan. 1578. -- Joh.
Wilkinson, oc. 7 Feb. 1582. -- Tho. Little, oc. 18 Jan. 1583. -- Geo.
Cocknedge, oc. 13 Dec. 1633. -- From the churchwardens books. Matthew Cooper,
cl. 1663. -- Hen. Smyth, oc. 1675. -- Jno. Thoresby, oc. 1696. -- Abraham Yapp,
oc. School. -- Fra. Clement, oc. 1700. -- John Teasdale, A. M. 1705. -- Rob.
Leake, oc. 1712. -- Joh. Waring, A. M. Vicar of Billingham, precentor of the
cathedral, was of St John's College, Cambridge, and nominated to the curacy of
Croxdale in 1714.
1721. -- Joh. Branfoot, A. M. 1732, p. m. Waring Pres. to Bossal, the 11th of
May, 1742.

There was a chantry in this church dedicated to St Catharine, val. 5l. 7s. 9d.

Lacentia Joh'i Belasys p' Cantaria fundanda. -- Rot. B. Langley, No. 35.


. -- Abraham Gregory, A. M. 28 Aug. 1742, p. k. Geo. II. -- Tho. Leighton, A.
B. 23 Aug. 1755, p. res. Gregory, k. Geo. II.

An annual pension of 40s. was paid to the rector of the church of the South
Bailey, by ancient custom, out of the rents of the lands of Crook and Billyraw,
formerly part of the possessions of Charles earl of Westmoreland, attainted of
treason.

This was extracted out of the survey of all the honors, etc. belonging to
Charles earl of Westmoreland, etc. made the 10th of June, by Edm. Hall and Wm
Humberston, gent. by virtue of queen Elizabeth's commission dated the 18th of
March, 1569. 12 Eliz. to them and Sir Tho. Gargrave, knight, Rich. Ashton and
Joh. Jenkins, Esquire directed. Ex. Rec. in Offic. Rem. Reg.

Ra. E. of Westminster. ob. s. in D'nco suo ut de feod. de advocatione eccl'ce Be. M.
Virg. in ballio australi Dun. infra castr. pr'dum. Inq. p. m. xx. Langley.

Easington Ward book of rates.
Durham. South Bailey parish, estimated value 1750l. In this the dean and
chapter's out-rents, and the patent and other fees and stipends of the several
officers of the bishop and dean and chapter are included.

Grey's MSS. L. s. d. Land tax at 4s. 4 10 8 The college 82 18 5 Dean and
chapter's rents 7 14 8 County rate at 6 s. 8d. 3 4 Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 inclusive
28 29 23 1760 to 1779 28 69 38 Increase 0 40 15

Burials in the last year four. -- Computed number of inhabitants 120.


.

The two Bailies are inhabited by people of the first fortune; the houses on
the east side of the street command a beautiful view of the river, and the
romantic scenes on its borders; on the west side the tenements receive some
equivalent for their loss of prospect, by having an easy passage to the
Place-green, Cathedral, College, and Castle.

The Parish of St Nicholas, in Durham.
From the Gaol-gates to the Marketplace, you pass down Sadler-street, having
Elvet-bridge on the right hand. This street, or some considerable part of it,
was anciently called the Fleshewer-raw, and is still occupied by butchers. We
are led to lament that want of police in the city which should correct the
brutal spectacle of slaughtering animals in the street; shocking to travelers,
who instantly turn aside with disgust, and pass to other places, not only with
prejudice of mind against the whole place, but with censures on its
inhabitants: They look back on the magnificent buildings, and whilst they
recollect the royal rights of the powerful prelate, the learned body of men who
sit in the chapter house, the re-infranchised body corporate of the city, and
the opulent and polite inhabitants in general, they exclaim, In this seat of
learning, the episcopal capital, and center of the provincial law, hitherto
common decency has not drawn a skreen before the execution of the slaughtering
knife that serves their luxury.

Elvet bridge was built by bishop Pudsey, who also restored the borough of
Elvet, after the destruction made by Cumin's followers. As Framwel-gate bridge,
built by bishop Flambard, was called the Old bridge, so Elvet bridge, built by
Hugh Pusar, or Pudsey, was called the New bridge. There were on it formerly two
chapels, one dedicated to St James, built by Lewinus Burgensis in the reign of
king Henry III. and since converted to a prison for the house of correction:
The other, dedicated to St Andrew This chapel was built upon two pillars nearer
Elvet, and is at present a blacksmith's shop, but a charity school is kept in
the chancel, the old walls still remaining. Randal's MSS.
, founded by William, son of Absolam, Robert de Insula, bishop, Edw. I. king
Extract from the Dean and Chapter's books. -- Randal's MSS.
. In bishop Fox's time this bridge was become ruinous, whereupon he granted an
indulgence to those who should contribute to its repairs Indulgentia concess.
conseret. ad constructionem pont. de Elvete. -- Reg. Fox, p. 5.

Ric'us, etc. qui ad sustentac'om. construcc. om. and rep'acom. pont. de Elvete
in civitate n'ra Dunolm. etc. quadraginta dies indulgencie concedimus. p'
p'sentes, etc. Dat. in manerio n'ro de Aukeland epi xxiij die mensis Maij Ao
D'ni 1595. Et n're trans. Ao primo.


. It has several land arches, constructed for the purpose of bringing up a
gradual ascent from Elvet to Sadler-street, and we observe it became a custom
so early as bishop Skirlaw's time, to grant out those arches for storehouses
and other purposes From the copyhold books, Ao 1. usq. 17 Skirlaw, p. 108.

1393. Pl. Halm. ap. Esyngton die ven'is post fest. trans. Sci Thome Ao p.
quinto Tho Rotier capel custos Cantarie S. Jacobi sup' novum pontem in Dun.
cepit de D'no vasta subter ij arches ejusd. pont. ad sinem capellae.

By virtue of a commission of charitable uses, dated the 26th of July, 1683.
The inquisitors int. all is returned, That certain lands, lying in Pelawe Leases,
Backhouse Leases, and Broad Close and other lands and grounds called by the
said names, or other names, in the parish of St Giles, and which are now of the
value of 8l. p' ann. excepting taxes, out rents, and assessments, were
anciently given for the repairing of the pavement of the two bridges in Durham,
commonly called Elvet bridge, and Framwelgate bridge; but by whom such
charitable gift was made, the said jurors do not know, the same being very
ancient, and as appears to the jurors to be given for the uses aforesaid time
beyond memory. In witness, etc. Dated the 13th of June, 1684. Signed N. Duresme
-- Jo. Hutchinson, major. -- Miles Stapylton, and ten others.

Commissio ad inquirend. de reddit. ad rep'co'em pontis Dun. and Shincliff,
concess. Rot. B. Hatfield, sch. 1. No 4.

Tho. etc. dilc'is and sid. suis Joh'i Mowbray, etc. cum pont. Dunelm. and
Shincliff adeo dirutus sint and amfractis q'd maximu. p'ie'lm ho'ium p'tin.
illar. and aliar. per eund. pont. transcuntium, and jam intellexerimus q'd
nonnulli certi redditus div'sor. ten. ad sustentaco'em and reparacoem pont.
pred'ci ab antiquo concessor. subtrahuntur, etc. Assignavimus, etc. ad
inquirend, etc. and quiten. unde redd. ille pervenit. tenent. etc.

N. B. No return appears upon the record.


."

The Marketplace is a spacious square, well built; at the ^oot of which stands
the church of St Nicholas, occupying almost the whole of that side:
Sadler-street enters the square at the south-east corner, Silver-street at the
south-west, Claypethgate is situate at the north-east corner, and a flight of
steps leading by the New-place to the factory-house, on the north-west: These
are the stairs by which the archbishop of York escaped the fury of the mob,
when he came to Durham to exercise his pretended jurisdiction during the
vacancy of the Sea, after the demise of bishop Robert de Insula Vide vol. i. p.
228.
.

In this square is a fluent fountain of excellent water, which supplies the
greatest part of the town: The reservoir is built up in an elegant form, and
ornamented with a fine statue of Neptune. In the year 1450, Tho. Billingham,
esquire granted Mann's MSS. dat. Dunelm. ultimo die Maij, An. 1450. -- Confirmatio
cartae Tho. Billingham, de aquedactu pro Le Paunt in foro Dun. Rot. M Nevil, No
85.
to the city for ever, a spring of water in his manor of Sidgate, with liberty
to convey the same by pipes, etc. to a reservoir in the Marketplace for the
public use, at thirteen-pence a year rent, payable at the feast of St Martin;
and in default for forty days, the grantor and his assigns have power to break
up the aqueduct head, and divert the stream into its ancient course: With a
prohibitory clause against any person's making an aqueduct from the fountain,
except the grantor and his heirs, to whom power was reserved to lay a string
pipe from the reservoir to supply his own house in the Marketplace. This grant
was afterward confirmed by the bishop, who granted liberty to break his soil
for the aqueducts Some disputes lately arose, and it was questioned, whether
the above privilege of a string pipe survived to the owner of the house, on
which several learned counsel gave opinions clearly in his favor. -- We
believe this house now belongs to Sir Wm Appleby, knight.
.

There stood near the fountain a large market cross, which incumbered the
square very much: It was lately taken down, and a handsome piazza built at the
foot of the Marketplace, to answer the same purposes To the honor of
Almighty God, ornament of the city of Duresme and commodity of the people
si^quenting the market of Duresme, the market cross now there extant was framed
with twelve stone pillars, and covered with lead, at the sole charges and
expenses of one Thomas Emerson, of the Black Friars, in London, Esquier, in
the yr of our Lord, 1617. Mann's MSS.


.

On the west side of the square is the Town Hall, with commodious apartments
for public festivals and other uses, lately rebuilt on a modern plan. The old
hall was erected and given to the city by bishop Tunstal, ornamented with a
large cupola in the center, and in other respects exhibiting the elegance which
was introduced to these northern parts in that prelate's age: Whether before
bishop Tunstal's time there was a Common Hall for the burgesses, is not well
ascertained; but there was a Toll-booth in the middle of the square, as in
other ancient places for the weights and measures: As Chamber tells us, A
beautiful marble cross which stood in the upper part of the street of
Gilly-gate, in a place there called the Maid's-harbour, was given to William
Wright, of Durham, merchant, at his petition, by Master Ormstrang Scot, lord of
Keepyere, to be set up in Durham marketplace. That on that occasion the
figures of the twelve apostles, of curious workmanship in stone, were repaired
and sumptuously gilt; three figures on each side of the cross in a square. At
this time Thomas Spark, elected suffragan bishop by bishop Tunstal, was bishop
of Berwick, master of Holy Island, and custos and master of Gretham-hospital;
at his charge the cross was erected in the Marketplace where Old Toll-booth
stood, in which work he expended eight pounds Chamber Hist. Du^. Wharton's
Angl. Sac. p. 783 -- What became of this ancient monument we cannot learn.
.

Adjoining the Town Hall is the house called the New-place, and in some records
the Bull's-head: It was part of the possessions of Charles earl of
Westmoreland, and tradition says was his palace; perhaps his crest was figured
on the building, which occasioned it to be denoted by the Bull's-head, or
Black-bull Ra. nup' Com. West. ob. s. in d'nico suo ut def'd. inter all is un.
burg. in so^o Dun. q'd id. nup' Com. in vita sua ut lib'um ten. suum int'uit.
port mort. cujusd. Th. Lamb, nativi ipsius nup' Com. qui Thomas illud
adquisivit sibi and hered. suis and q'd te de d'eo ep. in burg. p' s. solvend.
eid d'no ep. tres d. p'an. etc sect. tri^. cap. cur. burgi Dun. and val. p'
ann. ultra rep'rs vjs. viij d. Inq. p. in. xxij Ap. Ao xx ep. Langley.

Inrolment of the purchase of the New-place, otherwise called the Bull, 29 July
13, king James I.


. It was purchased by the citizens for their factory-house Vide city of Durham,
p. 57.
; and now is used as a workhouse and charity-school.

Behind this edifice, by the river, side, are the workhouses, dye-houses, and
other offices for the city factory Francis Callaghan was inferred on the 25th
of February, 1675. He lest by will out of certain shops in Durham, for the
benefit of the poor of St Nicholas' parish, ^0s. yearly at Christmas, and 20s.
to the poor of St Giles, 20s. to the vicar of St Nicholas, and 4l. to the
lecturer for a sermon to be preached on the anniversary of his burial for ever,
and 5s. to the bell-ringers for ringing the bells. On any failure of the
lecturer the bounty for ever to cease and be extinguished.


.

The church is very plain and meanly built, being constructed of small and
perishable stones, so that from frequent pointing it is now almost covered with
mortar. It varies greatly from the situation of other churches, evidently to
suit the ground whereon it stands, which serves to support the opinion we
before gave, that anciently, by a sluice, the city was here occasionally
insulated, by bringing in the streams of the Were. The north wall is very
strong and lofty, supported by square buttresses, or rather bastions. This
church has two side ailes, that to the north running the whole length of the
building; the south aile is shortened by the tower standing on the south-west
angle. The nave and two side ailes are twenty paces in width, and to the
chancel the nave is twenty-six paces in length: The south aile is formed by one
small octagonal column of considerable height, supporting blunt pointed arches:
The north aile has two short octagonal columns, with wide and lofty blunt
pointed arches, rising from brackets at the extremities. The chancel opens with
a pointed arch in the center, to the south a small column with a pointed arch,
to the north a short round column, and irregular circular arches: The chancel
is in length six paces to the steps, and the recess for the altar is six paces
wide. At the opening of the chancel are the seats for the mercers company and
body corporate, neatly fitted up. The roof of the north aile is supported by
three half-arches, rising from octagonal brackets. The gates have circular
arches: The south windows are modern and sashed; the north windows irregular,
and some under pointed arches. This fabric has been constructed at various
times; the north aile bears marks of remote antiquity; but no records afford us
further light therein, than that we find Galfrid de Elimer rector in 1133;
though by the mode of architecture we should be led to give this church a
cotemporary date with the first settlement of the Saxons at Durham.

There were four chantries in this church; one dedicated to St Mary St Mary's
chantry, val. 4l. -- It was founded by Hugo de Queringdon, about the year 1299.
E. MSS. Tho. Rudd, Esquire -- Tho. Gray, Cantarista. -- John Stevenson, custos. --
Rich. Walker, custos altaris. -- Will. Marshall. -- Joh. Dawsoun, incumb. had
4l. p' ann. pension, which I find paid him Ao 1553. -- Randal's MSS.

Plita p' terris in Dunolm. Langley, Rot. E. No 34. 1426. -- Ibid.


, another to St James St James's chantry, val. 5l. 18s. 4d. It was founded by
Tho. Cockside and Alice his wife. E. MSS. Tho. Rudd, Esquire -- Ibid.

Lic. ad p'quirend terr ad altar S. Jacobi in eccl. S. Nich'i Dun. Rot. Ford.
Sch. 3. No 3. Dat. 26 Mar. 1383. -- Ra. Cotes, one of the last incumbents of
this chantry, at the dissolution had a pension of 5l. p' ann. which he lived to
receive in 1553. -- Lewis Bell, another incumbent, had 3l. p' ann. -- And Wm
Mason, another 5l. p' ann. -- Likewise 6l. p' ann. was paid to one Robert
Robson, belonging in some degree to this chantry chapel. -- Ibid.


, another to the Holy Trinity The chantry of the Holy Trinity, val. 7l. 3s.
10d. W. Cowper, oc. cantarista, Ao 1501.
, and a fourth to St John the Baptist, and St John the Evangelist Saints John
the Baptist and Evangelist's chantry, val. 6l. 16s. 4d. It was founded by Tho.
Kirkeby, rector of Whitburne.

De licentia adquirendi ad manu. mortuam. Rot. A. Langley, No 8. Dat. 5 Jan.
1407.

De cantaria sundata. Ib'm No 13. -- Ibid.


. The chapels on Elvet-bridge are noted as chantries under this church. There
was also a guild established in this church, called the Corpus-Christi guild,
by virtue of the license of bishop Langley, which was the ancient mode of
establishing a fraternity of merchants before the plan of enchartering was
adopted Rot. Langley, C. No 55. Dat. 3 Apr. xxxo Pont.

Tho. etc. concessimus and licentiam dedimus p' nobis and successorib's n'rs
quantum in nobis est Will'o Chauncellor constabulario Dunelm. Ric. Buckley,
clerico, Tho. Tange. Rob'to Jackson, and Will'o Racket devotionis zelo and
charitatis fervore, etc. q'd ipsi ad laudem Dei and honorem Corpus Christi
quandam fraternitatem sive gildam perpetuam de seipsis ac de aliis personis tam
de hominibus quam mulieribus in eccl'ia Sc'^ Nicholai in Dunelm. de novo
incipere, etc. with a power of electing a master or custos, with a common seal,
and to plead and be impleaded by name of the gild of Corpus-Christi, etc. --
for the rest of the form see the license for St Cuthbert's gild in the
gallilee, under the title cath. church. -- Randal's MSS.

St Nicholas' church.
There was a procession on Thursday after Trinity Sunday, in honor of
Corpus-Christi day. The bailiff called together all the inhabitants within the
town. Every occupation was to bring forth its banners, with the lights
appertaining, and with them to repair to the abbey church door. On the west
side of the way stood the banners, and on the east the torches pertaining to
the banners.

In St Nicholas' church was a shrine, called Corpus-Christi shrine, appointed
to be carried the same day in procession. This shrine was finely gilt, and on
the top thereof was a square box of crystal, wherein was enclosed the holy
sacrament. It was carried by four priests, the whole procession of all the
other churches in the town going before it. St Cuthbert's banner, with two fine
crosses, were brought out to meet it; and the prior and convent, with the choir
in their best copes, met the said shrine, and fell on their knees and prayed.
It was set in the choir, and Te Deum solemnly sung; and all the banners
followed the shrine into the church, going round St Cuthbert's feretory with
their torches lighted.

In the first year of king Edward VI. commissioners were appointed to deface
all such ornaments. -- Davies, etc.


. This church is in the deanery of Easington Certified value, 13l. 19s. 4. Hosp.
of Kepier prop.
This living was augmented in Forster's time, to which Mr Tempest contributed
200l. Sir Phil. Butler, of Kent, 100l. and Mr Forster, by collection, 100l. on
which 400l. was obtained of the governors of queen Ann's bounty, and a purchase
made at Easington of the yearly value of 30l. -- Randal's MSS.

Rectors. Galfrid de Elimer, 1133. -- Galfrid de Elnie, 1267, 1312. -- Will. de
Orchard, 1346. -- Joh. de Appilby, 1348. -- Rob. de Bulmer, 1355. -- Joh.
Austen, 1362. -- Tho. de Bryston, 1376. -- Wm de Bowland, 1378. Joh. de Hayton,
1392. -- Will. de Yharum, 1405. -- Joh. de Stafford, 1406. -- D'nus Rich.
Bukley, 1418. -- Tho. Bukley, 1437; he was rector the 5th of June 1443, when
bishop Nevil annexed this rectory to the hospital of Kepier, for its better
support and maintenance, till that hospital was surppressed by the resignation
of Franklyn, the last master thereof. I presume this church was served by a
stipendiary chaplain from the said hospital. -- Joh. Swain, oc 1501. -- Will.
Headlam, 1556. -- Extracts from a visitation book of bishop Barnes. Chr. Green,
cur. not licenced comparuit p'sonaliter 3 Feb. 1577, oc. 22 Jul. 1586. -- Fra.
Foster, oc. 7 Mar. 1637. -- Jonathan Devereux, an intruder.

Curates. Sam. Martin, cl. oc. 7 Ap. 1663, again 13 May, 1680. -- Joh.
Sanderson, oc. 1688 and 1702. -- Hen. Porter, 1710. -- Wm Eden, 1720 -- John
Perkins, 1722. -- Rob. Pigot, A. M. 1726. -- Wm Forster, A. M. 1749, p. res.
Pigot, p. John Tempest, of Winyard, Esquire He was vicar of Heighington, and
lecturer of this church, 1754. -- Jonathan Branfoot, 1763, per mort. Forster.
-- John Robson, A. M. p. m. Branfoot, 1783. -- Randal's MSS.

There is a lecturership instituted in this church, to which the mayor,
recorder, and aldermen have the nomination. The stipend arises out of lands at
Easington, about 50l. a year.

Lecturers. T. Heath, gen'osus p'prietarius eccl'ae parochialis divi Nich'i
Dun. oc. 27o die Maij, Ao 1625. -- John Cock, A. M. 1675, and 1690. -- Mich.
Burton, A. M. -- Hen. Porter, A. M. -- John Rymer, A. M, 1722, p. m. Porter. --
Will. Forster, A. M. 1732, p. in. Rymer. -- Will Forster, A. M. p. res.
Forster. -- Abraham Gregory, A. M. 1764, p. m. Forster. -- Held by sequest. by
Jon. Branfoot, etc. -- Ibid.

1366. Comp'tum est p' inq. etc. p'd Johana. de Luceby tenuit, etc. unu. mess.
cum p'tin in Dunelm, etc. redd'o eciam.p' sustentac'oe luminaris coram cruce in
eccl'ia b'i Nich'i in Dun. p' ann. quatuor libras cerc, etc. Inq. p. m. xxij
Tho. etc.


, and was a rectory appropriated to the hospital of Kepier, by Robert Nevill,
bishop of Durham, the 5th of June, 1443; and so continued till its suppression:
After which it remained in the crown some considerable time, till granted out
among other possessions to William Paget, knight. King Edward VI. in the sixth
year of his reign, gave the advowson, and also that of St Giles, to John
Cockburne, lord of Ormeston: From him they came to John Heath, by purchase, and
now are the property of John Tempest, esquire It appears that Mr Tempest's ancestor
married Elizabeth the only daughter of John Heath, esquire the 27th of October,
1649; in whose descendant the patronage now remains.

Near adjoining to the church is the old city gateway, called Claypeth-gate; a
weak edifice, nearly similar to that which lately stood in the South-Bailey,
called the Watergate, having no machicolation, and only the appearance of a
single pair of gates, built with irregular stones and much mortar; the present
remains of the city wall show it was of similar construction, remarked by
Leland to be of mean masonry: This gate has a foot passage at the east side.
Why this gateway now appears so weak, may be owing to the outworks being
totally defaced; and here, in particular, if there was a water-sluice, with a
drawbridge, as we presume there was, less strength was required in the gateway
Easington ward book of rates.
Durham. St Nicholas' parish. -- Houses, tolls, lands, and mills. Estimated
val. 1016 -- Grey's MSS.

Landtax at 4s. p' pound, 70l. 11s. 4d. -- County rates at 6s. 8d. 1l. --
Mann's MSS.

Bishop's rents, mayor of Durham, and Claypeth gates, 20l. 3s. 4d. -- Dean and
Chapter's rents, 14l. 17s. 4d.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 827 124
955 1760 to 1779 897 272 643 Increase 70 148 Decrease 312

Burials in the last year 31. -- Computed number of inhabitants 930.


.

In the street of Claypeth was an ancient chapel, dedicated to St Thomas the
Martyr; but where it stood has not been pointed out to us. It is thus mentioned
in Randal's MSS. It was in Clayport, in the city of Durham, on the south side
of the said street, in St Nicholas' parish. I meet with no account of the
foundation of this chapel, but find it was placed in a chapel-yard, and had an
enclosed way to it from the street Noveritis nos, etc. concessisse, etc. Hugoni
de Stillingham, pistori Dunelm. and Aviciae uxori suae una' placeam gardini,
etc. in Clayport, etc. ex part australi viae quae ducit ad capellam. B. Thomae
martyris, 1304. D. p. 33.

Noverit. etc. me dedisse, etc. Gilb'to filio meo primogenito totum illud
burgagium, etc. cum toto crofte juxta capellam B. Thomae martyris ex part
orientali et terram q'm Jacobus apothecarius tenet de burg. S. Egidij ex altera.

Noverit. etc. me dedisse, etc. Hugoni de Querington frati meo totum illud
burgag. quod quondam fuit Hodemanni, etc. cu. toto crofto juxta capellam S.
Thomae martyris, ex part orientali quod emi a mag'ro Gilberto de Batonia. --
E. Chartis, C. Hunter, M. D.

28 Ap. 13 k. Hen. VIII. Rob. How and his wife conveyed to John Hall, lands
called Small Lees, near Wolsingham, to the use of the church work and ornaments
of St. Nicholas' church in Durham. -- Cursitor's Rolls. Bishop Ruthall. Rudd's
MSS.


.

The Parish of St Egidius, vulgarly called St Giles.
The street of St Giles, anciently called the borough of St Egidius, and
vulgarly Gillygate, ascends swiftly from Claypeth in a curvature, bending to
the right, almost a mile in length. It stands on the ridge of a hill, the
ground inclining toward the river on each side, in some parts with a very
steep descent, having Old Durham to the south, and Kepier to the north.

THE HOSPITAL OF KEPIER,
to which this borough belonged, was first founded in the year 1112, by Ralph
Flambard, bishop of Durham, who (acceeded to this See A. D. 1099) for a master
and brethren, and dedicated the same to St Giles: He endowed it with the vill
of Caldecotes, and a mill upon Milburne, with two sheaves of corn from his
demesne lands in the vills of Newbotel, Houghton, Weremouth, Ryhope, Easington,
Sedgefield, Shirburn, Querrington, Newton, Chester, Weshington, Boldon,
Cleadon, Whickham, and Ryton FUNDATIO Hospitalis de KYPIER.
In nomine sanctae et individuae Trinitatis. Notum sit omnibus sanctae matris
ecclesiae siliis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, quod Ego Ranulphus licet
peccator et indignus, tamen Dei gratia Dunelmensis episcopus, hanc ecclesiam in
honorem Dei et Sancti Aegidii seci fieri, quam etiam tertio idus Junii
dedicavi, anno ab incarnatione Domini MCXII. qui est tertius decimus annus mei
episcopatus, in qua dedicatione eidem ecclesiae, ad subsidium clerici qui mibi
serviturus est, et ad sustentationem pauperum qui ibidem in hospitali domo quam
seci conversaturi sunt res inferius subscriptas, in liberam et puram elemosinam
dono, et volo et praecipio, et auctoritate Dei et ista mea donatione, et
praesentis chartulae attestatione confirmo, ut firm mancant et perpetue pro
salute animae meae, et pro redemptione animarum illorum qui me nutrierunt,
scilicet, Willielmi regis qui Angliam conquisivit, et Matildis reginae, et pro
anima quoque Willielmi regis qui me in episcopatus honorem sublimavit, et pro
salute animae regis Henrici qui me in eodem honor confirmavit, necnon pro
animabus illorum qui aliqua dona vel quamcunque elemosinam ecclesiae S.
Cuthberti contulerunt vel collaturi sunt.

Haec autem sunt quae dono, villam meam nomine Caldecotes, cum omnibus quae ad
eam pertinent, in planis et pascuis, in pratis et silvis, in aquis, terris
cultis et incultis, et exitibus, et omnibus consuetudinibus et libertatibus,
tam ecclesiasticis quam secularibus, et unum molendinum de Milneburne, et duas
garbas de meis dominicis de hijs villis, scilicet de Newbotel, Houghton,
Wermuthe, Reshope, Esington, Seggefelde, Schireburne, Queryngdone, Neutone,
Cestre, Wessyngtone, Boldone, Clyvedone, Cwycham, et Ritone, quae omnia quieta
et libera ab omnibus consuetudinibus, praedictae ecclesiae S. Aegidii et
hospitali ad opus pauperum Christi dono. Quicunque autem ex hiis imminuere,
inquietare, vel auferre, vel ablata retinere, vel aliquibus vexationibus
fatigare temere praesumpserit, noverit se illud Christo et S. Aegidio anferre,
et ideirco divino judicio cum sacrilegis reus existere, atque districtae
ultioni in extremo examine subjacere, et cum damnatis aeternaliter peri^e.




In the reign of king Stephen, when Cumin contended for the bishopric, his
retainers burnt the hospital and church of St Giles, and laid the whole borough
in ashes: In this state it remained till Hugh Pudsey came to the Sea, who
confirmed his predecessors foundation and endowment, restored the edifices,
augmented the house, and granted ordinances for its government; appointing,
that the fraternity should consist of thirteen, with a master, of which number
six should be chaplains, to officiate in the chapel of the hospital, one of
whom was to be confessor, and the others to hold domestic offices ORDINATIO
Hospitalis de KYPIER. -- Provisum est per venerabilem dominum Hugonum episcopum
Dunelmensis ecclesiae, quod sint in domo de Kepyer tresdecem conversi, qui
professionem faciant domni et priori domus more consueto, et tenebuntur ad
castitatem et ad renunciationem proprietatis, et ad obedientiam magistri quem
dominus episcopus praeposuerit; et erunt de numero fratrum sex capellani
celebrantes pro animabus ejusdem Hugonis episcopi et venerabilis memoriae
domini Ranulphi episcopi Dunelmensis primi fundatoris de Kypier. Qui quidem
capellani ministrabunt in capella in eadem, et unus eorundem capellanorum quem
magister hospitalis priorem voluerit assignari una cum consensu fratrum qui
audiet confessiones fratrum conversorum et infirmorum Infra cunam, et faciet
correctiones de ordine. Septimus conversus erit dispensator et lardarius.
Octavus erit custos tannariae. Nonus erit pistor hospitalis. Decimus erit
custos molendini. Undecimus erit graunger et custos carucarum, duodecimus erit
custos instauri in diversis locis ubicunque habent instaurum, tertius decimus
erit receptor et generalis procurator omnium negotiorum hospitalis interius et
exterius, quem magister cum assensu prioris et fratrum ad hoc perficere
voluerit. Et sciendum quod licebit magistro hospitalis per consensum prioris
illius loci et fratrum singulos istorum successive in officiis suis mutare
secundum quod providerit utilitati domus magis expedere. Si autem plures
fratres fuerint in eadem domo, quam supra dicti tresdecem, variis officiis
ejusdem domus pro dispositione magistri, prioris, et fratrum intendant,
fratribus autem numerum tresdecem excedentibus successive decedentibus, locorum
illorum alios substituere nullus praesumat nisi magister cum consensu prioris
et fratrum ejusdem loci.

Si aliquis conversus ceciderit in languorem continuum, erit infirmitorio, et
habebit necessaria in victualibus sicut unus frater percepit in aula, et sicut
magister habebit mensam suam in aula nisi fuerit infirmus vel minutus, ita et
conversi mensam suam in eadem aula habeant, nisi magister pro necessitate
hospitum vel alia causa honesta aliquo tempore aliter judicaverit de
necessitate facienda. Et omnes conversi simul jacebunt in dormitorio, et omnes
fratres erunt vestiti decenti habitu et honesto, sicut decet religiosos semel
in anno. Et erunt calciati fratres capellani cum botis bis in anno; caeteri
conversi qui plus laborant quotiens necesse fuerit, per annum socularibus cum
coreis ligatia. Caetera autem necessaria, scilicet de staminis pannis lineis,
et de pannis ad lectos fratrum pertinentibus de custuma domus per visum prioris
illius domus quotiens necessary fuerit sine contradictione aliqua obtinebunt.


. By another charter he granted to the hospital a free borough in the street
called St Giles, exempted of in-toll and out-toll, aids, customs, services, and
other exactions, and gave them pasturage ad averia sua, Hayam and extra;
focale, and maeremium, and pannage in his forest. He also gave them a toft in
each of the townships of Houghton, Ryhope, Easington, Darlington, Sedgefield,
Boldon, and Whickham, where they had tithes of his demesnes. Bishop Pudsey, by
the other deed noted by Stevens' Mon. vol. ii. p. 265, grants them Quitteleys
and Swyneleys, in Weredale, by boundaries; also granted a lead mine, ad
cooperendum ecclesiam St'ae Mariae and omnium sanctorum and infirmatorium
hospitalis praedicti; and also an iron mine in Rokehope, for their carriages,
etc. pasturage for all cattle within the limits, et pedes canum eorum non sint
ibi neq. ad Wacheriam in Weredale, tuneati sed pastores decant eos ligatos
proferis ad averia sua senanda pro Lupis. A toft called Laundene, tithes of the
lands of Bradwode and Besanskeldes, usq. ad Wycheles and unam travam bladi,
from each carucate in Weredale, tithes of all assarts or new cultivations, for
which he then took money payments, or kirsete, (Kirkseed) This record points
out the custom of amputating a fore-foot of every dog kept within a forest, to
prevent his chasing: Here saved because of the wolves. -- A thrave is a term
still in use, denoting twenty-four bundles or sheaves of straw, etc.

Vide Mon. Angl. vol. iii. p. 90. Rot. Pat. 8. Ed. 2. p. 2. m. 3. Claus. p. Ed.
3. m. 23. n. 130. ne pastura in Stifford. -- Tanner, p. 114.

In the year 1297, a composition was made between the prior and convent of
Durham, and this hospital, whereby the prior and convent did quit claim to the
brothers of the said hospital their tithes of corn at Clifton, which, till that
time, they had used to pay to the church of St Oswald, in recompense whereof
the brothers were to pay yearly upon the altar of St Oswald on his day unum
Bisantium, or two shillings, etc.

The men of Bedlington being obliged, by their lord the bishop of Durham, to
give to the hospital of St Giles, without Durham, one thrave of corn out of
every plough land which they held, they granted under their seals in lieu
thereof nine shillings in money to be paid to the said hospital on the feast of
St Michael, with a nomine paenae, etc.

And by another deed gave the town of Clifton, with a sheaf of corn of each
carucate in the lands belonging to his bishopric, and the tenth of all lands
not before tilled. Ralph Epplyndon gave one carucate at Epplyndon, each plough
land thereof to consist of fifteen acres, and twenty acres over and above of
his other lands. Gilbert Hansard, all his land at Aymendeston. Walter de
Victon, all his land at Frosterly. John de Romesey, sixty-five shillings p'
ann. of his half of the town of Claxton. Robert Corbeth, and his daughter
Sybilla, the town of Hunstanworth; and by another deed, quits his claim to the
land between Knokedenburn and Derwent. Hugh bishop of Durham, gave them the
lands of Quitteleys and Swyneleys. Robert bishop of Durham, gave a tenement at
Crawcroke. Ralph Mundevill, one sheaf of corn of every carucate at Stotfold.
Gilbert, the chamberlain, gave the brothers of this hospital leave to make
their mill dam on his ground. W. de Herz, two plough lands at Claxtone.
Quenilda, the wife of Richard de Lokes, twelve acres of land at Medomsley.
Henry Lightfoot, gave to this hospital all his lands at Bernecrok. -- Stev.
Mon. vol. ii. p. 265.

This hospital had the vill of Iveston. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Magister hospitalis de Kypier tenet certas terras in Crawcrook and red. p'
ann. xs. -- Tenet manner. de Bernecrok and red. p' ann. xs. -- Terras quond'm
Thomae Marschall et redd. p. an. xxs. -- Villam de Hunstanworth quondam Roberti
Corbet, per servic. forin. sicut in carta Roberti. -- Tenet quand'm assart. and
pastur. vocat Knokeden ad intendend. animalia sua ad opus pauperum and est
concessa de Elemosina D'ni Hatfield's Survey.


.

After the restoration of this hospital, we hear of no misfortune interrupting
the tranquillity of the society till the dissolution. In the 26th king Henry
VIII. the revenue was estimated at 186l. 10d. in the whole, and 167l. 2s. 11d.
a year clear. It was surrendered the 14th of January, 36th king Henry VIII.
1545, and granted that same year to Sir William Paget.

In bishop Nevill's time, the several evidences belonging to this hospital were
exemplified and confirmed, from copies or other muniments, the originals having
been destroyed in the reign of king Stephen, in 1146, when the house was burnt
Grants exemplified with those destroyed. -- Rot. Neville, X. No 31.

Bishop Hugh Pudsey, refoundation deed and several grants.
A charter of Ra. de Epplyngden -- Gilbert Hansard -- Walter de Viclon -- John
de Romesey -- Robert de Corbeth -- Robert bishop of Durham A charter of Ra. de
Mundevil -- Gilbert the chamberlain -- Wm de Herz -- Quenilda, wife of Rich.
Lokes -- Henry Lyghtfoot, and others Together with an incorporation of the
church of St Nicholas, Durham, therewith.
Rudd's MSS.
.

Kepier came into the possession of the family of Heath, by purchase from the
Cockburnes, in the time of bishop Pilkington Exemplif. of a fine from John
Cockburn, lord of Ormiston, and Alice his wife, to John Heath, of the city of
London, merchant, of the manors of Kepyer, Old Durham, Iveston, Frosterley,
Little Kepyer, and Tweedmouth, 27th July, 18 Eliz. 1576. -- Rudd's MSS.
Cursitors Rolls.

Gillygate, Sc'i Egidij p'pe Dun. De dominis and Seneschallis de Gillygate and
Iveston.
Joh'es Heath, arm. d'nus de Gillygat and de Iveston, 18 Eliz. -- Fundavit.
scholam apud Houghton. Sepultus Aug. 1591, in cancella ecclesiae de Gillyg.

Perquisivit de Joh'ae Cockburne, d'ni de Ormeston, and Alicia uxor ejus,
maneria de Keepyer, Old Durham, Iveston, Gillyg. etc. -- Rot. cl. temp. vac. p.
mort. Pilkington, C. No 6.

Cui successit Joh'es Heath, de Keepyer, 40, 41 Eliz. -- Rot. cl. Tob. ep'i. A.
No 16. -- Mich. Ca^verley, genesis senese.

Cui successit Tho. Heath, ar. frater ejus 17 k. Ja. I. Sene'lli ejus, etc. etc.

Joh'es Heath, arm. 1658, qui cum patre suo Thoma vendider. Keepyer, Ra'do
Cole, pr'i Nich'i Cole, bar. 5 Car. I. -- Rot. ^l. Howson, epi No 3.

Joh'es Tempest, arm. A. D. 1673. -- Mickleton's MSS.


, and continued in that family till the year 1658, when they sold it to Ra.
Cole, Esquire whose son, Sir Nicholas Cole, sold it in parcels to the families of
Tempest, Carr, and Musgrave, the present owners. And Tempest, by an
intermarriage with the heiress of the Heaths 27 Oct. 1744. Par. reg. St Giles.

PEDIGREE OF HEATH OF KEPIER. From the visitation of Wm Flower, Esquire N. K. of A.
and Robert Glover, Port. 1575, with additions from the visitation of Sir R. S.
George, N. K. of A. 1615. Arms. -- Party p' chevron or. and sa. 2 mullets and a
cock counterchanged. Granted by W. Harvey, clarencieux, 4 Aug. 1558. Motto --
Espere Mieux.
John Heath, of Heath in the co of Middlesex. John Heath of Twickenham John
Heath This gentleman purchased Kepier, etc. July 1576.
of Land. warden of the Fleet Ob. 1591. Buried in St Giles's church. Margaret
d. of Cloker. Nich. Heath, of East Greenwich, in Kent, 2 son. Anne d. of John
Topp. sen. Margaret wife of John Burrel. Topp. Heath son and heir. Ann d. of
Sir Wm Blakiston of Blakiston, Knt. Nich. Heath, son and heir, year old in
1615. John Heath, of Ramside. Anne d. of Tho. Burrel, of York. Edward son and
heir, Aet. 8, 1615. Thomasine. Anne. Eliz. Dorothy. Anne w. of John Bunam, of
Norwich. Margaret w. of John Smaithwaite, a preacher. John Heath of Kepier, Esquire
living 1615. Elizabeth d. of -- Parker, of Warwick. Ann d. of Sir Wm Blakiston
of Blakiston, Knt. Nicholas. Thomasine. John. Dorothy d. of John Blakiston of
Blakiston, Esquire Thomas of East Grange. Edward Heath Anne d. of -- Peckover, of
Norwich.


genealogy
, gained the other possessions of that family, and again united it with Old
Durham.

Kepier house stands in a very low situation, not a mile from the city, on the
banks of the river, and commanding a very short prospect. Of the hospital
nothing remains but the gateway; part of the superstructure of which appears
much more modern than the arching of the gate: There are two shields of arms on
the front, one on the dexter side appears to be the arms of Tinmouth monastery,
the other so much effaced by time that the bearings cannot be perfectly
ascertained; but how Tinmouth came to have any authority or interest here, we
have not discovered; and indeed the exact succession of masters is not known.

The borough tenure is of a mixed nature, the tenements being aliened by deed
for ninety-nine years, which conveyance must be attended with an admittance
from the lord, or his court-holder; and from admittance of alienee or heir, the
widow has her frankbank.

THE CHURCH OF ST GILES.
The church of St Giles has marks of distant antiquity; it has no ailes, and
much resembles the old church at Jarrow, being narrow, long, and very lofty: It
is thirty paces in length, and only seven wide; the rafters of the roof are
supported on brackets; it is lighted to the south by six irregular windows, and
two to the north; the tower rises from a pointed arch. The arch which separated
the chancel from the nave is broken down: The chancel is ten paces long, and of
equal width with the rest of the church; has a modern window to the east, two
windows under pointed arches to the south with pilasters, and one similar to
the north. The font is a large uncouth cauldron. There is a recumbent effigy
cut in wood, in the chancel; tradition says it belonged to the tomb of one of
the Heaths, pourtrayed in a complete suit of armor, his sword sheathed, the
hands elevated, and head rested on a helmet, with a bear's paw for the crest;
at the feet these words Hodie Michi St Giles's curacy not in charge.

Cert. val. 24l. -- Real value 26l. -- Augmented by subscrip. 1768, with 200l.
and from queen Ann's bounty 200l.

Incumbents. Meldredus, 1131. -- Joh. Kirman, cl. curate oc. 6 Jul. 1559. --
Sir Geo. Cook, curate oc. 10 Jul. 1564. -- Sir Oliver Esle, cur. oc. 16
October, 1565. -- Christopher Green, cl. 1574. -- Rob. Prentize, oc. 22 Jul
1578, Barnes vis. -- Jacob Hobson, cur. oc. 23 Jul. 1578. -- Jac. Pinckney,
cur. oc. 20 Jun. 1583. -- Will. Morrow, 4 Feb. 1584, oc. Mar. 1590, upon his
going to Pittington, 1591. I presume J. Watson succeeded, I meet with him in
the par. reg. 1604, and again in 1621. -- Elias Smith, A. M. lec. 18 Ap. 1632.
-- Hen. Smith, A. B. 1665. -- Tho. Came. 1682. -- Rich. Beel, 1685. -- Will.
Dunn, 1691. -- Joh. Perkin, 1706. and 1708. -- Henry Porter. -- Will. Foster,
A. M. 24 June, 1723. -- Rob. Pigot, A. M. 1725. p. res. Forster. -- Chilton
Wilson, A. M 1730, p. res. Pigot. -- Rob. Davison, A. M. p. res. Wilson. -- Ra.
Gelson, A. B. 18 Feb. 1768, the bishop by lapse. -- John Robson, A. M. 22 Oct.
1768. -- Randal's MSS.

In this church was a gild, called St Giles's gild, value p' ann. 7l. 4s. 2d.
-- Randal. -- [But it is probable this may be a mistake, and that it was a
chantry, as I find one of that value mentioned.]

The parish register of St Giles begins 1584, in which are the following notes.
"A. D. 1589. The plague began the first time in Gilligate."

"1597. Plague began the second time; a maid servant of John Homell's died x
Aug. of the plague." -- About forty-four died of the plague.

"1604. Nell Mewer, servant to Mr Watson, curate of St Giles's, 6 Nov. of the
plague." -- It continued from September to the 25th of January, 1605, and about
eighteen died.

Marg. Hall bur. 1 Jan. 1622. She gave to the parish for a standing stock the
sum of 20l. and the increase of the same to be bestowed in repairing of the
cawsie from Giles's brig to the cawsie foot betwixt the therd day of May and
the four and twentye day of June; or else to return to the executors.

1636. Mem'd'm, That Ra. Young gave 10l. to the parish of St Giles, etc. Mem.
That this legacy was laid out in a parcel of ground for the use of the poor in
Gilligate.

1639. Joh'es Heath de Keepeyr arm. vir pius, pauperum pater, et hujus
ecclesiae benefactor, poculum enim argenteum (quo sanguis Christi preciossimus
populo potandus exhibetur) cum operculo hinc ecclesiae dono dedit; naturae
concessit 6o die Jan. an. aetatis sue 71o and sepeliebatur die sequente circa
quartam horam matutinam.

Some inscriptions on the tombstones of the Heaths family, but much mutilated,
are in the chancel, dated 1612, 1638, etc.

Magistri hospitalis de Kepyer.
Adam canonicus procurator, 1167. -- 1254, Johan de London, chaplain to bishop
Kirkham. -- 1300, Petrus de Thoresby. -- 1311, Hugo de Monte Alto. 1341, Edmund
Howard, archdeacon of Northumberland. -- 1351, Will. Legate, rector of
Branspeth. -- 1388, Hugo Heile. -- Robert de Wycliffe, ob. ap'd Kepier. 1423,
rector of Rudby, and one of bishop Skirlaw's executors. -- 1437, Richard
Bukley. -- 1439, John Lounde. -- Henry Gyllowe. -- 1479, Ralph Booth. -- 1497,
Tho. Colston, nepos epi Fox. -- 1501, Roger Layborn. -- 15 --, John Boerius. --
1515, William Franklyn, and who surrendered this hospital.

Easington Ward book of rates.
Durham. -- St Giles's parish, estimated value 739l. 6s. 4d. -- Grey's MSS.

L. s. d. Land tax at 4s. 62 17 8 County rate at 6 s. 8 d. 3 1 6 L s. d. Dean
and chapter's rents 11 18 4 Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 inclusive
241 78 234 1760 to 1779 418 138 604 Increase 177 60 430

Burials in the last year 39. -- Computed number of inhabitants 1170.

Ralph earl of Westmoreland died seized of lands in Gillygate, which he held of
the master, etc. of Kepier, paying a rent and doing service at three courts "in
vico predicto". -- Inq. p. m. xxo Langley.

Applynden paid 13s. 4d Wm Heron, lord of Say. Inq. p. m. 17 Skirlaw.

John Bille held lands of this house of 6s. rent. -- Inq. p. m. 12 Hatfield.

Lands called Staynegrave, held of the hospital. -- Inq. p. m 29 Hatfield.

Wm de Claxton paid a rent of 65s. out of lands at Fishburn. -- Inq. p. m. 25
Hatfield.

Rob. de Hethworth paid 12s. rent for Le Mains. -- Inq. p. m. 2 John


. -- Probably this was the effigy of John Heath, who was buried in the chancel,
in the year 1591.

The traveller who is conducted to this church, should be admitted at the north
door, and depart from the south door, where a noble prospect opens to the view,
too extensive for a picture, and too rich for description. The inadequate ideas
which language can convey, are to be lamented by the reader who has a taste for
rural beauties, and the elegance of landscape. The church of St Giles stands
upon very elevated ground, open to the south where the view is unobstructed. In
front the meadow grounds form a steep descent to the river; on one wing closed
by the wood called Pelaw Wood, on the other by the buildings of the street. At
the foot of the hill the river Were forms a beautiful canal, almost a mile in
length, terminated by Elvet bridge to the right, and by the wooded enclosures
of Old Durham on the left. On the opposite shore is the race ground, consisting
of an extended tract of level meads, from whence, by a gradual ascent, rise the
two Elvets; the street of Old Elvet running parallel, the other obliquely,
bordered with gardens, and terminated by Elvet church; a handsome structure.
The channel of the river lying between New Elvet and the Bailies, affords an
agreeable break or change in the objects; the sloping gardens being seen over
the buildings of Elvet, softened to the eye with that pleasing teint which the
distance produces. On the brink of the ascent stand the Bailies, object rising
gradually above object, guarded with the remains of the town wall, and crowned
with the cathedral church, which in this view presents the north and east
fronts, like the mitre which binds the temples of its prelate; giving the
noblest supreme ornament to the capital of the principality. To the right Elvet
bridge, with seven arches, receives the stream, and intercepts a further view
of the progress of the river: Over it, tier above tier, rise the buildings of
Sadler-street, the gloomy and solemn towers of the gaol, and the battlement and
octagonal tower of the castle; the trophies of civil jurisdiction wearing the
aspect of old secular authority, and the frowns of feudal power. Between the
chief objects, the cathedral and castle, on the nearer back ground,
South-street, with its hanging gardens, makes a fine curvature; behind which
Brandon Mount, with a spit of high land extending toward Auckland, form the
horizon. Further to the right, from the banks of the river, rise the buildings
of the Marketplace, crouding the tower of the church, from whence the streets
of Claypeth and Gillygate extend. Thus far description has proceeded without
much faultering, but in the other divisions of the scene it is faint and
totally inadequate: Whoever would know the rest must come and view it See the
view placed as a headpiece to the first page of this volume.
. Over the meadows, in the center, a precipice rises near one hundred
perpendicular feet in height, called MAIDEN CASTLE, fear, or cliff; the steep
sides of the hill to the right and left are covered with a forest of old oaks,
and the foot of the cliff is washed by the river, whose stream appears again at
this point. The lofty ridge of hills clothed with oaks, stretching away, forms
a ziz-zag figure; at the most distant point of which, the great southern road,
up the new enclosed grounds of Elvet moor, is seen climbing the hill, for near
a mile, beyond which very distant eminences form a blue-tinged horizon. To the
left of Maiden castle cliff you look upon a rich valley, highly cultivated,
extending nearly five miles in length and two in width, bending to the
south-west, through which the river winds its silver stream, in the figure of
an S: Hanging woods shut in each side of the nearer vale, where are finely
disposed, the pleasant village of Shincliff, the bridge of three arches, the
villa of William Rudd, esquire and Hough-hall house: The extreme part of the valley
is closed by the woods of Shincliff, Butterby, and Croxdale, forming an elegant
amphitheatre; over these rise distant hills, lined out with enclosures, giving
the yellow and brown teint to the landscape over the richer colored woods. The
whole finished with an elevated horizon, on the wings of which are scattered
the villages of Ferryhill and Merrington; the tower of Merrington church
forming a beautiful and lofty obelisk. One of the greatest excellencies of this
landscape is, that the ground rises gradually before you, and just such a
distance is maintained as preserves all the objects distinct; not like the
landscapes painted by the Flemish and Dutch masters. To the left you look down
upon Old Durham house, its terraces and hanging gardens, with a fine bend of
cultivated country stretching away through another opening of the hills toward
the east, bounded by the high grounds of Quarrington, and the cliffs of Coxhoe
Limekilns; more rustic than the other views, and being in a simpler nature,
affords a pleasing variety to the eye of the man of taste, who stands (if we
may be allowed the extravagant expression) on this enchanted ground Mr
Doubleday's house, which is covered with lead, commands from the roof the whole
of this prospect, with a wide, though much less beautiful, view to the
northward.
.

Old Durham house is gone to decay, nothing now remaining but apartments for a
farmer: It was anciently the seat of the Booths, afterward of the Cockburns,
lords of Ormston, and in more modern times became the estate of the Tempests,
to which latter family it passed by intermarriage with the heiress of the
Heaths. The gardens are formed into terraces of a considerable length. This
sweet retirement is become a place of public resort, where concerts of music
have frequently been performed in the summer evenings, and the company regaled
with fruit, tea, etc. The gardens are open all summer for rural recreation. The
terraces command the elegant valley prospect before described.

At the corner of the garden some few years ago were the remains of a very
ancient building, with a circular window, and other appearances of the chapel
form. When the Scots burnt the hospital of Sherburn, it is probable they
destroyed the camera here. Of Poulton, Grainge, Ramside, and Ravensflat,
mentioned in the book of rates to lie in this parish, there is nothing
remarkable From a pamphlet entitled "A brief View of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, etc." addressed to Nathaniel Curzon, bart. and the rest of the
committee appointed by parliament for inquiring into the abuses and corruptions
of ecclesiastical courts and jurisdictions. London, printed for J. Peele. 1733.

I have now by me a most moving and lamentable account, contained in about
sixty letters, sent me by Mr J. Tempest, of Old Durham, formerly a member of
your house, complaining of the most barbarous and tyrannic proceedings of the
spiritual and temporal courts there against his person, estate, and property,
that ever was known to have been practiced in any court of law or justice
whatever. And this, as he says, chiefly promoted and carried on by a
confederacy between the bishop's chancellor and sheriff, who, by their under
officers and agents, have illegally seized upon whatever of his property they
can lay their hands on, on pretense of an outlawry or excommunication, of which
he had no notice till the seizure was actually made: And that upon application
to his sovereign, the bishop, for redress, he has been denied all manner of
relief; and therefore entreats me to represent his case to you the parliament's
committee, which I am now preparing to that end. W. Bohun.

The editor of Camden says, p. 946. On the same river is Old Durham, from the
name of which one would conjecture, either that the monks had first come
thither with St Cuthbert's body, or that there had been a town of that name
before their coming. But both these things are unwarranted from history.

PEDIGREE OF THE BOOTHS OF OLD DURHAM. Arms. -- Argent three boars heads
erected and erased, fable. -- Guillim, p. 165, edit. 1724.
John Booth, of Barton, in the county of Lancaster. **** d. of Trafford. John
John John John. George William George George Margery, ux. John Byron, of
Clayton Com. Lancaster. Lawrence, bishop of Durham, and afterward archbishop
of York, ob 19 May, 1480. See vol. i. p. 341. Roger Booth. Richard of O.
Durham, the 5th son. Philippa, d. and co. of T. Fulthorpe, de Hurworth. Ralph
of Tunstall. Jane, ux. -- Fulthorpe. Ann -- Smith, of Staynton. Lawrence Roger
of O. Durham. Grace, d. of ****** Isabel, ux. J. Swinburne, of Wylam Nor'd Jane
R. Booth, of O. Durham 1575. Catharine, d. of W. Layton, of Sproxton,
Yorkshire. Roger, 1575. Aet. 3 months. Elianor Elianor Elizabeth Catharine
Isabella, ux. Hen. Radcliffe. Johanna, ux. W. Constable. William 2d son. John
archd. of Durham. Ralph mast. of Kepyer hospital. Robert Roger Roger Thomas T.
Booth, knt. Catherine, d. of *****


genealogy


.

Magdalen chapel stood on the north side of Gillygate, in an adjacent field,
the ruins of which show it was a little mean edifice.

On a flat plot of ground, between the roads leading to Sunderland on the one
hand, and Sherburn hospital on the other, a little before they unite, is a
square platform raised above the common level, which was anciently called the
Maiden's Bower, where the fine cross stood which was removed into Durham
marketplace at the instance of William Wright, as before mentioned. Mr Cade,
in the tract particularly noted in the next page, says, The ground plot and
ramparts of the watch tower which served for signals to (a station placed by
him at Old Durham) Maiden Castle, are visible and almost entire at the entrance
of Gillygate moor, and exactly correspond in form with those on the Roman wall
in Northumberland. For want of distinguishing what entrance to the moor these
remains (described by Mr Cade) lie near, we have not been able to discover this
piece of antiquity, and know of no other vestigia of old work than the ground
work of the old cross.

The Parish of ST OSWALD.
Part of the parish of St Oswald lies in the ward of Easington, and part in
Chester ward. This parish includes the chapelries of St Margaret in Crossgate,
and Croxdale.

In our account of the chantries in the church of St Nicholas, we showed by a
record in bishop Langley's time, that a tenement belonging to the chantry of St
Mary was described to be in the old borough of Durham: In vet'i burgo Dun. sup.
finem pontis novi Harl. MSS. 1808.

Anno d'ni mill'mo, cccxviijo accidit in epatu Dunelm. res mirabilis et omnino
detestabil. q'd cum d'nus Ri'cus Marmeduc Senescall's epi Dunelm. versus
comitatu Dunelm. equitaret super veterem pontem Dunelm. intersectus est p' dn'm
Rob'tum do Neville cognatum suum. Ao vero sequenti mo cccxix quo anno rex
Edward --: secundus tennit pascham apud Kirkham cum regina, idem Rob'tus de
Neville in superbia filios excomunicatos and latrones congregavit volens aliqua
p'dam in marchia Scocie impetrare. Sed ut accessit ad parcum de Bewyk
intersectus est p. Jacobum de Douglas and Rad'us de Neville frat. suus junior
and here is vit. reservat. et in custodia d'ni Patricij de Dunbarre Comitis
Marchic Scocic ut prisonar. detent's and postea feliciter redemptus and
liberatus.


ex p'te australi. ten. Pr. Dun. etc. which, with other records of the like
nature, prove, that the old borough of Durham was situated in the parish of St
Oswald, and so all the ancient muniments tend to confirm. It is conjectured,
when the bishop erected a new free borough for merchants in Elvet, the
distinctions of the borough of Elvet, and the old borough of Durham first
arose. Was there not much evidence to show, there were distinct places called
the old and new borough, out of the bounds of the city, and in the limits of St
Oswald's parish, we should not have insisted on the position so positively.
When the old borough of Durham had its rise, from whence, or what were its
privileges, we remain ignorant; but the evidence we shall produce leads us to
judge the old borough of Durham comprehended the whole parish of St Oswald,
subtracted from Croxdale, and that on the institution of the borough of Elvet,
limits and bounds were set to the new borough, and the rest remained to the old
borough; admitting this conjecture, it will follow, that the old borough
comprehended Crossgate, South-street, etc. now St Margaret's chapelry, and in
fact circumscribed the new borough, It is not material to press this subject
further than to support our first position, that Old Durham, and the old
borough of Durham, were the first settlements of the Saxons here, before they
built their church on the summit of the hill; and from thence those places
derived their present name.

On the cliff before described, in the view from Gillygate church, is the
platform now called Maiden Castle Mr J. Cade, of Durham, in a tract published
in the 7th vol. of the Archaeologia, p. 75, has mentioned this place, and some
works at Old Durham, extracts from which are placed here, that the reader, and
particularly the traveller, may judge for himself on the subject. In the first
place then, I would observe, that there are several camps or stations in this
county, which were undoubtedly of Roman original; but being subsequently
occupied by different tribes of adventurers, and altered according to their
respective modes of defense, this circumstance has caused their primary
occupancy to be overlooked by antiquaries. I shall mention particularly those
of Mainforth and Maiden castle, (now Old Durham) etc. The latter is the
property of J. T^mpest, esquire and lies within half a mile of this city,
measuring, according to Dr Stukeley's account, about five hundred feet in
length, etc. Our camp at Maiden Castle I suppose may have derived its name from
the British word mad pulcher or fair, which the Rev. Mr Pegge thus ingeniously
explains, in treating of the maiden way or maiden castle, in the county of
Westmerland, and which term is particularly applicable to the delightful
situation of Old Durham. It also has a better claim to be considered as the
Condurcum of the Romans, from which it is about two miles distant, than the
camp near Sunderland bridge, (which is evidently of Danish construction) and
which the annotator upon Camden says, was the opinion of a very great
antiquary. I may likewise observe, with the learned Mr Whitaker and others,
that the Romans had generally a summer and a winter station, situated within a
few miles of each other, and often on opposite sides of the same river; which
entirely coincides with the situation of Chester and this camp; the former
might be the summer station, and this the winter. In Hollinshed's Chronicle,
first edition, p. 225, we have an account of a memorable siege which this place
sustained in favor of king Athelstan, against an army of Scots and Danes,
commanded by Godfrey brother to Anlaf, and son to Sithric, the Danish king of
the Northumbrians, about the year 930, under the title Duresme Duresme appears
to have been a name introduced by the Normans, on account of the fortress built
here after the Conquest, to keep the natives in subjection.
, though the foundations of the present city were not laid till sixty years
afterward; and Marianus mentions a synod being held at Dunelhoo, Ao 822. This
station, I imagine, was formerly thought of great consequence, but it at length
suffered the rate of many others in the northern parts, when William the
Conqueror made that horrid devastation between York and this place, and erected
his castrum in the new city A melancholy instance of this depopulation, amongst
many others, is to be met with at Acley, (or Acliff) in this county, which may
probably derive its name from Acca, bishop of Hagustald, in the beginning of
the eighth century, and where Sir Henry Spelman mentions two Saxon councils
having been held, annis 782 and 789. About a mile from the aforesaid village,
after the grass is cut, the foundations of a considerable town, with a large
church in form of a cross, are very conspicuous.
; the fortifications were then partly levelled, but enough is left to point out
its former magnitude and importance; it being, in my opinion, much larger than
Dr Stukeley His description is as follows; Iter Boreale, p. 70. Eastward, over
the river Were, upon another peninsula of high ground, I saw a camp, called
Maiden Castle, which I judge to be Roman. It is almost encompassed too by a
rivulet falling into the river from the east. It is of an oblong form, five
hundred feet long, very steep on three sides; the neck is guarded by a rampart,
and without that, at some little distance by a ditch. The prospect is large,
more especially eastward.
has described; and the rivulet Pidding, has, with great labor and ingenuity,
been diverted from its original channel, where it ran into the Were, near
Shinkley bridge, to answer the purpose of the fosse along the southern and
western sides of it. A gentleman, with whom I am acquainted, has carefully
surveyed the old road from this place by Kepyer hospital, and he assures me,
that in a dry season, the piers of a bridge are obvious in the bed of the
river, seemingly of Roman construction; and I have authority to say, that coins
have been formerly ploughed up here, and lately some of the lower empire have
also been discovered within its vicinage. The ground plot and ramparts of the
watch tower, which served for signals to this station, are visible and almost
entire at the entrance of Gillygate moor, and exactly correspond in form with
those on the Roman wall in Northumberland. At Newton-hall likewise, on the
opposite side of the river, there has been an exploratory castrum, seemingly
for the security of Old Durham and Chester-le-Street.

Maiden Castle he places at Old Durham, and supposes it a Roman camp: To
illustrate his subject, the tract is attended in the Archaeologia with a plate;
which represents the supposed face of a vallum, and shows in the back ground a
round mount. This supposed vallum is at present so much levelled, that if ever
it was forced, it now appears no otherwise than the swift slope of the bank on
the side of the brook, and the mount is only a natural swell or rotundity of
the back ground. The plot of ground chosen by this gentleman for the station or
camp, on the north-west side nearest to old Durham, and where the brook does
not run, shows some deep trenches and high earth fences; but the whole is so
irregular, that it is not possible to derive any distinct figure from the
remains of the works. He quotes Hollinshed's Chronicle to support a conjecture,
that about the year 930, this place sustained a siege. We beg leave to compare
this authority with others referred to in the 3d page of this volume. We have
not been fortunate enough in our reading, hitherto to discover any evidence
that William the Conqueror, when he laid waste the country, destroyed this
place, or that it suffered the fate of many others in the northern parts, and
that the fortifications were then partly levelled. -- Dr Stukeley's description
may, perhaps more happily be applied to the place described by us, and
delineated in our plate; it is certainly of "high ground" hanging "over the
river." and almost full "east" of the city: "Of an oblong form" one hundred and
seventy paces long on the most extended side, which comes almost accurately to
his description, five hundred feet long, very steep on three sides, the neck
guarded by a rampart, and without that, at some little distance, by a ditch.
The last circumstance noted by that author fixes the point. "The prospect is
large, more especially eastward." The elevation of Old Durham ground, pointed
out by Mr Cade, no part is above fifteen feet from the plain, where any slope
lies upon the margin of the brook; and the prospect consequently is bounded
eastward, by the termination of the vale, at the rising grounds of Shincliff,
not more than a quarter of a mile distant.

Mr Cade's positions, in the treatise from whence the foregoing extract is
made, may, it is hoped, without an invidious appearance be shortly commented
on, to the intent the reader may form a competent idea of the circumstances, or
be led to enquire for himself upon the spot.


, inaccessible from the river by reason of the steepness of the cliff, which is
almost perpendicular, and about one hundred feet in height. -- On the right and
left the steep sides of the mount are covered with a thick forest of oaks: The
crown of the mount consists of a level area or plain, forty paces wide on the
summit of the scar, in the front or north east side, one hundred and sixty
paces long on the left hand side, and one hundred and seventy paces on the
right. The approach is easy on the land side, from the south-west, fortified
with a ditch and breast work: The entrance or passage over the ditch is not in
the middle, but made to correspond with the natural rise of the outward ground;
probably this entrance was guarded by a drawbridge: The ditch is twelve paces
wide, and runs with a little curvature to each edge of the slope, now covered
with wood as before noted; on one hand being fifty paces in length, on the
other eighty paces. After passing the ditch there is a level parade or
platform, twenty paces wide, and then a high earth fence, now nine feet
perpendicular, which, as in most places of the like kind, it is apprehended,
was faced with mason-work: A breast work has run from the earth fence on each
hand along the brink of the hill, to the edge of the cliff or scar. The earth
fence closes the whole neck of land, and is in length one hundred paces,
forming the south-west side of the area. These particulars are illustrated by
the annexed plate. It is most probable this was the vetus burgus Dunelmensis
noted in the records; it is at a little distance from the head of the street
called Old Elvet, in a direct line therewith, and opposite to Old Durham, the
river dividing it from the latter place, and almost filling up the intervening
space: It was supported anciently, as is presumed, by another fortress called
the Peel, erected on the opposite eminence, which now bears the name of Peel
Law. Many places in the northern counties retain the name of Peel and Law,
implying castle and hill, whose antiquity may be traced back to the Saxon
times. We presumed to offer an opinion, in the preceding pages, that in the
valley overlooked by this fortress, the wandering Saxons sat down with the
remains of Saint Cuthbert; and we submit to the candor of the reader, whether
that idea is altogether vague and improbable. The name of maiden applied to a
castle is now become indefinite; whether it imples beautiful, or a fortress
which never has been conquered, has not been determined: Our best antiquaries
give preference to the distinction fair or beautiful. The old fort, on
Stainmore, in Westmoreland, is called Maiden Castle, and the adjoining
enclosures bear the name of Peel-yard.

Bishop Carilepho, on his bringing in the canons regular, granted to the
convent, Elvet as a free borough, that they might have forty merchants there,
exempted from all dues and duties to him and his successors Vide notes vol. i.
p. 134. -- Mon. Angl. vol. i. p. 43. -- Lel. Col. vol. ii. p. 385.
.

In the reign of king Stephen, Cumin's soldiers burnt the borough of Elvet; at
the same time they burnt St Giles's. Bishop Pudsey restored the borough, and
confirmed it to the convent, with all its ancient privileges Geof. de
Coldingham.

Declara'co Antonij epi sup' metis and divisis veteris burgi. E copiam
parochiali reg'ro S'ce Margarete, Dun. Universis s'ce matris ecl'iae filiis ad
quorum notitiam p'sentes l'rae p'venerint, Anthonius Dei gra. Dun. epus. s. in
d'no sempiternam, notum vobis facimus, q'd cum olim bone memory Will'ms Dun,
ep'us primus p'decessor n'r dil'cis in Xro filiis pr. and conventui Dunelm.
terras and ten. ex occidentali p'te Dun. ultra aqua. de Were usq. ad aquam de
Brun concessisset donasset and charta sua confirmasset (Ballivi n'ri tanqua.
extranei hujus modi fc'm penitus ignorantes p'tem etia illar terrar. -- n'ram
fuisse existimantes) quibusdam ad firmam dimiserunt in dil'ior filior damnum
and p'judicium. Nos in hac p'te rei c'titudinem ac v'itatem before
cognoscentes terras illas p' certas divisas antiquas and usitatas vid. Ab aquo
de Were ascendendo rivulum de Milneburne, v'sus Gybetknoll ex p'te australi, de
Gybetknoll versus aquilonem direct usq. ad viam regiam ducentem versus
Lanchester, et ab illa via usq. ad corneram australem p'ci de Bearepair. and
sic descendendo usq. in Brun. et -- terre vel more continetur inter Bearepair
et viam regiam qua itur de Crosegate versus Brounspittell quod est juxta
Rilleybridge, iterum in aquam de Broun dil'cis in xro filiis pr. and co'ventui
Dun. and succ. suis reddimus and omnino quietas clamamus ac donaco'em
p'decessoris n'ri p'dci eisdem f'cam p' nob. and succ. n'ris tenore p'sentiu.
confirmamus imp'p't'm. Et ne nos aut succ. n'ri in terris and ten. sed'm
divisas p'no'iatas exacco'em calumniam aut p'prietatis clamiu. inposteru.
exigere aut vendicare postimus p'sens scriptum sigilli n'ri munimine roboramus.
Test. etc. -- Randal's MSS.

These boundaries are partial, and only include the common lately enclosed,
called Crosgate moor, etc. etc.


. In the convention entered into between bishop Poor and the convent, for
quieting their privileges, we find Elvet thus mentioned. Consuetudines et
emendationes de bracinis et false pane, etc. de hoib's prior. apud Elvet and
apud vetus burgum Dunelm. remanebunt, etc. P'dci autem hoi'es prioris de Elvet
and de veteri burgo Dunelm. utantur eisdem mensuris and ponderibus quibus
hoi'es ep'i utuntur in burgo suo Dunelm. This convention was ratified and
exemplified by bishop Hatfield Rot. A. Sch. 9. No 1. Vide vol. i. p. 202.
. That prelate, in 1379, made a confirmatory grant of tenements, given to the
priory by bishop Bury, wherein they are distinctly described, " Un. mess. and
quatuor cot. cum p'tin. in Elvet in Dun. etc. un. gardinu et tres acras prati
cum pertin. in vet'i burgo Dun. etc. Rot. B. Sch. 2. No 1.
" -- In a license from bishop Dudley, 1483, to the convent, to put lands in
mortmain, Elvet is thus mentioned: Baronia de Elvet juxta Dun. burgo de Elvet
juxta Dun. -- Vet'i burgo Dun. -- Vic. Sc'i Egidii juxta Dun, -- Burgo Dun. --
and ballio australe Dun Rot. A. Dudley. No 77.
. Here we see the barony of Elvet, the borough of Elvet, the old borough of
Durham, and the borough of Durham: The reader will immediately draw the
distinction, and with it, we presume, this inference, that the borough of
Elvet, the borough of Durham, and the old borough of Durham, are several; the
name of the borough of Durham being solely applied to the present city Lic. to
acquire lands Rot. Fordham Sch. N. No 13, the like distinction cum multis aliis.

Inq. p. m. Killinghall. A close of land in the old borough of Durham, Ao xo
Tho. ep.

Inq. p. m. Aslackby. Tenements in Milburngate, South-street and Crossgate, "in
vet'i burgo Dun." etc. xxvo Tho. ep. Cum multis aliis.


.

Having trespassed much on the reader's patience, we proceed with the parish of
St Oswald. There are two streets, the one called Old Elvet, the other New
Elvet; from New Elvet branches out a street, called Hallgarth-street; from the
prior's hall, named in the records Elvet Hall, the manor and barony house
standing therein John de Herdwyck, d. s. etc. a mess. in Elvet, Durham, held of
the prior of Durham, by suit at the three head courts yearly, at the priors
court at Elvet-hall, etc. -- Inq. p. m. q'o Skirlaw, ap. Seggefield, cor. R. de
Laton, esc.
. At the end of this street is a lofty hill of a conical figure, called
Mont'joye, rising from the plain or valley, (but on the opposite side of the
river to Old Durham) where we have presumed the Saxons sat down with the
remains of St Cuthbert. In French history we find a definition of this
historical title, for there the name of Mont-joye is given to heaps of stones
laid together by pilgrims, on which crosses are erected, when they come within
view of the end of their journey; and so betwixt St Dennis, in France, and
Paris, they are called St Dennis's mont-joyes. When the travelers, bearing St
Cuthbert's remains, arrived here, they would view the whole ground of their
destination; and it lies in the exact line in which we presume they made their
progress from Ripon. The extremity of New Elvet bears the name of Church-street.

The church stands in a fine elevated situation, on the brink of the river.
Much conjecture arises in etymologies; perhaps the situation gave the name to
Elvet, derived from the French eleve, lofty, sublime. The street of Old Elvet
is very broad, excellently paved, and well built We find a tenement in this
street called Bedforth Place. Jac. ex una p'te cujusd. burgag. voc. Bedforth
Place, in tenura Johis Gibson. Fox Rot. B. Ao 1495.

John de Elvet held of the lord bishop in cap. 4 mess. in Old Elvet, of the
prior of Durham by fealty, and three suits at the prior's court for the barony
of Elvet, and paying hostillar. d'ci pr. v s. p' an. Also x mess. in New Elvet,
of the prior, as of burgage tenure, three suits at the barony court of Elvet,
and 4s. 11d. ad hostillar. pro land male. Ao 2o Joh. ep. etc. cor. R. de Laton
Mil. esc. in co. Dun. -- [Here we observe a line of distinction p'ainly drawn
between the barony tenure and the burgage tenure; the burgage tenure being in
New Elvet.]

The declaration and directions of me J. Cock, cl. v. of St Oswald's, Durham,
now deprived. -- He sets forth, that by his will, 27 May, 1701, he had given to
certain persons therein named, 600l. in trust, and declares the trust to be to
purchase freehold lands and tenements therewith; and to pay the produce thereof
to the minister and churchwardens, to lay out yearly 2l. 10s. for bibles,
common prayers, whole duty of man, explanation of the creed, and such like, to
be distributed among the poor inhabitants. To apply 5l. in physic and other
relief for the sick poor; 5l. a year for clothes for poor widowers or widows,
or other poor housekeepers, and 5l in money; 4l. to teach indigent children to
read, spin, knit, and sew; 6l. for setting out yearly one boy, being the son of
an inhabitant, and the surplus to be applied to the like purposes. A table of
which charities is directed to be written and read by the minister once a year.
With directions for keeping the trust subsisting by election of trustees, and
for keeping a book of account, etc.


: New Elvet is narrower, rises with a steep ascent, and has many ancient
buildings. The gardens of each are beautiful; those of the former inclining to
the race-ground, having a view of Pelaw wood, the river, and St Giles's: The
others hanging on the banks of the river, and its principal edifices.

The church ST OSWALD VICARAGE.
K. books 161. -- Yearly tenths 1l. 12s. -- Proc. ep. 7s. -- Real value 160l.

VICARS.
Dolfinus, presbyter de Elvete, oc. circa, 1156 Mag. Ric'us de Coldingham,
1175, ob. 1198 Nicolaus, vic. de Elvete, 1230. Joh'es de Derlington, 1266, vic.
Northallerton Radulphus, prior de Finchales Vic. of St Oswald deprived 1283,
and another collated the same year, names not obtained Nich. de Bishopton, 1353
Will. de Lanchester, 1371 Rob. Ashburn, 1405 Will. Bosum, 1408, p' res. Ashburn
Tho. Raket, 1409. p. res. Bosum Will. de Caton, 1411, p. res. Raket Joh.
Holderness, 1414, p. res. Caton Will. Newton, p. res. Holderness, 1419 Will.
Briscoe Will. Doncaster, 1420, p. res. Briscoe Joh. Lethom, 1435, p. res.
Doncaster Will. Newton, 1445 Joh. Pikering, 1472 Bertram Herbotell, 1485 Hugo
S^ell, LL. D. 1486, rector of Haughton, 1470 Will. Appulby, A. M. Tho. Farne,
B. L. 4 Ap. 1498, p. m. Appulby Chr. Werdale, LL. B. 1619 Anton. Bellasis, LL.
D. 1533 Lanc. Thwaites, LL. B. 1534 Hugo Hutchinson, A. M. 7 May, 1550 Tho
Pentland, cl. 23 Oct. 1562, p'depr. Hutchinson Car. Moberley, cl. 21 Mar. 1574,
p. m. Pentland Jacob Calfhill, A. M. 28 Mar. 1593, p. m. Moberley Rich.
Snowdon, cl. 8 Jun. 1602, col. to the 1st stall in Carlisle Joh. Brown, A. M.
15 Oct. 1622, res. 19 May, 1630 Joh. Scarth, deest dies mensis, 1631 Xtian
Sherwood, A. M. 20 Dec. 1631, p. m. Scarth, rector of Bishopweremouth, 20 Jan.
1643 Holdsworth, an intruder, ejected for nonconformity John Wood, A. M. 1662
John Cock, A. M. 19 Jul. 1673, p. res. Wood; deprived 1 Feb. 1689 Pexall
Forster, A. M. 1690, p. dep. Cock; he resigned for Egglescliffe rectory 1711,
and died 27 Feb. 1739 Tho. Rud, A. M. 1 Sep. 1711, p. res. Forster Will.
Forster, A. M. 24 Jan. 1725, p. res. Rud Tho. Hayes, A. M. 1765, p. m. Forster
Chester ward book of rates.
Durham. Parish of St Oswald.

L. s. d. Burnhall, Hallgarths, Relleye, Houghall, Finkley, two streets of
ElVet, half of Bearpark, rectory of Elvet, king's rents, Broom. Estimated value
1284 2 6 Easington ward. Shincliff, Butterby, and Southern-closes, Shincliff
tithe, rents to Dr Dalton, Croxdale, vicarage. Estimated value 792 1 0 Chester
ward. St Margaret's chapelry, Crosgate. Houses, borough lands, Newton, etc.
king's rent, Crosgate constablery, king's rent, St Margaret's rectory.
Estimated value 1300 0 0 L. 3376 3 6 Grey's MSS.

This parish pays to the land tax, at 4s. p' pound
L. s. d. Elvet borough 22 14 8 Elvet barony 59 4 8 Shincliff 46 14 8 Broom 15
0 0 Framwelgate 67 17 0 Crosgate 16 15 4

County rate's at 6s. 8d.
L. s. d. 3 5 7 1 15 3 0 14 0 2 13 6 0 11 6

The Dean and Chapter's rents.
L. s. d. Shincliff tithes 0 10 0 Old Durham tithes 4 3 4 Broom tithes 1 0 0
Burnhall tithes 1 2 8 Bellasis tithes 0 5 0 Pruddoe 0 3 4 Hagghouse tithes 1 6
8 Harberhouse and Carrhouse tithes 1 5 4 Stotgate tithes 0 1 8 Hunterbanks
tithes 0 3 4 Rectory of St Oswald 12 0 0 Rectory of St Margaret 12 13 4 Coal
mines in Bellasis 0 10 0 Ditto in Finkaley 0 10 0 Ditto Baxterwood 1 0 0
Shincliffe 38 11 2 Borough of Elvet 15 19 0 Barony of Elvet 19 11 0
South-street 10 3 6 Crosgate 17 19 10 Chilton pool 1 3 0 Coddesby 3 1 8 Little
Coddesby 0 8 0 Clock mill 3 13 4 Framwelgate 9 9 4 Mills 9 6 8 Scaltock mills
10 13 4 Kelley 2 5 10 Aldingridge 10 2 4 Beaurepare 0 8 0

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 639 156
747 1760 to 1779 872 289 1260 Increase 233 133 513

Number of burials in the last year 80. -- Computed number of inhabitants 2400.


stands in the center of a very large yard or burial ground, and having been
built of stone subject to decay, is in most parts covered with rough-cast and
lime: It is of such antiquity, that we find one Dolfinus mentioned as priest
there in 1156. This is a regular edifice, having two side ailes of a similar
form: The length of the nave is twenty-nine paces, the middle aile is eight
paces wide, and the side ailes six paces each: It is supported on pillars, five
in each row, three to the east are round, and two to the west octagonal, light,
and of a good height; the capitals ornamented with rolls: The arches are
circular: The arch which supports the tower, and that which opens the chancel,
are pointed: The upper windows of the nave are regular, five on each side, with
elliptic arches: The sout hail is lighted by five side windows, three are east
of the door, and two to the west, and there is a window at each end, all with
pointed arches: The north aile has but three side windows, two to the east of
the door, with elliptic arches, and one to the west, and a window at each end
with pointed arches. Those variances show, at different periods, material
alterations have been made in this fabric. The pulpit is placed against the
first south pillar EPITAPHS.
On a blue marble gravestone, near the belfry. Hic requiescit

On an ordinary stone, under the stairs of the gallery. Hac de terra raptus

On an altar tomb, in the churchyard. Hic jacet corpus


. In the south wall, under the windows, are four arches for tombs, but no
effigies or inscription; neither is there any tradition for whom they were
made. The font is a large stone basin, and there is a gallery over it which
fills the whole west end of the nave. The roof is of wood, in the vault form,
of excellent workmanship, jointed with rose knots, the rafters supported on
brackets, ornamented with cherubs bearing shields, but without blazoning of
arms. One of the knots, in the center of the arch, is painted blue, with an
inscription in a circle in letters of gold, of the old black character: Orate
p' A. W. Catten, vicr. We presume Catten caused the roof to be constructed in
its present beautiful form, and find a Will. de Catten vicar in 1411. The
church is well stalled, the chancel remarkably neat, and kept with that pious
decency which is necessary to the solemnities of divine worship: It is 12 paces
in length to the steps of the altar rails, and six wide: The altar is elevated
six steps, and the space within the rails is upwards of 12 feet: The east
window consists of four lights, under a pointed arch; there are three windows
on the north side, and four on the south, some of which are modern: Behind the
table, and on each side, it is wainscotted, painted, and gilded; and below the
rails, the chancel is regularly stalled in the cathedral form with oak, having
a large seat at each side of the entrance gate. The roof is flat and stuccoed.
The vestry room is also very neat. There is much broken painted glass in the
windows, but no figure perfect. Against the second pillar, chained to a desk,
is "The defense of the apology of the church of England," with the sermon
preached at Paul's cross, by the bishop of Sarum, 1560, and other curious
tracts. In the tower is a set of six musical bells. The vicarage house is
sweetly situated at the north entrance into the churchyard, on the banks of
the river.

The parish of St Oswald Boundaries of the parish of St Oswald, 1344.
Quod incipiendo ad novum pontem Dunelm. and procedendo versus orientem and
Molendinum de Scaletoke miln circa and juxta Were fines and limits dicte
parochie Sancti Oswaldi se ostendunt usq. ad oppositum rivuli decurrentis inter
Pellow and pomarium S'ci Egidii and descendentes in pred aquam Were and extunc
procedendo citra and juxta rivulum pred. usq. ad parvum pontem qui vocatur
Gillybridge, sic postea circumcundo campum and territoria villae veteris Dun.
usq. Whiteburn, and sic procedendo versus austrum usq. moram inter Swerrington
and Shinklick extunc procedendo p' exteriores extremitates camporum and
territoriorum villarum de Shinkliff, Croxdail, Bewhame, and Sunderland, cum
pertin. earundem descendendo usq. ad pontem and aquam de Broom, and
subsequenter procedendo infra and juxta aquam de Broom versus occidentem usq.
ad aquam de Deverness (que est marchia inter parochias ecclesiarum de
Brancepeth and S'ti Oswaldi) et extunc procedendo citra and juxta aquam and
rivulum de Deverness usq. ad Middlewood p' exteriores extremitates camporum and
territoriorum villarum de Relley, Broom, and Aldingrige sic procedendo extunc
usq. manerium de Bearpark all is Beurepaire ac villas de Whitton and Newton cum
pertin. earundem. Et sic extunc procedendo versus boream Herberhouse usq. le
Blackburn, ubi est marchia inter parochias ecclesiaram Cestrie and S'ti
Oswaldi. Et adhuc sic procedendo and redcundo usq. aquam Were, circumcundo
parcum de Franklaine inter and juxta aquam Were usq. veterem pontem Dunel, and
adhuc usq. novum pontem prout aqua Were currit ex una part duntaxat.

Randal's MSS. p. 194.
lies in the deanery of Chester, from which it is distant about seven miles;
being a Peculiar belonging to the dean and chapter of Durham, it pays no
procurations to their official, or to the archdeacon of Durham: Since the year
1660, no churches exempt from archidiaconial jurisdiction, and subordinate to
the dean and chapter of Durham, have paid any procurations to the official.
This church is dedicated to the royal Saint Oswald.

There were two chantries in this church: One dedicated to St John the Baptist
and St John the Evangelist, annual value 12l. 9s. 4d. was founded by Rich. de
Elvet, cl. John de Elvet, cl. and Gilbert de Elvet. Walter, bishop of Durham,
granted them license, dated the 5th of June, 1402, to erect a chantry of one
chaplain, at the altar of St John the Baptist and St John the Evangelist, that
they, their ancestors and heirs, might be prayed for, and that lands and rents
of the annual income of ten marks might be given to the chaplain and his
successors for ever: Accordingly the manor of Edderacres Rot. Skirlaw, No 103.
A disclaimer of right to Edderacres, from Tho. Coke, of Thorp, juxta Easington
and Johanna his wife, Margaret and Eliz. de Edderacres, 20 Oct. 1405.

Rot. Skirlaw, No 5. License dat. 26 April, 1403. -- Randal's MSS.


with its appurtenances, a message in Fleshewergate in the borough of Durham,
two messuages in the borough of Elvet, and one message in Old Elvet described
to be near the cemetery of St Oswald, all which were of the real value of 6l.
10s. were conveyed over to the chaplain and his sucessors for ever, by the
bishop's consent, the 26th of April, 1403 Chaplains. Will. de Fisheburn, cap.
and custos primus oc. 20 Oct. 1405. -- Chr. Aslabie, 1505. -- Ed. Popley, the
last incumbent, had a yearly pension of 6l. 13s. 4d. which he received in the
year 1553. -- In 1537, the advowson of this chantry was granted by Chr. Danbye,
knt. one of the heirs of Gil. Elvet, for the next turn only, to Edw. Tetsorth
and Geo. Smyth. This grant, I suppose, never took effect. -- Randal's MSS. --
Reg. Tunstal, p. 28.
. The other chantry was dedicated to St Mary the Virgin The dean and chapter
pay a rent to the Duke of Leeds for this chantry's lands.

We find a chantry of the holy rood named, val. p' ann. 3l. 10s. -- Also a
chantry of St Oswald. -- Rot. Skirlaw, No 5.


, annual value 4l. Walter, bishop of Durham, granted his license, dated the
20th of September, 1392, to John Sharp and Wm de Middleton, chaplains, to give
two messuages with their appurtenances in Elvet, of the yearly value of 12s. to
Alan Hayden, chaplain, custos of the blessed Mary's chantry in this church, to
be held by him and his successors for ever, for their better support and
maintenance Alanus de Hayden, cap. oc. custos 20 Sep. 1392. -- Rob Ellison, oc.
1501. -- Randal's MSS.

Edwardus d. g. rex. Inspeximus cartam quam venerabilis Pater Anth. Dunelmensis
epus fecit Johi ville de Dunolm. in haec verba, etc. etc. Nov'it universitas
v'ra nos dedisse etc. Jo'hi ville de Dunolmo p' homagio and s'vitio suo, etc.
Et quatuor december acre juxta hospitale S'ci Leonardi de Dunelmo, in p'ochia S'ci
Oswaldi regis, etc. Ao 1292. -- Or. penes Tho. Gyll, Esquire


.

There was an hospital dedicated to St Leonard, in this parish; but who was the
founder, what was the constitution, or the time of its building, remain
unknown: It is not named in the Monasticon, or any other authorities before us,
save those of the church of Durham. We are led to conjecture that this hospital
stood at Beautrove or Butterby, as that manor is tithe-free, and situated near
the medicinal springs hereafter noted.

Adjoining to the south wall of the churchyard, is a field, called the
Anchorage, (or Anchoritage, Hermitage, or Hermit's close) and adjoining thereto
is a field called the Palmer's (or Mendicant's) close; but we have met with no
evidence relative to a hermitage here.

From the south-west corner of the churchyard you enter upon those beautiful
natural scenes which border the river. A walk is laid open, and kept in order
for the recreation of the public, at the charge of the dean and chapter, whose
benevolence on this and various other occasions, demands the warmest
acknowledgments. Mr Pennant, speaking of the banks, says, they are covered with
wood, through which are cut numbers of walks, contrived with judgment, and
happy in the most beautiful and solemn scenery. They impend over the water, and
receive a most venerable improvement from the castle and ancient cathedral,
which tower far above. The banks are steep, and clothed with forest trees; in
several parts the rocks break forth, where venerable oaks are suspended: The
river, with a pure and tranquil stream, glides at the bottom of the hill,
reflecting the noble objects which crown her banks: Here the opening valley
pours forth a rivulet, and there the solemn dell, with Nature's wildest
beauties, yawns with broken rocks, which yield the living fountain from their
lips, whilst each brow is crowded with bending oaks, whose naked talons and
twisted arms rival each other in grotesque figure. You see the towers of the
cathedral rising sublimely from the wood, and lifting their solemn battlements
to the clouds; and beyond those the turrets of the castle, on their rocky base;
whilst on the other hand, the houses of South-street are stretched along the
summits of hanging gardens: In front is an elegant new bridge of three arches,
through the bows of which, at the first distance, are seen a fine canal of
still water, with a mill; at the second distance, Framwelgate bridge, of two
elliptic arches; and through the bows of the second bridge, the pleasant villa
of Crook Hall Crokhogh.

Johannes de Kirby tenet Villam de Crokhough and C. Aer. Terrae and Bosc. per
servic. sorin. redd. ijs. -- Et dim. Acr. apud Stokerley quond'm Petri del
Croke and redd. iiij d. -- Hatfield's Survey.


, with the rising grounds behind it. This prospect, perhaps, is not to be
equalled in the environs of any city in the known world. On turning about, you
have a view not less pleasing for its simplicity; you command the walk before
noted, with a fine bend of the river, forming a crescent; the banks richly
clothed with wood, and crowned with the church of St Oswald. This walk is much
frequented, and deservedly has the applause of every traveller. We present to
the reader two plates of those favorite views on the banks.

The New Bridge was erected in 1781, at the expense of the dean and chapter, by
Mr Nicholson their architect: It is upon a beautiful modern plan, the arches
semicircular, with a balustraded battlement. There was formerly a narrow bridge
near this place for horses to pass, which was carried away by the floods in
1771 At this bridge there happened a remarkable accident: A Mr Dalston of the
Cothamhall-garth family, forced his horse over the battlements, in the dark,
and was killed; he was passing the bridge on return from a country visit with a
large company, and though in the midst of them, was missed by none till they
arrived at the house where he was to lodge.

An account was given of the stood in 1771, in the public prints. The waters
were eight feet ten inches higher at Durham than ever known before.


: The accident proved fortunate for the public, as it occasioned the present
handsome structure See the plate.
to be erected, which being of a suitable width, the chapter permit gentlemen's
carriages to pass thereon, without toll.

FRAMWELGATE BRIDGE, seen upon this view, has one pier and two elliptic arches,
of ninety feet span, so flat as to be constructed on the quarter section of a
circle, calculated to suit the low shores on each side: The masonry is plain,
but excellent, as is proved by its age; it was built by bishop Flambard, has
stood near seven hundred years, and is perhaps the finest model of
bridge-building, of that antiquity, in Britain. A gateway tower which stood on
the city end of the bridge, was removed of late years for the convenience of
carriages, which have increased amazingly in number within this century. Bishop
Bainbrigg granted to prior Castle and the convent, all the waste land between
this bridge and Elvet bridge, reserving certain privileges to him and his
successors and their tenants Rot. B. Bainbrigg, No 61, dat. 28 Sep. 1508. --
Randal's MSS.

Carta Richi de Kellawe epi, de libera piscaria a ponte de Elvet usq. ad vet.
pontem -- Rudd's MSS.


; and bishop Kellow granted them the fishery.

CROOK HALL, which we mentioned in the preceding page, took its name from a
family of Crook who settled there in the times of king Edward II. and III. they
having disused the name of Sidgate manor, its ancient title. In the time of
Edward III. it became the possession of Billingham, of Billingham, who held it
for many ages; and we find by the proceedings on an elegit, in 1651, this was
the estate of Thomas Billingham, and therein it is mentioned as being the
capital house of the manor of Sidgate Mickleton's MSS
. The dean and chapter have a yearly payment out of the lands of Crook hall of
53s. 4d. for tithes Vide lease to Edward Gregory, relative to St Margaret's
chapel. -- We find in the parish reg. of St Margaret, a numerous race of the
Billingham family from 1559 to 1661.

PEDIGREE OF BILLINGHAM, AND CROOKHALL. Blazon of arms. -- Arg. three bars and
canton gules; on the latter lion pass. of the field.
Cuthbert Billingham. Elianor, d. of Rich. Hutton, of Hunwick. Ralph. Isabel,
d. of J. Claxton, of Old Park. John M. 1st. Alicia, d. of Ra. Claxton, of
Winyard. Ralph. Aet. 28 An. 1575. Richard. William. Second wife, Elizabeth, d.
of Rog. Swinburne, of Eglingham, Northumberland. Margaret. John. Margery. Ann.
Cuthbert,


genealogy Harleian MSS. No 1540.

Haec arma inveniuntur in eccl'ia de Egglescliffe juxta Yarum in com. Dunolm.
in orientali foenestra ubi sit mentio Tho. Bellingham, et Anne uxoris suae qui
idem faenestram fecerunt et d'ca arma supra ponuntur caput dicti Thom. cujus
imago subtus cernitur sicut et conjugis suae and liberor. etc. -- Flower's
visit.


.

Park-keepers have been appointed by patent for Frankleyn for many ages After
the patent of park-keeper of Frankleyn wood, dated 15 Oct. 1627, there follows
an entry, setting forth the rights of the park-keeper. Confirm. 16 Oct. an.
super script. -- Sig. R. Dunelm. Timoth. Common.

De forestariis and parcariis epor Dun. de Frankland.

Pro vita feod 30 s. 4 d. and forestarius in Middlewood feod 6 s. 8 d. (Nevil)
feod 57s. Ruthal.

Mickleton's MSS.
.

At the distance of half a mile from Crook Hall is NEWTON HALL, one of the
seats of Sir Henry George Liddell, bart. The situation is lofty and beautiful,
commanding a fine prospect of the city and adjacent country: It is a handsome
modern house, sheltered with plantations, and environed with rich meadow lands.
Newton is named among those tenements, which, the monastic writers tell us, the
bishops yielded up to the earls of Northumberland, to enable them by their
issues, the better to prosecute the wars of those times; which, when once
severed from the church, were refused to be restored, and in time became lay
fees: But afterward, when the Sea was settled at Durham, the church was
reinstated in all its ancient possessions. By the Boldon book Newtona.
Willielmus quondam abbas de burgo tenet Newtona juxta Dunelm. de accomodatione
et Elemosina d'ni episcopi and reddit pro medietate dominij quam Ricardus
Ingeniator tenuit j Marcam.

Radulphus Clericus tenet in eadem villa quatringinti acr. tam de terra quae
fuit Roberti Tit, quam de assartis quae episcopus ei dedit i^ Escambium pro
duabus Bovatis de Midilham pro xid. set quietus est de hoc redditu. dum est in
servitio d'ni episcopi. -- Bolden Buke.

Johannes Heron chev. tenet villam de Newton juxta Dunolm. per servic. forin.
and redd. cvjs. viijd.

Haeres Will'i de Kirkenny tenet x acr. super Kyowlawe and redd. per ann. ad
fest. S. Cuthb. in Sep. 1 lb. Cumin.

Terrae Scaccarij. Heredes Will'i de Kirkenny tenent, etc. Terrae Novi Vasti,
etc.

Will's Bows, chev. ten. xi. acr. terrae libere quond'm Roberti Scriptoris,
vocat Fyngall and redd. us.

Cum multis aliis. -- Hatfield's Survey.


we learn the abbot of Peterborough had Newton by agreement and free alms of
the bishop; and that Radulphus Clericus held certain lands there, as well the
estate of Robert Tit, as what he had of the bishop, in exchange for lands in
Middleham. Bishop Pudsey granted Newton to Roger de Reding, (who afterward
appears to have taken the name of Roger de Newton) under a reserved rent of
eight marks of silver: It soon afterward was part of the possessions of the
ancient family of Bows, for bishop Bury, by his deed, dated in 1337,
rehearsing several conveyances, confirms to Adam de Boughs the several lands
therein named, for the twentieth part of a knight's fee, and 20s. 1d. rent
payable at the bishop's exchequer. In 1345, bishop Hatfield also confirms the
same; and in 1447, bishop Nevil, by inspeximus of all the former instruments,
confirms the several premises to William Bows Nevil, No 72. -- Randal's MSS.
. In bishop Bury's time we see Nicholas Scriptor in possession of sixty acres
inter Petariam de Newton and Aldnewton, held in capite by service and fealty,
and 5s. rent payable at the bishop's exchequer in Durham, and 13s. 4d. to John
de Akeley, and 6s. to Alice, the widow of Rich. de Belle, for life Inq. p. m.
Ao 2o R. Bury, ep. co^. vic. in pleno com. Dun.
. By bishop Hatfield's survey it is stated, that John Heron, esquire was in
possession of Newton per servic. forin Forinsecum Servitium. That is such
service whereby a mean lord holds over of another without the compass of his
own see. Bro. tit. Tenures, fo. 251, No 12 and 28. Kitchen, so. 209. Or else
that which a tenant performs either to his own lord, or to the lord paramount
out of his see. Of these services Bracton speaks thus: Item. sunt quaedam
servitia, quae dicuntur forinseca, quamvis sunt in carta et de feoffamento
expressa et nominata, et quae ideo dici possunt forinseca quia pertinent ad
dominum regemet non ad dominum capitalem, nisi cum in propria persona prosectus
fuerit in servitio, vel nisi cum pro servitio suo satisfecerit domino regi
quocunque modo et siunt incertis temporibus cum casus et necessitas evenerit et
varia habent nomina et diversa: Quandoq. enim nominantur forinseca; large
sumpto vocabulo quoad servitium domini regis; quandoq scutagium; quandoq.
servitium domini regis et ideo forinsecum dici potest, quia sit et capitur
soris sive extra servitium quod sit domino capitali.

So that here we have a strong badge of the regalia, the bishop having the like
service for this land, as the king would have out of the limits of this
jurisdiction.


, and cvjs. viijd. rent. The heirs of William de Kirkenny had x acres called
Kyowlawe, rendering a pound of cumin: And of the lands there termed lands of
the exchequer, William Bows, esquire held 40 acres of freehold, formerly the right
of the scribe called Fyngall, rendering 5s. besides him sundry other persons
held lands of that tenure. By an inquisition taken on the death of Elizabeth
the widow of Robert Bows, it appears that she had dower assigned at Newton
Inq. p. m. 4, bishop Fordham.
. On the death of her heir Sir William del Bows, we find he died seized int.
all is of the capital message of Newton, with two hundred acres of land there,
of the gift of the bishop Inq. p. m. 12, bishop Skirlaw. -- Inq. p. m. Matildis
ux. Will'i Bows, 15 bishop Langley. -- Inq. p. m. Will'i Bows Mil. 1 bishop
Booth -- Inq. p. m. Will'i Bows, 9 bishop Booth. -- Inq. p. m. 27 bishop
Booth, Newton was then under an intail; and is described to consist of 20 mess
and cccc. acres of land.

A mess. and 24 acres of land in Newton near Durham, held in cap. of Roger lord
of Newton. Inq. p. m. Cuthbert son of John, Ao 10, Bury, cor. vic. in pleno
Com. Dun.


. This estate continued in the family of Bows till the fifth year of bishop
Pilkington, when Geo. Bows, esquire obtained a license to alien to Anth.
Middleton. It afterward became the estate of Thomas Blakiston, esquire who
conveyed it to Marmaduke Blakiston, clerk, one of the prebendaries of Durham,
in the seventh year of bishop James Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
; and he sold it to the family of Liddell.

At the distance of two short miles from Newton stands

FINCHALE,
on the banks of the river Were. It was a place of some consequence in the
early ages of the British church, for we hear of a synod being held here in the
year 792 An. 792, synodus in Fynkhaul celebrata. Flores' Hist. Lel. Col. vol.
iii. p. 38.

E libello de locis quibus S. in Angl. requiescunt Godricus anachoreta, Dunolm.
-- Ibid.


, in the time of Higbald, bishop of Lindisfarn, for the purpose of regulating
church discipline and manners: And it seems another synod was held here in the
year 810 A. D. 810, synodus apud Pincanhale in Nordanhumbria 4 No. Sep.
celebratur. -- Lel. Col. vol. iii.

Eodem anno, qui est tertius Cenwlsi praedicti Regis, synodus congregata est in
loco qui appellatur Pincanhalth, praesidente Eanbaldo archep. Ebor. -- Ibid.

As this place (though hard to be known, the names in our ancient writers being
so differently written) there was a synod held in 788. -- Complete Hist. of
Durh. p. 616. -- Vide Saxon. Chron. p Gibson, 64. -- 1288, hoc anno synodus
coacta est in Northymbrorum terra apud Pincanhale 4 Non. Sept. Pincanheal,
Pincanhale, (F^or.) Wincenhale, (Hunt.) Wincarheale, Phincanhal, (Hoveden)
Pinchamhalch, Finchale, (Westminster) vari ^hujus loci appellatio apud historicos non
aliunde orta est quam ex similitudine literarum Saxonicarum r. p. f. quae sive
librarios qui ex ea descripserant exemplaria quibus usi sunt historici, sive
ipsos etiam re rum gestarum scriptores in errorem traxisse videtur. hodie
Finkley, in agro Dunelmensi ad ripam orientalem sluminis Were.


.

In the beginning of the twelfth century, St Godric, a hermit, sought this
secluded situation for his devotions, mortifications, and severities, where he
lived sixty-six years, and died in the year 1170. Soon after the hermit settled
here, bishop Flambard granted to the monastery of Durham, in free alms, the
hermitage of Finchale, with its waters, fishings, rights, and privileges,
subject to Godric's life, who should hold of them; and after his death, that it
might be the habitation of such of their brethren as they should appoint Ex
Archivis penes registri custodem Dunelm. -- Vide Mon. Aug. vol. i. p. 512. --
About the year 1118.
. Gul. Neubrigensis, gives a particular account of this man. In cibo et potu,
in verbo et gestu, homo simplicissimus, decente cum gravitate servare modum
studuit. velox ad audiendum, tardus autem ad loquendum, and in ipsa locutione
parcissimus. The hermit erected a small chapel here, and dedicated it to St
John the Baptist: Though he died in great agonies, this writer describes him in
vultu autem ejus mira quedam dignitas et decus insolitum visebatur Ex Gul.
Newbigensis Hist. lib. ii. cha. 20.

The Rev. Mr Lamb, of Durham, obligingly furnished the author with a
translation of the history of St Godrie, from the old Latin edition. The
general distaste which prevails against legendary and miraculous tales, obliges
us to omit it.


. As to FINCHALE ABBEY.
view of Finchale Abbey his way of life, take the same author, Quem tandem post
multam lustrationem inveniens, ibidem, cum sorore paupercula primum, and ea
defuncta solus, multo tempore habitavit.

About the year 1180, bishop Pudsey granted a foundation charter for a cell at
Finchale Ex archivis penes registri custodem decani and capit. Dun.
Vide confirmationem cartarum cart. 3 Ed. 2, n. 21, et cart. 17 Ed. 2, n. 12.
-- Angl. Sac. vol. i. p. 724, 726. -- Rot. cart. 9 Joh. m. 6, n. 54. -- Cart.
14. Ed. 1, n. 40 p' xxs. anni reddit. e molendino de Emeldon. -- Pat. 12, Ed.
3, p. 1, m. 19, de grangia de Eshwell.


, by which it appears two monks of Durham, Reginald and Henry, had possessed
themselves of Godric's hermitage, and had some allowances made them for their
support. Henry, the bishop's son, was about to found a religious house at
Backstanford Near Wolsingham.
, which the convent of Durham did not approve, being esteemed an intrusion on
their rights; an agreement soon took place on the following terms; the convent
granted to Henry, Finchale, with its appurtenances, to the intent that he
should build a church there, and institute a convent of monks; thus he was
induced to transfer his works of piety to this retirement, where he erected
proper accommodations for a colony of Benedictines, chosen out of the convent
of Durham, over whom was placed Thomas the sacrist, as prior, in the year 1196.
This house received considerable augmentations by various pious donations Inq.
p. m. Isabella, ux. Joh'is de Birtley, d. s. of 3 mess. and 60 acres of land,
in the vill. of Cokyn, held of the prior of Finchale by service of half a pound
of cumin, etc. Ao 3d Walt. cp.

Copyhold books, H. Fox, p. 282.
Halm. ap. Wolsyngham, xxiiij Oct. Ao Tr. Rich. quinto.

Ad hac cur. ven. Joh'es Swayn, Monach Pr. de Fynkall and cep. de d'no j parcel
ter. de vasto d'ni voc. Dobynson Grene, etc. hend eid Pr. and succ. suis Pr. in
jur. sc'd'm cons. cur. redd. inde, etc.

Omnib's, etc. Stephus rector eccl'ie de Elwick, sal. Nov'it, etc. me dedisse,
etc Deo and b'ae Marie and S'co Joh'i Baptiste and S'co Godrico and Radulpho
Pr. and Monachis de Tinkhale Deo servantib's totam terra. q'm hui in villa de
Thorpe cu'm oib's, etc. ad sustentaco'em hospitalitatis and triu. paup'u. qui
cotidie imp'petum. ib^ ad mandatu. recipientur, etc. Test. etc. About the year
1200.

E. MSS penes Tho. Davison de Blakiston, arm. -- Randal's MSS.
Omnib's, etc. Nigellus de Rungeton, etc. Nov'it, etc. me concessisse, etc.
Deo, etc. Tres. Bovat. terrae cum p'tin. suis in villa de Thorpe, quas Steph's
de Elwic eid dedit, etc. -- Ib'd'm.

Omnib's, etc. Joh. Fill. Galfridi, etc. Nov. me concessisse, etc. Deo, etc.
duas. Bovat. terrae in villa mea de Thorpe, etc. -- Ib'd'm.

Joh'es de Ketton. etc. Nov'it, etc. me co'cessisse, etc. Deo. Tres Bovat.
terrae in villa de Thorpe, etc. faciendo inde forinsecu. s'vitin qua'tu.
p'tinet ad tanta' terram in cad villa p' om'i s'vitio, etc. -- Ib'd'm.

Gaufrid de Thorpe, etc. sciatis me concess. Deo, etc. duas bovat terrae in
villa mea de Thorpe, etc salvo loco meo hiis testib's, etc. -- Ib'm.

Robert de Minstertun gave all his land in the vill. of Thorpe, except liberty
in the lords woods. -- Robert de Thorpe confirmed the lands given by Rob. de
Minsterton, Gilbert de Eden, etc. -- John de Thorpe confirmed to the prior and
monks all their lands and tenements in Thorpe, as well of the gift of his
father, as of John de Ketton. (salvo bosco meo) Dated about 1200. -- John de
Ketton gave two ox gangs of land in Thorpe, which W. de Stodfald held. --
Galfrid, the son of John de Thorpe, confirms his father's grant. -- Cecilia,
the daughter and heiress of Walter de Shotton, quits claim to lands in
Thorpthewles, with an obligatory writing and oath for the performance of her
covenant. -- John Ward, of Thorpthewles, released a rent due to him out of
lands granted to Finchale by his ancestors. -- And Robert, the son of William,
lord of Thorpthewles, confirms the gifts of John de Eglisclyree, called Gylett,
Alan Clerk, of Sherburn, and his father, in the same hands. -- Randal's MSS.


.

When the church and other edifices at Finchale were erected, the remains of
which are yet standing, it is not possible to determine with precision, no
evidence thereof being found in the archives of the dean and chapter: From the
order of building seen in some parts of the ruins, much may be attributed to
Henry the bishop's son; but other parts appear of older date. The solemn
remains are situated in a very deep vale, on the banks of the river, where the
stream making a sweep, forms a little level plot, which is almost covered with
the buildings; sheltered to the north by the lofty rocks and hanging woods of
Cocken, and on every other side by steep hills. The river flows swiftly over a
rocky channel; and the murmuring of the waterfalls is re-echoed from the groves
and cliffs. The present buildings are much disunited, so that it is impossible
to trace all the ancient offices of this religious mansion.

At the entrance into the church, at the west end, on the right hand, is a
square vault, the roof of which is groined from the angles and the side walls,
and supported in the center by a short octagonal pillar: There was an aqueduct
to this place, and it had an upper apartment. The church, though small, is in
the form of a cross; the gateway, at the west end, has a pointed arch of
several members, rising from small round columns or pilasters, with plain
capitals: The nave is twenty-eight paces in length, and seven in width. In the
center of the cross it appears there has been a tower or spire, supported on
four circular pillars, very short and heavy, exceeding even part of Durham
cathedral for disproportion: The pillars are so massive, that one of them
contains a turpike staircase, which led to the superstructure; they form a
square of equal sides, twenty-one feet from pillar to pillar, the capitals of
an octagonal form: The center had a dome or vaulted roof, with intersecting
ribs, and on the east side one pointed arch remains. In the etching given in
Stevens' Monasticon, drawn by King, a short octagonal spire of stone is placed
on the tower. On the north side of the nave, are four pillars supporting
pointed arches; the pillars round, with capitals formed of double rolls,
constructed of a durable stone, and entire; the south side is close, a long
cloister or passage running on the outside to communicate with the south limb
of the cross. The north and south limbs of the cross are exactly equal in
length and width, being twelve paces long and seven broad: They are very ill
lighted; one great window in the south limb, toward the east, being the chief:
Indeed it appears that those parts have been added to the original structure,
or rebuilt; as they are in no wise similar to the other parts in masonry or
materials. The choir is remarkable; from the east window, ten paces in length,
it is enclosed with high dark walls, and from thence to the cross, being nine
paces, (the whole nineteen paces long) are two round columns on each side,
similar to those in the nave, bearing three pointed arches: The east window has
been sive paces wide, (as appears from the measurement of the sole, for all the
rest is gone) with outward buttresses, ornamented with stone pinnacles, one of
which on the south side still remains. It is very singular that windows of a
modern date have been placed between the pillars, to fill up the arches, formed
of a yellow and perishable kind of stone; which work now separates itself from
the arches: The yellow stone has been won from the bed of the river, and is of
the same kind with those of which the out-buildings are constructed; the
columns and arches are of a bluer nature, and in no wise injured by time; they
seem to be of the Normandy stone, much like the columns and castings of several
of the ancient castles. Allowing this observation to be just, we should be apt
to conjecture these columns and arches originally divided the center from a
side aile; but on strict search, no foundations or other work was discovered
which could encourage this idea: If there were no side ailes, then this was a
fabric of singular construction; for it will follow, that the nave and part of
the choir were open to the air on the sides, like a cloister: There is
something similar in the abbey of Furness, in Lancashire, where a part on the
north side is open. The founder, in imitation of the severities of St Godric,
might think it expedient to deprive the monks of indulgence, and leave the
church open to the air; but in after ages, when the religious professed more
outside show than real zeal, yielded to the fascinations of luxury, and studied
gratifications and softness, they closed the arches with windows, made covered
passages, and transformed this building to its present model: As its solenm
beauties are much admired, if the windows were displaced, and the columns and
arches laid open, it would greatly improve its appearance, and render it still
a finer objet from the walks of Cocken.

The rest of the monastic buildings are very ragged and ruinous: In one part a
bow window is projected from a pilaster in the wall, and seems to have
appertained to some chief apartment. The hall or refectory has been a handsome
edifice; it stands on the south side of a court, nearly of equal sides, about
twenty-six paces every way; is twelve paces long, and eight wide, within the
walls; having five regular windows to the south, and four to the north; in the
staircase or entrance is a large window to the south: The vault underneath is
supported by a row of four octagonal pillars in the center, without capitals,
from whence the groins are sprung; the pilasters in the walls and angles are
capitalled; the ribs are of hewn stone, meeting in points, and the interstices
of the vault wedged with thin stones; the whole a fine piece of architecture.
This vault is lighted by six small windows to the south, and is not above eight
feet in height to the crowns of the arches.

It is said that St Godric, and also Henry de Puteaco, or Pudsey, lie interred
here; but the floor of the church is covered with ruins, and grown over with
brambles and weeds, so as to prevent, without much labor, a search for their
tombs Henricus de Puteaco, son to Hugh Puteacus, was founder of Finkeshal
priorye, on Were, two mils benethe Duresme, and there is he buried, and also S.
Goodelak the heremite. -- Lel. Itin. vol. viii. p. 42.

Tanner's Notitia, p. 114. English Monast. Stevens', p. 63. -- Complete Hist.
of Duth. p. 616. -- Lambard's Dict. p. 115. A celle of St Cuthbertes
monastery, etc wheare Goodrike (whose pilgrimage was profitable to barren
women) lived the life of an eremite. It was valued in the records at 123
pounds yearlye.


.

The revenues of this house, 26th king Henry VIII. were valued at 122l. 15s.
3d. according to Dugdale, and 146l. 19s. 2d. Speed. At the dissolution it
consisted of a prior and eight monks So the Corpus Chris. Col. Cant. MSS. --
But Leland's Itin. vol. vii. p. 5, says xiii monks. Quere, whether the first
numeral should not have been v.

PRIORS OF FINCHALE.
Thomas, sacrist of Durham, first prior. Radulphus, t'pe Phil. ep Dun. circa Ao
1200. Rob. de Stichilie. El. bishop 1260. Rob. de Insula. El. bishop 1274.
Galfridus de Buredon, in e'r'o purif. 1308. Henr. de Stamford, 1316. Henr. de
Castro. Tho. de Lunde, S. T. P. men. Oct. 1333. Joh. de Beryngton, 18 May,
1384. Will. Poklyngton, 21 Mar. 1413. Will. Bawy, 4 Jan. 1437. Rich. Bell, S.
T. B. 20 Oct. 1464. Will. Bryden, 5 Jul. 1476. Joh'es Swayn, 24 Oct. 1499.
In Willis's Mitred Abbeys Chr. Harpworth is said to be prior Ao 1534. -- But
this is presumed to be an error.


. The manor and cell of Finchale were part of the possessions restored to the
church on the foundation of a dean and chapter, by king Henry's deed of
endowment.

Finchale being part of the prebendal corpse lands, the beauty of the retirement
induced Mr Spence Installed the 24th of May, 1754.
to make a good room in the farm-house near the abbey, with a bow-window
overhanging the murmuring streams of the Were, and looking upon the sweet
sequestered walks of Cocken, but turning its back upon the venerable ruins.

The pleasant village of SHINCLIFF lies within a mile of Durham, sheltered by
hills on every side, except toward the south-west, where it opens to the river
Were, with rich meadow lands. Bishop Carilepho granted it with other lands to
the convent of Durham Mon. Angl. vol. i. p. 45. -- Vol. i. of this work, p. 134.
. There was an ancient bridge over the river at this place, which, in bishop
Fordham's time, was gone to decay; collections have been made for repairing it,
but the money being embezzeled or misapplied, a commission of account issued,
dated 14th of January, 1385 Commissio de com'po emendaco's Pontis de Shinkle,
audiend. and terminand. Rot. Fordham, Sch. 8. No 3. -- Randal's MSS.

Commissio ad inquirend. de reddit. ad rep'aco'em pontis Dun. and Shincliff
concess. Rot. B. Hatfield. Sch. 1. No 4. in dorso. Dat. 2 Mar. 1370. -- Ib'm.

Vide preceding account of Elvet bridge.


: It seems the measure was ineffectual, for his successor, bishop Skirlaw,
erected a stone bridge of three arches, which stood till the year 1752, when
the violent flood on the 7th of February undermined and threw down one of the
piers, which carried with it two of the arches; the bridge was restored the
following summer at the public expense An engraving was published from a
drawing of the ruins made by the author, but the plate falling into ^^roper
hands, was destroyed.
. It is said Shincliff was the birth place of bishop Sever, abbot of St Mary's,
York. We find the family of Aslakby had possession here in bishop Langley's
time. It has been the seat of the family of the Hoppers of late years, whose
present representative is Robert Hopper Williamson, esquire

Near this village William Rudd, esquire built his villa, seated in a delightful
retirement, commanding a solemn view of the sequestered vale, with its hanging
woods, which form a beautiful amphitheatre; a scene excellently adapted to
study and contemplation.

On the other side of the river stands Houghall, part of the prebendal lands of
the church. The manor house was built by prior Hotoun, who, notwithstanding the
embarrassments he suffered under the persecuting spirit of bishop Bek,
completed this and other considerable pious works. No certain etymology of the
name of this place is obtained; from its situation, in a low and watery plain,
we may adopt the word hough, which in this country has acceptance for a plain
by the side of the river; which is sufficiently descriptive of the site of
this place. There was in the cathedral church, as before noted, an altar called
Howall's altar, erected perhaps by some benefactor who bestowed this place on
the church; or indeed it might be called Hotoun's hall, from the prior who
built it in the thirteenth century; the corruption to Houghhall seems a
familiar one. The house has been moated round and otherwise fortified:
Tradition says Sir Arthur Hazelrigge possessed it, and that Oliver lodged there
for some time; it is certain it was refitted, and perhaps put into a state of
defense by some of that party; the arms of Cromwell now remain on one of the
mantle-pieces in the house.

At the distance of a mile to the south-west, but on the opposite side of the
river, stands

BUTTERBY,
anciently written Beautrove, from its beautiful situation. The river Were runs
almost round the chief part of the estate, the neck of land which divides the
streams being only about two hundred yards wide. Here, it has been imagined,
stood the ancient hospital of St Leonard; the founder and institution not now
known. The lands are remarkably fertile; the river near the house falls swiftly
over a rough channel, under high rocky shores and hanging woods: On the more
distant side of the estate the river flows deep and slow, forming a canal a
mile in length, where the adjacent lands make a considerable plain. There is
not a sweeter rural scene in the whole county, unadorned and in simple nature,
for art has not yet extended her hand hither, further than in the ordinary
course of agriculture. As this place is remarkable for its beauty, so it is for
natural curiosities; surrounded with the river, from the fissure of a rock,
which lies about forty feet from the shore, flows a considerable spring of salt
water, mixed with a mineral quality. The situation of this spring subjects it
to a mixture of fresh water, so that it is difficult to know how much salt it
contains in its purest state; on several trials it has yielded double the
quantity produced from sea water. The shore for a considerable distance shows
many ouzings, or small issues of salt water; from which circumstance, and by a
dike or break of the rocks in the channel of the river, a little above the
spring, it is presumed a rock or bed of salt might be won of some value: It has
never been searched for; the family who lately possessed the estate, from a
love of retirement and ease, neglected a trial. The spring is much resorted to
in summer for its medical qualities; but as the well is not enclosed by any
building, it is frequently overflowed by the river. This water is reputed to be
an effectual remedy for a disease known among people employed in smelting and
refining houses belonging to the lead works. Half a pint is sufficiently
purgative for the strongest person. Within a few yards of the salt spring, on
the opposite shore, is a fluent spring strongly impregnated with sulphur,
without any vitriolic or other compound We find the following account of this
spring in Gibson's edition of Camden, which is transcribed almost literally
from Baker's Chronicle.

The Spadacrene is between Butterby and Durham on Elvet moor.

A little below Branspeth, the Were has many huge stones in its channel, never
covered but when the river is overflowed by rains: Upon these if you pour
water, and it mix a little with the stone, it becomes brackish, a thing which
happens nowhere else. Nay, at Butterby, a little village, when the river is
shallow, and sunk from these stones in the summer time, there bursts out of
them a reddish salt water, which grows so white and hard by the heat of the sun
(as has been thought) that they who live thereabouts use it for salt. But that
the saltness itself proceeds not from the heat of the sun, is plain by
experience, in that which is most saltish, and issues out of a rock, in as much
as if all the water be laved out of the place, there immediately bubbles out of
the body of the rock a water as salt as the former; and besides, the rock out
of which it issues is a salt rock of a sparkling substance. On the other side
of the Were, there is also a medicinal spring of strong sulphur; and above it,
toward Durham, is a mineral water, of the vitriolic kind, upon which Dr Wilson
wrote his Spadacrene Dunelmensis.

In Lowthorp's Abridgment of the Philosophical Transactions, vol. ii. p. 333,
the following account is inserted, given by Mr Hugh Todd.

About a mile and a half out of Durham, on the north east side near Butterby,
was lately discovered a medicinal spring, which is much frequented, and may be
of great benefit to the country. It was found by workmen that dug in that place
for coal. When they were twelve fathom and a half deep they discovered this
treasure of natural physic. They then tried the rock about one hundred yards
off, where they lost themselves much about the same depth, and instead of coal,
discovered an excellent spring of clear water, which issues out of the hole
their instruments made. These springs are in a deep gill or valley on the shore
opposite to Butterby.

Ibid. vol ii. p. 351, p' Mr Todd.

At Saltwater Haugh, near Butterby, about a mild and a half from Durham, in the
middle of the river Were. rises a salt spring. It is good to be seen and tasted
only in the summer time, when the water is discharged all on one side of the
channel, for in winter when the river is high it loses its salt in the fresh
streams, so that they ^^e not perceivable. The water seems to bubble up equally
in all parts of the channel for the space of fo^^y ^a^ds in length, and about
ten in breadth. The filtest of all the springs issues out of the middle of a
rock, the surface of which was manifestly saltish, and which in a hot day, as I
was told, would be all covered over (...) a persect salt. I had all the water
laved out of the place where it seemed to stagnate, and immedia^^ out of the
body of the rock there bubbled up water as salt as the former. It was as high
as any brine can be and though but little in quantity, in comparison of the
fresh river, yet of that force to give a brackishness to the ^^ca^^ one hundred
yards below. Those that have boiled this brine say, that it affords a great
quantity (...) baysalt, n^^ so palatable, yet as useful as ordinary salt is. It
tinges all the stones with a red color. The ^ea is eight miles off where
nearest.


.

The prospect from an adjacent head-land, called Croxdale Scar, is deservedly
admired by every visitant: It commands an extensive view of the valley toward
the west, with the channel of the river for several miles through a country
highly cultivated. Over a fine plain, at the distance of a mile, are seen
Sunderland bridge of four arches, with Croxdale, the beautiful seat-house of
William Salvin, esquire on the left, and Burnigill on the right; the scene animated
by passengers on the great southern turnpike road: Beyond the bridge the vale
narrows and winds toward the south, diversified by woodlands, cottages, and
enclosures: To the right you look down upon the vale of Butterby, belted round
with the crystal waters of the Were, and the eye traces its varied shores, its
rocks and sylvan scenes: Beyond which lies an extended valley, terminated by
the village of Shincliff, and enclosed on every side with lofty forests.

The manor-house of Butterby stands in a pleasant garden, which, with the whole
offices are enclosed by a deep moat, walled round, and though now dry, is
capable of being filled with water to the depth of 15 feet: The entrance is by
a strong gateway and bridge. The secluded situa^ion of the house shuts it from
distant prospects; but such as it commands are romantic and rural. In cleansing
the moat some years ago, in a large stone trough were found a coat of mail,
with a cap of chain work quilted in canvas, a halbert, breastplate and buckler:
In an adjacent field, where it is supposed an ancient chapel stood, many stone
coffins and holy water jars were dug up.

This is a manor and constablery of itself, free of all manner of tithes,
paying a prescript rent of 1l. 13s. 4d. to the curate of Croxdale, at Midsummer.

Butterby was part of the ancient possessions of the Lumleys, of Lumley castle:
Sir Marmaduke Lomeley held it, and from him it descended to Robert his son, who
died seized thereof in the 36th year of bishop Hatfield, 1381, as appears by an
inquisition taken at Durham, before Will. del Bows, escheator: Ralph de Lumley
was his brother and heir, and was possessed thereof at the time of his
attainder, 1st king Henry IV. 1329; after which, in great bounty, the crown in
the following year granted to Eleanor his lady, daughter of John lord Nevil of
Raby, and sister of Ralph earl of Westmoreland, 20l. a year out of the duties
of Hull, together with the manors of Beautrove and Stranton: Thomas, her eldest
son, died possessed of the castle of Lumley, and manors of Stanley, Stanton,
Ricklesden, and Beautrove, in the 5th Henry IV. leaving his eldest son Sir
John, who was restored in blood in the thirteenth year of that reign. As we do
not find Beautrove in any future inquisitions taken on the deaths of the Lumley
family, we may conclude it passed as a marriage portion with Margaret, one of
the daughters of Ralph Lumley, who married Sir John Clervaux of Croft, or
otherwise sold into that family; for Elizabeth, the heiress of Clervaux,
married Christopher Chaytor, and carried with her large possessions: And we
find, in the 8th year of queen Elizabeth, this Christ. Chaytor was possessed of
Beautrove, and suffered a recovery Record of Homage 7 bishop Barnes. --
Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
thereof in Cur. D'nae reginae apud Dunelm. Had this estate come into the crown
by the attainder of George Lumley, in the 29th king Henry VIII. we know of no
grant of so early a date as to admit such limitations taking place in the
Chaytors' family, as required a recovery being suffered, as before noted, to
dock and defeat the same; the whole length of time being only, a period of
twenty years. Nicholas Chaytor, of Croft, in the county of York, esquire by his
will, dated February 8, 1665, made several provisions out of this manor for his
younger children, and subject thereto the estate descended to his eldest son
Sir William Chaytor PEDIGREE OF CHAYTORS OF BUTTERBY. From the visitation of Wm
Flower and R. St George, N. Ks. of A. 1575 and 1615. Arms. Party p' bend
dauncette 3 cingroils pierced counterchanged.
John Chaytor, de Newcastel, mercator. Christophorus Chaytor, de Butterby,
mensor R. Eliz. pro com. Dunelm, Ao 1575. Elizabetha filia Will. Clervaulx de
Croft, postea haeres. Margareta. Joanna, ux Rad. Willey de Houghton, in Durham.
Hugo. ob. ^. p. Anthonius Chaytor, filius and haeres 1575. Aet. 28. Margery, d.
of W. Thornton, of Newton, esquire Will. C^aytor. Francis d. of Sir James
Bellingham. Richard. Thomas. Christopher. 3 fill. Thomas, 4 fill Registrary of
dioc. Durh. Jane, d. of Sir Nich. Tempest. Henry, Aet. 8. 1615. Nicholas.
Thomas. Therononie. Isabell. Margaret. Troth. Mary. Eliza. Beatrix.


genealogy


. In the 6th year of king William III. 1695, an act of parliament was obtained,
entitled, an act to vest certain lands of Sir William Chaytor, bart St
Oswald's. On a mural monument at the east end of the north aile, upon a blue
square stone, in golden capitals, under a coat of arms.
In obitum Christoferi Chaiter, de Butterbie armigeri qui obiit 17 Aprilis Anno
D'ni 1592, anno aetatis suae 98.
Aspice quam subito volvuntur singula casu
Occidit heu inopum fautor p' tecta Butrobi
A Christo nomenq. ferens cognomine Chaiters
Hic custos pacis, custos suit ille registri:
Hic viduae causas egit, causasque pupilli
Hic regius terram signavit limite mensor
Fidus erat sidis, nullusque in pectore sucus
Omnibus et mitis, dictis suit ille facetus
Terra tegit cineres, men's vivit in aethere summo
En, gnatus natu minimus, nunc p'manet haeres
Condigni patris, nec non sua munia prestans
Haec tibi devinctus, scripsit monumenta Dethiceus.

. in Yorkshire and Durham, to be sold for payment of debts charged thereon, and
to secure portions for younger children; by virtue of which the manor of
Butterby was sold in 1713, to Thomas, John, and Humphrey Doubleday, sons of
Robert Doubleday, then late of Jarrow, in this county, a Quaker family, under
which purchase it soon after became the sole property of Humphrey, save
one-third of the salt-springs reserved to the use of John Doubleday and his
heirs. Humphrey's eldest son, Martin Doubleday, dying a bachelor, he devised
the manor with his other estates, to his mother, who, by her will, devised the
same upon trust to be sold; and it has lately been purchased by Mr Ward of
Sedgefield.

About a mile south of Butterby is

CROXDALE,
the seat of the family of Salvin We find in the Cursitors Rolls, in the 15th
year of bishop Skirlaw, a writ to Robert Coniers, esch. to make livery to
Gerrard Salvin, son of Gerrard Salvin, of Hersewell, and Agnes his wife, of the
manor of Croxdale, to which she was entitled as daughter and heir of Joan, late
wife of William de Ressery deceased. -- No such marriage appears in the
pedigrees, which is remarkable, as this large possession came into the family
by that means.

6th bishop James. Livery to Gerrard, son and heir of Gerrard Salvin. -- Rudd's
MSS.


; an excellent house, placed on a lofty situation, and commanding a most
beautiful prospect of the vale through which the river Were winds its course,
stretching several miles toward the south-west; Sunderland bridge is in front,
and the enlivened prospect of the great southern road with the passengers, at
the agreeable distance of half a mile. It is bordered by extensive woods and
plantations, and embellished with pleasure grounds and gardens in a good taste.

The first mention made of Croxdale in the records before us, is in bishop
Langley's inspeximus, dated 1431 Rot L. Langley, No 14. Dat. 1431. -- Randal's
MSS.
, of a grant of bishop Anthony Bek, dated 1299, whereby the prelate granted to
Walter de Robiry, certain lands of Queryndon moor, extending to the fields of
Croxdale; and also an inspeximus of Richard of Routhbery's grant of the same
lands to John de Denum Joh. de Denum ob. circa, 1326.
; another inspeximus of a grant from John de Denum to Richard de Routhbery for
life, of the manor of Croxdale, with the before mentioned lands, by the service
of a rose at the feast of St John the Baptist. In the 37th year of bishop
Hatfield, the manor was in the possession of Robert de Whalton, who obtained
license to alien the same, with limitations to his issue Rudd's MSS.
. In the 14th year of bishop Skirlaw, A. D. 1402, it appears by an inquisition,
that the manor of Croxdale was in the hands of trustees, to the use of the
heirs of Robert Tirwhit, held of the lord bishop in capite, by suit at three
head courts.

In 1474, we find Croxdale was become the possession of the Salvin family, and
that Gerard Salvin died seized of the manor De terr. liberand. Gerardo Salvin.
Rot. B. Booth, No 151. -- Dat. 24 Jul. 1474. -- Randal's MSS.

St Oswald. On a monument of white marble fixed to the north wall in the
chancel. Prope hunc locum inhumatus est JARRARDUS SALVIN, de Croxdale in agro
Dunelmensi armiger, vicesimus Primus (sine intermissione) ejusdem) Nominis fuit
and loci. Jarrardum, filium Suum apparentem. strategum, illo Superstite,
perduelliones and ribaldos, apud Northallerton In comitatu Eboracensi, pro rege
Carolo primo demicantem, trucidebant, heredem tamen alterum reliquit Jarrardum.
Subditus fuit fidelis, maritus indulgens, Pater providus, ex hujus vitae
argastulo evasit decimo octavo die Januarij, 1663 Anno que Aetatis suae 74.
PEDIGREE. OF SALVINS OF CROXDALE. Extracted from the beforementioned
visitation books, etc. with additions. Arms. Arg. on a chief sab, a great T,
between two mullets of the field. [ From a manuscript in the Harleian
Collection, 1499.]
From a MS. composed by Mr Tho Bows, of Bradley, (end copied by Mr Allan) he
is said to be the son of Geo. Salvin, by Eliz. d. etc. of Peter de Mawley
(Malolacu) with whom he had, and was seized of the barony of Ecton, Newbiggin,
Isle Park, Cockwold-banks, Doncaster, Barse-Castle, Pocklington, Sutton,
Southcotes, Stonneferry, and Bainton


Sir John Salvin, knight. -- d. of Gray, of Heton, in Northumberland. N. B.
Bowes' MS. says d. Sir Rob. Constable, of Flamborough. Thomas Salvin. Mary, d.
to the baron of Graystock. Sir Rauff Salvin, mar. twice. Elizabeth; d. of Hugh
Hastings, of Fenwick, knt. first wife. George Salvin. Margaret, d. of Sir W.
Bulmer, knight. He had another wife, d. of Sir Ra. Ellerker.
Francis Salvin. Margery, d. of Sir Ra. Evers, knight. Ralph. So far that
record goes. 4 daughters. Matthew, 2 son. William, 3 son. -- 4 son. Ann.
Margery. John. Robert. Elizabeth.


genealogy


, and Gerard was his son and heir, then of the age of twenty-one years and
upwards, from which time the family have held an uninterrupted possession.

There is a chapel here under St Oswald's, which being only three miles from
Durham, was generally served by a monk from the convent: It is a mean building,
consisting of a nave or body and chancel, very dark, and in poor repair: No
arms or monuments, or any thing memorable. It is in the deanery of Easington,
and a Peculiar belonging to the dean and chapter of Durham, not certified or in
charge, consequently pays no first fruits or tenths, but only 2s. 6d. as
procurations to the bishop. The real value (1767) was 52l. 10s L. s. d.
Prescript in lieu of all tithes for Butterby 1 13 4 Due at Midsummer. -- for
hay of Sunderland bridge 1 8 0 Due at Michaelmas. -- for hay and corn for
Croxdale 1 0 10 Due at Easter.

Curates. -- John, 1170 -- Tho. Williamson, 1529 -- Wm Blunt, 1530 Nich.
Burnchoppe, oc. 6th Feb. 1564 Fra. Brackenburye, cl. 1570 -- Geo. Barker, 1604
-- Nich. Walton, A. M. 12th Nov. 1616 -- J. Green, 2d Jul. 1639 -- Rich.
Roberts, A M. 24th Oct. 1667 -- John Milner, A. B. 15th Apr. 1675 -- Rob.
Thompson, A. M. 1st Nov. 1681 -- John Smith A. M. 4th Nov. 1682 -- John Lille,
A. M. 21st Jul. 1684 -- Abra. Yap^, A. B. 16th Feb. 1694 -- Fra. Woodmas, A. M.
16th Nov. 1695 -- Rob. Leeke, A. M. 28th Jan. 1696 -- Tho. Sherman, A. B. 29th
Oct. 1700 -- Rob. Leeke; he was presented again, I suppose, after Sherman's
death John Powell, A. M. 27th Nov 1703 -- John Waring, A. M. 31st May, 1714 --
John Parkinson, A M. 15th Mar. 1715 -- H^ld by sequestration; I presume Waring
ob. 1716. Rich. Dunn, A. M. 31st Aug. 1723 -- John Delaval, A M. 18th Dec. 1725
-- Edward Gregory, A. B. 1731 -- John Branfoot, A. M. 1st Dec. 1712 -- Rob.
Davison, A. M. 19th Oct. 1742 -- Tho. Hayes, A. M. 27th Nov. 1759 -- Jonath.
Bransoot, A. B. 29th Jul. 1761 -- John Wheeler, A. B. 20th July, 1765. --
Randal's MSS.


.

From a manuscript of the late Mr Ra. Hodgson's of Durham.
Sir Gerrard Salvin, of Thorpsalvin, knight. --, d. of Sir Anselm St Quinton,
knight. Brian Salvin, of Thorpsalvin, esquire --, d. of John Folyatt, knight.
Gerrard. --, d. of Sir Wm Skergill, knight. George, of Thorpsalvin. Gerrard
Salvin, of Duffield, esquire --, d. of Sir Tho. Santon, knt. John Salvin, of
Duffield. From hence the visitation in 1615.
Gerrard Salvin, of Croxdale, esquire --, d. of -- Wren. Gerrard. --, d. of --
Norton, of Norton, Yorkshire. Gerrard. Ann, d. of Hum. Blakiston, of Great
Chilton. Jerrard Salvin, of Croxdale, esquire living 1615, ob. ^^. 74, A. D. 1663.
Dorothy, d. of Bryan Belasyse, esquire of Morton. -- N. B. This is placed by
conjecture, as such a marriage occurs about that time. -- M. T. Jerrard, esquire of
Croxdale. Ann, d. of -- Clavering, esquire of Callaly, Northumberland. Mary, mar.
Edw. Haggerston, esquire Cath ob. unmar. Bryan Salvin, of Croxdale, esquire Ob. 1751.
Ann, d. of Sir Wm Haggerston, of Haggerston, bart. Jerrard. Brian All died s.
p. Marmaduke. Edward. Ann. Margaret, d. s. p. William, of Croxdale, esquire living
1786. Mary, d. of Sir Ed. Gascoigne, bart. 1st wife d. s. p. Catharine, d. of
T. Thornton, esquire of Netherwitton, Northum. Jerrard, eld. s. d. young, 1780.
Catharine m. T. Stanley Massey, esquire Priddington, co. Chester. Anne d. young. Wm
Salvin, eld. surviving son. Bryan born 1779. Mary. Margaret. Frances.
Elizabeth. Mary m. Geo. Markham. esquire of Claxby, Lincolnshire. Ob. 1776. Ann
married Walter Strickland, of Sizergh, esquire Westmoreland. William. Ralph.
Francis de Elmdon, esquire About this time a Bryan Salvin, of Croxdale, mar. Cath.
d. of Sir Tho. Tempest, of Stella. -- He had two other wives. Ellen. Muriel.
Eliza. Robert. John. Marie mar. Ra. Bulmer, esquire


genealogy


A small rivulet runs at the foot of the pleasure grounds, called Croxdale
beck; this water passes through a very romantic channel, and supplies a
paper-mill: It makes its way in a deep and narrow dell, just sufficient to
admit a winding road to the mill. The rocks on each hand are shaken and
columnar, affording several grand and awful scenes; the precipices overhang the
vale; and large forest trees, bending from the cliffs, extend their solemn
shade on every side. The natural grottos watered with cascades, the mossy
banks, the falling streams of the brook, the gloom of the thick foliage, the
grotesque rocks, the spreading arms of the oaks, the grassy plots that border
the rivulets, all conspire to please the mind that has a taste for solitude,
romantic scenes, and rural meditation. Was a little art employed to smooth the
paths, to remove some few deformities, and with a skilful hand to dress the
wild beauties of the vale, we know not where a more extraordinary scene could
be found. The dell is so deep, that on very few days in the year the sun's rays
touch the mill-house, and a person might live there for an age and never enjoy
that spectacle. In days of deep ignorance and superstition, this dell was
thought to be the residence of evil spirits; an idea which gained credit,
perhaps, from its being a place resorted to by robbers and vagabonds. To banish
the infernal inhabitants, a cross was erected here, which gave name to the
adjacent lands, this being in several old writings wrote Croixdale; so the
desert of Cross-fell, in Cumberland, is in old authors and charts called Fiends
Fell; and since the erection of a cross thereon, to vanquish the legions of
Satan, it has obtained the present name of Cross-Fell.

Returning toward Durham by the turnpike road,

BURNHALL
lies to the left, the seat of Geo. Smith, esquire Wm Smith, cl. was rector of
Lowther in Westmorland; ob. 30th Nov. 1675, and was buried in the chancel there.

His son Dr John Smith, a famous orthodox divine, was born at Lowther in the
year 1659, settled at Durham 1681 ad^^t^^d a minor canon 1682, and was
nominated to the churches of Croxdale and Witton Gilbert in 1686; ^eat in
Madrid as chaplain to lord Lansdowne, then ambassador. In 1694, lord Crewe,
bishop of Durham, constituted him his domestic chaplain: 1695, he was collated
to the rectory of Gateshead and (...), and to a prebend of Durham in the month
of September; in 1699, was treasurer of the cath. ch.; 1^0^. he was collated to
the rectory of Bishop weremouth, and built the parsonage house there; died at
Camb. ^^th Jul. 1715, aet. (...) and was buried in St John's chapel. He mar.
Mary, eldest daughter of Wm Cooper of Sea ^rough, by his wife ^hiladelphia,
fifth daughter of Henry Smith, of West-Horrington and Moreton-house, which
Henry was half-brother to Sir G. Baker, of Crook, by their mother Mary,
daughter of Lio. Heron, of Chipchase castle, esquire who was married first to
Oswald Baker, esquire and after his death to Will. Smith of Durham and West
Herrington, esquire counselor at law, whence the said Mary Cooper was allied in
blood to Geo. Baker, esquire founder of 6 exhib. in St John's col. Camb. She died
in 1729, aet 57, and was buried in the cath. chapter yard. They had issue George,
John, and Joseph. George was of Burnhall, born 7th May, 1693; took orders in
the Nonjuring church, and was made titular bishop of Durham; a famous
antiquary, and editor of Bede's Works, and a tract entitled "Saxons not
converted to Popery"; ob. 4th Nov. and buried in Elvet churchyard, Durham,
1756: He married Christian, daughter of Hilkia Bedford. John was a Blackhall
factor; died and was buried at Durham, 1731. Joseph was fellow of Trin. Col.
Camb. died 1739; married a woman of no character at Camb. called Betty Woodgen.
George Smith, esquire had issue John Smith, esquire M. D. ob. 1752, aet. 29; buried in
Little St Mary's, Durham; married Anne, dau. of Nich. Shuttleworth, esquire and by
her had issue an only son, the present Geo. Smith, esquire who was a student at St
Andrew's, in Scotland, and now owner of Persfield, in Monmouthshire. -- [See a
full pedigree of this family in Thoresby's Ducatus Leodiensis, p. 21.]


The house stands in a low situation, on the banks of the river Bourn or Brune,
from whence the house took its name. Mr Smith has made great improvements to
his seat and adjacent lands: A farmhouse, on the opposite side of the turnpike
road, is called Old Burnhall. In the 25th year of bishop Hatfield, we find this
manor was the estate of Robert de Brackenbury, held of the lord of Brancepeth
by the fourth part of a knight's fee, value 10l. Inq. p. m. Rob. de
Brackenburye, ao 25o Hatfield ap. Dun. cor. W. de Menevylle vic. Dun.

Inq. p. m. Alicia dau'r of Gilbert, heir of Robert. Nicholas brother of
Gilbert, and her uncle, heir, ao 35o Hatfield co. W. de Bows esc.

Inq. p. m. Matil. q. fuit uxor. Joh'is Claxton cl'ici, etc. manerio de Magna
Brune, etc. te. de com. Westm'l. p. hom. and fid. and quartam p'tem un. feod.
mil. etc. ao 17o Langley


In the 5th king Richard II. 1381, it was called in the record Burnemagna, and
was then held by Alicia the daughter and heiress of Gilbert de Brackenbury, of
John de Nevill, lord of Raby. It came into the family of the Claxtons by
marriage with Maud, daughter and heiress of Will. de Brackenbury, and was then
held of the earl of Westmorland. It was afterward the property of the Peacocks
1688, Nov. 10, arms were granted to Simon Peacock of Burnhall, viz. Sable,
three peacocks in pride argent, a chief embattled, or. -- See Guillim, p. 233.
.

Near Burnhall house is a house vulgarly called Farewell Hall, situated on the
side of the turnpike road; this was the family house of the Farnhams, who
possessed a considerable landed property. The manor of Relley, which lies at
the point of land between the rivulets of Brune and Derness, with lands in
Aldernage, by the license of bishop Bury, were purchased by the convent of
Durham of Richard de Castro Bernardi Rot. B. Hatfield, Sch. 2, No 1.
Tho. d g. etc. S. Cu. Ric'us de Bury, etc. ac ja. p. quand. inq. cor. dil'co
and fideli n'ro Joh'e de Hyndsey esc. etc. p. l're n'ru. de ad q'd damnu. etc.
non est ad dampnu. etc. man'iu. de Rylly and dece. acr. t're cu. p'tin. in
Aldyngrige q'e fueru't Ric'i de Castro Barnardi cl'ici, etc. Dat. 28th Ap. 1379.


.

ALDERNAGE HOUSE, otherwise called Aldin-Grainge, in a pleasant retired
situation on the banks of the Brune, was the place of residence of John
Bedford, esquire M. D. in the last years of his life; with a considerable estate
adjoining, held under the dean and chapter of Durham, by lease for twenty-one
years Extract from Nichol's Anecdotes of Wm Bowyer, Printer, F. S. A. 1782. --
"The name of Bedford has occured so often in this volume, that it becomes
necessary to give some account of the family. Hilkiah Bedford, of Sibsey, in
Lincolnshire, a Quaker, came to London, and settled there as a stationer,
between the years 1600 and 1625. He married a daughter of Mr Wm Platt, of
Highgate, by whom he had a son, Hilkiah, a mathematical instrument maker, in
Hosier-lane, near West-Smithfield. In this house (which was afterward burnt in
the great fire of London, 1666) was born the famous Hilkiah, July 23, 1663;
who, in 1667, was admitted of St John's college, Cambridge, the first scholar
on the foundation of his maternal grandfather, William Platt. Hilkiah was
afterward elected fellow of his college, and patronised by Hencage Finch, earl
of Winchelsea, but deprived of his preferment (which was in Lincolnshire) for
refusing to take the oaths at the Revolution, and afterward kept a
boarding-house for the Westminster scholars. In 1714, being tried in the court
of King's Bench, he was fined 1000 marks, and imprisoned three years, for
writing, printing, and publishing "The Hereditary Right of the Crown of England
asserted, 1713," folio; the real author of which was George Harbin, a nonjuring
clergyman, whom his friendship thus screened, and on account of his sufferings
he received 100l. Perhaps the pocketing of the hundred pounds required no
ceremony; for Bedford "was prosecuted, and suffered imprisonment for fathering"
the book; which notorious fact, known to lord Weymouth and all the world, might
sufficiently account for the benefaction to Bedford, whether he was looked upon
to be the author of the book or not. But the strange part of the story is, that
Harbin, the author of the book, should carry the money to him as the real
author.


from the earl of Weymouth, who knew not the real author. His other
publications were, a translation of an answer to Fontenelle's History of
Oracles, and a Latin life of Dr Barwick, which he afterward translated into
English. He died in 1724. By his wife Alice, daughter of William Cooper, esquire he
had three sons; 1. William I have a number of this gentleman's letters to Dr Z.
Gray, in MS.
, educated at St John's College (appointed physician to Christ's hospital,
1746, and register of the college of physicians, London, of which he was fellow
and censor, and died July 11, 1747, leaving by his second wife an only daughter
Elizabeth, married to John Claxton, esquire of Lincoln's Inn, and of Shirley, near
Croydon, Surry, F. A. S.) 2. Thomas, a divine He was editor of Symeon Dunelm.
Hist. published in 1732.
. And 3, John Who used to sign himself "John Bedford, M. D. Univ. Patav." About
the year 1761, he retired from practice, and lived remarkably recluse. He was
described by a gentleman who visited him in 1766, as near in his expenses,
sober and regular in his living, exact in his payments, and punctual in his
promises. He had at that time an intention of putting up a monument to his
father, in the church of which he was deprived. He was thrice married; died in
1776, very rich; and left a son, Hilkiah, who was entered in the summer of
1768, of St John's College, Cambridge, became a fellow of that college, and a
counselor, and died greatly beloved in 1779. Dr John Bedford had also two
daughters: Elizabeth died single in August 1765: The other, Alice, (born in
1748) was married in 1766, to -- Hall, esquire of Durham, and is now a widow.


, a physician at Durham. He had also three daughters, of whom Christian the
eldest married George Smith, esquire The following inscription is copied from a
blue marble altar tomb in Elvet churchyard, Durham.

Here lies the body Of GEORGE SMITH, of BURNHALL, esquire The venerable remains of
a most valuable person, Whose manners, life, and writings, Gave a luster to his
birth and station. And showed, that with the name, He had all the
qualifications Of a gentleman, a christian, and a scholar. He dyed November 4,
1756, in the 64th year of his age. Near him are also buried twelve of his
Children, who dyed infants, viz. 7 sons And 5 daughters. Also Christian, Wife
of the said George Smith. Who died the 23d of July, 1781, Aged 79. Not in
Nichol's publication. On a monument of white marble, fixed to the wall of the
east end of the south aile of St Oswald's church. GEORGIO SMITH, de Burnhall,
armigero, qui hac in urbe natus, Academicisque disciplinis Oxonii primum deinde
Cantabrigiae institutus, Ita postea linguarum, historiaeq. and theologiae
studiis se totum dedit, Ut inter celebriores aevi scriptores Scriptor ipse
acutus gravis eruditus enitesceret. Quam raro autem et felici exemplo Literis
Saxonicis operam impenderet Praeclara Bedae testatur editio Post patris sui
labores morte interceptos a filio adhuc juvene absoluta, variisque Haud
vulgaris argumenti and doctrinae Dissertationibus illustrata. Vitam ad
severiora Religionis instituta propius exactam Humanitatis interim et
Benevolentiae Condimentis ita temperavit Ut maximam nomini suo dignitatem
Virtuti ipsi decus quoddam and splendorem conciliasse videretur. Vir pius
prudens integer mansuctus Officiosus omnibus, omnibusq. carus, Ipsi imprimis
luctuosae viduae, Quam amanter viventem foveret Mortuumque aeque desideret
Testem hoc marmor perennem esse Voluit Obiit die 4 mensis November. 1756 anno
Aetatis 64.
; of Burnhall; Elizabeth married fifty years to the Rev. Mr Gordon, who died
advanced in years within a week after her, October 1779; Mary married to Mr
John Soleby, druggist, in Holborn.


.

BROOM is frequently mentioned in our ancient records. By an inquisition taken
in the third year of bishop Bury, it appears, lands in Broom were the
possession of Constantia del Brom, who held them in capite by fealty and ten
shillings rent, and Thomas del Brom was her son and heir. In the year 1362,
Richard de Wyteparys died seized of lands in Netherbrome, held of the bishop of
Durham at 6s. 8d. rent, which paid a rentcharge of 20s. yearly to the prior of
Durham; and also lands in Overbrome, held of the prior of Durham at 2s. rent.
By bishop Hatfield's survey Brom cum Flash.

Robertus Belford tenet j mess. and xxx acr. terrae quond'm Alani Brom and
red. xiijs. iiijd. and j rod terrae de novo approat. etc ijd.

Will's Ward j mes. and xxx acr. xiij s. iiij d. -- and j plac. juxta ten.
suum iiijd. -- Tho. Ryndwode j mes. and xv. acr. vjs. iiijd. -- j acr. de novo
approat. iiijd. -- Tho. Yoman, Robertus Palman, Johannes de Lambeton, Johannes
de Cawode tenent, etc.

Haeres Thomae de Essh tenet j mes. and xxxiiij acr. viijs. and manner de Essh,
etc. j lib. cene and mult. al parcel.

Prior Dunolm. tenet xx acr. terrae libere quond'm Rich. Whitparish and red.
vjs. viijd.

Haeredes Thomae de Hexham tenent ij acr. juxta Bromeholme and red. xij d. etc.
-- Hatfield's Survey.


it is stated, that one Robert Belford held lands which formerly belonged to
the family of Brom, and that there were sundry other proprietors, among whom
the prior of Durham is noted to be in possession of Wyteparys lands. In the
31st year of bishop Hatfield, by an inquisition taken on the death of Thomas de
Hexham, whose heirs are named in the survey before noted, we find he died
seized of the manor of Broom, held of the prior of Finchale by fealty and four
shillings rent. In a license of bishop Fordham's, for the priory of Durham to
obtain lands in mortmain, dated 1388, certain lands in Le Brom are mentioned
Rot. Fordham, Sch. 10. No 13.
, formerly the estate of John Cawoode, named in the survey before referred to,
T'e. de Pr. ut de Cella sua Fynkhall. In the beginning of the fifteenth
century, the 27th year of bishop Langley, it became part of the great
possessions of the Fossour family, who afterward wrote their name Forcer
Man'co del Brom juxta Aldyngrenge and octod'cim acr. t're cu. p'tin ib. ex
dono and concessio Tho. Copper and Tho. Kellawe capellor. he'nd sibi and
he'dib's int. eos (Johan ux.) litie p'creat imp'p'm q'd. quid. man. and t'r.
cu. p'tin. te' de Pr. Dun. p' que servicia jur. ign. etc.

PEDIGREE OF FORCERS.
Johannes Forcer de Kellowe, in epatu. Elizabeth, fill. Radi Ellarcase Mil. ux.
2. Radulphus. Franciscus. Bartholomus. -- Filia Joh'is Awderwood, de Midridge
Graynge, in epatu. Thomas Forcer, de Kellowe. -- ^il. Joh'is Racket de
Wharr^ton, ux. 1. Thomas. Margareta. Elizabetha, fill. Joh'is Trollope, ux, 1ma
Johannis de Kellowe, Ao 1575. Margareta filia Xtoferi Carre de Shirburnhouse.
Thomas, Aet. 18, Ao 1575. Margareta. Elizabetha.


genealogy

Flower's visitation.
.

Part of BEAUREPAIRE, or BEARPARK Bearpark.

Moiety de q. est en paroch. de Witton l'aut Elvet.

Locus de Bello redditu. olim suit vaccaria pertin. ad Eleemosynam Dun. de qua
excambium p' Moorhouse farm p' B. priorem Dun. -- 4 Reg. D. and Cha. fo. 1 and
41.

Bertramus prior construxit cameram cum capello ib'm.


, lies in the parish of St Oswald, particularly the remains of the prior's
house Camden.

Hugo de Derlington prior inclusit Bewpark.

Fuit rustica prior Dun. seeds and John Fossour prior ib'm vixit and obiit.

Vide plus de eo. Rot. Bainbridge, B. No 64, and Cart. D. and Cha.

Custod. parce de Bearpark, granted p' les priors p' patent purvy cum feodo. --
Mickleton's MSS.

Ex tabula pencilibus Dunelmensis.

Rex David venit ad Bewrepark, ubi sixit tentoria. Hoc tempore, exercitus
Anglorum erat apud Akeland.

Ex antiquo codice Dunelmensi.

Tempore Berthrami prioris vaccaria quaedam prope Dunelm um mutata est in locum
solatii and edificiis ornata; a quo tempore dicta est Beaurepaire, id est
Bellus redditus.

A. D. 1264. Hugo de Derlington, prior Dunelmen. fecit magn. campanile; Parcos
de Beaurepaire and Muggleswick, Stangnum de Fery, Pitington, Benliffe,
Mukeling; Ille fecit manerium de Ketton, capellam aula^ and cameras de codem;
Cameras de Pitington, Westow, and Wardlaw, postea a Scottis destructas. Fecit
ins^or cameram de Mugleswick aquam de Devernesset de Broun. -- Lel. Itin. vol.
viij.


. Originally part of the possessions of the bishop, it was obtained in exchange
by prior Bertram, for Moorhouse; who, having a desire for a rural retreat for
himself and successors, in this place erected a camera or lodge, with a chapel.
Prior Hugh, of Darlington, who succeeded him at the distance of about fourscore
years, in bishop Stichill's time, enclosed the park; it is also said by the
monkish writers, he built a camera here, which we may conceive implies he added
to or improved prior Bertram's erections. Whilst bishop Bek persecuted the
convent, he broke down the fences of the park, and drove out the game. In the
reign of king Edward II. the Scotch, among other depredations committed in the
environs of the city, pillaged and defaced this beautiful retreat. Prior
Fossour See page 89.
had great pleasure in this place; to him we may attribute part of the
embellishments, for the architecture of the chapel points out the improvements
of a refined age; and as he acceded to his office in 1342, it may be presumed
he restored Beaurepaire after the destroying hand of the Scots, in 1346, when
David Bruce, as Camden says, ferro and flamma foevisset. As authors are silent
touching Beaurepaire from this period, it is probable nothing material happened
to it till the dissolution. The manor, with the house and park, were part of
the possessions of the monastery, restored by the king's endowment, after the
institution of the dean and chapter.

In the time of dean Granville, who was instituted in 1684, an inquisition was
taken of the deanery possessions, in which we find Beaurepaire thus described: "
Proeter domos sive aedificia apud Dun. fuit and est spectan. ad decan. decanat.
Dun. et 40, 50, aut 60 annos ultimo elaps. et ultra, necnon p' te'pus, cujus
contrarii memoria hominis non existit, fuit stan. and existen. apud Bearparke,
infra com. and dioc. Dun. quaedam domus mansional. vocat. the manor house of
Bearpark, quae quidem domus mansionalis distans est a decanatu Dunelm. p' unu.
miliare Anglicanu. vel eo circiter; ac infra eand. dom. mansionalem sunt, seu
saltem antiquitus and ab initio fuere stan. and existen. Cameae seu partitiones
and cellae particular. sequen. viz. a hall, two passages near the hall, one
large kitchen and an oven in it, a back room adjoining on the west end of the
kitchen, a dining room, a great room leading to the chapel called the
dormitory, some arches, and two rooms above the arches, a chapel and a room
under it, three rooms or two at least called the prior's chamber, and the
western room thereof called the prior's lodgings, a little room adjoining the
prior's chamber, a staircase, and vaults under all and every the lower or floor
rooms of the said mansion house, excepting the hall and kitchen, and the room
aforesaid adjoining the kitchen. And at Bearpark aforesaid, there formerly have
been belonging to the said manor house, several courts and gardens that were
walled about; and also sundry outhouses, which are now wholly dilapidated, and
nothing to be seen or perceived but the ruins thereof. Et etiam seeds, locus,
sive villa de Bearparke, est and ab antiquo fuit maneriu. ac domus mansional.
terraeq. dominical. ejusd. manerij and aedificiae and structurae reliquae
reliqua praementionat. ad cand. dom. mansional. spectan. necnon tenementa and
parcu. ejusd. manerij, aliaq. proficua and emolumenta infra precinctus and
territoria dict. manerij annuatim emergen. no'ric sunt pars and parcella
corporis decanat. Dun. etc. Et terrae dominical. and tenementa ac parcum
manerij de Bearparke aliaq. proficua infra terris dom. ejusdem manerii sunt and
pro 20, etc. annos ultimo elapsos et ultra fuere annuatim de claro valen. sumam
300 l. 295 l. 290 l. 285 l. aut 280 l. legalis monetae Angliae, ac praed. J.
Sudbury durante toto tempore p' q'd fuit decan. ex terris dominical. and
tenementis ac parco aliisq. emolumentis manorij de Bearparke, sum'am 6000 l.
etc. de claro leg'lis monetae Angliae habebat p'cipicbat and in usu. suu.
convertebat Ex Arch. D. and Cha. -- Randal's MSS.
." The situation of this house is excellent, about two miles to the north-west
of Durham, on a lofty eminence, above the rivulet of Brune, in a dry soil, and
surrounded with cultivated lands, having a long extended level mead to the
south; sine coppices are scattered over the steep descents on both sides of the
river; and there is a beautiful prospect to the north, rendered highly
picturesque by the town and church of Witton-Gilbert and the adjacent hamlets.
Much destruction has been made in the buildings since dean Granville's time;
and nothing but naked and distracted walls remain of this once beautiful place.
The chapel is thirteen paces long and eight wide; the east window consists of
three lights, circular at the top and very plain; there are three windows on
each side, each divided by a mullion into two lights, their framing on the
outside square: The wall is strengthened with a buttress of neat hewn stone
work between each window, and a cornice runs round the building of the zig-zag
figure: There is a door on the north side of the chapel from the court We meet
with the names of three chapels: 1. The chapel of St Edmund, "In aedibus
suburbanis Pr. and Conv. Dun. Bellus redditus nominatis." 2. Another chapel of
St Catherine in the manor, where five days in the week service was performed by
a chaplain. 3. The chapel of St John in the park, where service was performed
twice in the week. Hugh Whitehead, the last prior and first dean of Durham, is
said to have repaired many houses here which were fallen to decay.


Bishop Bainbrig granted to the prior of Durham free warren in his parks of
Beaurepaire, Muggleswick, Holayfield, and Raynton; and also in his woods of
Strothowe, Witton, Mayner, Sacristanheugh, Hayningwood, Herberclose, and
Ferycliffe; and Bakestanford wood, Rilley, cum Rilley wood, Aldinygrege,
Altonfield, and Morebybank. -- Rot. Sever, No 64.


. The walls of the chapel in the inside are ornamented with a regular
succession of small round columns or pilasters, belted in the midst, the
capitals filled with a garland of open cut foliage, of a delicate work; from
whence spring pointed arches, three pilasters and two arches in each space
between the windows: The west end is equally finished with pilasters and
arches; and there is a small window in the center: At each side of the east
window is a pedestal, for a statue, of considerable size. The apartment under
the chapel is lighted by small square windows; but as the floor of the chapel
is gone, it is not easy to determine how it was constructed. Adjoining to the
chapel on the west is a long building, the two gabels of which are standing,
having a large window of six lights to the south: This was most probably the
refectory. On the north are the remains of a building, twenty paces in length,
lighted to the east by three windows, which we conjecture was the dormitory:
The other remains are so ruined and confused, as to render them totally
indistinct. There is a door case standing, which has been the entrance into the
garden or some chief court, with the arms of the Sea in the center. The
principal parts of this edifice are delineated in the plate on the next page In
the second edition of Mr Grose's work he has given a fine inside view of the
great hall.
.

The Scotch army, before the battle of the Red Hills, in 1346 Ex tabula
pencilibus Dunelmensis.

A. D. 1346. Vigilia S. Luce hora q. bellum inter Scottos and Anglos in loco
dicto Nevill's cross. -- Berthram Copland mane irruebat cum part exercitus in
Scottos. -- Neville and Henri Percy postea fortiter cum Scottos dimicabant.
Gul. de la Zouche archiepiscopus Ebor and Mowbray ejus diacomis ac Robertus
Ogle ejus subdiaconus fortiter pugnabant. -- Thomas Carre vexillarius dixit
Joanni Copland, cape Davidem regem. -- Lel. Itin. vol. viii.

Corabale. Tho. etc. Sciatis q'd c. Rob'tus de Cornhale teneat ad terminum
vitae suae de nob. in capite 3 mess. and 6 bovatas terrae cum pertin. in
Cornhale, de dono Will'i de Pendregrest, que quidem messuagia, etc. post mortem
pred. Rob'ti nob. pro sorisficar'am presat. Will'i remanere deberent eo q'd
idem Will's Scotis municis and rebellib's n'ris adhesit. Nos ad gratu. et
laudabile obsequiu. quod dilectus nob. Joh'es de Coupland, nobis et eccl'ie
nostre Dun. impendit, etc. Concessimus, etc. messuagia, etc. prefato Joh'i,
etc. tenend. sibi and he^^delus suis de nobis and successoribus nostris per
servicia inde debita, etc. etc. P. L'ram de priv. sig. -- Rudd. MSS.


, (called by many writers the battle of Nevill's Cross, from the cross erected
on the ground after the BEAR PARK
view of Bear Park victory) lay at Beaurepaire. In the Chronique of William de
Pakington, it is thus spoken of: About this time, by the mean of Philip
Valoys, king of France, David, king of Scotts enterid in to the north marches,
spoiling and burning, and took by force the pyle of Lydelle, and causid the
noble knight Walter Selby captain of it, to be slain before his own face, not
suffering him so much as to be confessed. And after he came to the cost of
Dyrham, and lay there at a place caullid Beaurepaire, a manor of the prior of
Duresme, set in a park; and thither resorted many of the cuntery about,
compounding with him to spare their grounds and manurs. Then William Souch,
archbishop of York, the count of Anegos, Mounseir John de Montbraye, Mounseir
Henry de Percy, Mounseir Rafe de Neville, Mounseir Rafe de Hastinges, Mounseir
Thomas de Rokeby, then sheriff of Yorkshire, and other knights and good men of
the north, marchid toward the Scotts, and first lay in Akeland park, and in
the morning encounterid with Sir William Duglas, killing of his band 200 men;
and he, with much pain, escapid to Burepaire, to king David, declaring the
cuming of the English host. Where then king David issued, and faught upon a more
nere to Duresme town, and there was taken prisoner, and with him Sir Wylliam
Douglas, the Count of Menethe, and the Count of Fyfe, and great number of
the communes of Scotland slain. The king, because he was wondid in the face, he
was carried to Werk, and there he lyd, and thens brought to London. We have
repeated this account because it contains some circumstances not named by
modern authors. The year in which this battle was fought, was productive of the
most glorious laurels that wreathed the sword of Edward III. and the Scotch
received such humiliations as that nation never before experienced. The king of
England, with an army greatly inferior to his foes, by the valor and intrepid
conduct of his heroic son, obtained a glorious victory at Cressy. He then
formed a blockade before Calais, which, with other distresses, induced the king
of France to send proposals to the court of Scotland, for making an invasion on
the borders: The absence of Edward, the vast supplies of men and money which
his campaign required, the exhausted state of England, afforded a probable
appearance that David's projected expedition might be attended with success:
The king of France's object was not honor to the Scotch crown, but to amuse
the king of England, or draw off some of his forces: A considerable sum of
money and reinforcement of troops were sent into Scotland, and the king, with
the assent of his parliament assembled at Perth, engaged in the expedition.
Edward having entertained doubts, that during his absence a storm would be
gathering on the brow of his known adversary, dispatched messengers to the
court of Scotland, to amuse by offers of a restitution of Berwick, on condition
that the Scotch would stand neuter in the conflicts between England and France;
but contrary to the opinion of many of his most skilful peers, David rejected
the proposed terms of amity, and prepared to invade England: He collected a
powerful army, consisting, according to Rapin, of 30,000 men; other authors,
particularly Froissart, Speed, Barnes, and Knighton greatly exaggerate the
numbers; with these, in the beginning of October, 1346, David entered England
by the western march, showing tokens of a bloody and savage mind in his outset,
by putting the garrison of Liddell tower to the sword, and marking his progress
through Cumberland with wanton slaughter and desolation. He advanced to the
county of Durham, and approached the city. The queen of England summoned the
prelates and military tenants to attend her at York, where measures were
concerted for opposing the invaders, and a body of troops, amounting to about
16,000 men, were assembled with all speed; whilst David, with his army, lay at
Beaurepaire, the associate lords encamped in Auckland park. Douglas, with a
chosen troop, reconnoitering the English, was engaged near Merrington; his
detachment was put to the rout, and he escaped to the king with much peril.
Rapin tells us, the queen of England led the English forces to battle; but that
assertion is not supported by any cotemporary writer of credit: David looked
upon his adversaries as a raw and undisciplined army, not able to stand against
his hardy veterans, and showed signs of great impatience before the troops
engaged, presuming that victory was certain, and that the riches of the city
were due to his plundering soldiers: The English army was drawn up in four
divisions; lord Henry Percy commanded the first, supported by the earl of
Angus, the bishop of Durham, and several northern nobles; the second body was
led by the archbishop of York, accompanied by the bishop of Carlisle, and the
lords Nevill and Hastings; the bishop of Lincoln, the lord Mowbray, and Sir
Thomas Rokesby led the third division; and at the head of the fourth was Edward
Baliol, supported by the archbishop of Canterbury, the lord Roos, and the
sheriff of Northumberland: Each division consisted of four thousand men, and
the archers and men at arms were distributed through the whole corpse: The
author of the Border History, probably from his own conjecture, for he quotes
no authority, alleges That besides the forces above named, a strong and
gallant party under the lords Deincourt and Ogle, guarded queen Philippa, who,
in the morning before the battle, having rode along the ranks, and exhorted
every man to do his duty, to maintain the honor of his king and country, and
take revenge upon their barbarous invaders, recommended her people to the
protection of God, and retired to a small distance from the place of action.
The Scotch army was drawn out in three divisions; the first was led by the high
steward of Scotland, and the earl of March; the earl of Murray and lord Douglas
commanded the second; and the third, consisting of choice troops, in which were
incorporated the flower of the Scottish nobility and gentry, sustained by the
French auxiliaries, was commanded by the king in person. With much heroic
ardour the Scotch king ordered the trumpets to sound the charge: The high
steward, who led the van, being sore galled by the English archers, rushed on
with such impetuous fury, that he threw them into confusion, and drove them
back on lord Henry Percy's division; and the Scotch pushing on vigorously with
their broad swords and battle axes, broke them so much, that if relief had not
instantly been sent them, they would have been put to the rout; but Baliol,
rushing in with a body of horse, threw the Scotch battalion into confusion, and
gave the English time to rally and regain their ground, whilst the high steward
was obliged to retreat and reform his distracted array: In this maneuver he is
said to have shown great generalship, performing the evolutions in a masterly
manner, and with little loss. Baliol, with equal skill, gave his troops breath,
made no pursuit, and when least suspected, rapidly charged the king's division
in flank, whilst they fought man to man in front: Unrelieved, and distressed
with this complicated battle, the king fought desperately, repeatedly bringing
back his flying troops to the charge, encouraging them by his example, his
exhortations and prayers: Ashamed to desert their prince in such jeopardy, a
brave phalanx threw themselves around him, and fought till their numbers were
reduced to little more than eighty: In this desperate state, and bleeding with
many wounds, David scorned to ask for quarter, hoping he should still be
relieved, At length resistance was vain, a tumultuous multitude, with shouts of
victory, rushed upon him; and he at length was made prisoner to John Copeland,
a Northumbrian esquire. The division under Douglas and Murray, struck with a
panic at the fate of the royal legion, and overpowered with numbers, were soon
broken and routed: Murray died on the field, and Douglas was made prisoner, and
few of the inferior officers escaped the sword. The Scotch king, though he had
two spears hanging in his body, his leg desperately wounded, and being
disarmed, his sword having been beat out of his hand, disdained captivity, and
provoked the English by opprobious language to kill him: When John Copeland,
who was governor of Roxborough castle, advised him to yield, he struck him on
the face with his gauntlet so fiercely, that he knocked out two of his teeth:
Copeland conveyed him out of the field as his prisoner. Upon Copeland's
refusing to deliver him up (his royal captive) to the queen, who stayed at
Newcastle during the battle, the king sent for him to Calais, where he excused
his refusal so handsomely, that the king sent him back a reward of 500l. a year
in lands, where he himself should choose it, near his own dwelling, and made him
a knight banneret Rymer's Foed. tom. v. p. 542. -- Froisart, l. 1. p. 140. --
Rapin, p. 425.
. This battle was fought on the 17th of October, 1346, and lasted only three
hours, beginning at nine in the morning, the victory being declared by sound of
trumpet at noon: The loss of the enemy was estimated at 15,000, the chief of
whom were the earls of Murray and Strathern, the lord constable David Hay, the
lord marshal Edward Keith, together with the lords chancellors and chamberlain
of Scotland, the lords Philip Meldrum, John Stewart, and Alan Stewart his
brother, sir Alexander Bothwell, the king's standard bearer, sir Alexander
Ramsay, and others of high rank. Among the prisoners were the earls of Fife,
Sutherland, Monteith, Carrick, and Wigton, the lord Douglas, the bishops of St
Andrew and Aberdeen, James Douglas, sir Malcolm Fleming, with many men of
distinction. Historians have not mentioned what particular loss was sustained
on the part of the English. Knighton tells us of four knights and five esquires
only, who fell in the field; and Dugdale says the lord Hastings was mortally
wounded: But in so bloody a battle it is impossible but many men of distinction
would fall in the English army.

The ground where this battle was fought is hilly, and in many parts very
steep, toward the river, so that it is not possible to conceive how such an
armament could be arranged and engage in any order. The account given of this
battle, and of the subsequent transactions of the convent, by the writers of
that house, as published by Davies, and contained in Sir John Lawson's MSS. and
Mr Hogg's Roll, is to the effect given in the notes In the night before the
battle of Durham, there appeared to John Fossour, then prior of the abbey of
Durham, a vision, commanding him to take the holy corporax cloth, wherewith St
Cuthbert covered the chalice when he used to say mass, and to put the same upon
a spear point, and next morning to repair to a place on the west of the city of
Durham, called the Red Hills, and there to remain till the end of the battle.
-- The prior and monks, accompanied with Ralph lord Nevil, and John Nevil his
son, lord Percy, and many other nobles, returned to the abbey church, there
joining in prayer and thanksgiving to God, and holy St Cuthbert, for the
conquest obtained that day: In which battle a holy cross, taken out of Holy
Rood House, in Scotland, by king David Bruce, was taken from the said king;
which cross is recorded, by ancient and credible writers, to have come to the
said king most miraculously: Being hunting the heart in a forest near Edinburgh,
upon Holy Rood day. In the place where this miracle was wrought, now springs a
fountain, called the Rood well. The night after he was warned in his sleep to
build an abbey in the same place. -- Many excellent jewels and monuments
brought from Scotland, and noblemen's banners, were offered to the shrine of St
Cuthbert; together with the black rood of Scotland.

The banner cloth was a yard broad, and five quarters deep, the bottom was
indented in five parts, and fringed, and made fast all about with red silk and
gold. It was made of red velvet, on both sides embroidered with flowers of
green silk and gold; and in the midst was the said corporax cloth enclosed,
covered over with white velvet, half a yard square every way, having a cross of
red velvet on both sides, being fringed about the edge and skirts with red silk
and gold, and three fine little silver bells fastened to the skirts of the said
banner cloth, like unto sacring bells.

On the west side of the city of Durham, where two roads pass each other, a
most famous and elegant cross of stone work was erected to the honor of God,
for the victory there obtained, known by the name of Nevil's cross, and built
at the sole cost of lord Ralph Nevil; which cross had seven steps about it,
every way squared, to the socket wherein the stalk of the cross stood, which
socket was fastened to a large square stone, the sole or bottom stone being of
a great thickness, viz. a yard and a half every way: This stone was the eighth
step. The stalk of the cross was in length three yards and a half up to the
boss, having eight sides all of one piece; from the socket it was fixed into
the boss above, into which boss the stalk was deeply soldered with lead. In the
midst of the stalk, in every second square, was the Nevil's cross: A saltire,
in a 'scutcheon, being lord Nevil's arms, finely cut; and at every corner of
the socket was a picture of one of the four evangelists, finely set forth and
carved. The boss at the top of the stalk was an octangular stone, finely cut
and bordered, and most curiously wrought; and in every square of the nether
side thereof was Nevil's cross, in one square, and the bull's head in the next,
so in the same reciprocal order about the boss. On the top of the boss was a
stalk of stone, (being a cross a little higher than the rest) whereon was cut,
on both sides of the stalk of the said cross, the picture of our Savior Christ
crucified; the picture of the Blessed Virgin on one side, and of St John the
Evangelist on the other, both standing on the top of the boss. All which
pictures were most artificially wrought together, and finely carved out of one
entire stone, some parts thereof through carved work, both on the east and west
sides of the cross, with a cover of stone likewise over their heads, being all
most finely and curiously wrought together out of the said hollow stone; which
cover of stone was covered over. It remained till the year 1589, when the same
was broken down and defaced by some lewd and wicked persons.


. The hilloc called the Maiden's Bower, where St Cuthbert's banner was
displayed, whilst the monks put up their prayers to Heaven, within hearing of
the noise and bustle of the conflict, where the battle was (truly) with tumult
and garments rolled in blood, is yet to be seen in the depth of the valley, by
the hedges of Shaw wood And likewise in the said Red Hills, on the north side
of Nevil's cross, a little distant from a piece of ground called the Flasse,
the Maid's bower used to be, where the prior and monks stood making their
prayers to God with the holy relic of St Cuthbert: During the said battle
there was erected a beautiful cross of wood, in remembrance of that holy
relic carried to the battle.

In the Harleian Collection, No 4843, is the following historical poem
Transcribed by Mr Jos. Ritson, of Gray's Inn, and transmitted to Mr G. Allan.
He says the writing appears of the fifteenth century, and the book as having
belonged to the abbey of Durham. He adds there is a Latin poem on the same
subject in the Cottonian Collection, A. xx. 14. And he transmitted a copy,
which did not seem sufficiently curious to excuse its being obtruded on the
reader, together with the above.


.
Anno domini MCCCXLVI. die Martis in Vigilia Lucae Evangelistae hora matutin.
nona. commissum suit bellum inter Anglos et Scottos non long a Dunelmia, in
loco ubi nunc stat crux vulgariter dicta Nevill Cross.
Incipit Prologus.
O miranda bonitas Jesu salvatoris
Humiles qui respicit omnibus in horis
Superbos humilians cuspide meroris
Quos ceca cupiditas tenuit erroris.
Non est sapientia certe contra deum
Ulla nec prudentia valet contra eum
Nunc uni nunc alteri dat deus tropheum
Judas Forte Judaeus Gens Anglorum
sed prevaluit nunc in amoreum Gentem Scoticam.
.
Benedictus dominus qui nos visitavit
Ab Egypti Scottica tirannide.
carcere qui nos liberavit
Qui sub nostris pedibus pharaonem stravit Angli.

Filios qui Isreal diu captivavit.
Explicit Prologus.
Incipit Tractatus Belli.
In Francorum partibus rege debellante
Et sibi subjecere Callis laborante
Sathanic satellites Scotti.
treuga non obstante
Irruunt in Angliam ut solebant ante.
Rex DAVIT indomitus vana spe seductus
Et Francorum litteris falsis circumductus
Postea Lidel.
Ad Ledel se properat ad suorum luctus
Nam patet per exitum qualis fuit fructus.
Fructus parvus astuit licet capiebat
Unum forcinuculum sibi quod nocebat
Proch dolor sed militem vivum quem videbat
Post visum interimit licet non decebat.
Non decet ad principes nec ad reges magnos
Ad vindictam pessimam nimis esse pronos
Qui studet destruere fideles colonos
Vix sedebit filius ejus super thronos.
Capto forcinuculo DAVIT est letatus
Plusquam credi potuit et est exaltatus
Sic sic per Achitofel Malcolm Flemyng.
est conciliatus
Parts quae destruere vult episcopatus. Dunelmie.

Temptavit multocies Duglas Willi^lmus.
suo more
Ut ab hoc proposito et ab hoc errore
Davit regem verteret suo pro honor
Error sed novissimus pejor est priore.
Captis raptis omnibus ad Lidel inventis
Versus austrum properat infurore mentis
Non erant sed memores prophet dicentis
Salva locum domini et ipsius gentis.
Occidebant homines utpote bidentes
Non misericordiam in se plus habentes
Heu Cuthberti presulis sic tractabant gentes
Horum sunt plures inopes erant qui potentes.
Spoliant ecclesias rapiunt jumenta
Et de quibus sumpserant nummos and talenta
Comburunt et grangias simul et frumenta
Parum parcunt talibus salla fide tenta.
Vox in Rama Northumbria.
sonuit fletus and ploratus
Quando vir cum gregibus fugit desolatus
Panem petit parvulus nec est sibi datus
Ex hinc lamentabiles dabat ejulatus.
Tunc fugit plebs ululans parts ad australes
Non succursus hominum sperans aliquales
Set inter angustias voces promunt tales
Cuthberte nos adjuva si quomodo vales.
Cuthbertus non immemor tante seritatis
Et vim grandem sustinens sue libertatis
Sic precatur dominum nostris pro peccatis
Horum sors et victoria cessit desperatis.
Ad Dunelmum properant Scotti maledicti
Deridentes Anglios ac si essent victi
Ad nemus de Beureparke festinant predicti
Ubi erant postea fortiter afflicti.
Figentes tentoria leti comederunt
Nam dispersos Anglicos nuncij Monachi transmissi.
dixerunt
Scottis nescientibus prompti sed fuerunt
Aput Aukland Anglici mane ut viderunt.
Noctis sub silentio quando rex David.
dormivit
Duglas cum complicibus ad predandum ivit
Misit suos Catulos Praedones.
huc illuc ut scivit
Set ruinam maximam venturam nescivit.
Luce in vigilia Evangelistae.
sere in aurora
Venerunt ad Merington non in bona hora
Depredantur patriam voce cum sonora
Set in luctum vertitur risus sine mora.
Ipsis depredantibus ecce summo mane
Quedam pars exercitus gentis Anglicane Bertram et Coupland

In predones irruit and fugerunt plarie
Omnes velut lepores persequente cane.
Sicut canes lepores insequi solebant
Sic nostrates Anglici.
Scoticos ubique cingebant
In agris and semitis mortui cadebant
Quia sparsis cerebris stare non valebant.
Agmina prospiciens Duglas Anglicorum
Et progressum indicans sagittariorum
Non stetit ulterius ad tenendum sorum
Set ivit celeriter ad relictum chorum. Exe^^itum Scottorum.

Cum venisset igitur Duglas infra nemus
Dixit fratres surgite nova nos habemus
Ad arma concurrite and post ordinemus
Si pro nostro commodo sit ut nos pugnemus.
Tribus in agminibus venit gens Anglorum
Et in prima acie est gens Northumbrorum
Sunt viginti milia certe pugnatorum
Et Percy quem novimus ductor est eorum.
Si fas esset vincere ipsius vexillum
Et Nevell similiter qui stat juxta illum
Caperemus Anglicos tempus post pusillum
Et archiepiscopum W. de Souch.
veluti pupillum.
Tunc dixit ut dicitur David ad majores
Non sunt nunc in Anglia viri bellatores
Non sunt nisi clerici atque portiores
Fient ergo martires isti confessores.
Non est nisi palea hec plebs congregata
Seges est in Francia valde fatigata
Capiemus Anglicos si permittant fata
Velut auceps volucrem cum sit inviscata.
Philippus rex Franciae noster specialis
Nobis scripsit literam et est tenor talis
Non est nunc in Anglia sexus aliqualis
Caput qui defendore potest suum malis.
Wilham Duglas.
illa agmina que sic indicasti
Ex defectu cerebri forte machinasti
Extra cursum solitum quia vigilasti
Tu ex uno homine duos estimasti.
Si tu sis perterritus vade vias tuas
Et fuge velociter ne percussus ruas
Donec habuerimus manus nostras duas
Non timemus Anglicos nec cautelas suas.
Ad hec verba motus est Duglas vehementer
Et circum astantibus dixit luculenter
Hodie non fugiam stabo sed potenter,
Et hoc luet plurimus incrassatus venture.
Non Anglorum domine curo de cautelis
Regnoque Scocie ero vir fidelis,
Quod si non credideris et probare velis
Hoc probetur hodie sactis non loquelis.
Tunc ad arma bellica Scotti concurrerunt
Clipeis ab aureis montes splenduerunt
Juxta regis latera fortes confluxerunt
Et pre magno gaudio Query, forte tripudiaverunt.

Venit eo tempore missus a Priore,
Unus simplex monachus tractans de amore
Quem jussit interimi David in surore
Sed non ita sactum est ut precepit ore
Exeunt de nemore insimul globati
Gladiis et sustibus fortiter stuffati
Licet erant omnibus been preparati
Erant nichilominus excommunicati
Scotis audientibus turmas segregatim
En nostrates veniunt valde seriatim
Cum tubis clangentibus accedunt paulatim
Ad ictus et ad verbera convenerunt statim
Currunt Scottis ob viam mox architenentes
Et transmittunt Angelos Sagittas.
ipsos persequentes
Sic purgati fuerant Scotticorum dentes
Quod sunt qui relicti sunt adhuc conquerentes.
Irrurerunt insimul Anglici and Scotti
Ut Leones rabidi circa praedam moti
Sed quod non dixerant culpas sacerdoti
Per ictus and verbera erant culpis loti.
Quia suspicabilis Duglas suit David
Ad juncturam igitur primam festinavit
Quem in ictu oculi Bertram trucidavit
Vivus tam captus est licet non putavit.
Nescio quali ductus sit David fantasia
Recte cum Angligenis junxit alta via
Benedicto domini matre et maria
Non ut ipse dixerat stetit prophecia.
Prophetavit inscius ut pote volebat
Set non ita accidit sicuti dicebat
Lauds cum victoria sibi ascribebat
Set stetit oppositum antequam sciebat.
Stetit Percy dimicans fortitor cum Scottis Henricus.

Cui magnates plurimi starent a remotis
Quod Comes.
Augus percipiens viribus cum totis
Ad Percy se properat cum ducentis notis.
Non averlunt saces Comes nec Henricus
Donec victus fuerat omnis inimicus
Vix in campo steterat dives vel mendicus
Per quem tantus periit sanguis impudicus.
Tunc archiepiscopus de Such qui est dictus
Ad creandos Dandos ictus.
ordines venit valde strictus
Quotquot ordinaverat senciebant ictus
Ex hinc imperpetuum siat benedictus.
Fuit nam diaconus Episcopi.
Mowbray vir urbanus
Atque subdiaconus Robertus.
Okyll ille canus
Qui ad istos ordines fuit tam prophanus In occidendo.

Quod non potest fieri post haec capellanus.
Illi namque clerici dicti confessores
Quos Davit vocaverat atque portioris Inabiles ad praeliandum.

Occidunt.
Absolvunt in fustibus suos derisores
Sicque jacent mortui velut peccatores.
Morique Forte Moriss pro Mauretius qui in hoc praelio cecidit.
de Moravia vir inordinatus
Contra jus ecclesiae comes nuncupatus
Quia duxit conjugem non licentiatus
Nunc ad istos ordines fuit degradatus.
Thomas cancellarius Charters.
ducto regis Davit
Qui pomposas literas saepius dictavit
Quia terras Angliae nimis adoptavit
Ipsum nunc exigua terra saturavit.
Comes de Moravia Anglicis ingratus
A nostris magnatibus nimis honoratus
Quia venit contra nos cum David armatus
Jacet inter mortuos dire vulneratus.
Senescallus Scotiae videns ordinatos
Super terram mortuos jacere prostratos
Ordinari (Mori) noluit inter memoratos
Iter sed arripuit inter effugatos.
Gens nostra viriliter stetit Anglicana
Set fugit celeriter turba Scoticana
Currebant per aspera insimul and plana
Sperantes evadere sed spes fuit vana.
Scotis fugientibus ipsos sunt secuti
Equites and pedites per paludes luti
Multi vero capti sunt multi sunt minuti
Panci set ad propria pervenerunt tuti.
Videns rex attonitus quod fugissent sui
Volebat se reddere sed nescevit cui
Volens vexillarius Tho. Carre.
ejus vita frui
Dixit Coupland Johanni.
cape, hunc servus ejus fui.
Mox in David guttere Coupland misit manus
Sed in quantum poluit restitit prophanus
Velit nolit captus est sed ut vir urbanus
Fecit secum armigcr Coupland.
volens quod sit sanus.
Set non ita sanus est quin architenentes
Cum sagittis ferreis visitabant dentes
Est unum proverbium dictum inter gentes
Deridentur saepius qui sunt deridentes.
Non erant nunc ordines nisi speciales
Qui non sunt mortui omnes capitales
Cumque congregaverat suos consodales
Senescallus Scotiae erunt generales.
Wath qui sanctuarium Cuthberti destruxit
Fidelem qui militem occidens seduxit
Qui leonem catulos super nos induxit
Et comburens segetes risit et non luxit.
Wath qui terras dividit quas non adquisivit
Alienas detinens pluresque concupivit
Qui vixisse potuit pace sed non scivit
Foveas confodiens in quas dissilivit.
Wath qui regis Angliae filiam despexit
Propter unam pellicem quam sors sursum vexit
Lyam lippam oculis rex David dilexit
Set Rachel Regina Scotiae.
pulcherrimam vix gaudens respexit.
Non laudetur aliquis propter istud factum
Nam fuit miraculum quicquid erat actum
Laudetur set dominus qui custodit pactum
Et Cuthberti praesulis vindicat jus fractum.
Lauds deceptorias cunctas respuamus
Et ad thronum gratiae preces effundamus
Ut per temporalia sic sic transeamus
Semper eternalia ne nos amittamus.
Amen.

.

Near the turnpike road leading from Durham to Newcastle stands AYKLEY-HEADS
HOUSE, the property of Mr Francis Johnson, in a fine elevated situation,
commanding picturesque views of several branches of the city of Durham, seen
through various openings of the hills: The gardens and pleasure grounds are
laid out in a good taste, and the adjacent lands are highly cultivated: This
villa being within a mile of Durham, is a most desirable retreat: The
mansion house was built by Mr John Dixon, an eminent attorney at law, uncle to
the present owner; and it is presumed, is not a place of higher antiquity, as
we do not find it mentioned in any records, save the proceedings in elegit
touching the possessions of Thomas Billingham in the middle of the last
century, mentioned with Crookhall Mr Cade has asserted, that there was a
druidical grove here, the barrow being very conspicuous. -- We admitted this
account implicitly in a note to p. 2 of this volume, but have not been able to
gain further information thereof.
.

FRAMWELGATE, called in the old evidences the borough of Framwelgate, being
incorporated with the city of Durham, affords no matter for particular
attention in this place; what is already said of the city or borough of Durham
having immediate relation thereto. It consists of one long street leading from
the bridge toward Newcastle Framwelgate, Durham.

Liberi tenentes. Walterus Tailbojs tenet quodd'm manner. vocat. Erlehouse
quond'm Ricardi de Kellowe and postea comitis D'Angos per cartam and servic
forin. and red. per ann. lxiij s. jx d.

Johannes de Notyngham tenet unam plac. vocat Morehous. and red vjij s. x d.

Johannes de Thwenby, tenet j plac. vocat. Spitilfate, contin. per estimat. xvj
acr. terrae and quend'm alium campum ad caput de Milburn slash ibid. per
servic. forin. and red. lij s. vj d. -- tenet j mes. and liij acr. and dimid.
terrae and j plac. pro j. Fald juxta Wytton, per servic. sorin. et redd. per
ann. xiv s. j d.

Johannes de Baumbrough tenet j mes. and lxj acr. terrae and dimid. quond'm
Rob'ti Leycest. vocat Drybourn-house, per servic forin. and redd. per ann. xlj
s. ij d.

Robertus de Massham tenet iij acr. vocat Hesilsyd sed de red. ignor.

Magist. Johannes de Hagthorp tenet manner de Nettilworth and xlj acr. terrae
quond'm Mag'ri. Will'i de Lambeton per servic. ut supra, and redd. per ann.
xxvij s.

Mag. hospitalis de Kypier tenet manner. de Holmers and lxiiij acr. and dimid.
terrae in vj parcel. quond'm Will'i Wyld. and red. per ann. xxxiij s.

Terrae Scaccarij. Will's Bows chev. tenet boscum vocat. Farnyley red. v s. --
Johannes Elvet and alij. -- Spiti'croft, Selknoll, Cadnesfeld, Graywast,
Edeswast, Horsardleys, Keperlawe, Hurehill, Barara, Halyside, Snawdon,
Hurehill, Warthall. -- Mag'r hospitalis de Kypier, tenet v acr. quond'm Will'i
de Layton apud Fyndon and redd. iij s. iiij d.

Terrae vastae and redditus non soiut. sunt satis prolix. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Certain disputes having some time been agitated touching Shaw wood, the same
was submitted in referrence to Sir Tho. Davison, who made his award, dated the
18th of December, 1666, and finally settled all matters relative thereto for
the benefit of the city of Durham and Framwelgate, and the two Baileys. -- It
is to be observed that the original award was produced by Mr Christopher
Mickleton, deputy register of the court of chancery of Durham, and was in his
hands at his death. A full copy is among Randall's MSS. in Mr Allan's custody,
but too long to be inserted in this work.


.

CROSGATE, which begins near the bridge, branches out into three limbs;
South-street to the lest, and Allergate, or Allertongate, to the right. In the
point where South-street separates from Crosgate, on an elevated situation,
stands the church or chapel of St Margaret, to which you ascend by two deep
flights of steps.

This church has suffered great alterations since its first erection; the
architecture being various. The altar is ascended to by three steps, from which
the chancel is five paces in length, being eight paces in width; the south side
is laid open by a wide pointed arch; the whole extent of the chancel forming a
spacious porch; the north side is opened half way by a small arch. The body of
the church has a center and two side ailes, is in length seventeen paces, and
of equal width. The south aile is formed by three short round pillars,
supporting circular arches; the north aile by three long small pillars, with
circular arches. The church is lighted by five modern windows to the south, and
four to the north, more ancient. It has a tower Bap. Mar. Bur. State of
population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 818 202 852 1760 to 1779 938 315
1021 Increase 120 113 169

Number of burials in the last year 63. -- Computed number of inhabitants 1890.


.

St Margaret's is in the deanery of Chester, and a Peculiar belonging to the
dean and chapter of Durham, formerly a chapel of ease to St Oswald's St
Margaret's chapel.

Clear yearly val. ^l. 12s. 6d. -- Yearly tenths 11s. 3d. -- Certisi. val. 31l.
6s. 8d. -- Real val. 120l.

It was augmented by lot with 1^0l. in the year 1748, and with an additional
200l. on the 3d of May, 1758, in conjunction with the dean and chapter of
Durham, who settled and secured a rent charge of 40l. a year to the curate. In
March, 1769, an act of parliament was obtained for the division of Crosgate
moor, by which the curacy is advanced about 30l. a year.

CURATES.
Richard Collyson, cap. 1501. Rich. Grethed, cap. oc. 1 Jun. 1521. Sir Henry
Morle, cur. oc. 12 Jul. 1564. Car. Moberlay, cl. oc. visit. book bishop Barnes,
28 Apr. 1572: Was vic. of St Oswald's, 1574. Mich. Patreson, oc. 3 Feb. 1577.
Jermanus Gardener, oc. 1584. Geo. Parkison, 1601. Edw. Harrison, cl. 1628. John
Durie, A. M. oc. 1641. Edw. Moorcroft, A. M. oc. Easter Tuesday, 1666. Sam.
Martin, min. oc. 1672. Joh. Martin, min. oc. 12 Jul. 1694. Philip Robson, 1703.
John Powell, A. M. 1713, p. m. Robson. Will. Forster, A. M. 27 Oct. 1719, vic.
of St Oswald, 1725. Ra. Eden, cl. 14 Mar. 1722, p. res. Forster, second son of
Laton Eden, vic. of Hartburn, Northumberland, deprived in 1732, for immorality,
and died in Yorkshire. Edw. Gregory, A. B. 2 Dec. 1732, p. dep. Eden. John
Wheeler, B. A. 4 Oct. 1753.

. In the year 1431, the inhabitants of this chapelry obtained a license for the
dedication of the church, and having sepulture there Langley Rot. D. in dorso.
Dat. 11 Dec. 1431. arch. dean and chapter. -- Randal's MSS.

E. reg. paroch. 20 June, 1739. The Rev. John Simon gave 12l. 12s. to the
curate of St Margaret's, to be placed at interest for the use of the poor of St
Margaret's chapelry.

1327. Un. burg. in Milburnegate. reddendo inde annuatim custodibus luminaris
eccl'ie Ste Margarete, etc. 4 solidos argenti. Carta Walt'i Boney and Aliciae
ux'is.

1328. Rob. Plawseworth, and Agnes his wife, gave out of a burgage in
Allertongate, 4s. to the support of lights in this chapel.

1477. Joh. Blenkarn, etc. deliberaverunt unum antiphonarium quod quondam fuit
ex dono p'dci Joh'is. -- He'nd and tenend p'd'm antiphonariu. p'fato Joh'i
Poton, cap'no ad terminum vite sue et post decessum suum remaneat ad p'd'cam
eccl'iam, etc.

Many other rent charges for support of lights.

1385. An indenture touching the receipt of books for the use of the chapel.

1328. A grant of 4s. out of a burgage, quod habui ex dono and concessione
Will'i fill. Walt'i de Fysthe Carnificis de Dunolm. sustentacoi cereor.
ardentium coram imagine be. Margarete in cancello dee. capelie. etc.


. There was an ancient chantry in this church, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin;
but who was the founder is not known. The annual income was 7l. 14s. 8d. out of
which is yearly paid to the king's receiver forty shilllings Bishop Tunstall,
in his fourteenth year, granted to Hugh Spark, tanner, and his heirs, two
burgages in Crosgate, forfeited by the attainder of Tho. Blunt, of Durham,
cook, for high treason. -- Cursitors Roll. -- Rudd's MSS.

On a black wooden tablet fixed to one of the pillars.
GABRIEL SWAINSTON, Generosus legum baccalaureus Obiit vicesimo secundo die
Mensis Februarii, A. D. 1711. Aetat. suae 63. Qui dum vivus suit, saepius in
animo revolvit ac ideo in tabula inde conficienda post mortem suam, et hic
effigenda sub literis majusculis inscribi voluit, et ordinavit ad usum
superviventium, (et praesertim ad usum Leguliorum, et aliorum in Curiis
Juridicis versantium) Ista Juris Civilis Effata sive Axiomata laudatissima, et
omni Encomio majora, tanquam Monumenta semper et ad semper observatu
dignissima: Nempe HONEST VIVERE ALTERUM NON LAEDERE JUSSUUM CUIQUE TRIBUERE,

On a large gravestone in the body of the church.
Depositum JOHANNIS DUCK, Baronetti Civitatis Dunelm. Senatoris, Viri
prudentis, justi, benefici, Qui quam fuit in re familiari augenda foelix tam
fuit in largienda liberalis; Et ne suae tantum aetati prodesset, Ptochotrophium
Lumleiae xij pauperibus alend, Extruxit. Obiit An. D'ni MDCXCI. Aug. xxvj. Cum
vixisset circiter An. LIX. Sub eodem marmore condita jacet ANNA uxor ejus,
Foemina pia, prudens, Fortuna selix moribus felicior Dum sic vivit benefica,
post mortem desiderata Ut quos vita junxit, nec mors quidem separaret Obiit
December. XIV. An. Dom. MDCXCV. Aet. LX.


.

The manor of Harberhouse lies within this chapelry, the ancient estate of the
Forcers. In Hatfield's Survey it is said, that William Kellowe held the manor
of Harebarowes at two shillings rent Vide Harebarowes under title (Chester.)
; and we find Agnes de Kellowe died seized thereof in fee tail to her and the
heirs of her body begotten by William de Kellowe, in the eleventh year of
bishop Langley, A. D. 1417 Et Joha. ux. Joh'is Fossour est s. d'ce Agn. int. se
and d'c'm Will'um de Kellawe legit. procreata and her. ipsius Agnet. p'p' and
aetat. quadraginta annor. Cor. W. de Claxton. chiv. esc. co. Dun.
, and that Johan, the wife of John Fossour, was her heiress. On the 20th of
October, in the first year of bishop Sever, John son and heir of Thomas son and
heir, and John and Cecily his wife, had livery of Harberhouse, with lands in
Kellowe, Plawsworth, Nunstanton, and Great Kellowe. It continued in the family
of Forcer to the death of Basil Forcer, the last male of that house, who died
about ten years ago.

The chapelry of

WITTON GILBERT
lies within the parish of St Oswald. The village is pleasantly situated on the
north banks of the rivulet Brune, commanding a beautiful prospect to the
southward; the ruins of Beaurepaire being the chief objects in front, with the
adjacent wooded banks of the rivulet.

This church is dedicated to St Michael, and was founded in the year 1423 In
the parish register is an entry of the ancient boundaries of this parish, and
the following entry.
Memorandum. Q'd parochia de Wytton Gilbert, incipit ab Hennyburn aliter
Hornbyburn ex part orientali sequendo le Hordley usq. Conkburn, et ita usq. ad
le Lech juxta locum vocat Nixon-howse, and sic ad le Marlpark usq. ad le Lech
inter le Marlpark et Edmundsle-seld, et usq. ad le Sagarslaynhough et Blackburn
sicut cadit in Were, et sic ascendendo rivulum de Blackburn a stagno d'ni epi
juxta Kymlisworth usq. ad caput ejusdem rivuli, et sic de capite illius rivuli
usq. Yvesmose qui est infra parcum de Beuepark; and sic ex descendendo versus
boream per quoddam Siketum q'd cadit de Yvesmose usq. le Halywell in
Myddilwodde, et sic ex part occidentali per quoddam Siketum usq. dum dictum
Siketum quod currit inter Stany^eses et Sclayt-slat descendendo per Wetchall
and Ryding quousq. perveniatur in Broun infra parcum.

By a convention between the prior and convent, and parishioners of Witton
Gilbert, Ye said parishioners shall find all manner of charges whatsoever
touching the chapel. And it is further agreed upon, by and betwixt ye
abovenamed, yt the curat of ye said Witton Gilbert, shall after the manner of
a parson gather or have for his mayntenaunce all manner of tithes in kind
Witton belonging: And yt ye said curat, by the agreement shall be tied to no
reparation of ye said chapel, but ye parish itself, as may appear in the
Euydence in the house of Durham. In a book called ye fourth Carturye, fol.
98, Z. W 6d. Spinl'm 1 z. Lawrentius Pilkington, curatus haec ad inven.

1614, 22 Feb. In quo die maxima fuit Nix, and incipit 5o Janu. and duravit
quotidie nivente plus vel nimus 12o Martii, et hac tempestate tam homines quam
bestiae multi sunt suffocati.

Ao D'ni 1627, 16 Dec. Maxima fuit tempestas Venti toto d. et circa hora q'rtam
post prandium ventus fuit valde magnus, et tempestas fulguris et tonitrui
maxima timida. pt. ea secuta est magna pluvia and Nix ad mediam noctem.


; William Battmanson and John Shephardson, soliciting the prior and his
brethren under pope Clement III. It is in the deanery of Durham, being anciently
a chapel of ease to St Oswald's; is a Peculiar belonging the dean and chapter
of Durham, and not being in charge, pays no first fruits or tenths At the west
end of the chapel hang two bells. -- Parish reg. begins 1570, 12 Eliz.

Certfi. val. 55l. -- Proc. ep. 3s. 4d. -- Pen. d. and cha. 3s. 4d. -- Real
val. 90l. exclusive of house, etc. 1772.

CURATES.
Joh. Brown, 1561. Laur. Pilkington, cl. min. of God's word, 6 Feb. 1570, p.
dep. Brown. Mich. Pattenson; oc. 17 Jan. 1583. Rob. Hawkesworth, 20 Jul. 1605,
p. m. Pattenson. Jos. Cradock, A. M. 14 Jan. p. m. Hawkesworth. Henry Hutton,
A. M. 4 Aug. 1635, p. ces. Cradock. -- A true vicar of Bray. Edward Kirkby, A.
M. 28 Sep. 1671, p. m. Hutton. Joh. Smith, A. M. 1 Jul. 1684. p. res. Kirkby.
Abr. Yapp, A. M. 1695, p. res. Smith. Tho. Drake, A. M. 17 Jan. 1716, p. dep.
Yapp. -- A nonjuror. Bryan Turner, A. M. 25 Nov. 1720, p. res. Drake. Abr.
Gregory, A. M. 1 Nov. 1738, p. m. Turner. Ja. Douglas, D. D. 19 Feb. 1773, p.
m. Gregory. -- Prebendary of Durham and rector of Stainton. Thomas Richardson,
p. m. Douglas.
Randal's MSS. In the churchyard. Hic jacet Johannes Smith. Qui permissione
divina fulmine percussus expiravit 28 die Aprilis, 1728, Aetat. 42. Videte ut
vigiletis and oretis, nescitis enim quando Tempus Futurum sit. I. H. S.
. The chapel being too small to contain the parishioners, a gallery was built
at the west end in 1742. The manor of Witton Gilbert was the estate of Isabell,
the wife of William Claxton, esquire who married to a former husband William de
Laton; on the issue of which first marriage Witton was settled in tail; of that
marriage there was issue Elizabeth, who intermarried with Peter Tylliall, chiv
Inq. p. m. 15 Langley. P'dca Isab. ten. die quo. ob. si. and he'dib's de
corpore suo and corp'e d'ci W'i de Laton, p'creat man' de Wytton Gylbert, etc.
and q'd Eliz. ux. Petri Tylliall, etc. -- Inq. p. m. 30th Langley, etc.
. It descended to Robert their son and heir, and in failure of issue came to
his sisters and coheiresses, Isabel, who married John Colvylle, and Margaret,
the wife of Christopher Moresby, in whose families it continued in moieties for
a considerable time Whitton Gilbert.

Thomas de Claxton tenet villam de Witton Gilbert, per servic. forin. and redd.
per ann. xxs.

Elemosinar Dunolm. tenet quand. parcel terrae subtus Essh vocat. Aumenerlowde
redd. per ann. ad fest. S. Cuthberti in September. j. Libr'. Piperis. --
Hatfield's Survey.

Chester Ward book of rates.
L s. d. Witton town, Witton hall, Fulford, Sacriston heugh, Acrousclose,
Simperley, half Bearpark, Earls houses, Kimblesworth, out rent to Sir Gilfrid
Lawson for Kimblesworth, Witton Gilbert vicarage, Colliery ib'm. 612 18 6
Grey's MSS.

Land tax at 4s. -- County rate at 6s. 8d.
L. s. d. Kibblesworth 5 16 8 Witton Gilbert 33 11 2 L. s. d. 0 5 6 1 10 7 ^/4

Registered estates. -- John Clark 4l. 12s. 7. -- Mary Fenwick 4l. 12s. 7d. --
Ann Clark 4l. 12s. 7d. -- Eliz. Langdale 20l. -- Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 inclusive
231 69 193 1760 to 1779 223 57 264 Decrease 8 12 0 Increase 0 0 71

Burials in the last year 11. -- Computed number of inhabitants 330.


. We find Fulford was the possession of the family of Lyndley, in the time of
bishop Langley Inq. capt. 6o bishop Langley.
.

KIMBLESWORTH in the old books is called a rectory; the church has long been
gone to decay, and the parish united to Witton Gilbert: Was a discharged living
in the deanery of Chester, and a Peculiar belonging to the dean and chapter of
Durham: It lies about two miles east of Witton, and was given to the monastery
of Durham about the year 1220. So far back as the year 1593 we find this church
in decay Kymblesworth.

Tenths 6s. 8d. -- Proc. ep. 1s. 8d. -- Clear val. 4l. 2s. 6d.

RECTORS.
William de Hilton, 1255. Rob. de Hasilarton, 1308. Joh. de Lytham Wm Boven,
1353, p. res. Lytham. Joh. de Derlington. 135. Rob. de Ormesby, 1358, p. res.
Derlington. Tho. de Whom, p. res. Ormesby. Hugh de Chilton, 1360, p. res.
Whom. Joh. de Sykethorp, 1371, p. res. Chilton. Wm de Barker, 1374, p. res.
Sykethorp. Joh. de Ackliffe, p. res. Barker. Rob. Carles, 1383, p. res.
Ackliffe. Wm de Bishopton, 1394, p. res. Carles. John Skirwith, 1406, p. m.
Bishopton. John Soulby, 1414, p. res. Skirwith. John Clerk, 1416, p. res.
Soulby. Rob. Kemp, 1421, p. m. Clerk. Rob. Foston, 1430, p. m. Kemp, -- was
bishop of Elphin, and suffragan bishop to bishop Langley. Tho. Ryhall, 1434, p.
m. Foston. Rich. Creswell, 1462, p. res. Ryhall. Rob. Clerk, 1465, p. res.
Creswell. Joh. Pykering, 1478, p. res. Clerk. Joh. Woodfal, 1483, p. res.
Pykering. Ra. Hamsterley, 1484, p. res. Woodsal. Hen. Merington, 1487, p. res.
Hamsterley. John Young. Chr. Blunt, 1519, p. res. Young. John Tyndale, 1520, p.
m. Blunt. Rob. Hertborne, 1526, p. m. Tyndale. Joh. Smythe, 1 Sep. 1543, p. m.
Hertborne. Rob. Crawforth, 25 May, 1560, p. m. Smythe. Laur. Pilkington, 1572,
p. dep. Crawforth, col. by bishop on lapse 19 Jan. 1583, p. m. Pilkington.
Mich. Pattenson, cl. 1583,. -- In his time Kymblesworth was united to Witton
Gilbert.
Witton par. reg. 1601. The church was quite gone to decay, however Maria Stoke
peregrina in domo Edw. Robinson, de Kimblesworth, recepta intuitu paupertatis
septula in cancella de Kimb. 28 Feb. 1623.

Randal's MSS. 1. Guillim, p. 388, we find the arms of Nath. Johnson, of
Kiblesworth, in the county of Durham, chief farmer of the chimney money of his
majesty for the four northern counties, viz. party per pale sable and azure, a
saltire arg. charged with 5 cocks sable, between 3 flaming towers and two
spears in saltirewise in base, or.

One of Langley's chantry clerks did duty at Kimblesworth.


; and by entry made in the parish register of Witton, it appears the
parishioners came to the following agreement, -- The Ascension-day being the
9th day of May, viz. Ao D'ni 1593, Mem. That the day and year abovesaid it is
concluded and agreed upon between the parishioners of Witton Gilbert and the
parish of Kymblesworth, that for ever hereafter, it shall be lawful for the
said parishioners of Kymblesworth, in respect of their want of a church at
Kymblesworth, to come to the said church of Witton aforesaid to divine service
and sacraments, and whatsoever other rites, viz. burials, weddings, and
churchings accordingly as law requires. Provided always, that our bishop of
Durham and Mr Dean do not withstand or let this their grant and agreement. And
in consideration of this abovesaid agreement, the aforesaid parishioners of
Kymblesworth shall ever hereafter pay or cause to be paid unto the said church
of Witton Gilbert, all and all manner of sessments accordingly to their ancient
rent, to pay to the said church of Witton as they pay, viz. so much of the
pound as they lay for themselves. And where it was agreed, that in respect of
the surplice and other things, that the said parishioners of Kymblesworth
should pay 11s. viijd. which 11s. viijd they did pay unto the hands of the
churchwardens of Witton Gilbert, upon Trinity Sunday the year abovesaid This
extracted from the parish register, under which is the following certificate.

"Least the above written memorandum should have bin lost, its here saithfully
and word for word transcribed out of the old paper into ye regr. by me.

"Joh. Smith, cur. of Witton-G."
.

Ra. Eure died seized of the manor of Kymblesworth in the fourth year of bishop
Booth, and livery was made to his coheiresses, Ann, the wife of Ra. Constable,
Isabel, the wife of William Constable, and Henry Thwaites, his cousins, on the
24th of September, in the first year of bishop Sherwood Cursitors Rolls. --
Rudd's MSS.
, 1485.

Sacriston-heugh, as part of the possessions of the cathedral church, is before
noted. Of Simperley we find nothing remarkable in the records.

LANCHESTER CHURCH
depiction of Lanchester Church The Parish of LANCHESTER
The Parish of LANCHESTER adjoins to Witton-Gilbert. It is very extensive,
having now three chapels of ease belonging to it, Esh, Satley, and Medomsley.
There are the remains of other chapels; one at Old Hall, one at Rowley Gillet,
one at Collierly, and another at Esp Green; but no evidence of their date or
rights has come to our knowledge. This parish, to the north-west, adjoins upon
Muggleswick, near Horslipburn, and the parish of Wolsingham; to the southward,
on Brancepeth and St Oswald's, with Witton-Gilbert; eastward, on Chester; and,
northward, on Tanfield chapelry, and Whickham parish.

In the extracts from the Boldon Buke, given in the notes, the reader will find
the servile tenures of lands in this parish. The villains were bound to mow the
lord's meadow, and win and lead his hay; when they mowed, they were to have
from the lord their mess called a Corrody The word Crowdy is a name in general
acceptance in the north for a mess of oatmeal mixed with water, which is the
diet of the Scotch shepherds, and much in use among the common people of the
northern counties of England.
; they were to drive the lord's hogs from the forest after the mast and pannage
season, on which latter duty each received a loaf of bread. Some held their
lands by more honorable services, as attending the lord in his forest-hunt in
Weredale, called in all the records Magna Caza, or the Great Chase, with one or
more greyhounds, and going upon embassy; such was the tenure of the lands of
Hulfus, Ulkillus, and Meldredus, in this parish. The punder had lands assigned
as a gratuity for his office, besides a fee from the inhabitants called in the
record Trava A thrave of corn is a term used in this country to express 24
sheaves -- a proper see to the punder for protecting the crop.
, rendering to the lord forty hens and three hundred eggs LANGCHESTRE. -- In
Langchestre sunt xlj bovatae unaquaq. de viij acris, quas xx villani tenent.
and reddunt. de unaquaq. bovata xxxd. cum auxilio cotmannorum falcant totum
pratum and levant foenum and quadrigant and adducunt porcos de pannagio, and
dum falcant semel habent corrodium, and cum adducunt porcos habet unusquisq.
unum panem.

Hulsus tenet ibid'm lx acras and reddit. xvis. and vadit in legationibus
episcopi, and venit in magnas cazas cum j leperario.
Ulkillus and Meldredus tenent fimiliter xl acras, and reddunt xijs. vjd. and
vadunt in legationibus.
Orm tenet in j assarto viij acras and dimid. and reddit. ijs.
Uxor Galfridi personis tenet j toft and viij acras de elemosin. episcopi.
Quatuor cotmanni tenent viij acras and reddunt iiij s.
Punderus tenet vj acras and habet travas de villa de Langcestria and reddit xl
gall. and ccc ova.
Prata sunt in manu episcopi and vaccaria.
Praeterea v bovatae de villinagio sunt vastae and similiter xviij acrae quae
fuerunt de dominio.
Molendina reddunt viij marcas.
Et singulae ij bovatae de villinag inveniunt j cordam in magna caza. -- Boldon
Buke.
LANGCHESTR. -- Liberi Tenentes. -- Walterus ate Hall tenet j mes. and x acr.
terrae per servic. ^orin. and red. per ann.
Haeredes Patricii de Kellowe tenet j clos. vocat. Patrick clos. and red. per
ann. vjd.
Thomas Umfravill tenet juxta Holmeset x acr. terrae quond'm Galfridi Raghop.
Cotag. -- Ricardus Shephird tenet j cotag. cum gardin and ij acr. terrae
quond'm Ric'i Morley; auxiliatur ad faleand. prata and levand. foenum ad
quadrig. and adjuvat ad ducend. porcos de panag. red. ijs. vjd. -- Tres alij
tenent singuli j cotag. and ij acr. terrae and faciunt ut supra and redd.
singuli ijs. vjd.

Terrae Bond apud le Forth. -- Johannes Shephird tenet j mes. and xxvj acr.
terrae and dimid quond'm Ri'ci Morleys and solebat falcare prata d'ni pro part
sua ad auxilium cotmannor. and levat. foenum and quadrigat and adducit porcos
de pannag. and dum falcat habebit semel corrodium, and cum adducit porcos
habebit unum panem et red. per ann. viijs. x d.

vij alij tenentes tenent vj mes. and cx acr. terrae and faciunt ut supra and
red. aequalem.

Terrae Scaccarij. -- Johannes Prentys and iij alij, etc.

Terrae Bond apud Newbigging. -- Johannes Fildyng tenet j mes. and xi acr.
terrae and facit sicut Bond apud le Forth, red. iijs. viijd. -- Thomas Hill and
xxvj alij tenentes tenent xxvij mes. and dimid. j mes. cum diverse. acr. terrae
in vario numero reddendo per ann. cert. reddit.

Terrae Scaccarij. -- Johannes de Hull tenet iij acr. terrae quond'm Rad'i de
Newbiggyng and red. per ann. xijd. -- Johannes Fildyng and xvij alii tenentes
tenent. xvj mes. j toft and ij claus. and diverf. acr. terrae, reddendo certos
redditus annuatim.

Omnes tenentes tenent inter se pastur. etc. Smalhop sord xxd. -- xiij acr.
prati de domin. xvjs. xd. ob. -- xiiij acr. terrae in Smalhop iiijs. x d. etc.
and alij.

Radulphus Milner tenet molend. de Langchestr. and Burnhop quae solebant
reddere-per ann. viijl. us. viii. modo reddunt per ann. ad iiij terminos vj l.
v s. v d.

Terrae Scaccarij apud Hurtbuk. -- Johannes Younger and alii.

Punderus de Langchestr. red. pro officio suo ad. festam Natalis and Paschae xl
gallin. and xxxviij ova.

Hatfield's Survey, Within this manor are the vills of Roughside and Rowley,
Kyo, Billingside and Peth, Benfieldside, Buttesfield, Broomsheels, Colpighill
and Satley, Burnop and Hamsteels, Broom, Plass, and Lanchester.

De parcarijs epor. Dun. bosci sui de Lanchester.

Ball. forestar. ward. de Lanchester in foresta e'pi de Lanchester pro vita.
(Fox) etc.

Mickleton's MSS.
. We observe also by this record, that part of the villain service was
providing j. cordam in Magna Caza This is an obsolete term, and not easily
defined. We read in some records, Foenum autumnale cordum; and in others,
foenum cordum, which signifies the latter math. or lateward hay; so we presume
this villain service was providing hay or provender for the prelate's horses at
the chase. We also find in the law books the word cordus applied to measures of
wood, and was ascertained in quantity as to the length of the billet, and
breadth and height of the pile.


.

Robert Lovel, 16 K. John 1214, held the lordships of Longchestre (the Roman
Longovicum) and Thornton up the Weye (Were) whereof there was livery at that
time made to Robert de Gaugi, who had marryd Beatrice, daughter of Isolde,
niece and heir to the same Robert Dugd. vol. i. p. 558, 679.
.

The church is a fine building of hewn stone work, covered with lead; its
revenues were swallowed up at the suppression of religious houses, a scanty
allowance and a laborious cure being left to the officiating minister. The
south front of the church is disfigured by a deep porch of fifteen feet: There
is an aile on each side of the nave, formed by two rows of three beautiful
round pillars excellently proportioned, supporting pointed arches, carved with
the zig-zag figure; the nave is about forty-five feet in length, and twenty in
width, lighted on each side by four upper windows, of two lights each, square
topt; the ailes exceed the length of the nave some few feet, and are not of
equal widths, the south aile being about nineteen feet wide, and the north only
fifteen, lighted by three regular windows similar in form to those above, and a
window at the east end, having a pointed arch: In painted glass in this window
is a coat of arms, impaling Tempest, and under an arch in the side wall of this
aile is the recumbent effigy of an ecclesiastic with his hands elevated,
clasping a chalice, well cut in black marble We are inclined to believe this is
the tomb of Stephen Austell, one of the deans, who died 27 Feb. 1461. The
marble of the tomb is of that sort won near Stanhope, in this county.

Thurstan Ryston, rector of Stanhope, and Rob. Southeroun of Durham, chaplain,
by their charter of feofment, dated 14 Apr. 1462, gave to the churchwardens and
other parishioners of Lanchester, two tenements and eighteen acres of land and
meadow, with their appurtenances, situated in the vill and fields of
Greencroft, upon condition that the said churchwardens cause yearly placebo and
dirige, with mass to be solemnly celebrated in the church for the soul of
Stephen Austell, late dean thereof, on his anniversary, viz. 27 Feb. and find a
light burning before the image of St Catherine, where his body was buried. --
Ex. orig. penes Geo. Clavering, arm. de Greencroft.

BOOK OF RATES.
Land tax at 4 s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. L. s. d. L. s. d. Ash
and Flass 28 0 1 0 16 0 Burnhope and Hamsteels 13 9 7 0 12 8 Bunfieldside 7 14
0 0 5 6 Butsfield and Satley 19 17 11 0 17 6 ^/4 Conset and Knitsley 15 0 0 0 9
6 Greencroft 12 13 0 0 11 7 1/^ Iviston 10 17 8 0 8 10^/4 Kyo 18 7 8 0 10 6
Langley 14 14 0 0 14 0 Lanchester and the Middles 20 18 10 0 19 11 Lanchester
hamlets 20 8 8 0 13 3 Medomsley 47 19 11 1 8 2 Holmeside hamlets 23 2 3 1 0 9
Rowley and Roughside 8 0 2 0 5 6 Collierly and out-hamlets 12 12 6 0 10 1

9 king George I. registered estates. Yearly val. L. s. d. Holmside. Mr Roger
Meynald 10 0 0 Ash. Sir Rich. Smith 374 2 10 Butsfield. John Fewster 10 0 0 Ann
Tailor 10 0 0 Burnhope. John Johnson 12 0 0 Colpig hill. Mrs Ann Coxon 91 10 0
^veston. John Tailor 20 0 0 Thomas Smith 24 0 0

Yearly value. L. s. d. Lanchester. Ra. Widdrington, esquire for tithes 170 0 0
Jane Wheatley 7 0 0 Mrs Ann Widdrington for tithes 400 0 0 Mrs Cath. Selby for
tithes 12 0 0 Mr John Smith 19 0 0 Medomesley. Lady Mary Swinburn 121 6 0
Satley. William Tailor 16 0 0 Po^top. Anth. Meaburn, esquire 93 8 0 Kyoe. Ditto 296
15 0 Iveston. Ditto 10 0 0 Rowley. Ditto 34 0 0 Mann's MSS.

Book of rates 20l. 11s. 11d. -- Value of lands 2455l. 7s. -- Grey's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 493 140
498 1760 to 1779 1442 418 1027 Increase 949 278 529

Burials in the last year 47. -- Computed number of inhabitants 1410.


. The chancel is separated from the nave by a circular arch, all the mouldings
of which are covered with a zig-zag figure; the groins rise from clustered
pilasters: The chancel is about forty-one feet in length, and fifteen in width,
having a large window of three lights to the east, in which there has been much
painted glass; the figures of three sages bringing offerings to our Savior
remain, with an inscription Ecce Magi verum deum Ador. There are three windows
to the south, two of which have two lights, and the other three, all under
pointed arches: In the north wall is a large arch, where six stalls are fixed,
the seats of the prebendaries, neatly built of oak, and decorated with carving
The stalls for the archbishop and canons on the south side of the chancel have
been altered since the Reformation.

License to Adam de Bows to give lands in Lanchester to Hexham priory. -- Rot.
bishop Bury. Cursitors Rolls, Rudd's MSS.


. Over the vestry door, on the north side of the chancel, is a sculpture of a
person sitting in a chair of state accompanied by cherubs suspended in the
clouds. The tower is rather heavy, being a square of twenty feet. The whole
edifice is kept in neat order.

It was said, that on placing regular canons in the cathedral church at Durham,
Lanchester was one of the establishments instituted for the reception of the
seculars; but we find no authority to support that idea: Till the time of
bishop Bek, this church was merely rectorial Rectors. Henricus occurs rector
1147. -- Philippus de Sancta Helena, 1221. -- Mag'r Alex. de Alvertona. -- John
de Cravene pbr' 8 Kal. Apr. 1283, p. m. Alvertona, appointed defensor
ecclesiae. -- Randal's MSS.


: But he, among other works of munificence, in the year 1283, upon a vacancy by
the death of the rector, appointed John Craven priest, the lawful defender of
the same, the patronage belonging to the bishop; and being sensible the
revenues were sufficient for the maintenance of several ministers, of a
considerable part whereof it had lately been defrauded, he ordained that it
should for the future be collegiate It was valued in the Lincoln taxation at
90l. 13s. 4d. but 26 Hen. VIII. at no more than 49l. 3s. 4d. and was granted 7
king Edw. VI. to Simon Weldbury and Chapter Moreland.

Vide Mon. Ang. vol. iii. p. 2, p. 38, 39. Cart. 20, Edw. I. n. 26, in qua
recensentur ordinationes et statuta fundatoris. Eandem cartam in Prynne, vol.
iii. p. 462. -- Tanner's Notitia.

The deanery is 42 0 0 Preb. of Eshe 8 13 4 -- Medemsley 7 6 2 -- Newbigginge 2
10 0 -- Langley 3 0 0 -- Iveston 5 6 8 -- Causide 2 0 0 -- Greencroft 4 13 4

All formerly in the bishop of Durham, who has now the placing of the
minister, and he receives from the king 10l. p' ann. -- Vide Prynne, vol. iii.
p. 462.

At the dissolution this church became a curacy, and not being in charge, pays
no first fruits or tenths. It is dedicated to All Saints.

Certifi. val. 14l. 8s. 4d. -- Proc. ep. 1l. -- Bishop Crew's legacy 10l. --
Surplice fees about 20l.

CURATES.
Sir Rich. Miller, or Mylner, oc. 21 July 1562. Miles Watmough, 31 Jan. 1586,
p. m. Miller. Rob. Hunt, A. M. lic. 15 Sep. 1624. Tho. Thompson, lic. 30 Sep.
1635. Josias Dockwray, an intruder, deprived 1662, after a conformer, and LL.
D. Josias Dockwray, A. B. 1663. John Martin, A. B. lic. 15 Jul. 1669, p. res.
Dockwray. Alex. Eagleston, 1682. Tho. Scaise, 1686, p. res. Eagleston. Rob.
Carr, 1694, p. res. Scaife. Joh. Bryding, A. M. 1695, p. res. Carr. Rob.
Richarby, ent. 10 Sep. 1721, p. res. Bryding. Miles Patrick, cl. lic. 17 Sep.
1731, p m. Richarby. Will. Adey, cl. lic. 14 Sep. 1744, p. m. Patrick. -- Dent.
cl. 1778, p. m. Adey.
Randal's MSS. On a brass plate formerly fixed to a stone in the middle of the
chancel.

Orate pro anima mag'r Ioannis Rudde in Decretis Baccalaurii quondam Decani
hujus Ecclesiae qui obiit xxix. die Septembris, Anno D'ni MCCCCLXXXX. cujus
animae propitietur Deus animarum.

The tithes of grain of Lanchester and Newbegin, parcel of the rectorial rights
of Lanchester, were granted in see farm by letters patent of queen Elizabeth,
dated 9th Feb. 30 year of her reign to Downing and another, they conveyed to
Crompton, and another, by indenture, dated 23 June, 34th of Elizabeth; they by
indenture, dated 28 May, 43d Elizabeth, sold to Rante and others, who, by
indenture, dated 10th July, 4th k. ^^. I. conveyed to George and Peter Ward,
and they to Sir Nich. Tempest, of Stella, 13 Nov. 1610.

Randal's MSS.
, with a dean and seven prebendaries, and established the following statutes
for the government thereof; whereby it was directed, that the dean should
always be a priest, residing there, and having cure of souls, to find two
proper chaplains, habited like the vicars of the canons, for his assistance;
that he repair and keep up the chancel, but be not obliged to any new building:
That he cause the chapels of Eshe, Medmesley and Helay, (Satley) to be served
by proper ministers; for maintaining of all which he was to have all the
obventions of altarage, as well in the church of Langecestre, as in the
aforesaid chapels, viz. of offices for the dead, wool, lambs, milk, calves,
colts, hens, geese, pigs, flax, hemp, and of all small and personal tithes,
with the lands, meadows, services of lordships, revenues, and courts of all
tenants of the church, as also the pensions of Collierley and Sateley. The dean
to have the messuages belonging to the aforesaid chapels, with their courts and
lands, excepting that the prebendaries of each of them should have one part
where they might lay up their corn. Each of the prebendaries who had the three
first prebends, was to find a vicar chaplain at his own cost, and each of the
other four, a vicar in holy orders, to serve the church in the habit of canons,
and observe the method of singing as practiced in the church of York or Sarum.
Each in his turn to be hebdomadarius, and the dean to take care of all things
relative to divine service, and to make rules and correct them. Mattins to be
said in the morning for the sake of the parishioners. To the first prebend was
assigned the farm-fees of all Essche, Corneshows, Hedley, Hamsteles, the lower
and the upper Bromsheles, and the land of Matthew the Forester. To the second
prebend those of Medmesley, Hussetres, Kighou, Bursblades, Billingside,
Bradeley, and Croke. To the third those of Grenecrofte, Holmside, Colpyel,
Steley, Buclesfelde, the smith's land and Scatigurley. To the fourth those of
Langeley, Riddinge, Stabbileye, Brom, Notesteles, Brunhope, Langecestre, and
Peche. To the fifth those of Helay, Conkesheved, and Kincheley. To the sixth,
Yenestane, and Benefeldside. To the seventh, Morileys, Neubegginge, Hurtibuke,
and Fordes. The churchyard, with the buildings, to be divided by the
archbishop between the dean and canons for their dwelling. The first stall in
the church, on the south side, to be for the archbishop; the first on the left
for the dean, and so the canons on both sides in order. These statutes were
confirmed by king Edward I. in the 20th year of his reign, 1293 Dugdale's
Monast. Anglican. vol. iii. p. 38.

Deans. Mag'r Joh. de Craven, p'br. 1283. -- Mag'r Will. de Marclan, oc. Dec.
1311. -- Will. de Qwycham, 1313. -- Vide Wilkins' Council. vol. ii. 397.

Mag'r Joh. de Newbigging, oc. 19 June, 1350. -- John de Derby, collated 2 Aug.
1369. -- Sir Joh. Burgeys, 1383. -- John de Cokyn, 18 May, 1399. -- Joh.
Dalton, ob. 1409. -- Joh. Hunteman, S. T. B. 25 Jan. 1409, p. res. Dalton. --
Will. Brown, 1416, p. res. Hunt. -- Will. Aslakby, 1421. -- Steph. Austell,
ob. 27 Feb. 1461. -- Joh. Rudde, B. D. ob. 29 Sep. 1490. -- Tho. Thomyoo, D. D.
1490, p. m. Rudde. -- D'nus Lanc. Claxton, capel. col. 7 Apr. 1496, p. m.
Claxton. -- Rob. Hyndmer, col. 2 Apr. 1532, p. m. Claxton -- He was dean at the
dissolution, and had a pension of 20l. allowed him, which I find was paid in
1553. -- Randal's MSS.

MSS. Harleian, No 605. This deanery was by warrant of the lord protector
Somerset, leased to Thomas Gerrard, esquire 16 Oct. 2d Edw. VI. ao 1548.

Willis's Hist. Abbeys, vol. ii. p. 74. Pensions paid in 1553, to Lanchester
college.

L. s. d. To Robert Hindmere, dean 20 0 0 To Will. Frankland, preb. of Eveston
3 0 0 To Lancelot Knagge, preb. of Butfield 2 0 0 To Rich. Burncheper, preb. of
Medeslaye 5 6 8 To John Kyller, preb. of Grenecrosse 4 13 4 To Wm Knagges, of
Esne 5 0 0

Rymer's Foedera. vol. xxviii. pat. k. Chapter I. 14 Mar. 1626. In the grant for
life to queen Henrietta Maria consort to k. Cha. I. 1626, is a fee farm rent of
43l. 10s. paid out of the d. of Lanchest. -- Note vol. i. p. 1224.

Donatio terr. in Dameleyes in Stubbiley a d'no Auth. ep. Dun. concessar. Joh'i
Ville; with an inspeximus and royal confirmation. -- Ex. orig. pen. Tho. Gyll,
arm.


.

Lanchester appears to have decreased greatly of late years, and now is a mere
straggling village, placed in a warm and well-sheltered valley, with a fine
stream of water, called Smallhop Burn, running through it. The site of the old
deanry-house enclosed with a moat remains, but no edifice: Several fertile
enclosures skirt the town, and the improvement of land advances rapidly.

At the distance of a quarter of a mile, on an eminence toward the west, are
the remains of the great Roman station, which Camden called Longovicus. Dr
Gale, in the Philosophical Transactions, No 357, calls it the Castra Stativa,
where the soldiers were quartered in time of peace.

GLANNIBANTA, near Lanchester.
map

Mr Horsley supposes Horsley's Britan. Romans p. 450, 451.

Mr Camden was of opinion that Lanchester was the Roman Longovicum, and by what
Dr Hunter has written to the Royal Society about it, we have reason to rest in
that conjecture; for he says, that several inscriptions have been dug up there,
and the Roman street called Watling street lies through it. It is seated on the
top of a hill, and overlooked by another. By the ruins we may discern it has
been a much larger place, in a square form, and fortified with a thick strong
stone wall, about which now both within and without are nothing but ruins and
rubbish. It is probable that the buildings within the walls were all public,
viz. temples, palaces, and stations for the soldiers, and perhaps lodgings for
the garrison. No doubt this colony was adorned with many beautiful buildings.
The inscriptions found here since Mr Camden's time are as follows.

N. B. They are all noted in the following extracts.

When I was last there I looked at the pillars which had supported the floors
of what is supposed to have been a balneum They were not all alike, nor of a
very regular figure, but yet there was some similitude and proportion between
them; they are all about two feet and five inches high, perhaps two Roman feet
and a half. The angles or corners of four square stones rested on each of these
pillars, and between each, two pillars was more than a yard distance. Upon the
square stones had been a plaistering about four inches thick, consisting of
lime and small pieces of brick. The marks of fire and smoke were very visible
when they first discovered the place. I was also informed that there was
another set of pillars underneath, which supported another such floor, and some
sort of metal upon it, on which the upper set of pillars rested. The lower
pillars stood upon a blue clay, and the intervals between them were filled up
with earth and rubbish. It was conjectured that the first had failed or been
destroyed, and that the second had been built on its ruins. Above this
(according to the account I had, for there are no remains of it now) was a
square room, having each side about four yards long, and the walls plaistered
in the same manner, and with the same materials as the floor. The altar
hereafter described was found at the east end of this room, with its back
undressed toward the wall. I have been more particular in this description
because it has not been sufficiently given before; but the other remains and
monuments here I shall also largely describe.

There is a very considerable tumulus about a mile from Lanchester, called the
Maiden Law, and probably the military way has not been far from this tumulus.

No 2, plate. Imperator Caesar, Marcus, Antonius, Gordianus pius felix Augustus
Balneum cum Basilica, a solo instruxit per Gneium Lucilianum legatum Augustalem
Propraetorem curante Marco Aurelio Quirino praefecto Cobortis primae Legionis
Gordianae.

This and the next are two curious and useful inscriptions, which, with most of
the following, were made public in the Philosophical Transactions, No 266, 354,
from Dr Hunter, and have most of them been inserted in Camden. The originals
are now in the library at Durham. Mr Gale thinks, that the Legio here called
Gordiana, was the legio sexta victrix, which continued so long in the north,
and had its stated quarters at York, whilst the other legions had their's at a
much greater distance. Yet we have an inscription at this very place by the
leg. xxvv. which was employed not far from hence in building or repairing some
structure, as appears from the inscription at Whitley castle, in
Northumberland. These inscriptions are valuable, as they have preserved to us
the names of two propraetors, which otherwise must have been lost. For as Mr
Gale observes, from Virius Lupus, who was propraetor under Severus in the year
208, to Nonnius Phillippus, (whom he believes to have succeeded the latter of
these here mentioned) to the year 242, the name of no other propraetor or
legate is any where else to be met with. It is highly probable that the two
here mentioned immediately succeed one another, because both inscriptions were
erected not only under the same emperor, but under the same commander of the
cohort Aurelius Quirinus, who had the care of both these works. This, as Dr
Hunter informs us, was found about one hundred yards cast of the fort, the
other within the sort, which confirms Mr Gale's opinion, that the soldiers
lodged within the sort. The Basaliacae of the ancients were public buildings,
in which causes were heard, and merchants met for business; they were adorned
with pillars and covered walks: Vitruvius has given a description of them, and
so has Palladio from him. This stone is broke through the middle, and some of
the letters are damaged or lost, but it is easy to supply them. And this
inscription seems rather to be worse cut, and to be the later of the two. As
for the pre for per and Gn. for Gneium in the fourth line, it would be easy to
produce other parallel instances, as also of L for Legionis. But Mr Ward is
inclined to think that pre at the beginning of the fourth line was not designed
for per, and that the following word should not be read Gneium, but Egnatium, a
name that frequently occurs in Gruter. His reason for reading it thus is, that
in all such mixtures of smaller letters against the middle of larger in the
same word, the word always begins with a letter of the larger size; and as for
the E he imagines it was not intended to serve both words by being read twice,
because in such cases, which are very rare, the letter to be repeated is always
found in a complex character. He supposes, therefore, that there has either
been a small e between PR, which is now defaced, or that it was designed to be
put there, but was forgot, as it easily might be. -- Horsley, No 11, p. 289.

The reader will refer to a learned treatise on this subject in the additions
to Gordon's Iter. Sept. p. 12, too long to be inserted here.

No 3, pl. Imperator Caesar Marcus Antonius Gordianus pius felix Augustus
principia et armamentaria c^nlapsa restitu^ per Maecilium Fascum Legatum
Augustatem propraetorem curante Marco Aurelio Quirino praefecto cohortis primae
Legionis Gordianae.

So much has been said already concerning this inscription, under the former
and another in Northumberland, that little more need be added here; it may not
be amiss to observe, that the Emperor's name is here at length Antonius, as it
is printed also in the Fasti Consulares. We have likewise some other instances
of it in Montsaucon. Mr Gale says, that the armamentaria signify the arsenal,
and principia the quarters either of the legionary soldiers, called the
Principes, or the place where the ensigns are kept. But from a passage in
Tacitus, one would rather conclude the latter to be the general's pavilion. --
See Gordon's Itin. Add. p. 14, and Horsley, No 12, p. 290.

N. B. Maecilium in the original Durh. lib. is Mercilium -- W. H.

No 4, pl. I believe this was set up by the same cohort as the two former. It
is much of the same sort with those which I have frequently observed to be
erected by legions and cohorts in the face of some work they were building. The
last letter has frequently been mistaken for a T, but in the original it is
evidently an I, with the usual numeral stroke above it, and so can be nothing
else but cohors prima. -- Horsley, No 13, p. 290.



Fortunae Augusti Sacrum Publius Aelius Atticus Praefectus votum solvit libens
merito.

I know not what cohort Publius Aelius Atticus commanded who erected this
altar. The word Praefectus, without any thing following, is not uncommon in
inscriptions. The person where I lodged at Lanchester told me that this altar
was found at the east end of a square room, which they discovered within the
station, and the back of the altar is undressed. I know not whether or no the
figure between the two leaves in the capital can be designed for the sun. --
Horsley, No 14, p. 290.

Mr Horsley's correspondent had furnished him with a very inaccurate drawing;
the cut was made from the original in the dean and chapter's library, in April
1776. The radiations Mr Horsley mentions are no other than the marks of the
chissel round the cavity: The mouldings of this altar are as represented. -- W.
H.

No 5, plate. Genio Praetori Claudius Epaphroditus Claudianus Tribunus Cohortis
secundae Lingonum, votum libens posuit merito.

This stone looks like a pedestal, and seems by its regular square cavity at
the top to have had something fixed upon it, but it is nothing like the base of
an altar. The letters are tolerably well cut. I at first was doubtful if the
first line might have been Genio Praetoris, but upon examining the original, I
saw every letter very plain, and was convinced that there neither was nor ever
had been an S at the end. I then thought it might be a flattering compliment to
the un-named praetor, as if he was their genius or tutelar god. But my learned
friend Mr Ward, judges this too high a compliment to be paid by a tribune to a
praetor, and observes that Genius is a proper name frequent in Gruter. It is
therefore my present opinion, that this stone has sustained some pillar, or
somewhat of that nature; and that the monument has been erected to the honor
of Genius the praetor. If we read votum posuit, the word votum must by a trope
be taken here for the thing vowed, as upon another inscription we have memoriam
posuit for monumentum; and upon another votum fecit, which expression in the
common sense is not to pay a vow, but to make it. And thus Virgil seems to have
used the word votum, when he says "Lustramurque Jovi, votisque incendimus aras."
AEN. 3. xi. 279. And likewise Petronius, in the following passage, -- "Stipant
graves
"Equi recessus Danai et in voto latent."
SATYR, cap. 49. where the same thing is twice repeated in different words, and
both equi and voto denote the wooden horse, which the Greeks pretended to
consecrate to Pallas; votum pro redditu simulant. This compliment is paid by
Claudius Epaphroditus Claudianus, the tribune of the 1st or 2d cohort of the
Lingones. The 2d cohort of these people was in Britain, as appears from other
inscriptions, and in Camden, a smaller I is set before the other in this
inscription, so as to make it plainly the second. There is, I think, room for
it on the stone, but the part where it should be is broken or worn. -- Horsley
No 15, p. 290.

MAR.T.I D AVG D AVFIDI US AVFI DIANVS The judicious antiquary, Dr Hunter, of
Durham, was so obliging as to send me the copy of the inscription in the
margin, which I sound to be very exact when I compared it with the original.
The Doctor supposes it has been affixed to the face of an altar, and that the
holes in the first line have been for this purpose. The plate is of gold, but
very thin, weighing just two guineas, and the letters, which are very peculiar,
are raised by an impression made on the inner side by some proper instrument.
The plate is so thin that in some places it is struck quite through with the
too^ that has been used for raising the letters. It may be questioned whether
we are to read Marti Aug^sto, and suppose the emperor to be represented as it
were under the image or notion of the god of war, or Marti Augusti, and to
suppose the emperor to be the favorite of Mars, or Mars to be the emperor's
favorite deity. But as to this matter I shall only refer to what has already
been said in a parallel case in Cumberland. The cut of the letters,
particularly the G, looks like the lower empire; but I know no evidence whereby
the particular emperor can be determined with any great probability. We have
several other altars at this place, inscribed also to Mars, which have been
taken notice of before. I have only to add, that according to Dr Hunter's
account in his letter to me, This plate was found in the year 1716, in a heap
of rubbish cast out to clear an old foundation without the fortification of the
garrison, a little south from the balneum. It is now in the chapter library at
Durham. -- Horsley, No 16, p. 291.

No 6, plate. Legio vicesima valens victrix fecit.

The corona here is supported by two winged victories, with the usual symbols
and the usual drapery and attitude; the boar within may imply that it has been
erected after some victory over the Caledonians by this legion. The stone is
broken quite through, but the letters notwithstanding are very visible, and
none of them lost in the breach. -- Horsley, No 16, p. 291.

No 7, plate. This and the next are dedicated to Mars, and both but meanly
performed. There is no name upon this, so we cannot tell by whom it was
erected. -- Horsley, No 17, p. 291.

No 8, plate. Deo Marti Caii Aurelii susceptum votum.

The name of the person who dedicated this is Caius Aurelius; but who he was I
suppose is unknown. This small altar has a patera on one side, and a
praefericulum on the other. -- Horsley, No 18, p. 292.

No 9, plate. Deo Vitiri.

This is inscribed to the local god Vitires, but by whom is not said. --
Horsley, No 19, p. 292.

No 10, plate. These three are all of them small altars, which have no visible
inscriptions upon them. They have, I believe, been published only by Mr Gordon.
The first has three female figures, which he very probably supposes to be some
of the matres. The second has a toad on one side, and the usual sacrificing
instruments on the other. I have only represented that side with the toad, as
being more curious. The third has a pediment supported by two rude pillasters.
-- Horsley, No 20, p. 292.

No 11, pl. This small altar, with the boar on the side, and the inscription
much effaced, is also ranked among these Lanchester inscriptions. Mr Ward
supposes this altar might be erected to the god Vitires, and that the letters
Vit were upon the first line, as we find them before; the second line is
plainly votum, and the remaining letters upon the third line he thinks may be
part of Solvit. This conjecture is favored by another inscription of this
county upon an altar dedicated to this deity, which has a boar upon one side:
But I think it more likely that the latter part of the inscription has been the
name of the person erecting the altar: The last letters are obscure and
doubtful.

Besides these before mentioned, which are not at Durham, there are some
curiosities remaining yet in the station or town, and among the rest a large
stone almost like a mortar. What use it has been for is hard to determine; some
of the people call it a font, others who are more skilled, think it has been
designed to hold water for the Roman lustrations. -- Horsley, No 21, p. 292.

No 12, plate. Deo Marti Aci --.

This small altar was in a stone wall enclosing a field called Broomlawe near
the station, belonging to Mr Rowland Wilkinson, but I have now got it into my
own possession. The inscription has suffered very much by the weather. The
remains of it look like Deo Marti; but it cannot now inform us by whom it was
consecrated, though the last visible letters look like Acilius, a common Roman
name, and which, I think, occurs in another of our inscriptions. -- Horsley, No
24, p. 293.

No. 13, plate. (...).

The capital of this altar and a small part of the inscription is broken off
and lost, and the want of it occasions some difficulty as to the reading. When
I first saw this stone it was built up in the wall of an enclosure. I viewed it
several times in this situation, but then nothing appearing but the imperfect
Greek inscription, the opposite part of the stone being entirely under cover,
and built up within the wall. At first view I concluded it to be Greek, but
could discover no satisfactory reading. When I had purchased the stone, and got
it into my own possession, I was much surprised to see a Latin inscription on
the opposite part of the altar. Which is the face and which the back of this
altar, or whether like Janus bifrous, it was designed to be double faced, I
shall not pretend to determine. However to have inscriptions both before and
behind is a singular curiosity, of which I remember no parallel instance in
Britain, unless the beautiful altar in Camberland be taken for such. But to
have two such inscriptions in two different languages is yet more remarkable.
Some suspect the Greek inscription not to be genuine, or that it has been added
by a different hand and at a different time from the Latin. But I see no just
reason to entertain this suspicion, because I cannot discern by whom or with
what view it could have been added. So little was this altar regarded or
valued, that according to the usual fate of such monuments, it was used as a
common stone in the wall.

The high prices of curious Roman coins have produced a great many forgeries,
contrived very artfully; but the little regard that has been had for monuments
of stone, renders us more secure of their being altogether genuine. But to
return from this digression; the sight of the Latin inscription enabled me to
read the remains of the Greek one, I humbly think, with great probability; for
I take the greatest part of the one to be much the same with the other,
excepting the different language and character. I shall therefore speak to the
Latin inscription as being more easy and perfect. -- Horsley, No 25, p. 293.

No 14, plate. Aesculapio Titus Flavius Titianus Tribunus votum solvit
libentissime merito.

It appears plainly from this, that the altar has been erected by one Titus
Flavius Titianus, a tribune, but no cohort is mentioned which he commanded.
There are several consuls of the name Titianus, but the other name are
different from that of our tribune. Tiberius Fabius Titianus appears five times
in the Fasti, and at such a distance of time as to make it probable they were
five different persons. This made me suspicious that the T in our inscriptions
was to be read Tiberius, and that the following name might be Fabius. But the
Fl are so distinct on the stone as to leave no room for a doubt. I find
Postumius Titianus was consul in the year 301, in the time of Diocletian and
Maximian. And Almeloveen conjectures, that this may be the same with one who is
called in Gruter T. Fl. Postumius Titianus. This comes nearest the names of our
tribune, but there is no arguing from hence with any probability that these two
Titiani lived at or near the same time. But thus much for the person erecting
this altar; the principal question is, to whom it has been inscribed? We have
little to guide us in this but the letters Pio at the top, which are certain
and distinct. I thought of Antoninus Pius and other emperors, to whom living or
dead, and deified, this epithet Pius has been applied, such as Divo Constantio
Pio and others. Baron Clerk was so obliging as to send me several conjectures
about this Latin inscription, a copy of which I transmitted to him. Among other
things, this very learned antiquary supposes, that Pio may be a part of
Aesculapio: This conjecture is more agreeable and satisfactory than any thing
that has occurred to myself, or been offered by any other. I think by the
proportion of the altar, that there is not above one line of the inscription
wanting, which might be filled up with Aescula, or with Deo Aescula.

As for the Greek inscription, I believe it has stood thus when entire, (...)

Pro salute Titus Flavius Titianus Trib. Votum solvit libentissime merito.



I observe, that there are five lines in the Greek inscription, and but four
remaining in the Latin, and that the stone is rather higher on the side of the
Greek inscription than the other. This induces me to think that the imperfect
remains at the top have been a part of the first line of this inscription. I
need say nothing to show how suitable this reading is to the remains on the
stone, and to the Latin inscription on the other side. Both the one and the
other, I think, appear at first sight. That there were some here in this part
of the island, who were willing to pay regard to the gods who presided over
health and recovery, appears from the sculpture at Risingham, in
Northumberland. (...) is the Greek word that generally corresponds to Tribunus
in Latin. In the New Testament (...) is rendered Tribunus, and (...) cohors by
several. This is the second instance of the Greek character used in such
inscriptions in Britain; the other is the famous altar at Corbridge. No doubt
they have been erected by some auxiliaries which came from Greece, or the
neighborhood of it, such as the Thracians, etc. some cohorts of which were in
Britain. -- Hor. No 25. p. 263.

The letter from Sir John Clerk to Mr Horsley, we find noted in one from him to
Roger Gale, esquire in which the conjecture touching the word Aesculapio is
mentioned, dated from Edinburgh, 12 Apr. 1730. Reliquiae Galcanae, p 262.

No 15, plate. Jovi optimo maximo vexillatio cohortis Vardulorum and
Consecraneorum equitum, v. s. i. m.

When I first saw this stone it was in the corner of a close belonging to
Nicholas Greenwell, not far from the former; the upper part was broken off and
built up in the wall, and the inscription covered, but upon removing it out of
the wall, and comparing the two parts together. I perceived they had been
originally united. I have since this got both the pieces into my possession,
and so have had an opportunity of placing them one upon another. When this was
done they tallied with so much exactness as to render it absolutely certain
that they have originally made up one and the same altar. This altar is
inscribed to Jupiter optimus maximus, and has been erected, as I take, by the
vexillation of an Equestrian cohort, of the Varduli Cranei, people of Spain.
The first word in the second line must, I think, have been Vexillatio, and the
o perhaps has been a little one, and added near the top of the I, as we
sometimes find it. I once thought I discerned it there, but own myself jealous
that my imagination assisted my eye sight. The next word is plainly Cohors, but
who the people have been of which this cohort consisted must be more distinctly
considered. When I first viewed the two pieces as they lay separate, I read the
name Vardiorum. These are a people of Dalmatia, mentioned with some variation
of the name by Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolomy, but since I got them home and put
them together, I have found that by the largeness of the interval there must
have been two letters between the D and O in the third line. I have also
discovered the sure remains of a V after the D besides the imperfect letter
before the O, I make no doubt therefore but the name is Vardulorum. The two
first letters in the fourth line of which there are any remains, seem plainly
to have been CR, which I would have concluded to have been the initial letters
of the name Cranei, and to have been read Vardulorum, Craneorum, or e^
Craneorum if my first conjecture concerning Craneis in the Richester
inscription could have been supported: But that being rejected, I am more at a
loss for any probable reading of this part of the inscription now before us. I
would gladly still make use of the one as a key to the other. And therefore if
Consecraneis be read in the former, I am most inclined to suppose CR to be some
part of an abbreviation of the same word in this. Possibly it has been CSCR,
which supply seems not unsuitable to the vacant space on the stone, and perhaps
ET has been at the end of the preceding line in letters of the same size; thus
it would be Fardulorum et Consecraneorum in this as Vardulorum cum Consecraneis
in the other. EQ in this fourth line is no doubt for Equestris or Equitum. The
character at the end of this line is much the same with an M that is used for
Mill in one of the inscriptions of Glasgow, but that it here signifies 1000
horse is more than I dare venture to affirm. We have A^a and cohors milliaria
and millenaria in Vegetius and the Notitia. Goltzius, in his Thesaurus, has
also Cohors millenaria. Titianus, in the preceding inscription is styled (...).
Possibly this might be the millenary cohort which he commanded. -- Horsley, No
26, p. 294.

No 16, plate. At first view this seemed to be an altar, with an urn upon the
top; but I sound it to be somewhat like a flower-pot placed upon a square
stone, which I suppose has been set for ornament in some proper place, and by
the hole in the bottom it appeared to have been fixed upon something else. --
Hor. No 27, p. 295.

Extract of a letter from Mr Horsley, to Roger Gale, esquire dated from Morpeth.
10th December, 1730.
Gale's MSS. I have discovered the remains of a letter or two which had escaped
me before, and now I read it Jovi optimo maximo vexillatio cohortis (or
Equestris) votum solvit libentissime merito. The reading, which seems to lie
pretty much out of the way, I have found out by the help of another late and
lucky discovery; I mean a stone found not long ago at Richester. -- [For this
vide View of Northumberland.] The Varduli Crarei, though this latter name be
usually wrote with a G at the beginning, are two neighboring people in Spain,
etc.


Extract from Mr Gale's answer.
As for the OM they can have been nothing but the remains of Jovi optimo
maximo, and perhaps what follows is the remains of Vexillatio, though I am not
without my scruples as to that. In the first place. I do not remember I ever
met with such an expression as Vexillatio cohortis, or cohortium, though
frequently with a Vexillatio legionis, which I take to imply a detachment sent
off from the legion under a Vexillu^m, where we meet with those Vexiliationes,
Leg. II. VI. XX. upon the wall in Scotland. Secondly, Vexil^^i^ Equitum is
generally taken for Cohors Equitum but as there might be a detachment upon
occasion as well from a legion, I will not insist upon that. Vardulorum is very
plain upon this altar, though a name hitherto unknown in Britain; I wish the
Craneorum was as much out of dispute, for the Cr that follow VARD^I. are the
initials of that word, yet I cannot think they belong to Vardulorum, as you
read them, because we find but one nation of the Varduli in Spain, and
consequently no occasion for the add^tional Cra^^ to distinguish them from any
other of their neighbors that might have the same appellation. Pomponius Mela
expressly calls the Varduli Gens una. As for the Cranei upon the Richester
stone, I shall show you plainly by and by that it is quite another thing. To
this I am obliged to add, that I cannot find among my old geographers such a
people as the Cranei or Granei in Spain, or any where else, therefore should be
glad to know where you met with them. In the Richester inscription, etc. the
Cum con -- I read with the beginning of the seventh line cum consecraneis, a
word not very common, but you have it in Julius Capitolinus's life of Gordian.
c. 14. Sacrati commilitiones uno etiam mei consecranei, etc. This is Ejusdem
sacramenti militaris participes, than which nothing can be more opposite, and
leaves no room for the Cranei.


Extract of a letter from Mr Horsley, on the same subject, dated 1 Jan. 1730-1.
I confess your letter has shocked my assurance, though I still hope my
conjecture will not be quite overthrown. Gravij, Graij, or Granij, as I think
it is sometimes written, are people not far from the Varduli, mentioned by
Pliny and others. These were the people I meant and thought of. The change from
Granei to Cranei is very easy, the word consecranei no where occurs in
inscriptions, and no evidence of its being used till after the time of this
inscription: But I only send this to beg excuse for the delay, till I return
home, when I shall examine the Riechester stone.


Mr Gale, in his letter from London, dated 16 Jan. shows the improbability of
the people mentioned by Mr Horsley, being expressed in the foregoing
inscriptions: The letter is long, and might not be esteemed sufficiently
pertinent to have a place here. -- W. H.

Extract of a letter from Dr Hunter, of Durham, to Roger Gale, esquire dated 17
May, 1735.
I have had the happiness to meet with these two altars found lately at
Lanchester, in the Roman station; the first within the ancient fortification,
having its bottom broken off, and the initial letters of the last two lines.
That of the last has undoubtedly been a D. The other was found in the next
ground near the remains of the baths.

No 17, plate. 1. Numini Augusti et Genio cohortis secundae Vardulorum
Gregalium Equitum Millenariorum "sub Antisto Advento Legionis Augustae
propraetore (fecto) F. Tirannus. Tribunus Dedicatq. revertenier rite. 2. Deo
Marti Sancidus lubenti animo.

These, with two portable altars, without any inscriptions, and a figure of
Ceres, are presented to the worshipful James Clavering, esquire who, in respect to
such valuable antiquities, intends to entertain them in the avenues of his
beautiful garden at Greencroft, about a mile distant from Lanchester.

Pliny is the only author we can gather any thing from remarkable concerning
the Varduli, and that so very concise, I think deserves a place here. In
conventum Cluniensem Varduli ducant populos xiv. ex quibus Albanenses tantum
nominare libeat. Not. Hist. lib. iii. c. 3. sect. 4, of the last Paris edition;
and in lib. iv. c. 20, sect. 34, he enumerates the Vardulorum Oppida, Morosgi,
Menosca, Vesperies Amanum Portus ubi nunc Flaviobriga Colonia, where Mr
Hardoiun recites the modern names. And as Gruter's almost infinite collection
affords no inscription where the Varduli are named, I presume the Roman
economy under the emperor Trajan, by descent a Spaniard, if not sooner, had
abolished the old distinctions of separate governments, and reduced the whole
province under one general name, Hispania, which afterward the Notitia Imperij
occidentalis divides into three consular provinces, under the direction of four
presidents, viz. Farraconenis, Carthagineus Tingitania, Insula Balearium, and
places no garrison of the Varduli in any fortress in the eastern or western
empire.

The inscription upon the first is cut very fair. In comparing my copy with Mr
Horsley's altar, No 26, Durham, belonging also to Lanchester, which is at
present in the dean and chapter's library here, I observe a difference between
the first letter of the fourth line, where C is very apparent: If my copy is
true, I hope my reading may be allowed. The figure I call a Ceres is well cut;
the left hand leaning upon a globe, which I take to be a Lapis Molaris, prompts
me to term it so. One of the small altars has a toad upon the side, the same as
one of the three mentioned by Mr Horsley in our library.


Answer to the preceding letter by R. Gale, esquire dated London, 7 June, 1735.
As for the two inscriptions you sent me, I will venture to give my thoughts
upon them, etc. The first of them is very curious, as it gives us the name of a
Legatus Augustalis and propraetor hitherto unknown in Britain, and which ought,
as I think, to be read as follows, Numini Augusti and genio cohortis secundae
Vordulorum Equitate Milliariae sub Antistio advento, Legato Augusti
propraetore. F. Tiranus Tribunus dat dedicatque rite. To read GR in the fourth
line, Gregalium, is not a little doubtful: It cannot well be supposed that the
tribune of the cohort would dedicate an altar to the deity of the emperor, and
at the same time to the genius of the common soldiers, exclusive of the genius
of the officers, of which he himself was one; and how to read it otherwise is
as uncertain, if the letters are GR, as in your copy. But if they are CR, as on
the altar given us by Mr Horsley, Durham, No 26, in his Brit. Romans and which
you say has C very apparent instead of G, they may denote civium Romanorum, and
those Varduli people of Spain, and admitted to the freedom of the city of Rome
for some extraordinary merit, or by some emperor's savor, perhaps their
countryman Trajan's. This was a privilege frequently conferred upon foreigners,
even whole towns and nations, and at last communicated by Antoninus Pius
omnibus in commune subjectis, by which it seems as if this altar had been
erected before this general grant of that emperor; for it is no great honor or
advantage for these Varduli to value themselves upon, if they had enjoyed it
only in common with all the rest of the world. Mons. Spanheim observes,
Exercit. prima ad constitution. Imp. Antonini de civ. Romans quod sub. M.
Antonino Imp. civitate donati essent quicunque in Romani orbis provinciis aut
oppidis delecti essent milites ut praesidarij in imperij limitibus
constituerentur. This seems contradictory to the first mentioned grant, since
it only confers the freedom of the city upon the soldiers in garrison on the
frontiers of the empire, and the other gives it to all the subjects of the
Roman empire without exception. Perhaps the soldiers had this advantage given
them at first, and upon finding the encouragement it gave them to defend the
countries where they were quartered, it was thought advisable to admit all the
subjects of the empire to the same privilege, to interest them the more in
preserving the whole from the attacks of the barbarians: But there has been no
small uncertainty among the learned to which of the Antonins this constitution
is owing, some attributing it to Antoninus Pius, others to Marcus Aurelius, and
Mr Spanheim with great reason to Antoninus Caracalla, from Dion Cassius
chiefly, who tells us this privilege was granted to him omnibus qui in urbe
Romano erant, not so much for the honor and advantage of it to the people, as
for the filling his treasury, since it made them liable to the payment of
several taxes, from which they were before exempted; so that the soldiers had
this benefit conferred on them for their services, and the rest of the people
afterward most likely to drain their purses. In Gruter's Thesaur. p. 455, 6,
is mentioned Tantistius praefectus alae sulpiciae C. R. i. e. Civium Romanorum:
And in p. 459, 8, L. Praesentius praefectus cob. 1. Afr. C. R. E. which is read
Praefectus cohortis primae Afrorum civium Romanorum Equitate, just the same as
this at Langchester, only changing Afrorum into Vardulorum.

A cohors Equitata was composed partly of horse, partly of foot, as Vegetius
informs us, lib. ii. cha. 2. Prima cohors habet pedites mill centum and
quinque; Equites loricatos centum triginta duos et appellantur milliaria. I
must own the cohors in this inscription is called secunda Vardulorum, of which
an inscription was found at Riechester, in Northumberland. -- [See Horsley's
Brit. Romans North. 94.] This second cohors of the Varduli might however be the
prima auxiliaria of some legion, perhaps the sixth, and in more esteem for some
eminent service or fortunate accident than the first, not dignified with the
honorable title and privileges civium Romanorum, perhaps also independent of
any legion. And after all, the sole reason why one of the cohorts was called
the first, and the other the second, might have been from the priority of time
when they were first raised. This Antistius Adventus seems also to have been
Legatus Augusti, and propraetor in Belgium, from an altar found near Utrecht,
where he is called Caius Antistius (vid. Reinesiis Syntagm. Ius. Class i. 24^.)
Jovi opt. Maximo Summano ex superamissimo soli invicto Appoltini, Lunae,
Dianae, Fortunae, Marti, Victoriae, p^ci Caius Antistius Adventus Legatus
Augusti propraetore dat. and this justifies my ^^ing of his titles here,
Legatus Augusti propraetore, and not Legionis Augustae propraetore, there being
no mention of a military body in the Belgiae inscription: Besides we never meet
with a legion styled August^ singly, without some other adjunctive distinction,
as the Legio II. VI. or Antoniana Augusta; nor could there be any such officer
as a praetor, or Propraetore Legionis, that magistrate being entirely civil.
The R in the last line denotes, as I think, rite, and not reverenter, a word
not used by the ancients for this purpose upon any altars or antique monuments.

The L. A. in the last line of the other inscription, I believe, stands for
Lubenti Animo, and not for Libertus Augusti, there being nothing in it leading
us to such a person. There is nothing else in it of curiosity to be satisfied
or difficulty to be cleared.


Extract of a letter from Sir John Clerk, touching the above, dated from
Pennycuik, 26 June, 1735.
There were many barbarities in the language of the lower empire, and therefore
it is hard to determine with any certainty about letters. I cannot approve of
the doctor's Gregalium, though I believe he would be vastly sond of it, and
pleased with the invention. Your Civium Romanorum is certainly right, if the
letters be not G. R. for Germanicorum, for I have seen, if I remember right,
some such inscription, though I cannot tell where. You will be surprised at my
notion of Germanicorum, if I do not explain to you the reading of the altar so
as to comprehend such a word. If the letters are G. R. in the sense I take them
the reading must relate to the Cohors Milliaria It is hard to conceive how
Cohors Milliaria Germanicorum should dedicate an altar Genio Cob. II.
Vardulorum; besides if it was so, the reading upon the altar would have been
Cohors Mill. German. and not Germ. Cob. Mill. -- R. G.
, as dedicating an altar to the genius of the Cohors Vardulorum upon some
signal service done. F must be fecit, and the last letter R. restituit. etc.
etc.



This must have been the figure of the goddess Fortune seated, the wheel that
is by her side, and the cornucopia she has in her left hand, and the globe at
her foot on the other side, do all show it to be Fortune, though one of her
arms, as well as her head; be now broken off. There are several altars at
Durham inscribed to Fortune; one found at Lanchester inscribed Fortunae
Augusti; perhaps this has been the image of that Fortune; and by this image
with the globe at her feet, may be expressed the emperor's universal dominion.
The modern letters that are now cut on the base, may easily, at first view,
deceive one into an opinion that the image is not Roman or antique; but this
only shows when it was found, and by whom, namely in the year 1700, by Henry
Ornsby, of Lanchester, whose wife's name was Elizabeth. To disguise this figure
further, there stands on it a Mercury's head, as is plain from the petasus, so
that I look upon it as certain that the head and body have belonged to
different figures, though now the one is generally set upon the other. -- This
image of Fortune I take to be the same with a figure in Mr Gordon, which I can
find no where explained. He has made the proportion far too large for the rest
of the figures, and possibly had forgot the dimensions.


This figure, about twenty-four inches in height, remains in the dean and
chapter's library at Durham, and the proper head is to be seen there: The
sculpture is uncommonly good, and we prefer cutting the representation from a
drawing made in 1776, to a mere imitation of Mr. Horsley's plate.

This represents a curious sculpture which is on a stone built up in the vestry
wall of the church. It is much like that at Netherby, though there is some
difference in the drapery, and here is no corona on the head, but only the hair
plaited. I believe this to be a genius as well as the other, or at least the
emperor represented as such.


the first name of this town has been Glanchester, composed as usual of the
first syllable of the old Roman name, with the word Chester annexed to it: The
G, for the sake of an easier pronunciation, might be dropped. If Glanoventa
signifies a bank, or hill near a river, ven or vent in the British tongue
signifying a river, the situation of the station at Lanchester is not
unsuitable to this etymology; for it stands on high ground, with a river on one
side, and a rivulet on the other, and not far from either. I know two of our
greatest modern antiquaries, Roger Gale, esquire and Dr Hunter, of Durham, suppose
Lanchester to be the ancient Longovicus, the affinity of name having, as I
presume, inclined them to this opinion; but I have a pretty strong reason to
offer why this cannot be the Longovicus in the Notitia, garrisoned by the
Numerus Longovicariorum, which is this: It is evident that some order is
observed in the Notitia in setting down the several places, and Longovicus is
set among the most southerly that were under the Dux Britanniarum; it is put
down as more to the south than Lavatrae or Verterae, and next to Derventio, all
which are mentioned in the Notitia as well as the Itinerary; and this suits
much better with the situation of Lancaster in Lancashire, than Lanchester in
the county of Durham; and as none of the military ways on which any of the
itinera proceed seem to have passed by Lanchester, so this may be a good reason
why Longovicus is not mentioned in the Itinerary, though we have it in the
Notitia. Upon the whole, therefore, I see no place bids so fair to be the
Glanoventa in the Itinerary as Lanchester, especially if we consider how the
rest of the iter goes on when this foundation is laid.

The station and town have been situated on a lingula between the river Browney
and the rivulet Smallup. This rivulet runs into the Browney a little below the
station, and Browney loses itself and name in the river Were, at Sunderland
bridge, two miles south of Durham. The station is two furlongs distant from
Smallup, and not so much from Browney. It has a high situation, and yet the
prospect is bounded quite round about with hills or rising grounds, that are
not at a very great distance. The same sort of situation is observable at
Elsdon, in Northumberland, and several other places. This situation has this
advantage, that an enemy could not come over these rising grounds, but they
must immediately appear to the garrison.

Mr Horsley has delineated this station of an exact square figure, whereas it
is oblong, one hundred and seventy-four paces from north to south, and from
east to west one hundred and sixty within the wall. It had survived many ages
less mutilated than any structure of the kind, in the northern counties, but of
late many of the stones have been removed to enclose the adjacent lands, and
make the roads; and the proprietor is regularly destroying this piece of
antiquity. In some parts the wall yet remains almost perfect; the outside is
perpendicular, twelve feet in height, built of ashler work, in regular courses,
each stone being about nine inches deep and twelve long: By some large stones
which lie near the foot of the wall, it is evident there was a parapet, with a
walk near three feet wide at the top. At the west entrance a stone, as
represented in the cut, was lately dug up, from which the drawing was made in
1783, and shows that such fortifications had more ornament than is commonly
apprehended: The inside of the vallum is built of ashler work, but from the
ground work upwards, at the distance of about twenty inches, it diminishes
gradually in thickness, in steps running parallel through the whole structure,
by which those within might ascend the wall, and instantly line the parapet
with troops on the approach of an enemy. The wall where broken through is eight
feet thick at the present surface, diminishing to somewhat more than four at
the top; the interior part between the facings is formed of thin stones, placed
inclining, feather-wise, tier above tier, run full of mortar mixed with rough
gravel. What is remarkable, there appear no throughs, as the masons call those
stones which bind the buildings by going through from face to face, or into the
heart of the wall. There was an entrance in the center of each side of the
square, and to the west a wide ditch; the ground has been cultivated many years
on the other sides, as well as within the vallum. We did not discern any
inscription on the walls save L. xxxv. Mr Greenwell, of the Ford, has preserved
in his garden wall several rude effigies lately found here; the most remarkable
are represented in the cuts.

The cup used at divine offices in the church has a cover, which was found in
this station; the date on it (1571) is presumed to be the time of finding. It
is a Roman patera, and is also represented in the cut.

The last time we visited this station, in August 1783, we discovered at a gate
on the west side of the road, the pillar represented, which it is presumed
stood on the Watling-street: It is now fixed as a gate post, and is inscribed,
as we apprehend, to Marcus Antonius Gordianus; the F in the last line has been
compound, to make the word Felici.

An extensive division of common lands within this parish took place by virtue
of an act of parliament, in the twelfth year of his present majesty, on which,
it was computed, twenty thousand acres were to be enclosed. The commissioners
were empowered to dispose of lands, to raise money for making all the roads,
and paying expenses; for which purpose they sold one thousand five hundred and
fifty-one acres for 8174l. or thereabouts, and three hundred acres were set out
and vested in the justices of the peace of the county, for raising money to
compensate the owners of allotments, such damages as they should sustain by the
lord bishop of Durham, or his lessees, winning mines therein: But being
afterward considered, that it would be more expedient to sell an allotment of
three hundred acres, subject to a rent charge of 30l. a year, an act of
parliament was obtained to carry such sale into effect, and Thomas White, of
Retford, in the county of Nottingham, esquire became the purchaser. He set a most
laudable example on this division, and planted two hundred and eleven acres
with forest trees, and sixteen acres with fruit trees, which, under the shelter
of rising plantations, promise to answer the adventurer's expectations. Of the
three hundred acres purchased, Mr White has planted one hundred and fifty acres
more with forest trees. This vast tract of country, which was barren, desert,
and dreary, where the perplexed traveller wandered in the ambiguous tracks with
anxiety, is now enclosed, much of it cultivated, and intersected with direct
roads, made in the turnpike manner, fit for the reception of any carriage;
innumerable buildings are scattered over the prospect; merchandise has found an
expeditious passage to villages heretofore almost inaccessible, but in the very
midst of summer; and the inhabitants, greatly multiplied, are cheerful and
prosperous. In one farmhold, totally separated from all ancient enclosures, in
the summer of 1783, we observed thirty-four stacks of corn in one yard, the
produce of new cultivations. Many parts lie very high, the prospect
consequently extensive: At a point where the roads leading to Durham, Hexham,
Chester, and Lanchester meet, the view is noble, and commands a vast extent of
country, even to the mouths of the rivers Tyne, Were, and Tees, besides a
distant prospect to the west and north.

The chapelry of ESH is mentioned before as appertaining to the first prebend
of Lanchester. The church was a very mean structure, being in length from east
to west about nineteen yards, and five yards and a half wide: In the year 1769
bishop Crewe's trustees gave one hundred pounds toward rebuilding it Esh
chapel. -- Dedicated to St Michael. -- Col. Lanch. prop. -- Bishop of Durham
pat. -- Not in charge. -- 6l. 13s. 4d. certified value, out of which is paid
1l. 8s. 4d. clear 5l. 5s. a pension paid by the crown.

Curates. Anth. Ruther, oc. 14 Dec. 1562. -- Rich. Milner, cl. oc. 3 Feb. 1577.
-- Pet. Norman. -- Matthias Wrightson, cl. lic. 30 Sep. 1623, p. m. Norman. --
Rob. Swan, cl. lic. 12 Oct. 1627, p. res. Wrightson. -- Timothy Barnes,
literatus 14 Feb. 1634. -- Joh. Martin, A. B. 1673. -- Will. Dunn, 1696. --
Joh. Bryding, cl. a Scot. -- Miles Patric, cl. lic. 17 Sep. 1731, p. m.
Bryding. -- Will. Adey, cl. lic. 14 Sep. 1744, p. m. Patric. -- Abrah. Gregory,
A. M. lic. 13 Feb. 1768, p. res. Adey. -- John Wheeler, A. B. 7 Aug. 1773, p.
m. Gregory. -- Thomas Capstack, 1783, p. m. Wheeler.


. In a porch called St Helen's porch, lies a fine recumbent effigy in stone,
supposed to be one of the ancient and eminent family of De Esh, who held the
local name for several generations, and were in high offices in this
palatinate, as will appear by reference to the tables of temporal officers.
Dominus Rogerus de Esh died possessed of lands here, together with other
considerable estates in this county, in the tenth year of bishop Hatfield Inq.
p. m. cor. R. de. Bows, vic. Dun. -- Inq. p. m 32 Hatfield, cor. I de
Kyndeley, esc. in co. Dun. -- Inq. p. m. 36 Hatfield co. Will. de Bows, esc.
-- Inq. p. m. R. de Bland, 6 Skirlaw, co. Tho. de Boynton, ^sc. -- Inq. p. m.
17 Skirlaw, etc. -- Randal's MSS.

Book of rates 2l. 4s. 8d. -- Value of lands 308l. 13s. 4d. -- Grey's MSS.


; and in the thirty-second of bishop Hatfield, William de Esh died seized of
the manor of Esh, held in capite, by homage, fealty, and suit of court,
together with a large tract of waste and lands in Esh-field; he was also
possessed of other considerable estates, as the manor of East Herrington, etc.
In the thirty-sixth of the same bishop, Thomas the son and heir of William died
seized of the same manors, and the male line became extinct, he leaving a
daughter and heiress, Johan, who married Robert de Bland, who in her right
possessed the manor of Esh, with Ulshaw and Heleigh, members thereof. The
family of Esh possessed a city house in the Bailey, Durham, built against the
castle wall. We do not find that Bland had any issue, but Johan, his widow,
married to her second husband Thomas Colvill, esquire who, in the seventeenth year
of bishop Skirlaw, died seized in her right of this manor. Colvill's widow
married a Forster, and by an inquisition taken on the death of Richard Forster
her son and heir, in the second year of bishop Nevil, it is stated, that Johan,
by a deed of settlement, dated at Staindrop, the last day of June, in the year
1428, conveyed to trustees the manor and vills of Skyrnyngham, Bermton, Esh,
Ulshawe, Estheryngton, 1 mess. c. acres of land in Roll, 6 mess. cclx. acres
of land, and seventeen shillings rent in Middle Herryngton and West Herryngton,
2 mess. cc. acres in Cornshowe, 2 mess. and c. acres of land, etc. called the
Hugh, in Esh, a close there called the Neuparke, 1 mess. and 60 acres called
Undersyd, in Esh, and 1 mess. called Ratonrawe. No license was obtained. That
the manors and vills of Esh and Ulshawe, the Hugh and Undersyde, were held of
the bishop by military service of the value of twelve marks. That Matilda, the
wife of John Walkerfield, sister and heir of the before-named Richard Forster,
had released her right in the premises to the trustee, whereby he was in power
to make his deed of indenture, dated the 1st of November, the eighteenth of
Henry VI. whereby he granted to Walter Boynton, arm. 3 mess. cxl. acres of land
and meadow, in Esh, Middle Herryngton, and West Herryngton for life, and after
his death to William, the son of William Hodilston, and the heirs of his body,
remainder to John Walkerfield, the son of the before-named Matilda, the sister
of Richard Forster, and the heirs of his body, remainder to Alice, John's
sister, remainder to the aforementioned Matilda, and the heirs of her body,
remainder to the right heirs of Roger de Esh. And by another indenture, dated
the 4th day of the same month of November, he granted to the same John
Walkerfield, son of Matilda, son and heir of Richard Forster, who was the son
and heir of John, the son of Thomas, lord of Esh, the manors and vills of Esh
and Ulshawe, a mess. and c. acres in Roll the Hugh New Park and Undersyde in
Esh, 2 mess. and cc. acres in Corneshowe, 1 mess. and c. acres in Heugh, and to
the heirs of his body, remainder to Alice his sister, and the heirs of her
body, remainder to Matilda, Richard's sister, and the heirs of her body,
remainder to William Hodilston, Matilda's brother, and the heirs of his body,
remainder to the right heirs of Roger de Esh. The manor of Esh and lands there
were held of the bishop by military service, and the lands in Corneshowe were
held of Johan countess of Westmereland. -- How the remainders took place it is
difficult to ascertain. The manor of Esh is now the property of Sir Edward
Smyth, baronet Edward Smyth, of Esh, esquire was created a baronet the 28th of
February, 1660.
.

CORNSEY and HEDLEY appertain to the parish of Brancepeth, and are so stated in
the book of rates, though in this deanery For Cornsey and Hedley, vide
Brancepeth.
.

We find nothing more of Hamsteels, Broomsheels, and Burnhope, than what is
noted in bishop Hatfield's Survey Hamstels cum Burnhope.

T^^ta S^ac^ary. Po^^rt^ Sewright, tenet j mess. and xxxvj acr. terrae and
redd. per ann. xij s. Et xv. acr. etc. de vasto antiq. v s. ij d. -- Joh.
Grome, Ranulphus Burnhope, Gilbertus Raph, Richardus Hemison tenet j mes. and
ij acr. terrae vocat. le Nonnery, and redd. per ann. ij d. xiij alij tenentes,
etc.

Liberi tenentes. Robertus de Carlell j mes. and lx acr. apud Blakburn xjx s.
xd. Haered. Nicholai Knout, etc. Thomas Umframvill tenet xx acr. terrae juxta
Hollesheved quas acquisivit de Willo Acton red. vjs. viij d.

Et est ibid j toftum and lij acr. terrae vocat Hugonfeld quond'm in tenura
Johan's Sewright quae solebant reddere per annum xiij s. modo vast. and extra
tenur. -- Hatfield's Survey.

An act of parliament passed in the 12th of king George III. for dividing and
enclosing Hamsteels moor or common.

Bromeschels. -- Terrae scaccarij.

Hugo del Park tenet de jure uxoris suae j mes. and xliij acr. terrae quond'm
Rad'i Carter, etc. red. per ann. xvjs. jxd.

Adam del Dale j mes. and xij acr. iij s. -- and dimid. red. terrae de novo
vast. appruat. jd. -- Rob. Alde j mes. and xxx acr. red. x s. iij d. -- and j.
mes. and iiij acr. Leperfeld viiij d. -- Ricardus del. Shell j mes. xx acr. vij
s. ij d. -- Henricus Barnardj Claus. jx acr. iij s. -- Hugo Parker j mes. xjx
acr. vj s. x d. -- and vj acr. terrae de vast. de novo appruat. ij s. -- Adam
Tailler, j mes. xlij acr. Stubleys xxvj s.

Magister hospitalis de Kypier tenet j mes. and xv. acr. and dimid. terrae and
red. xiij s. iiij d. -- Hatfield's Survey.


.

The next place mentioned as parcel of this parish is

MEDOMSLEY Medomsley.

Medomsley reddit xxij s. -- Boldon Buke.

Medomsley cum Hamsterley.

Johannes de Felton Miles tenet villam de Medomsley, per servic. forin. and
redd. xxij s. tenet terram Nigelli de Both and redd. per annum ij s. -- tenet
clx acr. terrae ibid quond'm Will'i Medomsley vocat Hamsterley redd. iiijli.

Haeredes Hugonis de Redheugh tenet vj acr. terrae ibid libere and redd. per
ann. iiijd. -- Hatfield's Survey.

In the deanery of Chester. Not in charge. Pays no first fruits or proc.


,
a pleasant village, on an elevated and healthful situation, and a dry soil,
skirted with good meadow grounds; the more distant country consisting of new
cultivated lands, which promise a due reward to the industry of the
inhabitants, who are skilful in agriculture, whilst the enlivened prospect is
yearly improving upon the traveller. You command from hence a fine view into
the rich vale of Derwent-water, possessing all the beauties of cultivation,
mingled with a variety of woodlands, together with a more distant prospect of
the lands north of Tyne.

The church of Medomsley is superior to many in this part of the county; it
stands lofty, and is viewed at a considerable distance; the building is of
stone, covered with lead, but has no tower Certified value 10l. 3s. 4d. --
Augmented by lot. -- Col. Lanchester prop. -- Bishop of Durham patron.

Curates. Rob. Wright, 1501. -- John Crosby, 1561. -- Wm Struderish, 3 May,
1564. -- Sir Geo. Thompson, 14 Aug. 1566. -- John Graunger, 22 July, 1578. --
Miles Watmonth, 7 Feb. -- 82. -- George Wrightson. -- And. Leach, A. M. lic. 19
Dec. 1635. -- Chr. Collison, cl. -- Jonath. Jefferson, cl. oc. 26 July, 1736,
p. m. Collison. -- William Ellison, A. M. 1784, p. m. Jefferson. -- Randal's
MSS.

An award, order, and conclusion, made and set down the 20th of August, 1614,
by Sir John Claxton, of Nettlesworth, in the county of Durham, knight, and
William Porter, of Sheelraw, in the same county, gentlemen, arbitrators
indifferently chosen by Rob. Isildyard, of the city of Durham, gentleman, and
Thomas Marley of Kyhoe, in the said county of Durham, gentleman, for the ending
and arbitrating of all suits, differences, and demands, for and concerning the
rights, members, and tithes of corn due and belonging of right to the dean and
deanery of Lanchester, and the prebend of Medomsley now depending, etc.

Maydenstall Hall, all is manor house juxta Langchester.

Prior de Hexham tenet j mes. vocat Maydenstanhall and lxx acr. terrae quond'm
Simonis Dash, per servic. sorin and redd. per ann. ad iiij term. xiij s. iiijd.
-- Hatfield's Survey.

Lanchester. Dean and chapter's rents. Iveston 13s. 4d. -- Rowley Gillets 3s.
4d. -- Londhouse 6s. -- Stonyheap 1s. -- Broom 10s. 4d.

Bishop's rents 29l. 3s. 9d. -- Colliery, Sir Edw. Smith 2l. 1s.

Parish register of Medomsley, 1683, Dec. 21. Magna Campana Lanchestriae fracta
and multa alia valde ruinosa.

Parochiana de Lanchester Solverunt 51 17 8 Inhabitants infra cap'niam de
Medomsley Solverunt 14 14 0 Inhabitants de Esh ^ pro conjectu campanae 4 11 8


: The nave is about sixty-five feet in length, and twenty-two feet in width;
lighted to the south by three windows, two of double lights, the middle one
single: The chancel opens by a fine pointed arch rising from corbles or
brackets; it is thirty-five feet in length, and twenty in breadth, lighted to
the east by three long windows; the piers ornamented with small round columns
or pilasters, belted in the midst, having foliated capitals: To the south there
are three windows, two under pointed arches, and one of two lights under a
circular arch: By the sculptures and heads scattered in the walls, it seems
this structure has anciently been more ornamented. This church is dedicated to
St Mary Magdalen; it still depends upon Lanchester, though served by a distinct
curate.

The first person of consequence we find mentioned as owner of lands at
Medomsley, is William de Felton, chiv. who held the vill with Hamsterley, of
the bishop of Durham in capite, the vill of Medomsley by homage and fealty, and
twenty-four shillings rent, payable at the bishop's exchequer, valued at twenty
shillings, and Hamsterley at four pounds rent, no value set forth Inq. p. m.
15, bishop Hatfield, co. Will. de Claxton, esc. in Dun. in cathedram.

Book of rates 6l. 6s 2d. -- Value of lands 108d. 1s. -- Grey's MSS.


. In the twenty-second year of bishop Hatfield, by an inquisition taken on the
death of William de Felton, son of the former William, it appears he held the
manor of Medomsley in fee tail, except the lands called Tailbois's lands and
Haddames's lands, containing two messuages and thirty acres, paying the same
rent: He not having issue, the estates descended to his brother John: This John
appears in bishop Hatfield's Survey, and there Hamsterley is called one hundred
and sixty acres: Several subsequent inquisitions show that John was half
brother to William by a second venture, and succeeded to the estates by virtue
of an intail, created by the general ancestor, under a fine levied of the
premises Inq. p. m. 2^ Hatfield co. W. de Mem^vylle vic. Dun. -- Inq. p. m. 27
same bishop, Robert de Felton. -- Inq. p. m Alicia Dautry, 8 Skirlaw, co. R. de
Layton es^.
. John, the son of John de Felton, dying without issue, the manor descended to
his sister Elizabeth Inq. p. m. John de Felton, 15 Skirlaw, co. R. de Conyer
chiv. esc.
; she married Edmund Hastings, esquire and by him had John her son and heir; Henry
Boynton was her second husband Inq. p. m. Eliz. q. s. ux. Hen. Boynton, 16
bishop Langley.
. John Hastings died in the fourth of bishop Nevill, leaving a son, Edmund, of
tender years; and of that family's possession we find no further notice in the
records. In the time of bishop Skirlaw John lord Nevill held lands at
Medomsley, of John de Fenton, of two shillings rent, and in the twelfth year of
that bishop, William de Wessington, esquire died seized of lands in Medomsley, held
of the heirs of John de Felton: The families of Bows and Redheugh had also
acquired some possessions here; one of the heiresses of Redheugh married Henry
Boteler, and that family thenceforth held lands at Medomsley Inq. p. m. Maria
ux. Hen. Botuler, 23 bishop Langley.
. We have not found when the family of Hastings aliened the manor, but it
appears the Nevills acquired it, and it was under forfeiture on the attainder
of the earl of Westmoreland, and comprised in the grant to the citizens of
London upon the great trust for sale Dr C. Hunter was born in 1675, at
Medomsley, educated at the free school of Houghton-le-Spring founded by the
famous Bernard Gilpin and John Heath, esquire admitted of St John's College,
Cambridge, about 1692. He first practiced physic at Stockton, afterward at
Durham; from whence he retired in 1757, to an estate of his wife's at Shotley,
in Northumberland, where he died, and was buried July the 12th in that year,
and in the 83d year of his age. The greatest part of his large and valuable
library was purchased by Mr Richardson, bookseller, of Durham above mentioned,
for 350l. and his MSS. and coins by the dean and chapter of Durham for 40l. He
is acknowledged by Mr Horsley and Mr Gordon to be very exact and masterly in
the knowledge of antiquities; and Dr Wilkins expresses his obligations to him
in his edition of the Councels. -- His elder brother John, married Margaret,
sister of the celebrated Mr Tho. Baker. -- Brit. Top. 1. 330, 331.


.

HOUSETREE is the next place mentioned in this extensive parish. In bishop
Hatfield's time the manor was the estate of the Birtleys Inq. p. m. John de
Birtley, 25 bishop Hatfield, co. Will. Menevylle, vic. Dun. -- Inq. p. m. Will.
Chaunceller, 4 bishop Nevill.

15 July, 1459. Pardonac'o p' terris adquisit sine lic. Will. Chaunceller, etc.
concessa.

Thomas par la grace de dieu evesq. de Duresme a n're conestable de Duresme
sal. come me tres. chier, etc. William Chauncellers ent purchasset a leng and a
ses heirs de Tho. Birtley, le manorir de Houstre ave les apportenances, etc.
sauns n're license, etc. -- Randal's MSS.


, of fifteen shillings rent, and value ten shillings. This family had large
possessions in the county. Isabell, the wife of John, died in the third year of
bishop Skirlaw, and on the inquisition then taken the manor and lands thereto
appertaining are set forth at sixty shillings and ten-pence rent, value
twenty-six shillings and eight-pence. About the year 1429, Thomas Birtley sold
the manor to William Chaunceller, who settled the same on Thomas his son, by
Alice Wandesforth, and the heirs of his body, remainder to Richard another son,
and the heirs of his body, remainder to Margaret the wife of William Claxton,
Richard's sister, and the heirs of her body, remainder to the right heirs of
William Claxton in fee simple. By virtue of the before stated limitations this
manor became the estate of the Osberns of Sheles, by Alice the wife of John
Osbern, who was the daughter of Alice Myddleton, and the grand daughter of
Beatrix, Thomas Chaunceller's sister. The manor is described in the above
inquisition to consist of a new built hall cum Stramine tect. roofed with
straw, an ancient ruined house, a stone built chamber, and one hundred acres of
land.

KYO-LEIGH was the estate of the Birtleys, and by them held of the master of St
Edmund's hospital, in Gateshead, by the service of a rose on St John the
Baptist's day Kyowe.

Henricus Kaunt tenet j bercar. ibid. and iiij acr. and red. per ann. ad. iiij
terminos xx d.

Ricardus Henrison tenet viij acr terrae vocat Lymess^ld and soleb't reddere
per ann. vj s. viij d. quae suer. in tenur. Ricardi Purceblades qui sinivit pro
dicta terta and adhuc vivit and red. iij s. iiij d.

Will. sil. Ricardi j mes. and xxxij acr. xj s. iij d -- vj acr. in Kyoclonyng
ij s. -- Johan. Collison j mes and xxx acr. terrae x s. -- Henricus Kaunt j
mes. and xxxiij acr. Kyowpath xj s. j d. -- Hatfield's Survey.


. The family of Chauncellers held considerable lands in this manor.

BURSBLADES appears in the Boldon Book; Gilbert Chamberlain then held the vill
by virtue of an exchange, and a message with fourscore acres of land there,
passed by the same limitations as those created of House tree. The manor was in
the hands of the bishop. In the fifth year of bishop Hatfield we find this vill
was the estate of Thomas de Gildeford, held of the bishop by homage, fealty,
and suit of court, and was valued at twenty shillings Bursebred.

Gilbertus Camerarius habet servitium Radulphi Caunti de Bursebred, in
Escambium Insula de Bradbrae, quam d no episcopo debet warantizare.

In Witton and Fulsord sunt xxiiij bovat. and dimid. quas villani tenent
unaquaq. de viij acris, and unaquaq. reddit ij s. and j gallin. and x ova. and
arant and herciant j die, and salcant prata, and levant faenum and quadirgant
and in omnibus operationibus istis habeat corroduim.

Theobaldus tenet j bovat. and reddit iij s. sine operatione.

Hugo tenet ij bovat. sine servitio, quamdiu episcopo placuerit.

Dominium est in manu episcopi.

Molendinum reddit ij marc. -- Boldon Buke.

Buresb ades.

Willielmus Crome tenet villam de Buresblades quond'm Gilberti Camerarij per
servic. sorin. red. x s.

Hatfield's Survey. Inq p. m. Tho. de Gildeford, 5 bishop Hatfield, co. W. de
Mordon, vic. Dun. in cath.


; he also held a wood there, called Le-smethe-strecher, at one mark rent, and a
pasture called Dependen, at ten-pence rent; he held the vill of Merley of
Gilbert de Merley, by fealty and suit of court. In failure of issue these
estates descended to Johan the daughter of Thomas de Gildeford's sister, who
married Robert Grame Inq. p. m. Rob. Grame, 5 bishop Fordham, co. R. de Layton,
esc.
; and by an inquisition taken in the eighth year of bishop Skirlaw Ap.
Langchestre, co. W. de Elmedon, esc.
, it appears that Johan aliened the premises without license to her son
William Grame, whose name appears in bishop Hatfield's Survey; he died in the
fifteenth year of bishop Skirlaw: And we find this family remained possessors
for several years. There was a family who took the local name of Bursblades,
and held considerable possessions there of the bishop, paying ten shillings
rent, and also held of the lord of Bursblades lands, paying the third part of a
pound of Cumin Inq. p. m. John son of John, son of Philip de Buresblades, 13
bishop Hatfield, c. W. de Claxton, esc.
. The family of Birtley also had lands here Inq. p. m. John de Birtley, 25
bishop Hatfield, c. W. de Menevyll, vic.
, and in bishop Langley's time, we find John de Gildeford held lands of the
Grames.

BILLINGSIDE, which is next named, is little mentioned in the ancient records,
other than what appears in bishop Hatfield's Survey: We find a family called
Gourlay held lands here, not noticed in that record Bi^lyngside.

Ricardus L^nde tenet j mes. and xxxvj acr. and dim. terrae xij s. vj d. --
Thomas Gowhill j mes. and xxiiij acr. viij s. ij d. etc. etc. -- Hatfield's
Survey.


.

BRADLEY, near Medomsley, was a manor of the De Feltons; the family of
Redhoughs held of them in the third year of bishop Skirlaw by suit of court at
Medomsley, and it was then valued at twenty shillings. It was afterward the
estate of Roger Thornton, whose daughter and heiress, Elizabeth, married Sir
George Lumley, and transferred to him her family's large possessions Inq. p. m.
Roger Thornton exemplified 18 Apr. 14 bishop Booth. -- Cursitors Rolls. Rudd's
MSS.
. It gave name to a resident family, and William de Bradley held lands there of
the lord of the manor in bishop Bury's time, by the payment of a rose and a
pound of pepper for all services Inq. p. m. Hugh de Redhough, 3 bishop Skirlaw,
co. M. de Lumley, esc. -- Inq. p. m. Will. de Bradley, 7 bishop Bury, in pleno
com. Dun. cor. I. de Menvill vic.
.

CRUKTON, as it is called in the Boldon Book Crukton.

Crukton reddit iiij marc. -- Boldon Buke.


, or Crokehugh in the records of bishop Langley, now called Crook-hall, was the
estate of the Hiltons, and by William de Hilton aliened to Peter Tilliol Inq.
touching alienation in the sixth year of bishop Langley.
; it is uncertain how long it continued in that family. For more than a century
past it has been the estate of the Bakers, of Sir George Baker, knight,
recorder of Newcastle, and his son George Baker, esquire Vide his will under the
head the city of Durham, page 58. The learned Mr Thomas Baker, of St John's
College, was younger brother to George Baker, esquire

Inscribed on the stone under which Dean Rudd was interred, in Lanchester
church.

Here lies the body
of George Baker, of
Crook, esquire eldest son
of Sr George Baker, knt
who departed this life
October the 14th, Anno
D'ni 1677
Vita Christus, mors lucrum.
Phil j. 21.
Parish Reg. George Baker, of Crook, esquire who died at Bristol the 1st of June,
and was buried June the 12th, 1723.


; whose charitable donations, with the wise disposition thereof, by his
brothers and trustees, the city of Durham will ever gratefully remember.

GREENCROFT next named is the seat of George Clavering, esquire a spacious old
mansion, placed on an elevated situation, with a southern aspect, commanding a
view of Lanchester, with a prospect of the winding vale. The house is sheltered
with fine plantations, and the adjacent grounds are beautiful. Greencroft is
mentioned in the Bolden Book with its services, the villains there having the
twelfth part of the mill-pool of Lanchester to repair, and to carry the
bishop's wine with four oxen: In bishop Hatfield's Survey they are said to find
two greyhounds for the bishop's great chase. In that prelate's time Robert de
Kellawe de Lumley, and John Rugheved held the vill of Greencroft, under the
title of Dringes They were tenants, in capite, says an ancient MS. Doomsday
tit. Lestr. R^g. Pictaviens Neu^on. They were, as Spelman defines it, E genere
vassalorum non ignobilium cum singuli qui in Doomsday nominantur, singula
possiderunt maneria. Such as at the conquest being put out of their estates;
for that they being before owners thereof were against him neither by their
persons nor councels. -- Cok. on Lit. fo. 5, says, Drenches are free tenants of
a manor. Vide Mon. Angl. 2 par. sol. 598, a. Vide Trin. 21, Ed. 3, Ebor. and
Northumb. Rot. 191. Vide Spelman, Drengagium.


. The Roughheads held a moiety of Greencroft in the time of bishop Bury, by
fealty, two shillings rent, and suit at all the bishop's courts at Durham, and
performing with his other parcener the service of leading the third part of a
dole of wine yearly, repairing a twelfth part of the mill and mill-pool of
Lanchester, and grinding at that mill under a thirteenth portion for the
mulcture, and paying to the bishop's head forester for an assart two shillings
and ten-pence, and eight hens Inq. p. m. Nich. Roughhead, 6 bishop Bury, cor.
vic. in pleno com. Dun.
. They held their moiety for many generations; but how long the Kellawes were
possessed we have no evidence before us, their moiety becoming the estate of
the Evers, of which Ralph Ever, esquire died seized in the seventeenth year of
bishop Langley. Thomas Claxton was possessed of a moiety in the fifth year of
bishop Booth Inq. p. m. T. Claxton, cor. I. Athirton, esc.
, and the same descended to Ralph his son, who died in the fifteenth year of
bishop Booth, leaving John his son and heir. This family's large possessions
came to the crown by attainder of Robert Claxton. In 1468, one Thomas Forster
was possessed of the hall of Greencroft, as heir of W. Forster, by Alice his
wife Inq. p. m. Will. Forster, an. xij. Booth, etc.
, and conveyed to one Thomas Hall, Overhouse and a moiety of the park of
Greencroft Cursitors Rolls, Nevill, Rudd's MSS.

Canon Barton levied a fine to John Hall, of Greencroft. 2 and 3 Phil. and Mary.


. Greencroft has been the place of residence of a branch of the family of
Claverings, above a century past Grencroft.

Grencroft reddit xvj s. and quadrigat vinum cum iiij Bobus. Et villani ejus
villae faciuint duodecimam partem Stagni Molendini de Langcestria and dominium
inde quiet. est and quadrigant vinum cum iiij Bobus.

Boldon Buke. Grencroft.

Dring. Rob. de Kellowe de Lomeley, and Johan's Rugheved tenent villam de
Grencroft, and quad. vinum cum iiij Bohus, and villani ejusd villae faciuint
xij partem Stagni Molendini de Langchest. and er'nt in magna chacea episcopi
cum ij Leporarijs. Sed dominium est quiet. inde and quadrig. vinum cum iiij
Bobus, and praedicti Robertus and Johannes redd. per ann. xvj s.

Terrae scacrarij Will's Stell tenet j mes. and xvj acr. iiij s. x d. -- Alex.
de Moresyd j mes. xxxij acr. x s. viij d. -- Johannes Smyth j mes. and xxxiij
acr. iij Rod. de part Smyth felling xj s. iij d. -- V. alias parcel terrae
solv. certos redd. annuatim.

Johannes Urpath and iij alij tenentes tenent xxix acr. terr and sub eisd.
legibus.

Will's de Fulthorp Miles ten. quond'm ten. ibid vocat le Burnhous, and redd.
iij s. x d.

Te^rae vast. Et sunt ibid. iiij acr. terrae vocat Grenhowseld soleb. reddere
per ann. ij s. modo vast.

Hatfield's Survey. Lanchester church. On a small mural monument of white
marble, near the north door. Memoriae sacrum JACOBUS CLAVERING, de Greencroft,
in Comitatu Duresmensi, armiger (filius Jacobo Clavering, de Axwell, in
Comitatu predicto Baronetti) and Jana conjux ejus. Charissima cum Liberis Eorum
hic Requiescuri. On a flat marble stone. Benjamin, son of James Clavering, of
Green Croft, esquire departed this life April 26, 1683. Isa. Clavering, 5 dauther
of James Clavering, esquire of Greencroft, died 8br. 30, 1706. Henry Clavering,
youngest son of Sir James Clavering of Axwell, died August ye 11th 1711.
Catherine, wife of James Clavering, esquire dyed Nov. 29th 1723: She was daughter
of Thomas York, esquire of Richmond, in Yorkshire. Parish Reg. Mrs Jane Clavering,
wife of James Clavering, esquire buried 15 Mar. 1718.

James Clavering, sen. esquire of Newcastle, bur. 26 Jan. 1721.

Catharine, wife of James Clavering, esquire of Greencroft, bur. 4 Dec. 1723.

Sir James Clavering, bar of Whitehouse, bur. 16 May, 1748.

Lady Clavering was bur. 26 Feb. 1746.


.

The first notice we find taken of WHITLEY manor in the records, is in the time
of bishop Bury, when it gave name to the resident family, and John died seized
thereof in the sixth year of that prelate, he having held the same by fealty,
and thirty-four shillings and eight-pence rent. He also held lands in Holmside,
of John de Bertley by fealty, and one penny rent. In the fifth of bishop
Hatfield we find one John de Parco possessed of a third part of the manor (...)
^lings yearly to Marmaduke de Lomley. By the survey of the la^^ me^ (...) late,
it appears that Thomas Umfravill then possessed the manor, and died (...)
thereof in the sixth year of bishop Fordham, together with Holmside, and they
continued in that family till the male line failed as after mentioned. Whitley
soon afterward became the estate of the Nevils, and on the death of Ralph earl
of Westmoreland, descended to Ralph his grandson Inq. p. m. Ra. earl of West.
20 bishop Langley.
; and in 1430 we find a pardon for the alienation of this manor, to Tunstall
and others, but the trust does not appear Madox's Formul.
. It afterward became the property of the Tempests.

HOLMESET, now known by the name of Holmside Hall, the estate of the
Whittinghams, is mentioned next. It is named in the Boldon Book as rendering
one mark to the bishop, and performing the service of carrying his wine with
four oxen, and finding one man for forty days in the bishop's forest, at the
fawning season, and forty days at the rutting season. In bishop Fordham's time
this was the possession of Thomas Umfraville, who held the vill of Holmeset by
homage and fealty, with the services above, and was then valued at forty
shillings Inq. p. m. Tho. de Umfraville, 6 bishop Fordham, co. W. del Bows,
vic. and esc.

Holmeset.

Holmeset reddit j marc. and invenit unum hominem in foresta xi diebus in
Forneson, and xl diebus in Ruyth, and quadrigat vinum cum iiij Bobus. -- Boldon
Buke.

Vide Whickham. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Lanchester church -- in the chancel.

Here lies dame Elizabeth Whittingham, wife of Sir Timothy Whittingham, of
Holmeside, who died the 13th of March, A. D. 1614.

Here lies John Whittingham, the 3d son of Sir Timothy Whittingham, who died
the 1st day of June, 1614. -- Here lie the bodies of Stephen and Elizabeth
Whittingham, 2d son and eldest daughter of Timothy Whittingham, of Holmeside,
esquire which son was buried the 10th day of July, and Elizabeth my daughter, the
22d day of October, both in the year 1679.

Parish reg. Timothy bur. 9 Oct. 1682. -- Timothy Whittingham, esquire bur. 10 Oct.
1751. -- George Whittingham, esquire bur. 27 June, 1758.

The last Timothy and George were the sons of Zachary, who was the son of
Timothy Whittingham.


. In the seventeenth year of bishop Langley, the male line failed in the death
of Gilbert de Wheteley.

Thomas Umfravill tenet manner. de Wheteley per servic. sorin. and redd. per
ann. xxxvj s. Predictus Thomas tenet. manner. de Holmeset contin. c acr. terrae
and invenit unum hominem in forest. xl diebus in Fownyson, and xl diebus in
Ruyth and quad. vinum cum iiij Bobus redd. xiiij s. iiij d. -- Will's de Kyowe,
Johannes Hallyng, Isabella de Britley, Johan's de Wharnows, etc. etc.

Inq. p. m. John son of Rich. de Parco, 5 bishop Hatfield, W. de Mordon, vic.


Umfraville, and his possessions descended to five coheiresses, his sisters,
who had intermarried with Elmedon, Rither, Lambton, Constable, and Hagerston.
Holmeside became the estate of the Tempests, and Robert Tempest died seized
thereof in the seventh of bishop Fox, together with the manor of Whitley and
Green Shipley Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
; and it was the place of residence of Thomas Tempest in 1530, who obtained
license to celebrate a marriage between him and Anna Lynthall, of Brancepeth,
dated the 21st of November There was an ancient chapel here. -- Fox. p. 33,
Log. Leybourn, S. T. P. vic. spiritualib's genesis co'cess. dispencac'om Joh'i
Hall de Middleham epi and Isabelle Tempest fill. Rob'ti Tempest de p'och de
Lanchestr. (to marry) in capella infra man'ium de Homesid. situat. dat. 7o
Augusti, 1500. -- Randal's MSS.


.

PEDIGREE OF WHITTINGHAM OF HOLMESIDE. William Whittingham, dean of Durham, Ao
1563, was the son of William Whittingham, gent. by a daughter of Houghton, of
Houghton-tower, grandson of William Whittingham, of Over, and great grandson of
Seth Whittingham, of Swallow, in the county of Chester; he mar. Catharine,
sister of John Calvin, of Geneva, and died 10 Jun. 1577. -- See p. 143.
Sir Timothy Catharine He was seized of the manor of Holmside, and lands there
of 250l. a year value, and granted annuities to his four younger sons, 15 Dec.
1666.
Timothy, esquire Sarah -- Timothy ob. s. p. Stephen ob. 10 Jul. 1679, s. p. John
She survived John, and mar. Rich. Brodrop, who possessed the estate in 1699,
but was recovered by Zachary, under a settlement.
Elizabeth -- William ob. s. p. Zachary ob. July, 1711. -- Sarah Timothy ob.
Oct. 1752. Elizabeth, d. of Mr Whitfield, of Sherburn, and half sister of
George Wood, late of Merrington. Sarah m. Isaac Cookson, of South Shields, esquire
ob. 1758. Elizabeth, 25 Oct. -- 85, m. Ju. Han^ll, of Sun^^^, si^ter. Sarah
unmarried Elizabeth, the eldest daughter, m. first Mark Hudson, by whom no
issue, -- second Joh. Hunter, of Medomsley, esquire by whom she had John Hunter,
Nov. 15, -- 85, m. Eliz. Bunting, d. and coheir of Tomlinson Bunting, esquire
George, M. A. fellow of Christ Col. Cambridge. Margaret unmarried. Elizabeth
George, to whom Timothy left the estate on condition of paying 500l. a piece to
his daughters. Ob. s. p. 1758, the male line extinguished. Elizabeth ob. 1679.
William ob. 3 May, 1687. John ob. June, 1614. Catharine Elizabeth m. Mich.
Mitford, of Sighil, in Northumberland, ob. Dec. 1613. Daniel Judith Sarah m.
Jerrard Birkhead, and had 7 d.


genealogy


The ancient possessors of the manor of COLE-PIKE-HILL, vulgarly called
Colpighill, were the family of Parkes: In the latter end of the fifteenth
century, in the time of bishop Booth, issue male failing, it came into the
family of Walkers, by marriage of Isabell the daughter of Edward Park
Colpighill.

Willielmus tenet j mes. and j acr. xij d. -- Tho. Urk j mes. and xvj acr. v s.
iiij d. ij acr. de novo vast. appruat. viij d. -- Johannes Scot, etc. xxx acr.
x s and j ten. and v acr. xxj d.

D'nus de Nevill tenet ibid. per cartam vj ten. etc. acr. terrae and redd. ij
s. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Inq. p. m. Edw. Park, 10 bishop Booth, cor. l. Athirton, arm. esc.


: In the inquisition it is described The manor of Colpikehill, with the
appurtenances held of the lord bishop in capite by military service, and
rendering to the said bishop, at his exchequer in Durham, yearly at the usual
term, fourteen shillings and five-pence: And there are in that manor six
tenements and one hundred acres of land, which Richard del Park, Edward's
father, lately had of the lord Nevil, a message and three acres of land,
formerly Ade Scot's, and a message and thirty acres of land, which were
formerly John Scot's and Alice his wife's: The premises were worth yearly,
above all reprisals and outgoings, forty shillings. -- It passed from the
family of Walkers on the death of William Walker, without issue, in the sixth
year of bishop Dudley, he leaving his wife Alicia surviving, and several
sisters. The manor afterward came to the family of the Newtons, and by
marriage to the present Andrew Robinson Bows, esquire where he has a neat little
mansion, on a fine elevated and healthful situation, in a good sporting
country. He has lately erected stables and other conveniences adapted to a
hunting seat, to which use he now appropriates it.

SATLEY is next named; a small place creeping in a narrow vale, with a mean
chapel placed on an eminence to the north: It was formerly a chapel of ease to
Lanchester, but was severed in the year 1768 in consequence of endowment, under
an augmentation by queen Ann's bounty. It was anciently a distinct chapelry,
and had a release of all tithes, obventions, and claims, granted by Philip de
Sancta Helena, rector of Lanchester, and confirmed by bishop Richard de
Marisco: It is not in charge Certified val. 11l 4s, -- Queen's bounty 200l.

Curates. Rob. Richardby. -- Miles Patric, cl. lic. 9 Jul. 1736. -- William
Adey, cl. lic. 14 Sep. 1744. p. m Patric. -- Abra Gregory, A. M. lic. 13 Feb.
1768. p. res. Adey. -- John Wheeler, A. B. lic. 7 Aug. 1773, p m. Gregory. --
Thomas Capstack, 1783, p m. Wheeler.


.

The first proprietor we find of the vill of Satley was Robert de Grenewelle,
in the sixth year of bishop Beaumont, who held of the bishop in capite, paying
forty shillings rent, and thirteen shillings and four-pence for the mill Inq.
p. m. 6 bishop Beaumont, cor. vic. in pleno com. Dun.
. No farther mention is made of this family there, the lineal descendant now
possessing Greenwell, otherwise called the Ford, half a mile to the south of
Lanchester town; a pleasant retirement. Hugh de Tesedale had lands in
Satley-heigh, of sixpence rent, and in Shorneton, held in drengage, in the
fifth year of bishop Hatfield. -- John del Chamber, in the same year, had lands
there, held of the bishop by fealty and four shillings rent; he left four
sisters, of whom Juliana was one, and Eda the daughter of another sister his
heirs: Juliana married Peter de Heswell Inq. p. m. Peter de Heswell, 35 bishop
Hatfield, cor. Will. de Bows, esc.
, and they held the manor of Satley by homage, fealty, suit at three head
courts, and four shillings rent. By bishop Hatfield's Survey it appears the
Heswells got the lands of Eda, another of the heiresses of John del Chamber,
and that the vill of Satley was then the possession of William de Merley Satley.

Liberi Tenentes. Willielmus de Merley, tenet villam de Satley cum Molend.
ibid. contin. c. acr. per servic. forin. red. liijs. iiijd.

Haered. Patri de Hesswell, tenet j ten. etc. acr. terrae quond'm Adae de
Chambr. per servic. forin. redd. iiijs. -- and j Claus contin. xxx acr. terrae
and redd. per ann. j d.

Terrae Scaccarij. Johannes de Chestr. and ij alii etc. -- Hatfield's Survey.


. The Heswells held lands here for many generations, and the Merleys in the
twelfth year of bishop Langley, failing in male issue, on the death of William
Merley the estates descended to diverse females, his sister's children, and
under that sub-division were dispersed in other families Inq. p m. Will. de
Merley, 5 bishop Skirlaw, R. de Boynton, esc.

Inq p. m. Will. de Merley, 12 bishop Langley.


. The family of Ever possessed some small portions of land here Inq. p. m. Rad.
Eure mil. 17 bishop Langley, c. Rob. Eure, esc.
.

BUTSFIELD is seldom mentioned in our records. It was the ancient estate of the
Heswells, and in the first year of bishop Bury, in an inquisition taken on the
death of William de Heswell, we find he held lands there of the bishop in
capite by homage and foreign service, and thirty-three shillings rent. In
bishop Hatfield's Survey, Heswell's lands appear in the hands of the lord under
a writ of cessavit; the operation of which ancient process was to seize the
estate of him neglecting or ceasing to perform his services to the lord of the
fee; and as we hear no more of those lands in the records, it is probable they
never were restored Buttesfeld.

Johannes Prentys and Ricardus filius ejusdem tenet j mes. and xxiiij acr.
terrae red. xxxij s. iiij d. -- Rogerus de Ode, tenet. j mes. and xxx ac.
terrae de Antiq. Domin. and redd. per ann. xv s. -- Tenet. vij acr. and dimid
cum Torali, etc. redd. iij s. x d. ob. -- Will's Heart j mes. xxx acr. de Antiq.
Domin. redd. xv s. -- Ricardus de Birley j mes. and ^. xxxiij acr. redd. xvij
s. ij d. etc.

Et sunt ibid. lxix acr. terrae quond'm Ricardi Hessewell existen. in Manu D'ni
per breve de cessavit. Et j (...). apud ^^hed, quae soleb' reddere per ann.
xxxj s. viij d. modo vast. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Old Not. Brev. so. 136. -- Fitz. Not. Brev. so. 280. -- Fleta Lib. v. cha. 34.
-- Reg. Orig. 237. -- New Book of En^s, etc.


.

Nothing relative to SCATERLY appears in the records.

LANGLEY is named next. The extensive ruins of the ancient hall yet remain in a
fine elevated situation, of a southern aspect, near the banks of the river
Brune, embowered in a thick forest. The first note we have of this place is in
the Boldon Book, where it is mentioned to have been granted to Arco le
Dispenser, by bishop Pudsey, in reward of services performed, as well to Henry
bishop of Winton as himself, the bishop of Durham having purchased a moiety of
the premises for the purpose of that gift Langleia.

Arco Dispensator habet Langleiam pro servitio quod secit Henrico bonae
memoriae episcopo Winton, quam pro eo quod fecit D'no Hugoni Dunolm. Episcopo
cujus medietatem idem d's episcopus emit de propria pecunia sua and dedit eidem
Arconi cum servitio ulterius medietatis and reddit dimid. marc. -- Boldon Buke.

Langley.

Ricardus le Scrop Miles tenet villam de Langley quond'm Henrici de Insula per
servic. for. redd. vjs. viijd. tenet stagnum molendini villae praedictae and
redd. per an ij d. -- Hatfield's Survey.


. Langley having afterward escheated to the Sea, bishop Rob. de Insula granted
the same to Henry de Insula about the year 1280 Copied from the original in the
charter chest of the duke of Bolton, at Bolton hall, in Wenslydale, 1758, by T.
Gyll, esquire
Universis Christi, etc. Rob'tus, etc. Noverit universitas vestra, nos dedisse,
etc. dilecto and fideli nostro Henrico de Insula p' homagio and servitio suo
totum manerium de Langley cum pertinentiis q'd fuit eschaetum eccl'ie n're
Dunelm. He'nd and tenend eidem Henrico and heredibus suis vel suis assignatis
de nobis, etc. reddendo inde annuatim nobis, etc. ad scaccarium Dunelm.
dimidiam marcam argenti, etc. Et faciendo sectam ad omnes curias Dunelm. Et
forinsecum servicium quantum pertinet ad vicesimam partem feodi unius militis,
etc. Volumus etiam and concedimus, etc. q'd predictus Henricus and heredes sui
and sui assignati com'unicent cum omnibus animalibus and averiis suis in
forensecis pascuis and pasturis n'ris and succ. n'or. Et q'd totam terram ad
dictum man'ium p'tinentem omni tempore anni seperabilem habeant and illam
includere posuit p' voluntate sua and q'd idem Henricus and heredes sui and sui
assignati and omnes homines sui liberi and villani quieti sint de panagio
porcorum suor. p' forestas n'ras etc. Et q'd quieti sint de sectis molendinorum
n'ror. Et q'd idem Henricus and here is sui and sui assignati possint in dicto
tenemento molendinum construere and habere p' voluntate sua. Et de tallagiis
cum contingerint sint quieti. Et quod habeant Housebote and Haybote p' visum
sorestarior. n'ror. de boscis n'ris, etc.

Bishop Robert held the Sea only eight years and some months, and was elected
in 1274.


. How this manor escheated we have no evidence. About the year 1306, the manor
having again reverted to the Sea, was granted by bishop Bek to lord Henry
Percy, and the gift received ratification from king Edward II. in the fourth
year of his reign, 1310 Rex omnibus, etc. Inspeximus cartam quam venerab Pater
A Patriarcha Hierosolomitanus and Epus. Dun. secit di'lco and fideli n'ro H. de
Percy in hec verba, etc. etc.

A. permissione, etc. Sciatis nos dedisse, etc. manerium nostrum de Langeleye
cum omnib's suis p'tinentiis. Tenendum and habendum p'dum manerium dicto d'no
Henrico and hedib's suis and assignatis libere quiet been in pace and
hereditarie imperpetuum cum omnibus suis p'tinentiis, tam in servitiis
liberorum quam villanorum cum eorum servitiis eschaetis wardis releviis parcis
vivariis stagnis silvis molendinis aquis and omnibus aliis et predictum
manerium pertinentibus sine ullo retenemento reddendo, etc. Nos autem
donac'oem, etc. confirmus, etc. Test me ipso apud Berewicum super Twedam
decimo nono die Decembris, etc. Pat. 4, p. 1, m. 7. -- Rymer's Foedera, vol.
iii. p. 241.


. How long it continued the estate of the Percys we are also ignorant. In
bishop Hatfield's Survey it is set forth, that Richard le Scrope held the vill
of Langley, formerley the estate of Henry de Insula; and by the inquisition
taken at his death in the sixteenth year of bishop Skirlaw Inq. p. m. Rich. le
Scrope, 16 bishop Skirlaw, cor. W. de Claxton, chiv. 1404.
, it appears he held the same by the fourth part of a knight's fee, paying
yearly seven shillings at the bishop's exchequer, and performing suit at three
chief courts: He was succeeded by Richard son of Roger, then an infant of ten
years old. By an inquisition taken in the fifteenth year of bishop Langley,
1421, on the death of Richard lord Scrope of Bolton, it is stated, that he had
divested himself of the manor and vill of Langley some time before his death,
and that Ralph Eure, chiv. was seized thereof to him and his heirs; and by an
inquisition taken on his death, in the seventeenth year of the same bishop, he
appears to have died possessed thereof by the name of Maneria and villa de
Langley and le waterfall cum p'tin. que h'uit ex feoffo. Rici de Scrop, chiv.
We do not find Langley mentioned in any succeeding inquisition taken on the
death of any of the Eures. In the second year of bishop Booth, on the death of
Henry lord Scrope Inq. p. m. Henry lord Scrope, 2 bishop Booth, cor. R. Ogle
Mil. esc.
, it is stated in the inquisition then taken, that Richard le Scrope and others
had been enfeoffed in this manor, with diverse other estates, by virtue of the
license of bishop Nevill, but the trust is not specified: The feoffor Henry
left John his son and heir, who was grandfather of Henry after mentioned, and
probably the confidence reposed consisted of diverse limitations in tail, by
virtue of which it descended to Henry lord Scrope the feoffor's grandson, who
by the inscription after mentioned, is presumed to have built the hall, of
which the present ruins are remains. An engraving of this inscription was
published in the Antiquarian Repertory in 1775, from a drawing made by Mr Rob.
Hutchinson, in 1771, and we presume communicated by Thomas Gyll, esquire with the
following account Page 285, 286.
. At Langley hall, in the parish of Lanchester, is a mantle-piece of stone,
over a large fire place, with an inscription thereon in capital letters: The
inscription relates to Henry lord Scrope, of Bolton, in Yorkshire, who married
Margaret the daughter of Thomas lord Dacre, of Gilsland, in Cumberland. The
arms on the second quarter are those of Tibetot, or Tiptoft, an heiress of
which family married an ancestor of the said Henry lord Scrope, whose coat of
arms are engraved with hers, and the same are depicted in the upper windows on
the south part of the parish church of Richmond, in Yorkshire. The escutcheon,
by the division on the wife's side, on the right hand, looks as if intended for
him and his two wives, for he was twice married; but the arms on the side of
the wives are so worn away that they are not distinguishable. The uppermost
seems as if something like bars or barry were in them; bars were in the arms of
Greystock: The other should be Scrope of Upsal, his second wife, whose name was
Alice, daughter of Thomas lord Scrope, of Upsal, by Margaret his wife, daughter
of Thomas lord Dacres, grandfather of Thomas lord Dacres above mentioned. We
must observe further on this inscription, that the lines are not to be read
direct, but are broken in the center, and stands thus, so far as the letters
are distinct: HENRICUS. SCROPE. MIL.
XI. DOMINVS. DE BOLTO --.
-- ET VXOR EIVS FILI --
-- DACR ET GRAISTOKE.
by this it appears he was the eleventh lord of Bolton, and she the daughter of
lord Dacre, of Greystoke. Mr Allan further illustrates this matter by the
genealogical table on the next page.

From the family of Scrope, Langley came into the family of Paulet, by marriage
with one of the natural daughters of Emanuel Scrope, earl of Sunderland, and
not many years ago was sold by Mr Paulet, son of lord William Paulet, who was
the second son of the first duke of Bolton, to Henry Lambton, esquire of Lambton,
late member of parliament for the city of Durham, and is now the property of
John Lambton, esquire the heir general of that ancient family.

The manor of Rydding was part of the large possessions of Gocelinus Surtays:
At the time of his death it was held of the bishop of Durham, at two marks rent
Inq. p. m. Gocelinus Surtays, 22 bishop Hatfield, W. de Menevyll, vic.

Sir William Scrope Sir Henry Scrope, ob. 10 Ed. 3. Richard lord Scrope Roger
lord Scrope Marg. d. etc. of Sir Rob. Tiptoft, knt. Richard lord Scrope Henry
lord Scrope Eliz. d. of John lord Scrope of Masham John lord Scrope Henry lord
Scrope Henry lord Scrope of Bolton, died 25 H. 8th. Margaret d. of Thomas Lord
Dacres, of Gillesland, by Eliz. his wife, only daughter of Sir Rob. de
Greystoke, knt. heir of Ralph baron of Greystoke. John lord Scrope of Bolton,
temp. H. 8. Cath. d. to Henry lord Clifford, of Cumberland. From whom were
numerous descendants. Alice d. and heir. of Thomas lord Scrope, of Upsall and
Marshall, ob. s. p. 1st wife. Sir Geoffrey Scrope 2d son Henry Scrope, lord of
Masham Stephen lord Scrope of Masham John lord Scrope Eliz. d. of Ralph lord
Greystoke Eliz. d. of John lord Scrope of Masham Thomas lord Scrope of Masham
Thomas lord Scrope, of Upsall and Masham, ob. 19 H. 8. Margaret d. Thomas lord
Dacres, of Gillesland, by Philippa, d. R.^* Neville, earl of Westmor land.
Alice d. and heir. of Thomas lord Scrope, of Upsall and Marshall, ob. s. p. 1st
wife. Chaworth, 2d wife, s, p.


genealogy

C. A.
, then valued at twenty shillings. By an inquisition taken on the death of
Alexander Surtays, in the thirty-sixth year of the same bishop, it was
returned, that he had enfeoffed William de Skipwyth and others in this manor
with other estates, to the intent that his heir should not take until he
attained his full age, thereout to pay his debts; and when his heir attained
that age, then that the trustees should enfeoff him in the premises; which
conveyance was made in fraud and collusion to prevent the lord having ward and
marriage of the heir. In all future inquisitions taken on the death of the
Surtays, no mention is made of Rydding, so that probably it had become an
escheat, of which there had been no remittance.

The ancient records furnish no more of Stobbilee than that in the seventh year
of bishop Skirlaw it was the possession of the family of Thweng, held of the
bishop in capite, rendering fourteen shillings at the exchequer, and was of the
clear value of thirteen shillings and four-pence.

Of BROOM and SLALEY there is nothing remarkable on record, or of NOSTEELS and
PECHE.

HELEY is mentioned in the Boldon Book as the property of Alan de Chilton; it
had given a local name to a resident family Heleie.

Alanus de Chiltona tenet Heleie sicut in carta sua continetur pro Cornsord
quam calumniabatur, quam etiam defendere debet contra omnes calumniatores, and
redd. dim. marc. -- Boldon Buke.

Heley Aleyn.

Paior Dunolm tenet manner. de Heley cum pertin. quond'm Johan de Chilton per
servic. sorin. and redd. per ann. vj s. viij d. -- tenet ij. acr. etc. xijd. --
vj acr. etc. iij s. -- Bishopelos xiiijd. iij de vasto appruat. iij d.

Hatfield's Survey.
, for in the first year of bishop Hatfield, we find one Peter de Heley died
possessed of the manor, which he held of the bishop in capite, rendering six
shillings and eight-pence for all services, of the clear value of one hundred
shillings; Richard the son of Hugh de Chilton was found his heir: In bishop
Hatfield's Survey it appears, that the priory of Durham had acquired this manor
in mortmain, and it is noted as having been the estate of John de Chilton, from
whom it is probable it was purchased.

The first notice we find of CONSET, or as it is called in the old records
Conkesheved, is in the Boldon Book, where it is said Arnold Baker had it in
exchange for Trillesden. By an inquisition taken on the death of Thomas Gray,
chiv Inq. p. m. Tho. Gray, chiv. 25 bishop Hatfield, coram W. de Menevill, vic.
. it appears, he, with his wife Margaret, held a moiety of this manor by
homage, fealty, and a rent of eleven shillings, then of the clear value of
forty shillings: And by the survey made by that prelate it is stated, that
William de Stokes held the other moiety, formerly the estate of Richard Harpyn
and Hugh Skewland. In an inquisition taken on the death of Robert son of Ralph
de Nevil, in the thirteenth year of the same bishop, it is set forth, that
jointly with Margaret his wife, in her right, under a feoffment made by Thomas
Gray deceased, her former husband, to her and the heirs of his the said
Thomas's body, he held a moiety of the manor of Conkesheved, by the services
before mentioned, and the park of Conkesheved held also of the bishop under ten
shillings rent. In the tenth of bishop Langley it was returned on an
inquisition, taken after the attainder of Thomas Gray, that at the time of his
forfeiture he was possessed of Conset Park, and a moiety of the vill of Conset
Ao xo Thom. ep. 27 Jan. cor. Will. de Claxton Mil. esc.
. We have several succeeding inquisitions, on a claim set up by the heir of
Thomas Gray, of an intail created of his estate, by virtue of which limitations
the forfeiture was contended; but as no act of restitution appears in the
records of that time, it is to be presumed the pretense proved futile; and we
do not see Conset specified in any future inquisition touching that family,
till after the 18th year of bishop Nevill, when on the petition of Ralph Gray
the bishop's nephew, son of Alicia his sister, they were regranted, with
Urpath, Rowley, and other forfeited estates Cursitors Rolls, and Rudd's MSS.
. A moiety afterward became the property of the Middletons of Silksworth Inq.
p. m. Tho. Midilton ar. de Silksworth, 4 Dudley, cor. Tho. Popeley, ar. esc.
. Another moiety of Conset was the estate of William Pegham, by the feoffment
of William Melot, with various limitations to his issue, and remainders to
other branches of his family, by virtue of which it vested in Margaret the wife
of William Ward Conekesheved.

Arnaldus Pistor habet Conekesheved in eseambium de Trillesden and reddit
xxiiij s. -- Bolden Buke.

Conekesheved.

Thomas Gray and Will's de Stokes tenent manor de Conkesheved quond'm Ricardi
Harpyn and Hugonis de Skewland per servic. sorin and soleb' reddere per ann. ut
in libro de Boldon xxiiij s. modo xxij s. -- tenet Calfelus, and redd. ad Fest.
Mich's j libr. Piperis. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Arth'us Simpson custos Bosci de Cockburn, seod. 13 s. 4d. Temp. Crew, Geo.
Winship, p' vita.

Mickleton's MSS. Inq. p. m. W. Pegham, 17 bishop Langley.


, in whose family it continued till by the marriage of Isabella, the heiress,
with John Birtley, it passed to that family, of whose heiresses one married a
Kellawe, and the other Egleyne.

KNYCHELEY, by bishop Hatfield's Survey, appears to have given a local name to
its possessor, and that it afterward was the estate of Robert de Kylowe: It
soon after became part of the property of the Surtays family; and in the
fourteenth of bishop Skirlaw it belonged to Thomas de Claxton, held of the
bishop by military service, paying fifteen shillings yearly at the exchequer,
and was then of the clear yearly value of seventy-eight shillings and
four-pence Knycheley.

Liberi Tenent. Robertus de Kylowe tenet villam de Knycheley quond'm Will'i de
Knycheley per servic. forin. red. xv s. j d.

Terrae Scaccarij. Johannes Todd tenet j mes. and iiij acr. terrae vocat
Richardland and red. per ann. ij s.

Terr. Vast. Et sunt ibid. cij acr. and iij Rod. terrae in Mora de Knycheley
soleb't reddere per ann. xxxiiij s. iiij d. vast. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Inq. p m. Tho. de Claxton, 14 bishop Skirlaw, cor. R. Conyers, chiv. and esc.


. In bishop Langley's time it was the estate of the Eures, and for some
descents remained with them.

IVESTON is named in the Boldon Book, with its services. In bishop Hatfield's
Survey the manor or vill is set forth as part of the possessions of Kepyer
hospital Ivestan.

Ivestan reddit ij marc. and j vaccam de Metrid. and arat j acr. and dimid.
apud Langcestriam and est in magna Caza cum ij leporarijs, and quadrigat vinum
cum viiij bobus. -- Boldon Buke.

Ivestane.

Magister hospitalis de Kypier tenet villam de Ivestan per servic. sorin. and j
vaccam de Metrich, and arat j acr. and dimid. apud Langchestr. and erit in
magna chacea episcopi cum ij leporarijs, and quadrigat vinum d'ni episcopi cum
viij bobus redd. liij s. iiij d. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Iveston is a copyhold manor of similar customs to those of the bishops.


. Robert Hall, in the sixteenth year of bishop Booth, died seized of forty-six
acres of land there, held of the bishop in capite, leaving Robert Hall of
Stanley his heir Inq. p. m. cor. Hen. Radelyffe, ar. esc.
.

Of BENFIELDSIDE we have nothing more in the records than what appears in
Hatfield's Survey Benefeldside.

Liberi Tenences. Robertus Coigniers tenet manner. de Bires libere per cartam de
haerede Will'i de Dalden contin. c acr. terrae bosci and pastur. per servic.
sorin. and redd. per ann. xl s.

Thomas Brom tenet j pastur. etc. Robertus Saddeller, etc. etc. Johannes
Heiter and vij alij tenentes xiij s. mes. and diverse. parcel acrar. red. cert.
red. Tenentes inter se tenent j tostum and xviij acr. terrae quond'm Rici.
Grene redd. vj s. ij d. -- et omnia antiqua vasta ejusdem villae pro iij s.
iiij d. etc.

Et est ibid. quodd'm molend. aquat. etc. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Custodes o'ium boscor. apud Benfieldside and alibi infra paroch. de Lanchester
and Ball'i itin. Scc'ij Epi. Lib. Pat. in Offic. And. Epi. so. 37, Custos seod.
10 s. and Ball. 40 s. -- Mickleton's MSS.


; and of NEWBIGGIN, HARTIBUKE and FORDS there occurs nothing memorable.

PONTOP, in the sixteenth year of bishop Hatfield, was the estate of John de
Gourley and Johanna his wife, limited to the heirs of their bodies; also a
moiety of the manor of Shepmansteel and land in Byllingside, held of the bishop
by homage and fealty, and certain rents Pontop.

Will's de Gourelay tenet manner de Ponthop contin. lx acr. terrae and redd. ad
fest. S. Cuth. in sep. ij s. -- j claus contin. xv acr. vocat. le park and
redd. v s. -- j mes. and xlviij acr. terrae quond'm Will's Gilleson soleb.
reddere xvj s. modo viij s. -- j mes. and xxx acr. terrae vocat. Shippingstele
and redd. per ann. ij s.

Hatfield's Survey. Inq. p. m. I. de Gourley, 16 bishop Hatfield, cor. W. de
Claxton, esc.


. It continued in that family a long time, and by an inquisition taken on the
death of William de Gourley, in the eighth year of bishop Skirlaw, it appears
the manor was held by the service of offering yearly Unum Bysancum at St
Cuthbert's ferretory on his festival, and another to the bishop by way of
oblation. It afterward became the estate of the Claxtons, and in the 25th year
of bishop Langley, on the death of William Claxton, is described to consist of
a mansion house and garden, an hundred acres of land, and an hundred acres of
pasture, held under fifteen shillings rent and suit at three capital courts. It
then came into the family of Bulmers, and Bertram Bulmer sold it to Anth.
Meabourn in the twentieth of queen Elizabeth Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
. It is now part of the possessions of the Swinburns.

ROWLEYS are distinguished in bishop Hatfield's Survey by the names of East and
West Rowley West Rowley.

Johannes Alotson tenet j mes. and xxvj acr. terrae quond'm Johannes Chestr.
and redd. jx s. iiij d. Alanus Swale and Johannes Stanlawe, etc.

Tenentes villae tenent inter se cxxiiij acr. de antiqu. vasto quae soleb.
reddere per ann. xl s. iij d. -- modo red. ad Fest. S. Michaelis v s.

Et est ibid j molendinum apud Alaynsorth and redd. per ann. xx s.

Thomas Gray tenet ibid. manner. dictae villae cum domin. terr. quae soleb.
reddere xxjx s. modo redd. per ann. jx s. vij d. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Est Rowley. Haeredes Hugonis de Redheugh tenent villam de Est Rowley quond'm
Will'i Roll per servic. forin. and redd. per ann. ad iiij terminos v s. iiij
d. -- Hatfield's Survey.


; and Thomas Gray is therein said to hold the manor of West Rowley, with the
demesne lands, and the heirs of Hugh de Redhugh the vill of East Rowley,
formerly the estate of William Roll. In the twenty-sixth year of that prelate
it appears by an inquisition taken on the death of John de Howden, that he died
seized of the manor of Rowley, which we presume implies East Rowley, held of
the bishop in capite, by homage, fealty, suit at three chief courts, and six
shillings and eight-pence rent. He left no issue, and his estates descended to
his sister's daughters, one of whom, Agnes, married Thomas Beke to her second
husband, having issue by her first husband Hugh del Redhugh a son, Hugh, who
was heir to this manor, and possessed the same after her death, in the eighth
year of bishop Skirlaw: The male line of the family of Redhugh, as observed
before, failing, their possessions were severed among coheiresses. The
possessions of Gray, after being in Robert de Nevill for a short time, came to
Thomas Gray, who was attainted, and were restored to Ralph Gray, with Conset as
before mentioned. The family of Bland held of the prior of Durham a small
parcel of land here.

COLLIERLY was the estate of the Gildfords in bishop Bury's time, and remained
part of their possessions till the name was extinguished in female issue
Col^r^ey. Johannes de Gildeford tenet manner. de Colierly contin. cc acr.
pastur. terr. and bosc. per servic. forin. redd. ij s. -- Et xlvj acr. and dim.
terrae per cart. and redd. per ann. xv s. vj d. -- Hatfield's Survey.
. They also possessed Green-lawe near Collierly, which the Redhughs afterward
acquired. Robert Rhodes died in the seventeenth year of bishop Booth; and by an
inquisition then taken, it is stated, that he had conveyed this manor, with the
lands called Greenlawe, held under Ralph earl of Westmoreland, by his deed
dated the 1st of April, fourteenth Edward IV. to John Hebburn and William
Lawson, but no trust is specified; and that he died without issue, leaving
Alicia, the wife of Richard Bainbrigg, daughter of John Rhodes his brother his
heir. This manor was divided by two parceners, and in the seventeenth year of
bishop Dudley, Johan, the wife of Robert Robson, died seized of one moiety
thereof, with a moiety of Greenlawe and Smether Strother, leaving Thomas
Hodgson, her son by a former husband, her heir. The records before us do not
point out how the other moiety descended.

CHESTER


We now enter the parish of CHESTER-LE-STREET, which adjoins to Lanchester
toward the west Cestria.

Cestria cum villanis and dominio sine instauramento, and cum piscarii and
molendino de eadem villa reddit xxiiij marcas. Molendinum de Urpath est ad
firmam and reddit iiij marcas.

Pelton and medietas de Piktree quasque Gualeramus de Cestria tenet reddit ij
marcas. -- Boldon Buke.

Cestr. Liberi Tenentes. Johannes Mylote tenet manner. de Whytehill contin. lvij
acr. and iij claus quond'm. Rogeri de Aula ibid redd. per annum ad iiij term.
in episcopatu Dunolm. constitut xl s. viij d. cum aliis -- Will. de Kellowe
tenet manner. de Harebarowes cum pertin. redd. per ann. ij s. etc. cum aliis.

Terrae domin. Peter Jordinson cum aliis -- in toto xxli. -- Et praedicti
tenentes tenent inter se xiij acr. terrae vocat Smythland pro quo nihil solv.
-- Idem tenentes terrar. dominicar. recipient de quolibet selfode j opus
Autumn. praedict. domin. -- Idem tenentes tenent inter se capitale mes. cum
gardin j acr. prati infra firm. domin. cum pastur. pertin.

Terrae bond. Johannes Wilkynson and xij alii, etc.

Opera bond. Praedicti tenentes bond solebant reddere pro operibus Autumnalibus
arur. and heriatus; and hujusmodi ad Fest. S. Martini quolibet anno ut dicunt.

Et idem tenentes cariabunt d'no and senescallo cariag. consuet. and
quadrigabunt j dolium vini, and faciunt opera ad molend. consueta and reddunt
pro qualibet bovat ij d ob. pro yaresilver ad sest'm S. Martini tantum.

Punderus ibid. reddit pro officio suo per annum ccc ova.

Cotag. Tho. de Pelton cum aliis, etc. praedicti. cotar. solebant solvere inter
se annuatim ad firm. cotag. viij d. omnes cotar. supradicti. solv. inter se
annuatim ij s. viij d. -- Quilibet tenens cotag. praedict. facit quolibet anno
iij opera autumnal. and j opus ad mol. item quolibet eorum dat pro yaresilver
ad fest'm S. Martini. -- S'd ob in omnibus.

Terrae Scaccarij. xxxvij diversi tenentes, etc. Will's de K -- tenet ij
molend. aquatica ibid. cum tolnet. cervis. and cum communi surno. quod solebat
reddere xx s. p' ann. and dicta molend quae solebant reddere per ann. xxiili.
and modo red. p' ann. ad iiij term. xvjli. vj s. viij d.

Idem tenet piscariam aquae de Were ibid. redd. per ann. xli. xiij s. iiij d.
-- Hatfield's Survey.

Within this manor are Ryton, Whitburn, Cleadon, Bowdens, and Chester, all
which places attend the bishop's court there. Expensae prandij and equor.
subvunter p' prefectum, qui p' consuetudinem est in officio p' duos annos.
Habet terras p' expensis, sed quae minime expendent oneri. -- Mickleton's MSS.

Chester in the street. Demises p' epu'm (Wolsey) de Minerio Carboni. epi de
Chester and le Blackburn usq. aquam de Tayme. Et stagni de Chester nec non
piscal eid. p'tin. Rot. cl. -- Stagnum voc. Chester dam. and piscar. inde
spectan. dimiss. p' epum (Tunstall) Joh'i Lumley mil. d'no Lumley pro 90 ann.
sub. red. 5l. -- Rot. cl.

Fuerunt ibi'm Decanus and 7 Prebendarijs, de Lamesley, 2d de Lamesley, de
Pelton, de Chester, de Tanfield, de Birtley, de Urpeth.

Carta Antonii Dunelm. epi de funda'cone eccl'iae collegiatae ib'm 3 Dugd. Mon.
44.

De ballivis and collectoribus reddit. epi. ib'm.

Feod. 40s. 26 Hen. 8. -- Anth. Simpson, bal. etc. and custos bosci de Cockburn
(f. 13s. 4d.) pro vita.

(Morton) Laurencius Cook gen ballivus d'nij Halmot and villae dech. and
collector red. and firmar. villae de Chapter Ac custos sive sorestar. o'ium boscor.
epi infra Halmot de Chester pro vita. -- Geo. Winship, 1662.

Mickleton's MSS.
.

The reader will revert to the account given of this place in the annals of the
bishops Vol. i. p. 52.
, where he will find more at large the particulars here briefly recapitulated.
Bishop Eardulph, who was the eighteenth prelate of the church of Lindisfarn,
flying with the remains of St Cuthbert before the barbarians who made their
sacrilegious descent on that island, not settling at Crake, where he sat down
for a time, rested at Chester, and there began to build a church about the year
883; and the religious body retained this residence till the year 995, when
they rested at Durham. Tanner says, the Sea removed hither "had probably a
chapter of monks, or rather secular canons attending it." -- Chester
entertained the same religious society that existed at Lindisfarn, and they
were again translated to Durham, so it is pretty certain there was no
establishment of monks here, but of seculars. Egelric, the fourth bishop of
Chester, was induced to take down the humble building of wood which his
predecessor erected for his episcopal church, and raised one more magnificent:
Finding great treasures, he conveyed the same out of his bishopric to enrich
the monastery of Peterborough, from whence he came: We have already offered
conjectures on this treasure-trove, and therefore shall not dwell on it here.
On the introduction of canons regular into the cathedral church of Durham,
Chester, it is said, was one of the churches appointed to receive the seculars,
who, without having committed offense, were removed from the seat of dignity,
and no doubt were provided for in the most ample manner.

The church of Chester, divested of its state and authority, became merely a
parochial rectory Chester church dedicated to St Mary and St Cuthbert.

Rectors. Mervinus Preost de --, 1085. -- Walerandus Clericus de --, 1155. --
Jolanus. -- Robertus, 1230. -- Walerandus 1245. -- Robertus le Bursar. 1258. --
Sire Walt. de Clifford, cl. 1280. -- Mag'r Alan de Esingwalde, 1280, p. depr.
Clifford. -- Quinto Idus Nov. A. D. 1286, rectoria mutata in collegiat eccl'iam
ex decano and vii prebendiis compositam. Pryn. vol. iii. 443. -- Randal's MSS.

Chester parish. That branch which is in Chester ward L. s. d. L. s. d. Book of
rates 28 8 10 Value of lands, etc. 4389 13 5 The branch in Easington ward 4 2 4
1686 6 0 Totals 32 11 2 6075 19 5 Grey's MSS.

Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 1d. L. s. d. L. s. d.
Chester 61 8 9 2 1 0 Harraton 49 15 10 2 6 2 Urpeth 28 0 0 1 5 11 Pelton 18 0 1
0 15 0 Birtley 18 10 2 0 15 4 Edmondsley 17 4 5 0 16 8 Walridge 10 1 8 0 9 4
Plausworth 14 15 4 0 15 1 Great Lumley 69 17 0 3 0 11

Registered estates. Chester; Mrs Mary Owen, 10l. Mr John Owen dec'd 70l. 10s.
-- Holmfide; Mr Rog. Meynald, 10l. -- Waldridge: Mr John Owen dec'd 16l. --
Mann's MSS.

Bishop's rents. Demesnes 16l. 7s. -- Eures 15l. 18s. 2d. -- Ball. 23l. 15s.
1d. -- Urpeth colliery 1l. 6s. 8d. -- Chester colliery 5l. -- Chester ferry 1l.
-- Tanfield colliery 1l.


, till the year 1286, when that munificent prelate, Anthony Bek, in holy
reverence to the memory of St Cuthbert, and in honor of the place of his rest
for upwards of a century, founded here a collegiate church, consisting of a
dean, seven prebendaries, five chaplains, three deacons, and other ministers.
The account given of this transaction in Stevens's Monasticon, is to the
following effect Extract from the foundation of Chester deanery, with the king's
inspeximus of the pope's confirmation, and the ordination of bishop Beke, with
the king's assent, etc.
WE do ordain, etc. That the aforesaid church of Chester shall from henceforth
become and be a collegiate church, and there shall be in the same hereafter one
dean and seven prebends, so that the dean be in perpetual sacerdotal order,
taking the cure of souls, and keeping continually personal residence there,
etc. etc. And to the intent he may better bear and undergo the premises, we
will and firmly ordain, that to the deanery shall be totally assigned and
annexed the revenues as well in the church of Chester, as in the chapels
aforesaid, (Tanfield and Lamesley) to wit, of mortuaries, wool, lamb, milk,
calves, hay, lint, hemp, hens, geese, pigs, and of all minute tithes and
personal tithes, together with the rent and court of the tenants of the church
and the town of Chester, and of Waldridge, and the whole dominical land of
Herverton. And we do assign also unto the said deanery the messuages to the said
chapelry of Lamesley and Tanfield belonging with their courts and demesnes.
Provided and excepted, that the prebendaries of both these places shall have a
certain portion or part of our limitation, wherein they may competently repose
their corn. The dean shall also have the fishing in the river of Wear, and the
tithe of fishing. Moreover every one of the prebendaries who shall have the
three first prebends, shall find of his own cost and charge one vicar chaplain;
and touching the other four prebendaries remaining, every prebendary shall have
a vicar deacon ministering in the same church in canonical habit, and shall
observe the manner of singing according to the use of the church of York or
Salisbury. And that every one of them shall be weekly observers of their turns,
etc. And that this community may not beget and bring forth discord, but that
every one may content himself with his own, we have thought good to distinguish
these prebends in this wise, that is to say, that unto the first prebend shall
belong the predial tithes universal of Great Lumley, Little Lumley, Lampton,
Woodsend, as also the tithes of the coal mines: To the second prebend of
Lamesley, Kibblesworth, Ravensworth, Darncrook, Hedley, Ladesend, Tugersland,
Ravensholme, and Newhouses: To the third of Pelton, Pokerley, Pelaw, Picktree,
Tribley, Edmundsley, Stevesley, and Nettlesworth: To the fourth of Chester and
Whithall: To the fifth of Tanfield, Lynce, Crook, Tanfield-leigh, Stanley,
Stanley-hall, Caldsit, and Steels: To the sixth of Birtley, Harverton-moor, and
Harden: To the seventh of Ulston, Urpeth, and Twisle. And for all the residue
of the parish of Chester, viz. the predial tithes of Plawsworth and of
Waldridge, and of all the wastes within the same parish, that shall hereafter
be reduced into tillage, we do assign and allot the same unto the common
residence within the parish of Chester, amongst them only equally to be divided
who for three months space at least in the year continually or for the most
part shall make their personal residence in the same church, etc. -- Randal's
MSS.

Vide Prynn's Collection, vol. iii. p. 453. -- Mon. Angl. tom. iii. p. ii. p.
44.


.

A suit having long depended between Sire Walter de Clifford, cl. on the one
part, and Master Alaine, of Esyngwalde, on the other, the former claiming the
rectorship or parsonage of Chester, and the latter alleging that he had for
certain lawful causes been deprived by Robert (de Insula) bishop of Durham and
himself by the same bishop substituted in his place, both parties being
unwilling to be any further entangled with suits and contentions, yielded up
all their rights in the said church into the hands of Anthony (Bek) bishop of
Durham, and submitted it to his ordinance, together with the chapels, lands,
fruits, and revenues unto the same belonging. The bishop finding the church
sufficiently endowed, and yet ill served, ordained it should for the future be
collegiate, and that there should be in it a dean and seven prebendaries, the
dean to maintain two chaplain's assistants, and other necessary clerks, and to
repair the chancel, and find ministers for the chapels of Tanfield and
Lamesley; for the defraying of which expense he assigned him the altarage of
the said church and chapels, with other revenue, and the fishery on the river
Were, together with the rent and court of the tenants of the church in the town
of Chester and of Walrige, and the whole dominical land of Hervertone. In like
manner he regulated the several prebends, and the manner of the canons sitting
in their stalls, and all other particulars as in other collegiate churches, and
ordered the tenth part of the portion of every non-resident to be given to the
residents; and in case there were no residents, then to the use of the church
or poor. This ordination was made by the bishop, at Auckland, in the third year
of his consecration, was confirmed by king Edward I. at Berwick, on the 12th of
June, 1292, and by Pope Boniface VIII. at Rome, in the Ides of March, 1296, in
the third year of his pontificacy Chester on the street deanery. -- True value
40l. -- Reg. Tunstal.

DEANS.
Will. de Marclan, jur. canonici, p. oc. 1311. Wilkin's Council. vol. ii. p.
397. Mr Roger de Gillyng, officialis Dun. oc. ult. Jun. 1345 Joh. de Salthorpe,
all is Sculthorp, New. vol. i. p. 403 Joh. de Kyngeston, cl. 26 Sep. 1354, p.
res. Salthorp Joh. de Derby, oc. 4 Jun. 1390. -- King's chaplain, preb. of St
Steph. 17 Jun. 1370, archd. of Northumb. 3 Dec. 1370, preb. of Driffield, in Y.
chapter 28 Jul. 1372, r. Weston-Longuevill, co. N. 1359, pres. by k. which he
exchanged for Barum archd. coll. 23 Feb. 1354 Tho. de Hexham, 1407. -- Receiv.
genesis of Eland and Norham shires, Rot. Skirlaw, No 38, r. of St Katharine,
London, 22 Sep. 1388 John de Ashbourn, 1409 John de Newton, cl. 1454 Joh.
Bawdwyn, cl. 1491. -- He was admitted soh. in King's Col. Came. 1453 John
Balswell, 1501. -- R. of Middleton in Teesdale Rob. Chamber, 13 Jun. 1505 Tho.
Keye, L. L. B. oc. 14 May, 1532. -- He was preb. of Shildon, in Auckland col.
chapter and resigned 1 Sep. 1533. He resigned this deanery for an annual pension of
24 l. during life Rich. Layton, 1 Sep. 1533, p. res. Keye. -- He was LL. D.
archd. of Buckingham, 1534, r. of Bremton, co. Northump. r. of Sedgefield,
1535, preb. of Kentishtown, St Paul's, 1523, etc. Will. Warren, 1544, p. m.
Layton. -- He was the last dean, and had at the dissolution an annual pension
of 18 l. 9 s. which I find was paid him in 1553, but how long after I know not
-- Willis.
Randal's MSS. Pensions paid in 1553, to Chester College. -- Willis's Hist. of
Ab. vol. ii. p. 73.

William Warren, last dean 18l. 9s. -- John Marshal, preb. of Wifr^the 2l. --
Rich. Atheyr, preb. of Tanfield 2l. -- John Smitherton, preb. of Chester 2l. --
Claudius Rent, preb. of Lomeley 4l. -- Rich. Cliffe, preb. of Birtley 1l. --
Ja. Brackenbury, preb. of Benfield 1l. -- Rich. Norman, minister 5l. -- Tho.
Stone, minister, 4l. -- William Parker, minister 2l. -- John Hind, minister 5l.


.

Under this establishment the church of Chester continued till the dissolution
of collegiate churches and chantries, in the first year of Edward VI. when, by
virtue of the statute, the deanery, prebends, rectory, and the several rights of
that church became vested in the crown. The prebends of the seven portionists,
with the vicarage or deanery of this church, were taxed in the Lincoln
valuation, 20th king Edward I. 1291, at 146l. 13s. 4d. but 20th king Henry
VIII. 1534, the deanery and seven prebends were valued at no more than 77l. 12s.
8d. in the whole, viz. the deanery 41l. -- Prebend of Lamesley 5l. 16s. 8d. --
Pelton 5l. 16s. 8d. -- Chester 6l. -- Second prebend of Lamesley 10l. --
Tanfield 3l. 6s. 8d. -- Birtley 3l. 6s. 8d. -- And Urpath 2l. 6s. This deanery,
with its members, continued in the crown until the 16th year of James I. when,
by letters patent under the great seal, dated at Westminster, the 26th of July,
he gave and granted to Sir James Ouchterlony, knight, and Richard Gurnard, or
Green, citizen and cloth-worker, of London, their heirs and assigns, the
deanery, prebends, rectory, and vicarage of the collegiate and parish church of
Chester; which instrument was enrolled in the high court of chancery: In 1618,
by indenture, also enrolled in chancery, they conveyed the premises to William
Darling, in see: In 1620, William Darling died, leaving Edward his son and
heir: In 1622, Edward Darling, by indenture, also enrolled, conveyed the same
in fee to Thomas Liddell, of Ravensholme, in this county, esquire In 1626, Liddell
conveyed to Jeffery Walker; and in 1629, he conveyed the same to Richard
Hedworth, esquire In the ninth year of bishop James, a special livery was granted
to Richard Hedworth, son and heir of John Hedworth (inter all is) of the house of
the deanery of the collegiate church of Chester with the barns, orchards, etc.
etc. and the tithes of wool and lamb in the parish of Chester, and in Lamesley
and Tanfield, to the said deanery belonging, and the tithes called thrush tithe,
in the parish of Chester, Lamesley, and Tanfield. Cursitors Rolls, Rudd's MSS.
So that it appears by the various conveyances, from the time the deanery came
out of the crown in 1609, there was a private trust therein for the Hedworth
family, the above livery being in 1614.


in whose family it descended in the following succession, to Ralph in 1680, to
Ralph his son, in 1683, to John his son, in 1704, who presented William Lamb
clerk to the curacy, and John, by his will, dated the 15th of December, 1746,
devised the premises to his two sons-in-law, Sir Ralph Milbanke, and Sir
Richard Hilton, baronets, and their heirs: Sir Richard Hilton died on the 1st
of July, 1755.

The church of Chester being reduced to a curacy, is not certified, and Sir
Ralph Milbanke and the representatives of Sir Richard Hilton are patrons
CURATES.
Geo. Brom, oc. 23 Feb. 1564 Geo. Brown, July, 1578 Wm Massey, cl. occurs 13
July, 1579 Brian Adamson, oc. 7 Feb. 1582 Tho. Lyddal, cl. oc. 14 July, 1585
Robert Willis, 1616, p. m. Lyddal Rob. Hunter, oc. par. reg. 1631 William Hume,
A. B. 1673 Edm. Brown, 1674 Nich. Conyers, 23 Sep. 1685 Nath. Chilton, A. B.
1690, p. res. Conyers W. Lamb, A. M. (p. pres. Joh. Hedworth, esquire) p. m.
Chilton Francis Milbanke, 22 July, 1769, (p. m. Lamb) rector of Croft, p.
pres. Sir Ra. Milbanke Lewis Powell, p. m. Milbanke, p. pres. W. Jolliffe, esquire
representative of Sir R. Hilton John Nelson, cl. 1780, p. m. Powell, p. pres.
Sir Ra. Milbanke.
Tho. Wood, D. D. gave by will 100l. to the poor of this place.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population in this parish from 1660 to 1679 1729 133
375 1760 to 1779 4169 1010 3552 Increase 2540 877 3177

Number of burials in the last year 16^. -- Computed number of inhabitants 4890.


. It is a handsome edifice of stone, covered with lead; the tower from the
foundation is square, but when it rises above the roof, takes an octagonal
form, and in this part is apparently much more modern; it is finished with a
most elegant stone spire, one of the finest in the north of England, being in
the whole one hundred and fifty-six feet in height: The accurate plate will
save much description. The whole length of this building on the outside is
fifty-four paces. The church within is of a regular form, having two side
ailes, separated from the nave by five pointed arches supported on pillars, two
of which toward the east in each row are light and round, but the third, an
odd conceit in the architect, is formed of two cylinders put together, the
broad sides facing the nave and ailes: The nave is in length from the foot of
the tower thirty paces, and in width, including the ailes, from the north door
to the south, fifteen paces: The pulpit is placed against the center pillar in
the south row; the sounding board heavy with rude carving. The whole church is
decently stalled, and kept clean; the pavement is new; there is a handsome
white marble font, and a gallery at the west end: The south aile is lighted
with three regular windows of three lights each, under pointed arches; in the
eastern one are two coats of arms. The chancel has been altered in modern
times, and is only six paces wide by eleven long; the arch which separates it
is supported on light brackets, and the stalls are without much ornament. There
are four windows to the south, and a large modern-sash to the east.

The north aile, which now is solely appropriated to and filled with a line of
tombs of the Lumley family, has anciently been further extended, three arches
and two columns appearing in the outside wall, as if some small cloister
formerly lay contiguous to the church: The windows discover the alteration,
which perhaps was made when the tombs were placed, for there are three square
windows within the old arches, and a window under a pointed arch beyond them.
Before Before we speak of the monuments, it must be noted, that bishop Matthew
granted license in 1594, authorizing John baron of Lumley, to translate hither
the remains and monuments of his ancestors, particularly of John Lumley, and
Ralph Lumley, from the yard of the cathedral church at Durham, where they were
placed near the north door Registr. Modern. Eccles. Dunelm. Matthew, p. 465, d.
and chapter lib.
.

This solemn arrangement of effigies, this aile of death, cannot be visited
without some emotion by those who know the family, descended of an illustrious
race of ancestry, or have traced their history and possessions. The
genealogical table which attends the description of Lumley castle will save a
tedious rehearsal of monumental inscriptions.

The first effigy at the foot or west end of the aile, is by an inscription on
the wall, noted to appertain to Liulphus, that unhappy minister of Walcher
bishop of Durham, who provoked the massacre at Gateshead church: The figure is
cut in stone, but much mutilated, having lost the feet; the right hand is
extended, grasping the sword, as in the action of drawing the weapon; the legs
are straight. It will be necessary to note why such different attitudes had
acceptance in monumental effigies. Persons who died in battle on the victorious
side, were represented with the helmet on the head, the shield on the lest, and
the sword on the dexter side, naked, and with the point upwards. Those who died
in battle on the vanquished side, were represented on their tombs without their
coat over their armor, with their feet resting on a dead lion, having their
hands joined on their breast, the visor lifted up, and the sword in the sheath.
Those who died prisoners were represented without helmet, sword or spur. One
who had served a great part of his life in the army, and afterward became a
religious person, was represented upwards in the habit of the order he
professed, and below in complete armor. A gentleman or knight, who had been
killed or vanquished in single combat, was represented in complete armor, his
battle ax out of his arms, lying by him, and his left arm across his right. If
he had been victorious, he was represented armed on all points, with his right
arm across over the left, and his battle ax in his arms. The son of a general,
or governor of a castle or fortified city, if he died when the place was
besieged, was pourtrayed in complete armor, with his head resting on an helmet
instead of a pillow Barley's Diction.
.

The second effigy, Utredus filius Liulphi, cut in stone, his head, shoulders,
and arms covered with a coat of mail of chain work, the legs of the same, the
right hand grasping the sword hilt in the action of drawing the weapon.

The third, William de Lumley, accoutred the same as the last; a parrot held by
the tail in the right hand, the legs crossed, the right foot uppermost, the
feet rested on a lion couchant -- an elegant figure; the folds of the vest
skirts easy and finely disposed. This William was the son of Uchtred, and
grandson of Liulphus beforementioned.

The fourth, William Lumley mil. in a suit of armor, his legs crossed, the
left leg uppermost, the feet broken off, his right hand drawing the instrument,
his head rested on an helmet; his hair cut at the fore-top, and in stiff curl.

The fifth, William de Lumley mil. son of William, in a suit of armor, his
head rested on his helmet, the right hand drawing the sword; the hair like the
fourth; the legs straight, and the feet gone.

The sixth, Roger, in a suit of armor, much mutilated, the legs, hand and
shield gone, hair curled as the former. This personage married Sybil, daughter
and coheiress of Hugh de Morwic, who had two other daughters, Theophania and
Beatrix; and they, in the fourth year of king Edward I. made partition of the
knights fees of their inheritance.

The seventh, in a suit of armor, a shield, no sword, his right hand on his
breast, his hair curled, his head supported on cushions, the legs straight, and
feet resting on a shield of his coat armor: This tomb belongs to Robert de
Lumley, eldest son of Roger, and father of Marmaduke, whose tomb is next noted.

The eighth, Sir Marmaduke de Lumley, with a curled beard, a cap in upright
folds and terminating in a point, his head resting on his gauntlets laid across
each other, the fingers inwards; his hands elevated on his breast, three
parrots scattered on his garments below the girdle; his legs appear to have
been placed straight, but are much mutilated: This personage's mother was the
eldest daughter of Marmaduke de Thweng, a great baron, lord of Kilton and
Thweng, with many other manors in Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Westmoreland; she
and her sister Catharine were coheiresses of William, Robert, and Thomas de
Thweng their brothers: Sir Marmaduke's eldest son, Robert, was under age at his
father's death, and he died during his minority, leaving Ralph his next brother
and heir: They derived from their mother the manors of Moressome-Magna,
Moressome Parva, Ocketon, Lythum, Merske, Brotton, Hylderwell, Skynnergreen,
Lyvertoun, North Cave, Rotese-on-the-Wolds, Lound, Langtose, Swaythorpe, Thorp
juxta Kilton, Foxholes, Thweng, with the advowson of the church, Kilton castle,
Stotevil-fee, and Bulmer-fee, all in the county of York Esc. 49 king Edw. III.
p. 2, 5.
.

The ninth effigy, Ralph, first lord of Lumley. This is a remarkable figure,
cut in coarse freestone, and was one of those removed from the yard of the
cathedral church at Durham, by virtue of the license before noted: It is
dressed in a straight-sleeved jacket or coat of mail, his visor is rib'd down
the front, and has two transverse slits for the sight; the breast is covered
with the shield bearing three parrots, the sword under the shield unsheathed,
the point upwards rested against the face of the visor; the legs are straight,
supported on a dog lying at rest. This personage was a knight in the ninth year
of king Richard II. and in the retinue of Henry de Percy, earl of
Northumberland, in the expedition into Scotland, where he behaved so gallantly,
that the king in the year succeeding appointed him governor of Berwick: In the
twelfth year of that reign he was taken prisoner by the Scotch: After his
release he held Berwick as the earl's deputy for some time: Was summoned to
parliament among the barons from the eighth year of king Richard II. till the
first of king Henry IV, inclusive, when he was attainted, and had his lands
seized for being a confederate with the earl of Kent and others against that
accession, and opposing the disposal of Richard. The associators appeared in
arms, and took possession of the town of Cirencester, whilst their troops lay
encamped without; but on an insurrection of the inhabitants, the lords were
overpowered, and carried prisoners to the king at Oxford, where they suffered
immediate execution. It seems lord Lumley was not among the prisoners, for by
the record of his forfeiture and attainder, it is set forth he died in the
field of battle: If we give credit to the device on the monument, when he fell
he was of the victorious party. His wife Elianor was daughter of John lord
Nevill of Raby, and sister of Ralph earl of Westmoreland: In her widowhood, she
had in the second year of king Henry IV. an assignment of twenty pounds a year
during life out of the customs at Hull, which was confirmed by king Henry V. in
the first year of his reign, with the further grant of lands and tenements in
Beautrove and Stranton, in the bishopric of Durham, and Holme in Holderness.
The eldest son, Thomas, died in the fifth year of king Henry IV. seized of the
castle of Lumley Parva, and the manors of Stanley, Stranton, Ricklesden, and
Beautrove, in the bishopric, together with diverse other large estates in
Yorkshire and Northumberland; dying without issue, he left Sir John Lumley,
knight, his brother and heir, then twenty years of age. John earl of Somerset
had obtained a grant of several manors and estates, which came to the crown
under the attainder of Ralph lord Lumley, to the value of three hundred and
sixty pounds a year; a great possession in that age Rymer's ^o^d tom. viii. p.
16^.
.

The tenth effigy, Sir John Lumley: A figure resembling the last described, and
most probably the second monument removed from the cathedral churchyard. -- To
this personage king Henry was much attached; in the sixth year of that reign he
had livery of all the castles, manors, and lands of which his father was seized
at the time of his attainder; and for his services in Scotland he received the
honor of knighthood: He also fought bravely in the French war, for which
gallant conduct and fidelity to his sovereign, he had full restitution of blood
by parliament in the thirteenth year of that reign, as well what was attainted
by the conviction of his father, as Thomas his brother; so it is expressed in
the parliament rolls. In the wars of king Henry V. he also signalized himself:
Under the conduct of Thomas duke of Clarence, the king's brother, he was in the
battle of Baugy, in the province of Anjoy, on Easter-eve, 1421, to which the
English army was betrayed by one Andrew Forgusa, a Lombard, who was employed by
the duke as a spy, and falsely represented the numbers and situation of the
enemy: Many of the English lords were averse to the enterprise, and dissuaded
the duke from approaching his foes on so slight and suspicious a report; but
the General implicitly placing confidence in his emissary, resolved to seek the
foe and engage; his troops disdained the idea of deserting danger, and, when
too late, found they were attacking four times their numbers; feats of
distinguished bravery were displayed, and all the efforts of intrepid courage
exhibited, but in vain; for in the dreadful carnage of a defeat, there sell the
duke, lord Lumley, the earls of Tankerville and Angus, and the lord Ross,
together with many of inferior rank: He left a son and heir, Thomas, whose tomb
is not in this arrangement at Chester.

The eleventh effigy, George lord Lumley: This figure, like the rest, is
recumbent, dressed in robes, a heavy ruff or roll about his neck, his hands
elevated, curled hair and beard: The dress similar to the robes of a peer as
now worn. This personage was knighted by king Edward IV. He was sheriff of
Northumberland in the second and third years of that reign; an office then not
only of great trust and authority, but of vast emolument, for no account was
made to the king's exchequer till the third year of king Edward VI. but the
issues and profits of the bailiwic were appropriated to the sheriffs proper
benefit, with all debts, fines, and amerciaments, emoluments accruing from
alienations, intrusions, wards, marriages, reliefs, etc. the intention of which
appropriation was to reward their diligence in protecting the borders against
the Scots, and for that purpose to keep sufficient guards in pay. But that duty
being lessened by the appointment of wardens of the marches, in the third year
of king Edward VI. it was enacted, that the sheriffs of Northumberland should
thenceforth like others account to the exchequer. In the sixth year of king
Edward IV. he, with Sir Robert Folbery, were elected knights of the shire for
the county of Northumberland, in the parliament summoned to meet at
Westminster, and in the return of the writ are styled milites gladiis cincti.
He was appointed sheriff of Northumberland in the eighth year of that reign,
and continued in office four successive years. In the twentieth year he was in
the duke of Gloucester's army, at the taking of Berwick, having a great command
in that expedition, and in the rolls of the troops is called lord Lumley: He
was one that entered Edinburgh at the head of the forces, and with lord Fitz
Hugh, the lord Scrope of Massam, and others, was made a knight banneret in
Hooton-field, as a testimony of approved gallantry. On the accession of king
Henry VII. he attended the king in his northern progress. In the thirteenth
year of king Henry VII. he served in lord Surrey's army, when they raised the
siege of Norham castle, where the king of Scots lay in person; and from thence
penetrating into Scotland, made a diversion, and destroyed some considerable
fortresses in sight of the Scotch army. On the espousals of the princess
Margaret of England with James king of Scotland, 1502, he, with his son and
their retinue, accompanied by eighty horsemen in their train, apparelled in the
family liveries, met the queen at Darlington and attended her to Berwick. He
married one of the daughters of Roger Thornton, esquire a merchant at Newcastle, by
whom he got a large fortune, and among other possessions the manors of Witton
in Northumberland, Ludworth and the Isle, in this county. There happened much
litigation touching this lady's fortune, through one Giles Thornton, a natural
son of her father; and the contention becoming personal, lord Lumley slew him
at Windsor castle ditch. Bishop Sherwood, in the sixth year of his pontificacy,
granted a pardon to George lord Lumley, of all felonies, and restoration of
forfeitures Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
. His eldest son and heir apparent died in his life time, to whom the following
monument was erected.

The twelfth effigy, Sir Thomas Lumley: This figure is in a suit of armor, his
hair curled, and head resting on a helmet, the hands elevated, and legs
extended: Quarters the royal arms with a bar, having married Elizabeth
Plantagenet, a natural daughter of king Edward IV. by lady Elizabeth Lucy. He
appeared on behalf of the clergy and commonalty of the diocese of Durham, in
the eleventh year of king Henry VII. when the three estates of the kingdom were
summoned to assemble at Westminster on the 27th of October, 1495. He left four
sons, Richard, John, George, and Roger From him the Lambtons, Conyers, and
Trollops, of this county, are descended.
; the eldest became heir to George lord Lumley, the grandfather: He also left
three daughters, Ann married Ralph lord Ogle, of Bothal; Sibil, who married
William baron Hilton of Hilton, in this county; and Elianor, who married --
Creswell, of Creswell, in Northumberland.

A mural monument of blue marble, inscribed to Richard lord Lumley, the first
earl of Scarborough.

In a circle above, an inscription to George Lumley, son of John, attainted the
twenty-ninth of king Henry VIII.

The thirteenth effigy, Richard lord Lumley, in robes, with elevated hands, a
ruff or roll about the neck. This personage was the eldest son of Thomas
Lumley, as before mentioned, and had summons to parliament among the barons, in
the first year of king Henry VIII. He left by Anne his lady, daughter of Sir
John Conyers, of Hornby castle, his eldest son John, who succeeded to the
family honors and estates.

The fourteenth and last effigy, John lord Lumley. The figure dressed in robes.
This personage, in the fifth year of king Henry VIII. on the Scotch invasion,
joined the earl of Surrey with a large force, and was one of the principal
commanders of the van guard of the English army at the battle of Flodden Field:
It is mentioned by several historians, that this van guard showed great bravery
in the engagement, and were victorious over that body of the enemy commanded by
the earls of Crawford and Montross, who both fell in the field. In the
following year he was summoned to parliament, and in the year 1520, he was
present at the interview the king had with the emperor Charles V. at
Canterbury, and that with the king of France near Ardres: He served under the
earl of Shrewsbury in the Scotch expeditions; and in the twenty-first of the
reign, had summons to that parliament which existed five years by prorogations,
and struck the first blow in the dissolution of religious houses: He was in the
combination that encouraged the king to the divorce of queen Catharine; and at
last fell from his loyalty, and joined the northern confederates in the
pilgrimage of grace, but accepted the terms of the duke of Norfolk's
proclamation. His son George fell into other broils, and was one of the
partisans of the lord Darcy, was apprehended and committed to the Tower, and
soon after suffered death. John the son of George Lumley, at the death of his
grandfather, was an infant under age; and in the first year of king Edward VI.
on his petition was restored in blood, as son and heir of George, and cousin
and heir of John, then late lord Lumley, but sundry parts of the estate were
severed from the family, the act of restoration not repealing the attainder of
his father.

Another monument of one of the ancestors of this family is noted to us by Mr
Gross, which he says he found in an old book of pedigrees in the British
Museum; as it is not one in the arrangement before mentioned in remembrance
thereof we have given a cut of it. We conceive that this is the monument of
Thomas the son and heir of Sir John Lumley, whose effigy is the tenth in the
arrangement, and had been removed from its station in Chester church, for some
cause not noted there.

This ancient monument or statuarie, broken and wasted nere the ruynes of the
chapel in the first ward within the castle called Barnard's castle, was at
the honorable means and motion of John baron Lumley, sent by Sir William
Bows, knight, into this church at Chester, to be placed with his ancestors,
April 1594." -- The pattern of this I have seen at Barnard castle. S. Garter,
1591.



We lamented on observing in the churchyard the basin of an old font, thrown
out and subject to be defaced and spoiled, instead of being laid up from
profanation, and preserved in respect to the donor; it is charged with four
arms. Those of Lumley in the first shield, in the second Lumley quartering
Thornton's; in the third Thornton's single; in the fourth Lumley quartering
Nevill's; whereby it is denoted that this basin was given to the church by
George lord Lumley, probably in the time of king Edward IV.

There were two chantries in Chester church, but the founders are not known;
the one dedicated to St Mary, of the yearly value of 5l. 8s. 10d. to which
belonged a tenement in Seaton Carowe Rot. James 42.
. Thomas Holyman, incumbent at the time of the dissolution had a pension
granted him of 4l. which he received in 1553 Willis.
. The other chantry was dedicated to St. George, of the yearly value of 5l. 3s.
of which Jeffrey Glenton was priest at the dissolution, and had a pension of
4l. which was also paid him in 1553.

The effigy of a prelate, which Leland speaks of in the body of this church,
denoting where St Cuthbert lay, was removed, we presume, when the floor was new
paved, as no account was to be obtained of the monument when we viewed the
church.

The deanery house, the seat of the ancient family of Hedworths, is in a
pleasant situation, commanding a fine view of Lumley castle and the adjacent
grounds, and is surrounded with excellent meadow grounds The manor of Chester
deanery is a copyhold manor.
.

Gunceastre, or Goncaceastre, was the ancient Saxon name of this place, and as
Leland says, was derived from the rivulet Cone, which there empties itself into
Were. In the Itinerary, vol. i. p. 83, it is said, There is no bridge memorable
on Were beneath Duresme but Chester bridge. Were cummith within a quarter of a
mile of the town self of Chester. From Duresme, over Framagate bridge to
Chester in the Streate, partly by a little corn ground, but most by
montainiouse pasture and some mores and firres. Or I came in Chester I saw
scant half a mile of it, Lomeley castle upon a hill, having praty wood about
it, and about Chester self is likewise sum wood. The town of Chester is
chiefly one streate, of very mean building in height. There is beside a smaul
streate or 2 about the chirch collegiate, that has a dean and prebendaries,
but it is a very mean building; and in the body of the chirch is a tumbe, with
the image of a bishop, in token that St Cuthbert ons was buried or remained in
his feretre there. At the very end of the town I passid over Cone brook, and
there is a fair stone bridge of 3 arches over it. Thens to Gateshed vii miles
by montainiouse ground, with pasture, heth, more, and firres; and a little a
this side Gatehead is a great cole pit.

The present town of Chester is about a mile in length, consisting chiefly of
one long street, has many good buildings in it, and is commodiously situated
for supplying the numerous miners employed in the neighboring collieries and
other works At Whitehill, or Whitwel, in this neighborhood, is a blast
furnace, which makes iron metal from iron stone dug out of pits in the
neighboring fells. These fells have been very much worked for iron stone
(supposed by the Danes, when they were in possession of this kingdom) as
appears from the great quantity of scoria or cinder which is found upon the
fells and extends many miles westward. The method in those times had been to
melt the iron stone with charcoal in a large smithy hearth, called a bloomery,
and then in another hearth to melt it down again and reduce it to bar iron for
all manner of country uses: And when the wood failed they removed their hearths
to where was more plenty, so that evidently they must have blown their bloomery
bellows either by hand or with horses, or have known the use of air furnaces,
as the most scoria or cinder is found upon the high grounds, where no water
could be obtained. About three miles west of Chester is a place called the Old
Furnace, where very lately was to be seen the bottom of a furnace hearth,
according to the usual method of building them now, but of much smaller
dimensions: They had blown the bellows with a water wheel, as appears by the
cut of a water race to convey it to the wheel from an upper part of the burn.
On the opposite side of the burn is a place called the Alum Well, from the
water having a strong aluminous smell and taste. The method of making metal is
by putting into a large furnace about thirty-four feet in height, and twelve or
thirteen feet wide in the broadest part, but contracted at top and bottom, a
certain number of baskets of coal or cinders, to a certain number of boxes of
iron stone, calcined for the purpose, and a quantity of lime stone sufficient
to slux it; when a sufficient quantity is melted into the hearth or basin at
the bottom of the furnace, it then is tapped with an iron bar, and run off into
metal pigs, or large vessels prepared in loam, (a composition of sand, clay,
etc.) for different uses, such as brewing vessels, soap pans, engine pumps,
cylinders, cannons of all sizes,; and the iron stone and coal used here, are
allowed by the best judges at his majesty's warren at Woolwich, to make the
strongest and soundest cannons that are proved there. -- From the information
of Mr Smith, agent to these works.


.

This is one of the bishop's copyhold manors, and of extensive jurisdiction: It
gives name to the ward, and has a coroner: There was a forester here anciently
Vide Annals bishop Hatfield.


. Whilst the servile tenures existed, it experienced no great severity of
service, as appears by the preceding notes from the Boldon Book and Hatfield's
Survey; and there was a money payment instituted in lieu of some duties in that
early period. THE PEDIGREE OF THE NOBLE FAMILY OF LUMLEY, EARL OF SCARBOROUGH.
(VOL. 2. PAGE ^98.)
The Family of LUMLEY is undoubtedly of great Antiquity; and various are the
Traditions, touching the original Stem thereof; which, like most others of such
long standing, is so ingulphed in Obscurity, that no other Light than
Conjecture is now to be had thereof: the most probable (besides the authority
of so great men as Camden and Sir William Dugdale) is, that this Family is
denominated from LUMLEY on the Banks of the River Wear, near Chester-le-Street,
in the county Durham, where being seated, they were thence surnamed, as the
manner of those ages was, to style men from the places where they lived or were
born, and by the best Records, etc. are said to be descended from Liulph, a
nobleman of great note in the time of Edw. the Confessor, and in great credit
and esteem with Walcher, Bishop of Durham, which was the cause of his death, as
is recorded by Holinshed Chron. vol. II. p. 12 and 13, and who quotes Simeon
Dunelmensis. Algitha, d. to Aldred, Earl of Northumb. by his wife Adgina,
youngest dau. of King Etheldred II. and by her had issue Uchtred, who first
took the name of Lumley........ Sir Will. de Lumley a baron in Durh. Judith,
dau...... Hesilden, of Hesilden. -- Seages Bar. MSS. Sir William de Lumley,
only son. Sir Will. de Lumley,...... d. and coh. of Sir Walter de Audre, of
Morton Audre, in co. Durham, Knt. Sir Rog. de Lumley, who in the time Hen. III.
mar. Sibill, one of the daus. and cohs. of Hugh de Morwic, an ancient baron in
Northumb. died in 1298. Sir Robt. de Lumley, 26th Edw. I. on death of his
mother, succeeded to several manors in Northumb. at which time it was certified
that he was her son and heir, and of the age of 26 years. Lucia, eldest of the
3 daus. and cohs. of Sir Marmaduke de Thewng of Kilton Castle, in co. York, a
great baron in those parts. Sir Marmaduke Lumley, was prior of St. John of
Jerusalem in Ireland, commonly called Killmainham, and who took his mother's
arms, which were argent, a fefs gules between 3 parrots vert, each gorged with
a plain collar of the 2d, and have ever since continued the paternal arms of
this family. Margaret, d. and h. of...... Holland. Sir Robt. de Lumley died
under age, 12th Dec. 48th Edw. III. as is evident by an inquisition, taken 49th
Edw. III. at Gisburgh, when it was proved that Ralph de Lumley, was his brother
and heir, and of the age of 13 years. Sir Ralph de Lumley, a Knt. in 9th Rich.
II. in 16th same reign obtained a license (Pat. 16 Rich. II. p. 2. m. 22.) to
make a castle of his manor house of Lumley. -- Had summons to parlia. amongst
the barons, from 8th Rich. II. to Hen. IV. inclusive, when he was attainted,
and had his lands seized. -- Died in battle, as is evident from a record
(Rymer, vol. VIII. p. 529.) whereby all his lands and tenements, goods and
chattels, were adjudged in parliament to be forfeited. -- Bur. at Duthrm.
Eleanor, d. John Lord Nevill, of Raby, and sist. of Ralph, 1st Earl of
Westmorland. Thomas de Lumley, died during his minority, 31st May, 5th Hen. IV.
leaving his brother Sir John Lumley, Knt. his heir. -- Esc. 5th Hen. IV. n. 30.
Sir John de Lumley did homage, 6th Hen. IV. and had livery of all lands, etc.
his father, Sir Ra. was seized of at time of his attainder, and was knighted,
and by act of parl. 13th Hen. IV. restored in blood. -- Killed at battle of
Bangy, in province Anjou, on Easter Eve, 10th Hen. V. 1421. -- Bur. at Durham.
Felicia, dau. Sir Mat. Redman, govr. of Berw. Sir Tho. de Lumley, 10th Hen. VI.
making proof of his age (claus. 10th Hen. VI. n. 16.) had livery of his lands,
and was afterward knighted, 33d Hen. VI. constituted governor Scarborough
Castle for life. -- In 1st Edw. IV. on his petition, the attainder of Ralph
Lord Lumley, his grandfather, was reversed, and from that time to 12th Hen.
VII. had summons to parliament arcordingly. -- Ob. 1485. Margaret, d. Sir Jas.
Harrington, brother to Sir William H. Lord Harrington, and Knight of the
Garter, in the reign of Hen. V. Sir Geo. Lumley, Knt. 2d Edw. IV. when sher.
Northb. In 6th Edw. IV. was Knt. shire for that county, and in 8th Edw. IV. was
again sheriff. -- In 20th Edw. IV. he bore the title of Lord Lumley, and on 22d
Aug. that year was made a knight banneret. -- Died 23d Hen. VII. -- Seagar.
Baron. MSS. Eliz. d. and coh. of Rog. Thornton, Esquire a wealthy mercht. in Newc.
upon Tyne, by whom he had lordships of Witton, in co. Northumb. Walworth, and
the Isle, in co. Durham. Thomas Lumley, Esquire died in the lifetime of his
father, 1487. Eliza. Platagenet (not. dau. King Edw. IV. by Lady Eliz. Lucy) by
whom he had issue. Rich. Lumley succeeded his grandfather, and had summons to
parliament among the barons, 1st Hen. VIII. -- Ob. 26th May, 2d Hen. VIII.
1511. Anne, d. of Sir John Conyers, of Hornby Castle, in co. York, Knt. Garter
(sist. to William Ld. Conyers) by whom he left iss. John, Lord Lumley, was 18
years of age at death of his father. In 5th Hen. VIII. was at the battle of
Flodden Field. -- In 6th Hen. VIII. had summons to parliament, as Lord Lumley.
Ob. 36th Hen. VIII. -- Bur. at Gisborough, in the abbey. Joan d. of Hen. Lord
Scroope, of Bolton, by Elizabeth his wife, d. Hen. Percy, 3d Earl of
Northumberland. George Lumley, Esquire was concerned in an insurrection with the
Lord Darcy and others, committed to the Tower, and in June 29th, Hen. VIII.
found guilty of high treason, and suffered death in the lifetime of his
father. Jane, 2d dau. and coh. Sir Rich. Knightly, of Fawsley, in co.
Northampton, Knt. John Lumely, on the death of his grandfather, was in inf. in
1st Edw. VI. restored in blood and a new barony of Lumley, created and
limited, by express words, to the said John in tail male (the ancient barony
being merged in the crown by the attainder of his father Geo.) on 29th Sept.
1553, was made knight of the bath. -- This nobleman caused monuments to be
erected in Chester-le-Street church, to the memory of his ancestors, in order
as they succeeded one another, from Liulph down to his own time (Camb. Brit. by
Gibson, vol. II. p. 950.) Obiit 11th April, 1609, bur. at Cheam, in co Surry.
-- His children dying in his lifetime, this new barony expired with him. 1st
wife, Jane, eldest of the two daughters and coheirs of Henry Fitz Allan, Earl
of Arundel. Charles, Thomas, Mary. all died in the lifetime of their father.
2d wife, Eliz. d. of John, Lord Darcy, of Chick, who surv. her husband without
having issue. Jane mar. Jeffery Markham, Esquire died without issue. Barbara mar
Humph. Lloyd, of Denbeigh, Esquire of whom see an account below. From the above
named Barbara and Humphrey Lloyd, descended the Rev. Dr. Lumley Lloyd, of
Cheam, in co. Surry, who was Rector of St. Paul's, Covenant-Garden, London, and
died in Nov. 1730. -- In 1723, he presented a petition to the king, suggesting,
that he was heir at law, to Ralph the first Lord Lumley, as son of Henry, son
of Henry, son of Henry, son of Barbara, by Humphrey Lloyd abovementioned, and
praying a writ of summons to parliament. The same was referred to the Committee
of Privileges, who resolved, that the petitioner had not any right to a writ of
summons to parliament. -- Humphrey Lloyd was the only son of Robert Lloyd,
alias, Rossindale of Denbeigh, Esquire and had issue Henry Lloyd, of Cheam in
Surry, Esquire who, by Mary, daughter of Robert Prowe of Bromfield, in Essex, Esquire
had Henry his heir, who married Isabella, daughter of Isham Parkyns, of Bunory,
in Nottinghamshire, Esquire and had a son, Henry Lloyd of Cheam, Esquire who died 3d
Dec. 1704, leaving, by Elizabeth, daughter of Benjamin Goodwin of Streatlam,
Esquire one son, the abovementioned Dr. Robert Lumley-Lloyd. -- See Journals Ho.
Parl. 23d March, 1723.


The male issue being now extinct, we must have recourse back to Anthony
Lumley, 2d son of Rich. Lord Lumley.
Anthony Lumley, Esquire 2d son, Rich. Lord Lumley, as is evident by an inquisi. of
the court wards, 30th May, 7th Jas. I. as also by the will of the last Lord
Lumley..... d. Rich. Gray, of the county of Northumb. Esquire Roger Lumley, Esquire who
married Anne, d........ Kurtwich, Esquire had issue several sons and daughters,
whereof were -- Rich. Lumley, eld. son and h. was the chief heir male of the
family, after the decease of John, Lord Lumley, in 1609, and inherited the
greatest part of the estate of his ancestors, by deed of settlement, and the
last will of the said John, Lord Lumley, was knighted 19th July, 1619. On 12th
July, 1628, was created Visc. Lumley, of Waterford in Ireland. -- Bur. at
Cheam. Frances, d. Hen. Shelly of Warminghoist in Sussex, Esquire John Lumley, Esquire
only son, died in the lifetime of his father. -- Bur. at St. Martin's, London.
Mary, d. and one of the coheirs of Sir Hen. Compton, (youngest son of Hen. Ld.
Compton, ancestor to the Earl of Northampton.) Richard succeeded his
grandfather in his Irish honors, and on 3d May, 1681, 33d Charles II. was
created Baron Lumley of Lumley Castle, in co. Durh. and to the heirs male of
his body, for want of such issue to his brother Henry, and the heirs male of
his body. And on 10th April, 1689, created Visc. Lumley, of Lumley Castle, and
on 15th April, 1690, Earl of Scarborough -- Obiit. 17th Dec. 1721, and was bur.
in Chester-le-Street church. Frances, only d. and h. of Sir Hen. Jones of
Aston, in co. Oxford, by his wife Frances, sist. to Tho. Earl Fauconberg. She
died in March 1737. Henry, Visc. Lumley died of sm. pox, 24th July 1710, and is
bur. at St. Martin's in the Fields, in London. -- Memb. for Arundel. Richard,
Visc. Lumley succeeded his father as Earl of Scarborough in 1721. -- On the 9th
June, 1724, elected a Knt. of Gart -- Ob unm. 4th Feb. 1739. bur. in St. Geo.
chapel, Audley-street, London. Thomas Lumley, elected a Knt. Bath, 27th May,
1725, and by virtue of an act of parliament, bore surn. of Saunderson, pursuant
to the will of James Saunderson, E. of Castleton, who died without iss. 24th
May, 1723. -- In Feb. 1739, succeeded his bro. as Earl of Scarborough. -- Ob.
15th March, 1752. Frances, 2d d. of Geo. Hamilton, Earl of Orkney, by whom she
left issue. Richard Visc. Lumley, in March 1752, succeeded his father as 4th
Earl of Scarborough. -- On 12th Dec. 1752, he married. -- In Oct. 1765,
appointed deputy Earl Marshall of England. -- Died..... Barbara Saville, sister
to Sir Geo. Saville, Bart. member for co. York. -- Died 27th Dec. 1772. George
Augustus Visc. Lumley, born 22d Sept. 1754, the present Earl of Scarborough.
Frances-Barbara-Ludlow, born on 25th Feb. 1756, died young. Richard born 3d
April, 1757. Thomas-Charles. John. Frederick. Mary-Arabella. Geo. Lumley, Esquire
died unmar. Dec. 1732. Frances, in June 1753, mar. Pet. Ludlow, Esquire or
Ardsallagh, in co. Mead, in Ireland, since created Lord Ludlow. Anne. Harriot
died unm. 6th Nov. 1747. William, 3d son, was killed in a sea engagement, in
the Mediterranean, 9th April, 1709. Charles was member in parliament for
Chichester. -- Ob. 11th Aug. 1727. John was a col. in the guards, and mem. for
Arundel. Ob. Oct. 1739. James, memb. for Chichester, and groom of bedchamber to
the late Pr. of Wales. Ob. unm. 14th March, 1766, and bur. at
Chester-le-Street. Mary mar. Geo. Montague, 1st E. of Halifax. -- Ob. 10th
Sept. 1726. Barbara mar. Chas. Leigh, of Leighton, in c. Bedford, Esquire br. to
Th. Lord Leigh of Stoneley, in co. Warw. -- Ob. 4th Jan. 1755. Anne mar.
Frederick Frankland, Esquire late memb. for Thirsk. -- Ob. without issue* Feb.
1739. Henrietta died unmarried, 6th Nov. 1747. Hen. Lumley, Esquire was a general
in the army, and gover. of Jersey, mar. twice and died 18th Oct. 1722. Bur. at
Sabridgworth, co. Herts. 1st Elizabeth, d. of.... Thimbley, of co. Lincoln, Esquire
by whom she had no issue. 2d Anne, d. Sir Wm. Wiseman of Great Canfield-hall,
in Essex, Bart. by his wife Arabella, sist. and h. to Geo. Hewit, Visc. Hewit,
of Goran, in prove. Semster in Ireland. -- Ob. 4th March 1736, leaving issue an
only daughter. Frances, who died 13th Oct. 1719, in the 6th year of her age.
Elizab. m. Rich. Cotton, of Watergate, in co. Sussex. Esquire Frances, Anne, both
died unmar. Julia mar. 1st, to...... Germain, Esquire by whom she had a daughter,
Frances, (mar. 1st to Francis Moore, Esquire son and heir of Sir Hen. Moore; and
2dly, to John Shuckburgh, of Barton, in co. Warwick, Esquire) and by her 2d
husband, Sir Christ. Conyers, Knt. had also an only daugh. named Julia, mar.
1st to Sir Will. Blackett, of Newc. upon Tyne, Bart; 2dly, to Sir Will.
Thompson, one of the barons of the Exchequer. Other sons, who died young or
unmarried. Elizabeth mar. Sir Wm. Langley, of Higham Gobions, in co. Bedford,
Bart. -- Isabel mar. Rich. Conyers, of Horden, in co. Durham, Knt. John, Geo.
Roger, who left 3 daus. his cohs. viz. Agnes mar. John Lambton, Esquire --
Isabella, to Rich. Conyers, of Horden. -- Marg. to Tho. Trollop, of Thornley,
Esquire Anne mar. Ralph Ld. Ogle, of Bothall. Sibil, to Wm. Baron Hilton, of
Hilton, in co. Durham. Elizabeth, to..... Creswell, of Northumb. Esquire. Roger
Lumley,...... d. Sir Rich. Radcliffe, Knt. Garter, by whom he had a son. Roger
Lumley. Ralph Lumley. Joan m. Bertram Harbottle, of co. Northumb. Esquire Margt. m.
Bertram Lumley of Ravensholm, in co. Durh. Eliz. m. Will. Tilliot, Esquire William
de Lumley. Marmaduke, he was chan. Camb. 7th Hen. VI. and on 15th April,
following 1430, had temporalties of Bishop of Carlisle delivered him, and next
day consecrated bishop, -- On 18th Dec. 25th Hen. VI. constituted treasurer of
England, was 20 years bishop there, and after translated to Lincoln, 1450,
which he scarce enjoyed a year till he died. Elizabeth. mar. Adam Tirwhitt of
Kettleby, in co. Lincoln. Margaret mar. Sir John Clarvaux, of Croft, in co.
York, Knt. Catharine mar. Sir John Chideock, by whom she had two daughs. cohs.
Matilda m. Sir Hen. Thirkell. Eleanor died unmarried. Thomas. William. Isabel
married Sir Wm. Fulthorpe, Knt. William de Lumley. Thomas de Lumley. Sir Rog.
de Lumley, Knt. ancestor to the Lumleys of Harleston and Clipston, in co.
Northampton. Marmaduke, who was father of John Fitz Marmaduke, Lord of Horden,
in co. Durham, 29th Edw. I. Matthew de Lumley. Osbert, whose d. and heir,
Ormonda, was mar. to Robt. de Peshall. Adam, had by gift from Will. the Conq.
Uldell and Gilcrouse. -- Dug. Monast. vol. I. p. 400. Odo, had also by a gift
from said King Talentre and Castlerigge, with the forest between Galtre and
Graecr. -- Ibid.


genealogy LUMLEY CASTLE
view of Lumley Castle LUMLEY CASTLE (...)
view of Lumley Castle The chief improvement of this country is attributed to
cardinal Langley, who disforested the lands, and licenced their being enclosed
and brought into tillage.

As this manor appertained to the bishop, we must naturally conclude there were
few free tenants therein: In the fifth year of bishop Hatfield, Will. de
Birtley died seized of a message and thirty acres of land here, held by
homage, fealty, and fifteen shillings rent; and Ra. Clerk, in the seventh year
of the same prelate, died seized of twenty-six acres of land, held by fealty
and ten shillings rent, and sixty acres of wood, by fealty and rendering two
arrows; and they are the only free tenants we have met with noted in the
ancient records.

Camden apprehended Chester was the Condercum of the Romans: Dr Stukeley, in
his Iter-boreale, 1725, says, The Hermen street is very plain, being a straight
line hither when we descend from Gateshead fell: I think Bid mentions this
station, as called Concester, which retains part of the Roman name. Great coal
works too hereabouts. The first wing of the Astures made this their garrison,
as the Notitia tells us, being ad lineam valli; for though it be not upon the
wall, it is reasonable to think his expression is not to be strictly taken; it
was convenient that some of the forces that guarded the wall should be
quartered at some suitable distance, that they might have room of country for
their maintenance. No inscriptions or other Roman remains have been discovered
here; and the name of Chester-on-the-Street derived from its situation on the
Roman way, has hitherto been all that led the antiquaries to conceive it was of
Roman origin. It is probable, as Dr Stukeley observes, some troops were
stationed at a distance from the wall; perhaps they lined the great roads at
intervals with small detachments; and this is still more probable, if we admit
they knew any thing of pit coal for fuel. But we defer speaking on that till we
advance to the banks of Tyne.

For the sake of connection,

LUMLEY CASTLE
is the next place of observation. This castle, one of the seats of lord
Scarborough, stands on a fine elevated situation, ornamented with beautiful
plantations; the lands rise gradually from the channel of the river Were on the
south and west sides; and on the north is the rivulet called Lumley beck: The
east front of the castle stands immediately on the brink of a very deep valley,
full of wood, through which the brook winds toward the Were. The form of this
edifice is square, having a projecting tower at each angle, and a court or area
in the center: The corners of each tower are guarded with ^u^tresses, crowned
with a small turret or observatory; what is singular in the turrets is, that
they are octangular, so that they overhang the face of each square of the base,
and are machicolated or open for the purpose of annoying assailants by casting
down stones, etc. which gives the edifice a singular appearance: The castle is
built of a yellow freestone, which makes it look bright and beautiful at a
distance. The chief entrance is at the west front, by a double slight of steps,
and a platform, which fills the whole space between the tower; the south front
is modern, and brought forward almost parallel with the tower, sixty-five paces
in length; the north front is obscured by offices; and the east front retains
its ancient form: There is a gateway in the center of the east front, which
projects and is guarded by square turrets at the angles, with observatories as
before described; above the gate is a gallery formed in the arch, with
apertures to annoy an enemy: Above this gate are six shields of arms boldly cut
in stone, with their several crests, cotemporary with the building, and which
critically give us the date of it.

The arrangement of the arms is as follows: In the center, and elevated above
the rest, are the arms of France and England quarterly, being, as we presume,
the arms of king Richard II. as in that reign Sir Ralph Lumley obtained license
from bishop Skirlaw, dated 1389, to castellate his house of Lumley; and the
architecture of this front is a grand model of the taste of that age: The act
of Richard II. mentioned by Mr Pennant, had been intrusional or merely
confirmatory It is said to have been built in the time of Edward I. by Sir
Robert de Lumley, and enlarged by his son Sir Marmaduke. Prior to that the
family residence was at Lumley, (from whence it took the name) a village a mile
south of the castle, where are remains of a very old hall house, that boasts a
greater antiquity. The former was not properly castellated till the year 1392,
when Sir Ralph, the first lord of Lumley, obtained from Richard II. Licentiam
castrum suum de Lomley, do novo aedificandum, muro de petra and calce batellare
and kernellare et castrum illud sic batellatum and kernellatum tenere, etc.

Pennant's Tour in Scotland, pt ii. p. 319. The bishop's license for
re-edifying and embattling.
Rot. A A. Skirlaw, ep. Dunelm. in dorso, No 37. Walterus Dei gratia Dunelm.
Episcopus. Omnibus Ballivis et Fidelibus suis Salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia
nostra speciali concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro nobis est successoribus
nostris quantum in nobis est dilecto nobis Radulpho de Lomley Milit. quod ipse
Castrum suum de Lomley de novo aedificandum infra nostram regiam libertatem
Dunolm. muro de Petra et Calce batellare et kernellare et Castrum illud sic
batel atum et kernellatum tenere possit sibi et heredibus suis imperpetuum sine
vec'cone vel impedimento nostri vel successorum nostrorum Justic. Escaetor
Vicecomitu aut aliorum Ballivorum seu Ministrorum nostrorum quorumcunque. In
cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Dat. per
manus Hugonis de Westwyk Cancellarii nostri x die November. anno Pontificatus
nostri secundo.


. In the center are the arms of Lumley, as adopted from the Thwengs, whose
heiress married into this family; on the dexter side the arms of Percy, the
crest a lion passant; on the sinister side, Nevill, with the bull's head for
the crest; the lowest arms on the dexter side are those of Cowley, crest a
ram's head; on the sinister side the arms of Hilton baron Hilton, and Moses's
head for the crest. There are three stories of apartments in this front, with
mullioned windows guarded with iron: Between the walls and the brink of the
precipice, is just space enough for a terrace, which in early times was guarded
with a curtain wall: The dell is very deep, the banks are steep, and now filled
with large forest trees: The uniformity of the east front, the arrangement of
the arms, and the whole appearance of the masonry, testify that this was part
of the original structure, and a chief entrance; for should we form our
conjecture from the appearance of the center area, we should conclude every
front of the castle was similar to this.

Many accounts and prints have been published of this beautiful place, which
strikes the eye of the traveller on the great northern road; the most excellent
of the prints was by Hearne and Byrne: We will in the first place select from
the various publications such matter as appears most worthy attention, and then
proceed with our view. All that Camden says of it is, that it is enclosed with
a park. In Russell and Owen's England Displayed, it is described to contain a
great number of spacious apartments, some antique and others modern: The
paintings are valuable, many of them representing the ancestors of that noble
family, for some centuries past, in the habits of the time. The park, besides
the pleasantness of the situation, has another and still more valuable
circumstance to recommend it, that of being full of veins of coal; this,
together with a navigable river, by which the coals are carried down to
Sunderland, render Lumley park an inexhaustable mine of treasure to the family.
In one of the monthly magazines we are informed by a paper signed Edward
Barras, that the park is walled round with hewn stone, had formerly deer, but
after it was reduced and the pales removed, they sickened and died." And he
adds, "there are several dates upon different parts of the castle; one was
pointed out to me, on the inner side of one of the eastern turrets, where the
letters I. L. 1550 appear, though almost defaced. Much repair has been given to
the inner walls of the area; and on one of the eastern towers are two long
strings of escutcheons cut in stone, and placed in the building, nine in each
row, with the arms of Lumley in the center at the bottom, and in two small
shields at the top, a fleurde-lis on the dexter side, and a rose on the
sinister: In those strings the Lumley arms are impaled, with the several
families wherewith they intermarried.

There is a tradition at Chester, that about a century ago, the remains of an
old chapel stood about three hundred yards to the north-west of the castle,
with several vaults and subterraneous passages: A hill called Chapel hill, is
well known, but no one about the castle could give any information touching the
buildings.

From the platform at the entrance into the hall you command a beautiful
prospect. At the foot of the avenue which leads up to the castle, is a fine
basin of water, with a salmon lock, and fishermen's cottage; over which, on the
opposite rising grounds, you view the town of Chester, the deanery house, and
church, at a pleasing distance: The more extended landscape comprehends the
great northern road, animated with passengers, the house of Flalts, (formerly
belonging to the Allans The following tablet is at this day to be seen in many
of the houses at Chester.
On Sunday the 21st day of December, 1741, died at his house at Flatts, THOMAS
ALLAN, esquire He left a son, Thomas, who died unmarried, and four daughters, who
became coheirs to their brother, viz. Susannah married Ra. Jenison, esquire of
Walworth, and died without issue; Margaret married Jenison Shasto, esquire and died
without issue; Dorothy married Ja. Garland, esquire of Michael-Stowhall, in Essex
(now living); Camilla married Robert Shasto, esquire of Benwell, died the 14th of
July, 1782, leaving an only child, a daughter, married to -- Adair, esquire.


; one of the principal coal owners on the river Were. He was a gentleman whose
integrity and worth placed him in the highest estimation, and whose good nature
and generosity endeared him to all his acquaintance. He was earnest in
promoting the good of his country, and particularly that great support of it,
its trade; in the cause of which he embarked his fortune, and applied a most
laudable industry; manifesting in his affairs an uncommon elegance and
propriety; and as his life was adorned with every virtue that dignifies human
nature, so his death is universally a most melancholy occasion of sorrow.


) the village of Pelton, and other striking objects; and the back scene
consists of broken and irregular grounds, every where scattered over with
cottages. A cultivated scene fills the view to the left: In a variety of
situations you see the winding streams of the Were: On the one hand the town of
Great Lumley, on the other Walridge, and the hermitage, with many hamlets in
the vale; whilst the distant landscape is terminated by Plawsworth, and the
plantations above Newtonhall.

The hall is a proportionable room, twenty paces in lenth. Here is an
arrangement of portraits at full length of the chief personages of the noble
family of Lumley, together with a tablet, and in an oval, bordered with arms,
the following inscription Exactly similar to one in the church of Chester.
.

LIVLPHVS Nobilis Generosusque Minister Ex Anglosaxonu' Genere Vir clarissimus
qui late per Angliam Possessiones multas Haereditario jure possidebat cum
te'pore Regis Guilielmi primi Co'quisitoris Angliae Norma'ni ubique saeviret,
et Quia Cuthbertu' Dunolmensem Antistitem inter Divos Relatum, multum
dilexerat, cum suis ad Dunolmum se co'tulit, Et ibidem Walchero Episcopo adeo
devenit charus et acceptabilis, Ut absque illius consilio nihil consulte fieri
videretur: Multorum dehinc Odium sibi conflavit, donec a Gilberto quodam
aliisque sceleratis dicti Episcopi Ministris crudeliter tandem occideretur in
cujus necis Vindictam Northumbr. Walcherum Presulem innocentem apud Gateshed
trucidarunt anno MLXXX. Ex Aldgitha co'juge Northumbroru' Comitis Aldredi filia
Liulphus filium suscepit Uctredum, Patrem Gulielmi de Lumley ejus nominis
primi, a cujus loci Dominio sui posteri cognomina sunt sortiti, Gulielmum istum
Uctredi filium Dunolmensis Episcopus Hugo eisdem erui immunitatibus volvit,
Quibus caeteri sui Barons in Episcopatu gaudebunt, et secundi Henrici Regis
cartam inde obtinuit: Tanti beneficii non immemor Gulielmus, villam suam de
Dictona in Alvertonschira eodem Episcopo et Successoribus suis liberaliter
contulit. A primo Gulielmo Oritur secundus, a secundo tertius qui ex filia
Gualteri Daudre Equitis Rogerum filium procreavit, maritum Sibellae cohaeredis
inclyti Baronis Hugonis de Morwyco Inde natus Robertus, qui ex Lucia Sorore et
Haerede Thomae Baronis de Thwenge, Marmaducum filium genuit, Paternorum armorum
desertorem primum, sibi suisque retentis maternae stemmatis insignibus.
Procreatis ex Margreta Holand conjuge sua, Radulphum Equitem strennum, Quem Rex
Richardus secundus anno regiminis octavo ad Baronis Regni dignitatem evexerat:
Ductaque Aleonora primi Comitis Westmariae sorore Johannem tulit Qui ex Felicia
Uxore, Thomam suscepit, cui Margarete conjunx filia Jacobi Harington Equitis,
Georgium Enixa est, Maritum Elizabethae haeredis Rogeri Thornton Armiger, inde
Pater efficitur illius Thomae. Qui ex magni Regis Edovardi quarti filia
naturali, Richardum susceperat. Is annam ducens sororem Gulielmi Baronis
Coigners, Johannem reliquit haeredem, sponsum Joannae filiae Henrici Le Scroope
de Bolton Baronis eximii, avum Johannis ultimi Baronis de Lumley hoc Conditorio
in certam spem suturae resurrectionis repositi: Quem illi Georgius filius, ex
Jana Cohaerede Richardi Knightley Equitis, unicum reliquerat Nepote mac
haeredem: Bino conjugio saelix ultimus hic Johannes suit, Janae scilicet
Arundeliae Comitis Henrici filiae aetate maximae et cohaerede: Necnon et
Elizabethae filiae Johannis Baronis Darey, Foeminae non Solum Prosapia et
antiquo stemmate Nobiles Sed quod magis laudandum, virtutibus Pudicitia,
verecundia, et amore conjugali Nobilissimae. Ex illarum prima nati silii duo,
Carolus et Thomas, filiaque unica Maria, haud din superstites Sed in ipsa
infantia mestissimis satis sublati We may suppose this tablet was shown to king
James, and occasioned the shrewd remark hereafter mentioned, but by the letters
we think it has been painted since this time.
.

The pictures are placed in the following order. 1. Liulphus. 2. Uchtred. 3.
Gulielmus, who married Hesleden. 4. Sir William de Lumley. 5. William de
Lumley, who married Daudre. 6. Sir Robert de Lumley, who married Lucy Thwenge.
7. Sir Marmaduke Lumley, who married Margaret Holland. 8. Sir Ralph de Lumley,
the first baron in his parliament robes. 9. Sir John de Lumley, who married
Felicia Redman. 10. King Richard II. sitting in a chair of state, lord Lumley
in his robes kneeling, above the figure R. R. II. An' D'no 1385, Ao Reg. 8. 11.
Sir Thomas Lumley, who married Margaret, daughter of Sir James Harrington: He
received knighthood as a reward for his military prowess, and was employed by
government in several momentous negociations: In the twenty-eighth,
twenty-ninth, and thirty-first years of king Henry VI. was guarrantee for the
king of England in the Scotch treaties: In the thirty-third year of that reign
was made governor of Scarborough castle for life; a most distinguished trust:
Was entrusted in many other appointments of government. It appears he was
equally a favorite with king Edward IV. for in the first year of that reign he
obtained a reversal of his grandfather's attainder; had summons to parliament
for the remainder of his life, and was employed in various confidential matters
by his sovereign, particularly in the negociations with king James of Scotland,
touching his marriage. 12. George lord Lumley, who married Elizabeth Thornton.
13. Sir Thomas Lumley, who married Elizabeth, natural daughter of king Edward
IV. 14. John de Lumley, who married Joan, daughter of Henry lord Scrope. 15.
Richard de Lumley, who married Ann, daughter of Sir John Conyers. 16. George
Lumley, who married Jane, daughter of Sir Richard Knightley. 17. Elizabeth,
daughter of John lord Darcy of Chiche, and second wife of Sir John Lumley, who
was restored in blood the first of king Edward VI. and had the ancient barony
revived.

The great dining room is in the south-west tower, elegantly stuccoed, with a
vaulted roof; on one side it commands a view of the adjacent meadows, the
sloping banks of the river Were, highly cultivated; with a fine canal, formed
by a curvature of the stream: at the end windows, a prospect down the avenue,
with Chester and the chief objects described from the platform.

The little dining room has several fine portraits. John lord Lumley, 1563, a
three quarter piece; a pleasing picture: There are other two portraits of this
personage in the music-room, one dated 1588, the other 1591. This John was the
son and heir of George Lumley, who suffered death as before mentioned, and
grandson and heir of John lord Lumley. In the sixth year of king Edward VI. he
was restored in blood, and that he and the heirs male of his body should hold
and bear the name, dignity, state, and pre-eminence of a baron of this realm,
etc. On the 29th of September, 1553, he was made one of the knights of the
bath, and attended with his lady at the coronation of queen Mary, he among the
barons, and she one of the six ladies who sat in the chariot of state, dressed
in crimson velvet, etc. He was one of the two lords who introduced the first
Russian ambassador to audience: Was in employ in the first years of queen
Elizabeth, but being suspected of intrigue in the affairs of the queen of
Scots, was taken into custody with his father-in-law, the carl of Arundel, in
the twelfth year of that reign, and was a great favorite with the earl, as
appears by his will. He afterward came into great confidence with the queen,
and was one of the lords commissioned to sit in trial of the unhappy victim of
Elizabeth's jealousies, and with a firmness some historians have spoken of with
expressions of surprise, delivered his opinion that the sentence was justly
pronounced against the queen of Scots. In the forty-fourth year of the queen he
was one of the peers who sat on the trial of Robert D'Evereux, earl of Essex.
On the accession of king James he experienced many testimonies of royal
confidence: Camden made most honorable mention of him: He was a person of
entire virtue, integrity, and innocence; and in his old age a complete pattern
of true nobility. He had so great a veneration for the memory of his ancestors,
that he caused monuments to be erected for them in the collegiate church of
Chester in the Street, in order as they succeeded one another, from Liulphus
down to his own time, which he had either picked out of the demolished
monasteries or made new. By his will he devised his estates, particularly the
castle and manor of Lumley, to Richard Lumley, eldest son and heir apparent of
Roger Lumley, esquire son of Anthony, brother to John lord Lumley his grandfather.
He married Jane, the eldest of the two daughters of Henry Fitz-Allan, earl of
Arundel, and by her had three children, who died in infancy; and to his second
wife married Elizabeth, daughter of John lord Darcy of Chiche, who survived
him, and by whom he had no issue: He died on the 11th of April, 1609, and was
buried in the church at Cheam. The ancient barony of Lumley expired at his
death.

The portrait of Garcia Sarmienta Cuna is next; a full length, in armor, a
ruff, red stockings, white shoes, a white cross on his breast, a spear in his
hand. Out of a window a view of the sea. He was captain of the guard to Philip
II Pennant, 325.
.

Ferdinand duke of Mar, 1557, in rich armor.

A full length of the duke of Monmouth, with a sweet countenance and long hair.

Jane Fitz-Alan, the first wife of John lord Lumley, in black robes, a small
ruff, with gloves in her hand: This is a beautiful portrait; her dress is
gracefully ornamented with strings of jewels. She was a lady of uncommon
learning, having translated from the Greek into Latin some of the orations of
Isocrates, and the Iphigenia of Euripides into English. She compliments her
father highly in a dedication to him, prefixed to one of the orations, which
begins Cicero, Pater honoratissime, illustris, etc. She died before her father,
as appears by his will Vide Ballard's British Ladies, 16. -- Pennant, 322.
.

In the music-room: Thomas Ratcliff, carl of Sussex: A full length, in white
armor, and gold brocade breeches, young and handsome, a staff in his right
hand, his left re^ing on a sword: His helmet with an enormous plume placed on a
table: This motto amando and sidendo traopo, son ruinato. This nobleman was a
figuring character in the reigns of Mary and Elizabeth, frequently employed in
embassies, in both reigns deputy of Ireland, and in the first an active
persecutor of the Protestants: He conformed outwardly to the religion of his
new mistress, was appointed by her president of the north, and commanded
against and suppressed the rebellion of the earls of Northumberland and
Westmoreland, notwithstanding he secretly approved the opinions they armed in
favor of. He was the spirited rival of Leicester; but the death of Sussex left
the event of their dispute undetermined Pennant, 324.
.

A fine portrait in a purple robe, inscribed Duke of Suffolk, 1593. Who this
picture represents is uncertain, -- the last duke, Henry Gray, was beheaded
1553.

Viglius, president of the council in the low countries, 1560. A three quarter
piece, in a black gown furred in front, a black cap, sitting in a chair: A fine
old face.

A fine portrait of one of the Lumleys; but what personage is not known.

A three quarter length of a man in a scarlet robe, over the left shoulder a
white mantle, a scarlet cap tied in the middle, and open behind, a narrow white
ruff, and a collar of the fleece; the scarlet robe is furred with white, on
which are several times repeated the words Ah! amprins au ra jay! Oh, had I
undertaken it!"

Over the chimney, the duke of Buckingham.

A half length of Robert earl of Salisbury, minister in the last years of queen
Elizabeth, and first of king James I. dressed in black, a bell on the table,
and a letter directed to him by all his titles, round the neck a green ribband,
with the George: Above his head Sero sed serio.

Sir William Peter, or Petre, a native of Devonshire, fellow of All Souls
College, and afterward secretary of state to four sovereigns, Henry VIII.
Edward VI. Mary, and Elizabeth. His prudence in maintaining his post in reigns
of such different tempers is evident; but in that of Mary he attended only to
politics, of Elizabeth to religion Dugd. Baron. 11, 388. -- Prine's Worthies of
Devon. 498. -- Pennant, 32^.
.

Queen Mary and queen Elizabeth; of a severe countenance.

Dudley earl of Leicester, in a three quarter piece, dated 1587, with the
collar of the garter, and staff in his right hand.

Andrew Doria, a three quarter length, the great Genoese admiral and patriot.
He is dressed in black, in a cap, a long beard, a collar with the fleece
pendant, a truncheon in his hand, and a dagger in his girdle: View of ships
through a window.

John lord Lumley, 1588, aet. 54. A full length, in rich armor. Another in his
robes, with a glove and handkerchief in one hand, a little black scull-cap and
white beard, dated 1591. The latter portrait, Mr Pennant says, he believes was
the performance of Richard Stevens, an able statuary, painter, and medalist,
mentioned by Mr Walpole An^ed. Paint. 1, 161.
: He further adds, This illustrious nobleman restored the monuments that are in
the neighboring church, was a patron of learning and great collector of books,
assisted by his brother in law Humphrey Lhuyd, the famous antiquary. The books
were afterward purchased by king James I. and proved the foundation of the
royal library. Mr Granger says, they are a very valuable part of the British
Museum.

The drawing room, elegantly furnished with crimson damask. A picture of king
Charles II. on horseback.

In a dressing room, over the fire place, Zebedeus Jacobus Major, Salome,
Christo coevus.

A group of four, a fine picture, supposed by Holbein.

In the lodging-rooms, etc. etc. John lord Russel; a fine portrait.

A portrait of a lady, in a singular dress of black and gold, with a red and
gold petticoat, dated 1560. Mr Pennant's account of this picture is, This is
called Elizabeth, third wife of Edward earl of Lincoln, the fair Geraldine,
celebrated so highly by the earl of Surry; but so ill favored in this picture,
that I must give it to his first wife Elizabeth Blount: Geraldine was the young
wife of his old age. Her portrait at Woburn represents her an object worthy the
pen of the amorous Surry.

Sir John Petre; a very fine portrait.

Ambrose earl of Warwick, son of the great Dudley duke of Northumberland: His
dress a bonnet, furred cloak, small ruff, and pendant George. This peer
followed the fortunes of his father, but was received to mercy, and restored in
blood; was created earl of Warwick by queen Elizabeth, and proved a gallant and
faithful subject: He died in 1589, and lies under an elegant brass tomb in the
chapel at Warwick.

The earl of Surry; whom Mr Pennant styles, the gallant, accomplished, poetical
earl of Surry; in black, with a sword and dagger, the date 1545. The ornament,
says Mr Walpole, of a boistrous, yet not unpolished court; a victim to a
jealous tyrant and to family discord. The articles alleged against him, and
his conviction, are the shame of the times.

King Edward VI. a full length.

Ralph Lumley, 1567; a small full length portrait.

Sir Thomas More, a half length, dressed in that plainness of apparel which he
used, when the dignity of office was laid aside; in a furred robe, with a
coarse capuchin cap. He was the most virtuous and the greatest character of his
time; and by a circumstance that might humiliate human nature, fell a victim
for a religious adherence to his own opinion, after being a violent persecutor
of others for firmness to the dictates of their own conscience: To such
inconsistencies are the best of mankind liable Pennant, 320.
.

William Cecil, lord high treasurer of England, a half length, in black, collar
of the garter.

A good half length of Mr Thomas Wyndham, drowned on the coast of Guinea, aged
42, M. D. L. a robust figure in green, with a red sash, and a gun in his hand.

The earl of Essex in a full length, dressed in black, covered with white
embroidery. Mr Pennant, speaking of this picture, says, the brave, impetuous,
presuming Robert earl of Essex: A romantic nobleman, of parts without
discretion, who fell a sacrifice to his own passions, and a vain dependence for
safety on those of an aged queen, doting with unreasonable love, and a criminal
credulity in the insinuation of his foes.

In a low room, Sir Nich. Carew, master of the horse to king Henry VIII. There
is great spirit in his countenance; a white feather in his hat, his head bound
round with a gold stuff handkerchief. He was beheaded in 1539, as lord Herbert
says Hist. king Henry VIII.
, for being of council with the marquis of Exeter, a favourer of the dreaded
cardinal Pole, then in exile. During the time of his confinement in the Tower
he imbibed the sentiments of the reformers, and died avowing their faith
Pennant, 324.
.

The last earl of Arundel, a three quarter piece: His valor distinguished him
in the reign of king Henry VIII. when he ran with his squadron close under the
walls of Bulogne, and soon reduced it. In the following reign he opposed the
misused powers of the unhappy protector, Somerset, and yet declined connection
with the great Northumberland. He supported the just rights of queen Mary; was
imprisoned by the former, but on the Revolution was employed to arrest the
abject fallen duke: He was closely attached to his royal mistress by principles
of religion: In his declining years he aimed at being husband to queen
Elizabeth. Had her majesty deigned to put herself under the power of man, she
never would have given the preference to age. On his disappointment he went
abroad, and on his return first introduced into England the use of coaches
Pennant, 323.
.

The first earl of Bedford, engraved among the illustrious heads.

Killigrew, gentleman of the bedchamber to king Charles II. in a red fash, with
his dog: A man of wit and humor, and on that account a great favorite with
the king.

A three quarter length, unknown, dated 1596, aged 43, dressed in a striped
jacket blue and white, black cloak and breeches, white ruff, gloves on, collar
of the garter, and a high crowned hat.

Paracelsus, thus described by Mr Pennant, A half length of the famous
eccentric physician and chemist of the fifteenth century, Philip Theophrastus
Paracelsus Bombast de Hohenheim; on the picture is added also the title
Aureolus. The cures he wrought were so very surprising in that age, that he was
supposed to have recourse to supernatural aid; and probably, to give greater
authority to his practice, he might insinuate that he joined the arts medical
and magical. He is represented as a very handsome man, bald, in a close black
gown, with both hands on a great sword, on whose hilt is inscribed the word
Azot. This was the name of his familiar spirit, that he kept imprisoned in the
pummel, to consult on emergent occasions. Butler humourously describes this
circumstance: "Bombastus kept a devil's bird
"Shut in the pummel of his sword,
"That taught him all the cunning pranks
"Of past or future mountebanks Hudibras, p. ii. c. 3.
."


A head of Sir Anthony Brown, a favorite of king Henry VIII. with a bushy
beard, bonnet, and order of the garter. He was master of the horse to that
prince, and appointed one of the executors of his will; and of the council to
his young successor Pennant, 322.
.

A half length inscribed Fernandes de Toledo duke of Alva, in rich armor, with
his baton, short black hair and beard: A great officer, and fortunate till his
reign of cruelty. He boasted, that he had caused, during his command in the Low
Countries, eighteen thousand people to perish by the executioner. He visited
England in the train of his congenial master Philip II. Mr Pennant speaking of
this picture says, he imagines this portrait was painted when the duke was
young, for he had seen one sent into England by the late Mr Benjamin Keen, then
in the possession of the bishop of Ely, which represented him with a vast
flowing white beard Pennant, 325.
.

Doctor Stukeley, in his Iter Boreale, in 1725, before mentioned, says, At
Lumley castle is a curious old picture of Chaucer, said to be an original. We
could not find any such portrait, neither is it mentioned by Mr Pennant.

There is a wooden equestrian statue of Liulphus in the house, with his
battle-ax in his hand. Mr Pennant tells the following story: When king James I.
in one of his progresses was entertained in this castle, William James, bishop
of Durham, a relation of the house, in order to give his majesty an idea of the
importance of the family, wearied him with a long detail of their ancestry, to
a period even beyond belief, O mon, says the king, gang na farther, let me
digest the knawledge I ha gained; for, by my saul, I did na ken Adam's name was
Lumley Grant al. Ra. de Nevil, chr. d'nus de Raby del ward'p de Robert fitz de
Marmaduke de Lumley, chiv. de^unct. 22d bishop Bury.

A general pardon to Ra. Lumley, and restitution of lands, 1 bishop Fox.

A pardon of intrusion to Richard Lumley, son of Thomas, who was son of George
lord Lumley and Elizabeth his wife, sister and heir of Roger Thornton. Bishop
Bainbrig.

A recovery against Sir John Lumley, lord Lumley, for the manors of the Isle,
Bradbury, Bolam, Sheraton, Seaton Carew, Ludworth, Lumley, Morton, Hesleden and
Hawthorn, 15 bishop Tunstall.

Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
.

The foot walk to Lumley castle from Chester, leads through fine meadows, and
by the fish lock: They take about six hundred salmon here in a season.

We must not depart from this beautiful place, without remarking, that on
failure of issue in John lord Lumley, Dr Lloyd was competitor with Richard earl
of Scarborough, for the barony, which was determined in 1723, in favor of the
earl.

GREAT LUMLEY has nothing remarkable but the ruins of an old hall. There was a
partition of the Lumley estates in the time of king Henry III. to three
coheiresses, which might occasion the following circumstances: In the first
year of bishop Booth, Margaret, the wife of Christopher Moresby, died seized of
a moiety of the wasted manors of East Hall and West Hall, in Great Lumley,
consisting of 100 acr. of tillage land, 30 acr. of wood, and 30 acr. of moor,
with a moiety of a fishery in the river Were, held of the bishop in capite, by
half a knight's fee, leaving Chapter Moresby her son and heir, an infant; and we
hear no more of that family there from that period, so that it is probable his
moiety reverted to the Lumleys. Thomas Lumley's daughter Elizabeth, married
William Tyllyoll; and in the fourth year of bishop Dudley, by an inquisition
taken on the death of the same William Tyllyoll de Lumley Magna, arm. it
appears he died seized of a moiety of Great Lumley, leaving Phillis, the wife
of William Musgrave, and Margaret Tyllyoll, his daughters by his wife
Elizabeth, coheiresses.

As in our itinerary we pass through the chapelries of Tanfield and Lamesley
distinctly, and apart from the mother church, we will first notice those places
mentioned in the book of rates, as lying within the separate district of
Chester MSS. Tanner, 185, temp. Car. 1. The information of Richard Grame,
giving a strange discovery of a murder, 1631, at Willington mill, committed by
Sharp and Walker, never printed. The fullest account of the fact is to be
found in the preface to Dr Glanville's Saducism. Triumphatus.
: The first of which,

HARRATON,
is situate about a mile below Chester, a seat of John Lambton, esquire on the
banks of the river Were, whose border abounds in romantic scenery Whitehall,
August 22, 1660. His majesty was pleased to confer the honor of knighthood on
lieutenant colonel John Jackson, of Harraton, in the county of Durham, as a
present mark of his royal favor, for his loyal services and sufferings in the
wars. -- Parl. Intel. p. 566.

There was an ancient chapel at Harraton, but no evidence relative to it has
come to our knowledge.

The Birtley family held 2 mess. and 28 acr. of land in the vill of Morhouse,
held of the manor of Herverton, by a pound of pepper, and other lands by a
rose. Inq. p. m. Isabellae, ux. Joh. de Birtle, 3o Skirlaw, and Inq. p. m. Joh.
de Birtley, 25 Hatfield.

Wm de Chestre also possessed lands in les Morehouses, held of Rob. Darcy. Inq.
p. m. 8 bishop Langley.

[For Lumley and Hedworth's pedigrees, -- see the adjoining leaf]


. This was anciently the seat and estate of the D'Arcys, who conveyed to the
Hedworths, and they remained possessors till the year 1688, when John Hedworth,
esquire the last heir male of that family died, and left two daughters Dorothy and
Elizabeth his coheiresses: Dorothy, the elder, married Ralph Lambton, esquire a
younger son of the Lambton family of Lambton hall, and Elizabeth married Sir
William Williamson, of Monkwearmouth, baronet. In 1714, William Lambton, esquire
purchased lady Williamson's moiety. In the same year a family settlement was
made by Ralph Lambton and his wife, with diverse limitations and remainders, by
virtue of which the estate has hitherto passed in the family.

URPETH,
by the Boldon Book, appears to have had dringage tenure, wherein, among other
duties, we find that of feeding dog and horse, and finding fifteen cords, and
two greyhounds for the great chase, carrying a tun of wine, the millstones for
Durham mill, attending the court, going on embassies, and making repairs at
Chester mill Urpath.

Urpath reddit lxs. pro firma per iiij term. and arat and herciat viij acras
apud Cestre, and facit iij porcationes in autumno Porea.

Terra porrecta sive projecta, quod ea seges frumentum p^r^icit. Varr. R. R. 1.
29. Quae est inter duos sulcos, elata terra, dicitur porea. Varro de Lingua
Latina and Re Rustica.

In some expositions it is said to consist of a measure of land, containing 130
feet in length and 30 in breadth.

Drengus pascit canem and equum, and vadit in magna caza cum ij leporarijs and
xv cordis, and quadrigat tonellum unum vini and molam molendini apud Dunolm.
and sequitur placita, and vadit in legationibus, and reparat medictatem stagni
and molendini and domus ejusdem de Cestr. cum hominibus de Cestria. -- Boldon
Buke.

Urpath.

Thomas Gray de Heton tenet dom. de Urpath cum molend'o aquat. and j assart.
ibid. per servic. forin. redd. viij^^. -- reddit pro operibus xx bond.
tenentibus terr. domini de Cestr. ad fest. S. Martini xxs. and carriabit
quolibet anno j ton. vini, and debet sect. ad com. Dunolm.

Will's Talbot tenet xvij acr. terrae sca^carij quond'm Batini del Ridding,
red. jxs. xid.

Isabella de Britley tenet cum capellanis Cantariae de Brigford and Roberto de
Kellowd de Lomley villam de (...) per servic. forin. and redd. per ann. ad
se^ce. Dunelm. xiijs. iiijd.

Will's de Elmden tenet villam de Pellowe, per servic. forin. red. per ann.
xiijs. iiijd.

Rob^rtus de Scoula^d tenet v acr. terrae apud Pelton, per servic. ut supra,
red. ij s. viij d.

Johannes de Karrowe and haeredes Alex de Kibleworth tenet j mes. and xxvi acr.
terrae quond'm Gilberti (...) juxta Shedne^lawe per cart. and servic. forin.
redd. per ann. x s.

Will. de Stele cepit ad opus husbandor. de Urpath xj acr. iij rod. and dimid.
terrae vocat. Wodyngdon quoad. Ricardi de Ulleston and sol^b't reddere per ann.
viij s. iiij d. modo us. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Newfeld. Ricardus de Urpath tenet. mult. par. terrae juxta Pelton 2l. 7s. 6d.
-- Ibid.

Inq. p. m. Tho. Gray, 25 bishop Hatfield, cor. W. de Menevylle, vic.


unamquamque porcationem cum xxiiij hominibus; and quartam porcationem cum xij
hominibus.


. The first person noted in the records as possessing this manor, is Thomas de
Urpeth, who held the same of the lord bishop in capite, except five lands of
husbandry, and an assart there called the Rydding, which Alexander de
Kibblesworth, who married his daughter Idoma, then had; Thomas doing homage and
fealty, and rendering sixty shillings yearly at the bishop's exchequer, plowing
and harrowing eight acres of the lord's land at Chester, having provisions
found by the bishop during such work, preparing three balks of land for seed
corn in Autumn, with twenty-four men each, and one with twelve, the bishop
providing them, for every three men, a loaf of bread, of the assize of eight to
the bushel, a flaggon of beer, and a portion of cheese of half a stone weight;
besides the dringage service as stipulated in the Boldon Book Inq. p. m. an. 20
Hatfield, in plena co. Dun. in cathedra.
. In bishop Hatfield's Survey it appears, that Thomas Gray of Heton, then held
the manor, and he died seized thereof in the twenty-fifth year of that prelate:
It was part of the forfeiture on the attainder of Thomas Gray, and in the
eighteenth year of the episcopacy of bishop Nevill, he granted the same to
Ralph Gray his nephew. In the seventeenth year of bishop Booth, John Park died
seized of this manor, together with the Rydding. By this inquisition it
appears, that the manor was held per forinsecum serve. paying also twenty
shillings rent by the hands of the coroner of Chester ward, carrying a tun of
wine, and doing suit at the county. We find John Hedworth, esquire in the time of
bishop Sever, obtained license to alien his lands in Urpeth Cursito^s Rolls. --
Rudd's MSS.
.

The first owners we find of PELTON were John de Hadham, and Hugh Burdon, which
latter, in the time of bishop Beaumont, held a moiety of the vill of Pelton, of
the before mentioned Hugh, by homage and the sixth part of a knight's fee: It
afterward was the estate of the Redhoughs, and was aliened to Robert
Whelpington, and became at length the estate of Ralph earl of Westmoreland, of
which he died seized in the twentieth year of bishop Langley, and was part of
the estates forfeited on the attainder. William Chancellor had some lands here,
as appears by a pardon for purchasing without license, dated 15 July, 1529.

The manor of BIRTLEY, in the seventeenth year of bishop Hatfield, was held of
the bishop by Will. de Birtley, who also held the manor of Tribley at twenty
shillings rent, and attending the great chase with two greyhounds Birtleia and
Tribleia.

Birtleia and Tribleia reddunt xxs. and vadunt in magna caza cum ii leporariis.
-- Boldon Buke.

Vide Kyblesworth, Hatfield's Survey.

Inq. p. m. W. de Birteley, cor. W. de Claxton, esc.


. The Birtleys held a moiety of the manor of Birtley for several generations.
It became the estate of the Nevills, who held the vill for some time jointly
with Gilbert Elgyne, who married Elizabeth, one of the heiresses of William de
Birtley, and was part of the forfeitures on the attainder: Tribley manor became
the estate of the Lambtons, in the time of bishop Langley Inq. p. m. Will.
Lambton, 28 bishop Langley. Q'q p'de'us W. L. ten. d. quo ob. in d'nico suo ut
de f'o con'm cum Rob'to L. juniore and Rog'o de Both, etc. Man' de Tribley cum
p'tin in co p'd'co ex dono and seoff'o Joh'is Arowesmith, etc. etc. p' c'tam
suam eisd. jur. in evid. ost. cujus dat. est apud Tribley deci'o die Febr. an
reg. Henr. sexti p't conq. Anglie sexto, etc.

PEDIGREE OF BIRTLEY OF BIRTLEY. Penson's Collection, Harleian MSS. No. 1052.
William de Birtley, lord of the manor of Birtley, 30 king Henry VI. Robert
Hall of Birtley Ralph Hall of Beamish and Birtley -- Nevill John Hall of
Birtley Agnes d. of J. Twynburn of Lynsford. Elizabeth m. T. Hutchinson of
Moorside Agnes m. Leo. Elmerard, of Evenwood Robert John of Byrtley 1575
Isabella d. and h. of Wm Ward of Cawside Ralph Christopher John heir to Cawside
and Birtley, 1615. Jane d. of Chr. Maire of Hedworth John eldest son an idiot
Thomas aet. 13, 1615 Michael Isabell Elizabeth Eleanor Robert Dorothy Matthew
Jane Isabella Wm Stubbs was seized of the manor of Cawside, 8th k. Hen. IV.
Alice Isabel, m. Blackburn. -- daugh. and heir. John Ward. John Ward Margaret
d. and h. of Sim. Walkerley of Walkerley, 9 k. Hen. VII. Wm Ward of Cawside
Elizabeth d. of Swinburn of Englingham Isabella d. and h. of Wm Ward of Cawside
Marg. ob. s. p.


genealogy

So far Harleian MSS.
.

EDMUNDSLEY Edmunsley.

Edmunsley reddit xxijd. -- Boldon Buke.

Edmunsley.

Sacrista Dunolm. tenet iiij acr. quond'm Johannis Maidstone vocat. Holleys and
red. vjs. viijd.

Johan's Killinghall tenet manner. de Edmansle contin. c acr. terrae and redd.
xs. -- Not. De praedicto Sacrista pro xx acr. terrae de vasto d'ni apud
Sacristonhough de novo appruat. per cartam d'ni Thomae episcopi dat. vo die
Aug. A. D. 1435, ad terminum xxiiij annorum, reddendo per annum iiijs.

Terrae Scaccarii. D'nus de Nevill tenet xxviij acr. terrae and dim. rod.
quond'm Johannis Edmansle prout contin. in antiqu. rentali in vij parcel. and
redd. per ann. xxijs.

Idem Johannis Edmansle tenet iiij acr. terrae juxta Conkesburn vocat.
Edmundleclogh red. ijs. -- j mes. and xxxvj acr. per cartam quond'm Godrici de
Newson vocat. Whitlay xijd. parcel. de vasto appruat. red. per ann. iijs. --
Hatfield's Survey.


gave name to a resident family, and in the sixteenth year of bishop Hatfield,
William de Edmansley died seized of the vill, which he held in capite by
homage, fealty, and ten shillings rent at the bishop's exchequer: By the same
bishop's survey, it appears that John Killinghall held the manor. In the
thirty-fifth year of the same prelate, we find Rob. de Umframvill, esquire died
seized of this manor, rendering d^ar. orar. Ora was a Saxon coin, about the
value of sixpence, reserved in payment in many old deeds.

Inq p. m. 15 bishop Langley, cor. R. de Eure, esc. Man. de Edmansley, cu. p't.
q'd ten. de d^o ep. in soc. redd'o si. and succ. suis ij oras p' an. ut patet
p' cartam d'ni Hugon. nup' epi Dun. ostens. p' o'mi al. s'o.


for the same; also forty acres of land there, called the Marle-park, of
nineteen shillings and three pence rent. In the first year of bishop Skirlaw,
on an inquisition taken on the death of John de Nevill, it was returned that he
died seized of this manor, and Ralph earl of Westmoreland aliened the same to
John Hoton, some time before the sixth year of bishop Langley, the manor being
then estimated at one hundred shillings yearly value.

WALRIDGE was the possession of the Lumleys in distant antiquity. We find a
pardon granted for aliening this place without license, together with diverse
other estates, by Sir John Lumley, lord Lumley, and Catharine his wife, by fine
to George Smith and Thomas Kimraston, dated the 1st of August, 1607 Rudd's MSS.

Walrig.

Johannes Melote and Will's Lawson tenent ibid. iij acr. terrae and dimid.
quond'm Ric. Walrig. ijs. jd. -- Will's Osburne tenet vij acr. and dim. terrae
and x pertic. quond'm Ricardi Osburne red. us. ijd.

Decanus Cestr. tenet j acr. and dimid rod. terrae quond'm Rogeri Gilling and
red. xijd.

Tenentes villae Cestr. tenent tertiam part. j rod. and redd. per ann. iiijd.
-- tenent inter se dimid. acr. terrae quond'm Roberti Clerici and redd. vjd. --
Hatfield's Survey.


.

PLAWSWORTH.
Various proprietors held lands in Plawsworth from distant time: In the
eleventh year of bishop Bury, Richard de Kelawe was one, and he also had
twenty-pence rent out of the land of Alan de Plawsworth: The possessions of
this family came to the Forcers of Harberhouse, by marriage of Johan, the
heiress general of the Kelawes, of which John had livery in the first year of
bishop Sever Plausword.

Plausword quam Simon Vitulus tenet xxs. and quadrigat vinum cum viij bobus,
and vadit in magna caza cum leporarijs. -- Boldon Buke.

Liberi tenentes. Thomas de Boynton tenet de jure uxoris suae cum aliis villam
de Plawsworth per cartam and forin. servic. and redd. per ann. ad quatuor
terminos usuales xxs. -- Et quadrig. vinum cum viij bobus, and vadunt in magn.
chas. cum ij leporariis.

Terrae Scaccarii. Johannes Aleynson and ix alij tenentes tenent vj mes. j tossed
and diverse. parcel. acrar. terrae, and xj parcel terrae vast. and reddit. non
solut. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Inq. p. m R. de Kelawe, 11 bishop Bury, cor. Will. de Mordon, esc. --
Cursitors Rolls, Rudd's MSS.


. In the fifth year of bishop Hatfield, William the son of Alan before named,
and John his brother, a bastard, died seized of lands here without heirs,
valued at one mark above reprisals Inq. p. m. apud Dun. cor. Will. de Mordon,
vic.
. In the eighth year of the same prelate, John de Wylughby, chiv. died seized
of lands here held by fealty, and two shillings and four-pence rent. In the
survey it is set forth, that Thomas de Boynton, in right of his wife and
others, held the vill of Plawsworth, rendering twenty shillings rent, which, by
the Boldon Book it appears, Simon Vitulus paid for the same. One John de Elvet
held lands here in the second year of bishop Fordham Inq. p. m. 2 bishop
Fordham, cor. R. de Laton, mil. esc.
, rendering five shillings and four-pence rent, and four hens at the office of
the master of the forests at the feast of St Martin. The families of Hotons and
Claxtons had property here. By an inquisition taken on the death of Margaret,
the wife of the abovenamed Thomas Boynton, in the third year of bishop
Langley, it appears that she had an estate in Plawsworth by the feoffment of
John, son of Robert Conyers of Ornysby, knight, for her life, with certain
limitations in favor of Robert Conyers and Alice his wife, who were then dead,
with remainder to William the son of Jordan de Dalden, esquire and his heirs male,
with remainder to Robert his brother, and remainder to John the son of Edmund
Killingwyck, with various other remainders; and by virtue of the remainders
over, the estate came to Johan the wife of Tho. de Brounsield, knight, who was
the daughter and heiress of the before-named Robert Conyers. On the death of
Margaret, it was found that William Bows, esquire was her heir: He died seized of
Plawsworth in the first year of bishop Booth Inq. p. m. W. Bows, mil. 1 bishop
Booth, cor. G. Midilton, arm. esc.
; and in various succeeding inquisitions it appears as part of the possessions
of that family.

LAMBTON was the family seat of the Lambtons before the conquest: It stands on
the southern banks of the Were, opposite to Harraton, in a sine cultivated
country: The house was taken down by the late William Lambton, esquire in order to
erect one on a very elegant plan, but he died before any considerable part was
proceeded in There is an expressive portrait of him here, by Sir Josh.
Reynolds; the hands have totally lost their color.
. As there has been no interruption in the possession for so many ages, little
historical matter rises on the subject Bury, 37o Pont.

Pardon p' alienacon. p' Willielmum de Lambton de manerio de Lambton and
licentia concedendi d'c'm manerium ad usum d'ci Will'i and Aliciae ux. ejus p'
vita. Rem. Rob'to filio suo in feodo talliat. -- R. Will'o al. filio in feodo
talliat. -- R. Thomae al. filio in feodo talliat. -- R. Joh'i al. filio in
feodo talliat. -- R. Rad'o al. filio in feodo talliat. -- R. haeredib's d'ci
Will'i p'ris. -- Cursitors Rol's. -- Rudd's MSS.

Thomas Lambton son and heir of William Lambton, livery 9 bishop Fox.

John Lambton son and heir of Thomas Lambton, livery 4 cardinal Wolsey.

William Lambton brother and heir of Sir Marmaduke, livery 8 bishop Tunstall.

Ralph Lambton son and heir of Robert, livery 7 bishop Barnes.

Margaret wife of William Lambton, daughter and heiress of John Barnes, livery
1 bishop James. -- Ibid.

Sciant p'sentes and futuri q'd ego Willielm. fill. Rob'ti de Lambton, d'nus
ejusd. ville remisi relaxavi and omnino de me et hered. meis in perpetuum
quietum clamavi Thome f. Gilb'ti de Lambeton totum jus and clameum q'd habui
habeo vel aliquo modo habere pot'o in sanguine ejusd. Tho. causa nativitat. aut
ejus sequelis legitime procreatis ita q'd nee ego predictus Will. nec hered.
mei nec aliquis al. no'ie n'ro aliquid jus vel clameum in predicto Tho. aut in
liberis suis legitime procreatis bonis aut catallis exigere vel vendicare
quoq'o modo pot'imus in futuris sed ab omni acc'oe juris simul exclusi imperp'm
per presents sigillo meo sigillatas.

Test. etc. Datum apud Lambton die dominica in vigil. S. Jacobi ap'li Ao D'ni
1373.

Rot. B. Hatfield, sch. 9. No 5. in dorso.
. At the farm house leading to Lambton, are the remains of a chapel, the stone
work of the eastern window yet perfect; and in the front of the house, in a
circle, is the figure of a man to the waist in relief, with elevated hands, --
the inscription defaced.

The several places named in the settlement of the prebends, not before spoken
of, are as follow:

POKERLEY was the estate of the Monbouchers; and on the death of Bertram, in
the first year of bishop Skirlaw, was described by the name of the lordship
Pokerly, with diverse lands and tenements there, with their free tenants held of
the heirs of the lord of Urpeth, rendering a clove-gilly-flower at the feast of
St Cuthbert, in September Inq. p. m. Bertram Monboucher, 1 bishop Skirlaw, cor.
W. de Bows, esc.

Pokerleia.

Pokerleia reddit ij s. -- Boldon Buke.

Vide Kyblesworth, Hatfield's Survey, Bertram, Monboucher, Terrae scaccarij.


.

PELAWE gave name to a resident family, and in the time of bishop Bury, one
John de Birteley held lands there of Richard de Pelawe in capite, by
twelve-pence rent and suit of court, and a quarter of beans yearly to the
rector of Boldon for the time being Unum quart'ium fabarum.
. The above named Richard held the vill of Pelawe in right of Agnes his wife,
in capite, by fealty, rendering three shillings and four-pence rent. They had
issue one daughter, Juliana. The Birtleys fell into female issue, and two
coheiresses, one of whom married Kellawe, and the other Egleyne. By bishop
Hatfield's Survey Vide Urpeth.
, it appears Pelawe was then the estate of William de Elmeden, who died seized
thereof in fee-tail, in the twelfth year of bishop Skirlaw, by virtue of a deed
of feoffment. He held by the tenth part of a knight's fee, rendering thirteen
shillings and four-pence at the bishop's exchequer yearly Joh'es fill. Rob. de
Pelawe ven. in canc. Dun 7o d. Apr. and cognovit scriptum subsequens esse
factum saum, etc. -- Rot. B. Hatfield, sch. 8. No 7. in dorso.

Omnibus, etc. Joh'es fill. Rob'ti de Pelawe s. in d'no. Noveritis me
concessisse, etc. Will'o de Elmedon seniori and Johanne u^'i ejus and Tho. de
Elmedon he'dib's and assign. suis totum jus and clameum* etc. in manerio de
Pelawe cum serviciis liberor. tenentium and advocac'oe capelle S'ci Stephani
infra p'dem manerium, etc. Et ego and he'des mei, etc. warrantizabimus, etc.
Dat. in canc. viid. Apr. 1381.

P'd^'m man'ium de Pelawe tenetur de d'no E. in capite p' servic. militare and
non in so^. ut apparet p' pl'itum sup' unum scire ^ac. sc. sup' petic'oe Hen.
de Pelawe quondam d'ni de Pelawe monstrat. Lodovico dudum Dun. epo. a'o p. sui
primo sup' collac'oe hospitalis de Pelawe, etc. Et id. Will's dicebat tam p'
d'no epo. quam se ipso q'd advoca'co ejusd. hospitalis ad p'd'm d'n'm ep'um
pertinet, etc. -- Rot. Rowthall.

Rob'tus dei gra etc. Noverit, etc. q'd nos tradidimus, etc. Will'o fill. and
h'di Will'i Elmedon mil. manerium n'rum de Pelawe cum suis pertin. una cum
advoc. capelle sive hosp. S'cti Stephani ibid. q'd quidem man'ium nup' h'uimus
inter alia ex dono and feoff'o Will'i Bows, etc. he'nd. and tened. man'ium and
advocaco'em p'd'cam cum suis p'tin. p'fato Will'o sil. Will'i Elmeden and
he'dib's de corp'e suo, de nob. and suc. n'ri^ epis. Dun. p' s'vic vice'siae
p'tis feodi unius milit. etc. -- Rot. M. Nevill, 6. p' breve de pr. sigillo.


.

There was an hospital and chapel here, dedicated to St Stephen, of which we
have little proof, save the records before noted, no remains now appearing. The
name of Elmeden expired in female issue; Elizabeth, the daughter and heiress of
William Elmeden, esquire married William Bulmer, and carried into that family the
large possessions of her ancestors Cursitors Rolls, temp. bishop Rowthall. --
Rudd's MSS.
; part of which Sir Bertram Bulmer and Dionisia his wife, by virtue of a
license, dated the 3d of August, in the eleventh year of bishop Matthew,
conveyed to Sir William Gascoin and Sir Nich. Tempest Ibid. temp. bishop
Mathews.

Chapel or hospital of St Stephen. -- Masters.
Will. de Littel pressed, col. by R. de Stichehill, 1260. Rich. de Fair pressed,
col. by R. de Insula, 1274. Hugh de Drisseld, col. by Rich. de Kellawe, 1311.
Will. Marckam, cap. col. by L. de Beaumont, 1st of his pont. Will. Lamb, cap.
oc. Oct. 4, 1450.
Randal's MSS.
.

PYKTREE, by bishop Hatfield's Survey, is set forth as the possession of Robert
de Kellowe de Lomley Vide Urpeth.
: The family of Birtley had possessions there in the same prelate's time, which
they continued to hold for several succeeding generations. William Peyghan had
lands here of the grant of Ralph de Lumley, for life, reverting to the right
heirs of the Lumley family: He died in bishop Langley's time. A third part of
the vill of Pyktree, in the last named prelate's pontificate, with various
parcels of land there, were possessed by the Lambtons, and descended with the
rest of their extensive estates.

Of STEVESLEY there is nothing memorable.

The manor of NETTLEWORTH PEDIGREE OF THE FAMILY OF HAGTHORPS OF NETTLEWORTH.
John Hagthorpe de Nettleworth, younger son of Hagthorpe of Holdernesse John
William Ann d. of Claxton of Old Park John Elizabeth d. of John Lewen of
Newcastle Robert Margaret d. of Menvill of Sledwish Jeronimus ob. s. p. John
Isabell d. of John Vavasour of Weston Eliz. wife of Rob. Smith Grace Ann Thomas
Robert a priest Rowland George Philip Dorothy Margery Margaret Rowland, ob. s.
p.


genealogy Penson's Collections, Harl. MSS. 1052.


belonged to the family of Gategangs, who in the time of bishop Hatfield, held
the same by homage, fealty, and payment of twenty-six shillings and eight-pence
rent at the bishop's exchequer; it afterward, in the time of bishop Langley,
became the estate of John de Hagthorpe, who settled it on Cath. de Wessington
and John her son, and the heirs of his body.

WHITEHILL manor was possessed by persons who took the local name; and in
bishop Hatfield's Survey, is noted to be the property of John Mylote, formerly
of Roger of the Hall A. D. 1343. De fidelitate capta Joh'is Othehall. Rot.
Bury, sch. xix.

R. etc. quod Rogerus Othehall tenuit, etc. un. mes. q'd vocatur Whytehall
sexaginta and septem acr. t're, etc. q'dq. Joh'es Othehall fill. p'd^i Rogeri
est her. ejus, etc. cepimus sidelitat. ipsius Joh'is de mes. etc. and vob.
mandamus q'd eid. Joh. de mes. etc. que occ'oe m'tis p'd'ci Rog'i p'ris sui
cepistis in manum n'ram, plenam s. he're fac. etc. etc. -- Randal's MSS.

PEDIGREE OF THE FAMILY OF MILLOTS OF WHITEHILL.
Robert Millot Raphe Elianor eldest d. of Sir John Hedworth of Harverton,
knight. Robert Jane d. and coheiress of John Pickering of Westmerland, esquire
Raphe Isabell d. and heiress of Rob. Evers, esquire Robert Grace d. of John
Wycliffe, esquire Eliz. m. Henry Wycliffe of Wycliffe. Ann m. T. Prunchern Thomas
living 1615, did hom. 26 Oct. 1581. Jane d. of James Rookby of Morton Raphe Ann
d. of Thomas Tempest, esquire of Stella Robert Dorothea d. of Wm Wray of Beamish,
esquire Eliz. 6 years old, 1615 Mary Margaret Jane Frances m. Tho. Fenwick Robert
John Grace m. Hen. Strangwic Dorothea m. W. Stockdale Jane Johanna m. Rob.
Wycliffe Grace ob. infans Katherine Raphe


genealogy

By Mr Ra. Hodgson's book of notes, the pedigree of Millots is carried further
back, and begins with Thomas, who had issue John, who married the daughter of
Robert Chauncellor, esquire who had issue Robert, who married the daughter of Sir
Gilb. Hansard, knight, of Walworth, who had issue Ralph, who married Mary the
daughter of John Seeton, esquire and they had issue Robert, Jane, and Margaret;
Jane married Thomas Pain, merchant, and Margaret John Trewsdale, gent. Robert
married the daughter of John Ch^^er, lord of Houghton-le-Spring, and is the
Robert first above mentioned.


. There was an uninterrupted possession in the Millots, till their heiress
about forty years ago married: In the old inquisition it is thus described, In
q'o quid. m'io sunt aula una, una cam'a, una coquina, unum orreum, unum
stabulum, una ustarin, lxvij acr. t're, and tres clausur. contin. xliiij acr.
t're arab. and vj acr. p'ati, etc.

The manor of TWISILS was the estate of the Birtleys at the time of taking
bishop Hatfield's Survey, and afterward came to the possession of the Lumleys
Twysill.

Thomas de Birtley tenet. manner. de Twyfill and viij acr. terrae and j rod, in
iij parcel. redd. iij s. ij d.

Hatfield's Survey.
.

We find nothing memorable of OUSTON alias ULSTAN and HARDEN.

The chapel of LAMESLEY has been rebuilt of late years: It was one of the
chapels of ease to Chester, till bishop Bek made this and Tanfield prebendal,
in which state they continued till the dissolution Bap. Mar. Bur. State of
population in Lamesley, from 1762 to 1781 inclusive 1541 344 1147 Burials in
the last year 43. -- Computed number of inhabitants 1290. Tanfield, from 1762
to 1781 1822 403 1336

Burials in the last year 77. -- Computed number of inhabitants 2310.

Lamesley chapelry. -- Col. Chester prop. -- Hen. lord Ravensworth patron. --
In the deanery of Chester, not in charge or certified

CURATES.
Thomas Lang, 1409 Joh. James, 1464 Sir Will. Johnson, 1565 George Eglesfield,
1567 Thomas Martin, 1572 Edw. Erington, 1587 John Blaxton, 1590 Tho. Hope,
1606. Ambrose Lowther, 1611 Jerem. Williams, 1619 John Buckley, A. M. 1636 --
Wilson, ejected 1660 Jac. Harrop, 1677 John Aird, 1700 John Balguy, A. M. 1711
Rob. Wison, cl. 1729, p. resig. Balguy John Wibbersley, A. M. 1751, p. m.
Wilson Caleb Dixon, 1782, p. m. Wibbersley
Randal's MSS. Lamesley chapelry. -- Book of rates 15l. 17s. 2d -- Value of
lands 2140l. 13s. 4d.

The bishop of Durham's collieries at Blackburn demised to Sir Ja. Clavering
and Tho. Liddell, esquire and their heirs, Oct. 1691, for three lives, rent 40l. --
Grey's MSS.

Land tax at 4s. County rates at 6s. 8d. Lamesley 80 0 0 2 12 6 Revensworth 17
9 7 0 16 7 Kibblesworth 31 9 4 1 10 0 Hedley 7 0 0 0 6 4 Mann's MSS.


. In this chapelry are Ravensworth town and Ravensworth castle.

THE PEDIGREE OF LIDDEL OF RAVENSWORTH, IN THE COUNTY OF DURHAM. (VOL. II. PAGE
417.) The account of this family is very imperfect, and does not go back much
above 200 years, though mention is made, that the family were anciently Lords
of Liddel Castle, and Barony of Buft. -- They have been proprietors of
considerable coal-works from the time of their settling in this county.
The first ancestor we find mentioned, is Thomas de Liddel, who married
Margaret, d. John de Layburne. Thomas Liddel, Barbara. d. and coh. of Rich.
Strangwayes. Francis, Anne, d. Wm. de Seagrave. Bartram, ob. s. p. Barbara, d.
Th. Cramlington. Thomas Liddel, purchased the manors of Ravensworth, Lamesley,
and Righton, of Sir Wm. Gascoigne, in 1607, d. in 1619. Margaret, d. John
Watson, Esquire Tho. Liddel. Esquire defended the town of Newc. against the Scots, and
was created a bart. 2d Nov. 1642. Paid 4000l. to the sequestrators for his
estates. Isabel, d. Henry Anderson, Esquire (by a D. and C. of.... Morland.) Sir
Tho. Liddel, Knt. ob. vita patris, 1627. Bridget, d. Ed. Woodward, of Lee, near
Windsor. Sir Thomas Liddel, 2d bart. died in 1697. Anne, d. of Sir Hen. Vane of
Raby castle, in co. Durham. Sir Hen. Liddel, 3d bart, died 1st Sept. 1723.
Catharine, d. and h. of Sir John Bright, of Badsworth, in co. York, Bart.
Thomas Liddel, m. at Lanchester, 12th Oct. 1707. Ob. vita patris, 1715. Jane.
d. Jas. Clavering, of Greencroft. Esquire died 7th Sept. 1774, aet. 95. Sir Henry
Liddle, 4th baronet, member for Morpeth, mar. in April, 1735. -- Created Baron
Ravensworth, in co. Durham 29th June, 1747. -- Died 30th Jan. 1784, when the
barony became extinct, but the baronetage descended to his nephew. Anne, only
d. of Sir Peter Delme, Knt. Alderman and Lord Mayor of London. Anne, only
child, mar. 29th Jan. 1756, to the Duke of Grafton, and after mar. in 1769, to
the Earl of Upper Ossory. James, Thom. both d. young. Thomas Liddel, Esquire seated
at Newton hall, near Durh. was a posthumous son. -- Mar. Sept. 1745, died 6th
March, 1772. Margaret (posthumous) d. of Sir Wm. Bows. Knt. and sist. to Geo.
Bows, Esquire late of Gibside. A son who died an infant. Henry-George Liddel, 5th
bart. born 25th Nov. 1749. -- Married April 1773........ d. of...... Steel,
Esquire Henry, 6th baronet. Several younger children. Catharine died aet. 12. John
Liddel, adopted heir to his grandfath. Sir Joh. Bright, assumed that name, and
possessed Badsworth. -- Died 6th Oct. 1737. Cordelia, d. of... Clutterbuck of
Hides, in co. Essex. Thomas Liddel, Margaret Norton, neice and heiress to John
Lowther of Ackworth, co. York. Mary, mar. to Charles, 2d Marquis of Rockingham.
Stephen, John and Henry, all died s. p. Anne, Catha. Cordelia, mar Dr.
Wintringham. Henry died without iss. Anne, d. John Clavering of Chopwell, in
co. Durham. George was member for Berwick, and unmar. died unm. 9th Oct. 174^
Michael died unmar. Eliz. mar. Rob. Ellison, of Hebburn in co. Durh. Esquire Thomas
died unm. Edward died young. Robert, ob. 1718. Priscilla, d. Wm. Kiffin of
Land. merchant ob. 1669. Thomas, Mary, d. of..... Nelthorpe. Henry, ob. Aug.
1770. A daughter, mar. John Middleton, of Chirk Castle, in c. Denbeigh, Esquire
George died unm. Frances mar. Tho. Vane, of Raby cast. Esquire and 2dly, to Sir
John Bright, Bart. Eliz. m. Christ. Stockdale, of Bilton Park, in co. York.
Isabel died unmar. Fran. knighted vita patris. Eliz. d. Sir Geo. Tongue of
Denton. Francis Liddel. Will. Robt. Geo............. Henry died unmarried.
Eliz. mar. Geo. Baker, Esquire C. at Law, and afterward knighted. Mary mar. Nich.
Cole, Esquire of Brancepeth, after created a baronet. Isabel mar...... Anderson.
Elizabeth, mar. Wm. Sherwood, of Middlesex. Alice mar. Gawen Salkeld Eleanor
mar. Tim. Draper, of Newc. merchant. Jane, d. Hen. Mitford, Esquire Henry,
Elizabeth, d. Wm. Jenison Esquire Roger, Grace, d. Jas. Clavering, Esquire Barbara,
mar. Sam. Sanderson of Hedleyhope Esquire Jane, married Robt. Anderson. Robert,
both died s. p. Percival, Alice, mar. Oswald Carr, Esquire Barbara died an infant.
George Liddel, Eleanor, d. John Burn. George Liddel, ob. s. p....... d. Robt.
Barker, Esquire ARMS: -- Argent, frettee, Gules, on a Chief of the Second, three
leopards faces, Or. CREST: -- On a wreath, a Lion rampant, Sable, crowned, Or.
THE PEDIGREES OF THE FAMILIES OF CONIERS. (VOL. III. PAGE 148.) Sir Christ.
Conyers, of Sockburn, Knt. Marian, d. Sir Will. Eure, Knt. Sir Will. Knt. Anne,
d of Sir Ralph Bigod, of Settrington, Knt. Sir Christopher, Anne, d. of....
Markenfield. Sir Thomas. Sir George. Sir John. Sir John of Sockborn, Knt.
living, 1615. George, son and h. Aet. 6, 1615. Cuthbert, 2d fill. Mary, d. of
Tho. Laton, of Saxhoc. John..... of Layton, Jane, d. of John Oglethorpe, and
wid. of...... Danby. Ralph, of Layton, Mary, d. of Sim. Mawe of ^^andesham,
Stafford. Cuthbert, son and h. Aet. 4, 1615. Mary. Anne. Johannes Conyers, mil.
Margaretta, fill. et una her. Duo Darcy. Johannes dus. Conyers, de Horneby.
Alicia, fill. et her. Will Nevill, dus. Falconbridge, com Cantij. Richardus,
Eliza, fill. et her. Rob. Claxton, mil. de Horden. Ricardus de Horden.
Christopherus de Horden, Eliza, fill. Johis Jackson, de Bedale. Ricardus de
Horden Eliza, fill. Rogeri Lumley. Christophorus* vixit, 1575 Eliza, fill. Cuth.
Convers de Layto^ ob s. p. Anna, fill. Johis Hedworth de Harverton. Johannes de
Horden, Francisca, fill. Thomae Garnes, de Ebor. Anna. Isabella, ux. Ca. Hall.
Durh. FLOWER'S VISIT. etc. Maria. Georgius. CONIERS........ Coniers. Sir John
of Sockburn. Robert. John of Horneby, Eliz. d. and coh. of Billeston. Sir John
of Horneby, Knt. of whom is descended Lord Conyers. Margery, m. Robt. Wycliffe.
Elizabeth, m. William Burgh. Catharine, m. Conan Ask. -- 2d,..... Pudsey.
Joan, m. Fitz Randolphe. Margaret m. Roger Lascells. 2d,.... Pickering. Robert,
of Hutton. Sir Rich. of Cowton. Alice, d. of... Wycliffe. Margaret, d. and coh.
m. Ra. Danby. Eleanor, d. and coh. m. Rob. Lascells of Sowerby. Margery, d. and
coh. m Sir Ralph Bows. Sir Rog. Ld. of Winyard and Redmarshall, 4th pr. of
Seaton, c. Sibill, d. of Will. Langton, 1436. William, Isabel, d. of Ric.
Clervaux, of Crofte. Robert Claxton, of Haliwell, son of Will, son of Tho. son
of Lionel of Claxton, son of Sir Roger, Sibil, ob. 1500. LISLE. Henry Lisle, of
the Isle. Sir John, Catharine, neice and heir of Sir Henry. Aline Langton,
burgess of Berw. and Newcastle. Henry, Lord of Winyard and Redmarshall.
Margery, d. of Rog. Fulthorpe. Simon, Alice, coh. to John, her neph -- 2dly, to
Thomas Elmedon, of Winyard. William of Winyard,...... d. of Will. Elmedon.
Sibill, d. of Will. Langton, 1436. John, 1st son ob. s. p. Sir Thomas, Knt. 2d
son. John......... 2d d......... Joan, Rich. Haton. John. Isabel, Will. Porter.
4 dau. John. Alane. John, ob. s. p. 1442. Sir Henry, Lord of Winyard and
Redmarshall, ann. 1303. ob. s. p. CARROWE. Peter Carrowe, Lord of Seaton, car.
tem. Ric. I. Walter, living 1200, 2d King John. John. Thomas. Walter. John, son
and heir.


(For the Notes see the other Side.)

The Genealogical Table is illustrated, and great Additions made thereto, by
the following Historical Notes, taken from Mr. GYLL'S MSS. who, in the first
part of the Collection, remarks, that he took the same and others, from a
Manuscript written in the Reign of King Charles I.

In an old manuscript which I have seen of the descent of Connyers of
Sockbourn, there is written as follow: Sir John Connyers, Knt. slew the
monstrous vermin, and poisonous vermin, or wyverne, or ask or worm, which
overthrew and devoured many and sundry people in feight, for that the sent of
the poison thereof was so strong, that no person might abide it. And by the
providence of Almighty God, this John Connyers, Knt. overthrew the said
monster, and slew it. But before he made this enterprise, having but one son,
he went to the church at Sockburn in complete armor, and offered up that, his
only son, to the Holy Ghost: the place where this great serpent lay, was called
Graystane. And as it is written in the same manuscript, this John lies buried
in Sockbourn, in complete armor, before the conquest.

Roger Connyers or Cognyers, was Lord of Sockbourn about the time of the Norman
conquest, which was An. Dom. 1060. -- He was, by William the Conqueror, made
constable of Durham Castle, and keeper of all the arms of the soldiers within
that castle; which was after past to him, the said Roger, by deed to him and
his heirs male for ever, and under the great seal of William de Sancto
Carelipho, the then Bishop of Durham. -- This Roger had issue Roger, his son
and heir, and others.

Roger Connyers or Cognyers, Lord of Sockbourn, son and heir of Roger the
first, was also, after his father, constable of Durham castle, and of all the
a^ms therein; and he had issue Roger, his son and heir, and others.

Roger Connyers, the third of that name, son and heir of Roger the second, and
grandchild to Roger the first, constable of Durham, and lord of Sockbourn, was
also himself constable of Durham: this Roger he married the daughter of......
Aiskby, Esquire and had issue Robert and others. -- Et Henricus 2d rex Angliae
dedit vel confirmarit Rogero de Connyers sive de Cognyers constabulatum de
Dunelme.

Robert Connyers, Lord of Sockbourn, son and heir of Roger the third, of the
christian name; he married the daughter of Robert Welbury, of Castle Eden, and
had Robert and others.

Robert Connyers, son and heir of Roger, and grandchild of Roger, the third of
the name, was Lord of Sockbourn, and married the daughter of Layton, Esquire and by
her had Roger, Galfred, John, and others. -- This Galfred, second son of
Robert, afterward had the estate, and was Lord of Sockbourn, either by gift or
purchase.

Roger Connyers, son and heir of Robert, the second of the name and family, was
Lord of Sockbourn, and married the daughter of Sir Gilbert Hansard, Knt. and
had issue Robert, the 3d of the christian name and family; he married the
daughter...... and died without issue -- Robertus filius et here is Rogeri qui
hereditatem suam alienavit Galfrido consanguineo suo et obijt fine prole.

Robert Connyers of Sockbourn, was lord thereof; he was son and heir of Roger,
son of Robert, the second of that christian name and family; he mar....... the
daughter of...... Umfravill, Esquire and died without any issue. -- Robertus filius
et here is Rogeri: qui hereditatem suam alienavit Galfrido consanguineo suo et
obiit sine prole.

Galfred Connyers, second son of Robert Connyers, the second of that christian
name, was lord and the owner of Sockbourn, after the death of Robert Connyers,
the son and heir of Roger, who died without issue; and the descent of Connyers,
in an old manuscript, sets down, that this Galfred bought the lordship of
Sockbourn of his cousin Robert, the son of Roger, who died without issue, and
so possessed the lordship of Sockbourn, and was lord and owner thereof; and so
it seems, as by an ancient deed, that Connyers of Sockbourn, was not the chief
man of the family. -- This Galfred married the daughter of Lilbourn, Esquire and
had issue John, Thomas, and James.

John Connyers, son and heir of Galfred, was, after his father, Lord of
Sockbourn: he married...... the daughter of Sir Walter Manning, Knt. and had
issue John, Galfred, and Humphrey; John and Galfred, the two eldest brothers,
both died without issue, so as Humphrey, the youngest son of John, after the
death of the two elder brothers, John and Galfred, was lord and owner of
Sockbourn, and that whole estate; and in an old descent of the family which I
have, he is set down primus miles, istis familiae.

Sir Umsrey Connyers, of Sockbourn, Knt. third son of John, the son of Galfred
Connyers, Lord and owner of Sockbourn, after the death of his two elder
brothers, John and Galfred, who, both of them died without issue, leaving this
Sir Humphrey Connyers, Knt. their brother, heir to them both, and was Lord of
Sockbourn, and had the whole estate. -- This Humphrey, he married the daughter
of Sir John Basset, Knt. and had issue Sir John Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt.

Sir John Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. son and heir of Sir Humphrey Connyers,
Knt. of Sockbourn; he married the daughter of Sir John Fitz J^^ffry. Knt. and
had issue R^ Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt his son and heir, who had issue three
daughters, his heirs; Jane married to Sir Rob. Bows, of Dawden and Streatlam,
Knt. Elizabeth married to John Cowell, jun. Knt. and Petriwell married to......
Heron, Esquire -- This John, perceiving his elder son, Robert, to have no issue
male, gave his lordship of Sockbourn to his younger son, Roger, to have the
land of Sockbourn to continue in the family and name of...... Connyers.

Sir Robert Connyers, Knt. son and heir of John Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. he
married the daughter and heir of Sir John Surtees, Knt. and by her had issue
three daughters, his heiresses. -- Sir Robert Bows, Knt. married one of the
heirs general of Sir Robert Connyers, who was made knight at the battle of
Poictiers, anno 1356.

Roger Connyers, second son of Sir John Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. and brother
and next heir male of Sir Robert Connyers, that died without issue male, was,
after the death of Sir Robert, his elder brother, who died before his father,
Lord of Sockbourn. -- This Roger, the son of John, and brother to Sir Robert,
he married the daughter of Sir John Fayes, Knt. of...... and had issue Galfred
that died without issue; and Sir John Connyers, Knt. that married the daughter,
and one of the coheirs of Sir William Aiton, Knt. Lord Vescy.

Sir John Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. second son of Roger; and, after the death
of his eldest brother, who died without issue, heir to his father also: he
married Elizabeth, the daughter and coheir of Sir William Aiton, Knt. the widow
of William Place, Esquire and by her he had issue Robert, afterward Sir Robert
Connyers, of Sockbourn, Knt.

Sir Robert Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. son and heir of John and Elizabeth
Aiton, his wife, one of the coheirs of Sir William Aiton, Knt. and Lord Vescy's
heir general: also this Robert he married Isabella, one of the heirs of William
Peart, Esquire (whose other heir) married to Conanus Ask, of Ask, Esquire by her he
had issue Crister Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. his son and heir; Robert
Connyers, second son; Humphrey Connyers, third son; John Connyers, of Horneby,
called Justice John, a lawyer, was 4th son, and others. -- William Peart, Esquire
had issue three daughters, his heirs; Elizabeth, who was married to Conanus
Ask, of Ask, Esquire Isabella married to Sir Robert Connyers, of Sockbourn; and
Margaret who was mar. to --

-- Crister Connyers of Sockbourn, son and heir of Sir Rob. Connyers of
Sockbourn, Knt. and of his wife Isabella, one of the heirs of Will. Peart, Esquire
he mar. Marjory, the daughter of Sir William Eure, Knt. and had issue William,
his son and heir, and others, both sons and daughters.

William Connyers of Sockbourn, Esquire son and heir of Crister; he married the
daughter of Sir Ralph Biggot, of Settrington, Knt. and by her had issue
Crister, Ralph, George, Robert, Roger, Richard, Cuthbert, and daughters.

Sir Crister Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. son and heir of William; he married
the daughter of...... Markenfield, of Markenfield, Esquire and by her had issue
Thomas 1st, Ralph 2d, Richard 3d, Robert 4th, George 5th, and Cuthbert 6th;
Anne, Marian, Margaret, and Agnes.

Sir Thomas Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. son and heir of Crister; he married
Margaret, the daughter of Sir Edward Radcliffe of Dilston, Knt. and by her had
issue George.

Sir George Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. son and heir of Thomas; he married to
his first wife,...... the daughter of...... Eure, Knt. by whom he had no issue;
and then he married to his second wife, Anne, the daughter of Sir John Dawney
of Seysey, Knt. and by her had issue John.

Sir John Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. son and heir of George; he married Anne,
the daughter of Sir George Bows of Streatlam, the Knight Marshall, and by her
had issue George 1st, John 2d, William 3d, Ralph 4th, Robert 5th, and six
daughs. Eleanor mar. to John Stindder; Jane mar. to James Lawson of Sum, and
had issue; Elizabeth married to James Riddel of Gateside, Knt. and had issue
Sir William Riddel, Knt. his son and heir, Thomas; Anne married to......
Midford of Hoolam, obiit sine prole; Katherine to Sir William Kennet, Knt. and
Mary married to Mr. Foster.

Sir George Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt. son and heir of John; he married
Katherine, daughter of Anthony Bulmer of Emdon, Esquire and had issue George, who
died an infant, William and John who died also young.

William Connyers of Sockbourn, Esquire son and heir of Sir George Connyers of
Sockbourn, Knt. he married the daughter of George Symonds, and had issue Anne,
his daughter and sole heir; married to Francis. Lord Talbot, afterward Earl of
Shrewsbury.

Crister Connyers of Horneby, son and heir of John Connyers of Horneby,
vulgarly called Justice John, married Eleanor, the daughter and sole heir
of...... Ryelston, Esquire and by her had issue John Connyers, Knt. of the
honorable order of the garter, and Lord of Horneby, of whom descended the Lord
Connyers as below:

John Connyers of Horneby, fourth son of Sir Robert Connyers of Sockbourn, Knt.
which John was commonly called Justice John, a lawyer; he married Margaret,
daughter and sole heir of Anthony St Quintaine, and had issue by her
Christopher Connyers of Horneby.

Crister Connyers of Horneby, son and heir of John Connyers of Horneby,
vulgarly called Justice John. -- This Crister, he married Eleanor, daughter and
heir of...... Ryelston, and by her had issue Sir John Connyers, Knt. of the
noble order of the garter, his son and heir; Sir Richard Connyers, 3d son of
South Couton, Knt. who had issue three daughters, his heirs; Margery married to
Sir Ralph Bows, Knt. Margaret married to Sir Robert Danby of Yafford, Esquire
Eleanor married to Robert Lassels of Sowerby; Robert Connyers of Hutton Wiffe,
5th son of Crister; Sir Roger Connyers of Winnyard, Knt. 6th son; William
Connyers of Mask, 7th son; George Connyers of Danby, 8th son.

Sir John Connyers of Horneby, Knt. of the most noble and honorable order of
the garter, son and heir of Crister of Horneby; he married Marjory, one of the
daughters and heirs of Philip, Lord Darcy and Mcnell, and by her had issue Sir
John Connyers of Horneby, Knt. his son and heir; Rich. Connyers of Horden. --
Henry Conyers, William and Crister, of Richard, second son of this Sir John, is
descended Sir John Connyers, Knt. Bart. of Horden, in a direct male line.

Sir John Connyers of Horneby, Knt. son and heir of John: he married Alice, one
of the daughters and heirs of William Nevill, Lord Falconbridge, and Earl of
Kent, and by her had issue William, first Lord Connyers, and others that died
without issue. -- This John was slain at the battle of Barnet, in the reign of
King Edward...... -- This John had a daughter named Elizabeth, who was married
to Richard, Lord Lumley, and was mother of John Lord Lumley.

William, first Lord Connyers, son and heir of Sir John Connyers of Horneby,
and of his wife Alice, and one of the daughters and heirs of William Nevill,
Lord Falconbridge, and Earl of Kent; he married Anne, the daughter of Ralph
Nevill, third Earl of Westmorland of that family, and he had issue Crister,
Lord Connyers, his son and heir, and others that died young without issue.

Crister, Lord Connyers, son and heir of William, the first Lord Connyers; he
married Anne, the daughter of William, Lord Dacres, of Gililand, and by her had
issue John, Lord Connyers, his son and heir, and two daughters.

John, Lord Connyers, son and heir of Crister, Lord Connyers; he married Mande,
the daughter of Henry Clifford, first Earl of Cumberland, and by her he had
issue, two sons that died young, and three daughters, his coheirs; Anne who was
married to Anthony Kemp, Esquire Elizabeth who was married to Thomas Darcey, Esquire
and was father of Sir Connyers Darcey of Horneby. Knt. and Katherine, third
daughter of John, the last Lord Connyers, and one of his coheirs, was married
to John Attorton, Esquire

Richard Connyers, second son of Sir John Connyers, Knight of the Garter, and
Lord of Horneby, and of his wife Marjory, one of the daughters and coheirs of
Philip, Lord Darcey and Menell. -- This Richard Connyers, he married Elizabeth,
one of the daughters and heirs of Sir Robert Claxton, Knt. and had by her the
lordship of Horden, and had issue Robert, Richard, and Perceval.

Robert Connyers, son and heir of Richard, and in right of his mother, Lord of
Horden; he married Marjory, daughter to Thomas Bamforth, Esquire and had issue by
her Crister, Esquire his son and heir. -- John and Ralph, and daughters,
Elizabeth,.......

Crister Connyers of Horden, son and heir of Robert; he married Anne, the
daughter of Thomas Jackson of Beddall, Esquire and by her had issue Richard,
George, Nicholas, Ralph, Francis, Marjory, Alice, and Isabella.

Richard Connyers of Horden, Esquire son and heir of Crister; he married Isabella,
the daughter of Roger Lumley of...... Esquire and by her had issue Thomas, who died
without issue. -- Crister, his son and heir, who married Anne, the daughter of
John Hedworth of Harraton, Esquire and had issue Richard, Anne, Elizabeth, and
Jane, and John Connyers of Horden, Baronet. -- End of the old Manuscript.

Sir Baldwin Connyers, head of the Family died about 50 years ago, leaving his
estate to his two only daughters. -- The baronetage came to Ralph Connyers, his
heir at law, who was a glazier, and from him descended to Blakiston Connyers,
his third son and heir. who was in very low estate; for some time a dependant
on the house of Bows, and afterward was collector of the customs of Newcastle
upon Tyne. -- He lately died without issue.

genealogy

RAVENSWORTH CASTLE
view of Ravensworth Castle

RAVENSWORTH CASTLE,
the seat of the family of Liddells, now of Sir Henry George Liddell, bart.
stands on the side of a hill, sloping gradually toward the east; a situation
not chosen for strength. Near to it, by the road side, is a stone column, but
of what event it is a memorial, history or tradition give no account. The
antiquity of this castle leads to conjectures as to the etymology of the name;
in many old records it is called Ravens-helm and Ravenswaith, in the old
spelling Raffensweath. The Danish standard was called Raffen, and weath is a
north country word, now used in Scotland for sorrow. "I should be very weath to
do such an act," is a phrase very commonly used in this country. The
application we would make is, that Ravensworth castle is of Danish foundation,
and had its name from them as Raffens-Helm, or the strong hold of the Danish
standard; and that some defeat of that people had occasioned the name of
Raffens-weath, or Danish woe. All etymologies, where there is such a mixture of
languages as in this country, will be subject to much uncertainty, and we offer
this only as a vague conjecture. This castle has anciently formed a complete
square, with a tower at each corner, connected with a curtain wall: Whether
there was any keep or other structure in the center, it is not possible to
determine; two of the towers form part of the offices to the present mansion,
the other two project to the front. The apartments are small, but neat, without
much ornament; the breakfast room and room above it are modern, and face the
south, with a bow window; the lower one stuccoed; the upper room elegantly
fitted up, and hung with tapestry of Antwerp; at one end of the room the
landscape work is strikingly beautiful, in the style of Pousin: There is a
spacious saloon, staircase, and a good dining room. The castle is shut in to
the north and west by a fine forest of oaks, the nursery of a large breed of
herons, and some pheasants: The south aspect consists of rich meadow lands,
scattered over with large trees at irregular distances: To the east the vale of
Lamesley, beautifully clothed with wood, is extended to the eye for a mile and
a half; immediately opposite, at the greatest distance, Gateshead-fell, wild
and shaken, with a multitude of hovels and cottages.

Soon after bishop Flambard came to the Sea, he granted to Richard his nephew,
and his heirs, to hold in fee by homage and the service of half a knight's see,
Ravensworth, Blakiston, and Hetton, now called Eighton Vol. i. p. 149.

Orig. penes Hen. Liddell, bart. -- This deed describes the boundaries. -- Hen.
I. confirm. -- These instruments were given in evidence at York assizes, 1716,
by Sir Hen. Liddell against lord Crewe, in a boundary cause. -- Randal's MSS.

Lel. Itin. vol. viii. p. 5.

A bishop of Durham gave, as it apperith by writings, the lordeshipe of
Ravensworthe upon a time to a nephew of his. Sins it was one Umfrevill's, then
Lomeley, and now Gascoyne. Bointon was owner of the castle no very long time
sens.


. Ravensworth castle was a fortress before any records now extant; as there is
no license to embattle and kernellate this house found in the bishop's
archives, though of every other castle in the county there is that evidence. It
is presumed, that according to the fashion of the times, the owner of
Ravensworth assumed a local name: In the twelfth year of bishop Hatfield, we
find Tho. Stutville held lands of the lady of Ravenswarth Inq. p. m. cor. Joh.
de Byrland. vic. and esc.
; and in the twenty-third year of that prelate, Alex. de Kybblesworth held a
moiety of the vill of Ravensworth, of Elianora countess of Ravenshelm Inq. p.
m. cor. W. de Menevyll, vic.
: Here we also have the distinction before noted of Ravenshelm. In the same
year, on an inquisition taken on the death of William de Silksworth, it appears
he died seized of the manors of Ravenshelm and Lamesley. In the twenty-fifth
year of the same prelate, John de Kibblesworth held a moiety of the vill of
Ravensworth of Robert de Lumley, by the eighth part of a knight's fee, and a
message and forty acres in Landheved in Ravensworth, held of the bishop in
capite, under thirteen shillings and four-pence rent. In the thirty-fifth year
of the same prelate, Robert de Umfrevill, esquire was possessed of a message only
in Ravensworth, which he held of Alan de Ravensworth Inq. p. m. cor. Will. del.
Bows, esc.
. In the third year of bishop Fordham, Robert de Lomley died seized of the
manors of Ravenshelm and Lamesley Inq. p. m. cor. R. de Laton, esc.
; and in the fifth year of bishop Skirlaw, Elizabeth, his widow, who afterward
married John de Bukham, died possessed in dower of the third part of those
manors Inq. p. m. ap. Chestre, cor. chiv. Boynton. esc.
. The branch of Lumleys seated at Ravensworth castle became extinct in Isabell,
the daughter and heiress of Bertram Lumley, who married Sir Henry Boynton,
whose daughter and heiress Elizabeth married Sir Henry Gascoiyn, who, in the
eighth year of bishop Tunstall, had livery of her castle, manors, and estates
^tors Rods, Bishop Tunstall. -- Rudd's MSS.

Lumley's pedigree on the next page.

Willus Lumley mil. ob. 1473 Elizabetha Thomas Lumley ar. 1487, 2d Rich. III.
Bertramus Lumley An. 2 Rich. III. Marg. fill. Tho. d'ni Lumley Isabella fill. and
her. Bertram Lumley Henricus Boynton fill. Chr. de Sudbury mil. Isabella fill.
and her. Henricus Gascoyne 2 fill. Will. de Cawthorpe Henricus de Sudbury
Richardus Ao 1578.


genealogy

Flower's Visitation.
. In the fifth year of king James I. Sir William Gascoin, by indenture of
bargain and sale enrolled, conveyed to Thomas Liddell, esquire ancestor of the
present Sir Henry, all the castle and manor of Ravenshelm, alias Ravenshell,
and the manor of Lamesley; and on the 2d of August, in the sixth year of king
James I. Sir William, with dame Barbary his lady, levied a fine of the granted
estates, with a description of four thousand acres of furz and heath, and three
thousand acres of moor in Ravenshelme, Lamesley, Eighton, Hedley, Over-Eighton,
Nether-Eighton, Longacres, Ravensworth, and Pokerley: In the second year of
bishop James, pardon was granted of the above mentioned fine and alienation
Cursitors Rolls, Bishop James. -- Rudd's MSS*

Sir William Gascoin of Sedbury, was son of Richard Gascoin, esquire and grandson
of Henry, knight. -- Tho. Liddell of Ravensworth, esquire was created a baronet in
November, 1642.

By the will of Sir Tho. Liddell, dated the 1st of August, 1661, it is set
forth, that he received the sum of six hundred pounds from Sir George Tongue of
Denton, in the county of Durham, knt. in consideration of his daughter Eliz.
her filial portion at the intermarriage betwixt his son Sir Fran. Liddell, knt.
and the said Eliz. Tongue; in consideration of which he granted to Sir Francis
the working of one coal pit within the lordship of Ravenshelm, for the term of
twenty-one years, beginning immediately after his decease. He gave to his
grandchild Eliz. Liddell, all that part and household stuff he brought along
with him for his own chamber unto Balmborough. To his grand child Mary Liddell,
one great gilt bowl and 100l. To his son Geo. Liddell his three children
350l. To all the children of Sir Francis Liddell, excepting the said Mary; and
to the grand children of his son in law Sir Geo Baker, knt. and to the children
of his son in law Sir Nich. Cole, knight and baronet; as also to the children
of his daughter: Isabell Anderson, 50l. a piece. And he gave to his son Sir
Francis 100l. in satisfaction of 100l. which his brother Cole lately received
by virtue of an extent forth of the Redheugh. -- Reg. Neile, p. 117. --
Randal's MSS.


.

Of LAMESLEY there is little distinct from Ravenshelm in the records: The
Stutvills and Eures held portions of land there of the Lumleys, but of little
consideration in the whole. In the inquisition taken on the death of Thomas
Lumley, in the sixteenth year of bishop Booth, this manor, of which he died
seized, is described to consist of sixty acres of arable land, fifty acres of
pasture, ten acres of meadow, and forty acres of wood; and Eighton is described
as parcel of the manor. This vale exhibits a new scene for description; busy
and black faces, machines laden with coals rolling on frames, engines, and
smoking furnaces, perpetual agitation, traffic, and business: But of these
matters we shall speak at large hereafter O'ib's videntib's et audientib's
literas istas t'm futuris q'm p'sentib's Rob'tus filius Ric'i de Ravenswich
sal'm Sciatis me concessisse and in p'rpetuum quiet clamasse Galfrido fill.
Galfridi nepoti meo and heredibus suis in seodo and hereditate totum clameum
and totum jus q'd habui in villa de Lamesleya cum suis p'tin. et in villa de
Horden cum suis p'tin. and in villa de Blakiston cum suis p'tin. et in villa de
Hettona cum suis p'tin. et in villa de Silkeswich quae suer. Galfrid. fill.
Ric'i p'ris ejusdem Galfridi. Preterea quietum clamavi eidem Galfrido et
heredibus suis in p'petuum totum jus q'd habui in villa de Hamildona cum suis
p'tin. et in o'ib's all is villis et terris quibus Ric'us pater meus vel
Galfridus filius Ric'i vel ego aliquod jus vel heretagium habuimus. Propter
hanc vero quietam clamationem mihi dedit idem Galfridus nepos meus sexginta
marcas argenti. Et sciendum est quod idem Galfridus concessit mihi and
heredibus meis pro homagio and servitio meo totam villam de Ravensworth cum
suis p'tin. excepto vasto q'd in manu sua ad opus suum and ad opus heredum
suor. o'io retinet, faciendo inde forinsec. servicium quantum pertinet ad
quartam partem feodi unius militis cum forinseco servicio de Hedley. Hiis
testibus Henrico de Nevill, Rob. fill. Meldredi, Jordano Esculand, etc. etc.

Ibid.
.

The town of RAVENSWORTH is so mixed with the preceding subject, that nothing
material remains to be selected from the records to be applied thereto singly;
save only that in the inquisitions we find regularly the distinctions of
Ravenshelm and Ravenswath.

KIBBLESWORTH gave name to a resident family, and Thomas Stutvill, in the
beginning of bishop Hatfield's episcopacy, held a moiety of the vill of
Kibblesworth, of Alex. de Kibblesworth, by homage, fealty, ward, marriage, and
suit of court, estimated at one hundred pounds value above reprisals. Alexander
died seized of the chief hall of Kibblesworth vill, with a moiety of the same
vill held of the bishop by the tenth part of a knight's fee Kybblesworth.

Thomas Trewyk and Alicia de Massham, Ricardus de Cramelyngton and Will's
Symson haered. Alex'i de Kybbleworth tenent xl acr. terrae juxta Ladheved per
cart. and servic. forin. red. xiiij s. iiij d.

D'nus de Nevile et Gilbertus Eglyne tenent villam de Britley, and vadunt in
magn. chac. cum ij leporar. and redd. per ann. ad iiij terminos xx s.

Jordanus de Merley tenet manner. de Bromemyngholme and xxjx acr. terrae juxta
Tribley quond'm patris sui and redd. per ann. jx s. viij d.

Robertus Umsravill tenet manner. de Farneacres per servic. forin. and redd. ij
s.

Will's Bultflour tenet j mes. and xxviij acr. terrae per cart. ut supra quond.
Rob. Grems. red. xvj s.

Will's de Bekley tenet j mes. etc acr. terrae vocat. Wyhirst. quond'm Rod'i
Bekler, red. xiij s. iiij d.

Johannes Hog tenet j mes. and xxx acr. terrae vocat. Wyhirst. soleb. reddere
per cart. xiij s. v d. modo red. per cart. x s.

Terrae scaccarij. Johannes del More tenet, etc. Tho. Stafforth, etc. -- D'nus
Bertramus Monboucher, etc. Ricardus Laws, etc. Octo alij tenentes tenent iiij
plac. and diverse. acr. terrae, red. cert. redd. annuatim.

Robertus de Lomeley tenet j molend. aquat. juxta Ravenswirth, and redd. vj d.

Omnes tenentes redd. pro stagno j molend. ibid. quolibet anno vj d.

Hatfield's Survey. Inq. p. m. 23 Hatfield, cor. W. de Menevyll, vic.


. In the fourth year of bishop Langley, John Stutville died seized of the whole
manor, then valued at ten pounds, held by military service and suit at the
county court, from five weeks to five weeks. In the fifth year of bishop Booth,
Bertram Harbotel died seized of a moiety of the manor Inq. p. m. etc.
, leaving Ralph his son and heir. The Mashams had some small property in this
manor Inq. p. m. Aliciae ux. Rob. de Masham, 9th bishop Langley, cor. W. de
Claxton, esc.
. Kibblesworth became the property of the Skirfields, and Will. Skirfield
conveyed the same to John Hedworth, esquire and George Lawson, gent. for which
alienation by fine, bishop James granted his pardon, dated the 20th of August,
in the eighth year of his episcopacy ^^rsitor* Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
. William Bonner, esquire was possessed of considerable property at Kibblesworth,
and dying in 1759, devised his estates to his daughter's children, one of whom
married James Hargrave of Shawdon, in Northumberland, esquire the other to Thomas
Lewen, of Durham, esquire William Hargrave, esquire was the issue of the first-named
marriage, and there was a daughter of the other marriage, who died without
issue.

Of DARNCROOK we find nothing memorable.

The vill of HEDLEY was the estate of the Mundevills, of which family Gilbert
de Merley and Agnes his wife held the manor of Hedley, with a moiety of the
vill, making suit at the court of Ravenshelm, and paying to William Bultflour
and his heirs thirteen shillings and four-pence rent Inq. p. m. Gil. de Merley.
25 bishop Hatfield, cor. W. de Menevyil, vic.
. It soon after became parcel of the Gibside estates, of which the Blaxtons
were vested in the reign of king James I. as appears by a pardon of alienation
in the fourteenth of that king.

FARNACRES is not noticed in the assignment of the prebends, and probably at
that time was included in the description of Lamesley or Ravenshelm: In some of
the records it is called of the parish of Whickham. It gave name to the
resident family in the beginning of bishop Hatfield's episcopacy; but when his
survey was taken, Robert Umfrevill held the manor by homage, fealty, and the
fourth part of a knight's fee, as also appears by an inquisition taken on his
death, in the thirty-fifth year of that prelate, then valued at ten pounds.
This family fell into female issue in the time of bishop Langley, as is before
noted in Holmside, in the parish of Lanchester. In 1428, Robert Umfrevill
obtained license to found a chantry in the chapel of Farnacres within that
manor, which he endowed with the manor; after which, in 1439, the hospital of
Frereside was annexed thereto: After the dissolution, Farnacres was annexed by
purchase to the Ravensworth estate Farneacres.

Eudo de Lucels tenet in Farnacres j carucat de xxvj acris pro decima part
feodi unius mil.

Robertus de Joltune tenet terram quae fuit heremitae super Derwentam, and
reddit unum bisanciuim, vel ij s.

Boldon Buke. Vide Kybblesworth, Hatfield's Survey.

Thomas d. gra. etc. Sciatis. etc. concessimus and licentiam dedimus, etc.
Rob'to Umfrevile mil. q'd ipse quand. cantariam de uno mag'ro capello and uno
alto capello sibi associando divina sig'lis dieb's in capella de Farnacres
infra man'ium de Farnacres p' salubri, etc. int' all is p'aiab's oiu'm nobilium
principium and militum qui nup' de garteria Sci Georgij de Wyndesore infra
regnum Anglie existerunt and existent in futur. etc. Et q'd id. Rob. p't q'm
dicta cantaria sic facta fundata and stabilita fuerit dare possit and
assignare, etc. man'ium de Fernacres cum p'tin. q'd de nobis tenetur. in
capite, hend. and imp'p'm. -- Rot. B. Langley, No 12, 1428.

Thomas d. gra. etc. Concessimus q'd cant'ia p'dca cantaria scor. Joh'is
Baptiste and Joh'is Evangeliste de Fernacres nuncupetur imp'p'm and q'd
magister and sociis suis capelli cant'ie p'dce sint p'sone habiles and capaces
ad p'quirend. terr. etc. and q'd possint plitare, etc. 20 die Martij, 1428. --
Ibid. No 4.

Thomas, etc. Sciatis q'd cum Joh'es Lyster capellus nup' adquisivit sibi and
he would suis de Rob'to Umfravyll mil. and Isabella ux. ejus man'ium de Fernacres
cum p'tin. que de nob. tenentur in capite, and illud ingressus suisset ac idem
Joh'es idem man'ium cum p'tin. dedisset and concessisset p'sate Rob'to he'nd
sibi and hered's suis etc. Et ulterius concessimus, etc. p'sato Rob. q'd ip'e
he'at and teneat man'ium, etc. sibi and he would. suis de nob. and succ. n'ris p'
servicia inde debit and co'sueta imp'p'm nolentes q'd Joh'es, etc. aut Rob.
etc. inde inquietentur, etc. 26o Aug. 1429. -- Ibid. No 8.

Licentia Rob'to Umfravile, feoffare Will'm Tart, cl. and Adam Toslon, cl. Rot.
B. Langley, No 52.
Irrot. l'rar pat sub sigillo ad causas de unione and annexione hospitalis de
Freresyd cantaria de Farnacres, Rot. B. Nevill, indorso No 72. Universis, etc.
Rob'tus p'missione divina, etc. exhibita nob. nup' p'p'te dictor. filior.
mag'ri and socii sui capellor. cant'ie de Farnakers, etc. que t'n on'a dci.
mag'r and socius suus attentis decrescentiis and diminucoib's fructuum
emolumentor. and p'ventuum h'moi in dict. man'io and suis p'tin. p' innudaco'es
aquar. and alia mundi misera infortunia quotidie in deteriora delabent
emergentibus non poterunt hiis diebus nec in futur verisiliter debite supp'tare
nisi eis de alicujus subvenco'is remedio succurratur. Quor. p'missor. p'textu
annexio unio incorp'aco and app'priaco cujus hospitalis de Freresyd jam
vacantij m'ar etiam collacois and dioc. eis and cor. cantarie de Farnacres,
etc. nob astancium dc'm hosp. de Freresyd cum jur. and p'tin. univ'sis p'dce
cant'ie de Farnakers annectimus unimus and incorp'amus, etc. dat. duodecimo die
mensis Sept. 1439.

Collations E. Reg'ro Fox, p. 5. Tunstal, p. 27.

Copyhold book, m. p. 457.

Halm. ap. Chestr. xix die Oct. an. transl. Cuthb'ti 17o.

Whickham. It. p'nt q'd Rob. Claxton de Farneacres cap'nus adhuc non fecit
fossat. suum int. cursum aquae molendini ibid. and t'r d'nii de Ravensworth ad
grave nocumentum vicinorum vj d.

At the dissolution of the chantries A. D. 1547, R. Claxton had an annuity of
five pounds allowed, which he received in 1553.

Conform'aco Henrici Liddell, armiger. E. reg'ro Neile, p. 100, 1627.

N. B. Fryerside lies on the banks of Derwent, a little above Gibside.

In 1620, by an inquisition taken on the death of Tho. Liddell, esquire alderman of
Newcastle, Fernacres is thus described: Cantar. Sanctor. Joh'is Evangest. and
Joh'is Baptist. vocat. Farnacres chantrie in parochia de Whickham, nuper
dissolut. and de tota capitali domo and scitu ejusd. nuper cantar. and de uno
molendino aqua'tus and de oib's terris, etc. voc. Grevegarth, Netherfrereside,
Priestfield, Greveacres, et Grevehouse, and oib's mess. ter. etc. in villis
campis parochiis and hamlet de Whickham, Tanfield, Wardel, Wolsingham, and
Lamesley, etc.


; and was settled on the marriage of Thomas Liddell, of Newcastle, merchant, to
Elizabeth, daughter of William Jennison, of the same place, merchant, and
described to have been acquired, together with Tanfield and Lamesley, by
purchase from Tho. Edams and others, the 13th of November, 1600 Inq. p. m. Tho.
Liddell, arm. and alderm. 1620, Neile, ep.
.

The chapel of TANFIELD has lately been rebuilt, and fitted up in a handsome
manner; it was formerly dependent on Chester. Bertram Mounboucher is the first
possessor we find mentioned in the records of Tanfield, which is thus noted in
the inquisition taken on his death, in the first year of bishop Skirlaw: All
the manor of Tanfield, with the hamlet and appurtenances held of Robert de
Conyers, knight, and Ellen his wife, by homage, and one penny rent, value five
marks: He also held the manors of Beamish and Cawsey Tanfield Curacy. --
Dedicated to St Margaret. -- Hen. Liddell pat. -- Not in charge or certified.

CURATES.
John Mason, 1409 Will. Hardweke, 1562 Rob. Dawson, 1574 John Armstrong, 21
Jan. 1580 Joh. Wilson, 7 Feb. 1582 Joh. Mason, 7 Jul. 1582 Hugh David, 11 Jan.
1583 Tho. Carter, 1608 Joh. Martin, 1673 Joh. Aird, 1700 Joh. Balguy, A. M.
1711 Rob. Wilson, A. M. 1729, p. res. Balguy Joh. Wibbersley, A. M. 1751, p. m.
Wilson, pr. lord Ravensworth Caleb Dixon, 1782, p. m. Wibbersley
Randal's MSS. Sub hoc tumulo Sepulta jacent corpora Timothei and Elizabethae
Davison Haec conjux clarissima Gulielmi Davison de Beamish arm. Ille filius
eorum primo genitus Cujus (heu nimium dilecti) mors immatura Etiam secum rapuit
matrem Forma adhuc and aetate llorentem Obiit hic 15 December. An. Dom. 1708,
aetat. 6 Illa in consolabilis quotidie moricus Vitam heu miseram Pro beata
immortalitate libenter commutavit 20 December. Ann. Dom. 1712, aetat. 40. Ra.
Harrison of Brian's-lope, in this chapelry, who died in 1697, by his will left
to the poor of the chapelry of Tanfield 100l. in money, as a standing stock, to
be put out for their use by the most substantial men of that chapelry. Proved 8
April, 1699.

Tanfield collieries were sold during the usurpation, to Marshall two-thirds,
91l. 16s. Lovett one-third, 17l. 6s. 8d. -- Vol. i. p. 513.

Tanfield. -- Book of rates 10l. 4s. 3d. -- Value of lands, etc. 1570l.
Land tax at 4s. a pound. County rate 6s. 8d. Beamish 66 9 6 1 11 0 Lints green
66 17 6 1 17 0

Registered estates. -- Tanfield, Mr Anth. Meabourne, 3l. 7s. -- Lints green,
Mr Rich. Hodgson, 173l. -- Mr Nich. Blakiston, 52l. -- Francis Wray, 7l. -- Mrs
Mary Hudson, 80l.


. The house of Cawsey, or as it is called in the old records Caldsit, is
situated a little distance from Tanfield: This estate has for some considerable
time appertained to the family of Claverings. The Dawsons had property and a
mansion house at Tanfield, now annexed to the Beamish estate. Beamish continued
in the family of Monbouchers for several generations; and in the time of bishop
Nevill, Elizabeth, baroness of Hilton, formerly the wife of Bertram Monboucher,
died possessed of Beamish and Tanfield, which she held for life. In the fifth
year of bishop Booth, Bertram Harbotell died seized Inq. p. m. cor. Joh.
Athirton, arm. esc.
of the manors of Beamish and Tanfield, in the latter of which Caweset,
Le-Croke, and Le-Leigh are described as members. The manor of Beamish is
therein set out to consist of one hundred and sixty acres of land, and forty
acres of wood. The Hilton name became extinct in female issue, Dorothy, one of
the coheiresses, marrying Morton Davison of Beamish, esquire The Davisons also
failed in male issue, and the large possessions of that family are come to Sir
John Eden, baronet, whose mother was the surviving sister of Morton Davison,
esquire eldest son of the before named Morton.

BEAMISH-HOUSE is situate in a wooded vale, on the banks of the river Team, and
in a deep retirement; the adjacent lands are fertile and well sheltered, but
the hills which surround it barren and lofty; yet nature has amply recompensed
all outward deformities, by her riches in mines of coal and iron.

Near Tanfield is a great work called Cawsy-Bridge, carried over a deep gill or
valley, to obtain a level for the coal wagons to pass, constructed at the
expense of the Grand Associators in colliery works in this country, known by
the local appellation of the Grand Allies: The span of the arch is one hundred
and two feet, which rises in abutments or land piers about nine feet in height,
and being semicircular, makes the elevation about sixty feet; the level is from
thence kept up by forced bankings of earth, in some parts forty feet in height,
and one hundred and forty paces in length; much more expensive than mason-work:
There is a drift cut through the solid rock, to convey the stream of the
rivulet under the bankings. The valley is wooded, wild, and romantic.

TANFIELD LEIGH Tamfeldlegh.

Will's Jonson, tenet. ibid. iv mes. vj parts de Taumfeldlegh contin. xxviij
acr. quond'm Johannis de Birtley de Twyfill, and solebat reddere per ann. liij
s. iiij d. modo, redd. xl s.

Bertramus Monboucher tenet. vij parts de Taumfeldlegh sicut contin. in xv
parcel. in antiquo rentali and redd. per an. jxs. jxd. -- Idem Bertramus tenet
villam de Tamfeldlegh xxxvi acr. terrae and red. xxxjx s. x d.

Hatfield's Survey.
is mentioned in bishop Hatfield's Survey in such large descriptions, that we
are induced to believe by that name, the whole of Tanfield was anciently
comprehended: Exclusive of what was at that time the estate of the Monbouchers,
John of Birtley, then of Twisills, held eight score acres of land, being six
parts in fifteen of that place: It was part of the possessions of Sir Nich.
Tempest, who also held Stanley hall. Stanley was the estate of the Birtleys,
till Thomas de Birtley, about the eighth year of bishop Skirlaw, who held the
manor of Stanlew for life, with certain premises called the Hag, alias Hall,
with a reversion expectant to Richard de Kirkenny, granted the same to Ralph de
Lomley, held of the bishop in capite by military service, and subject to the
payment of ten pounds yearly, to Catharine the widow of William de Kirkenny for
life.

STOKERLEY, CROOK, and FRERESYDE, were the estates of Roger Thornton, and came
to the Lumleys by intermarriage with his daughter Exempl. Inq. p. m. Thornton,
18 Apr. 14 bishop Booth.
.

The manor of LYNCE, or LINTS, gave a local name to the resident family, whose
male issue failing in the fifth year of bishop Hatfield, the estate descended
to PEDIGREE OF SHAFTOE OF TANFIELD-LEIGH.
John Shaftoe of Tanfield-Leigh. -- daughter of Fenwick of Wallington Gerard of
Bavington -- daughter of Foster of Edderstone James of Tanfield-Leigh Mary
Christ. Rowland James live. 1615. Eliz. d. of Tho. Milles of Collingham. James
son and heir aet. 8, 1615. John Thomas Richard Catherine Elianor m. Blareton
Mary m. Tho. Trotter Flower's Visit. Jacobus Shafto de fam. de Bavington Will.
-- fill. Fenwyke Clemens Shaftoe de Anvill. in episcopatu Eliz. fill. Roll. Raw
Rowlandus de Anvil. ao 1575 Isabella fill. Rob. Rain of Shortflat, c. Northum.
Will. aet. 10 1575 Anthony Anne Willielmus de Swalwell An. 1516. Marg. fill.
Joh. Bellingham de Crookhall. Arthur Alice fill. J. Gascoyne of Turnmill Timothy
fill. and her. Aet. 8, An. 1615. Will. Jane Will. Christ. Charles Barbera m. Ra.
Blenkinsop of Birtley. Isabel Marg. Elizabeth m. Nath. Jackson Barbara m. R.
Harbottle Isabell m. W. Law Anna m. -- Harbottle


genealogy Flower's Visit.


three coheiresses, daughters of Richard de Lynce Inq. p. m. Rob. de Lynce, 5
bishop Hatfield.
: It afterward became the estate of the family of Redhoughs Inq. p. m. Hugh
del. Redhoughs, 3 bp Skirlaw, who died seized of two parts of the manor of
Lynths, the third part being in dower, held of the bishop in cap. by knt. serve.
suit of court, and 28s. 8d. rent. -- Also 6s. 8d. rent out of the lands of Rob.
Boutflour, in the vill of Lynths, and 12d. free rent out of the tenements of
Henry Kant there.
, who failing in male issue, this, with their other possessions, descended to
coheiresses in the fifteenth year of bishop Langley, on the death of Thomas de
Redhough, son of Thomas, son of Hugh, the daughter and grand daughter of which
Hugh succeeded, viz. Mary, the wife of Henry Boteler, and Grinatruda the wife
of William Hokley, who was the daughter of Agnes, the daughter of the same
Hugh. Mary died without issue, so that the whole vested in Grinatruda, in the
twentieth year of the same prelate Inq. p. m. Tho. de Redhough, 7 Oct. 15
bishop Langley. -- Inq. p. m. Mary Boteler, 15 July, 20 bishop Langley.
. When the family of Hodgson obtained possession, we have no evidence, but
after their enjoyment for a considerable number of years, male issue failed in
Ralph Hodgson, esquire the last proprietor, on whose death the family estate at
Lints Green descended to his only daughter now living.

Near Lints Green is a neat little mansion called the Leazes, the seat of
William Scafe, esquire counselor at law.

We must not quit this tract without observing, that traces of a Roman way have
frequently been discovered on the moor north of Urpeth, in a direction leading
from the north to Chester: Within a mile of Urpeth is a round hill, with a
trench, one of those temporary fortifications used on the incursion of the
Scots, when they came down in small bands to pillage the country: Such are
numerous all over the borders. At Lawsome hill is a most extensive prospect,
commanding the Chiviots to the north, Cleveland hills south, Newcastle toward
the east, with Lumley castle, Chester, and Durham cathedral on the nearer
grounds, the towns of Tanfield and Shield-row, with the mountains at the head
of Weredale, on the most distant ground, to the west. The rivulet of Team may
truly be called a mechanic stream, as there are not in the north any works to
be compared to those its waters supply: It carries ten mills or more, for the
working of iron by Crowley's people, making oil, fulling, and grinding corn.
Although mining and trade exercise the attention of so many inhabitants, yet
agriculture and country occupations are not neglected: The farmers have
introduced an improved breed of sheep, by crossing with the Lincolnshire sort,
and feed mutton to twenty-five pounds a quarter; the fell sheep are small and
degenerated by want of change: The fell-bred cattle are about twenty-five stone
weight at the slaughter; the better breed come to about sixty stone weight:
Such are the stocks on the estates adjoining the moors; in the lower lands by
the banks of the river, the breeds of cattle are much superior. There are iron
mines near Tanfield, which appear to have been wrought in very distant times:
The metal lies at a very inconsiderable depth from the surface. If the use of
coal be so important as a late pretended discovery seemed to promise, these
mines from their situation may hereafter prove of very great importance.

The Parish of MUGGLESWICK.
Adjoining to Lanchester parish, on the west, lies the parish of Muggleswick.
The first mention made of this place is in the time of bishop Pudsey, who
granted it to the convent of Durham, in exchange for Hardwick: And in the
middle of the thirteenth century, Hugh, prior of Durham, enclosed a park here,
and built a camera, consisting of a hall, chapel, and lodgings: The remains of
those structures yet appear, part of the park wall and the east end of the
chapel; the whole camera has had underground apartments for securing cattle
during the incursions of the Scots. Bishop Bainbrigg granted to the convent a
confirmatory charter of Muggleswick, and also of two hundred and sixteen acres
of wood and waste lands in the vill of Horseleyhope, given to them by bishop
Kirkham, with license to enclose and empark the same, accompanied with an
inspeximus of his predecessors several grants Bainbrigg Rot. B. No 66. -- Ibid.
Rot. No 64. 28 Sep. 1508.
. The etymology of the name of Muggleswick is very doubtful; it seems to have
derivation from the Scotch word mickle, and might imply a large village in
former times, though now an insignificant little place. The church is a mean
edifice; the nave thirty-seven feet in length and twenty-one in width; and the
chancel eighteen feet long and fifteen wide: The park was originally about
three miles long and two broad; much of it is now in tillage and divided into
farms Muggleswick curacy. Prior of Durham prop. -- Dean and chapter Durham
patrons.

It is a peculiar belonging to the dean and chapter, and not being in charge
pays no first fruits or tenths, and procurations to the bishop only when he
visits. -- Cert. val. 15l. 18s. 8d. -- Proc. ep. 2s. 6.

CURATES.
Rich. Staykiston, 1323 John de Skipton, 1357 Galfrid. Bachiler, 1361 Rob. de
Durham, 1391 Hen. Hynton, 1410 Rob. de Aukland, 1411 Robert Forest, 1504 Joh.
Byndley, cl. pres. 28 Mar. 1550 Tho. Benson, cl. pres. 12 Mar. 1565, p. m.
Byndley Tho. Hawkins, cl. 10 Jun. 1572, p' depr. Benson Jaco. Murthwaite, oc.
21 Mar. 1575, p. res. Hawkins Miles Watmough, oc. 3 Feb. 1577 Will. Southwick,
1586, p. res. Watmough Pet. Fisher, cl. 15 May, 1607, p. m. Southwick Rich.
Bradley, A. M. 20 Nov. 1641, p. m. Fisher Tho Boyer, an intruder, depr. for
nonconformity: Afterward confirmed John Dury, A. M. 28 July, 1662, p. res.
Bradley Chr. Smith, admitted coadjutor to Mr John Dury, being old and unable to
serve, in the cures of Edmondbiers and Muggleswick, 16 Oct. 1684 Chr. Smith, 20
Nov. 1684, p. m. Dury Fra. Hunter, A. M. 27 Sep. 1735, p. m. Smith Tho.
Coulthard, A. M. a Scotch degree, 1743, p. m. Hunter Will. Stephenson, A. M.
Randal's MSS. In the churchyard lies interred, one Edward Ward, a person of
gigantic stature, and a great hunter in his days, whose limbs were so enormous,
that tradition says, a favorite hound littered in his wooden shoe: -- He was
most probably one of the seditious associators in 1662, and from the enormity
of his exploits obtained the name of giant.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 from 1760 to 1779

Dean and chapter's rents -- Shotley burn 10s. 3d. -- Edmundblers 6l. 8s. 2d.
-- Muggleswick 4l. 8s. 4d. -- Underside 16s. 8d. -- Bishops tenths in
Edmundbiers 13s. 1d.

Muglyngwye.

Prior de Dunelm. habet Muglyngwye sicut in carta quam inde habet continetur
tam de gratia and dono D'ni episcopi quam in Escambium de Herdewic. -- Boldon
Buke.

Mugliswyk.

Prior Dunolm. tenet manner. de Mugliswyk in Escamb. pro villa de Herdwyk. --
Hatfield's Survey.

Durham. -- The information of John Ellerington, of Blenchland, in the said
county, March 22, 1662.

This informant says, That he has known diverse seditious meetings in
Muggleswick park, within these last six months, sometimes at the house of one
John Ward, who is one of their chief preachers, sometimes at the house of John
Readshaw, Robert Blenkinsop, and Rowland Harrison, who were met together. The
said John Ward, John Readshaw, Robert Blenkinsop, and Rowland Harrison,
together with Capt. Dossen, Capt. George Gower, Robert Readshaw, son of the
said John, Robert Tailor, Mark Tailor, both of Ecles bridge, John March, of the
same, John Joplin, of the Fox-holes, John March, of Ridley mill, Cuthbert
Newton, of Hendsey, Richard Tailor, of Crankley, Henry Angas, Cuthbert Maugham,
of Birchenfields, George Readshaw, of Edmondbyers, John Oliver, of the same,
Lewis Frost, of South-Sheales, Cuthbert Coatsworth and Michael Coatsworth, of
the same, Richard Ord and John Ord, of Birchenhaugh, James Carr, of Ardley,
Rob. Dalmer, of Crowcroke, Rowland and Nicholas Harrison, sons of Rowland
Harrison abovesaid, John Hopper, of Carp-Sheals, Thomas Readshaw, of
Paddomsack, Michael Ward, of Shotley-field, Cuthbert Ward, of Black-Hedley,
Ralph Iley, of ^dmundbyers, Richard Johnson, of Sunderland, and Foster, of the
same; where they did mutually take an oath of secrecy not to discover their
design, which was to rise in rebellion against the present government, and to
destroy the present parliament, which had made a law against liberty of
conscience, and to murder all bishops, deans and chapters, and all ministers of
the church, and to break all organs in pieces, to destroy the common
prayer-books and to pull down all churches, and farther to kill the gentry that
should either opp^ them, or not join with them in their design; that they
intended first to fall upon Durham, to seize any m^ine that might be there, or
money in any treasurer's hands, and to plunder the town. They did boast ^any
thousands of Anabaptists and Independents that were to join with them in the
nation, with whom they had daily correspondence by letters and messengers, upon
which employment the said informant has been diverse times sent to diverse
persons; and he heard them lately say, that some Papists were lately come into
their party, and they did not doubt of their real intention to join with them
in their design; that they have already in their hands some provision of arms,
and do expect great proportion both of arms and ammunition from Lewis Frost
abovesaid, who has undertaken to provide for them. And he further says, that
for diverse months by past it was resolved amongst them, to rise on the 25th of
this instant March, but they did lately agree to defer the execution of their
design for a month longer, till they see what the parliament would do
concerning indulgence to tender consciences, and toleration of their party, and
withal, by putting off their rising, they would be much stronger by many that
would come to their party daily. And this informant says, that he knows to
depose what he has said, because he was one of their party, and was
re-baptised by the abovesaid John Ward, and was with them at most of their
meetings, and did take the abovesaid oath of secrecy, but being pricked in my
conscience at the horror of such a bloody design, he could have no rest nor
quietness in his mind, till he had discovered the same.

Sam. Davison, Cuth. Carr, Tho Fetherstone, Rich. Neile, justices of the peace.

Among the Harleian Manuscripts in the British Museum.
.

The mines were so rich in this country in the time of king Charles I. that he
made a grant to George duke of Buckingham, of the mines of silver, or of lead
mixed with silver, in or near Muggleswicke, alias Mugglesley, in the county
palatine of the bishopric of Duresme, and within the compass of ten miles from
Muggleswicke aforesaid for twenty-one years Rym. Foed. tom. xviii. p. 90. Ann.
1625. 1 k. Cha. I.
.

The parishes of MUGGLESWICK, EDMUNDBIERS, and HUNSTANWORTH, stretching along
the banks of Derwent river, form the extreme lands of the county of Durham in
that part. By the Boldon Book it appears that Alan Bruntop held the manor of
Edmundbiers by forest service; and in bishop Hatfield's Survey it is stated to
be the possession of the priory of Durham, from which time it has been
connected with Muggleswick: Bishop Beaumont granted a moiety of the vill to the
convent, and the other moiety they derived from various grants, as appears by
the several licenses to acquire in mortmain, and confirmations among the rolls
of bishop Bury and other prelates. Here is a straggling village scattered round
the skirts of a green: The church, though rectorial Edmundbires.

Alanus Bruntop tenet Edmundbires, pro servitio suo in foresta sicut in carta
quam inde habet continetur.

Boldon Buke. Edmundbires.

Prior Dunolm. tenet villam de Edmundbires, quond'm Alani Bruntop per servic.
suum in soresta, sicut contin. in carta ipsius Alani. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Edmundbyers rectory, in the deanery of Chester. -- Conv. Durh. prop. -- Dean
and chapter patr. -- Dedicated to St Edmund. -- Clear yearly val. 24l. 11s. 8d.
-- Tenths 13s. 1d. -- Proc. cp. 4s. 6d. -- Synod 2s.

RECTORS.
R. de Kirkeby, 1275 Laurence, 1333 John de Bamburgh, 1348 Joh. de Seham, 1357
Thomas de Gatoril, 1392, p. m. Seham Tho. Annesley Will. Hyndley, all is
Lamesley, 1399, p. m. Annesley Will. de Malteby, 1401 Joh. de Hexham, 1401, p.
res. Malteby Hen. Hinton, 1402, p. res. Hexham Rob. Aukland, 1411, p.m. Hinton
Rob. Baker, 1419, p. m. Aukland Rich. Walworth, 1421 Will. Denton, 1456 John
Woldhave, 1468, p. res. Denton Will. Fabayne, 1504, p. m. Woldhave Rob.
Spragane, 1508, ^ res. Fabayne John Foster, 17 Dec. 1557 Tho. Benson, cl. 6
Feb. 1670 Joh. Greenwell, A. B. 20 Mar. 1575, p. m. Benson Mark Leonard, A. B.
22 Jun. 1609, p. m. Greenwell Mich. Walton, A. M. 21 ^l. 1628, p. res. Leonard
Joh. Durie, A. M. 2 Jul ^^9, p. m. Walton Franc. Foster, cl. 4 Oct. (...) p. m.
Durie Joh. Durie, 1661, p. m. Foster Chr. Smith, A. M. 21 Nov. 1684, p. m.
Durie Franc. Hunter, A. M. 27 Sep. 1735, p. m. Smith Tho. Coulthard, A. M.
(Scotic) 1743, p. m. Hunter Will. Stephenson, A. M.
Randal's MSS. Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 from 1760
to 1769

The author regrets that these tables are obliged to be left blanks; no
entreaty or interest, and nothing but a heavy pecuniary gratuity, could
influence the guardians of these small parishes to indulge him and the public.


, a very mean edifice; the chancel still more deplorable, supported on stilts
or short buttresses, and not sufficiently lighted; the whole building only
sixty-four feet long and twenty-four wide: The incumbents house new and
handsome, with good offices. Birden-hope, a considerable rivulet, washes the
skirts of this place, and where Feldon-beck runs into it at a little distance,
are the lead mills belonging to the Blacket family. The whole of this parish
consists of about twenty farmholds, all of leasehold tenure under the dean and
chapter. The aspect of the country is meagre and without shelter; and the
cattle and sheep are of a very inferior kind. Agriculture is discouraged by the
various disadvantages of situation, for all the lime is supplied from the banks
of Were near Stanhope, and to be brought over the intervening desert, in bad
roads, with much labor. The lead works employ the inhabitants, and bring in
some foreign money, or the country would become desolate.

HUNSTANWORTH, the next adjoining parish toward the west, was the estate of
Robert Corbet in ancient time, and by him and Sibilla his wife given to the
hospital of Kepier. After the dissolution the manor, together with the right of
presentation to the church, came into lay hands, and is now the property of the
family of ORD, descendants of the late chief baron of Scotland, who was
temporal chancellor of this county palatine Hunstanworth.

Robertus Corbet tenet Hunstanworth, pro servitio suo in soresta, sicut in
carta quam inde habet continetur.

Hospitale S. Egidii tenet ibid'm juxta divisam Walteri de Bolebec quasdam
assart. and pastur. ad incrementa pecorum. -- Boldon Buke.

Hunstanworth curacy. -- Hosp. of Kepier prop. -- * * * * Ord, esquire patron.

A chapel in the deanery of Chester, not being in charge pays no first fruits or
tenths, only procurations when the bishop visits. -- Cert. val. 10l. -- Proc.
ep. 3s. 4d. -- Real. val. 30l.

CURATES.
Ric. de Baldock, 1322 Rich. Stephenson, 1577 Tho. Beck, 1645 Jo^n Forest, 15
Jan. 1667 And. Rudd, 21 Jun. 1696 Tho. Jones And. Naughley, A. M. 1724 Tho.
Hudson, cl. pres. by Rob. Ord, esquire chief bar. of his maj. exch. in Scotland, 21
Sep. 1758
Randal's MSS. From the parish register.

27 Jan. 1645. This day the great storm brack, which had begun eight weeks
before.

25 June, 1678. Bur. Ann wise of John Robinson, John Ritson an infant, and Ann
daughter of Robert Egleston, killed by a thunderbolt, 23 June.

4 Nov. 1709. Ann daughter of James Colling, who was eighteen years of age, and
never chewed bread; of stature not above a three years old child, the thickest
part of her arms and legs not exceeding the thickness of a man's thumb.

Muggleswick, Edmundbiers, and Ebchester book of rates 5l. 15s. 11d. -- Val. of
lands 1155l. 17s. 9d.

Grey^s MSS. Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Edmundbyers
5 10 0 0 5 2 Hunstanworth 8 19 8 0 8 6 Muggleswick 14 8 1 0 13 4

Registered estates, Ra. Fuester 16l.

Mann's MSS. In the time of bishop Nevill the master and brethren granted a
lease of the vill of Hunstanworth, in which the boundaries are described. --
Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 1760 to 1779


. -- The chapel was under repairs when we visited it.

All the banks of Derwent river down to Ebchester are beautiful; and the
traveller, turning his back on Muggleswick, finds new objects of pleasure
attend his steps. Allans-ford has some wild and romantic wooded scenes, which
surround the pleasant little inn by the bridge; and the landscape which opens
to the view, as we descend from Medomsley on the Whickham road, is scarce to be
equalled: All the northern shore of Derwent is beautifully mingled with
wood-lands, which, in irregular figures, intersect and variegate a rich
cultivated country, gently bending toward the river; the hanging woods of
Gibside rising on lofty hills, and sweeping swiftly to the brink of the stream,
oppose their nobler aspect on the southern shore, decorated with elegant
buildings, among which the Column of Liberty is best distinguished; beyond
these you view the banks of Tyne, with Benwell, and a vast tract of
Northumberland, terminated by the lofty mountains of Cheviot.

At SHOTLEY BRIDGE is a small village, hanging on the banks of the river: On
the northern shore is a pleasant mansion belonging to Dr Andrews, in a
beautiful retirement. On the southern banks, and elevated situation, stands
SNOWSGREEN, the seat of John Leaton, esquire We also passed BENFIELDSIDE, famous
for one of the first Quaker meeting houses in England, where the Devil, in much
wrath, appeared to snatch the key which was to imprison him for ever See an
account of this apparition in Turner upon Providence.
. From Shotley bridge to Ebchester a pleasant ride, scarce three miles, through
a cultivated tract, commanding a prospect of the Northumberland boundary,
finely fringed and intersected with wood-lands.

EBCHESTER is a small irregular village, scattered on the edge of a steep
declivity; the church, with a few cottages, lie within the limits of the Roman
station. Here, it is said, St Ebba, daughter of Ethelfrid king of
Northumberland, built upon the banks of Derwent, a monastery, before the year
of Christ 660, which was afterward destroyed by the Danes Tanner's Notitia, p.
110, Cressy's Chapter Hist. 18 lib. chapter 14.
: Not the least trace of such an edifice is to be discovered in this age.
Ebchester church Ebchester curacy. -- Dedicated to St Ebba. -- Sherburn hosp.
prop. and patr. -- In the deanery of Chester. -- Cert. val. 16l. 7s. 5d. --
Proc. ep. 2s. 4d.

CURATES.
Joh. Same, 1501 Clem. Bell, oc. 26 Sep. 1554 Giles Widows, 1576 Geo.
Wrightson, pr. 8 Aug. 1586, p. res. Widows M. Wrightson, cl. 19 Aug. 1626, p.
res. G. Wrightson Reg. Steedman, cl. 1680 Chr. Collinson, p. m. Steedman
Jonath. Jefferson, cl. 1736, p. m. Collinson.
Randal's MSS. Ex vita Ebb. Sancta Ebba construxit monasterium feminarum apud
Ebchester juxta ripam Derventonis fluminis eiq. ex nomine suo vocabul. indidit
ex dono fratris sui Oswini. -- Bibl. Cotton Julius 2. II.

Vol. ii. Dugd. Mon. Prioratus de Coldingham, etc. p. 1051, Ex Hist. MS. in
bibl. Bodl. v. 4. Jur. lib. 22. ca. 3.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population for the last twenty years 160 29 48

Burials in the last year 8. -- Computed number of inhabitants 240.


is superior to those last visited, but yet mean; the nave is thirty-two feet
in length and twenty in width, and the chancel twenty-six feet by eighteen; in
order to accommodate the parishioners, the chancel is obliged to be stalled up
to the altar rails. Bishop Pudsey, when he founded Sherburn hospital near the
city of Durham, among other possessions endowed it with lands at Ebchester,
then the place of an hermitage, which, from the sanctity of St Ebba, and
retirement of the situation on the borders of the forests, was chose as the
seat of severity and religious exercise Et super Derwentam fluvium, qui
forestam nostram dividit a vicinis Ebchester locum (viz.) Anachoritarum, ad
animalia fratrum infirmorum usibus ibi nutrienda, et ad eorum pastores ibidem
procurandos, licentiam dedimus de sartis proficiendis unam carucatam terrae
arabilis, quae octies viginti acras tantum in se contineat. -- Vide
Ordinationem sive fundat. dom. de Sherb.


. Bishop Fordham, in 1384, granted free warren here to the master and brethren
of the said hospital Vide Sherburn hosp.
. King David II. of Scotland, in his unfortunate expedition, entered the county
of Durham at Ebchester, A. D. 1346; perhaps led that way by the great Roman
road, which we may suppose was in good preservation in those days.

There is not the least doubt the Romans had a considerable station here
Horsley's Brit. Romans p. 287, 398.

Several Roman antiquities have been found here, which are taken notice of by
Dr Hunter in the Philosophical Transactions, No 278. One of these is a tall
altar, but no visible inscription upon it. Another is said to be a man in a
Roman dress, upon a gravestone near the church door. The image is very obscure,
nor do I see how it can now be discerned, whether male or female, for there is
no inscription at all, and the features are quite gone. There have been two
dolphins, one on each side the image, which is somewhat peculiar. When I viewed
it, the small figure at the top appeared like a pineapple, or perhaps a bunch
of ears of corn, and that on the side of the image seemed designed for a
wreath. I doubt not but it has been sepulchral, and that the image was intended
to represent the person deceased. When the ancients erected their own tombs in
their life time, they often left the inscriptions, and sometimes their
essigies, to be cut by their relations or friends after their decease. So
Gorius Gor. Monument. libert. etc. Live. Aug. p. 20.
, in his description of a large funeral vault, lately discovered near Rome, has
given us the draught of a marble coffin, with a bust of the deceased person cut
upon the side, but only a round ball for the head, which doubtless was designed
to have been afterward finished. And upon another there is a whole human
figure finished except the head, which is left in the same manner with the
former. And in several of the niches made in the side of the monument, which
contained two urns, the inscription is cut over one only, and that part of the
stone which is placed over the other is empty, the person being then living for
whom that urn was designed.

HAVE
This in Camden is placed among the Lanchester inscriptions, but it is plain,
from Dr Hunter's account, that it was found at Ebchester. It was first in the
doctor's own possession, and is in the library at Durham: It has been a
sepulchral monument, and HAVE is for AVE, as in Gruter, Have Meletina
suavissima. The custom of thus saluting, as it were, the dead, or taking their
last farewell of them, is very well known, and it may seem almost needless to
produce any instances of it. Thus Aeneas bids eternal adieu to Pallas: "Salve
aeternum mihi, maxume Palla
"Aeternumque vale."
"Ave atque vale."
AEN. xi. 97. CATULLUS.

Thus also Achilles salutes his dead friend Patroclus: (...). Hom. II. ps v. 19.

I shall not insist on the novissima verba, ter vocati, etc. but old Priam's
words spoken with reference to this custom are so moving, that I must beg leave
to transcribe them "Sic, O, sic positum adfati discedite corpus." AENEID. ii.
644.

There is another stone of a like figure which probably has stood beside it,
but there never has been any letters upon it.

Deo Vitiri Maximus votum solvit.

This according to the account in Camden, was also found in this place. It is a
small altar erected to the local god Vitires, to whom we find a good number of
altars inscribed. The letter A having no transverse is included in M at the
beginning of the third line, and the M and V are connected as usual: The
letters are meanly cut. On one side of the altar is a boar, and a toad on the
other. It may deserve to be considered, why these noxious creatures should be
represented on altars: Whether it might be, that they who erected the altars
were much molested with them, and addressed to the deities to be delivered from
them. It Is well known that the ancients used to address to different deities for
different benefits, and ascribe names to them suited to the favors which they
imagined they received from them. Thus Apollo is said to have been called (...)
by the Greeks for destroying mice, (...) in their language signifying a mouse:
And as this country might anciently have been infested both with boars and
toads, the inhabitants might apply to this god Vitires on that account. And
since it was customary with the Romans to adopt into their worship the deities
of those nations which they conquered, this Maximus might for that reason erect
an altar to the god Vitires, and cut the figures of these two animals upon it.

VVNB OCEM VIT
This fragment is in the outside of a garden wall at the end of the town. I take
it to have been a piece of an altar. It is difficult to make Numinibus Oceani
of it, or to account for it if it be read so: Possibly the Vit in the last line
may have been part of vitam that is Ob vitam servatam or some such thing.

Parcite caerulei vos saltem numina ponti,
Infestumque mihi sit satis esse Jovem.
OVID. TRIST. lib. i. cl. ^^ We are also told in Camden, that an urn was found
here of a very uncommon shape, near a yard high, and not above seven inches
wide, with a little cup in the heart of it, perhaps for an oblation of tears,
or of wine and milk, such as the Romans used at the burying of their dead.

Several stones of the centurial kind have been found here. One was discovered
a few days before I came there, and is very clear and distinct, having been
erected by the fifth cohort of some legion; most likely of the Legio sexta
victrix.

There is another centurial stone, which I have represented at large, in order
to show that these stones were generally like what masons call through stones,
or however that they were very long, and went a great way into the wall, twice
or thrice as far as the other facing stones. Sometimes they are as this, in the
form of a parallelopepid, and sometimes of a pyramidal. I can make nothing out
of the letters which appear on this.

There are four other centurial stones found here, the two first and finest of
them are in the front of a house near the door, but not a visible letter upon
them. The next is in the end of a house, and whether the cross within be
designed for an ch, cohors decima, or only ornamental, I cannot be certain. The
last with No 4 upon it, was before the door of a dwelling house: The single
stroke at last is to me unintelligible; it may be part of an L, for Legionis.
So great a number of these sort of inscriptions make it probable that this sort
was built by the legionary cohorts, upon which occasion these stones, as usual,
were inserted in the face of the ramparts, or the inscriptions cut out upon
them.

Minervae Julius Gnenius Actarius cohortis quartae Brittonum Antoniniae votum
solvit libentissime merito.

Mr Horsley has placed this amongst the inscriptions and sculptures of
Northumberland, and says it was of Mr Warburton's collection, and is now in the
library at Durham. From whence it came, or where it was found, he does not
certainly know. -- Romans Britan. Observe. 233. But Dr Hunter tells us it was
taken out of the corner of a barn at Ebchester, by the direction of Dr
Montague, late dean of Durham, to be preserved in the library at Durham. Mr
Horsley says, I cannot find that this stone has ever been published before, though
it certainly has been curious when perfect. It has been plainly the face of an
altar, and not only the capital and base, but part of the plane itself is also
demolished; for a line or more has been broken off the top, and two or three
letters at least from every line on the left side. Actarius was an officer who
used to provide corn for the forces.

There are the remains of two piers in the river Derwent, supposed by some to
be part of a Roman bridge; but the present bridge near Ebchester being
constructed on piers with a platform of wood, indicates that the first
mentioned are much more modern than the time of the Romans, and were forsaken
for a more commodious passage.

Extract of a letter from Mr John Warburton, to Mr Gale.
It is strange there should be but four great Roman roads recorded, when there
are such numbers of them; and more that the greatest of them all should want a
name, viz. that which comes from the Roman wall near Dunbrytton frith in
Scotland, to Rochester in Northumberland, where Antoninus begins his first
journey, and from thence continues its course by Corbridge, Ebchester,
Lanchester, Binchester, Piere^bridge, Caterick, Aldbrough, and I believe might
thence be traced directly forward through London to Dover, and this without
intersering with any of the four great roads. It is well if Higden, or whoever
was the first describer of those ways, was not mistaken in his placing the
Watling street. The course he has taken for it seems far too short and out of
the way, and I rather agree with Talbot, who thinks that Antoninus's second
journey was along it, viz. from the west end of the Picts wall to Southampton,
which I think much more probable, as it enters the country on Gathertey moor,
etc. -- Gale's MSS.


Extract of another letter from Mr Warburten to Mr Gale.
I have read your essay toward a recovery of the four great Roman ways over
and over, with greater pleasure than I ever read any thing in my life, and am
fully convinced that the course you have taken for those ancient roads are
perfectly right, excepting that you lose the stem of the Ermin street upon
Gatherley moor, and follow only two branches of it that go directly to Tinmouth
and Boulness, the two extremes of the Pict's wall, while the main street
proceeds northward almost in a straight line and uninterrupted ridge from
Piercebridge, close by a small village called Denton, where there are many
remains of antiquity, and from thence continues its course by Bolam, Houghton,
St Helens Auckland, and soon after crosses the Were to Binchester, (Vinovium)
where there are to be seen the vestigia of a Roman fort, several altars, and in
the possession of Far^er Wren, esquire the lord of the soil, a great number of
Roman coins dug up there. From this place its course is generally over moorish
ground to Lanchester, and six miles further to Ebchester, where it crosses the
river Derwent, and enters Northumberland. But before I leave Ebchester, which
is inferior to no place I have mentioned for antiquities, I cannot but acquaint
you that I look upon it to have been the Vindomora of Antoninus, and not at
Wall's-end, where that station has hitherto been fixed, since it exactly
answers the distance between Corstopitum and Vinovium, the 2d and 4th stations
in the first iter, viz. nine miles from the first of them and nineteen from the
latter, and this in a direct line along one of of the most entire regular and
large ways I ever saw, the ridge being for the most part two yards in height,
full eight yards broad, and all paved with stone, that it is at present as even
as if new laid; whereas from Constapitum, or Corbridge, to Wall's-end, the 3d
station in the first iter, it is twenty miles directly cast, and from thence
back to Vinovium, the 4th station twenty-five miles to the westward, so that we
are carried eighteen miles about upon a road that has no appearance of a
military way, except just where it touches the Pict's wall, and has the river
Tyne to pass in a part where it never could be crossed without boats, which are
difficulties I think the Romans would never subject themselves to.


[Printed in the sixth vol. of Lel. Itin. published by Mr Tho. Hearn, at
Oxford, in 1711, page 93.]


, although Camden, in his edition of the Britannia of 1594, does not notice it:
The traces of the vallum are yet apparent, though cut in some places by
buildings, so as to render it impossible to take the exact dimensions, the
square being about one hundred and sixty paces, as we could compute, on the
side next to the river, running along the brink of a steep declivity: Also many
curious pieces of antiquity have been discovered here, as set forth in the
notes: Some since the learned antiquaries there mentioned visited the place,
particularly three inscriptions, which the reverend Mr Jefferson, for their
preservation, caused to be fixed in the wall of the curacy house.



In the wall of another house is the following inscription: And in 1784, by the
washing of the flood in the banks of Derwent, this altar was discovered, now in
the possession of H. Swinburne, esquire It is two feet six inches high, and
thirteen inches thick; the characters well cut and mostly distinct See Gent.
Mag. Sup. 1784.

In the first iter of Antonine's Itinerary; the distances of the stations in
the county of Durham are thus laid down, including the next stations south and
north in Northumberland and Yorkshire: -- A Bremeneo. Richester, --
Corstopitum. M. P. xx. Corbridge. -- Vindomora, M. P. ix. Ebchester. --
Vinovia, M. P. xix. Binchester. -- Cataractom, M. P. xxii. Cataract.

Vindomora nine miles distant from Corstopitum, according to the Itinerary, and
this next station at Ebchester is distant from Corbridge about seven computed
miles, and near ten measured, as was found on actual mensuration with a chain.
This, therefore, is no doubt Vindomora: And here again, as in almost all cases,
the Roman miles fall short in number of our English measured, almost one in
ten, which confirms the Roman to be horizontal. The people told me of two or
three load of burnt ashes found here, with some large bones and teeth. The
Roman inscriptions and monuments that have been found here may be seen in the
collection.

[In the year 1728, a countryman with his plough fixed upon somewhat he could
not overturn, he opened the earth, and found an oblong square stone, which by
more assistance was removed, finding under it a cavity, composed of six erected
stones, the interstices walled up, and therein an urn about eight inches in
height What is included within the brackets are Dr Hunter's MS. observations on
the margin of the Britannia, penes Leo, Hartley.
.] Dr Gale seems to think that Vindolana and Vindolande in Ravennas are the
same with Vindomora in the Itinerary; and then from the affinity of the sound
concludes Dolande to be it: But I believe the name is Dotland, and this is
rather too near Corstopitum, even though we should prefer the copy that is five
miles for the distance instead of nine. But to wave these smaller matters, it
is certain that Vindomora and Vindolana are two different places, and that
Dotland can neither be one nor the other, for this is quite off the military
way, and there is no appearance of Roman antiquity here. As to Camden's opinion
of Vindomora being Wall's-end, and Vindobola being the same, it is needless to
confute it, or to add any thing more on this head.

[At a Roman mile and a half distance to the south, some years ago was
discovered, the foundation of a square watch tower, about 6 or 8 yards on the
west side of the military way; the stones were cemented with lime Dr Hunter, in
another of his MS. observations in the year 1727, says, a little south of the
south-west angle of the ramparts, I discovered part of the aqueduct that
brought water to the baths; it was composed of two erected flat stones cemented
into two niches, cut in one laid flat for the bottom. I am apt to think the
ditch of the fortress has been supplied by another aqueduct.


.] About five computed and six measured miles and a half more along the same
military way, which is still very certain and often very grand, bring us to the
large and remarkable station at Lanchester, which is not mentioned in this
iter; the true reasons of which silence I take to be these, that it is too nigh
the last station to finish the day's march here, and that it belongs to another
iter, which I shall endeavor to show in its proper place does begin at this
station, etc.


. We paid attention to the great Roman road which leads to this place from the
southward, and found it remarkably perfect where the new enclosures of common
lands had not taken place. We traced it for a considerable distance, so as to
enable us strictly to ascertain the dimensions: It is formed in three distinct
parts, with four ditches; a center road, probably made for carriages and
cavalry, forty-two feet in width, with a narrow road on each side for foot
passengers, twelve feet wide: As we had not observed this form in any of the
roads in Northumberland, or on the line of the wall, it made us more attentive
to ascertain the matter. In the vicinity of large cities our modern roads have
the like conveniences; in this northern situation the circumstance here
increases our ideas of the Roman power and possession, when such a station as
Ebchester required such conveniences, either for the ease of passengers, or to
accommodate troops who should line the roads and guard the forage or the
baggage of armies.

RYTON CHURCH
view of Ryton Church

Crossing the river Derwent, we enter the parish of

RYTON,
bounded toward Northumberland by the rivers Tyne and Chopwell. The village of
Ryton is pleasantly situated about eight miles from Newcastle on the banks of
the river Tyne, where the vale widens into extensive and fertile fields: It is
inhabited by opulent families, and contains many handsome new buildings. The
church stands at the west end of the village, in a spacious yard; is a stone
building of ashler work, covered with lead, having a tower ornamented with a
stone spire, the whole height of which is one hundred and eight feet This
church is rectorial, lies in the deanery of Chester, and is dedicated to the
Holy Cross. -- The bishop of Durham is patron. -- There is an excellent
rectory-house, built by James Fynney, rector, with all suitable offices: He was
instituted in 1706, and died in 1726.

King's books 42l. 10s. 10d. -- Tenths 4l. 5s. 1d. -- Proc. ep. 18s. -- Synod
and proc. 2s. -- Proc. arch. 3s. -- Real value 300l.

RECTORS.
Will. de Marghe Mag. 1254 Alan de Esyngwald, 1300 Mag. John de Botheby Test.
q'd cum. int. Dom. Hugonem de Monte alto mag'ram hospitalis de Kypier ex p'te
una and mag'r'm Joh'em de Botheby rectorem eccl'ie de Ryton ex alt'a, tam sup'
juraq. possessione p'cipiendi quemdam annuum redditum duar. marcar in medietate
de'cie Garbar de d'nicis venerabilis p'ris d'ni epi Dunelm. infra p'ochiam de
Ryton juxta, etc.

E. orig. pen. Tho. Gyll, arm.
, 1312 Nic. Gategang, 5 Sep. 1334 Will. de Olby, 12 Jan. 1342, p. m. Gategang
John de Wyndlinbourgh, 1378 Mag. Tho. de Gretham, cl. Joh's Dei gra. etc.
concessimus, etc. dil'co cli'co n'ro mag'ro Tho. de Gretham p'sone eccl. de
Ryton, etc. q'd ipi imp'p'm he'ant aqueductionem p' fistulam subterraneam in
solo n'ro e font voc. Strotewell etc.

Rot. Fordham, s^h. 5. in dorso.
1382 Joh. de Burgh, cl. 1402 Bishop Skirlaw confirmed the aqueduct. Rot.
Skirlaw, No 100.
Rob. Moore, 1407 Joh. de Nepotus, cap. Joh. Wynname, A. B. 9 Dec. 1497 Rob.
Davell, LL. D. Anth. Salvayne, S. T. B. 28 Apr. 1558, p. m. Davell Will.
Garnet, A. B. 27 Dec. 1558, p. res. Salvayn Joh. Bowde, S. T. P. 14 Feb. 1577,
p. m. Garnet Franc. Bunney, A. M. 11 Sep. 1578, p. res. Bowde Will. James, A.
M. Apr. 1617, p. m. Bunney John Weld, an intruder Ra. Blakiston, A. M. 10 Dec.
1660, p. m. James Will. Cave, S. T. P. 1676, p. m. Blakiston Malinus Sorsby,
1679, p. res. Cave James Finney, S. T. P. 1706, p. m. Sorsby Tho. Secker, A. M.
17 Jun. 1727, p. m. Finney Rob. Stillingfleet, A. M. 1733, p. res. Secker Joh.
Floyd, A. M. 1738, p. res. Stillingfleet Joh. Rotheram, A. M. 25 Feb. 1766, p.
m. Floyd Hon. Rich. Byron, A. M. 4 Nov. 1769, p. res. Rotheram, presented to
Houghton
Book of rates 17l. 15s. 2d. -- Value of lands, etc. 2418l. 18s. 2d. -- Grey's
MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 1560 195 576 from 1760 to
1779 2755 782 2577 Increase 1195 587 2001

Burials in the last year 93. -- Computed number of inhabitants 2790.

Bishop's rent 45l. 5s. -- For mines 6l. 13s. 4d. -- Tenths 4l. 5s. 1d.

This parish pays toward the land tax when it is 4s. in the pound, and the
county rates after the rate of 6s. 8d. in the pound, as follows: Land tax.
County rates. Crawcrook 25 4 8 0 10 6 Chopwell 42 14 0 0 15 8 Ryton 67 18 1 1 2
4 Ryton wood side 71 9 9 0 7 0 Winlaton lordship 105 1 9 2 17 4 Stella 0 4 2

Registered estates. Ryton wood side, G. Errington, esquire 45l. -- Lord
Widdrington 44l. -- Dicto Stella 160l. -- Winlaton, Mrs Eliz. Langdale, 100l.
-- Mann's MSS.

MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTIONS, etc. In the chancel, on a brass plate.
Francis Bunny He was the third son of Rich. Bu^y, of Newland, near Wakefield,
esquire by his wise B^dge^ S^stwo^d.
, born May 8, 1543, began to preach God's word Nov. 1, 1567.

Inducted into a prebend at Durham the 9th of May, 1572, made archdeacon of
Northumberland, 1573, October. 20, and the 11th Sep. 1578, made rector of Ryton;
having buried here his four sons, and his daughter at York, hastneth to Heaven
after them, and triumphing for hope of immortality, says thus: My bark now
having won ye haven,
I fear no stormy seas,
God is my hope, my home is Heaven,
My Life is Happy Ease.
This hope, this home, this life most sweet
Whosoever will seek to win,
Must bid adieu to all delights,
The four roots of sin.
Died 16th of April, 1617.



. On the east front of the tower, in relief, is a large figure of St George
subduing the dragon, which lies at his feet; of this sculpture the village
tradition, like most others, is rediculous. This is a regular building, with an
aile on each side of the nave, formed by two well proportioned columns, one of
which is round, the other octagonal, supporting pointed arches, the groins of
which are ornamented with sculptures of heads, etc. The nave is twenty-six
paces in length, and with the ailes fourteen paces wide: The tower stands upon
an arch supported by heavy clustered pillars, and there are three narrow
windows to the west: The chancel is separated from the nave, by an arch rising
from brackets or corbles in the side walls: The front of the south aile was
rebuilt in 1627, and is lighted by two modern sashed windows, and a small
window to the east; the north aile is lighted by two side windows, and one to
the east; there is no north door: The font is a large ancient stone basin:
There is a gallery appropriated to the workmen called Crawley's Crew, employed
in the great iron manufactory Sir Ambrose Crawley, knight, draper and alderman
of London, who was sheriff in 1706, and died on the 7th of October, 1713. He
established great iron works at Swalwell, Winlaton, etc.
, particularly mentioned in the sequel: The pulpit is placed against the east
pillar, in the south row: A large stall is enclosed on the south side for the
owners of Chopwell, and another for the house of Stella; the whole nave is
decently kept. You ascend by three steps into the chancel, which is ten paces
long and seven wide, stalled with oak on each side, and enclosed by a screen,
carved in open foliage work; it is lighted by a large window of five lights to
the east, and six small windows to the south: Within the altar rails is the
recumbent essigy of an ecclesiastic cut in black and white shell'd marble, such
as is won in the bed of the river Were, near Stanhope, in this county; the
hands elevated, clasping a book, and the feet resting on a lion. The vestry
room is neat and spacious.

There was a chantry in this church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary; the
founder or endowment, save what is mentioned in the notes, now unknown The
account of R. Eure, sheriff and esch.

A. D. 1425. Five shillings from the rent of one message and eighteen acres of
land, called Saint Maryland, lately given by the lord of Crawerook, to the
altar of St Mary, in the church of Ryton, in mortmam, without the bishop's
license.

1498. John Saunder of Ryton, Sep 13, in the 4th of Rich. translation,
surrendered one cottage with its appurtenances, and three acres of land with
one plot of land belonging to the same cottage, to Will. Clark, chaplain to St
Mary's chantry, and his successors, for the maintenance of a light to be
continually burning before the image of the blessed Mary. -- Rot. B. Fax. Xo
11. in dorso.


.

There is a very large tumulus near the north wall of the churchyard, planted
with trees, whence it is difficult to take the dimensions of its base; it is
about twenty perpendicular feet in height, and a beautiful object from the
opposite side of Tyne. One somewhat similar, in this parish, near Bradley hall,
was opened some little time ago, and therein found a square cavity, composed of
stones set on edge, which enclosed the remains and ashes of the interred, but
nothing was discovered to denote the age or nation to which it belonged.

Though Ryton is seated in a valley, yet it commands a most beautiful prospect
to the north and east. The banks of Tyne rise gradually to a considerable
distance, exhibiting as fine a cultivated scene as the north of England
produces. The town of Newburn lies almost on the brink of the river; to the
west the villas of Wylam and Cross-house; on the distant landscapes are
scattered the towns of Walbottle, Throckley, Heddon-on-the-Wall, and Horseley,
with the villa of East Newburn: Further eastward down the vale, Benwell
cottage, the plantations above Fenham, and the heights of Newcastle town moor.

In the reign of king Edward I. the 18th of October, 1297, Ryton was burnt by
the Scots, whilst the English forces were dishonourably conducted by Warren and
Cressengham Abercromby's Hist. of Scotland.
. In August, 1640, it was the scene of panic and confusion, when Lesley led a
handful of Scotchmen to the banks of Tyne, and obliged lord Conway to evacuate
Newcastle, and retire with his whole force to Durham For a full account of this
transaction, vide View of Northumb. vol. ii. p. 448.
.

Certain lands in Ryton called Greenside, were the estate of John Swinburn, who
forfeited the same by treason, being one of the earl of Northumberland's
partisans in the year 1571. Bishop Barnes granted out the same in the year
1580, to Cuthbert Carnaby, esquire to hold by copy of court roll Dated 4 Oct. 22
Eliz. -- Randal's MSS.
.

Ryton manor belonging to the bishop, and subordinate to Chester, furnishes
little historic matter; the ancient services are set forth in the extracts from
Boldon Book and bishop Hatfield's Survey: By the latter it appears that the
prior of Brenkburn held two ox-gangs of lands here, and a fishery in the river
Comp't est p' inq. cap. apud Gatesheved coram W. de Mordon, vic. Dun. die
veneris prox. ante fest. nativ. S'ci Joh'is Bapte ao p. d'ni Ric'i (Bury). Epi
Dun. undecimo, q'd a t'pe d'ni Anth. (Beke) quond. epi. D. and a t'pe a quo non
extat memoria, solebat esse una piscaria vocat le Blackhough juxta Ryton
p'tinens epo Dun. ex p'te occidentali pontis de Tyne apud Novum Castrum. Et est
ibid. una p. voc. Cromwell ejus ^'cia p's p'tnet d'no epo. Et una p. voc.
Quickham dranwater juxta Quickham p'tinens dicto d'no epo. Et est un. Yare voc.
le Rutyare eum tribus capitibus juxta Quickham p'tin. dicto d'no epo. and
solebat extendere usq. ad medium ^ile aque de Tyne a t'pe quo non extat
memoria. Et est unum Yare voc. le Maleyare p'tin. d'co d'no e. jux'a le
Redhough and sol. extendere usq ad medium file aque p'd. Et ex p'te orientali
pont. p'der est un. Yare voc. le Kyrkeyare subtus man'ium d'ni ep. apud
Gatesheved p'tin. eid. d'no E. and solebat ex'e^^ere usq. ad t'ciam p'tem aque
pred. Et est ibid. unam p. voc. Toulershell p'tin eid. d'no E. Et est ^m. Yare
voc. le Helpiryare subtus le p'k ap. Gatesheved p'tin. eid. d'no ep. et sol.
extendere usq ad t'ciam p'tem aque p'dce. Et est ibid. un. p. voc. Turnwater
subtus le Frergose p'tmens eid'm d'no epo rem. ut supra.

Extracts from the register books. -- Lib. k. fo. 159.
Attorn. epi Dun. cont. Selby and al. Information to ascertain the right of
common upon Ryton moor, belonging to the bishop, and upon Winlaton common
adjoining thereto; whereupon it was ordered, that the right should be tried at
law; but it does not appear any further proceedings were had therein.

Tempest and al. con. At. ep'i and all is. 16 Sep. 1638, p. 497. Division of
Ryton moor. This common has been very large, containing many hundred acres, as
appears by the several allotments made to the several persons interested
therein, who all hold the same by copy of court roll, at the yearly rent of 4d.
p' acre, payable to the lord bishop of Durham.

The mines are reserved to the bishop, with the several liberties of winning,
working, and leading thereof, paying damages for spoil of ground.

Twenty acres of this common were allotted to the tenant of the bishop's mill
at Ryton, toward keeping horses for fetching corn.

Ritona.

Homines de Ritona tenent villam de Riton ad firm. cum dominio and redditu
assiso and molendino and operationibus and cum instaurament unius carucae and j
herearij and xx celdr. de avena ad mensuram episcopi, and cum piscaris, and
reddunt xiiij libras, and faciunt ladas sicut illi de Quykham and quadrigant
cum Craucrok unum tenellum vini.

Punderus tenet v acras and habet travas sicut alii and reddit xxx gallinas and
cc ova. -- Villani de eadem xxiiij gallinas and cc ova. -- Boldon Buke.

Ryton.

Liberi tenentes. Will's fill. Thomae Gategang tenet j mes. and lx acr. terrae
quond'm Will's Ughtred and red. xiij s. iiij d.

Johannes Stepyng tenet j mes. and xxj acr. terrae quond'm Gilberti Forster and
red. xiij s. iiij d.

Rector ecclesiae de Riton tenet xiij acr. terrae vocat. le parson-med. ut
gleba ecclesiae suae and nihil reddit, ut dicitur.

Moniales de Novo Castro super Tynam tenent manner. de Stelley, ibid. and red.
per ann. xiij s. iiij d.

Robertus de Horsley tenet medietat villae de Crawcrok, per servic. forin. and
red. x s. -- tenet j toft and xl acr. terrae vocat. Bradley and red. ad term.
S. Cuthb. in Sept. j d.

Prior de Brenkburn tenet ibid. ij bovat. terrae and piscar. in aqua, de
Elemos. d'ni nihil datur.

Terrae bond cum parcel. dominicar. Johannes Knout tenet j mes. and vj acr.
terrae quarum j acr. and dim. terr. domin. and iij acr. and dim. de terr. bond
ij s. iiij d.

Johannes Taillour and xxvj alii tenentes tenent terras bond. cum parcel.
dominicar. and xxv. mes.

Johannes Newcome, tenet, etc. Wappesley and red. xviij d. -- Rector ecclesiae
de Riton, etc. j mes. and xiij ac. ter. ibid. and red. per ann. x s. viiij d.
-- Will. Robynson, Ricardus Skyll capellanus altaris B. Mariae, Johannes Bell
and xxxiij alij tenent, etc.

Tenentes tenent inter se commune forg. contin. in long. xl pedes and in lat.
xx pedes and redd. iiij d. -- Molend aquat. ibid. cum x s. de tolnet cervis.
and red. per ann. cvj s. viij d. -- Cariant inter se j ton. vini and faciunt
opera ad molend. and stagnum consueta.

Robertus Newcomen tenet terr. vocat. Punderland contin. v acr. terrae, and
habet de tenentibus sicut alij de consuetudine officii and reddit ad festa
natalis d'ni and paschae xxx gallin.

Johannes Haynyng tenet piscar. in aqua de Tyne ibid. and red. per ann. xl s.
-- Hatfield's Survey.

Skirlaw. Rob'tus Paterson, collector ep'i de Ryton.

Ruthal. Joh's Richardson, forestarius ep'i de Ryton and Milbourne flash p'
vita cum seod. 57 s. p' pat. epi.

Pilkington. Controversia inter Jacobum Pilkington ep'm and Joh'em Swinburne de
Chopwell ar. de Bundis, manerij and vast. epi de Ryton, and manerij and vast.
de Chopwell. Et arbitriu' fact. de eis p' Thomam Gargrave mil. and Henricum
Savile ar. 10 Oct. 5 Eliz. Rot. cl. m. No 11.

James. Joh'es Widows pater and fill. custodes parci epi de Frankland,
Middlewood, and Ryton, p' vitis sub. feod. -- 22 Mar. 11 Ja. I. 1613. --
Mickleton's MSS.

E. copyhold b. marked B. p. 393.

1402. Pl. halm. ap. Chestr. etc. Joh. de Wyndale, cl. cepit de d'no unum
puteum carbonum maritimor. infra camp. de Ryton de novo.

Ibid. marked C. p. 550.

1413. Halm. de Chestr. etc. Ordina'co o'ium tenentium c'oi consenc. ordinatum
cor. R. de Eure chi. sen'lo cum consilio Rob'ti More R'coris eccl. ib. q'd ubi
oi'a t're and p'ta modo tenent. sc'am usus foreste de cet'o teneant. secundum
usus rurales, q'd capi dividant in tres parts, viz. un. d. p' bladis secu'dis
and p' warect ^allow ground.
, p' qua ordinac'oe p'd Rob. R'r dedit p'dcis ten. de elemoz. sua xl solidos.


.

CHOPWELL, in this parish, the estate of lord Cowper, was the inheritance of
the Claverings, and before them of the Swinburns An exemplification of an
information in the chancery at Durham, by the attorney general against John
Swinburne, for working coals in Ryton common, with inter, and depos. thereon.
-- Also an award of arbitrators, touching the bounds of Chopwell and Ryton, on
the above information, 5th of q. Eliz.

Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
. In the reign of king James, John Lions, esquire receiver of the king's revenues
in these parts, being a defaulter in his accounts to the crown, an extent
issued against his estate in Chopwell, called the East wood, Moor close, Deane,
and the Carrs King's rememb. office ven. xxvjo die Jan. 1640, order for
restitution.
.

A moiety of the vill of CRAWCROOK was the estate of the Horsleys at the time
of taking bishop Hatfield's Survey Craucrok.

Craucrok est ad sirmam cum villanis and dominio, and cum instauramento unius
carucae and j hercarij, and reddit preter assisum redditum xj marc. and dimid.
and reddit de assiso redditu iiij marc. and dimid. Et j vaccam ^ metrid. and
iiij celdr. brasij and totidem sa^inae and totidem avenae and j castelman and
quad^ cum R^ton (...) ^o^ellum vini. -- Boldon Buke.


, held of the bishop by fealty and ten shillings rent: They also held certain
lands, called Bradley, in socage; of these Richard de Horsley died seized in
the twenty-seventh year of that prelate: And in the succeeding inquisition
taken on the death of Robert de Horsley, in the fourth year of bishop Skirlaw,
the lands of Bradley are described by the names of Bradley field cum le B^ye.
Crawcrook is now divided into a multitude of properties, and Bradley, by a late
purchase, is become the estate of J. Simpson, esquire.

STELLA, seated on the banks of Tyne, after the dissolution of the Benedictine
nunnery of St Bartholomew in Newcastle, to which it appertained, became the
estate of the Tempests Inq. p. m. Nich. Tempest, mil. and baron, 1626, and Tho.
Tempest, bar. 1642, in which it is described manner, de Stellingley, al^s vocat.
Stelley, etc.
, in which family it continued, till by the marriage of the heirefs of that
house, it came to the possession of William late lord Widdrington, who
forfeited his life estate therein in 1715, but the inheritance remained
unattainted to Henry Widdrington, esquire his eldest son 12o die Sep. ao 2o Caroli
regis compertum post mortem Nicholai Tempest de Stelley in com. Dunelm. milit.
and baronet, quod fuit feissatus de and in manerio de Stellingley all is voc.
Stelley, situat. stan. and existen. prope aquam de Tyne in parochia de Ryton,
in ep'tu Dunelm. cum suis juribus membris and pertinenciis universis. Ac de
omnibus terris arabilibus pratis pascius pasturis boscis subboscis communis
piscationib's mineris carbonum infra solum and fundum ibidem comoditatibus,
proficuis emolumentis and aliis advantagiis eidem manerio de Stellingley all is
Stelley pertinentibus vel ullo modo spectantibus nuper parcello possessionum
domus five monasterij S. Bartholomei infra villam Novi Castri super Tynam
dissoluti.

Bourne's Hist. Newcastle, p. 166. Stella. Here is a magnificent house and
garden: The village is now chiefly inhabited by coalworkers, and has staiths
in it. There are many other villages on the sides of this river, such as
Blaiden, Lemington, Swalwell, Delaval, Redheugh, etc. Several of them have
staiths belonging to them, such are the staiths of Lady Clavering, Sir Henry
Liddell, bart. Richard Ridley, esquire George ^iddell, esquire Edward Wortley Montague,
esquire Geo. Bows, esquire George Pit, esquire Geo. Malliber, esquire Mr John Simpson, and Mr
Joseph Ledger.

An inscription on a mural monument, north wall.

Sepulturae consecratum Nicholai Tempest de Stella, militis and baronetti (qui
obijt Ano D'n MDCXXV. aetatis suae LXXIII.) et Isabellae uxoris suae
charissimae, filiae Gulielmi Lambton de Lambton armigeri: Quae quatuor filios,
et totidem filias, illi peperit, et obiit Ano D'n. MDCXXIII. aetatis suae LXXI.
Illa per tot annos praemoriens, quot illi praenatus erat. E liberis eorum sunt
superstites Thomas, Henricus, Isabella, uxor Bertrami Bulmer de Tyrlesden,
militis. -- Jana relicta Thomae Chaitor de Butrobee, armig^ri. -- Et Margareta,
uxor Gilberti Errington de Ponteland, armiger. -- Parentibus optimis et
suavissimis Thomas Tempest baronettus, eorum filius, observantiae et amoris
ergo, sibique et suis mortalitatis memor, hoc posuit.

Filias extruxit tumulum, pia sacra parentum.
Lambton erat matris, Stella domus que patris.
Miles erat Ni'olas Tempest, pater et baronettus
Isabella suit matter; amor pares.
Octo illis liberi sexu aequo: Septuaginta
Ultro vixerunt, et cecidere pares.

.

WINLATON, in bishop Hatfield's Survey, is set forth to be the possession of
lord Nevil, which he held by forest service and 20l. rent: The Menevylls held
under this family the manor of Thornley in Winlayton, at forty shillings rent;
and also another tenement styled a hamlet of Winlayton, called Huntley-sleigh,
at two shillings rent Wynlaton and Berleia.

Wynlactona and Berleia sunt ad firmam cum dominio and villanis cum
instauramento and reddunt xvl. Et ^alcant prata ij diebus unusquisque villanus
cum homine and tunc habent corrodium. and hevant saenum and quadri^ant j die.

Marescum, pratum, and nemus sunt in manu episcopi.

Molendinum reddit v marc. and dimid.

Vide Quykham, Hatfield's Survey. Boldon Buke,

Inq. p. m. Agnes widow of J. Menvyll, 16 Hatfield, cor. W. de Claxton esc.


. The Silksworths held considerable property here in bishop Hatfield's time
Inq. p. m. Will. de Silksworth, 23 bishop Hatfield, cor. W. de Menevylle esc.

Inq. p. m. Ra. de Nevylle, 23 bishop Hatfield, and John de Nevylle chiv.
Winlayton manor, 1 bishop Skirlaw, cor. Will. del Bows vic. and esc.


; as also the family of Ferys, whose property bore the names of Berley and
Spen, by three shillings rent to John de Nevill, and suit at three courts in
Winlayton Inq. p. m. Cath. ux. Will. de Fery, 25 bishop Hatfield, cor. Will. de
Menevylle vic.
. In 1424, Ralph earl of Westmoreland, by will devised this manor to his son
Edward de Nevil, and the heirs male of his body E Madox. form. p. 432. Datum in
castro meo de Raby, A. D. MCCCCXXIIII. and m. Oct. die xviij.
: By the inquisition taken at his death, it appears he had aliened the manor to
trustees, with other estates; and in the description of Winlayton are the words
cummim'is carbonum de Fu^ay pute and Morlay pute, etc Inq. p. m. 20 bishop
Langley.

Ind. betw. bishop Bury and John de Nevill lord of Raby, touching his services
in war and peace, on condition to hold the manor of Winlaton discharged de
vingt livers de rent de quel rent le dit man' est charge, etc.


.

About the year 1690, that great patron of manufactory and trade, Sir Ambrose
Crawley, fixed upon this situation to establish those works which have employed
multitudes of people, and caused an influx of wealth since that happy era, to
this country: He first sat down at Sunderland by the sea, where, in its
infancy, the project was nursed for five or six years, but the situation of
this place and its environs, both in regard to coals and water, induced him to
transplant his Cyclopean colony hither. The town of Winlayton stands on a high
ridge of country, inclining on the east, north, and south toward the rivers
Tyne and Derwent. Before Sir Ambrose settled his people here, the place
consisted of a few deserted cottages, and now contains about fifteen hundred
inhabitants, chiefly smiths. The works carried on in this town are various;
making nails is the chief branch, but there is an eye of jealousy on enquiry,
and the traveller can reap little information as to the various articles
manufactured, or quantity produced. The buildings are regular, and calculated
for convenience and not show: The streets are well paved. A commodious chapel
was built in the year 1705, which will receive three hundred people at divine
service, and a stipend provided for a chaplain The chapel is said to be erected
on the site of an old chapel, dedicated to St Ann, destroyed in the rebellion
of the earl of Westmoreland: Human bones have been repeatedly dug up, when
there was occasion to break the soil to any depth.

Chaplains Edm. Lodge, cl. 1705. -- * * * * Watson -- * * * * Mean, 1706 -- * *
* * Battle -- * * * John's or Eyons -- Rob. Wright, cl. ob. 1768 -- Thomas
Spooner, cl. Feb. 1768 -- Rev. T. Carr, cl.

An account of the re-building of Winlaton chapel was printed in London in
1711, to which is prefixed a letter of lord Crewe's, dated from Durham castle,
23d of September, 1710, setting forth, that Mr Jonathan Story had been very
instrumental in that work. The narrative is addressed to Henry lord Hyde, by Mr
Story, and comprehends an oration delivered by him to the people on occasion of
an attempt to found a dissenting meeting house at Winlaton, where he represents
were settled in the manufactory above two thousand souls. Mr Story, though not
of the church, in his oration first expatiated on the excellency of religion in
general; second, the advantage it has in the minds of men; third, the
excellency of the Christian religion in particular; and lastly, full thoughts
on the established church of England; and he recapitulates the circumstances
attending the year 1641, and the succeeding times, with much warmth. -- The
first place for p^^^^ing i^ which was licenced 1704-5, was the hall belonging
to Sir William Blacket, bart. In June the manufacturers chose a minister of
their own, and contributed one half farthing in the shilling for all wages they
should receive, for his support, which made up a considerable sum, and being
augmented with ten pounds a year given by the proprietors of the works, made a
comfortable subsistence for their clergyman, besides paying all other incident
charges of the chapel; at length a certain stipend of fifty pounds a year was
fixed for the minister, and the beforementioned allowance became sufficient to
yield above twenty pounds a year for a school. A subscription was next set on
foot for building the chapel, which was begun the 17th of April, 1705; on the
23d of August following it was fit to receive the congregation; and in January
following it was fully finished and beautified, regularly pewed, and a large
gallery at the west end, with a turret and clock: Daily service is performed
therein.


. Winlayton mill, which in the last century was used for corn, and had a few
cottages near it, now is surrounded with a considerable village, where the iron
works are also carried on. It is in a pleasant situation, on the banks of
Derwent, with an open prospect toward the east; the number of people employed
there may amount to about three hundred of all ages: A stone in the mill dam
shows the propitious year of its conversion, 1691. The chief work carried on
there is making and grinding edge tools, slitting bars of iron into long narrow
pieces, proper for making nails, etc. Steel is also blistered here, and
file-making constitutes a considerable branch of the business, together with a
diversity of other articles.

As we are speaking of the manufactory, for the sake of connection, we will
advance to SWALWELL, part of which town is in the parish of Whickham; it is
seated on the banks of Derwent, near its influx with the Tyne: The principal
part of the inhabitants are employed in iron works, but in the most massive
articles, as ship anchors; they make hoes and shovels, and cast pots, kettles,
and other domestic utensils. -- Our obliging correspondent, from whom we
received much information touching this country, observes to us, that the
anchor-smith's shop strikes the spectator with a pleasing astonishment, where
the images conceived by the inimitable poet are justly represented: -- "Alii
ventosis follibus auras
"Accipiunt, redduntque; alii stridentia tingunt
"Era lacu: Gemit impositis incudibus antrum.
"Illi inter sese, multavi brachia tollunt
"In numerum; versantque tenaci forcipe massam."
VIRG. AEN. lib. 8. 449, etc.

Here a warehouse is kept for such articles as suit the country demand; the
principal storehouses are at Greenwich, and in Thames Street, London. Three
ships, appertaining to the company, called the Ambrose, Theodosia, and
Elizabeth, are constantly employed in conveying their goods from the north
thither. The workmen in Swalwell are still more numerous than at Winlayton. The
villages of High and Low Team, situate to the south-east of Swalwell, are
chiefly peopled by the manufacturers employed in the same works: There several
of the large articles are made, and manufacturing saws constitutes a principal
branch; the plates are not beat, but produced by fusion in a mould.

Pedigree of the several Families of CLAVERING of Calleley, Tilmouth, Axwell,
and Berrington, as deduced by Sir WILLIAM DUGDALE, and continued to the present
Time. (VOL. II. PAGE 443.)
Eustachius, a noble Norman, had two sons, (See Mon. Angl. vol. II. p. 592, --
819.) Serlo de Burgh came into England with the Conqueror, and built
Knaresborough Castle. -- Died without issue. John called Monoculus, from having
but one eye, heir to Serlo. Pagan. William. Eustace died in the Welsh wars, 3d
King Hen. II. Vir magnus et Grandaeus. Beatrix, only d. and h. of lvo de Vescy.
-- 2d wife. William de Vescy, cut out of his mother's belly, after her death.
Burga, sister of Robt. de Stuteville, Lord of Knaresborough. Eustace de
Vescy,..... d. of William King, of Scotland. William de Vescy. Agnes, d. of
Count Ferres. Matilda. Cecilia. Agnes, eldest daugh. of Will. Fitz Neil, Baron
of Halton, and sist. and h. to her bro. Wm. -- 1st wife. Richard, Baron of
Halton, and Constable of Chester, in right of his mother. Albreda, d. and h. of
Robt. de Lizures. After mar. to William Fitz Williams. John, who took the furn.
of Lacy, together with the arms, was constable of Chelster. -- Ob. 25th Hen.
II. Henry de Lacy left an only daughter....... married to the Earl of
Lancaster, on whom she settled all her lands, and from them the Lacys, Earls of
Lincoln (now extinct) descended. Roger, 1st Baron of Warkworth, by the gift of
King Hen. II. Eleanor, d. and coh. of Henry of Essex, Baron of Raleigh. Robert
founded Langley monastery, in Norf. King Rich. gave him Eure, in Bucks, was
sher. of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Northumb. Margt. only d. and h. to Wm. de
Caisneto (vulgo Cheney) relict of Hugh de Cresey. John, Baron of Warkworth and
Clavering, in Ess. Ada, d. and h. of...... Baliol. Hugh de Eure, from whom the
Lords Eure descended. Roger, Baron of Warkworth and Clavering. Ob. 33d Hen.
III............... Robert, Baron of Warkworth and Clavering, died 3d Edw. II.
having had summons to parliament, from 23d Edw. I. to 4th Edw. II. -- Had great
possessions in Norfolk, Suffolk, Bucks, Northamptonshire, Yorkshire, Durham,
and Northumberland. Margery de la Zouch. Sir John Clavering, Knt. had this
surname given by King Edw. I. from the place of his estate in Essex. --
Summoned to parliament from 28th Edw. II. to 5th Edw. III. -- Died at his manor
of Aynhoin, Northamptonshire (s. p. male) 1332, bur. in Langley abbey. --
Settled his manors of Newburn, Warkworth, Rothbury, and Corbridge, in the
crown, which were given to Hen. Percy and his heirs, by Edw. III. -- The manors
of Aynho and Horford, he gave to Ralph Neville and his heirs, who, at last,
inherited them (his brother Edmund dying s. p.) whereby this family were
deprived of these large inheritances, which otherwise would have descended to
them. Hawise, dau. of Robert Tibitot. Tho. de Audley, 1st husband. Eve, only d.
and h. mar. 4 times. Ralph de Neville 2d husband. Ralph. Robert. Ralph de
Elfford, 3d husband. John. Robert. Edmund. Robert Benhall, Knt. 4th husband,
ob. s. p. Edmund. Sir Alexander. Robert. Henry. Roger left an only daugh.
Margery, who died unm. Sir Allan Clavering, Knt. inherited no part of his
brother's estates, but what he had independent of him, given by his father,
which were Calleley and Yetlington. -- Died 2d King Edw. III. Isabel, eld d.
and coh. to Wm. Riddel of Tilmouth, and who brought the estates of Duddo,
Greenlaw, and Tilmouth, with other possessions, into the family. William de
Clavering died 20th Edw. III. Matilda, died 26th Edward III. Sir Robert
Clavering, Knt. a soldier. -- Ob. 17th Rich. II. John Clavering bred a soldier,
a knighted. -- Died 4th Hen. VI. Johanna, d. of Tho. Hetton. Robert Clavering
died 31st Hen. VI. Elizabeth. Robert Clavering died Edw. IV. John Clavering
died 2d Hen. VII. Isabella, or Elizabeth.............. after mar....... Gray.
Robert Clavering ob. 6th Dec. 10th Hen. VIII. Joan, alias Jane, d. of......
Reims of Shortflat, in Northumb. John Clavering of Calleley, ob. 28th Hen.
VIII. 1536. Eliz. d. of...... Fenwick, of Fenwick, in Northumb. Rob. Clavering
of Calleley, died 25th Eliz. 1583. Ann, d. and coh. Sir Tho. Gray of Horton, in
co. Northumb. Knt. Robert Clavering, of Calleley, died 42d Elizabeth, 1600.
Mary, d. Sir Cuth. Collingwood, of Eslington, in Northumb. Knt. Sir John
Clavering, Knt. died in prison, for his loyalty to Cha. I. 22d Charles. Anne,
d. Sir Tho. Riddel, of Gateshead, Knt. Sir Robert Clavering, a Col. in regt. in
service of the king, and a knight banneret. -- Died unm. (vita patris) 1643,
Aet. 26. John, a Romans Cath. priest, and resigned his estate to his brother
Ralph, reserving an annuity. -- Aet. 46, in 1666. Ralph Clavering, of Calleley,
Aet. 44 in 1666. Mary, d. Wm. Middleton, of Stokeld, in co. York, Esquire John
Clavering, of Calleley, Esquire b. 1659. Anne, 4th dau. of William, 2d Lord
Widdrington. John b. 13th Apr. 1688, died unmarried. Wm. born 1689, d. unmar.
Robert b. 1690, unm. Ralph b. 1695, m. 1st Aug. 1723, d. 1748. Mary, d. Nich.
Stapleton, alias Errington of Ponteland, and of Carleton in co. York.
Ralph-Peter, 3d son and h. b. 27th June, 1727, died at St. Omer's, in 1787, m.
3 wives. 1st Eliza. d. Jas. Egan, Esquire d. 7th May, 1761, s. p. 2d Frances, d.
John Lynch, Esquire ob. 24th Nov. 1765, at Douay. John-Aloyzius Clavering, born 22d
July 1765, living 1794. 3d Mary, d. Edw. Walsh, Esquire Ralph, ob. infant. Edward.
Mary mar. Hen. Robinson, Esquire a banker in London. Lucy mar. John Stapleton, of
Clintz, Esquire Francis-Monica-Anne. Ellen-Elizabeth, born 1783. 2 John's both died
infants. Nicholas, a Romans Ca. priest, 1764, 4th son. Francis, 5th son. Eleanor,
d...... Lambton of Whitehall, in co. Durh. ob. s. p. Joseph, 6th son died an
infant. Mary mar. Nich. Magrah, died July 1758, s. p. Anne, abbess of English
nuns at Pontoise near Paris. Winefrid, a nun at Ghent, in Flanders. Catharine
died unmar. at Newc. about 1774. Elizabeth died an infant. Barbara, a nun at
Bruges in Flanders. John b. 1700, d. unm. Mary b. 1692. Anne m. Fra. Maire, of
Hardwick, in co. Durh. Esquire ob. s. p. 1783, Aet. 83. Mary mar. Gerrard Salvyn,
of Croxdale, in co. Durh. Esquire Thomas and Peter. Wm. Clavering, of Berrington,
mar. Barbara, d. Hen. Lambton, of Lambton, Esquire Eleanor, mar. John Thirlwell of
Thirwell in Northumb. Jane, Mary. Eliza. ob. s. p. Robert, all died without
issue. William, James, Anne, m. Rob. Clavering of Tilmouth. John was fellow of
Eaton College, and Rector of Gamlingue, in co. Camb. had a son Thomas. James
Clavering, of Newc. and Axwell, in co. Durham. Grace, d. and coh. of Rog.
Nicholson of Newcastle mercht John Clavering of Axwell, Esquire Anne, d. Rob.
Shafto, James. Esquire of Newcastle. James Clavering, of Axwell, created a Bart.
5th June, 1661. Bur. at Whickham. Jane, d. and h. Chas. Maddison of
Sutwellside, in co. Durham. -- Had 13 children, two only survived. John
Clavering, of Whitehouse, died vita patris. Dorothy, d. Hen. Saville, of
Methley in co. York, Esquire Jas. succeeded his grandf. as 2d Bart. died without
leav. issue male. Eliz d. Sir Wm. Middleton of Belsey, in Northumb. Bart. A son
died an infant. Henry died 11th Aug. 1711, bur. at Lanchester. A dau. mar.
Nich. Fenwick of Newcastle Esquire Sir John, 3d Bart. Jane, d. Rob. Mallabar of
Newc. mercht. d. 12th May, 1729. John died an infant. Jas. Clavering 4th Bart.
died abroad, on his travels, in 1726, aet. 18, unm. when the title went to his
uncle, Francis Clavering. Alice Ld. Winsor. Eliz. Ld. Dunkerron, son to Ld.
Shelburne. Fr. succeeded his neph. as 5th Bart. d. 31st Dec. 1738, s. p. and
succeeded in title by Jas. Clavering of Greencroft. Susan, d. of Mr. Sells, ob.
s. p. Sarah Edw. Harrison. Dorothy Chas. Wait. Anne William Hauxley. Eliza
died unmarried. James Clavering, of Greencroft, in co. Durham, Esquire Jane, d. and
coh. Benj. Ellison, of Newc. mercht. James Clavering, Esquire of Greencroft,
succeeded as 6th Bart. on death of his cousin, Sir Francis Clavering of Axwell,
in Dec. 1738. Bur. at Lanchester, 16th May, 1748. Catharine, dau. Those. York,
of Richmond, in co. York, Esquire d. 29th Nov. 1723. 4 sons and two daughters, all
died infants. Sir Tho. Clavering, the 7th baronet, bap. 19th June, 1718. Memb.
in parl. for co. Durh. -- Living May 1794....... d. of Joshua Douglas, of
Newcastle, Attorney at Law. Geo. Clavering, Esquire of Greencroft, bap. 10th Nov.
1719, mar. 3 wives. -- Ob. 1793. 1..... d. of Dr. Bromwell, of Rombaldkirk. Ob.
s. p. 2..... d. of Palmer, and widow of Sir John Pole, Bart. Tho. Clavering,
Esquire...... a French Lady. A son. A daughter. 3.... Ellison. Sir John Clavering,
K.B. bap. 31st Aug. 1722. -- A maj. genesis and commander in chief in the East
Indies, left several children now living..... d. of Ld. Delawar. Elizabeth d.
Lionel Vane, of Long Newton, Esquire ob. 1746, s. p. Benjamin, bap. 15th March,
1682. -- Died an inf. 26th April, 1683. Jane, mar. 12th Oct. 1707, to Tho.
Liddel, Esquire father to late Lord Ravensworth. Elizabeth born 1684. Anne died
unmar. 14th Nov. 1750. Alice married Geoffrey of Newcastle, 13th Oct. 1712.
Robert Clavering, Jane, only d. and h. Toby Dudley, of Chopwell, in co. Durh.
Esquire Dudley Clavering, ob. s. p. John Clavering of Chopwell. Anne, 2d d. Sir.
Hen. Thompson of Escrick, in co. York, Knt. Dudley died an infant. Mary mar.
Will. Lord Cowper, High Chancellor of England. Anne mar. Hen Liddel, 3d son Sir
Hen. Liddle, Bart. Elizab. 2d d. and coh. of Thomas Hardwick, of Potter Newton,
in co. York, Esquire ob. May 1704. John Clavering, of Chopwell, memb. for Penryn in
Cornwall. Elizabeth. Margaret. Jane. Emilia. James was of Grays Inn, Land. died
unm. John died at Hamburgh. William Clavering, killed at the battle of
Clavering Cross. Robert Clavering,........ Robert Clavering, from whom the
Claverings of Learchild, in co. of...... descended, and now thought to be
extinct. Ralph Clavering, seated at Tilmouth, in co. Durh. Edward Clavering of
Tilmouth. Ralph Clavering of Tilmouth. Robert Clavering of Tilmouth, was a
capt. in the regt. of Sir Rob. Clavering, Knt. Banneret. Anne, d. of Rob.
Clavering of Calleley, and Mary Collingwood. Robert Clavering of Tilmouth,
married, but died without issue. William Clavering, of Tilmouth, Dorothy, d. of
Rich. Selby, Esquire mayor of Berwick Robert was Bishop of Peterborough. Mary, 2d
d. of John Cook, a Spanish mercht. Robt. Mary m. Rev. Fred. Wiliiams, preb. of
Peterborough, 3d son of William-Peere Willams, Counselor at Law. Catharine.
Susannah, m. Rev. Will. Brown, a preb. of Peterborough. Anne. Wm. was a brave
soldier, govern. of Dickey's Cove, in Africa, died unm. Thomas Clavering was
gov. of Norham Castle, and died s. p. Thomas. Robert. Roger. Robert de Eure,
ancestor to the Eures of Axholm, in Lincolnshire. Isabel, d. and coh. of Roger
de Merley. ARMS. -- Quarterly, Or and Gules, a bend sable. CREST. -- Out of a
ducal coronet, Or, a Demi Lion, issuant, azure. CLAVERINGS OF BERRINGTON
CONTINUED. William Clavering, of Berrington, Esquire 6th son of Sir John Clavering,
of Calleley, by Ann his wife, d. of Sir Thomas Riddell, of Gateshead, Knt.
Barbara, d. of Henry Lambton, of Lambton, in co. Dur. Esquire 1st,.......
Clavering, ob. s. p. 2d,....... Clavering, of Berrington, Esquire.... dau. of.....
Widdrington, of Horsley, co. Northumb, Esquire 2d, Edward Clavering. 3d,......
Clavering, mar..... d..... Blackett. Ob. s. p. 1st, William Clavering, of
Berrington, Esquire...... dau. of..... Whittenham of Whittenham, c. Sanc. Esquire wid.
of..... Dalton, of Thurnham, Esquire 1. John Clavering, ob. celebs. 3. Henry
Clavering, living 1794. 4. William Clavering, Berrington, Esquire living 1794. 2.
Edward Clavering, of...... d. of.... Lesley, Esquire of Scotland..... a daughter.
Ob. celebs...... a daug. mar..... Rogers..... a d. mar...... Young-husband, of
Tugall, Esquire Barbara living celebs, in Durham, ao. 1794.


genealogy

After these works were brought to answer the proprietor's view, his
benevolence dictated to him that it was necessary to institute a code of laws
for the establishment of peace and good order; not only calculated for the
profit and use of the master, but the ease, tranquillity, and happiness of the
servant; those, after amendments and additions as cases and exigencies
dictated, have become certain and established. To put those laws in execution,
a court of arbitrators was constituted at Winlaton, to be holden every ten
weeks, for hearing and determining cases among the workmen, to which all have
an appeal. The fees are fixed beyond innovation, at a moderate rate. This
institution has the most happy and extensive use, it quiets the differences of
the people, protects their claims to justice in an easy and expeditious manner,
preserves them from the expenses and distress of common law, and the noisome
miseries of a prison. As a further protection of civilization, to promote good
manners, and inspire religious principles, schools are established at Winlaton,
Winlaton mill, and Swalwell, for the sole benefit of the workmen's children,
where they are instructed in reading, writing, and accounts. The poor and
distressed were objects of the founder's solicitude; he appointed a surgeon for
the relief of the whole body of workmen, by whose timely assistance many lives
and limbs have been preserved to the public: When a workman is ill, he has
money advanced by the agent; when superannuated or disabled, he has a weekly
maintenance; and when he dies, his family is provided for. What eulogium can be
suitable to the benevolence here displayed, or panegyric express the virtues
thus exercised! The exulting spirits of thousands daily breathe praises before
Heaven, which no language can comprehend. Our correspondent adds, It is in
tears the country confess, none of this excellent family of the name of Crawley
at present exist. Mrs Theodosia Crawley, relict of John Crawley, esquire the last
of the name, died on the 7th of May, 1782, aet. 88. There is no doubt her
successors will tread in the same generous and benevolent steps.

Before we quit Swalwell, it is to be observed, that by bishop Hatfield's
Survey it is noted, that the vill was then held by Will. Swalwells; and by
various inquisitions, it appears it remained in that family till about the
sixth year of bishop Langley, when Roger de Thornton acquired the same, by
whose heiress it passed to the Lumleys, in the time of bishop Booth Pardon of
alienation to Sir John Lumley, lord Lumley, and Catharine his wife, by fine to
Geo. Smith, and Thomas Kimraston, of a coal mine in Swalwell, Tugerfeld, and
Lyngfeld in Whickham, 1 Aug. 1607

Cursito's Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS. Swalwels.

Terra de Swalwels reddit xvij s.

Willielmus filius Arnaldi pro quodam assarto de vj acris, j marc. --
Boldon-Buke.

Vide Quykham, Hatfield's Survey.


.

Opposite to Swalwell, on the northern banks of Derwent, situate on grounds
inclining toward the south-east, and diversified by beautiful risings and
irregular swells, lies AXWELL PARK, the seat of Sir Thomas Clavering, baronet,
an elegant modern house of Payne's architecture, surrounded with a fine park,
and groves of forest wood, disposed with that irregularity which constitutes
true rural beauty, maintaining the countenance of nature with the simplest
embellishments of art: The house is built of freestone, and placed on elevated
ground, so as to command a fine prospect, and become a pleasing object in
various points of view in the adjacent country. From its eminence the south
front of the house commands a view of the country adjoining Whickham, and the
rich wood-lands of Gibside; the east front a prospect of the busy Tyne,
Benwell, Newcastle, Gateshead, and the shipping below the bridge; the new
bridge of Swalwell of three arches, and the village on the front ground to the
right. The old family house was called Whitehouse, and stood at the distance of
half a mile to the westward of the present mansion, in a sequestered situation.
The first of the Claverings whom we find seated here was John Clavering, the
son of James Clavering, and grandson of Robert Clavering, esquire who died in the
twenty-fifth year of queen Elizabeth, 1582, whose next successor there was
James Clavering, esquire On the south wall of the body of Whickham church.
Memoria sacrum
Jacobus Clavering de Axwell
In Comitatu Dunelm. Barronettus
Ex antiquissima familia
Clavering de Caloley in
Comitatu Northumbr^e orta,
Quae eit a nobili Familia
Domini Clavering de Clavering
In comitatu Essexiae deducta
and D'na Jana Uxor eius cum Liberio little hic jacent,

; created a baronet the 5th of June, 1661. -- See pedigree annexed.

AXWELL PARK
view of Axwell Park

The Parish of WHICKHAM.
The first account we have of the manor of Whickham is in the Boldon Book,
where the bishop had xxxv villain tenants, each of whom held an oxgang of land,
consisting of fifteen acres, at sixteen pence rent, exclusive of services,
which were severe. Every villain wrought for the lord three days each week in
the year, besides the labor of harvest and plowing; they were bound to erect a
cottage forty feet long, and fifteen wide, every year, for the maintenance of
the town, and carry and fetch from Durham and Bedlington, the bishop's baggage,
etc. when required, with the allowance of the corrody whilst they wrought. They
also paid nine shillings cornage rent, and provided a milch cow for the lord,
and for every oxgang of land they found a hen and ten eggs, and served in the
lord's fishery in Tyne. The headborough man, who is styled praepositus, now
called the greve, had twenty-four acres of land allotted to him in recompense
for the duties of his office. The manor was then under firm with the villain
service, mills, carts, barrows, fisheries, and twenty chalder of oats of the
bishop's measure, rendering twenty-seven pounds, and performing certain
services in carriage, for which there was an allowance of two pence for every
horse. The punder had land assigned him, besides an acknowledgement from every
tillage farm by the threave; and he provided the bishop with forty hens and
three hundred eggs. In bishop Bury's time we find one Robert Bridock held some
small parcels of land here, by homage and xs. rent at the bishop's exchequer
Inq. p. m. Ao 1o bishop Bury, cor. Sim. de Essh, vic. He held of the lord
bishop in capite, twenty-six acres of waste land beyond Whickham wood near to
Priesthill, by homage, etc. xs. at the exchequer. And five acres of meadow in
Quickham meadows, ten. de lumina^. B. Mariae de ^uickham, 12d. rent. And also
Priesthill, consisting of thirty acres of land in cap. of the manor of
Ravenshelm, by the service of two arrows.

Inq. p. m. Will. Herring, 4 bishop Bury, cor. Sim. de Essh.


: And also Will. Herring This parcel of land the convent of Durham acquired,
for which they had license. Rot. Fordham, sch. 10. No 13.
, other small parcels, by the service of a rose. In the fifth year of bishop
Hatfield, Alan Gategang died seized of four acres of meadow in Whickham, held
in capite by homage and fealty, and a pound of cumin; also lands called
Jopsriding, near the river Tame, held also in capite by homage and fealty.
Ralph Clerk, in the seventh year of the same prelate, died seized of seven
acres of land in Whickham field, with a message, and one hundred acres in
Whickham, held in capite by fealty and xs. rent Quykham.

In Quykham sunt xxxv villani quorum unusquisque tenet j bovat. de xv acris and
solebat reddere xvjd. and operati per totum annum iij diebus in Ebdomeda. Et
praeterea iij porcationes in autumno cum familia domus excepta husewyva and
quartam porcationem cum ij hominibus, and in operatione sua solebat falea^e
prata and levare and quadrigare faenum, and metere and quadrigare totum Bladum,
similiter in operatione sua and extra operationem suam arare de unaquaque
caruca ij acras de averere and herciare and tunc semel habere corrodium, and in
operatione sua facere unam domum long. xl pedum and latitud. xv pedum, and
facere ladas and summagia sicut villani de Boldona; and quandocunque metebant
Bladum, and falcabunt prata and faciebant porcationes solebant habere corrodium.

Praeterea solebant reddere jx s. de cornag. and j vaccam de metrid. and de
unaque bovat. j gallin. and x ova. Et in operatione sua solebant facere in
piscarias Tina.

Prior de Brenkburn tenet ibid. ij bovat. and j piscariam de Elemos. episcopi.

Girardus praepositus tenet xxiiij acr. pro servitio praepositurae and illae
xxiiij acr. ante eum solebant redd. iiijs.

Molendinum solebat redd. iii marc. piscariae iij marc.

Et dominium ij carrucar. erat tunc in manu episcopi. Nunc autem praedictum
manerium de Quykham est ad firmam eam dominio, and villanis and molendino, and
cum instauramento ij carucar. and ij hercarior. and xx celdrar. de avena de
mensura episcopi, and cum piscarijs, and reddit xxvjli and facit ladas de
Gatesheved usque Dunelm. and de Gatesheved usque Bedlyngton, and computantur in
firma pro unoquoque equo ij d. and quadragint unum tonellum vini.

Punderus de Quykham tenet vj acras, and habet travas sicut alij, and reddit lx
gallinas and ccc ova. Et xxxv villani xxxv gallinas and xxxvij ova. -- Boldon
Buke.

Quykham.

Liberi Tenentes. Petrus Graper tenet de jura uxoris suae j mes. and acr.
terrae quo^d'm Will'i Freman per servic. forin. and red. vjs.

Haeredes Johan's Patirncoke, etc. red. j lib. peperis. -- Will. Galeway, etc.
viijs. -- Marg. Gray etc. vjs. viijd.

Will's Swalwell tenet villam de Swalwells and solebat reddere per ann. per
librum de Boldon xxixs. iiij d. modo redd. per annum xxviijs. viij d. -- tenet
j plac. pro le milnedame ibid. and redd. per ann. viij d.

Adam de Eshdall tenet j plac. de vasto, etc. xij d.

D'nus de Nevill tenet villam de Wynlaton per servic. forin. and red. per ann.
xxli.

Haeredes Hugonis de Redheugh tenet villam de Asshels per servic forin. and
red. xv s. iiij d. -- j mes. and xxv acr. terrae ib. villam de Lines per
servic. forin. xviijs. viij d. -- Situm molendini ibid. ij s. -- Manner. de
Holynside etc acr. terrae ibid. red. per ann. vj s. viij d.

Will's de Fulthorp miles tenet j acr. terrae juxta Freresyde and red. per ann.
iij d. -- xx acr. ibid. xiij d. -- j claus. vocat. les toftes contin. xxx acr.
terrae and red. per ann. xs.

Robertus de Lomely tenet dim. acr. quond'm Johannis Marmaduc and red. per ann.
iiij d.

Will's Gilson tenet j molend. apud Creswelcrok and redd. per ann. xiij s.

Comes Northumbr. tenet manner. de Fugerhouse contin. c acr. terrae per estim.
per cartam and servic. forin. and red. per ann. xs.

Idem Comes tenet j puteum carbonum ibid. and redd. per ann. xxvijli. xiij s.
iiij d.

Tenentes tenent inter se molend. de Swalwells and piscar. ibid. cum tolnet
cervis. and solebant reddere per ann. xxxviijli. modo reddunt per ann. xxli.

Agnes Fairhare sen. tenet dominic. mes. villae contin j acr. and dim. cum j
toft. and redd ij s.

Terrae hond. cum dominic. Walterus Thomson tenet ij mes. and ij bovat. terrae
bond. hovat. contin. xv acr. terrae; and ij bovat. terrae domin. bovat. contin.
jx acr. pro ij bond. praedict. redd. per ann. xvj s. jx d. q'ar and pro dictis
ij bovat. terrae domin. iiij s. iiij d. ob. unde in toto xxj s. iiij d.

xxxvj alij tenentes tenent xl mes. and xxxiij bovat. terrae bond. and dimid.
and xxx bovat. terrae domin. Et omnes isti bond. solv. de redd. bond. inter se
ijd. ultra redd. praedict. ut per antiqu. rentale ijd. Et iidem bond. faciunt
ladas de Gatesheved usque Dunolm. and usque Bedlyngton and habebunt allocation.
pro equis ij d. and quadrigant unum tonellum vini. Praedicti bond. tenent inter
se viij toft. aedificat. ultra xxxv mes. pariter bond. pro quib. nihil. -- Et
omnes praedicti bond. solent reddere per ann. pro qualibet bovat. xvj d and
operari per totum annum per iij dies in qualibet ebdom praeter iiij septiman,
festival. and facere in porcation. in autumno cum familia excepta houswyva and
x praetera cum ij hominibus in opere suo per septimanam, falcare pratum, levare
and quadrigare faenum metere and quadrigare totum Bladum in operatione sua
praedicta; and extra dicta opera arare de unaquaq. carucat. ij acr. de avererth
and herciare and semel tum habebit corrodium; and in operatione sua per j dies
in Ebdom, facere unam domum long. xl pedum and latitud. xv. pedum and facere
ladas and summag. sicut villani de Boldon, and quando metunt and salcant prata
and faciunt porcation habebunt corrodium, and solv. pro cornag. xx s. et solv.
j vac. de Metrich, and soleb. sacere iij porcation. in aqua de Tyne, and
solebant solvere xx celdr. aven. ad mensur. d'ni.

Cotag. Johannes Hawyk tenet ij cotag. and vj acr. terrae and red. pro operib.
vj d. ad term. mart. and v s. de redd.

Johannes Gallin and v alij tenent vj cotag. and xij acr. terrae, reddendo
singuli iij s. iij d.

Iidem tenentes tenent inter se j pec. terrae vocat. Fremantall xxx acr. xs. --
vj acr. vocat. punderland iiij s. reddunt ad festam natal. d'ni and paschae lx
gallin. and xxxviij ova. tenent, etc. commun. Furnum x s -- Solvunt ad festa
natalis d'ni and paschae xxxv gall. and xxxviiij ova.

Pratum. Omnes tenentes villae tenent inter se quoddam pratum vocat.
Grenelonyng. red. iiij s. viij d. -- xl acr. praepositi red. per acr. ij s.
iiij d. -- Johannes Martyne iij acr. Robertesmedowe viij s. -- Will's Eire iiij
acr. Eiresmedowe and alii.

Iidem tenentes tenent inter se pratum dominic. contin. xxx acr. prati and
sol't reddere per ann. per ant. rent. vjli.

xxxvj tenentes tenent xj mes. viij ten. ij plac. and clxxv acr. terrae
reddendo cert. redd. per ann.

Hatfield's Survey. Whickham.

Infra quod manerium sunt nulli distinc'ones villar. sed omnes vocantur sub
titulo de Whickham hoc manerium est infra dimissionem epi cum mineris carbonum
ib'm, and curia tenetur p' Firmarios vel p'sonas p' ipsos ad hoc nominat. and
stylus cur. est cur. venerabiliu' viror. Gilb'ti Gerard, etc. Firma^ior, etc.
Le Greive hic sumptus solvit. -- Mickleton's MSS.

Inq. p. m. Ra. Clark, 7 bishop Hatfield, cor. R. de Bows. -- Also held in
capite of the church of the Blessed Mary in Quickham, an acre of meadow in
Quickham for finding a lamp to burn daily in that church: Also held in cap. of
the lady of Ravenshelm, a message called Feugerhouse and sixty acres of land
in Ravensworth, by fealty and two arrows pennat. pennis pavonum.


. Will. Freeman also held a parcel of land there, in the sixteenth year of
bishop Hatfield. By the survey taken at the last-mentioned prelate's command,
we find that Peter Graper then held, in right of his wife, a message and
fourscore acres of land that were Freeman's: The earl of Northumberland held
the manor of Fugerhouse, containing one hundred acres by estimation, by foreign
service and xs. rent; also one coal work there, rendering xxvij l. xiij s. iiij
d. Swalwell mill, with its duties and the fishery then brought in xxl. but had
formerly produced xxxviij l. The services of the villain tenants do not differ
much from those set out in the Boldon Book, but are thereby much illustrated,
as amongst various other matters the work in Tyne is stated, and the xx
chalders of oats before mentioned in the firm, are set forth as part of the
bond rent. In bishop Skirlaw's time, the family of Claxton had acquired lands
there Inq. p. m. Tho. de Claxton, 14 Skirlaw, cor. R. Conyers, chiv. esc.

Roger Thornton, in bishop Langley's time, gave three acres of meadow and three
acres of land in Whickham, to the chantry of the chapel of St Thomas on Tyne
bridge. 6 Langley.

De fidelitate capta Will'i Birtley, sched. 18 Bury

Q'd Joh'es de Birtley defunctus tenuit de nob. in c. etc. unam acr. terrae
tres acr. parti and sex solit. redditus and redditum unius libre pip'is cum
p'tin. in Quickham, Gateshe^ed and Lumley, etc. -- Randall's MSS.

Bishop Bury granted a lease of coal mines here to Sir Thomas Gray, and John
Pulhore, parson of Whickham, for 12 years, 500 marks rent. -- Cursitors Rolls.
-- Rudd's MSS.

Fordham, sch. 10, No 3, in dorso.

Joh. d. gr. Sciatis q'd concessimus dilco s'vienti n'ro Rob. Stertelk offic.
forestarij n'ri de Quyckham hend, etc. quamdiu se been and fidel'r gesserit,
p'cipiend o'ia scod. and p'sicua eid. officio p'tin. In cujus, etc. Dat. 2 Sep.
1388. -- Randal's MSS.


. In the twenty-fourth year of bishop Langley, on the death of Roger Thornton,
it appeared he held, for term of life, certain waste lands called Fugerfeld,
and also thirty acres called Rydding, by the grant of John duke of Bedford,
which reverted to the duke on his death.

The town of Whickham hangs on the brow of a hill, with an open eastern aspect:
The chief buildings, which are many of them modern and handsome, stand on the
southern side, on the brink of a steep descent, so as to overlook the rest of
the town: The prospect is remarkably beautiful, comprehending part of
Gateshead, with the church, the tower of St Nicholas in Newcastle, the castle,
and much of the town on the margin of the river; to the right, Gateshead fell,
patched with innumerable cottages, quarries, wind mills, and other objects; to
the left, the pleasant villages of Ryton, Benwell, Elswick, Newburn,
Lemmington, and other places before noted, whilst through the deep vale the
river Tyne Along the banks of the river are arranged the staiths for the
reception of coals, and delivering them into ^eels or lighters, to carry down
to the shipping, called Blaydon staiths, Dunstan staiths, etc.

The north fields of Whickham were divided the (...) Charles II by agreement of
the proprietors: And the award was confirmed by decree in the (...) of Durham,
the 3d of July, 1667. for quieting the proprietors in their possessions it was
thought expedient to have an order for an injunction, which was obtained the
18th of June, 1678. By the award the highways were set out, and ordered to be
repaired by the inhabitants of the township. -- From the information of Mr
Jasper Harrison.

In the town of Whickham there is a stratum of burnt earth, consisting chiefly
of clay and stone: According to tradition, the king's army had their tents in
some land called the church land, below the church, and in other fields
contiguous; that the Scots under the command of Lesley, at that time lay at
Newburn; and upon his crossing the river for the purpose of attacking the
king's army, the latter fled with such precipitation, that they left their
tents and set fire to them, this fire communicated to a small seam of coal at
day, and many years burnt with great fury; at night the flames were seen from
different parts of the village and grounds adjoining: The fire is now out, and
the burnt earth and stones are commonly used for the highways.

Ibid.
forms a fine canal of seven or eight miles in extent, and flows with solemn
majesty, as if conscious of the wealth that loads its bosom: Prior's
description of Thames is very applicable, "Serene yet strong, majestic yet
sedate,
"Swift without violence, without terror great."


The church of Whickham shows much antiquity in its architecture, and very
little beauty: There are two side ailes, separated from the center by three
short round pillars, and four circular arches, without any mouldings, the
capitals of the columns square, with a rose or knot at the corners; the whole
nave ill lighted, and the west end crowded with galleries, thrown into four
angles; the pulpit is in the center, and faces the south. The chancel is
divided from the nave by stalls, has lately been repaired and sashed Whickham
Rectory. In the deanery of Chester, -- dedicated to St Mary.

The parish is bounded on the north by the river Tyne, on the east by the river
Tame, on the west by the river Derwent, and southward by the chapelry of
Lamesley.

King's b. 20l. 8s. 11d. -- Yearly tenths 2l. 0s. 10 ^/4d. proc. ep. 13s. --
Arch. synod 2s. -- Proc. arch. 4s. -- Real value 340l.

RECTORS.
Hugo, 1287 Rob. de Baldoks, 1313 Joh. de Windesore Tho. de Thwenge, 1344 Joh.
de Pulhore, 8 Aug. 1346 Rich. Rotore, 1360, p. res. Pulhore Mag'r Will Tart,
1399 Edw. Prestwick, p. m. Tart Joh. Kent, 1444 Will. Nicholson, 1462 Rich. --,
1470 Tho Bartram, 1474 Alex. Skinner, 1483 Rob. Walker, cl. Joh. More, 1513
Anth. Bellasys, utr. jur. d'r 4 May, 1533. p. m. More Nich. Williamson, cl.
1540, p. res. Bellasys Claud Rent, cl. 30 Sep. 1558 John Fernysyde, preacher of
God's word 20 March, 1575 J. Allenson, cl. Hen. Ewbank, A. M. 5 Sep, 1620 Rob.
Brook, A. M. 23 Dec. 1628, p. m. Ewbanke Tho. Wood, A M. 2 July, 1635 Nich.
Stote, an intruder Tho. Mason, A. M. 12 July, 1671 Will. Hartwell, S. T. P.
1681, p. m. Mason Will. Graham, S. T. P. 1685, p. res. Hartwell Rob.
Thomlinson, S. T. P. 1712, p. m. Graham Will. Williamson, D D. 1 April, 1748,
p. m. Thomlinson Will. Radley, A. M. 1763, p. m Williamson John Wibbersley, A.
M 1768, p. res. Radley -- Greville, p. m. Wibbersley
On the north wall of the chancel.

Under This monument Lies the Body of Rob. Thomlinson, D. D. Prebendary of St
Paul's, Land. Rector of this Parish 36 Years, and sometime Lecturer of St
Nicholas in Newcastle upon Tine. He died the 24 of March, 1747, aged 79 Years
Reader if thou would know the Character of ye Deceased Learn it from the
following Account of his Pious Munificence And Charity. Dr Thomlinson built and
endowed ye Charity School for this Parish at his own expense, save 100l. left
by Mrs Blakiston For that purpose. He also built a Chapel at Allonby in Cumberd
and a school-house there, and gave to procure the Queen's bounty to ye said
Chap. 200l. To the Col. of Matrons at Wigton in Cumb. 600l. To the Charity
school there 100l. To Queen's College in Oxfd 100l. To Edmund Hall there 200l
And left by his Will to ye Societies for Propagating ye Gospel 500l. for
promoting Christian knowl. 100l. for Working Schools in Ireland 100l. He also
bequeathed his Library, a large and most valuable collection of Books in all
kinds of Literature, to the Corporation of Newcastle for public Use, with a
rent charge of 5l. a year for ever as a Fund for Buying new books. Benefactions
to this parish: -- The Right Reverend Thomas Wood, formerly rector of Whickham,
and after wards bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, by his will dated the 11th of
November, 1690, inter alia, I give unto the town of Whickham, in the bishopric
of Durham, 100l. besides the 100l. formerly given by me, and both to be laid
out unto trustees upon a rent charge for the use of the poor there for ever;
and I will that Sir James Clavering, bart. James Clavering, his grandson, Sir
William Blakiston, and Richard Harding, of Hallingside, in the county of
Durham, gent. to see the same settled accordingly.

1696. Mr Ralph Herrison, of Bryan's lope, gave by will 100l. to the poor of
the parish, to be put out for their use.

1726. Upon the much lamented death of her hopeful and only son Sir James
Clavering, bart. on the 18th day of May, in the 18th year of his age, lady
Clavering gave to the poor of this parish 100l. to be put out ^t interest or
laid out in lands by the rector and churchwardens with the consent of the
vestry; and the interest or produce to be distributed yearly at Christmas among
such workmen and their families as are the greatest objects of charity, and are
not in the poors books.

Rot A Hatfield, sch. 1, No 3. -- Process on the denial of rendering tithes of
the mills to the rector.

Copyhold book A. p. 87. Pl. halm. ap. Chest. de Lune p't f'm Sci Luce ao p'
Tho. 9o De Rog'o Gray nativo d'ni p' licentia retinendi triginta acr. ter.
p'ioris de Brinkburne (in Quickham) ex dimissione Joh'is Pulhore, etc.

Ib^^o 43. Pl. halm. ap. Chest. die M'curij in c'ro ai'ar ao p. Hatfield, 6o.
P'cept. est Waltero de Kirkeby q'd seisir faciat in manu. d'ni p'tun del
Redhough, q'd valet p' ann. 5 marc. q'd mag'r de Westspetell adquisivit d'eo
hospit'li sine licentia d'ni ep'i. -- Various others of the like nature for
other lands

Register's-office, lib. M. 370, 3 July, 1677. Tho. Liddell, bar. and o. c.
major and burgenses Novi Castri sup' Tynam and al.

Whickham division.

Churchwardens of Whickham nine acres and twenty five perches in the Lowfield
in full of their interest. Thomas Mason, rector of Whickham, thirty-four
perches in the Easterbanks, five acres one rood and twenty-six perches in the
Coleway-haugh, seven acres three roods and twelve perches in the Corn-moor, and
two acres and twenty-six perches in the Leigh, in full of all the glebe lands
of the rector and his successors, to all the lands lying in the common fields
within the manor of Whickham. -- Hodgshon's MSS.

Sir William Riddell, knight, in the reign of queen Elizabeth, was one of the
grand lessees in trust for the corporation of Newcastle of the manors of
Whickham and Gateshead, and the parks, wastes, and coal mines, belonging to
them under the bishop of Durham, then said to be worth fifty thousand pounds a
year. -- Sir William Riddell's seat was the hospital of St Edmund in Gateshead.


.

The reader will revert to the transactions during the usurpation, touching
church possessions Vol. i. p. 461.
; and also in the succeeding annals of the bishops the several demises are
noted. The manors of Whickham and Gateshead are now in lease under the bishop
of Durham to the late lord Ravensworth and others, at the yearly reserved rent
of 235l. 11s. 4d.

DUNSTAN is on a pleasant situation, and Mr Carr's delightful villa commands a
beautiful prospect of the town of Newcastle and adjacent country.

The manor of AXSELS, in the seventeenth of bishop Hatfield, was the estate of
William de Birtley, who held the same in capite under the rent of 13s. 4d. In
that prelate's survey it is noted, that the heirs of Hugh del Redhough held the
vill of Axsels by foreign service, rendering 15s. 4d. Hugh, the heir, died in
the beginning of bishop Skirlaw's pontificate, when there were two dowers
charged on this manor, one for Agnes his wife, and the other for Alice the wife
of Thomas de Stafford Inq. p. m. Hugh del Redhough, 3 Skirlaw, cor. M. de
Lomley esc.

12 April, 1345. Fealty by Will. de Birtley for the manor of Axsheles. -- Sch.
8.

Book of rates 14l. 1s. 10d. -- Value of lands, etc. 1546l. -- Grey's MSS.

Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Whickham parish 112 19 6
Whickham-fellside 1 12 8 Ditto town 1 5 1 Ditto lowland 0 17 7

Registered estates, Whickham. -- Mr Henry Liddle 20l. -- Mr Wm Liddle 20l. --
Mr Thomas Liddle 20l. -- Whickham, A^th. Meaburn, esquire 14l. 18s. -- Ditto,
Swalwell 16l. -- Biggin John Smith 15l. -- Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1762 to 1781 2851 579 2785

Number of burials in the last year 125. -- Computed number of inhabitants
3750. Colliery rents to the bishop 235l. 11s. 4d.


. In bishop Langley's time, Roger de Thornton acquired the manor of Axsels of
Thomas de Redhough, and the same passed by the heiress of that family with
their other large possessions.

The manor of HOLLINSIDE was the estate of the Burtons, alias Burdens, in the
time of bishop Bury, and was held in capite by homage, fealty, and suit of
court, rendering 6s. 8d. in silver at the exchequer. It soon afterward became
the estate of the Redhoughs Vide Quickham, Hatfield's Survey.
, by the marriage of Agnes the daughter and heiress of Hugh Burton, alias
Burden. It came afterward to the Massams; and in the tenth of bishop Langley,
was aliened by Robert de Massam to trustees, under limitations to the heirs of
the bodies of him and Agnes his wife. The Hardings were owners, and in the
tenth year of bishop Nevill, Ralph Harding, son and heir of Sir Richard
Harding, had livery thereof. The last male of that family died in poverty, and
the estate fell into the hands of the family of Bows by foreclosure of
mortgage.

The adjacent country wears an unpleasant aspect to the traveller, cut and
harrowed up with loaded carriages, scattered over with mean cottages, from
whence swarm forth innumerable inhabitants, maintained by working in the mines;
where many a sooty face is seen by every hedge-way side: The workmen earn great
wages, which recompense every other evil. The meagreness of the tract by which
you pass to the environs of Gibside, renders the scene more striking, and
enhances the beauties of the pass which leads immediately to those Elysian
shades.

By a serpentine road, for a mile in length, you wind through the bosom of a
thick forest, sometimes on the brink of a deep valley, at intervals descending
on the easy inclination of the hill, still embowered with venerable oaks,
before you approach the mansion and enter the opener works: The first escape
from the wood presents you with a view of the banqueting house, on a very
elevated situation, terminating a spacious avenue: This structure is in a high
Gothic style, garnished with pinnacles. After passing a piece of water, the
chief objects open upon you; to the right lies a noble sylvan scene, of great
extent, hanging on inclining grounds, from a lofty summit, to the very skirts
of the vale; in the midst of which, as a terminating object to the grand vista,
rises a fine Ionic column of stone, highly wrought, not less, as we compute,
than one hundred and forty feet in height, finished with an elegant gilt statue
of British Liberty, in whose service the person who erected the work was
enthusiastically virtuous: As you turn from this object, you look upon a
terrace above a mile in length, terminated by a new chapel, built in a most
elegant style, with a rich portico and dome, highly embellished. The chief
parts of the mansion house are old, of the architecture which prevailed in the
beginning of the seventeenth century, containing many spacious apartments: The
back part of the house is placed so near the brink of a very steep descent, as
merely to admit a terrace walk; from whence is a prospect, though narrow,
highly picturesque and beautiful; you look down into a deep vale of meadow
grounds, washed by the river Derwent, shut in on the right by hanging woods,
and on the left by cultivated lands rising in irregular swells from the banks
of the river, and terminated in the center by a lofty cliff much shaken and
torn: Walks are cut through the groves, and wind along the margin of the river:
Although nature has spread various rich gifts over the scene, yet art has
bestowed a multitude of embellishments; the buildings before mentioned, the
green-house, bath, and other edifices, are finished in a good taste, and some
of them in a superb style; with regard to the sylvan beauties, they are not to
be paralleled in the whole county.

There are some good pictures in the house; among the chief is a large piece of
Rubens's wife, whilst pregnant, in a fruit-shop; the expression is inimitable,
yet attempted to be rivalled by the curiosity of the old woman she addresses;
the collection of fruit is infinite, and well displayed. A picture of game, the
painter's name not known, the figures large as life; an excellent painting. In
the study is a fine portrait of Sir Martin Bows. A portrait, marked A. Bows,
1572, aet. 49, with many other modern portraits of the family.

GIBSIDE was the ancient estate of the Merleys, who held the vill of Merley,
with the manor of Gippeset in capite by fealty, paying a mark at the exchequer
yearly, and doing suit of court. Richard de Merley, in the third year of bishop
Fordham, enfeoffed Alicia de Massam of Massam, and William Martin chaplain, in
fee simple of the manor of Gebsete, the vill of Hedley, and the manor of Merley
Inq. capt. 8 Skirlaw, ap. Langchester, cor. R. de Laton chiv. esc.
. It continued in the Massams till the time of bishop Langley, when Robert
Massam obtained license to alien to the Merleys Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
: And in the first year of bishop Ruthall, John Merley, as son and heir of
William, had livery of Gibside Ibid.
: In the twelfth year of bishop Tunstall, on the 10th of October, Roger
Blakiston, esquire and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and heiress of Richard Merley,
had livery of Gibside Ibid. 2d bishop James, William Blakiston, esquire cos. and
heir of William of Gibside had livery. Ibid.
. Sir William Bows, by intermarriage with Elizabeth, the heiress of Sir
Francis Blakiston of Gibside, in the latter end of the seventeenth century,
acquired that family's large possessions.

GIBSIDE
view of Gibside

GATESHEAD CHURCH
view of Gateshead Church The Parish of GATESHEAD.
The ancient borough of Gateshead consists chiefly of one long street,
descending to the bridge leading over Tyne to Newcastle: Much doubt has arose
with our antiquaries touching the etymology of the name. It must content us to
accept the Saxon appellation of Gaetsheved as sufficiently expressive of this
place; where, if the Romans had a bridge, it is probable they also had a tower
and gate for its defense; and after the Saxons were possessors, we may conceive
this material pass was strongly fortified, and thence the name of Gaetsheved
may be derived, from the circumstance of the street leading to the tower and
gate of the bridge. The word gaet or gate is commonly used for way in this
country Gabrocentum hodie Gateshead, sive ad caprina capite Gabrocentum. In
Anonymo sexto casu legitur Gabrocentio, and in Notitiae libro Gabrocentum, levi
vitio; quod and nobis jam olim deprehensum est, cum nondum ederetur Ravennas,
qui Gabrocentium scripsit, quod videremus Gabr'cent' Anglorum vernacula dic^
Gateshead, uti superius monuimus. Tribunum cohortis secundae Thracum stationem
habuisse Gabrocenti ex Notitia didicimus. De Ruderibus autem tam antiquae urbis
nobis Novum Castellum in vicinia ortum est, mehori quidem, uti speramus,
auspicio; atque hoc nobis Gabrocentum novum sit.

Baxteri Glossar, ad verb. p. 125.
, so that this name might signify the head of the great way to Tyne bridge.

The most material circumstance in which we find Gateshead noted in ancient
history, is touching the catastrophe related of bishop Walcher, when on the
14th of May, 1080, the church was reduced to ashes. We have no account that
shows when Gateshead church was first erected, or by whom; but from the
preceding circumstance, it appears to be one of the most ancient within the
district. When or from whom the borough of Gateshead had its foundation we are
also ignorant; the first record we find relative to it Bourne, in his History
of Newcastle. p. 171, sets out a grant from bishop Philip, but he does not
point out where the original is to be found, or whence he had his translation
is not in the large collections before us.
is that of bishop Pudsey, in the year 1164, in which he gives to the burgesses
of Gateshead the liberty of his forest there, under certain restrictions: By
this charter the bishop grants also to the burgesses, that each shall have in
right of his burgage similar liberties to those enjoyed by the burgesses of
Newcastle in right of their burgages; and that they shall have free passage
within the liberties of the palatinate with their goods, clear of all dues and
exactions Concessio libertatis de forestagio burgensibus de Gatesheved per
Hugonem Pudsey episc. Dunelm. 1164.
. The next record of note is bishop Hatfield's Survey, in which various
particulars are set forth, and the possessors of several tenements are named,
but it contains nothing relative to the ancient constitution of the borough, so
that we must give up the hopes of recovering that curious particular, as the
records from whence it might be best presumed to be acquired are silent
Gatesheved.

Gatesheved cum burgo and molendinis and piscarijs and furnis and cum tribus
partibus terrae arabilis de eadem villa reddit lx marcas. Quarta pars terrae
arabilis cum assartis quae d's episcopus fieri fecit, and prata sunt in manu
d'ni episcopi cum instauramento duarum carrucarum.

Terrae Osmundi reddit. xxij s. vi d. -- Boldon Buke.

Liberi Tenentes. Johannes de Ravensworth tenet per cartam, etc. Saltwelsyde.
-- Mag'r hospitalis S'ti Edmundi regis tenet j plac. pro quodam chamino habend.
ab hospitali ad frergos per pratum domini, etc. Haeredes Thomae Surteys tenent.
j aquaeduct. and j mes supra aedificat, etc. -- Custos cantariae S. Trinitatis
apud hospitale S. Edmundi confessoris tenet. ij mes. etc. -- Thomas de Castle,
etc. haeres Hugonis de Redhugh, John de Topcliff (Easterlinstrother) William
Gategang (le Fletes Saltwelmed le Calscotes and le Host and Leystrech.)

Terrae Scaccarij. Magister hospitalis S. Edmundi tenet, etc. cum multis aliis.

Molend. Johannes de Sadberg tenet ij molend. aquat. and j molend. ventricum
quae solebant reddere per ann. xxijli. modo reddunt per ann. xvjli. xiij s.
iiij d.

Piscar. Tenet piscar. aquae de Tyne and red. per ann. xxli.

Manner. cum domin. and burg. Tenet manner. cum burgo terr. domin. pratis et
pastur. unde de terris domin. and pratis acr. in campo de Gatesheved and lv
acr. terrae and pratis super Tynam and redd. per ann. pro omnibus profic. dicti
burgi and curiae ejusd. ad iiij term. xxijli.

Terrae vast. Et sunt ibid. vj acr. terrae quond'm in tenura Ricardi Stickburn
quae soleb't reddere per ann. iij s. vj d. modo vast. Et dicitur quod persona
de Gatesheved tenet in diversis locis campi ibid. xv acr. terrae, quas credunt
esse terras scaccarij pro quibus nihil solvitur. -- Hatfield's Survey.


. The last mentioned prelate, in the year 1348, appointed by writ of privy seal
a keeper of his park of Gateshead Vol. i. p. 806, notes.

Rot. Skirlaw, No 66. W. etc. Sciatis, etc. concessimus dil'co, etc. Joh'i
Kempo custodiam parci n'ri de Gatesheved hen'd quamdiu nob. placu'it,
p'cipiendo t'm unum denarium and unum obulum p' diem p' feodo custodia sup'a
d'ca. In cujus, etc. Nov. 28, 1399. -- P. breve de p'r. sigillo.

Ibid. in dorso. No 4. W. etc. Sciatis, etc. concess etc. Hugoni Attehall
offic. custodis p'a n'ri de Gatesheved hen'd, etc. ad t'minum vita ipsius, etc.
24 Jul. 1404.

Carta de burgo concess. Joh'i Multgreve penes Tho. Gyll, arm.

Omnib's, etc. Rich's Blankyr, etc. dedisse, etc. Joh's d'co Multgreve, etc.
quoddam burgagium cum pertinent. in villa de Gatesheved q'd jacet int. terram
Gilb'ti Textoris and venellum q'd tendit v'sus fontem S'c Hel^^e and extendit
se a regia strata in Gatesheved usq. ad domum Alex. Stote, etc. -- Randal's MSS.


, which officer was constantly named in succession by other bishops of the Sea:
To this office bishop Nevill added that of keeper of the tower of Gateshead in
1438 Officium parcarii ac custodis turris de Gatesheved concessum Roberto
Preston per Rob. Neville episc. Dunelm. 8th April, 14^8.

A strong wardyd gate at Gatesheved. -- Lel. Itin. vol. 8, p. 51.

Tyne bridge has ten arches and a strong warded tower on it. -- Ibid.


: As in other boroughs the bishop had his bailiff there Langley, Rot. B. No 11.

Gateshead.

Concessio consuetudin. de rebus vena'lib's p' villam de Gateshead
transcuntibus, auxilium p' repara^'^ne pavimenti in d'ca villa (Langley.)

De sene'llis cur epor ib'm. -- Feod. 1l. 6s. 8d.

De ballivis epor. Dun. burgi sui de Gateshead.

Gi^^'tus de Gategang, 1333, 2 cart. 218. -- Jol^es Richardson p' vita feod.
100 s. Rot. cl. Et cus^os novae turris ib'm feod. 30s. 4d. (Fox.)

Parca^ius, etc. p' vita 1d. p' diem. and custos turris ib'm seod. 1d. p' diem.
(Nevil.)

Hugo P^sar. ep'us p' cart. concessi^ Turoldo de Land. and hered. suis tot.
ill. terram suam que jacet juxta T^^m apud west a capite pontis Tynae usq. ad
Redhoyle f's Pipewellgate, 4 Cart. so. 4^.

Will'us silius Onthredi Bull de Pipewellgate, Ao 1329. 2 Cart. 215, etc.

Curia tent. in Pipewellgate, coram balliis and al. probis hoi's do
Pipewellgate, 1343. 2 Cart. 26, and comp. quord'm in plena cur. -- Mickleton's
MSS.


. In 1557 bishop Tunstall granted a charter to the company of glovers within
the borough of Gateshead. In 1602 bishop Matthew incorporated sundry trades:
And bishop Cousin, by his letters patent, bearing date at Durham, the 16th day
of September, the thirteenth of king Charles II. A. D. 1661, incorporated the
drapers, tailors, mercers, hardwaremen, coopers, and chandlers in Gateshead,
into a commonalty, fellowship, and company. In king Edward the Sixth's time
Gateshead was annexed to Newcastle, but in the succeeding reign it was
reunited to the bishopric of Durham.

The religious settlements at Monkchester would most probably encourage others
on the southern shore. We repeat what the ingenious Mr Gross has said touching
the hospital of St Edmund, before our readers proceed to the records: This
house seems to have been of no great eminence, since it is not mentioned by
Dugdale, except in his general catalogue of the religious houses and their
value, where there is the following entry among those of Durham; Gatesheved,
hospital of St Edmund, 5 l. 9 s. 4 d. It is only thus slightly touched on by
Tanner, ad caprae caput, Goatshead or Gateshide, a monastery here, whereof
Uttan was abbot before A. D. 653: But in the notes he refers to Bede's
Ecclesiastical History, book iii. chap. 21, and to Leland's Collectanea Adda
^rat autem frater Uttan presbyteri illustris, and abbatis monasterij q'd
vocatur capra^ caput.

Bed. Hist. l. 3, c. 21. -- Lel. Col. i^. p. 14^. From Darwert mouth to Wyre
mouth, the low contry betwixt is cawlyd Wyralshire. Part, or (...) ^^teof
Chester is in Wyrale. -- Lel. Itin. vol. vii. fo. 78.


. In the latter is a transcript from the former, where, among the holy men
chosen by Peada, son of king Penda, to instruct him in the Christian religion,
one Adda is mentioned, who is there said to be brother to Uttan, an illustrious
presbyter and abbot of the monastery called Goatshead: Tanner likewise cites
Bourne, who in his History of Newcastle says, the monastery of Uttanus was
where Mr Riddle's or Gateshead house now is. From the following passage in
Leland's Itinerary, vol. vii. part i. page 78, added to the entry before quoted
from Dugdale's Catalogue, it appears as if this monastery was converted into an
hospital before the dissolution of religious houses; whereas the hospital (says
he) is now of St Edmund at Gateshed in Wyrale, was some time a monastary as I
have hard, and be lykelyhod the same that Bid spekythe of. In the Magna
Britannia, published in 1720, a different relation is given of this house, to
that taken from Speed, in these words: Gateshead, a religious house dedicated
to St Edmund^ who was the founder or benefactor, is not known, but the revenues
are found to be 109 l. 4 s. 4 d. per ann. Perhaps the former might be the value
delivered into the king's commissioners, and this its true amount. From these
obscure accounts little to be depended upon can be collected respecting its
ancient history; the following is its present state: Its remains stand in
Gateshead, on the east or right hand side of the high street leading to
Newcastle bridge, from which it is distant about half a mile. The entrance is
through a low square stone gate, decorated with pilasters, and seemingly of
modern construction. The site of the house with its offices and gardens,
occupied about two acres and a half of land: Toward the east end of it are the
ruins of a mansion, which, from the style of its architecture, seems to have
been built since the dissolution of the monastery, perhaps out of its
materials. This probably was Mr Riddle's house alluded to by Bourne, and the
gateway before mentioned was in all likelihood erected at the same time.
Nearest the road stands the chapel, whose west end is handsomely ornamented
with a number of pointed arches and niches, though the inside seems remarkably
plain: It consists of a single aile, twenty-one paces broad, by twenty-six
long; some steps at the east end leading to the altar are still remaining; near
them is a grave stone, on which is cut a cross similar to that on the jamb of
the church door at Jarrow; it has also the marks of an inlaid border about it,
but the brass is gone. The arches of the windows (except those of the east and
west ends, which are entirely pointed) are round within, and pointed on the
outside. A remarkable ornament is mounted on the east end, on a slender rod,
being a small circle chequered by several bars crossing each other at right
angles. In the year 1745 or 46, this chapel, being, as it is said, made use of
by the Roman Catholics, was out of a misguided zeal set on fire by some
persons, who perhaps meant to pass for good Protestants, but by this their
intolerant fury, showed themselves to be actuated by those very principles they
affected so much to contemn. This monastery is now the property of Ralph
Clavering, esquire of Callaly, and is chiefly used for garden ground This account
is attended with an elegant view of the chapel.

The house and garden ground, etc. were purchased about two years ago by Hen.
Ellison, esquire -- The mines were reserved upon this sale.


.

This account gives us ground to suppose, that on the martyrdom of bishop
Walcher, the old monastery and church were reduced to ashes; but whether they
were situated where Mr Gross has attempted to place them, the reader will form
his own conjectures. In the quotation from the Magna Britannia, it is said,
touching the hospital of St Edmund, "who was the founder or benefactor is not
known." It is probable that the ruined monastery, which had been a scene of
such violation, sacrilege, and murder, would lie under the horror of those
crimes, deserted and unrestored for some time; and it was not till the year
1247 that we hear of the hospital rising, as Mr Gross has presumed, from its
ashes. In that year, bishop Farnham founded the hospital of St Edmund the
Confessor in Gateshead, for a master and three subordinate brethren There is no
date to the foundation and ordination deeds. Farnham resigned 1249. Willis,
vol. i. p. 239. -- Prior Bertram, who confirmed, was not prior till 1245.
Willis, vol. i. p. 260. -- Supposed to be founded 1247. Tanner's Not. p. 115.
-- In the deed of ordination the hospital is noted as dedicated to St Edmund
the confessor and St Cuthbert.

Creatio Jo. de Apilby in magistrum hospitalis S. Edmundi in Gatesheved, per
Tho. Hatfield Dunelm. epis. 1353.

Reginaldus Porter vicarius ecclesiae parocialis de Pittington. constitutus
custos hospitalis B. Edmundi In this record styled "Hosp. B. Edmundi regis in
Gatesheved."
, in Gatesheved, per Walt. Skirlaw epis. Dunelm. 1399.

Custodia capellae S. Edmundi and Cuthberti In this St Edmund and St Cuthbert.
in Gateshede concessa Johanni Heyworth vicario S. Nicholai in Novo Castro, per
Tho Langley epis. Dunelm. 1435.


, for whose maintenance he granted the vill of Ulkistan, with the manor of
Gateshead, and wood-lands thereto belonging, called Benchelm, also certain
escheated lands in Aluresacyres, but no mention is therein made of any ancient
monastery or the lands of such. As by this foundation, the appropriated
tenements were dismembered from the church of Durham, in compensation the
bishop by the same deed assigned lands in Staindrop, with the advowson of the
church there, lands in Winston with the advowson of the church, lands and
services in Thymelby, lands in Creyk, bought of Robert de Raskelf, all the vill
of Herdwick near Stockton, obtained in part by purchase and part in exchange
for the manor of Bradewood, also certain money payments out of the bishop and
prior of Carlisle's ecclesiastical rights in Northumberland, together with the
advowson of the church of Stamfordham in that county. This foundation charter
received confirmation from the prior and convent of Durham. The bishop also
instituted certain ordinances for the government of the hospital, and by the
same instrument united therewith the chapel or hospital of the Holy Trinity in
Gateshead Bishop Tanner in the Notitia Monastica says, there was an hospital
here dedicated to the Holy Trinity, in the beginning of the reign of Henry III.
to which Henry de Ferlington gave his farm at Kyhoe, to find a chaplain, and
maintain three poor men; as appears by Simon de Ferlinton's confirmation of his
brother's gift, and the bishop of Durham's deed thereupon.

The confirmation by Richard de Marisco bishop of Durham, of lands given in
Frankalmoigne to the above hospital by Henry de Ferlington. [10 Henry III.
1226. Madox Form. p. 58. No 113.] Datum apud Acclent octavo decimo die Januarij
pont. nostri octavo.

The original is in the Augmentation-office, and written in a neat hand,
endorsed Collacio de Kyhowe. The seal, in green wax, exhibits a bishop in
pontificals, in the usual manner: On the reverse, a counterseal near as large
as the principal one, with three human figures, and inscribed Hoc onus ut sit h
(one^^) -- patronus.

Concessio terrarum ad hospitale S. Edmundi regis in Gatesheved, 6th October,
1378. Ex Rot. (B) Hatfield, Sched. 4, No 10.


. Bishop Hatfield, in 1378, granted several tenements in augmentation of the
hospital of St Edmund, by the style of S'ti Edmundi regis. In bishop Langley's
time, A. D. 1448, on the petition of the prioress and nuns of St Bartholomew in
Newcastle, in which the insufficiencies and failures of the revenues of their
house are set forth, the bishop appropriated St Edmund's hospital thereto, by
the style of the hospital of St Edmund the Bishop Appropriatio capellae S.
Edmundi episcopi in Gatesheved facta monialibus S. Bartholoma i in Novo Castro
per Robertum Neville epis. Dunelm. 7th October, 1448.

Obligatio monalium de Novo Castro de annua pensione capel. Sancti Edmundi
episcopi datum in domo nostra capitulari 20 die October. 1448.

A grant of the hospital of St Edmund in Gateside, and the possessions thereof,
made by the master of that hospital to the priory of St Bartholomew in
Newcastle, to find chaplains for ever to celebrate, etc. 1st May, 1449. --
Madox Form. fo. 271, No 458. -- Ex. Autogr. in Offic. Augmen.

The confirmation of the preceding grant by Robert Neville bishop of Durham,
1450. -- Madox Form. p. 69, No 131.

The original is in the Augmentation-office, to which the remains of a stately
seal upon silken strings is appendant. One side represents the bishop in the
equipage of a knight on horseback in splendid array:

The other side in pontifical vestments sitting on a throne, etc.

Though the preceding grants show this hospital of St Edmund in Gateshead, with
all the lands belonging to it, were granted 27th Henry VI. 1449, to the
prioress and nuns of St. Bartholomew in Newcastle; yet it is valued 26th Henry
VIII. 1535, (on the general survey) as having in yearly revenues 109l. 4s. 4d.
according to Speed; 5l. 9s. 4d. according to Dugdale; and 6l. 2s. 4d. clear by
the MS. val.

N. B. The only way to reconcile the great difference between these two
valuations, is to suppose it originally wrote 109s. 4d. and that Speed's
transcriber mistook, and put pounds for shillings, or that there were two
hospitals as after mentioned, and that by the coal working, licenced by bishop
Neville to the master of St Edmund the martyr, the great revenue arises.

Thirty-one of the lesser houses had the king's license in the 28th year of his
reign. 1537, to be resounded and continue some time longer; and the hospital of
St Bartholomew in Newcastle is said to be one of the number. -- Tanner's
Notitia, pref. p. 37. -- Burton's Mon. Ebor. vol i. p. 65.

Near the town of Newcastle appears to have been a small Benedictine nunnery,
as old as the time of William the Conqueror: It was dedicated to St
Bartholomew, and had a little before the dissolution ten nuns, when it was
valued at 36l. 10d. by Dugdale, and 37l. 4s. 2d. by Speed. -- Tanner's Notitia,
p. 391.

Agnes Lawson, the last prioress, surrendered this convent the 3d of January,
31st Henry VIII. 1540, and had a pension of 6l. assigned her, and enjoyed it in
1553, in which year there remained in charge the following pensions, viz.

Johanna, prioress 1 10 0 Johanna Brodrigge 1 6 8 Johanna Younger 1 6 8
Elizabeth Cranmer 1 6 8 Cicely Middletone 1 6 8

Willis's Hist. Abbeys, vol. ii. p. 164. Certain grounds behind the Turk's-head
tavern in the Bigg-market are called Nuns. and supposed to be the site of this
house.


. Whether upon the surrender by the prioress, the hospital was totally
suppressed or not, is uncertain, but king James I. refounded an hospital in
Gateshead, called the hospital or free chapel of St Edmund king and martyr, and
for that purpose granted his charter, dated the 8th of January, 1610, by which
it was ordained, that the house should from thenceforth bear the name of the
hospital of king James, in Gateshead, in the county palatine of Durham, for the
reception of three poor men, and that the rector of the church of Gateshead
should be master, and they should be incorporated by the style of the master
and brethren of the hospital of king James in Gateshead, and capable of
acquiring lands, tenements, etc JACOBUS Dei gratia, etc. Omnibus ad quos
presents literae pervenerint salutem. Cum in villa de Gateside infra
episcopatum Dunelm. quoddam hospital. a diu extitit vulgariter nuncupat.
hospital. sive capel. Sancti Edmundi regis et martyris de cujus fundatore certo
non constat. Quod quidem hospital. per idem tempus consistit de uno magistro et
tribus fratribus. Qui quidem magister et fratres hospital. predict. et
successores sui diverse. terr. tenement. pastur. libertat. et privileg. ad
sustentacionem patiperum ibidem in pur. et perpet. elemosin. habuer. et tenuer.

Volentes insuper, etc. de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia et mero
motu nostris volumus ac per presents pro nobis heredibus et successoribus
nostris concedimus quod predict. hospital. sive dom. situat. et existen. in
Gateside in com. sive episcopat. Dunelm. predict. modo vulgariter nuncupat,
"the hospital or free chapel of St Edmund king and martyr, within the town of
Gateside," de ceter. imperpetuum sit erit et permaneat hospital. pauperum in
Gateside predict. in com palatin. Dunelm. pro sustentatione relevamine et
manutentione pauperum.

Et quod dict. hospital. de cetero imperpetuum erit aut esse possit et
consistit de uno magistro et tribus viris pauper. in codem hospital imperpetuum
inveniend. et sustentand. et quod dict. hospital. deinceps imperpetuum
vocabitur hospital. regis Jacobi in Gaeteside in com. palatin. Dunelm.

TOT ill. hospital. sive reputat. hospital. antehac communiter vocat. sive
cognit. per nomen hospital. sive liber. capell. Sancti Edmundi regis et
martyris infra vill. de Gateside sive per nomen hospital. Sancti Edmundi
episcopi in Gateside sive per quodcunque al. nomen sive nomina quecunque
antehac vocat. sive cognit. suit.

Ac tot. scit. mansion. and gardin. eorundem, necnon quadraginta acras terr.
arrabil. quinque carect. feni, de december acr. prat. quadraginta acr. pastur. ad
sustentation. bestiar. et unu. claus. apud Shotley-brigge in predict. com.
palatin. Dunelm. cum omnibus et singulis little seal juribus membris
libertatibus et pertinen. universis de quibus reputat. magister et fratres
hospital. predict. et predecessores sui vel eorum aliquis vel aliqui per
spacium sexaginta annorum ultim. elaps. ante dat. harum litterarum nostrarum
patentium de facto saltem si non de jure habuer. perceper. vel gavis. suer.
annual. reddit. exit. revencion. seu profic. quiet et absque disturbatione.

Ac etiam omnia et singula messuag. molendin. domos edific. structur. nuper
hospital. vel reputat. hospital. ad aliquod tempus antehac spectan. pertinen.
inciden. vel appenden. etc. Habend. tenend. et gaudend. predict. hosp. terr.
etc. prefat. magistro et fratribus et successoribus suis imperpetuum ad solum
et proprium opus et usum corundem magistri et fratr. et successorum suorum
imperpetuum. IN cujus rei testimonium has litteras nostras fieri fecimus
patentes. TEST meipso apud Westmonasterium quarto die Januarii anno regni
nostri Anglie, Francie, et Hibernie octavo et Scotie quadragessimo quarto. Per
breve de privato figillo.


. He granted to the master and brethren the hospital or edifice known by the
name of the hospital or free chapel of St Edmund king and martyr, within the
vill of Gateshead, or by the name of the hospital of St Edmund the bishop in
Gateshead, with the site of the mansion house and garden, and certain lands at
Shotley bridge, with all such their rights, members, liberties, and
appurtenances whatsoever, which the master and brethren of the hospital
aforesaid, and their predecessors, or any of them, for the space of sixty years
then last past and next preceding the date of these letters patent, had
uninterruptedly held and enjoyed. And it was also thereby ordained, that during
the time of master Hutton, each of the three paupers should receive yearly 3l.
6s. 8d. out of the revenues of the endowment, and after his time the masters
should receive to their own use one third part only of the revenues, and the
other two parts be distributed to the brethren. From this deed it may be
understood, by implication, that the hospital had been a second time erected
before the time of this charter: The original constitution was totally altered,
and indeed one may apprehend, that the first foundation was utterly dissolved;
who had again begun this pious work, or when, we have no record to show. This
charter tells us the muniments which evidenced the foundation and endowment
were lost; such could not be the case if it arose from the original institution
by bishop Farnham; the more modern foundation, in the distraction of those
times which intervened between the year 1535 and 1610, might probably be lost
or destroyed; and this observation gains strength by the reference in the
charter to sixty years quiet enjoyment, by the master appointed thereby and his
predecessors, expressions not only useless, but repugnant to common sense, if
the hospital was instantly rising under that charter. Not having other records
to refer to in support of the idea, we leave the conjectures for the reader's
application Dr Smith, in his edition of Bede's Ecclesiast. Hist. says that in
Gateside there are no footsteps remaining of the ancient monastery of Uttanus;
but of a more modern one we see a most beautiful chapel, which is not as yet in
ruins. There is a tradition that this was a cell of the nuns of Newcastle, though
we cannot readily quote any authority for it. The tradition appears somewhat
probable, for in the charter (k. Hen. 2.) before mentioned, the nuns of St
Bartholomew received 2 s. annually from this cell. -- Bourne, p. 50.

This was one of the religious houses which by letters patent of king Henry
VIII. were new sounded, and preserved from the dissolution of lesser
monasteries, 30th March, A. R. 28, vol. i. Hist. Reform. col. records, 142,
143. It was afterward resigned and suppressed, 3d January, 31st king Henry
VIII. -- Ibid. 149.


.

From all the uncertainties noted in the account of St Edmund's, it is probable
king James's foundation did not affect the chapel described by Mr Gross, but
that the nuns of Newcastle had a cell there, within the ancient limits of the
hospital possessions; perhaps on the site of the hospital of the Holy Trinity,
or that there were two hospitals, one dedicated to St Edmund the bishop, and
the other to St Edmund king and martyr, in distant and distinct situations; or
how can we reconcile the facts of the chapel so described going to decay, and
that together with the whole site of the adjacent buildings and surrounding
lands being in lay hands for several generations, totally unconnected with the
present hospital, notwithstanding the words of king James's foundation charter.
Bishop Hatfield's Survey speaks of the hospitals of St Edmund the king, and St
Edmund the confessor distinctly Vide notes preceding.
. There is an irreconcilable confusion in this subject, and we are apt to
believe there were two religious foundations here dedicated as before noted,
one to St Edmund the confessor, appropriated to St Bartholomew in Newcastle,
which was dissolved under the surrender of that monastery, and another of a
foundation now unknown, which had been exempted from the dissolution, and
refounded by king James, dedicated to St Edmund king and martyr,
notwithstanding the complex description of lands, etc. in the royal charter. Mr
Riddle's house was called Gateshead house, and as Mr Gross observes, is of a
mode of architecture denoting a date subsequent to the suppression of religious
houses, and whilst in his or the family of Callaly's possession, there is an
obvious reason why it might be in use in the year 1745 Hospital of St Edmund.
-- Proc. ep. 13 s. 4 d. -- Real. value 200l.

Masters. Magister Ricardus occurs custos 12 Kal. April, 1265 -- Joh'es de
Lynce occurs 1 June, 1344 -- John de Appilby, 20 August, 1353 -- Adam de
Fenrother, el. 1366 -- Will. de Brantingham, 1374 -- Reginald Porter, 3
December, 1404 -- John de Newton -- John King W. Redhugh held an acre of land
in the east field of Gateshead within the limits of the lands of St Edmund the
king, ^lled Bolesacre, lying between the lands of John King chaplain and
custod. cantarie p'die in Gateshead.
, 1400 -- J. Walkington-Gen. Radclyf, d. 29 January, 1431 -- Mag'r John
Heyworth, in decr. bac. 12 May, 1435 -- Thomas Kirkeby. cl. May 1441 -- William
Hilderskelfe, 7 October, 1449 -- John Shirwood, 1467 -- Anth. Bellasys, LL. D.
-- Robert Claxton, 15 August, 1552 -- John Woodfall, 6 May, 1579 -- Clem.
Colmore, LL. D. 4 June, 1587 -- John Hutton, rector of Gateshead, appointed by
king James I. 4 January, 1610 -- The successors were all rectors of Gateshead.

N. B. The rector of Gateshead may let a lease of the hospital lands for ten
years; and if he dies within that term his executors are entitled by law to the
profits till the ten years are completed.


.

Before the act of the seventh of Edward VI. which annexed Gateshead to
Newcastle, tolls were paid by the burgesses of Newcastle to the bishop or his
lessees, for passage in Gateshead: But when Gateshead was restored to the
bishopric of Durham, to take off the great opposition made by the corporation
of Newcastle, or to compensate their loss, bishop Tunstall granted a lease to
the mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, dated the 17th of March, 1554, of the
Salt Meadows for ninety years, and so from ninety till the time of four hundred
and fifty years was spent, with a way to be assigned for all persons, and for
the conveyance of wares and merchandise and other things, to and from the Salt
Meadows and the high street of Gateshead At the assizes at Durham, August 3,
1748, a cause was tried between Henry Thomas Carr and Henry Ellison, esquire
plaintiffs, and Nich. Fairless defendant. Upon the pleadings the question was,
whether Fairless, lessee of J. Liddle, who was the lessee of the corporation of
Newcastle, had a right to a way from the high street of Gateshead down
Wash-house Lane and down the Limekiln Close to the Salt Meadows. After a long
trial, which ended about four o'clock in the morning, the special jury found
for the plaintiffs, who proved there was an ancient way from Gateshead cross
Akewellgate to the Salt Meadows. -- Gyll's MSS.

In the fourth year of bishop Nevill, he granted a license to Thomas Kirkeby,
master of the hospital of St Edmund the martyr in Gateshead, to work coals in
the hospital lands, and to lead them to the Tyne, and to build staiths upon the
bishop's soil there, and that such working should not be accounted
dilapidation, paying to the bishop and his successors 100 s. per ann. --
Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.

Cardinal Wolsey granted a lease for forty years to Tho. Winter, dean of Wells
and archdeacon of Richmond, of a house and furnace in Gateshead, and of all the
bishop's mines, as well in the country called Weredale, as in any other place
in the said bishopric. Five pounds rent. -- Dated 10th February, 20th king
Henry VIII. -- Ibid.


; rent reserved 2 l. 4 s. The Salt Meadows, with the buildings thereon, now
produce about 200l. a year. The same lease also comprehends all manner of toll
of the town of Gateshead for any and every kind of merchandise, tollable within
the precinct, liberties, and jurisdiction thereof, or any where else within the
bishopric of Durham for the said toll, to such effect and meaning that the said
toll should thenceforth remain unlevied, untaken, and as if extinguished, and
no such toll to be thenceforth gathered, taken, or paid of the said mayor or
burgesses and their successors, or of any other person or persons for or in
respect of the same, or such toll as theretofore had been taken in Gateshead,
or thereafter might be taken if that demise were not. And the mayor and
burgesses did thereby covenant with the bishop, that in consideration of the
said toll of the said town of Gateshead so demised, neither they nor their
successors, or any of their officers, or any person by their means, should at
any time during the term thereby granted, take or levy of any person or persons
any manner of toll of the south side of the water of Tyne, or within the town,
liberties, and county of Newcastle, for, or in manner, or in respect of the
town of Gateshead. Rent reserved 4l. 6s. 8d.

We find several families of note holding lands in capite in Gateshead. In the
fifth year of bishop Hatfield, John Gategang died seized of thirty-three acres,
called the Old Park, held by fealty and twenty-two shillings rent; and Alan
Gategang the same year died seized of the whole land called Pipewellgate, held
of the bishop in capite in baroniam: Sibilla the widow of Gilbert Gategang,
held a capital message and lands in Kabayncrofts, St Elenscrofts,
Marshal-Meadow, the Fleetes, and Strother Meadow, and twenty-four acres in the
wastes in Gateshead fields. In the twentieth year of the same prelate, she held
of the bishop the Park of Gateshead, paying one pound of pepper. Idoma their
daughter and heiress married John Fetherstonhalgh See the inq. p. m. Alan
Gategang, on the inquisition taken 20th bishop Hatfield, appeared to die seized
of 12 mess. 100 acres of land and 40 acres of meadow in Gateshead, held by
fea^ty and 4l. 6s. 8d. rent at the exchequer. -- And also 43 acres of moor land
on Gateshead moor.


. Gocelinus Surtays held of the bishop seven tenements in Gateshead, and
sixty-nine shillings rent out of lands, and six tenements in Gateshead and
Akewelgate, of the rectorial church of Gateshead, rendering 4s. 6d Inq. p. m.
22 bishop Hatfield.
. Rob. de Umfrevill died seized in the thirty-fifth year of bishop Hatfield, of
seven burgages in Gateshead. In the same year David de Rodham died seized of
grounds called Chilside and Spinner Flat: Alicia his daughter and heiress
married Thomas del Castle: And John de Eyghton held Saltwellside, and dying
without issue, his estates descended to his sister Emma, wife of John de
Ravensworth. The before mentioned lands, called the Fleetes, became the
possession of the Dolphanbys by purchase, in the time of bishop Langley Inq. 14
bishop Langley.
, who also held twelve tenements in Pipewellgate, and 9l. 7s. rent, issuing out
of other tenements there. The family of Redheugh held diverse tenements in
Gateshead, but failing in male issue, their possessions passed to the Butlers
and Heckleys, by marriage of the heiresses Vide Lynths.
. The family of Gategangs fell into female issue, and their estates passed to
the Guildfords, by marriage of Sibilla the sister of William Gategang, whose
family did not long survive the same fate Vide Collierly.
. Diverse families of note held burgages in Gateshead, too tedious to be
enumerated here.

TYNE BRIDGE in part appertains to the county of Durham: It is of great
antiquity, and several authors of note have supposed the Romans had an open
communication between their stations on the northern and southern shores of
Tyne at this place. Mr Horsley's opinion Page 104. Brit. Romans
was, that there must have been a bridge in the Roman times over the river
Tyne, near the place where the present bridge stands. He says, I think there
are some certain visible remains of a military way on Gateshead fell, pointing
directly toward the part where I suppose the station has been at Newcastle,
and coming, as I apprehend, from Chester-le-street. Dr Hunter assured me he had
also observed visible remains of such a way. The idea seems to be confirmed by
the discovery of several Roman coins in the ruins of the bridge after the flood
of 1771, taken up by the workmen who were employed in repairs Inscribed, Diva
Faustina Rev. Augusta. S. C. -- Divus Verus -- Consecratio -- Antoninus Aug.
Pius -- These coins were in the possession of bishop Egerton.
. In the time of William the Conqueror the bishop of Durham was admitted to
have, in right of his palatinate, the south part of the river Tyne 1080. Turris
London ss. Recorda merchiar. tempore Williel. Conq. regis, whereby the meets
and bounds of the river Tyne are described as then enjoyed.

Tempore regis Henrici primi filij regis Will. facta est concordia de piscar.
in Tyna secundum quod antiquiores totius Haliwerkfolke et Northumberlande
juraverunt tempore Ranulphi episcopi in presentia Walt. Speak et E^stacii filij
Johannis Justic. quod a Slaneburnmouth usq. Tynemouth viz. usq. in mare
medietas aquae de Tyna pertinet ad S. Cuthbertum et episcopatum Dunelm. Et alia
medietas ad com. Northumber. Ita tamen quod tertia pars utriusq. erit communis
and libera in medio. Eadem aqua debet mensurari ad Mayn^loode quando eadem aqua
sluit ut plena bancke and bancke -- Ib. ad An. Ann. 1454. Eo. 93. Ex reg.
Dunelm. Bibl. Cotton. 7047.


. By the charter of king Henry II. the bishop had confirmed to him the right of
ships plying in his part of Tyne, as fully and freely as the king possessed
that usage on the other. Bourne, speaking of this bridge, says, It has been a
query whether the bridge was originally of wood or stone; but I think it is
altogether needless, all the bridges in England were originally of wood. In the
reign of king Richard I. Philip bishop of Durham sent to the burgages of
Gateside, a grant of forestage, in which are these words, and it shall be
lawful for every burgess to give wood to whomsoever he will, to be spent about
the river of Tyne, without any license. This I imagine has been for building of
keys, and especially for the repairing of the bishop's part of the bridge,
which is a further proof that this bridge was wood. But what I think puts it
beyond dispute is, that according to Matthew Paris, it was burnt in the year
1248, together with a great part of the town P. 728. In Anglia vero, etsi de
aliis sileamus, maxima pars burgi qui Novum Castrum super Tinam appellatur, cum
ponte, igne quasi furioso consumpta est.
. After this misfortune happened, the town, who repairs two-thirds of the
bridge, and the bishop the other, laid out their endeavors to raise up another
bridge of stone: Accordingly the bishop of Durham sent out indulgences, and the
town procured other bishops to do the same, to all that would assist, either
with money or labor, by which they got a sum sufficient. The archdeacon of
Northumberland wrote to the clergy of his archdeaconry to assist the work of
the bridge; telling them, their venerable father the lord bishop of Durham by
his letters patent had commanded them without any let or delay, to go about the
affair of the indulgences, and that they were to prefer the episcopal
indulgences to others; and what arose from them was to be given to the master
of the bridge, whose name was Laurentius, for the use of the bridge. Lib. Cart.
Many other indulgences were granted for that purpose. By an inquisition taken
at Newcastle, in the year 1293, it was adjudged, that the right of the bishop
of Durham extended to the mid stream of Tyne Et inquisitio inde capt. apud
Novum Castrum super Tinam in com. Northumbriae cra. S'ti Hillarij anno regni
Edw. regis (fill. regis Henrici) 21o de medietate aquae de Tyne episc. Dunelm.
spectant.
. In the seventh year of k. Richard II. bishop Fordham obtained a charter
confirming the right of merchants plying their vessels on the bishop's side of
the river Tyne, and loading and unloading coals there unmolested, by the
burgesses of Newcastle Vide vol. i. p. 318, and note thereto.

1384. An. 7. Ric. 2. reg. Johannes Fordham episc. carta Richardi secundi regis
episc. Dunelm. pro applicatione navium, oneratione and exoneratione carbonum
merchan. diver. et aliarum rerum quarumcunque absq. impedimento hom. villae
Novi Castri super Tinam.

1393. 15 Rich. 2. Carta Richardi secundi regis episc. Dunelm. de libertatib's
regal. com. palatini infra Tynam and Tesam (usq. medium aquarum illarum) cum
applicatione oneratione and exoneratione navium batellorum et aliorum vasorum
in eisdem aquis. -- Vide Dugdale's Monast. prima part fo. 46, tit. Dunelm.


. There was a necessity for this solemn act, for the burgesses had paid no
obedience to the writ of king Edward III. Writ attested at York, 20th August,
8th of the reign, 1334.

Turr. Land. An. 18. k. Edw. 3. 1334. The king's commissioners appointed
conservators of the river Tyne, and were prosecuted before the bishop of
Durham's justices, (appointed by the bishop's own commission then Richard de
Bury) for intermeddling in the conservatorship of the south part of the said
river belonging to the bishop; wherein the king's commissioners pleaded not
guilty, but upon trial thereof were found guilty, and condemned to imprisonment.


on the behalf of bishop Bury, prohibiting the mayor and bailiffs of Newcastle
from impeding such navigation; or regarded the legal example of the king's
commissioners, who suffered imprisonment for intruding on the conservatorship
of the bishop's part of the river. In the fourth year of Henry V. 1416, bishop
Langley obtained judgment on a trial at law against the mayor and burgesses of
Newcastle upon Tyne, heard at the bar of the Court of King's Bench, on which a
jury were summoned from the counties of Westmoreland and Cumberland, on an
issue joined before the lord high chancellor, and transmitted to that court by
order of parliament to be tried there, whereby he was confirmed in the right of
the Sea to the south part of the river Tyne and the bridge and tower thereupon
See Annals of bishop Langley, vol. i. p. 333, records in the notes.
. About the year 1512 bishop Ruthall repaired the south part of the bridge.
Under the act of dissolution of 1553, all the possessions of the bishopric were
vested in the crown, and by the act of the succeeding year, when Gateshead was
annexed to Newcastle, the lands called Salt Meadows, with the whole river of
Tyne and the bridge passed therewith, and were adjudged to be within the county
and shire of the town of Newcastle, and that the inhabitants of Gateshead
should be under the rule, government, and correction of the mayor and burgesses
of Newcastle. All these were restored in 1554, as before mentioned. The bridge,
after the conflagration in 1248, was rebuilt on twelve stone arches, three of
which, by the construction of quays, on the Newcastle side, were thought
unnecessary, and converted into cellars: About the middle of the bridge a tower
was erected, with machicolations and iron gates; a little to the southward of
which the boundary stone was fixed, to distinguish the division of the
counties; the end from thence to Gateshead belonging to the bishop of Durham.
At the south end was another tower, and from the vacancy in the archings, there
wanting an arch near the southern tower, it has been presumed there was in that
space a drawbridge. The bishops of Durham have for time immemorial possessed
all rights and privileges of the bridge, from the boundary stone southwards,
being called a third part, and granted leases for lives or years, of all houses
and shops erected thereon, and as occasion required repaired that part of the
bridge. In July 1770, bishop Trevor repaired with stone the space before noted,
where it is supposed the drawbridge was; it was laid with large beams of
timber, and covered with thick planks, upon which the pavement was made: This
work was begun on Saturday night or Sunday morning, and finished on Thursday
following, all the materials of stone being previously prepared, and a proper
number of workmen, with boats and wherries above and below bridge, for
conveying passengers and carriages over the river during the time of the work.
In the night between the 16th and 17th of November, 1771, there was a flood in
the river Tyne, greatly exceeding any noted in history or otherwise known, by
the force of which an arch north of the toll-gate was first swept away A
curious view of the ruined bridge was engraved and published by Mr Beilby of
Newcastle.
, then another on the south end fell, with eight houses on the west side of it,
those on the east hanging by their timbers. On Monday the 18th, about four in
the afternoon, another of the south arches fell, with the houses thereon, and
the remaining parts of the bridge were so much shattered, that it was necessary
to take the superstructure down. Only seven persons were lost by the fall of
the several houses. The river began to rise at Newcastle about twelve o'clock
on Saturday night, and at five in the morning the arches of the bridge were
filled, so that a current was forced into the west end of the street called the
Close, which runs parallel with the river; it overflowed the Sandhill-square,
so that boats plied there, and many of the shops had five feet water in them:
The water exceeded every other flood of which we have any note; by eight
perpendicular feet in height; and infinite loss and damage was sustained on the
shores and in the shiping and craft. In 1772 an act of parliament was obtained
for making a temporary bridge, by the corporate body of Newcastle, to continue
for seven years, (provided a new one of stone was not erected, or the old
bridge restored in less time) with toll-gates thereon, and the tolls to be
applied in reimbursing to the corporation such money as they should expend
therein over and above the sum of 2400l. which they voluntarily gave to the
work: And in the same year an act of parliament was made to enable the lord
bishop of Durham and his successors to raise a competent sum of money, to be
applied for repairing, improving, or rebuilding such part of Tyne bridge as
belongs to the Sea of Durham. The preamble sets forth, that the lord bishop of
Durham is entitled in right of his See, to one-third part of an ancient bridge
extending across the river Tyne, between the town of Gateshead in the county
palatine of Durham, and the town of Newcastle upon Tyne; and that by the
violence and rapidity of a most extraordinary flood, which happened on the 17th
day of November, 1771, in the river Tyne, the said bridge was damaged and
broken down in several places, and rendered impassable: And in order to restore
an easy and safe communication between the counties of Durham and
Northumberland, it is highly expedient that the said bridge should be rebuilt,
and effectually repaired with all possible expedition; and that the necessary
repairs of one-third part of the said bridge, belonging to the bishop of Durham
in right of his See, and extending from two blue marble or boundary stones, on
the south side of the said bridge, to the town of Gateshead, will be attended
with great expense, and however reasonable or proper it may be, that the entire
sum necessary to be appropriated for, and employed in that useful and necessary
work, ought to be raised out of or secured upon the revenues and possessions of
the said See of Durham, and that the bishop of Durham for the time being, ought
not to bear any greater burden than shall arise from the interest or annual
charge to be paid in respect of the principal money to be raised for the
purpose aforesaid; yet the said lord bishop consenting, that a reasonable and
adequate sum of money may be raised by authority of parliament, by granting
annuities for lives, which will not only be speedy and effectual, but may be a
method less burdensome to the successors in the said See than to the said now
lord bishop, by the eventual dropping in of lives and the decrease of such
temporary charge; it is thereby enacted, that the chancellor of the bishopric
and county palatine of Durham and Sadberge, the sheriff of the county, etc. the
vicar general and principal official of the diocese of Durham, the attorney and
solicitor general to the lord bishop of Durham, the principal register or
registrar of the diocese of Durham, the auditor to the lord bishop of Durham,
the keeper of Auckland castle, the steward of the halmote courts of the lord
bishop of Durham, the clerk of the halmote courts of the lord bishop of Durham,
the clerk of the great receipt of the exchequer of Durham, the register of the
court of chancery of Durham, the clerk of the court of chancery of Durham, the
keeper of the rolls of the chancery aforesaid, the clerk of the itinerant
justices and other justices whomsoever in the county palatine of Durham and
Sadberge, and the bailiff of the borough of Auckland for the time being, or any
three of them, are thereby appointed trustees to put the said act in execution,
by and under the direction of the bishop and his successors, for repairing,
rebuilding, or improving such part of the said bridge as belongs to the Sea of
Durham: And to raise any sum not exceeding 12,000 l. for the purposes
aforesaid, by granting annuities not exceeding 10 l. per cent. to be paid by
the receiver-general of the bishop and his successors, out of the revenues of
the Sea of Durham.

In consequence of this act a new bridge has been erected on an elegant plan,
and no houses are permitted to be built on the piers or battlements.

REDHEUGH, the seat of Henry Askew, esquire lies to the west of Gateshead, near the
river Tyne. It gave a local name to the resident family, who held the manor of
the bishop of Durham in capite, by homage, fealty, and suit of court; and in
the fifth year of bishop Hatfield was estimated at forty shillings, clear of
reprisals. -- This family continued possessors several generations, till
failing in male issue, the estates descended to coheiresses, one marrying
Boteler or Butler, and the other Heckley Vide Lynths.
.

GATESHEAD PARK-HOUSE, the seat of Hen. Ellison, esquire a fine elevated situation,
commanding a view of the busy scenes on the river Tyne, and the adjacent
country.

The manor of EIGHTON was the ancient estate of the Lumleys, derived from the
grant of bishop Flambard to his nephew Vide Ravensworth.
. There was an hermitage on the banks of the rivulet near the road side leading
from Chester to Gateshead, to which bishop Fordham granted an acre of land, for
building a chapel and cell in honor of the Holy Trinity Rot. Fordham, Sch. 9,
No 7.

Joh'es d gra. Ep'us Dun. o'ibus, etc. Sciatis q'd nos de gra. n'ra sp'iali
concessimus Roberto Lamb heremitae, unam acram vasti n'ri ad finem borealem
villae de Eighton jacentem, juxta altam viam ducentem versus Gatesheved,
videlicet ex part occidentali dict. viae p'pe rivulum descendentem de font
vocat. Scoteswat. p' quadam capella and heremitagio p' ipsum ibid. in honor.
S. Trinitatis aedisicand. Hend. and tenend. eid'm Rob'to ad terminum vitae suae
de Elemosina n'ra libere and quiet ab omni s'vicio seculari ad serviend. Deo
ibidem and orand. p' nobis and p' predecessoribus and succ. n'ris. Dat.
vicesimo die Maij Ao sexto, etc. P' breve ^. priv. sig. A. D. 1387.


.

GATESHEAD CHURCH is a spacious building, capable of receiving a very numerous
congregation, and kept in that order due to places of divine worship: It is
very light, and receives a good circulation of air: The chancel, from the altar
rails, is nine paces long and six wide; the east window consisting of five
lights; there are also three windows to the south, and two to the north, under
pointed arches: The communion table is supported by cherubs, in stone work;
near which are three recesses or seats in the wall within the rails, for
priests officiating in the ancient service, and an aperture for a water basin.
This church is built upon a regular plan, in the form of a cross, with side
ailes, separated from the center by five pointed arches, supported on octagonal
columns about fifteen feet high, very light and well proportioned, having this
singularity, that they are without capitals, the arches springing from the
shafts, like the ramifications of a tree, which gives them a beautiful
appearance; the arches are about sixteen feet in span: The whole length of the
nave is twenty-eight paces, and its width sixteen; the cross aile is
twenty-four paces long. The south end of the cross is lighted by one large
window of five lights, and two to the east of three lights each; the ailes have
each two square windows of three lights: The upper arrangements are regular,
consisting of five windows under circular arches. The church is regularly
stalled with oak, ornamented with fleur-de-lis, has a pretty small organ, and
galleries at the west end: The font is a large black marble laver: The pulpit
is placed against the first south pillar. The adjacent ground is called the
Anchorage or Anchoritage, where the schoolhouse stands, with the beadle's house
and other edifices belonging the church. The steeple was rebuilt in 1740
Gateshead Rectory. -- Dedicated to St Mary. -- Bishop of Durham patron.

K. books 27l. 13s. 4d. -- Yearly tenths 2l. 15s. 4d. -- Pro. ep. 10s. -- Pro.
arch. 4s. -- Pension to Houghton school 2l. 13s. 4d. granted by J. Heath of
Kepyer. -- Real val. 200l.

RECTORS.
Rob. de Plesuys, sed. vac. an. val. of chapter 26 marcs Robertus, 1275 Hen.
Manselot, 1322 Rich. Kilvington, S. T. P. 1344, p. m. Manselot Joh. de Castro
Barnardi, 1370, p. m. Kilvington Adam de Fenrother, p. res. Castro Barnardi
Joh. de Castro Barnardi, 1376, p. res. Fenrother Joh. Bathre, 1379, p. res.
Castro Barnardi Tho. Everard 1380, p. res. Bathre Will. de Dalington, 1389, p.
m. Everard Joh. de Longley, p. m. Dalington Will. Malberthorp cl. p. res.
Longley Will. Wandesford, 1410, p. m. Malberthorp Joh. de Thoralby, 1419, p
res. Wandesford Henry Eton, 1421, p. res. Thoralby Joh. Bonour, 1427, p. m.
Eton Joh. Lethom, 1435, p. res. Bonour Thomas Tanfield, 1436, p. res. Lethom
Rob. Mason, LL. D. 1474, p. m. Tanfield Cha. Mann, 1493, p. m. Mason John
Brown, cl. 1532 Will Bell, S. T. P. 1557, p. res. Brown Will. Byrche, A. M.
1559 Discretus vir Lanc. Doddisworthe, 19 July, 1564, p. res. Byrche Will.
Hodgeson, predicator 5 Oct. 1571, p. m. Doddisworth Glem. Colmore, LL. D. 1587
John Hutton, 1595 Thomas Hook, 25 May, 1612 Jos. Brown, A. M. 18 July, 1620
Thomas Weld, an intrudor, 1657 John Ladler, A. M. 16 March, 1660, -- k. Charles
II. p' hac vice. See vacant. John Cave, A. M. 1685 Richard Werge, A. M. p. res.
Cave John Cock, A. M. 1617, p m. Werge Rob Brograve A. M. 1691, p. depr. Cock
George Tully, A. M. 1691 John Smith, A. M. 12 June, 1695, p. m. Tully Theo.
Pickering, S. T. P. 5 Dec. 1695, p. res. Smith Leo. Shafto, A. M. 1705, p. res.
Pickering Rob. Stillingfleet, A. M. 1732, p. m. Shafto Will. Lamb, A. M. 1733
And. Wood, A. M. 7 Sep. 1769, p. m. Lamb Rich. Fawcett, D. D. 1772, p m. Wood.
-- Had a dispensation to hold it with the vicarage of Newcastle. He died April
29, 1782 Robt. Thorpe, A. M.
There were four chantries founded in this church.

1. To St Mary. -- Ad altar beatae Mariae Virginis in porticu boreall in eccl.
etc. and quod post decessum, etc. The inhabitants of Gateshead to present.
Value 6l. -- 15 bishop Skirlaw. 2. St John Baptist and St John Evangelist. In
the 16th year of the same prelate, John Dolsonby obtained license to found this
chantry, value 4l. 11s. Vide donatio. 209 Bourne's Newcastle. 3. Chantry of the
Holy Trinity. 4. Chantry of St Eloyes.
Inscription behind the organ. -- This steeple was rebuilt A. D. 1740. with the
then churchwardens names.

On the new gallery. -- This gallery was built A. D. 1763. with the then
churchwardens names.

There are six musical bells in this church, obtained by contribution about the
year 1730, to which the corporation of Newcastle and the Trinity-house were
principal benefactors: One inscribed Te deum Laudamus, 1730; another Vos
Jubilate; a third Festa Decoro. -- T. Seller eborac. -- All the bells were new
hung in 1773.

Against the wall of the south aile of the church. To the Memory of ANDREW
WOOD, M. A. Rector of this church Born XXIX May, MDCCXV. Inducted IX Sept.
MDCCLXIX. Interred Amidst the Tears of his Parishioners XV March, MDCCLXXII.
This Monument of their Esteem Affection and Gratitude Was erected by the People
of GATESHEAD. His body is buried on the left side of the choir as you go to the
altar, close by his predecessor Mr Lamb.

An order for the tithe coals of Gateshed.
Md that the Xth day of October, in the year of o'r Lord God M.VC.XXXIX.
Whereas discord, clame and suyt haithe ben dependinge bytwixt Sir John Brown
clerk, p'son of Gateshed of the one p'tie, and Will'm Thomlyngson and Will'm
Inskip fermers of my lord of Duresme cole mines wt'in the township and p'ishe
of Gateshed on th'oder p'te, of, for, and upon the detynewe of the tiethe coals
of the said cole mines, for the appeasing of all such discord and suyt had and
maid bitwixt the said p'ties, it is agreade and ordered by the consent of both
p'ties in the presence of Mr Doctor Hyndmer chauncelor of Duresme, the day and
year above written in manner and form followyng, that is to say, the said W.
Tomlyngson and W. Inskip and either of them confessythe and grauntythe that the
said p'son shall have in recompense of his said tiethe coals for every pyt
three holl days work in the year wtin the said cole mine, to work and to draw
coals at the coals of the said p'son or his assigns. And the said W. and W. to
find the said p'son cole rope, corff, shoile, and barrowe every day of the
said three days; and the said p'son to be no further charget, but only what
workmens wags for the said three dais: The first day of the said three days to
begin before Xrenmes next insuyng after the dait above wrytton: The second day
to be had and taken before Candlemes then next after: And the third day of the
said 3 days to be had and taken within one year immediately ensewinge the date
hereof. Alwais providet, that the said p'son shall have fre liberty for his
workmen to work and draw as many chalders of coals of every of the said pitts
as ar dalye or any day drawn for and to the said Will. and Will. during the said
three days.

Randal's MSS. Book of Rates.
Books of rates. Rental of lands. 1st assm. 2d assm. Gateshead parish 11 5 4
2115 0 0 14 5 3 10 16 0 Rent to the bishop 60 0 0 Rectory and hospital 0 16 8
120 0 0 0 17 0 0 12 10

1719. Milbanke's pt of St Edmund's pays p' ann. 9l. 12s. to Rob. Oats, of
which Mr Cotesworth 6l. 8s. and Dr Thomlinson 3l. 4s.

1719. Paid for the manors of Gateshead and Whickham rent to bishop 235l. 11s.
4d. free from deductions.

Grey's MSS. Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rate at 6s. 8d. Gateshead
high-ward 208 4 0 4 6 0 Ditto low-ward 158 6 0 4 6 0 Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 3310 647 3379 from 1760
to 1779 3633 1224 4675 Increase 323 577 1296

Burials in the last year 245. -- Computed number of inhabitants 7350.

Dean and chapter rents -- Gateshead 6 3 10 Fishings in Tyne 2 19 4 Ferry-boat
0 6 8


. In the churchyard is the monument of one Robert Trollop, a famous architect;
it is a square building, the lower part of brick, the upper of stone, and of
that heavy taste which prevailed about the time of king James I. when Trollop
lived. It was embellished around the top under the cornice with several
scripture passages, in gold letters on a black ground, which in some places are
still to be discovered. A traditional account says, that formerly there stood,
on the north side, a statue in the attitude of pointing toward the town hall
of Newcastle, which is nearly opposite, under the feet, the following lines:
Here lies Robert Trollop
Who made yon' stones roll up
When death took his soul up
His body filled this Hole up.


Which statue and inscription, if such there ever were, have long been
demolished. The family of Harris now use the burial place.

It may not be improper to observe, that Daniel de Foe resided in Gateshead
whilst he wrote his much admired tale of the adventures of Robinson Crusoe; the
chief incidents of which, it is said, he gained from one Selkirk who was
shipwrecked on the island of Juan Fernandez; and it is reported, with some
disgrace to the memory of that ingenious man, that he obtained Selkirk's
minutes under pretense of writing his story, and applied them to his own
emolument.

JARROW
view of Jarrow The Parish of JARROW.
We now approach Jarrow, once a place of great consequence, and of distant
antiquity. Little more remained of this once famous town when we visited it in
1782, than two or three mean cottages, the distracted ruins of the old
monastery, the church, a venerable pile, then patched up so as to retain few
traces of its original figure, and the capacious haven, now called the Slake,
washed full of sand, and left dry by the river Tyne at ebb of tide.

The monasteries of Weremouth and Jarrow were the most ancient of any within
the limits of this county: That of Weremouth, dedicated to St Peter, we are
told, was built in the fourth year of king Egfrid, at the instance of Benedict
a monk, who became the superior or governor of both houses: The monastery of
Jarrow, dedicated to St Paul, was erected in the fifteenth year of the same
king; the place being then called Gyrwy or Girvy. Retirement and seclusion were
not the principles which directed the choice of this situation; for if the
original monastery was placed where the present ruins are, the ground is
elevated, and forms a curvature toward the great bay called the Slake, which
ancient authors tell us was the haven of Egfrid, where, consistent with the
burden of vessels used in that age, a thousand sail might lie moored in the
greatest security. Leland says, Jarrow is distant from Newcastle four miles
Lel. Col. vol. ii. p. 302, 303.
, but by land it is seven, and more by water: There is no ground near the
present remains of a more solemn or secluded situation which can answer the
description given by Roger Hoveden, for he calls it Monasterium Doni Amnis,
from a rivulet which runs from the southward into the Slake Ex Historia Rogeri
Hovedini DCCXCIIII.

Portus Ecgfridi forsan sinus de Garaw, ubi monaster. Bedae. -- Predicti
pagani, portum Ecgfridi regis vastantes, monasterium doni amnis praedaverunt.

Id est Tini quemadmodum est in exemplari ventans donus flu. qui per Garaw, vel
potius per Dancaster in Tinam descendit.

In the year 703, St Benedict, an English abbot, rested in the Lord. He was
nobly born, in his youth a soldier, then minister to king Oswy, and having
great possessions, resolved to leave the world for Christ, and going to Rome,
at his return had the land of forty families given him by Egfrid king of
Northumberland, to build a monastery to St Peter, at the mouth of the river
Were, and another in honor of St Paul at Girroy. -- Monast. Angl. Stevens, p.
21. Reg. 3, Eccl. Durh. p. 62. -- He is said to be the first who brought the
art of making glass into England.

Girwy and Girway-lond A. S. regionem palustrem notat, a Gyran Gyras Paludes
Geras Palus, Ger lutum, Skin. Lex. Etym. This derivation agrees well with the
situation of the place, it standing on the southwest side of a large body of
water called Jarrow Slake, which is supplied with water at high tide from Tyne
river.


. The descriptions given by ancient writers, of religious edifices, nearly of
the date of this monastery, which arose about 684, lead us not to expect one
remaining trace of the first structure, without we should discover it in the
repositories of the dead; for as such fabrics chiefly consisted of timber and
reeds, the sacrilege committed by barbarians in repeated invasions, would most
probably sweep away every part thereof. In the fifth year of Ethelred's reign
after his restoration, and during the episcopacy of bishop Higbald, the Danes
and rovers from the north entered the river Tyne, and laid this monastery in
ashes Portus Ecfridi sinus qui a Tina at Girwi penetrat. penetrabat and
interius usq. ad Bilton, pene 3 pas. Millibus super Girwi, quo antiquitus and
naviculae pervenerunt. Fluviolus hunc sinum intrat. -- Anno sequente dum pagani
portum Ecfridi regis, hoc est Girvi vastantes, monasterium ad ostium Tini amnis
depraedarentur, dux eorum ibidem crudeli nece interiit. Eodem tempore
depopulata est ecclesia Lindisfarn. -- Lel. Col. vol. i. p. 328.

Bilton, we presume, is meant for a place called Bill, where is a quay for
craft or small vessels; it is situated there on a curvature of the river Tyne,
which at that place takes a northern direction, and leaves a shore formed like
a crescent.

Ex chronico incerti Auctoris apud Whitby. -- Lel. Col. vol. iv. p. 42.

Famosum hoc monasterium, cujus Baeda alumnus erat, semel atque iterum a Danis
intrantibus Tinam, ita depopulatum fuit, ut locis aliquot vestigia tantum
antiqui operis and structurae appareant. Monachi, qui jam tantum tres
caenobiolum inhabitant, monstrant Bedae oratorium and arulam, in cujus medio
pro gemma ostentant fragmentulum serpentini aut viridis marmoris.

Inscriptio ibidem reperta in quadrato saxo majusculis literis Romany sculpta
'Dedicatio Basilicae S. Pauli viiii calendas Maij, anno xvo Ecfridi regis.
Ceolfridi abbatis ejusdem. q. m. ecclesiae deo autore conditoris anno iiii.

Ceolfridus.

Jubente pariter, and juvante Benedicto monasterium S. Pauli fundavit,
perfecit, rexit, ac deinde utrique monasterio viginti and octo annis solerti
regimine praesuit. Tres Bibliothecas acquisivit, duas utrique monasterio
reliquit novus abbas, jubente Ceolfrido, electus est antequam Romam versus
proficisceretur. Eligitur ergo ^petbritus, vir bonus and justus, qui erat
discipulus Sigfridi abbatis, ad cujus consecrationem Acca episcopus invitatus
est. -- Lel. Col.

Waltherus comes Northumbr. dedit Tinemuth cum corpore S. Oswini monachis de
Girwy. Quo tempore obtulit and Morekarum puertum monachi disciplina erudiendum.

Pauca subscribent donat. nomina.

Alcredus comes, Uthredus frater Morekari, Liwulf pater Morekari, Leobwinus
decanus Dunelmen. Gilbertus nepos Walkeri episcopi. Alwinus miles, Kenulphus
miles, Wulstanus miles. Swartebrant preost.

Lel. Col. vol. ii. p. 538. Comites Northumb. donaverunt monachis Girwicen.
ecclesiam S. Oswini de Tinemuth, unde reliquiae S. Oswini in Girvium
translatae, quae tamen postea Tinemutham retulerunt. -- Lel. Col. vol. i. p.
427.


. It is probable the monks would return to their ruined seat after the retreat
of the invaders, and restore their habitation and church: But their peace was
not of long continuance; for in the seventh year of Osbert's reign, the Danes
again entered the Tyne, practicing their accustomed rapine and devastation, and
laying waste all the religious houses. In the interval, whilst the Sea or
episcopal seat was fixed at Chester, we may reasonably presume the monastery at
Jarrow was again restored; and from the style and order of architecture, we are
led to conjecture, that part of the structures standing at the time we visited
them, were of that age: But the religious body had not yet sustained the last
of their misfortunes, for though subject to all the miseries of the provincial
war which distracted this part of the island, during the struggles between the
Saxon and Danish sovereigns, when they were frequently pillaged and laid under
contributions. Upon the enraged Normans marching northward, and finding the
city of Durham deserted, and the country evacuated, they put their sacrilegious
hands to this monastery, and notwithstanding they boasted of the dispensation
of the gospel, yet, as savage as the unenlightened barbarians of the north,
they reduced the sacred edifices again to ashes. Having advanced to this
period, we should now pay attention to the venerable character of Bid, and
present to the reader some short anecdotes of his life.

This holy monk was born about the year 672, in a part of this county adjoining
the river Were, where the monastery of Weremouth afterward had lands; that
house not being founded till the year 674, according to his own account
thereof: Much controversy has happened relative to the place of his nativity,
but it is well settled by historians, that he was born in the district before
mentioned: At seven years of age he was taken into the monastery at Weremouth,
and under the care of abbot Benedict and his successor Ceolfrid received his
education; at the age of nineteen was ordained deacon, and became exemplary at
that early stage for his piety and studious life: The attention paid to him by
all ranks of people, so far from moving him with vanity, or tempting him to
negligence, seemed only to excite him to a more eager pursuit of learning, and
stricter rules of religious conduct, insomuch that his character was held forth
as a pattern of Christian virtues, and his life as an example of monastic duty.
About the year 685, in the fifteenth of king Egfrid, the monastery of Jarrow
was founded under the conduct and superintendency of Benedict: Bid attained
his thirtieth year before he was ordained priest, which office was performed by
John of Beverley, then bishop of Hexham, who had been his preceptor, and
entertained great affection for him; much of his excellent character was
deduced from maxims instilled by that great teacher, which he constantly
professed to follow as the chief principles of his conduct. His great diligence
and application, comprehensive genius, and extensive learning, rendered his
name so famous, that he became the subject of attention in foreign countries,
particularly at Rome, where pope Sergius, struck with the accounts he heard of
this illustrious scholar, wrote to his superior the abbot Ceolfrid to send him
thither, that he might converse with him on some momentous subjects. Bid, as
singular in his modesty as accomplishments, received the summons without any of
that emotion this flattering distinction would have roused in many other minds;
but attentive alone to his studies, and the due performance of religious
duties, he was not to be allured from his cell by the smiles of potentates, and
the courtesy of princes. It has been remarked by many authors, that in
pursuance of Ceolfrid's command, he was ordained priest preparatory to his
journey to Rome; but why he did not obey the call, has not been accounted for
by those writers, further than that it is observed the pope died in 701, which
event might not be known in England at the time of our monk's receiving
ordination. No notice is taken of the foregoing circumstances by Bid in any of
his writings, and the whole rests chiefly on the account given by William of
Malmsbury and his copyists. It is certain he showed at all times a particular
desire for privacy and retirement, an avidity for learning, and an incessant
application to study, together with a warm affection for his native country;
such might operate powerfully with his own mind against the journey, whilst the
consequence he was of to the northern clergy, might influence the great people
to sue for his release from an engagement so disagreeable to his own wishes;
and contrary to the interests of his country. By remaining in his monastery,
and habituating himself to a recluse life, he had sufficient time to make
himself master of every branch of literature which at that period had gained a
footing in this island; and his acquisitions were made without any apparent
desire of same or promotion, but merely to render himself useful to society,
and for the promotion of religion and virtue. It was from such principles that
he applied himself for several years in collecting materials for his
Ecclesiastical History, which received in the early ages of the English church
infinite applause, and at this time is esteemed an inestimable record; in the
composition of which great work the several legendary and miraculous relations
are considered as merely the errors of the age, and not blots of the excellent
pen which related them. Though Bid was bred at Weremouth, yet it is admitted
by all writers he took up his residence at Jarrow, soon after that monastery
was founded, and the same superior governing both houses, much intercourse was
had between the religious societies; so that we see him at periods spoken of by
some writers as a monk of Weremouth, and by others of Jarrow, which variance is
easily reconciled when we consider the before-related fact. Bid published his
Ecclesiastical History in 731, when, according to his own account, he was
fifty-nine years of age; but before this he had written many other books, on a
variety of subjects, a catalogue of which he subjoined to that great work.
There was a strict friendship subsisting between Egbert bishop of York and
Bid, which produced a letter from our monk, descriptive of the tempers and
characters of both, and giving a picture of the manners of the age, and the
state of the church, such as no other authority supplies; full of servour,
religious censure, virtuous zeal, and bold condemnation. The letter discovers
the collective mind of the author, whilst his prophetic reasonings and the
distant consequences he deduced and predicted from the inordinances described,
show the shrewdness of his judgment, and the capaciousness of his observation:
He foresaw the multiplying of religious foundations, and the want of discipline
which daily broke in upon the conventual rules, would bring on the destruction
which in after ages took place. When he wrote this epistle he was in a bad
state of health, his death from that time advancing by a gradual decay; yet in
all the progressive stages of the disease he did not neglect his duty, he
employed the usual hours in writing, in study, in devotion, in exhortation of
the brethren, and teaching his disciples of the convent. He endured the attacks
of death with great fortitude, exemplary piety, and holy resignation, and
expired on the 26th of May, being the feast of the Ascension, in the year 735
Epilogum de obitu Bedae, ex sine libri 1i Gulielm. a Maildulphi curia de reg.
-- Script. Cuthwinus discip. Bedae. -- Vide Smith's Life of Bid, and page 259
of this volume.
. He was interred in the church of his own monastery at Jarrow, the place of
his burial being much reverenced in after ages, and resorted to by religious
persons on the anniversary of his death. His remains were afterward removed to
Durham, as before related A. D. 1074. Aldwinus presbyter de genere merc. prior
de Winchelescumbe iter ad transumbranos direxit. Walcherus episcopus Dunelmen.
dedit locum habitandi Aldwino in Girwi. Aldwinus culmen de lignis intormibus
and ^aeno solis antiqui monaster. parietibus in Girwi superposuit. Multi ad
Aldwinum ex australibus partibus, pancrab aquilonar. confluxerunt. Cum enim
ipsos eccl. reaedisicare and destructa monach. habitacula videret velle
reficere, dedit illis ipsam villam Girwi cum appendiciis, scilicet Preston,
Muneccatton, Henworth, Heabern, Wyeston, Heartedon ut opera perficere, and sine
indigentia vivere possent. Aldwinus adjuncto sibi quodam eletico Turgoto
Mailros in Scotia, relicto Girwi, petiit. Alduinus multas ibi injurias a Scotto
perpessus, rediit Dunel. jubente Walchero episcopo, ubi donatus est antiquis
monasterii S. Petri, de Weremuth ruinis ubi habitacula de Virgis faciebat, et
Turgotum comitem suum monach. habitu vessivit.

Lel. Col. vol. ii. p. 537. Is (Remfridus) quippe apud locum, qui Gerva dicitur
in Nordanhumbrorum partibus, prius aliquanto tempore commoratus, ibique divinae
contemplationi vacans solitarius extitit, etc. Ut multi fratres ad eum postea
consluxerunt. Locus (Gerva) autem ille, quamvis ad ejus introitum fuisset
serarum and avium habitatio ^um tamen in eo extitit servorum dei ibi degentium
fortilis constipatio. -- Ibid. vol. iii.


.

Soon after bishop Walcher was settled in the Sea, he invited certain
Benedictines to take up their abode at Jarrow; they found the monastic
buildings in ruin, though it appears some walls were yet standing, over which
they formed a roof of wood, and thatched it with straw, where they renewed
divine offices. The society increasing rapidly, the bishop granted various
lands for their support, and they began to rebuild their church. The reader
will revert to the account given of this society under the annals of bishop
Walcher. Bishop William de Carilepho confirmed to the monks of Jarrow the
endowment made by his predecessor; and soon after removing the seculars from
the cathedral church, he translated the monks of this house to Durham, and from
thenceforth Jarrow became only a cell to the monastery of Durham. When Galfrid
de Burdon was elected prior of Durham, on his predecessor's resignation, he had
this cell with the manor of Wardle assigned for his maintenance. At the
suppression of religious houses Jarrow was valued at 38 l. 14s. 4d. according
to Dugdale, and 40l. 7s. 8d. Speed, and was granted out in the 36th year of
Henry VIII. to William lord Eure One-half belongs to William Hargrave of
Shawdon, esquire one-quarter to General Cuthbert Ellison of London; one-eighth to
Sir Tho. Clavering, and one-eighth to Mrs Elizabeth Montague; and the
improp^^ated lands are possessed in the same proportion. -- Rev. Mr Glover's
Note.
.

The ruins of the old monastery lie to the south of the church, on a ridge of
land inclining gently toward the flat or slake, which is washed by the tide;
no part remains so perfect as to point out to what distinct office it belonged:
At the west end is a gabel, in which there is a round arched window, composed
of that species of architecture which prevailed in the Saxon time, and we
venture to allege was antecedent to the devastation made by the Norman
soldiers: The uppermost ornament is of the dental figure, succeeded below by
zig-zags, and the lowest members of the arch, plain circular rolls falling
within each other: Allowing to this apartment such antiquity, it will follow
from the degree of magnificence described, that it belonged to some chief
apartment of this monastery; and a religious house placed on the haven of
Egfrid, and of importance for ages after his time, most probably was marked
with many distinguished privileges and honors, in consequence of its public
and important situation Mr Gross, who visited Jarrow in 1773, says, Several
pieces of short columns with Saxon capitals lie scattered amongst the rubbish.

Tanner in a note makes a query whether Jarrow was not granted afterward, viz.
7th king Edward VI. in Simon Welbury and Chapter Moreland. Mr Gross says, At
present it is said to belong to -- Clavering, esquire and -- Bonner, esquire of
Callerton.

Tanner's notes. Vide Mon. Angl. i. 41, 42, and 384 -- Lel. Col. vol. ii. p.
348, 349, vol. iii. p. 42. -- Ven. B^dae Vit. Abbatum. -- Wilkinsi Council. vol.
i. p. 63.

William of Malmsbury says, a spirit of ignorance and laziness invaded this
island, and there was a general decay of all useful knowledge and neglect of
history. Some small remains of the monastic life were kept up in these parts,
and this town was assigned by bishop Walcher for the abode of the monks.

Reg. 3. Eccl. Dunelm. p. 62. The finances of Durham priory being at a low ebb,
and not sufficient to maintain the burdens of its subordinate cells, and
especially those of Weremouth and Jarrow, which were already great, and daily
growing greater. The prior and convent therefore sent their cons^^er William
Ebchester to inform the bishop (Langley) more particularly of the state of the
cells, and to beg his good advice and assistance to apply a proper remedy to
their pressing necessities. What the issue of this application was we know not.

Reg. 3. Eccl'ia Dunelm. p. 62 dat 2 Nov. A. D. 1424. Litera directa epo.
Dunelm. pro consilio suo pro relevamine cellarum de Jarrow et Weremoth. --
Randal's MSS.


. The entrance into the church was by a low porch with a circular arch, on the
north jamb of which was the figure of a crosier staff, stripped from some of
the ancient tombs: The descent into the nave was by three deep steps, on the
side walls of which were two pointed arches, that to the north built up, the
other opening into a porch used as a vestry room; the groins were sprung from
brackets, and the span was about twenty feet: The nave was twenty-eight paces
in length, and only six in width; so that, from the height of the side walls,
which were nearly thirty feet, and the small irregular windows scattered on
each side, the edifice had a very singular appearance: Some of the windows were
under circular arches, others pointed, and all the walling so patched and
irregular, that it was not to be distinguished to what age any particular part
of it belonged: The congregation had deserted the nave for some years, perhaps
from dread of being buried in its ruins, and the chancel alone was used for
divine service. Fixed in the south-east corner of the nave was a mount, whereon
a stone pulpit formerly stood. The rood-loft remained, being a gallery of wood
work across the church, above the entrance into the chancel, on which were the
remains of gaudy painting; here the rood or crucifixion was displayed in
ancient times, together with other paintings or effigies of holy personages;
and here also the minstrels performed their part in the service. In the north
wall, cut on a stone which passed quite through it, was that curious
inscription mentioned by many writers, and learnedly commented on In the copy
of the inscription on which the editor of Camden comments, the addition of a
stroke, which is not in the original, occasioned him much trouble, and to
reconcile the line not being a numeral, he was obliged to read the royal
founders name Jecfridi; for if the line was added to the numerals it would have
made 16, a year beyond the date of that reign.

Leland read the inscription without that stroke or letter.

Mr Gross transcribed the inscription in the same manner we have done. Vide
Antiq. Eng. and Wales.

The reader is requested to advert to the northern pronunciation of the
following words and the preceding doubts will be solved.

Edward Jedward and Yedward. -- Vide Shakespeare, 1st part Hen. IV. act i.
Earnest Jearnest Earth Jearth Earl Jearle with many others.
In the primitive times the greater churches were called basilicae, either
because the basilicae, which were the stately buildings where the magistrates
held their courts of justice, were upon the conversion of the Gentiles turned
into churches by the Christians, as Ausonius says, Basilica olim negotiis,
plena nunc votis, or because they were built in an oblong form like the
Basilicae.

The inscription round one of the bells is in the old Saxon character, and is a
dedication to St Paul.

The church has lately been rebuilt, and some inscriptions were discovered, but
of what kind was carefully concealed by those into whose hands they fell. The
inscription mentioned in the text is replaced in a situation to protect it from
injury.

Mr Gross says, Various are the superstitious and ridiculous stories told of
this place, among which are these, that it was never dark in Jarrow church, and
that the windows were of horn, and not of glass; the latter perhaps relates to
some almost forgotten tradition concerning the introduction of glass by
Benedict. -- There is an engraving of the chair in the Antiquarian Repertory.

Magistri cellae de Jarrowe.

Alex. de Lamesly oc. infra Idus oct. an. 1333. -- Joh. de Norton, oc. June,
a'o Thomae 8vo viz. 1353. -- Jo^. Durham, oc. 4 Jan. 1437.

E. copyh. b. of bishop Hatfield, halm. ap. Cestre. Pre'ntat. est q'd Joh. de
Norton mag'r de Jarow, W's Masham, d'n's W. Vavasour, Joh. de Lomley monachi
fugant in Weremam.

Jarrow curacy, ded. St Paul. Jarrow pr. olim propr. Hen. Ellison, esquire and
others patrons, cum Nether Heworth capella destructa.

Proc. ep. 2s. -- Cert. val. 46l. 1s. -- A peculiar belonging to the dean and
chapter of Durham, in the deanery of Chester. -- Not in charge.

Curates. Joh. Hutchinson, oc. 27 June, 1566. -- Jasper Hoppringle, 1573. --
Tho. Maslet, 1578. -- John Biers. -- Joh. Walker, 3 Oct. 1633. -- Francis
Battie, an intruder, oc. 1657, ejected for nonconformity. -- Geo. Howie, 1697.
-- Rich Roberts, 1703. -- Mordica Carey M. Carey was scholar of Trinity
College, Cambridge, master of Morpeth school 1724, appointed 22 March, 173^,
bishop of Clonfert and Kilmach-Drugh in Ireland, in the room of Dr And. Sing,
promoted to the sea of Cloyne, and afterward translated, 20 Dec. 1735, to the
bishopric of Killala and Achonry, in the room of Rob. Clayton, translated to
Cork and Ross. Ob. 1751.

Mich's 1697. The argument before the barons of the exchequer in the case of
Jarrow Slake, upon showing cause against the decree of that court, and also
against a perpetual injunction to be made for the town of Newcastle against the
dean and chapter aforesaid.

The dean and chapter's council were Mr Sol. General, Mr Serj. Wright, Sir W.
Williams Sir T. Powis, Mr Dormer, Mr Brown, Mr Turner, Mr Phipps, and Mr Bows,
to show cause against the decree made the last term, for quieting the
plaintiffs in the possession of their franchises, etc. according to the prayer
of their bill, and that the defendants may be stopped from erecting any shore or
wharf at Jarrow Slake. They thereupon insisted on these three points: 1st, That
the court ought to make no decree upon this bill, 2d, That they ought not to
grant a perpetual injunction. 3d, That before they make their decree absolute
with a perpetual injunction, they ought to grant a new trial, or a reasonable
time to make out a right at law.

The rehearsal of these arguments is voluminous, I shall only select the heads
of each subject. Newcastle prescribes that no ballast wharf was ever erected at
Jarrow: A negative prescription. The thing complained of, is the erection of a
public nuisance upon a public navigable river, for which they allege no
special right in themselves but as conservators: Should have prosecuted in the
king's name. They make no title to the soil. The decree is to quiet them in all
the liberties prescribed to in the bill, the issues related to Jarrow Slake
only: The decree would bind the dean and chapter's right in all other parts of
the river, and to quiet the plaintiffs in their pretended privileges from
Sparhawk to Heddon Streams, fifteen miles. The only ground of their right is
the pretended conservatorship; which must be derived from the crown, and that
by record, which they show not. Second general head: The doctrine of perpetual
injunctions. They are new, and nothing found of them in our old books.
Originated on trials of ejectment, and devised to prevent multiplicity of suits
for the same thing. Judge Hale, the oracle of the law, would never confine a
man's right to one trial. It was a new notion for courts of equity to lay such
fetters upon the common law. Third general head* Several cases were cited where
new trials were granted, and affidavits of several records being discovered
since the trial. Counsel then stated, 1st, That Newcastle itself was a
corporation within the time of memory, and so incapable of prescribing time
beyond memory. That its ancient name was Monkchester, and assumed the name of
Newcastle from the castle built there by William Rufus; was afterward
forfeited by Rob. de Mowbray earl of Northumberland, and remained in the crown
till king John granted it, which is time within memory, the time of memory
being to be computed from the beginning of the reign of king Richard I. 2d,
That commissions of conservatorship have been frequently granted from the crown
to the mayor, etc. whereby it appears they acted from time to time under the
crown, and so were not conservators by prescription. 3d, That the church of
Durham has time beyond memory constantly enjoyed the south side of the river
Tyne usq. ad filum aquae, or at least a third part of it, and enjoyed the
conservatorship on their own side* 4th, That ballast wharfs have not been used
upon this river for above one hundred years, and so cannot be prescribed to
time beyond memory. 5th, That the corporation has claimed them as proprietors
of the soil, and not as conservators, etc. Several records were produced and
read: 1. A commission of conservatorship 45th k. Edw. III. to the mayor and
others. 2. Another commission 32d k. Henry VI. directed to the mayor and others
for conservatorship of the river inter Sparhawk and Heddon Streams: The very
bounds prescribed to in their bill. 3. K. Henry I. confirmation to the bishop,
de consuetud. in aquis Sancti Cuthberti de Tina, quas Ranulphus epus
dirationavit adversus Northumbrenses, in sua and boranum suorum presentia. ^.
Record 18th k. Edw. III. of a verdict and judgment obtained by the bishop upon
a special commission before his own justices, against the king's commissioners
for trespasses done by them in intermedling in the conservatorship of the south
side of the river. 5. K. Hen. II. his grant or confirmation quod epus haberet
libere ^^^ori^ice and quiet applicationes navium ex part sua in Tina sicut
habentur ex altera part. 6. K. Rich. II. his confirmation to the bishop de
medietatibus aquarum de Tine and Tese cum applicatione oneratione and
exoneratione naviunt batellor, etc. 7. K. Rich. II. his other grant and
confirmation to the bishop pro oneratione and exoneratione carbonum
merchandizarum and aliarum rerum quarumcunq. absq. impedimento hominum villae
Novi Castri ^uper Tinam. These words aliarum rerum quarumcunq. were insisted
did include the unloading ballast, and that does make a ballast wharf. 8. A
record 2d k. Hen. V. showing that the bishop upon a solemn trial at the
King's Bench bar, upon an issue joined before the lord chancellor, and
transmitted thither by order of parliament, and tried before a jury of
Westmoreland and Cumberland, recovered against the town of Newcastle a third
part of Tyne Bridge, cum franchesiis jurisdictionibus and juribus regatibus. as
also four marks damages for usurping his privileges upon Tyne Bridge, in
building the tower on the south side thereof, and removing the two boundering
stones called St Cuthbert's stones: Whereupon the mayor is adjudged to bring
the stones back and lay them where he ^ound them, at his own cost, for
perpetual boundaries. By this record the corporation pleads inter alia, that
king John and his predecessors, kings of England, were time beyond memory
seized of the town of Newcastle, and the whole river of Tine, and the whole
bridge, and being so seized granted it to them, whereby it appears they derived
their original right from king John, which is time within memory. The dean and
chapter's council urged this record as an estopple against their prescribing in
themselves. 9. Act of parl. 1o Mariae, for reuniting the town of Gateshead with
the water and bridge to the county palatines jurisdiction, and for repealing
the act made 7th king Edw. IV. Besides the former, many others were ready to be
produced. 1. Recordatio marchiarum, which Mr Serj. Wright advised not to
produce, because it appearing thereby that the earl of Northumberland was
seized on the north side of the river, and that bishop Ranulph was seized on
the south side, comitive: This word he expounded to import quasi comites, or as
tenants in common, which he feared might give them some color of right on the
south side; though others thought that comitive might there signify that they
were each of them seized jure comitatus; others that it might signify that they
were both seized thereof at one and the same time; which if so, would be false
in fact, for Ranulph did not come to the Sea till after deposing earl Rob de
Mowbray. Comitiva, est dignitas and munus comitis inferioribus comitatus. --
Spelm. Gloss. 2. A record annexed to the record, marchiar giving an account
historically how the town of Newcastle and county of Northumberland came to the
Mowbrays, and were forfeited by them; of its name of Monkchester and when it
took the name of Newcastle. etc. 3. An inspeximus of king John's charter of
incorporation to Newcastle, and all their other charters till the time of king
Henry VI. whereby it appears they never had the port granted to them as
appurtenant to it, nor the conservatorship of it. Whereupon the defendant's
counsel prayed a new trial. The arguments were long, and would afford little
pleasure to the reader, I shall therefore only select such special matters from
thence as may seem important. As to the issues being particular to Jarrow
Slake, and the decree general to the whole river, the plaintiff's counsel gave
no answer. But the lord chief baron wondered how it had crept into the decree,
and agreed that the decree could only be particular as to Jarrow Slake. They
gave no answer to the objection that the plaintiffs ought to derive their
conservatorship from the crown. The chief baron cited many instances of
pepetual injunctions; but it was agreed they have been only in use since the
reign of king Charles I. As to the records, the plaintiff's counsel alleged,
that it did not appear any thing was done under the commissions of
conservatorship, or that the mayor of Newcastle ever accepted them; to which it
was answered, the acceptance must be presumed, if nothing is shown to the
contrary. As to the 2d article, the record of king Henry I. being of date
beyond memory, ought not to be given in evidence, without showing an allowance
of it in air: Cases cited to the contrary in answer. 3d article: Opposed the
reading of it, affirming it to be only an action of trespass prosecuted by the
bishop, for trespass done in taking away ships, etc. and being betwixt other
parties ought not to be read. This the chief baron overruled, but observed it
was a strange sort of commission, being a special commission of oyer and
terminer, to hear and determine one particular trespass, which he thought the
king himself had not a power to grant. -- Mr Dormer answered, that there were
special customs in the county palatine different from the common and ordinary
customs of the realm, and his lordship's commission when he sat there as judge
was ad audiendum and terminand. secundum legem terrae and consuetud. Dunelm.
4th article: Mr Mulso objected, that upon attempts by the bishop, the
corporation brought a scire facias to repeal the last grant, a copy whereof was
said to be produced at the hearing; and since the corporation have had the
enjoyment. Art. 5. The lord chief baron produced his notes, which he had taken
upon hearing the cause of king John's charter, whence he observed that king
John granted probis hominibus ejusdem, inter alia. omnes easdem libertates and
liberas consuetudines quas habere consueverunt tempore Hen. 2. patris nostri:
And said, he looked upon that charter of king John's to be only a charter of
confirmation. Serj. Lutwich likewise insisted that this proves their
incorporation time beyond memory. The objections to the stat. 1 Mar.
overruled. The lord chief baron then read notes of a trial in which he was
concerned as counsel in Riley's Placita Parl. fo. 25, the corporation of
Newcastle against the prior of Tynmouth. To which it was answered, the prior of
Tynmouth there justifies taking wreck, making forstallage, etc. under a charter
granted him by king Rich. I. which he insisted to be precedent to any liberties
granted to Newcastle, etc. -- The town of Newcastle did not prosecute the prior
of Tynmouth on their own behalf, but in the name of the king, setting forth
that the king ought to have totum portum in aqua de Tyne, a Mari usq. ad
Hedavin Streams, and claimed no interest in the port then as they do now; for
in this record they plead, that wreck specialiter pertinet ad regem, and that
the king ought to have thorag^^^^ naviu^i and batellorum in aqua de Tine
ascendendo versus Novum Castrum and descend^n^o versus Mare, libere ver terras
dominorum quorumcunq. and that he ought to receive at his port 4d. for every
oar, and 2d. for skullers for his duty of thorage.

Issues were granted and tried. 1. Whether the defendants could lawfully erect
and use a ballast key at Jarrow Slake, without the complainant's license. 2
Whether the erecting such key would be a damage to the river Tyne, or the
navigation thereof, or to the port of Newcastle.

Bourne, in his History of Newcastle, p. 164. 17 Mar. 1697, dean and chapter of
Durham and Sam. Shepherd petitioned and appealed to the house of lords against
the decree, 7 Maij, School. On hearing counsel it the lords' bar, on the petition
and appeal, it was ordained and adjudged that the same be dismissed that house,
and the decree confirmed.

Bourne, p 172, also says, In going down the water we meet with several keys,
as Winkemley, Bill key, Willington key, Hebbourn key, etc. When the hoastmen
renewed their charter, they had license to send coals above the Bill, and Mr
Cole procured a shore at Friar Goose, Mr Henry Chapman procured a shore upon
Heworth grounds, and Mr Rob. Brandling with much ado got leave to build a shore
upon his own ground at Fellin. In the mean time the tenants of the dean and
chapter at Durham took liberty to throw their ashes into the river, which did
much damage to the bar. Upon this Mr Leonard Carr and Mr Cuth. Bewick
complained, and the town caused them to lay them upon the land, of which they
have made mighty heaps. When king James I. came to the crown he was pleased to
be bountiful to his countrymen; among the rest Sir Henry Gibb being one of his
officers, he bestowed upon him the lordship of Jarrow, and he would have
procured a shore there to cast ballast; but although he had the favor of the
king, yet the town used such means and gave such reasons to his majesty and the
council, that they found it detrimental to the town, and especially to the
river, so that he was utterly hindered and disappointed.

It is observable that in the commission of oyer and terminer, 18th k. Edw.
III. before referred to, the articles of trade mentioned are, "sea coals, marle
or lime stones, small wood or fuel, timber for building, iron, corn, victuals*
and other goods and merchandise." Carbones maritimos, marleram, petras, buscam,
macremium ferrum blada victualia and alia, etc. -- Rot. Bury, Sch. xvj Ao xio
Randal's MSS.


, A. M. 1722. -- Rob. Wilson, A. M. 1724, p. res. Carey -- Joh. Mills, A. B.
1751, p. m. Wilson. -- Wm Glover, p. m. Mills.

Heworthechapel. Curates: Rob. Abell, 1395. -- Joh. Walker, 1633. -- Randal's
MSS.


: Some variances have appeared in the observations of those who have spoken of
it; when we visited Jarrow it stood as follows: P. DEDICATIO BASILICAE

The first character has been omitted by all the copyists, which we presume is
a compound meant for an invocation, and signifies Propitietur Deus: Below the
third line the stone is rough, as if it had suffered an obliteration: The whole
inscription is in Roman characters except one Saxon and two square or black
letter O's; from whence, and the situation of the stone, one readily determines
the inscription to be of equal date with the repairs which were made after the
Normans destroyed the monastery, and that it was only a modern memorial of the
antiquity of the foundation. Some of the religious had figured the plastering
of the north wall, to make the sunbeams from one of the windows serve as a
dial to point out the hour of the day. You advance to the chancel under the
archings of the tower; the pillars very low, ill proportioned, and square, with
capitals remarkably heavy and plain; the arches circular, and without ornament;
the dome vaulted with stone and rib'd, the groins rising from the corners, and
the ribs uniting in the center: The circumstance of the pillars not standing
square, but forming an oblong north and south, was remarkable; the width of
this part was only five paces. The tower standing in the center induces us to
conclude that formerly this church was in the form of a cross, and it is
probable, from outward appearances, that the nave had side ailes. We do not
know one instance where the tower stands between the chancel and nave that
there is not or anciently was a cross aile, and few have the tower in that
situation but churches of more than ordinary consequence. The length of the
chancel from the tower to the altar rails is ten paces, and the width only
about five paces, stalled on each side with old carved oak work: The east
window consisted of three lights under a pointed arch. On the north side there
were two windows, one under a circular arch, and the other a pointed arch, one
window to the south close by the tower, having also a pointed arch; all which
circumstances show the edifice had undergone innumerable alterations, and
indeed we considered no part so ancient as the tower, which it is presumed was
the chief of what remained after the devastation committed by the Normans. We
found no remarkable sculptures here save a sepulchral one, which had the figure
of a burning taper, with expanded wings. What, was shown as the greatest
curiosity, and is carefully kept in the vestry-room, is a great two-armed
chair, said to have been the common seat of Bid, and which has remained there
since his time: It is of oak, and appears as rude as if hewn out with an ax,
except that at the top of the back the cross piece is mortised to the standards
or upright parts, which also serve for legs; these with the seat and sides are
very ancient, but the back, according to the information of the person who
showed it, is modern: It is now become very rough and uneven from the
superstition of people, who, by carrying away a chip from it, presume they have
obtained the saint's protection*.

The haven of Jarrow, now called the Slake, is above half a mile in width,
through the middle of which runs the brook called by Leland the Done; this in
former times was most probably a powerful rivulet, but as it rises in a coal
country may have been greatly diminished, and its feeders drained off Inter
Majorem and Burgenses Novi Castri sup' Tynam. Quer.

Inter Decanum and Cap. Dunelm. and Samuel Sheapherd defend.

Ex MS. Gab. Swainston. -- Gyll's MSS.
: The passage from Jarrow monastery to the opposite shore is formed by a raised
causeway and a bridge over the rivulet, which, considering the haven to have
been neglected for many ages, is yet a formidable work. Mr Gross, from the
appearance of the haven in 1773, says, the situation of the monastery was not
judiciously chosen with respect to healthfulness, there being a large marshy
spot bordering it on the south, and when the tide is out, scarce any thing but
stinking ouse remains in the bed of the creek that runs close under it. It was
not so miserable when we saw it, for many acres of the margin of the Slake were
beautifully covered with thrift The statice armeria of Linnaeus.
in full bloom, giving the shores the finest purple hue; and the sands were
hard, and afforded pleasant traveling. As we observed before, when the ground
was first chosen, this was the royal port where the Northumbrian fleet lay
moored; these were the most populous shores, and here was the St Paul's of a
powerful nation. A ship of one hundred tons burden was a large vessel in these
parts in the sixteenth century, and such were even brought from abroad, and not
constructed here Now there were many merchantmen of 3, 4, and 500 tons burden
belonging to several ports, and upwards of 100 vessels, each of above 200 tons
burden, belonging to Newcastle alone, all built at home, and better built than
elsewhere; and before the death of king James, our trade was so far increased,
that in the opinion of Sir William Monson, we were little, if at all, inferior
in maritime force to the Dutch. See Campbell's Lives of the Admirals, vol. ii.
p. 28. He further adds, that whereas ships of 100 tons had been before esteemed
very large vessels, and were generally built and brought from beyond the seas.
p. 41.


: What must we then conceive of the vessels of Egfrid's fleet?

In the road from Gateshead to Jarrow we passed near FELLON-HALL, the estate of
Charles Brandling, esquire Sir Rob. Brandling, mayor of Newcastle, 1547, was
knighted there by the Protector (the duke of Somerset) at his return out of
Scotland. Oldmixon, fo. 162.

In the 36th of bishop Hatfield it appears, that Alex. Suretyes enfeoffed
trustees of the manor of Felling, held of the prior of Durham in capite, by
homage, fealty, two days works, and suit at the prior's court at Durham, in
fraud and collusion to prevent the bishop having ward and marriage of the heir
whilst under age. -- Vide Rydding.

28 Dec. 1331. Was the property of Tho. Suretyes, mil. Lewis bishop of Durham
granted him free warren in his manor there, which was confirmed by the prior
and convent, whereupon he gave license for the prior and his successors with
their attendants to chase therein. In 1605, Felling was the property of Rob.
Brandling, Esquire held under the dean and chapter by military service, suit of
court, and rendering for scutage 4s. when the scutage runs to 60s. and more,
and 26s. 8d. rent at their exchequer.

Dicto Rob to Brandling slexis genibus sic dicente. I do become yours and the
chapter's man from this day forward for life, and member and earthly honor,
and to you shall be faithful and loyal and shall be in says to you for the
lands which I do claim to hold of you, saveing the faith I owe to our
sovereign lord the king, and to such other lords as I hold of. -- Rudd's MSS.


which stands on the ridge of a hill, having an eastern aspect, commanding an
extensive prospect on the river Tyne: This manor was the ancient possession of
the family of Surteys.

There are two HETHEWORTHS, called the Upper and Nether Hetheworths, but being
both part of the ancient lands of the monastery of Jarrow, it is not easy to
deduce from the records any thing distinct or material relative to either or
both: The prior of Durham had a park here, in which bishop Farnham granted free
warren. A resident family in the time of bishop Skirlaw bore the local name,
and John de Hetheworth, in the twelfth year of that prelate, held diverse
parcels of land of the prior of Durham by various rents and services, inter
alias gloves, a pound of cumin, etc. which lands were described, in the
inquisition taken on his death, to have been formerly of William the son of
Peter de Hetheword, William Fraunceys, John Clerk, Hugh Colstanes and others.
White-House, belonging to Mr Colville, lies near to High-Heworth Inq. p. m. J.
de Farnacres, 6 bishop Bury, cor. J. de Menevylle vic.
.

There are two FOLLONSBYS, North and South. John de Farnacres held the manor of
Follonsby of the prior of Durham in capite, by fealty and ten shillings rent,
valued in the sixth year of bishop Bury at nine pounds 1344. Bishop Bury issued
his commission to enquire into trespasses committed in the prior of Durham's
free warren of Nether Heworth. Sch. 5. An. undecimo in dorso.
. The family of Gategangs had lands here in the fifth year of bishop Hatfield
Inq. p. m. Joh. fill. Joh. Gategang, 5 bishop Hatfield.
, and in the twentieth year of that prelate, they held of the heirs of William
Faderless a carucate of land called Faderleshouse, paying a pound of
frankincense Thuris.
or twenty shillings, and of the heirs of the lord of Folaceby two messuages
and thirty acres of land Inq. p. m. Alan Gategang, 20 bishop Hatfield, cor. W.
de Menevylle vic.
. In the time of bishop Skirlaw, the manor of Follonsby was the estate of John
de Kirkby, who before his death enfeoffed John de Skendelby and John de Dalton
chaplains therein, with the manor of Stokerly cum le Crook, he having no male
issue, and leaving Emma, daughter of Agnes his father's sister, his heiress
Inq. p m. Joh. de Kirkley, 13 bishop Skirlaw, cor. T. de Claxton esc.
. It afterward became the possession of Roger Thornton, and passed with his
other estates to the Lumleys by marriage Ao 14 bishop Booth.

An exemplification of a common recovery by Sir Tho. Lovel and others
demandants, against Rob. Hilton deforceant, of the manor of Folanceby with a
mess. 400 acres of land, 400 acres of meadow, 400 acres of pasture. and 6 acres
of wood, upon a writ of entry returnable die Lunae in vigilia S'i Lawrentii
Martiris Ao 22. reg. Hen. 7, with vouching of John Grainge, who I suppose was
the common vouchee, and the usual judgment to recover over in value. Dat. 20
Sep. 23d regis. -- Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.

The practice of common recoveries was not in all likelihood much in use,
Taltarum's case, 1^th k. Ed. IV. being the first instance of it.


.

Of WARDLEY we find nothing of note in the records, or of NORTH or SOUTH
HEBBORN At Wardley there are some ruins of an oblong figure, and from this
place lying so near the Wreckendyke, some have imagined these were the remains
of some fortifications or Roman camp: They would not be overlooked by Dr Hunter
or Mr Gyll, who often visited the ancient works in this district, and neither
they or any other writers have named these ruins, so that it is most reasonable
to conclude, they are the mere remains of some moat or wall which secured the
manor house in former times. -- W. H.


. The latter places stand sweetly in the plain, and have fine enclosures about
them. Hedworth was part of the ancient estate of the Hedworths of Harraton, as
also Muncton, for the alienation of which John Hedworth, esquire had license on the
24th of September, in the first year of bishop Sever, in order to raise certain
trusts and uses therein. The barrenness of the history of places in this
district, as we before observed, is owing to the ancient monastery to which
they were given; and thence they became involved in the general history of the
church of Durham; or such as were granted out by the crown, are now in the
hands of modern possessors, whose estates are derived from that period.

Descending into this vale, we found the country in a very different mode of
agriculture from that we had passed: Navigation, trade, and the mines fully
occupy the hands of the industrious in the neighborhood of Gateshead and
Whickham. In the valley about Hebborn the lands are laid out in beautiful
order, well cultivated and planted; new roads are formed, the buildings are
improved, and a happy fertility rewards the attention of the owner. Several
beautiful mansions, with plantations and pleasure-grounds, ornament the scene;
and the greatest part of the country from Gateshead to Shields is remarkably
pleasant.

The towns of NORTH and SOUTH SHIELDS lie opposite to each other. Bourne
remarks that North-Shields, in the reign of king Edward I. when the contest
between Newcastle and the priory of Tinmouth happened, had only five or six
fishermen's huts, and was become a large place but of late years, the church
having been erected in 1659. South-Shields is also much improved of late years;
it is situated on a higher shore, whence it is less affected by the smoke of
the several works carried on there, and stands more commodious for keys,
ship-builders yards, and many other matters material to trade. On a fine plain
a large square is lately built, having the church on the south, with streets
branching from the centers of each side of the square, and a handsome town hall
This is also used by the dean and chapter as a courthouse: Notice was given to
hold a court leet there on Tuesday the 16th of October, 1770, for the whole
manor of Westoe.

1729. This year the town of Newcastle had a trial at the assizes with Sir
Henry Liddell, about tolls, wherein a verdict was given in favor of Sir Henry.
It was then customary for the judges to go in the town's barge, attended by the
mayor and others of the corporation, to Tynmouth, in their return this year Mr
Justice Page who tried the cause, had some hot words with Mr Reay relative
thereto, and thereupon the ^^^ge threatened to commit the mayor, and the mayor
in return told the judge he would commit him, being (...) upon the water and in
his peculiar jurisdiction. This squabble occasioned a discontinuance of the
cur^ (...) ^ing to Tynmouth. -- G^ll's MSS.


in the midst, with a colonade under it for the market people; some of the
houses border upon elegance, though most of them have shops; the square is
handsomely paved, with a broad foot-walk by the houses in the London form.
Bishop Trevor granted them a market, to be held weekly on Wednesday, from the
17th of October, 1770, and two yearly fairs on the 24th of June and the 1st of
September. Much trade is carried on here; frequently four hundred sail of
vessels lie in this haven at a time; ships of such burden as cannot come up to
the Newcastle quays load and unload here: Some branches of trade have decreased
of late years, particularly that of salt-boiling, which used to produce a duty
of 80,000l. a year, and for some years past has not exceeded 10,000l. About
fifty years ago it is said there were two hundred salt pans wrought here, now
there are not more than thirty. But whilst that trade has declined, others of
great consequence have improved as rapidly; for within the distance of forty
years there were not more than four ships which belonged to this town, and now
we are informed there are about five hundred, of between one hundred and five
hundred tons burden: Eleven ships were built and launched from the yards in
1781. There are here three dry docks for repairing, and ten yards for building
ships: Four glass-houses for making crown glass and bottles; and it is supposed
the number of settled inhabitants is about fifteen thousand. Mr Fordyce erected
a large barilla work here, but it did not answer his expectations; some or most
of the buildings are now used for a soap-boilery. The victualling and fitting
out such a number of ships by the sister towns, as resort to this haven, of
which South-Shields has a considerable proportion, the many branches of trade
and manufacture carried on there, produce a vast influx of wealth. The
importance of South-Shields has arose in little more than a century: The
church, a chapel of ease under Jarrow, had occasion to enlarge the burial yard;
and, in 1631, bishop Howson consecrated a plot of ground for that purpose In
MS. Church, p. 895. Ordonatio, etc.
. The great increase of inhabitants is shown by the tables in the notes.

The antiquity of the church at Shields is not to be deduced with accuracy from
any records before us; it was perhaps nearly cotemporary with that of Jarrow:
Little can be gathered from the structure, it has been so often altered and
reformed. The nave is twenty-eight paces in length, having to the south an
aile, formed by five short round pillars with plain capitals, supporting
pointed arches, apparently of a more modern date than the columns; the four
arches eastward are uniform, but the two to the west much loftier, and of a
different model: The width of the nave and south aile is eleven paces: The aile
on the north side is new, erected in 1753, and six paces wide; the pillars are
square, and arches circular, neatly stuccoed: It is galleried above the whole
length, and regularly stalled below: There is also a gallery at the west end,
and three small ones in the south aile: The church is plastered throughout, and
ceiled with plain stucco-work: The place or recess for the communion table is
in the modern fashion, without any chancel, six paces wide, and lighted with a
large Venetian window. The pulpit is fixed against the second pillar in the
south row. The vestry room is remarkably neat, and the whole edifice kept in
decent order Penes Rev. Mr Hogarth vicar of Kirknewton, Northumberland.

The copy of what is found in an old book belonging to the cathedral church of
Durham, touching the rights of the chapel of St Hild. Reg. v. fo. 126, 6.

Johannes prior ecclesiae cathedralis Dunelm. dilecto nobis in Christo d'no
Joh'i de Tyseburn capello salutem. In ampleximus salvatoris laudabilis
conversatia tua et morum honestas merito nos inducunt ut capella n'ra S'tae
Hildae tuae custodiae committamus ad effectum ut parochianis de Les Sheels,
Harton and Wivestor divina celebres in eadem ac ministres sacramenta eccl'iae
prout alij capell'i ib'm ante commorantes facere consuebant recepturus et
habiturus mansum and terras eidem capellae pertinentes, and dimidium p'tem
oblacon. ad pixidem S'tae Crucis p'venientium et dimidiam p'tem cerae in d'ca
capella offerendae omnes minutas oblationes in purificationibus in
baptismatibus in sepulturis mortuorum provenienc. de Hedemespenys. denarios p'
pane b'ndicto singulis d'neis offerendos cum piscibus vocatis Saint-Hilde-fish
ex devocoe parochianorum ib'm conferendis and unam maream de magistro de Jarrow
qui p'tprefuit annuatim ad festa pent. et S. Martini in Hyeme per equales
por'cones. In cujus, etc. sigillum n'rm ex consensu mag'ri de Jarrow p'sentibus
est appensum duraturum ad terminum vitae tuae ita q'd capellae sup'dictae
debite deservias et benign. Dat. 4o die Januarij, Ao D'ni mill'mo
quadrigentesimo secundo.

This chapel is a peculiar to the dean and chapter of Durham, and not in charge.

Certain val. 66l. 8s. 4d. -- Proc. ep. 1s. 4d. -- Real val. 100l. CURATES.
Rob. de Dalton, 1321 Tho. Aldofeldo, 1323, p. m. Dalton Joh. de Werdale, 1375
Joh. de Giseburne, 1393, p. m. Werdale Will. Younger, 1418 Tho. Ellison, 1553
Tho. Blakiston, 26 Oct. 1568 Tho. Meslet, 1577 Edw. Ambry, A. B. May 1581, res.
Will. Bramale, cl. 24 Oct. 1583 Tho. Turwhitt, 1590 Geo. Carre, 1610, p m.
Turwhitt Tho. Wandles, A. M. 15, Nov. 1637, p. m. Carre Tho. Lupton, an
intruder, 1657 Steph. Bordley, A. M. 27 July, 1664, p. m. ult. Tho. Fawcett,
oc. 1690 Tho. Simpson, A. B. 13 July, 1721, p. m. Fawcett Rob. Lamb, 3 Aug.
1747, p. m. Simpson Gilb. Nelson, 20 Nov. 1747, p. res. Lamb Fra. Lherondell,
26 Nov. 1748, p. m. Nelson W. Thompson, 1 June, 1750, p. res. Lherondell Sam.
Dennis, A. M. 1754, p. m. Thompson
Randal's MSS.

Jarrow parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L. s. d. L. s. d. Muncton,
Jarrow, Hebborn's freehold closes 6 19 9 770 0 0 (King's rent for Jarrow 2l.
13s.) -- Poulter's close. -- Upper Heworth. White-house. -- Nether Heworth. --
Fellin. -- Wardley -- (Tithe corn Dr Brevint 20l. -- Hedworth. -- (Out-rent
12l. -- Follansby. -- Harton (tithe corn Dr Basire 32l.) -- Westoe, (tithe corn
Dr Carlton 34l.) -- Fewler's close. -- Sheel-heugh. -- South-Sheels, and East
and West Pans. -- (Jarrow impropriation 120l.) -- Hayning wood, (Mr Rawlin's
quarries 50l.) -- Sheels Mills and Moody's Mills 22 8 5 2544 3 0

Dean and chapter's out-rents as set forth in this record: -- Muncton 40l. --
Harton 47l. -- Westoe 42l. Sheels 92l. -- Grey's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population (Jarrow) from 1660 to 1679 545 90 111 1760
to 1779 1177 730 1140 Increase 632 647 1029 (Sheels) 1965 104 1793 4449 922
3565 Increase 2484 818 1772

Burials in the last year 337. -- Computed number of inhabitants 11, 110.

Dean and chapter's rents. Over Heworth 6l. 11s. 6d. -- Nether Heworth 13l. 7s.
10d. -- Hayning 5l. 2s. 6d. White house 14l. -- Hebborne 14l. 13s. 1d. -- Coal
mines in Jarrow parish 1l. 6s. 8d. -- Poulter close 10s. -- Wardley 8l. 13s.
4d. -- Muncton 9l. 4s. 2d. -- Hedworth 7l. 19s. 0d. -- Symonside 22l. 18s. 4d.
-- Harton 27l. 6s. -- Westoe 25l. 5s. -- Sheel-heugh 8l. 6s. 6d. --
South-Sheels burgages 15l. 17s. -- Salt pans and waste ground 78l. -- Waste
ground with Jarrow Slake, then built for a ballast shore 3s. 2d. -- The salt
pans in this list are 139. -- Sheels mills, two water and two wind mills 13l.
6s. 8d. -- Salt pans at Wall's-End 3l. 6s. 8d.

Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Harton 19 13 4 0 14 0
Hedworth 14 16 0 0 14 0 Up. Heworth 14 15 0 0 14 0 Neth. Heworth 54 19 3 1 7 1
Muncton 55 6 0 (with Jarrow) 2 12 5 South-Sheels 139 9 4 1 3 1 East pan ward 52
14 0 1 3 1 Middle ward 12 14 0 1 3 1 East ward 15 13 0 1 3 1 Westoe 30 12 11 1
2 0

Registered estates. -- Gateshead, lady Mary Radcliffe 134l. -- Mrs Cath.
Liddle 35l. -- Geo. Errington 6l. -- ^ow Heworth, Ra. Brandling, esquire 208l. 15s.
-- Mary Blakey 5l. -- Mann's MSS.


. The prospect from the churchyard southward is worth the traveller's
attention, where Jarrow and its ruined monastery on a fine point of land, are
particularly beautiful: But that from the ropery-walk excels every thing of the
kind in the north of England. The river thronged with vessels, and animated
with an incessant passage of small craft, is close on your left hand: The
batteries and barracks on the northern shore display a striking military scene,
whilst on the more distant ground, from the brow of lofty rocks, rise the
venerable remains of Tinmouth priory: At the time we saw this prospect, the
cliffs were gilded with the evening sun; the dashing billows which broke over
the bar of the river drove their foam against the precipices, over which the
solemn abbey, in the weeds of ruin, with distracted aspect, sinking under the
destroying hand of Time, completed such an assemblage of picturesque objects
as seldom are found in a space so confined.

Bourne, speaking of the river Tyne, says, The mouth of the river forms a haven
so deep as to carry vessels of a considerable burden, and of that security
that they are not in danger either of storms or shallows, save that within less
than half a mile of the bar of Tinmouth (which is a sand that lies cross the
river's mouth, not above seven feet deep at low water) you meet with many
rocks, which are called by the sailors the Black Middens, which are very
dangerous; but to prevent any mischiefs which might happen in the night time,
there are two light-houses, maintained by the Trinity-house in Newcastle; and
near them, in the year 1672, was built a fort called Clifford's fort, which
effectually commands all the vessels that enter the river.

Many judicious antiquaries have been of opinion, that there was a Roman
station at the point of land near South-Shields; and indeed the importance of
this river was such, that we can scarcely imagine so cautious and intelligent a
people would have neglected the southern shore, where an enemy's troops at some
seasons might safely be disembarked if the coast was unguarded Horsley's Brit.
Romans p. 286. There has been a Roman station here, and to this belong the three
following antiquities.

An altar was (when I took the draught of it) upon the spot where the station
has been, lying at the northwest corner. Dr Hunter has since got it removed to
the library of Durham, where I saw it, when last there.

It is of a coarse brown stone, much of the same nature with what we frequently
meet with in other Roman altars; though the people here tell me, no such stone
is now to be found in these parts The usual sacrificing vessels are upon the
sides of the altars, and the knife upon the back, which is not so common. --
There has no doubt been an inscription upon this altar, though it is now
entirely effaced. Yet as this was the only original I could recover belonging
to this station, I thought proper to give a draught of it.

Besides this, two other altars have been found at this place; one of which, as
I am informed, was built up in a quay wall about forty years ago, and is not
now to be come at. The other was first sent to York to Dr Lister, and since his
death, as I have been told, was sent to Norwich to one Mr Giles, and I suppose
is now lost. Dr Lister published it in the Transactions, No 145, and from
thence it has been inserted in Camden's Brit. and in Dr Gale's edition of
Antonine's Itinerary, p. 9.

Dis Matribus pro salute Imperatoris Marci Aurelii Antonini Augusti Pii felicis
-- lubens merito ob reditum. I have taken the draught of the altar and
inscription from the copy of Dr Lister, compared with the others, and given a
reading of the inscription somewhat different from Dr Lister's, and only
pricked those letters or parts of letters which I imagine ought to be supplied.
As it is not usual to place the word Imperator after the name of the emperor,
so I see no occasion for doing it here. The Doctor observes, that this altar
might be erected for Caracalla when going into Caledonia. Severus is, I
believe, generally joined to Caracalla in the inscriptions before the
Caledonian expedition, as he was in the expedition itself. This makes it less
probable that Caracalla is intended in the inscription, and yet ob reditum, and
the titles pii felicis don't seem to suit Marcus Aurelius, nor ob reditum
Commodus, though to him pius felix are usually annexed. So that I suppose it
yet more improbable, that either of these are intended. Nor do I think there is
much in having both pro salute, and ob reditum in the inscription. It is for
his safe return: Pro salute itus et reditus is not uncommon.

Extract from Professor Ward's letter to Mr Horsley, page 351.
Dr Lister, who first wrote out this inscription, and from whose copy the
others have since been taken, tells us, that it contained nine lines, and
therefore has left a space between the fifth and sixth line sufficient to
contain two others. In this space, the names of the person who erected the
altar might probably be inserted. -- And as it appears by the Doctor's draught,
that the inscription filled up the whole space of the altar, it is scarce
credible to me so great a chasm should be left between LV and BENS. I cannot
but think therefore, that a letter or two are wanting here, which may have been
LI in LIBENS, and that SO might have been at the end of the preceding line,
which joined to L at the beginning of this, would stand for solvit, as V that
follows may be votum. This is agreeable to the usual form, solvit votum libens
merito, suits the space, and renders the inscription complete.

Dis Manibus. This is a fragment lately discovered. I believe by the remains of
the pediment which has been at the top, and the imperfect letter which is
visible, that it has been sepulchral.



.

Extract of a letter from Dr Hunter of Durham, to Roger Gale, esquire May 17, 1735.
Give me leave to attempt the recovery of one of the Roman stations in this
country, both requisite for the security of the navigation into the northern
seas, and the protection of their frontiers beyond the river Tyne, thereby
saving the great expense and trouble of building the wall as far as the sea at
Tinmouth, no less than three miles. I mean that near South-Shields, at the
entrance of the river into the ocean, and which cannot but have flourished till
the Danish invasions, as Mr Leland has it in his Collectanea, vol. iv. p. 43. E
regione Tinemuthae fuit urbs vastata a Danis, Urfa nomine, ubi natus erat
Oswinus rex. The communication there was with Binchester, is visible in several
places, as is the angle where the paved way goes off from the military way
leading to Lanchester, about three miles to the north of Binchester, and passes
to the north east through Brancepeth-park, thence a little to the south of
Brandon Behind Willington the road is very distinct: A mile stone was lately
discovered there, with an inscription described to be legible; but when we went
to look after it, the farmers had totally obliterated the whole, and squared
the pillar to form some part of the sold for their cattle.

Ex historia incerti Authoris de paucis Northumbr. regibus and episcopus
Trans-humbrianis.

Ferunt quidem S. regem Oswinum natum in quodam Castro Burgh antiquitus
nuncupata, cujus fundamenta pro part adhuc manent ex australi parti aquae de
Tina prope Southe Sheles in territorio quod nunc est Prious Dunelmi. -- Lel.
Itin. vol. vi.


, and is lost in the cultivated grounds, but appearing upon Durham moor in the
same direction again, passing by Hag-house, and below upon Harbrass moor is
very visible, tending past Lumley castle in a direct line toward
South-Shields, passing about a mile east of that of Chester-in-the-Street,
without any signs of communication therewith. Two elevated pavements in the
river Tyne, the one at the west end of South-Shields, the other on the north
side of the river, near the end of the Roman wall, proper for their safe
landing at different times of the ebbing and flowing tide, fully show its
necessary correspondence with Segedunum, the first station upon the wall. But
another military way called Wreken Dyke That there has been a Roman station at
South-Shields is out of all question; the altars that have been found there,
and the military way which has gone from it, are convincing proofs of this. I
once imagined this station might have been the old Glanoventa (which no doubt
was the most easterly on this rout at that time) mentioned in the Itinerary and
in the Notitia, and that this iter had begun here, and proceeded according to
the military way leading from hence to Lanchester: But the distances in the
Itinerary are not to be reconciled to the distances between the respective
stations on this way, if we begin at South-Shields. Besides, that the slender
remains of the station and military way near it, incline me to think it has not
been mentioned so late as till the writing of the Notitia, that it was in being
at the time of Marcus Aurelius, appears from the altar and inscription found
here, if Dr Lister's reading be just; but I am apt to think it was abandoned
not very long after, perhaps at the building of Severus's wall, and the station
erected at Cousin's house, or a little after. This station seems not to be
named either in Ptolemy, the Itinerary, or Notitia, unless we suppose Ostia
Vedrae in Ptolemy to be as well the name of the station as of the river mouth.

I know no other name for the Roman station and town at the mouth of the river,
( Vedra Tine) near South-Shields, but Ostia Vedrae. If we consider the station
itself, the altar inscribed to one of the Antonines, and the nearness of the
place to the Roman wall, one can scarce suppose, that the river and station
should be wholly unknown to Ptolemy; and yet unless these be their names, they
are nameless in this geographer. I own the force of this argument is abated,
when we consider, that neither Newcastle nor any other of the Roman places on
the wall are mentioned by this ancient author; but it is true, that towns
rather than sorts came under Ptolemy's notice.

In this place it will not be amiss to take notice of Wreken Dyke, the military
way so called. This military way has no doubt terminated at South-Shields. It
seems to have come from the station, and to have crossed the marsh, then
possibly a branch of the river, not far from the station. Thence it has passed
most probably through, or a little to the east of a house called Lay-gate; from
thence it seems to have gone near a house called the Barns, the garden wall
probably standing on it, and so on to the Dean bridge, close by Jarrow Slake.
For this space, the traces of this way are very obscure and uncertain: In the
field beyond this bridge the track of it is plain, and for near the full
breadth of the enclosure, sensibly raised above the level of the rest of the
ground, though it runs cross the ridges. On the west side of this field or
enclosure there is a small descent, and in the bottom a lane, which is the high
road from Bowden to Shields, and a small ascent on the other side in the field
joining this lane. As the military way ascends on the one side and descends on
the other, it is bent into a curve, and then falls into the right line, in
which it seems to be continued all the way to Gateshead fell for the space of
five or six miles; from thence it goes toward Lamesley and Kibblesworth, which
it leaves a little to the south. It was very visible all the way not many years
ago, before Sir Henry Liddell enclosed and improved those grounds. And the
gardener at Cousin's house, who formerly wrought on Gateshead fell, assured me
he had seen and helped to dig up some stones out of Wreken Dyke, which he
called Bracken Dyke, so that he was altogether of opinion that this part of it
had been paved. This way passes on toward Beamish, and I make no doubt has
gone forward to Lanchester. It is indeed lost on the moor beyond Beamish, nor
is it any great wonder it should be so, considering how mossy and lost it is. I
was assured at Lanchester that several trees had been dug up in this moor,
which had been cut down with an ax, probably to clear this way; and if these
trees have been sunk so much below the surface, no wonder if a heavy military
way be much more so. I have heard a traditionary account of this way's passing
by Stanley toward Lanchester, though I know not how far this may be relied on,
but how little of such military ways appear in some other places, where it
might have been better expected? There is a remarkable tumulus near this way,
not far from Ravensworth: Besides which, I observed another very considerable
one about a mile from Lanchester, called the Maiden-Law, and probably the
military way has not been far from this tumulus. I am surprised to find the
military way which goes from South-Shields usually represented to pass near to
Durham, sometimes on the east and sometimes on the west side of it, when there
is such plain demonstration not only of the reality of the way, but of the
range and tendency of it; but I believe the military way which is supposed to
have gone from Newcastle to Chester, and from thence to Watling-street near
Binchester, has occasioned the mistake. The Gardener at Cousin's house, said he
had observed when he wrought thereabouts, this military way from Newcastle to
Chester, and that it lay to the west of the present highway through the sell.
Dr Hunter was positive he had observed the same way upon the sell, as also some
remaining track of a via vicinalis beyond Chester, between Binchester and
Brancepeth castle, (as I remember) pointing toward Chester, which he therefore
concluded must have gone that way. -- Horsley.

1750. Wreken Dyke is the boundary between Gateshead fell and Eighton common,
and may be seen as it passes through Eighton quarries, and at the north end of
the village of Eighton, from thence down one of lord Ravensworth's new
enclosures, and crossing the high road leading to Newcastle from Chester, it
appears plain in an enclosure on the west side of the road, the ridge not
having been ploughed, and it is partly over run with broom, and there is a foot
path on the ridge of it.

1759. The field on the west side of the road was ploughed up, but the
foot-path on the ridge of the way was continued and visible. -- Gyll's MSS.

Mr Horsley's remarks on the etymology of Wreken Dyke. -- Ichning or Icknild
seems sometimes to have been corrupted into Ricknild or Richning, as appears
from the names of some places that are supposed to be derived from the name of
this street. Drayton. in his Polly-Olbion, brings in Watling-street as speaking
thus:
And Rickneld, forth, that weight of Cambria's shore,
Where S. Wales now shoots forth St David's promontore,
And on his Midway near did me in England meet,
Then in his oblique course the lusty straggling street
Soon overtook the Fosse, and toward the fall of Tine
Into the German sea dissolved at his decline,

It is too great a force to suppose Racking corrupted from Roman, and Racking
Dyke from Roman Dyke; and yet there does not appear much more violence in this,
than in supposing Raven, in Ravens Dyke or bank, to have come from the word
Roman, which our best antiquaries seem to agree in. From the like conjecture
one might be inclined to think, that Ravens worth is from Romans worth; for the
village of Ravensworth is just by the military way, though the castle be at
some distance. But I know no better conjecture with respect to this etymology
than that it has been from Warken Dyke or Wrought Dyke, that is a dyke of great
labor and work, according to our northern pronunciation. It consists of firm
gravel and sand, very hard and compact, so as to make a very good way at this
time, at all seasons of the year. I also believe it has a mixture of stone or
somewhat of pavement.


, passing from this station to the west, has hitherto frustrated the enquiries
of our late antiquaries: Mr Horsley himself pointing out its ductus very justly
over Gateshead fell, where it passed the public road, and a little to the west
the Roman way going to the south from Newcastle to Chester-in-the-Street, and
afterward running through Lamesley and Kibblesworth fields, advances to the
south-west over Blackburn moor, and through the township of Hedley. It comes
next to Causey, a village which owes its name to it, and from thence ascends a
high hill, and terminates at a square fortification upon the top thereof at
Stanley, the seat of the Hon. Sir Nich. Tempest, bart. who, I am told,
possesses several Roman coins found therein. This place, though not above three
miles from Chester-in-the-Street and four from Lanchester, seems to have had no
immediate communication with either of them, no vestigia of any paved way
appearing upon the moors adjoining, and being situated as Chester itself, at
the termination of a military way, gives me convincing reason to believe the
use of each has been the same, namely, to guard herds of cattle at grass, for
the subsistence of the two garrisons at South-Shields and Pons Aelij, and for
victualling ships resorting to the first place: Whereas had its elevated
situation been intended to form a castrum exploratorium, then must the
advantage of paved ways to the next station have been necessary for the speedy
conveyance of intelligence. Though this last military way bears the names of
Wreken Dyke, I am apt to believe that name is rather due to the way leading
from Binchester to South Shields, especially from the authority of Ralph
Higden, who says, that Wreken Dyke, or Reken Dyke, passed from the west of
England and ended at Tinemouth. I dare not affix a Roman name to this our
station, without the authority of inscriptions.


After the learned definitions given in the notes on the etymology of Wreken
Dyke, it may appear presumptuous to offer new conjectures; but there is a
probability that this military road was restored by the Danes on their making
the river Tyne their frequent harbor, for the more easy communication with the
country, and victualling their navy: At their several stationary intervals
where sentries were placed, their standard, so well known in ancient writings
by the name of Raffen, would be displayed, and it seems but a small trespass on
the original word, to imagine it would fall into the corruption of Raken, so as
to make Raffen Dyke sound Racken Dyke: They were the last people who it may be
presumed kept this up as a military road, and thence the name in acceptance in
their days, not having been disused by new comers, has remained to our time. We
proposed the like etymology for the name of Ravensworth, much less corrupted
from Raffens-weath, the northern language, and it remains with the reader to
determine, whether, supported by each other, together with the tumuli of
Ravensworth and Maiden Law, the conjecture is probable, or at least not
altogether vague.

In the road from Shields to Sunderland we passed through the village of
WESTOE, having several handsome buildings, seated on an eminence, commanding a
beautiful prospect of the harbor and adjacent country.

The scenery around is pleasant, the cultivation kept in good order, and the
roads excellent.

The Parish of WASHINGTON.
To the south of Jarrow lies the parish of Washington: The manor is mentioned
in the Boldon Book, wherein it is said Will. de Hertburn held the same, except
the church and the lands thereto appertaining, in exchange for the vill of
Hertburn, rendering four pounds, serving in the great chase with two
greyhounds, and paying one mark to the palatine aid, when such happened to be
raised. At the time of making bishop Hatfield's Survey, the resident family had
assumed a local name, and W. de Wessyngton, knight, then held the manor and
vill Wessyngton.

Willielmus de Hertburn tenet Wassyngton excepta ecclesia et terra ad ecclesiam
pertinente in escambium pro villa de Hertburn, quam propter hoc quiet.
clamavit. and reddit iiijli. and vadit in magna caza cum ij leporariis. Et
quando commune auxilium venerit, debet dare unam marcam ad plus de auxilio.

Boldon Buke. Wessyngton.

Will's de Wessyngton miles tenet manner. and villam de Wessyngton per servic.
forin. redd. iiijli.

Hatfield's Survey.
. On the inquisition taken at his death, in the twenty-second year of that
prelate, it appears that in his service he was to provide three greyhounds for
the chase, and if he took any game in his way to the forest, it should be to
the bishop's use, but what he got on his return was to be taken for his own
benefit Inq. p. m. Will. de Wessyngton, 22 bishop Hatfield, cor W. de Menevyll
vic.
. In bishop Langley's time we find Washington became the estate of the
Blaykestons, who also held Blakiston, Coxhowe, and Whitton, and Will. de
Blaykeston settled the same in trust for his son William, and Katherine his
wife and the heirs male of their bodies, with remainder to his own right heirs.
How long it continued in that family is not easy to determine. By conveyances,
dated the 3d of July, in the eleventh year of king James I. it passed from Sir
John Malory of Studley in the county of York, and William his son, and Sir
James Bellyngham, to Tho. Caldwell and John Booth Cursitors Rolls. -- Rudd's
MSS.
, who were trustees for bishop James. Male issue failing in the prelate's
grandson William James, esquire the estate descended to coheiresses, one of whom
married Sir Richard Musgrave See vol. i. p. 480.
. The family of Bracks have considerable possessions here.

The church is built on elevated ground; the village inconsiderable, and
scattered on the skirts of the brook: Mr Brack's mansion stands a little to the
south. There is much antiquity in the architecture of the church, which has two
side ailes, each separated from the nave by three columns; two on one side are
octagonal, the middle one round; on the other all the pillars are octagonal,
the arches are pointed, and with the columns are well proportioned and light:
The nave is eighteen paces long, the ailes thirteen wide: Many of the windows
are modern and sashed. The chancel is separated from the nave by railings and
stalls, being six paces in length to the altar rails; the windows have been
regular, two to the north and two to the south under pointed arches; one is new
sashed: The east window consists of three lights under a pointed arch. The
vestry room is singular, and its original use not now to be discovered; it is
vaulted over with stone, with ribbed archings terminating in points, and seems
as if it was constructed for a place of interment. On the south side of the
church is a large porch, called the Lord's porch, about twenty feet long and
fifteen broad, now claimed as the burial place of the family of Bracks; it is
ceiled with wood in pannels, gaudily painted, sprinkled over with golden stars,
and further ornamented with the arms of the family of James; in one shield the Sea of Durham is quartered On a wooden tablet. WILL. JAMES of Washington, Esquire
departed this Life the 5 day of April, 1662, at his Death he gave to the poor
of Washington forty Shillings a Year for Ten Years. O^ a brass plate fixed in a
blue stone, within the rails of the altar, in old characters.

Hic jacet Joh'es Jackson, A. D. 1506.

Washington rectory.

In the deanery of Chester. -- The bishop of Durham patron.

King's b. 18l. -- Yearly ten. 1l. 16s. -- Pr. ep. 10s. -- Pr. arch. 2s. --
Real value 400l.

RECTORS.
Will. de Clifford, 1279 Rob. de Askelby, 1333 John de Herlowe, 1339 John
Edriche, 1342, p. res. Herlowe Rob. de Wartheton Will. de Winceby, 1366, p. m.
Wartheton Rich. de Penreth, 1374, p. m. Winceby John de Weston, --, p. m.
Penreth Will. Ingilby, 1406, p. res. Weston John Newton, 1408, p. m. Ingilby
John de Bryteby, 1440, p. res. Newton Will. Bedell, 1464 Ra. Hamsterley, A. M.
1486 Edm. Couper, 1 Jan. 1500, p. res. Hamsterley Rich. Curren, 1521, p. m.
Couper Chapter Barns, A M. 8 Oct. 1534 Roland Pratt, 6 July, 1558 Ra. Lever, A. M.
5 Nov. 1565, p. m. Pratt John Lever, cl. 23 Feb. 1576, p. res Lever Anth.
Garsorthe, 3 Feb. 1577 Hugh Broughton, A. M. 6 May, 1580, p. m. Garsorthe Hen.
Ewbanke, A. M. 24 Dec. 1583 Will. Barker, 2 May, 1611, p. res. Ewbanke Will.
James, A. M. 12 Sep. 1616 Rob. Lane, S. T. B. 19 July, 1617, p. res. James And.
Perne, A. M. 1 Ap. 1622, p. res. Lane Tho. Triplet, A M. 7 Ap 1640, p. m. Perne
One Williamson, an intruder Hen. Johnson, A. M. 9 Mar. 1661, p. res. Triplet
Fitzherbert Adams, S. T. B. 29 Sept. 1683, p. m. Johnson Rich. Stonhewer, A M.
1719, p. m. Adams John Gamage, A. M. 4 June, 1727, p. res. Stonhewer Geo.
Talbot, A. M. 4 Ap. 1728, p. res. Gamage Tho. Rudd, A. M. 7 July, 1729, p. res.
Talbot Wadham Chandler, A. M. 23 Aug. 1735, p. m. Rudd Hen. Bland, A. M. 23
Aug. 1735, p. res. Chandler Edw. Wilson, A. B. 18 Aug. 1768, p. m. Bland Cha.
Egerton, -- Sept. 1786, p. res. Wilson
Randal's MSS. Book of rates 7l. 5s. -- Value of lands, etc. 1466l. 13s. 4d. --
Grey's MSS.

Land tax at 4s. County rates 6s. 8d Barmston 18 11 2 0 17 6 Great Ushworth 32
8 4 0 14 0 Washington 29 8 0 1 8 0 North Biddick 0 8 5 Little Usworth 0 8 5
Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 330 83 280 from 1760 to
1779 956 213 828 Increase 626 130 548

Burials in the last year 64. -- Computed number of inhabitants 1920.


. Mr Stonhewer, whilst he was rector between the years 1719 and 1727, built a
good rectory house; but the present elegant mansion appears, by the arms over
the door, to owe its erection or great improvements to Mr Talbot, afterward
bishop of Durham.

GREAT USWORTH in this parish is the seat of William Peareth, esquire an elegant
newly erected mansion, on the southern inclination of a hill, and in a lofty
situation: The building is of freestone, in a good taste; the center,
containing the chief apartments, has an hexagonal projection; the offices form
the wings. The prospect is extensive and beautiful, having Biddick, Lambton,
Harraton, and the Staiths in front, a long tract of country eastward, and an
open view of the sea, with Sunderland, Weremouth, Hilton castle, and the
borders of the river Were.

This manor performed great services Magna Useworth.

Magna Useworth reddit xxx s. de cornag. and j vaccam de metrid. and j
castelman and viij scaceldr. brasij, and totidem sarinae, and totidem avenae,
unaquaq. caruca (excepto dominio) arat and herciat ij acras. Et villani saciunt
iiij porcationes in unamquamq. porcationem cum xxvj hominibus. Et has
operationes quas facere solebant apud Wessyngton, saciunt nunc apud Gatesheved,
and quadrigant unum tonellum vini and lapidem molendini apud Dunelm.

Drengus pascit canem and equum and est in magna caza cum ij leporarijs and v
cordis, and sequitur placita, and vadit in legationibus.

Molendinum ejusdem villae reddit x s. -- Boldon Buke.

Usworth Magna.

Will's de Hilton miles tenet ij parts villae de Magna Usworth, and Alicia de
Moderby tertiam partem dicta villae per servic. forin. and redd. per ann. xs.

Idem Will's and Alicia red. ibid. pro castelmen per ann. xxs. -- pro
operationibus ad term. S. Martini x s. -- pro cornag. dictae villae per ann. ad
fest. S. Cuthberti in September. xxx s. pro una vaeca de metrich. ad fest. S.
Martini vj s. -- pro praedicta villa ad fest. purif. pro scat. aven' x q'n and
dimid. -- pro eadem villa ad idem festum de sarin. aven. v quart. ij bz. ad
idem fest. de scat. brat. v quart. ij bz. -- quadrigant unum tonel. vini.

Hatfield's Survey. Inq. p. m. Rob. Swynowe, 12 bishop Laurence, met. ejusd.
pastur. in Magna Usworth, voc. le schelmore cont. xxx acr. ten. de barone de
Hilton, p. fid. and servic. etc.


, according to the account given in the Boldon Book: It paid thirty shillings
annually for cornage, provided a milch cow, and one castleman, viij scaceldr.
(chalders) of malt, meal, and oats, and the owner of every carucate of land
except the demesne, was to plow and harrow two acres. The villains were to
prepare in tillage for seed four portions of land, each portion with xxvj men;
and it was therein specified, that the service theretofore performed at
Washington they were to do at Gateshead; also to carry a tun of wine and
millstones to Durham. A dringe fed a horse and a dog, and attended the great
chase, providing two greyhounds and five cords of provender; he followed the
court and went on embassies. In the fifth year of bishop Hatfield, Alicia Bedik
was seized of two parts of the vill of Great Usworth, rendering yearly fifty
shillings and eight-pence rent, three quarters Eight bush. to the quarter.
and half a quarter of barley malt, called statmalt, or statute or stated malt,
the like quantity of oat-meal, called statmele, and seven quarters of oats,
called stathavire Inq. p. m. 5 bishop Hatfield, cor. vic. ap. Dun.
. By bishop Hatfield's Survey, it appears Will. de Hilton held two parts of the
vill of Great Usworth, and Alicia de Moderby the other part. The services were
then changed into money payments, 20s. for a castleman, for work at Martinmas
10 s. for cornage at the feast of St Cuthbert in September xxx s. for a milch
cow 6s. ten quarters and a half of oats, five quarters and two bushels of oat
meal, and the like quantity of malt. It appears by an inquisition in the
thirty-fifth year of the same prelate, that Alicia intermarried with Rich.
Stanhop. This manor continued for many ages in the family of Hilton Inspeximus
and exemplification ^1^ bishop Nevile, of an inquisition taken of the
possessions of Sir Rob. Hilton, knight, (styled in the margin p' barone de
Hilton) in which it is stated he died seized, inter all is, of Great Usworth
manor, and the manor of Bedyk near Wessington. -- Cursitor's Rolls. -- Rudd's
MSS.


, and attended the general dispersion of their great estates.

The manor of LITTLE USWORTH in the Boldon Book rendered x s. yearly, and
William who possessed it, carried the bishop's wine with eight oxen, and
attended the great chase with two greyhounds. In Hatfield's Survey it appears
to be the possession of the before-named Alicia Moderby, who afterward married
Richard Stanhop, and the manor was settled on their issue Useworth.

Parva Useworth, quam Willielmus tenet reddit x s. quadragat vinum cum viij
bobus and vadit in magna ea^^ cum ij leporariis. -- Boldon Buke.

Usworth Parva.

Praedicta Alicia (Moderby) tenet villam de Parva Usworth per servic. sotin.
and redd. per ann. x s.

Hatfield's Survey. (...) bishop Hatfield, co. Will. del. Bows esc.


. In the thirty-fourth year of bishop Hatfield, Isabella the daughter of Tho.
de Wessington, daughter and one of the heiresses of Jacob de Usworth, died
seized of a moiety of this manor, and a fourth part of the vill of Great
Usworth. In the sixteenth year of bishop Skirlaw we find Gerard Heron esquire
seized of a moiety of the manor, in right of Elizabeth his wife, and that Johan
de Riddell held the other moiety, they being daughters and coheiresses of
Cecily Taillior. Much confusion appears in the inquisitions from this period,
by the manor passing in moieties to females; and we find the families of
Wessington, Redmarshall, Dolphanby, Swynhoes, and Chestre severally interested
therein.

NORTH BIDDICK belongs to the family of Davisons, and lies in a low situation,
within a mile of Washington: It is mentioned in the Boldon Book as the property
of Ulkill, who held it by the sixth part of a knight's fee. In Hatfield's
Survey it appears William de Hilton, knight, held this vill, which theretofore
had been the estate of John de Yheland, from which period it continued in the
family of Hiltons for many generations, as before observed of their other
possessions. Bramston or Barmston was another manor of the Hiltons, situated on
the banks of the river Were Bedyk.

Bedyk Ulkilli servitium sexta partis feodi unius militis.

Johannes filius Eustac. and Alex. frater ejus de West Aukland qui fuerunt
irretiti de servitute quieti sunt per pateram.

Gilbertus filius Umfridi de Dunolm. tenet in mora de Newbotill xxiiij acr.
terrae sibi and haeredibus imperpetuum reddendo annuatim scaccario Dunolm.
xxviij s. iiij d. ad quatuor terminos in episcopatu Dunolm. constitutos. Et
habebit viij boves in mora de Newbotill per cartam quam habet de d'no episcopo.

Rogerus filius Roberti Bernard tenet xlviij acr. in Helmygden per divisas
sicut in carta quam habet de d'no Waltero episcopo Dunolm. plenias continetur,
reddendo x s. ad scaccarium Dunolm. ad quatuor terminos in episcopatu Dunolm.
constitutos. -- Boldon Buke.

North Bedik. Willielmus de Hilton miles tenet villam de North Bedick quond'm
Johannis de Yheland per sextam partem feodi unius militis and redd. per ann.
liij s. iiij d.

Idem Wil'us and Tho. Gray (Stanhers) Gilbertus Hunter, Robertus Luddok,
Johannes Bateson (Bedykfeld) etc. Willielmus de Stele cepit ad opus husbandor.
de Urpath xj acr. ijj r. and dimid. terrae vocat. Wodyngdon, etc.

Terrae vast. Est ibid. j acr. terrae vocat. Taberdyk nuper in tenura, etc. --
Hatfield's Survey.

Inq. p. m. 16 Cha. 1. 1541. Hen. Hilton. -- Barmeston was held by homage and
fealty, and the moiety of a knight's fee, and suit of court. -- North Biddick
by homage and fealty, and the sixth part of a knight's fee, and 53s. 4d. rent.
-- Great Usworth held in capite by knight's service. -- Tollonsby the fortieth
part of a knight's fee. -- Newton by homage and fealty and one knight's fee,
and suit of court. -- Ford by homage and fealty, and a moiety of a knight's
fee, and suit of court. -- Hilton by homage, fealty, and one knight's fee
(except a tenth part) and suit of court.


.

The Staiths called FATFIELD STAITHS exhibit a busy scene in the coal trade,
where the keels come up to receive their loading for the port of Sunderland.
The village is very populous. Near this place is an eminence called the Worm
Hill, which tradition says was once possessed by an enormous serpent, that
wound its horrid body round the base; that it destroyed much provision, and
used to infest the Lambton estate, till some hero of that family engaged it,
cased in armor set with razors, and when it would have crushed the combatant
by enfolding him, sustaining a thousand wounds, fell at last by his falchion.
We thought to have found intrenchments round this mount, and that the fable had
reference to some Danish troop who kept the place as a station, from whence
they could commit depredations on the country, and that the story of the hero
imported some chief personage's victory over a public enemy: But there is not
the least trace of any such matter, and the whole miraculous tale has no other
evidence than the memories of old women. Our map makers have figured the place
very significantly.

BOLDON.
To the east of Jarrow and Washington lies the parish of BOLDON. This manor
gave title to the provincial Doomsday Book, called Boldon Book, from the
referrences therein to services within Boldon Boldon.

In Boldona sunt xxij villani, quorum unisquisq. tenet duos bovatas de xxx
acris and reddit duos solidos and vj denar. de scacpenynges, and dimid.
scatcheldram de avena and xvj d. de averpenys, and v quadrig. de wodlades and
ij gall. and x ova, and operatur per totum annum tribus diebus in ebdomada,
excepta septimana paschae and pentecostae, et tresdecim diebus natalis d'ni. Et
in operatione sua facit in autumno iiij porcationes ad metend. cum omni familia
domus excepta huswyva; and praeterea metet iij rodas de averipe and arat iij
rodas de avereve and herciat. and praeterea unaquaque caruca villanorium arat
duas acras and herciat and tunc semel habebunt corrodium episcopi, and tunc
sunt quieti de operatione illius ebdomadae, set and quando magnas porcationes
faciunt habent corrodium. Et in operationibus suis herciant cum opus fuerit;
and faciunt ladas and cum eas faciunt, habet unusquisq. unum panem. Et falcant
una die apud Hoctonam and operatione sua usque ad vesperam, and tunc habent
corrodium. Et faciunt in nundinis S. Cuthberti singuli ij villani unam botham.
Et quando ligias faciunt and wodlades (...) quieti sunt de aliis operationibus.

Duodecim cotmanni, q^^^n unusquisq. tenet xij acras, operantur per totum annum
duobus diebus in ebdomada, exceptis tribus praenominatis festivitatibus, and
reddunt xij gallinas and lx ova.

Robertus tenet ij bovat. de xxxvj acr. and reddit dimid. marc.

Punder tenet xij acr. and habet de unaquaq. caruca unam travam bladi, and
reddit quaterviginti gallinas and vc. ova.

Molendinum reddit v marcas and dimid.

Villani debent facere singulis annis in operatione suae, si opus fuerit, unam
domum longitudinis xl pedum, and latitudinis xv pedum. and tunc cum faciunt
sunt quieti unusquisq. de iiij d. de averpenynges.

Tota villa reddit xvij s. de cornagio and unam vaccam de metride.

Dominum est ad firmam cum instauramento iiij carucarum and iiij hercariorum et
reddit pro duabus carucis xvj celdr. de avena, and viij celdr. de ordeo and pro
duabus aliis carucis x marc. -- Boldon Buke.

Boldon.

Liberi tenentes. Johannes de Hedworth tenet j mess. and xxxvj. acr. terrae
quond'm.

Ricardi de Hedworth and vadit in legation. episcopi, and adducit redditus de
Werchall apud Dunolm. per librum de Boldon ibid. etc. -- Petrus del Hay tenet
etc. D'nus de Nevile, etc. villam de Newton juxta Boldon and redd. p' ann xx s.

Terrae dominicae. xxvij tenentes tenent ccxxx acr. tener. dominicar. solvendo
pro sing. x acr. xxxij s. viij d.

Terrae bond. Thomas Wake tenet j mess. and ij bovat terrae bond bovat contia.
xv. acr. and solebat reddere ij s. vj d. pro scatpenys and xvj d. pro
averpenys, and v quadrig. de wodlade ij gallin. and x ova and solebat operati
per totum annum iij dies in ebdom. except septimana paschie and pentecost. and
xiij diebus in natali d'ni and facit opera sua and iij porcationes in autumno
ad metend cum omni familia; domus excepta houswyva and preteria metet iij rod
de averipe, and arat iij rod de avereth and herciat, and unaquaq. carucata
villan. arat and herciat ij acr. and tunc semel habebit corrodium episcopi, and
tunc erit quietus de operatione i^lius ebdom. Et quando facit magn. porcation.
habet corrodium and in operationibus suis herciant cum opus suerit and faciunt
ladas, and cum eas faciunt habet unusquisq. unum panem, and salcant uno die
apud Houghton in operatione sua usq. vesperam and tunc habebit corrodium and
faciunt in nundinis S. Cuthberti singuli duo villani j botham and quand. logeas
faciunt and wodlades ducunt quieti sunt de aliis operationibus pro ut
continetur in libro de Boldon, and faciunt in parco unam domum long. xl pedum,
and lat. xv pedum, and cariant unum ton. vini and faciunt opera ad molend.
consucta, and cariabunt cariag d'ni episcopi and senesc. and redd. p ann. ad
iiij term. usuales xiiij s. ij d.

xxiij tenent. etc. Iidem tenentes solvunt pro cornag. xvij s. -- Pro j vacca
de metrich vj s. -- Pro maltpenys xxvj s. v d. -- Pro officio punder lx s. --
Pro bathesylver ad term. S. Cuthberti in Sep. ij s. iiij d. -- Pro punder viij
s. -- Pro molend. aquat. and j molend. ventritico p' ann. xvijli. etc.

Tenentes cotag. qui tenent. terr. dominic. Elias Anfray (and alies) soleb.
operari per totum annum ij diebus in Septima, exceptis temporibus festisis
supradictis and red etc.

Cotag. sine ten. domin. Johannes Robinson and alies.

Nova dimiss. Praedicti xxxij tenentes in bondag. solvunt pro xxxj acr. ter.
dom. in tenura sua ut supra and xxij mess. and xliiij bovat. terrae de bond.
cum molend. and terra in mora and pastur. supr^script. annuatim xliiijli. unde
quilibet eorum xl s. and aven. de scat. and gallin and ova, and cariabunt unam
ton. vi^ and sustentabunt molendinum sumptibus suis propriis and facient
cariag. pro d'no episcopo and senescalio.

Et iidem tenentes in bond qui nihil tenent de dominicis redd. per ann. pro ij
mess. and iiij bovat. terrae cum portion. earund. de molend. and pastura
superius scripta, quilibet eorum xxx s. ut praedicti xxij de novo dimissione
facta dictis tenentibus per Johan. Heron senescal and alios de consilio d^no
Thomae episcopi desuncti lx s.

Hatfield's Survey. Bishop's rents. -- East Bowdon 35l. 10s. 11d. -- West
Bowdon, Fatherless field, Jo. Sharp 1l. 3s. 4d. Collection there 9l. 10s. 7s.


. The villains here were under severe duties; for besides various kinds of
labor to be performed for the lord in the field, they rendered money payments
at the bishop's exchequer, and 16d. each for averpennys, which appears to be a
payment in lieu of royal averages quietum esse de diversis denariis pro
averagiis dom. regis, a service by horse and carriage for conveying the
sovereign's ammunition and baggage in time of war, etc. The villains labored
three days in each week throughout the whole year, excepting the weeks of
Easter and Whitsuntide, and thirteen days at Christmas, and amongst them to
build a house for the lord in his park, forty feet long and fifteen broad, for
which they were exempt from one-third of their averpennys: They were privileged
at the fairs of St Cuthbert to set up one booth or hut for every two villains,
of whom there were twenty-two in Boldon. The cotmanni or cottagers wrought only
two days in each week. The pinder here held twelve acres of land in right of
his office, and had a thrave of corn from every carucate of land, rendering to
the lord yearly twenty-four hens and five hundred eggs: The whole vill paid
seventeen shillings cornage, and provided a milch cow for the household. The
demesne lands were in farm, and rendered rent in grain, as bread, corn, oats,
and barley. In Hatfield's Survey we find the names of the free tenants, among
whom is John Hedworth, who served on the bishop's embassies, and was bound to
bring up to Durham the bishop's rents of his manor of Werehall. Peter del Hay
held lands, and the lord Neville had the vill of Newton. The bond services vary
a little from those set forth in Boldon Book; there are malt-pennys and
bathe-sylver mentioned: This is the first time the bathe-sylver has occured in
the progress of the work, and it is difficult to ascertain what it was. Buthena
is defined to imply a park for cattle, and bothena a barony, lordship, or
sheriffwick; whether it applied to either of these, we confess ourselves at a
loss; perhaps it was stallage-money for the booths or stalls allowed to many of
the villains at St Cuthbert's fairs in the city.

In bishop Bury's time, Alicia de Marrays died seized of lands in West Boldon;
and Allan Gategant held certain lands there called Fadreless Houses, held in
capite by homage and fealty. By an inquisition taken on the death of Richard de
Hetheworth, or Hedworth, in the second year of bishop Fordham, it appears he
died seized of various tenements in Boldon, viz. Scots House and all the lands
and tenements that theretofore belonged to Ade Rhodes, Gilbert de Boldon, Roger
de Burdon, Ambrose de Southwyk, Ade de Clevedon, and Matilda Gray. This family
retained their possessions in Boldon for many generations. The family of
Claxtons held lands there called Strothers-field, touching which, in the time
of bishop Neville, Ralph earl of Westmoreland came and claimed oyer of an
inquisition taken by the escheator on the death of William Claxton, wherein
Strotherfield in West Boldon, was found to be held of the bishop in capite, and
by others in knight's service, and pleaded it was held in socage Cursitors
Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.
. It appears that the coroner's fee or stipend arose by produce of lands
assigned in ancient times; for we find on the 13th of October, second king
Edward VI. it was ordered and decreed by Robert Hyndmer, chancellor of this
county palatine, that the tenants and inhabitants of Whitburn, Cledon, Holdon,
and Boldon, should yearly from thenceforth pay the coroner for the time being
his corn in sheaf, as it had been accustomed in times past, unless they could
otherwise agree with the coroner Ibid.
.

The church of Boldon Boldon Rectory. -- Dedicated to St Nicholas.

K. books 24l. 13s. 4d. -- Yearly ten. 2l. 9s. 4d. -- Proc. ep. 11s. -- Proc.
arch. 2s. -- Real val. 300l.

RECTORS.
Willielmus Alverdus Mag Joh. de Insula, 1311 Hugh de Karliol, oc. 7 Ap. 1334
Joh. de Derby, 1360 Hen. Graspois, 1370, p. res. Derby Will. de Wyntringham,
1377 Will. de Yarom, 1392, p. m. Wyntringham Will. Marshall, 1406, p. res.
Yarom Joh. de Tuddowe, 1410 Tho. Hebbeden, LL. D. p. m. Tuddowe Ric. Kellow,
1430, p. res. Hebbeden Tho. Butler Joh. Rominaby, oc. 17 Oct. 1454 Will.
Mawdesby, 1501 Galfr. Wren, cl. pr. king Henry VII. 27 June, 1502, Sede vac.
Hen. Davy, LL. B. 1525 Rich. Clyff, S. T. B. 28 June, 1541, p. m. Davy Rob.
Rollis, A. M. 28 Aug. 1563, p. depr. Clyff Rich. Fawcet, S. T. B. 14 Ap. 1575
Pet. Smart, A. M. 1614 Rob. Chapman, A. M. 25 Mar. 1630, p. depr. Smart Rob.
Pleasaunce, an intruder Ric. Wrench, S. T. B. 16 Oct. 1665 Cha. Basire, A M.
1675, p. m. Wrench Sam. Blackwell, 1691, p. m. Basire Rob. Thornton, A. M. p.
res. Blackwell Hen. Dobson, S. T. P. 1692, p. m. Thornton Joh. Stackhouse,
1718, p. m. Dobson Edm. Tew, S. T. P. 1735, p. m. Stackhouse Joh. Blackett, A.
M. 10 Aug. 1770, p. m. Tew
Randal's MSS. William Wycliffe, esquire of Wycliffe, in the county of York,
purchased of Phil. Monckton, of Carell, in the same county, the gillie tithes
of Boldon, by indenture dated the 6th of April, 1605. These tithes afterward
became the possession of the family of the Martins of Fulwell, who sold the
same to Dr Tew. These are tithes of corn arising from seven hundred acres of
land, to which appertain two houses in the township of West Boldon.

Book of rates, Boldon parish. -- B. of rates 6l. 5d. -- Yearly val. 780l. --
Grey's MSS.

Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Boldon East 27 0 0 1 5 1
Boldon West 20 3 4 0 19 5 Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 298 53 215 1760 to 1779
221 64 243 Increase -- 11 28 Decrease 77 -- --

Number of Burials in the last year 18. -- Computed number of inhabitants 540.


is placed on an elevated situation: It has undergone many modern repairs; the
windows are sashed, and the ceilings of stuccoe-work, are neat. The nave is
regular, having side ailes; formed by two octagonal pillars on each side,
supporting pointed arches. The tower is ornamented with a short spire of stone.
From a station a little above the village there is a very extensive prospect,
where you command a view of the whole valley northward, with Offerton, Biddick,
Washington, Usworth, Jarrow, Shields, Tinmouth, and the rising grounds on the
north shore of Tyne.

In the beginning of the fourteenth century various disputes were agitated
touching the rights of the rectory of Boldon, in one of which the master of
Kepier was interested on behalf of his house, which was adjusted by the bishop;
and another relating to certain cattle-gates in grounds called the Heymyngs, on
which an inquisition was taken, whereby the right was certified in favor of
the rectory Compositio inter mag. Joh'm de Insula rect. eccl. de Boldon, and
Hugonem de Monte Alto mag. hosp. de Kepyre. Ex archiv. d. and cap. Dun.

Commissio ad inquirend. sup. petitio. Hugonis de Karlioto rectoris de Boldon,
etc.

Precept from the bishop to the sheriff dated 16 Feb. 1360, to summons a jury.

Precept from the justices, appointing a time and place, dated 13 May, 1361.

Executio istius precepti patet. in pannello eid. annex.

Inq. cap. apud Dun. etc. -- Qui dicunt sup. sacrum suum q'd H. de Carliolo p.
eccl. de Boldon tenuit quatuor mess. and sexies viginti acras terrae cum
pertin. in Boldon ut de jure eccl. suae p'dce and ipse and o'es predecessores,
etc. co'iam pasture ad sexdecim boves in, etc. quodam loco voc le Heynyng omni
tempore anni; and in omnibus dominicis terris ejusd. ville videl't. in duabus
partibus p' blada metita and asportata usq. alias leminent, and in tercia part
quando jacet Warectum per totum annum cum omnimodis averiis suis ut de jure,
etc. a tempore quo non extat memoria. etc. -- Randal's MSS.


.

NEWTON is a separate manor, and by Boldon Book Newton juxta Boldon.

Johannes Pannetarius tenet Newton juxta Boldon pro xx s. per annum.

In Newtona juxta Boldon tenent xij malemanny xxiiij bovat in unaquaq. de xv
acr. and reddunt de singulis duabus bovatis v s. de firma and ij gallinas and
xx ova and arant and herciant apud Boldon unusquisq. unam acram, and faciunt de
singulis ij bovatis iiij porcationes in autumno cum duobus hominibus.

Uxor Henrici de Montanis tenet xl acras pro xl denariis. -- Boldon Buke.

D'n's de Neville tenet villam de Newton juxta Boldon and redd. p' ann. xx s.
-- Hatfield's Survey.


is stated to be the property of John Pannetary, yet thereby it also appears
that there were villain tenants of the bishop, who performed their services at
Boldon, and are there called male-men, a term difficult to define; the most
probable conjecture we can form is, that they were so styled from their rent
payments, which we presume were anciently made in grain, and the produce of
their lands; for such is the construction given of maile or male by the best
expositors: There was a payment made in the northern counties called
black-male, to those who guarded the borders against the banditti of moss
troopers; or perhaps the tenants of Newton served as guards on the frontiers,
and thence were called male-men. Newton, in bishop Bury's time, gave a local
name to a resident family, and Rob. de Newton, in the fifth year of that
prelate, died seized of considerable property there. In bishop Hatfield's
Survey it appears, that lord Neville then held the vill, one moiety of which he
purchased of William son of Tho. Gategan, and the other moiety being the estate
of John de Hedworth, he aliened the same to Will. de Hilton, chiv. who sold it
to the Nevilles Ao 8o Skirlaw inq.
, and Ralph earl of Westmoreland aliened the manor to John de Hoton Ao 6o
Langley inq.
of Tudhow, which family afterward resided at Hardwick near Sedgefield, but
how long they held this manor we have not discovered. In bishop Neville's time
it was part of the possessions of the barons Hilton.

WHITBURN.
To the east of Boldon lies the parish of WHITBURN. This is a delightful
village, situate near the sea banks on the southern inclination of a hill, and
a dry soil, commanding a beautiful prospect of Sunderland and the adjacent
country. There are some handsome houses in the village, and several families of
consequence reside there. We do not find much of Whitburn in the ancient
records: In bishop Bury's time a family of Thorals Inq. p. m. Tho. Thoral, 1o
bishop Bury, in pleno com. Dun. cor. vic. Dun. Inq. 6 bishop Bury.
, and also one Nicholas de Gunnays, were seized of lands: The family of
Hedworths held possessions there in the time of bishop Hatfield Inq. p. m.
Rich. de Hetheworth, 2 bishop Fordham, cor. R. de Laton esc.

Ao 1o Sinews, 24 Sept.

License to John Hedworth, esquire to alien his manor and lands in Harverton,
Overmoor-house, Nethermoor-house, Michal Bedyk, alias Bedyk-furd, Urpeth, West
Herrington, Hedworth, Southwyk, Marresfold nigh Boldon, Clevedon, West Boldon,
Munckton, Whitburn, Sunderland nigh the Sea, and Durham, to trustees. --
Cursitor's Rolls. -- Rudd's MSS.


, which continued united with their other estates for several generations.

The church of Whitburn Grant by bishop Neville to John Lound rector and his
successors sixty acres of land in Whitburn, called Potter Land. 4 Ap. Ao 17o.
-- Cursitor's Rolls.

Whitburn rectory. -- The bishop of Durham patron.

K. books 39l. 19s. 4d. -- Y. ten. 3l. 19s. 11d. -- Proc. ep. 17s. -- Proc.
arch. 2s. -- Real value 400l.

RECTORS.
Will. de Burgo Joh. de Ryegate, 1245 Ric. de Wellburn, 1316 Tho. Kyrkeby John
Pulhore John de Appelby, 1352, p. res. Pulhore Rich. de Wynchecomb, 1362, p.
res. Appelby Will. de Orchard, 1 Jan. 1368, p. m. Wynchecomb Pet. de Stapylton,
1375, p. m. Orchard Will. Marnhill, p. m. Stapylton Tho. de Popylton, 1402, p.
res. Marnhill Tho. Kirkeby, oc. 22 Sep. 1407, p. m. Popylton Tho. de Lies, 9
Dec. 1409 John Thoralby, 8 Dec. 1410, p. res. Lies John Bonour, d. 10 Nov.
1434, p. m. Thoralby John Lounde LL. B. 1454 Tho. Popeley, A. M. Edm. Jackson,
LL. D. 1507 Cuth. Marshall, Here lies the body of Curtbert Marshall, D. D.
late archdeacon of Nottingham, prebendary of Ustwayte, canon residentiary of
the metropolitan church of York, of whose soul God have mercy; the burial of
whom was the xxvth day of January, in the year of our Lord God 1549. -- Drake's
Ebor.
S. T. P. 1525, p. m. Jackson Rich. Clyff, S. T. B. 12 Apr. 1550, p. m.
Marshall Leonard Pilkington, S. T. P. 28 Aug. 1563, p. depr. Clyff John Hicks,
1616 Tho. Triplet, A. M. 25 May, 1631 He was turned out and taught school in
the south in the times of rebellion; after the king's restoration he was made
prebendary of Westminster, and D. D. He gave, Ao 1664, 300l. out of the use of
which he ordered 5l. per ann. to be paid to Woodhorn, 5l. to Washington, 5l. to
Whitburn, to bind out poor children apprentices, etc. He died aet. 70.
Ric. Hicks, A. M. He supplied Mr Triplet's place in the rebellion, and upon
the restoration conformed.
21 Sep. 1662 Tho. Dockwray, S. T. P. 13 Sep. 1667, p. m. Hicks He perished the
28th of May, 1672, on board the Royal James, set on fire in a sea fight with
the Dutch, being in the same ship with Edward Montague earl of Sandwich, then
admiral of the fleet.
Sam. Speed, A. M. 28 Jan. 1672, p m. Dockwray Tho. Musgrave, A. M. 22 Aug.
1675, p. res. Speed He got 140l. of Speed for dilapidations, and laid it out in
new-fronting the rectory-house.
Sam. Air, S. T. B. 1686, p. m. Musgrave Franc. Blakiston, A. M. 1694, p. m.
Air Nath. Ellison, S. T. P. 20 Nov. 1704, p. m. Blakiston Joh. Wallis, Buried
in Whitburn church, Johan. Wallis, rect. de Whitburn, Na. Crewe nup. ^p'o
Duncl. and Hen. Duci canoi capellanus. Ouiit anno. et. 42, A. D. 1728. T. H. E.
G.

Clevedon and Whitberne.

In Clevedon and Whitberne sunt xxviij villani and unusquisque tenet. reddit.
and operator sicut illi de Boldon.

Ketellus tenet ij bovatas de xxiiij acras and reddit xvjd. and vadit in
legationibus episcopi.

Johannes de Whitberne lx acr. and j toftum and reddit viij s. vadit in
legationibus episcopi.

Rogerus xl acr. and j toftum and reddit viij s.

Osbertus filius Leising xxiiij acr. and reddit unam marcam.

Duodecim cotmanni tenent and operantur and reddunt sicut illi de Boldon.

Punderus tenet and reddit sicut illi de Boldon.

Duae villae reddunt xxx s. de cornag. and ij vaccas de metride.

Dominium est ad firmam cum instauramento v carucarum and dimidiae and v
hercarior. and dim. redd. pro ij carucis and dim. xx celdr. de frumento, and xx
de avena, and x de ordio and pro aliis tribus carucis xv marc. -- oves cum
pastura de Est supre and de Clevedon sunt in manu episcopi. -- Boldon Book.

Whitburne cum Clevedon.

Hugo de Gylmore tenet etc. j mess. and xxiij acr. terrae per servic. forin.
and vadit in legation. episcopi, etc.

Liberi tenentes. Robertus Hedworth tenet etc. Stephanus Whitgray, Johannes de
Kirkby, Will's Swalwells, etc.

Reginaldus Warmouth tenet xij acr. terr. dominicar. and redd. per ann. xxxij
s. vj d. -- xxx alii tenentes tenant terr. dominicar. parcel. solvend. cartel.
redd. per ann.

Tenentes bond. Reginaldus Warmouth tenet j mess. and ij bovat. Terrae bovat
contin. xv acr. and solebat facere in omnibus sicut bondi de Boldon. -- Et
omnes bondi tenentes de Whitburn and Clevedon tenent consimiliter, and quilibet
per se facit in omnibus pro part sua ut supra. -- Iidem tenentes tenent inter
se molend. ventric. -- Pastur. de Clevedon. -- Dominic. toft -- Officium
punder. cum incremento. -- lxxij acr. terrae in mora.

Praedicti tenentes xxviij qui tenent in bondag. pro xxxvj xvj acr. terr.
dominicar. in tenur. little ut supra, and lxj bovat terrae de bond. cum molend.
terra in mora and pastur. superius script. solvunt annuatim ad iiij term.
lvjli. viz. quilibet little xl s. and aven. de scat. and gallin. and ova. and
cariag. j ton. vini and opera ad molend. cons^eta; and faciunt cariag. pro d'no
episcopo senescallo per novam dimission. fact. dictis tenentibus per Joh. Heron
tunc senescall. and alios de consilio Thomae nuper episcopi Dunelm. desuncti.
-- Idem tenentes solv. inter se ad festum natalis d'ni lxviij gallin. and ad
fest. pasch. xxxij ova.

Cotag. Will's Swalwells tenet. etc. and solebat operari sicut illi de Boldon,
etc. cum aliis.

Terrae scaccarii. Tenentes villae tenent inter se herbag. cujusd'm campi
vocat. Colynfield, etc.

Terr. vast. Will's Swalwells, etc. Haec vasta sunt quam plurima xxvij s. viij
d. -- Hatfield's Survey.

1292. Inspeximus and confirmation of bishop Anth. Bek's grant of lands in
Cleadon, to John of Durham.

Ex orig. pen. Tho. Gyll. arm. -- Randal's MSS. 19 Jan. 1283. Edwardus D. g.
etc. rex, etc. Inspeximus cartam quam venerabilis pater Anth. Dunolmen^ epus
fecit Joh'i ville de Dunolm. etc. Omnibus, etc. dedisse. etc pro homagio and
servitio suo inter all is. Et duodecim acre in mora de Clevedon juxta terram
Alex'i de B^dik, in parochia de Witcberne, and tres acre and dimidia acra and
dimidia roda ad exitum ville de Clevedon, in parochia de Withberne and viginti
quinq. acre jacent in eadem p'ochia int' novam morem bondor. de Est Boldon and
Sikettum Fl^tes. Habend, etc.


27 May, 1721, p. m. Ellison Edw. Hinton, A. M. 1728 Benj. Pie, LL. D. 1769, p.
m. Hinton
Randal's MSS.
stands in a fine open situation, and is a neat edifice: The chancel is five
paces in width, and ten paces in length to the three steps leading up to the
altar. The east window, consisting of three lights, is under a pointed arch;
there are four windows to the south, under pointed arches; and two to the
north, one under a circular arch, the other pointed. The nave is regular,
having two side ailes, formed by rows of round columns, four on each side, with
the ancient roll capitals, supporting pointed arches; it is in length twenty
paces, and twelve in width, lighted by three square-top'd windows to the south:
The rafters of the roof are vaulted. At the west end of the south aile, railed
in, is the ancient burial place of the owners of Cleadon, where lies interred
Matthew of Cleadon. There is an altar tomb, with a recumbent effigy cut in a
modern dress, with square-toe'd shoes: The date 1689.

This church has a lofty tower, with a blunt spire Complete History of Durham,
page 620. Several copper coins have been found at this place, of which the most
were Constantines, with the sun on the reverse, and these words, soli invicto
comiti. -- One of them was Maxentius's, with something like a triumphal arch on
the reverse, and these words, conservatori urbis. There were also one or two of
L^icinius's, and as many of Maximianus's.

Newcastle newspapers, November 15, 1777. Last week some workmen pulling down
an old house at Whitburn, found several pieces of old silver coin of various
inscriptions, coined in different reigns, some above 250 years old, and others
as late as the reign of king Charles I.


.

In Boldon Book and Hatfield's Survey Clevedon or Cleadon is annexed to
Whitburn, as joint members of the same manor: The manor being the bishop's, was
in farm, and therein were twenty-eight villains, who held lands and performed
services similar to those of Boldon. In the Boldon Book we find the names of
Ketellus and John de Whitbern, with others, holding lands there: There were
twelve cottagers in the like servitude as those of Boldon, and the pinder had
the same privilege. The two vills paid 30s. cornage rent, and provided the
household with two milch cows. In the survey among the free tenants are the
names of several, particularly Hugo de Gilmore, Robert Hedworth, and Reginald
Warmouth, holding considerable possessions. In the inquisitions post mortem, of
bishop Bury's time, others are described as holding in capite, as Matilda de
Stafforth, who had lands at Cleadon, and John Correy the like, who left a
daughter Stigreda, his heiress. The Kirbys, named in the survey, held lands
here for several generations. There appears to be a freehold manor of Cleadon,
in the hands of a subject, the estate of the Hiltons, and by them conveyed to
Roger Thornton, whose possessions centered in the Lumley family, as before
noted Co'pt est p' inq. etc. q'd p'fat. Rog' ten. in d'nico suo ut de feod.
etc. com. feoffat. cu. p'fate T. de Pytyngton tria mess. in Clevedon, quor.
q'd'lt val. p' ann. ultra repr. 8 d. quator bovat t're cum p't ib. quar. quelt.
bov. t're co'tinet xxiiij acras quar. quelt. val. p' an. ult. repr. v d. ex
dono and feoffe W'i de Hilton chr. p' nomen W, i d'ni de Hilton mil. f'ct.
p'fato Rog'o p' nomen R'i de Thornton and Joh'i de Newton cl. defu'cto ac
p'sato T. de Pytyngton cap. adhuc sup'stit. head. and assign suis imp'p'm p'
nomen M'ij sui de Clevedon alias voc. Clesedon in epatu. Dun. una cum o'ibus
tr. ten. red. rev'sionib's and serviciis, etc. ten. de d'co d'no E. in Ca. red.
si. an. inde ad t'us 13 s. 11 d. -- Inq. p. m. R. Thornton.

Book of rates, -- Whitburn parish: Book of r. 5l. 15s. 6d. -- Val. of lands
735l. -- Grey's MSS.

Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Cleadon 16 0 3 0 10 6
Whitburn 39 19 4 1 10 1

Registered estates. -- Mr Tho. Wood 20l. a year. Mann's MSS.

The bishop of Durham against Chambers. -- Reg. Off. Lib. K. p. 360, 30 Apr. 13
Car. The custom of grinding at the bishop's mill at Whitburn established, and
the defendant restrained from grinding his corn at a mill upon his copyhold
lands there. -- Hodg son's MS. Notes.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 1760 to 1779

Number of burials in the last year. -- Computed number of inhabitants.

Bishop's rents, Whitburne, 51l. 3d. -- Cleadon 21l. 10s. 6d.


. There is an old tower at Cleadon, commanding an extensive view; it was some
short time ago the seat of the ingenious Mr Dagnia, and afterward became the
possession of Mr Chapter Harrison, formerly an attorney of Sunderland, whose
heiress marrying Mr John Wardell, carried this with his other possessions into
that family.

MONKWEREMOUTH CHURCH. N. E Aspect.
view of Monkwermouth Church The Parish of MONKWEREMOUTH.
St Bega, we are told by Bid, founded a religious society at Monkweremouth
Soon after the year 650.
; she had instituted a monastery in Copeland, in the district of Cumberland,
but what induced her to quit the western coast, for the stormy and boisterous
shore of the German ocean, we are not told. Particularly attached to maritime
situations, when she moved from Weremouth, she built another religious house
for the holy sisterhood at Heorthu, now Hartlepool; being of a restless temper,
this third foundation could not satisfy her, but she passed southward, and sat
down near Tadcaster. It is said she was born in Ireland, and received the veil
from bishop Aidan, being the first female who made the religious vow in the
territories of Northumberland Ex vita S. Begae, velatae virginis -- Lel. Col.
vol. iv. p. 39.

Bega nota in Hybernia.

Bega primum humile monasteriolum construxit in Coaplandia, ubi nunc sunt
aliquot monachi mariani urb^ chor. and vulgo vocatur seynet Beges. Deinde ad
septentrionalem partem Wirae stuminis monasterium const^uxit. Vide cet.
Hartlepool.


. In the fourth year of king Egfrid, A. D. 674, Benedict Biscopius, (whose
brotherhood from him took the name of Benedictines) having a grant of sixty
hides of lands, founded a religious house here, and dedicated it to St Peter.
Lambard, p. 400, speaks thus of him and his undertaking Bid, lib. iv. cha. 18,
gives the following account of this matter. In the reign of Egfrid. king of
Northumberland, one Benedict, an Englishman, came over from Rome, with John the
precenter of St Peter's, who was sent by pope Agatho to the synod convened by
The sorus, and he built the monastery of Weremouth, becoming abbot there.
Having a grant from the king of some lands for an endowment of the abbey, he
went to Rome and procured the pope's bull for a further security in the year
680. At his return the pope ordered John the precentor to go along with him,
and teach him and his monks the manner of singing used at St Peter's in Rome.
John, at his coming hither, performed this part of his commission, taught the
monastery church music, and pricked out a course for the choir for a whole
year. This manner of church music was quickly spread through most part of the
kingdom of Northumberland.


: This man labored to Rome five several times, for what other thing I find
not, save only to procure pope holy privileges, and curious ornaments for his
monasteries Jarrow and Weremouth.
; for first he got for these houses, wherein he nourished 600 monks, great
liberties; then brought he them home from Rome painters, glasiers, freemasons,
and singers, to the end that his buildinges might so shine with workmanshipe,
and his churches so sound with melodye, that simple souls ravished
therewithe, should fantasy of theime nothing but heavenlye holiness: In this
jolitie continued these houses, and other by their example embraced the like,
till Hinguar and Hubba, the Danish pirates, (A. D. 870) wear raised by God to
abate their pride, who not only fyred and spoiled them, but also almost all the
religious houses of the north east coast of this island. The introduction of
the fine arts did not suit our author's taste; he adds, And of these things
Beda and others note him the first author, ascribinge fondlye to his praise
that which worthelye may be written to his discommendation; for by these and
such other vanities of will worship, the spiritual service of God began first
to be weakened. It appears from good authorities, that at so early a period
Benedict brought into this district masons of the first denomination, pious
artists, who employed their hands in holy works; he introduced glazing in
public edifices, and the refinement of harmony and song in divine ceremonies:
We have no further description of this monastery in its ancient state Eegfridi
regis anno quarto constructum est quoddam nobile monasterium in Wiremuth. Sed
ut aliud est Caenobium constructum in loco qui dicitur at' Gyrum Easteruuinus
abbas monasterii S. Petri patroclis erat Benedicti abbatis.

Quae scripsit Symeon de vitis Benedicti, Ceolfridi and Easteruuini, excerpta
sunt e Beda, qui illorum vitam scripsit. Mortuo Benedicto et Easteruuine.
Ceolfridus utrique monasterio praefuit. Sexto decimo postquam monasterium
sundaverat anno quievit in domino pridie id. Januar.

Ceolfridus. Jubente pariter and Juvante Benedicto monasterium St Pauli fund.
-- Lel. Col. vol. iii.

Tempore Cutheberti floruit Benedictus Biscop. sundator monaster. P. and Pauli
in Weremuth and Jarrow.

Ibid. vol. ii. p. 370. Flore's Hist. P. Math. Westminster. Ao 703.

Anno gratiae DCCIII. Sanctus Benedictus abbas Anglicus, post vitam laudabilem,
glorioso sine in domino quievit. Hic vir dei de stirpe nobili gentis Anglorum
progenitus est, et in adolescentia militiae rudimentis addictus. Denique cum
esset minister Oswij regis and possessionem non modicam, ipso donante
percepisset, caduca mundi omnia pro Christo spernens. Romam adiit, et ibidem
ecclesiastica informatus disciplina militiam assumeret spiritualem, qua sibi
prodesset et allis, utilisque minister indominicae posset cultura vineae
reperiri. Inde vero rediens apud Lirinensem insulam, se monachorum caetui
conjunxit, tonsuram accepit, ubi per b^ennium regulariter institutus, ad limina
sanctorum apostolorum Petri and Pauli iterum repedavit. Quo tempore cum papa
vitalianus Theodorum cantauriae archiepec. in Britanniam destinavit, ipse simul
adveniens, multas secum reliquias sanctorum reportavit. Qui postea regi
Northanhumbrorum Egfrido conjunctus, confestim rex ei terram xl samiliarum ad
construendum apostolorum principi Petro monasterium contulit ad ostium Wirae
fluminis anno gratiae DCLXXIIII. indictione secunda. Sed et aliud monasterium,
ad honorem doctoris gentium Pauli in Atgyrum non long ab altero fabricatur, et
a rege prefato, praediis lx familiarum acceptis, multipliciter illud ditare
curavit. Haec autem monasteria religiosis implens monachis, Ceolfridum in uno
Ersteruinum in altero praepositos ordinavit. Hoc ideo fecit. ut tam in ejus
absentia, quam in praesentia, regularus semper custodia servaretur. Huic
denique samulo Dei Benedicto Beda venerabilis and doctor Anglorum, traditur
nutriendus, sub quo etiam ad ordinem sacerdotis legitur suisse promotus.
Quinquies Romam petisse asseritur, qui semper rediens divinorum locupletatus
commedorum subjectos instituere, opere pariter et exemplo, curavit. Tandem post
vitam laudabilem victor. viciorum Benedictus, confessor Christi piissimus,
carnis infirmitate victus, pridie Idus Januarij spiritum reddit creatori.
Successit ei in onere and honor vir sanctus and ejusdem discipulus,
Ceolfridus, sub quo Beda Christi famulus ad universalis utilitatem ecclesiae de
scripturis sanctis, laborem inchoatum laudabiliter adimplevit.

N. B. Wilfrid glazed York cathedral in 670, but it is presumed he imported the
glass.


. The reader will find a short account of the pious Benedict in the notes. In
Bentham's History of Ely, p. 21, we are informed the workmen employed in this
edifice were brought by Benedict from France, and that within the compass of a
year after the foundation was laid, he caused the roof to be put on, and divine
service to be performed in it: He continues, Afterward, when the building was
finished, he sent over to France for artificers skilled in the mystery of
making glass, (an art till that time unknown to the inhabitants of Britain) to
glaze the windows both of the porticos and principal parts of the church; which
work they not only executed, but taught the English nation that most useful
art. We are not informed in what manner the monastery was restored, or by whom,
after the Danish devastations; but when king Malcolm of Scotland made his
inroad in the year 1070, he ravaged many parts of this palatinate, and burnt
the monasteries of Weremouth and Hartlepool. We have few accounts of the ostium
of the Were being frequented by shipping in these early times, but from the
choice of situations, are induced to believe what led the founders of religious
houses to fix upon Weremouth and Jarrow, was their being the station of
mariners, who in all ages were objects for religious reformation; and yet
another and perhaps not less essential cause occurs, they were accustomed to
present gifts for propitiation, which would assist the maintenance, if not
increase the riches, of the religious societies. When Malcolm made that
progress, he found Edgar with his family and followers embarked, and lying in
the haven waiting wind and tide, for their voyage to Scotland; and it is more
than probable the king's intention was to cover that retreat. This circumstance
shows that the port was of some note in the eleventh century Vide vol. i. p.
108.

Scala Chronica. -- Lel. Col. vol. ii. p. 531.


. It is wonderful that Turgot, who took the monkish habit at this place, should
not speak of its history during so long a space of time, as from the incursion
of the Danes to the year 1075, a period of 205 years, or mention the restored
edifice, the return of the society, and the destruction made by Malcolm. Thus
dark as the long interval remains, we must pursue the facts which he delivers
down: Part of the religious society of Jarrow (which we are apt to conceive was
become too numerous by the monks who were driven from Weremouth seeking refuge
there) determined to form a colony, with Aldwin at their head, and settle in
the north, whilst another prepared for a southern settlement, headed by
Renfred: Aldwin, with his followers, sat down at the ruined huose of Melros,
where they suffered much persecution, refusing to swear allegiance to Malcolm,
who then possessed that territory Vide vol. i. p. 115. Also Jarrowe.
. Bishop Walcher was displeased with this emigration, which was not only made
without his consent, but also militated against a plan he had formed, though
not made public: He dispatched messengers to entreat the return of the northern
colony, and wrote letters of invitation; but in case of disobedience, the
messengers were charged with more rigorous commands, and the terrors of
excommunication were directed to be announced. On Aldwin's return to this
diocese, in the year 1075, the bishop placed him at Weremouth. Turgot then
tells us Tunc ecclesiam S. Petri, cujus adhuc soli parietes semiruti steterant,
succisis arboribus, cradicatis vepribus and spinis, quae totam occupaverant,
curarunt expurgare, and culmine imposito, quale hodie cernitur, ad agenda
divinae laudis officia stategerant restaurare. Ubi de virgis facientes
habitacula, etc. Symeon Dunelm. p. 203, 204, etc.
This relation affords some surprise, for according to other authorities, it
was only in the year 1070 that Malcolm laid his destroying hand on those
edifices, and in the space of five years few trees, thorns, or briers could
grow over the ruins. Lambard still creates greater confusion in the matter, who
says, Aldwyn of Evesham, or Winchecombe as others say, accompanied with two or
three other, took the place of bishop Walchers guifte, covered the church, and
somewhat repaired the house, and stoared it with company: But before they had
long rested theare, the destruction which William the Conqueror made in the
north country, and the fire of Malcolme king of Scotts came upon them, and
caused them to forsake the place for a season. And when they meant to have
returned, William, then bishop of Durham, compelled them to come to Durham
abbay, and made the house and cell subject to the same, etc. This account
destroys every degree of chronology, for bishop Walcher did not come to the Sea
till 1072. To solve the difficulty, it seems likely there were two religious
edifices, one north of Were, destroyed by the Danes, of which Jarrow was a
filiation, and another erected perhaps after that destruction, on the south of
Were, which Malcolm ruined: And this conjecture is not totally groundless; for
Tanner, in his Notitia Under the title Bishopweremouth.

Tanner's Notitia, p. 14. King Egfrid gave this town to the famous abbot
Benedict Biscopius, who, A. D. 674, founded a monastery here, and dedicated it
to St Peter. It suffered in the Danish wars, and was burnt down in the inroad
made by Malcolm king of Scotland, A. D. 1070: But was afterward begun to be
reedified by Walcher bishop of Durham, whose successor William de Carilepho
Lel. Col. vol. i. p. 383, 384. -- The summa inde is also 26l. in Stevens, vol.
i. p. 26; but 26l. 9s. 9d. in MS. Valor.
about A. D. 1083, removed most of the monks to Durham, to which Weremouth
became a cell for three or four Benedictine monks.

Complete History of Durham, p. 619. Bid calls it Wiranmuth, now commonly
called Monkweremouth, because it lies at the mouth of the river, and before the
Reformation belonged to the monks. William of Malmsbury writes thus of it: The
Were flowing into the sea here, kindly receives the ships that are brought in
with a gentle wind; upon each bank whereof Benedict Bishop built a church, and
likewise in the same places founded two monasteries, one to St Peter another to
St Paul. The author of the additions to Camden charges this quotation out of
Malmsbury with a mistake, and says, our historians all agree, that he built St
Peter's church at Girwy or Jarrow, which is some miles distant from this place,
but does not produce their words.


, makes a mistake in the situation of St Peter's, perhaps through the confusion
there appears in ancient history. After this last settlement the bishop gave
the vill of Weremouth, with Sudwick, for the maintenance of the religious
fellowship there; but their residence was soon disturbed, by bishop William de
Carilepho carrying into effect the design of his predecessor, and removing the
Benedictine monks to Durham, in the year 1083; from which period Weremouth
became a cell for three or four monks only of that order, subordinate to the
monastery of Durham. Prior Richard de Claxton, resigning his government of the
monastery, had assigned for maintenance the cell of Weremouth, with the tithes
of Sudwick; and prior Galfrid de Burdon, in the year 1332, had that cell
assigned him, with the tithes of Fulwell. At the dissolution, the whole
revenues did not, according to the utmost estimate, amount to more than 26l.
9s. 9d. yearly; and in the thirty-seventh year of king Henry VIII. the rights
of the monastery were granted out to one Thomas Whitehead It was valued, 26th
Hen. VIII. at 25l. 8s. 4d. per ann. Dugdale. -- 26l. Speed.

Vide Mon. Angl. tom. i. p. 96. -- Matt. Westminster. Ao 703. -- Lel. Col. vol. ii.
p. 348, 349.

Monkweremouth curacy.

This is a discharged living in the deanery of Chester, and a peculiar belonging
to the dean and chapter of Durham. The church retains the ancient dedication to
St Peter. Sir Hedworth Williamson is the patron.

Yearly value 4l. 16s. 8d. -- Proc. ep. 4s.

The perpetual advowson of this living was part of the estate of John Hilton,
esquire of Hilton, and worth in 1747, 49l. per ann. and upwards, arising from the
following particulars. -- A pension paid yearly out of the exchequer by the
king's receiver at Durham of 5l. 6s. 8d. out of which 10s. is deducted for
fees, the nett sum received being 4l. 16s. 8d. -- Queen Ann's bounty of 200l.
fell by lot, for which 2 p' cent. was received* 5l. A second bounty of 200l.
was added by means of contributions amounting to 200l. raised by the patron and
other benefactors, making together 400l. from which arose a further annual
income of 10l. commencing the 1st of May, 1751. -- Surplice fees (communibus
annis) may be reckoned at 20l. and Easter offerings at 10l. -- In all 49l. 16s.
8d.

CURATES.
John de Blithe, 1384 Will. Houghell, cur. 1563 Tho. Blackston, 12 Mar. 1565
Edm. Stapleton, 1571 Will. Reiseley, 1575 Will. Watson, 31 Jan. 1586 Geo. Carr,
1609 Fra. Todd Rich. Hicks, A. M. lic. 13 Sep. 1638, p. m. Todd Joh. Hicks, A.
B. 15 Mar. 1662, p. res. Hicks Edm. Bowey, A. M. 1667, p. m. Hicks John
Morland, cl. 1724 Tho. Hilton, A. M. 1736, p. res. Morland, pres. J. Hilton of
Hilton castle Fra. Grindall, 1739, p. m. Hilton, pres. i'b'm Tho. Gooday, cl.
1742, p. m. Grindall, pres. i'b'm Joh. Ivison lic. 26 May, 1768, p. m. Gooday,
pres. Sir Hedw. Williamson, bart. Whitburn Cooper Abbs
Randal's MSS. A chantery ad altar Sancti Laurentij was founded in this church
in the year 1220 by A. de Hilton, for his own and his ancestors souls. -- Ibid.

Monkweremouth parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L. s. d. L. s. d. 9 8 9
1149 15 4

Grey's MSS. Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Fulwell 9 16
0 0 9 1 Hilton 21 0 0 1 10 9 Monkweremouth and Shore 16 2 3 0 15 7 Sudwick 18 0
0 1 10 9

Mann's MSS. Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 508 73 322
1760 to 1779 2162 689 2456 Increase 1654 616 2134

Number of burials in the last year 163. -- Computed number of inhabitants 4890.

The author owes grateful acknowledgments to the Rev Mr Abbs of Monkweremouth,
for communicating counselor Grey's MSS. of which so much use has been made in
this work.

Dean and chapter's rents: Southwick 19l. 7s. 9d. -- Fulwell 21l. 16s. --
Monkweremouth 12l. 11s.


.

There are several remains of the monastic buildings, which form three sides of
a square, with the church; but none of the offices can be ascertained from the
edifice now standing. The present church consists only of the nave and north
aile, the south aile having been totally destroyed: The tower is most ancient,
and probably has stood from the eleventh century, being supported on heavy and
low arches, and the chancel is divided from the nave by a heavy circular arch,
much like the arches of Jarrow in form, but more lofty and extended: The north
aile is formed by two round pillars and three pointed arches, and the east
window of the chancel is under a pointed arch, and formed of five lights. The
nave is remarkably narrow in proportion to its length, being little more than
five paces wide, and twenty-two long; the aile is also five paces wide. On the
north wall of the chancel is a monument of the Hilton family Arms: Hiltons
quartering the arms of Musgrave.
; and in an adjoining porch, is the mutilated effigy of a man in a coat of
mail, with elevated hands, and a sword sheathed at his left side, which appears
to have belonged to the monument before noted.

MONKWEREMOUTH-HALL, erected on the site of the old monastery, is the property
of Sir Hedworth Williamson Dunelm. Mich. 4th James II. In quodam libro
decretor. scaccarij. Sir Tho. Haselrigg, and al. v. ep. Dunelm. and French, etc.
, and was for some time the place of his family's residence Dame Dorothy
Williamson, wife of Sir Thomas, being seized in fee simple of a moiety of the
site of the cell at Monkweremouth, by deed dated 18th October, 1682, between
Sir Thomas and Dame Dorothy of the one part, and Sir Robert Markham, John
White, esquire and Rob. Haselrig, esquire of the other part, did, by fine, convey her
moiety to the said trustees and their heirs, in trust to dispose the same for
the benefit of such person as by writing or last will she should appoint. Sir
Tho. Haselrigg seized of the other moiety by lease and release, of the 1st and
2d of July, 1689, made between him of the one part, and said John White and
Rob. Shaftoe, esquire of the other part, conveyed to the said trustees his said
moiety upon the like trusts. -- Dame Dorothy, by her last will, dated 28th
October, 1699, devised the premises to Sir Tho. Williamson for life, remainder
to Sir William Williamson for life, remainder to trustees to support contingent
remainders, with remainder to his first and other sons in^^ail male, with
diverse remainders over. Various subsequent settlements have been made in 1728,
1733, etc.

In Monkweremouth church.
Sub hoc marmore
Mortalitatis exuvias deposuit
D. Thomas Willliamson
De aula Monkweremouthensi in
Com. palatino Dunelmensi
Baronettus.
Thomae Williamson de Markham orientali
In argo Nottingham' mil. and ba^ti
Filius natu max.
Nec non universae ejusdem familiae
Caput
Obiit April xxviij.
An. Dom. MDCCIII.
Non mihi ponantur titulus operosa superbis
Saxa, supervacuos nec captet pulvis honores,
Seu contra fortunae ictus constantia mentis,
Seu probitas morum fuerit, seu cultus honesti
In regem; fides, nullis concussa periclis. --
At, vos, opotius defuncti in nomen euntes,
Qualis eram seris imitando ostendite sec'lis
Manibus hoc patrui supremum mittite munus;
Haec monumenta, mihi quae solum grata, locate,
Et forsan mansura diu, si pristina facta
Majorum poscant, non inferiora nepotes.
In the vault underneath lies the body of that excellent person Dame Dorothy
Williamson, the late infinitely beloved wife of Sir Thomas Williamson, formerly
of East Markham, in the county of Nottingham, but now of North Weremouth-hall,
baron, one of the daughters and coheiresses of Geo. Fenwick of Brenkborne, in
the county of Northumberland, esquire who, to the great grief of not only her said
husband, but likewise to all relations, friends, and neighbors, departed this
life on the 4th of November, 1699, which was the day of her birth, and the 54th
year of her age.

Memoria pius aeterna.

Memorandum. The abovesaid lady Williamson gave at her death these charities:
To the poor of the towns following yearly for ever, viz. North Weremouth town
1l. -- North Weremouth shore 3l. -- Hilton 1l. Suddick 1l. -- Fulwell 1l. --
Bishopweremouth 1l. -- Sunderland 2l.


. Lord Crewe, whilst bishop of Durham, contended against certain rights claimed
on the north shore of Sunderland haven, which were confirmed by proceedings at
law to the Williamsons.

This place is very greatly increased in buildings, population, and wealth
within the last twenty years. There are now five carpenters yards constantly
employed for ship-building; which, with the dependent articles of manufactory,
engage a multitude of workmen.

OF FULWELL we find nothing remarkable in history Gentleman's Mag. Oct. 1763.
"A few weeks ago a gentleman from Durham showed me some large teeth and two
Roman coins. The teeth he said he took out of the jaw of a gigantic skeleton of
a man, and the coins were found in the grave near it. The account he gives is
in the substance as follows. Upon Fulwell hills, near Monkweremouth, within a
measured mile of the sea, there are quarries of lime which he rents of the
proprietor. In the year 1759 he removed a ridge of limestone and rubbish, upon
one of these quarries, which was about twenty-five yards in length from east to
west, its perpendicular height about a yard and a half, its breadth at the top
was near six yards, and the sides were sloping like the ruins of a rampart. In
the middle of this bank was found the skeleton of a human body, which measured
nine feet six inches in length; the shin bone measuring two feet three inches
from the knee to the ankle; the head lay to the west, and was defended from the
superincumbent earth by four large flat stones, which the relater, a man of
great probity, who was present when the skeleton was measured, and who himself
took the teeth out of the jaw, saw removed. The coins were found on the south
side of the skeleton, near the right hand.

(Signed) "P. Collinson."


; or of SUDDICK, alias SOUTHWICK The family of Hedworth having acquired
possessions here, John Hedworth, esquire in the time of bishop Bainbrig, obtained
license to alien the same to trustees. And in bishop James's time, R. Hedworth,
son and heir of John Hedworth, had special livery of the manor of Suddick. --
Rudd's MSS.

5th Oct 12th Ja. 1614. By an inquisition then taken we find an instance of the
bishop claiming wreck of the sea east on shore, on Fulwell sands, within the
dean and chapter's liberty, seized by Rand the bishop's water bailiff to the
use of the bishop and dean and chapter, in moieties according to ancient
agreement.

In the 23d, 24th, and 25th of king Edward I. Rob. Hilton of Hilton, had
summons to parliament among the barons of the realm. -- In the 4th of king
Edward II. he was on the Scotch expedition -- Alex. de Hilton 7th king Edward
III. served in the Scottish wars, under R. lord Neville, and had summons to
parliament the 6th and 9th of that reign. -- Bourne's Hist. Newcastle. p. 82.

Inq. p. m. Alex. de Hilton chiv. 16 Hatfield, co. Will. de Claxton esc Dun. --
He h^ld of the bishop in capite, the manors of Hilton, Berneston, and Neuton,
by a knight's fee and a half, and suit of court. And also the manors of Forth,
Grendon, and Cloncroft, by a knight's fee and suit of court.

13th bishop Neville. Exemplification of an inq. taken of the possessions of
Sir Rob. Hilton, knight. In the margin p' barone de Hilton.

Hilton manor. Et quod sunt in eodem manerio una aula, quatuor camerae una
capella duo horrea una coquina, una domus vocat le gatehouse. -- The advowson
of the church of Hilton, Newton manor, Berneston manor, Forth manor, a ferry
over the Were called Bone ferry, a fishery and stone quarry, Grindon manor,
Great Usworth manor, manor of Bydick near Wessynton.

William his son and heir.

Livery to William Hilton, son and heir of Sir Robert. In the margin of the
roll called William baron de Hilton. Dated 1st July, Ao 13o Neville.

Li^ to Will. Hilton, arm bar. de Hilton. to alien all the above manors, etc.

7o bishop Fox, pardon of Sir Will. Hilton, of all murders, misdemeanors, etc.

William Hilton, esquire son and heir of Sir William, 2d king Henry VII.

10o bishop Tunstall. Livery to Sir Thomas Hilton, son and heir of Sir William
late baron of Hilton.

2d bishop James. Livery to Henry Hilton, cousin and heir of Sir William. --
Rudd's MSS.

Breve innocenti Johanni de Hilton, domicello i. e. baronis de Hilton, filio
primogenito data Avenione 16 k. Maij pontificat. 4o anno (A. D. 1356 (...) hic
linearum extremae parts abeissie sunt. Videtur confessori ejus permittere, ut
ei in articulo mortis ((...) tamen conditionibus) plenam peccatorum remissionem
concedat. B. ii. fo. 3, d. and cha. lib. -- Randal's MSS.


, in which latter place the family of Hedworth long continued to have
possessions.

HILTON MANOR, with the Castle, was the possession of the family of the Hiltons
before the Norman Conquest, and continued above seven hundred years, to the
time of John Hilton, esquire the last male heir, who died there the 25th of
September, 1746, and left his estates by will to Sir Richard Musgrave of Hayton
Castle, in the county of Cumberland, esquire his nephew, by his eldest sister,
provided he took the name of Hilton by act of parliament. Sir Richard died on
the 16th of June, 1755. The castle of Hilton and almost all the rest of the
family estates, were decreed to be sold for payment of the debts of John
Hilton, esquire in Sir Richard's lifetime. This manor, with the castle, and about
900l. a year in lands, in 1758, were sold to Mr Wogan the younger, then lately
returned from the East Indies, for 30,000l. and upwards, but that sale not
being perfected, the estates were purchased by Mrs Bows, relict of George
Bows of Gibside, esquire

HILTON CASTLE, seated in a vale on the river Were, is graced with many hanging
woods and ornamental plantations, in long extended avenues; and though
possessing few beauties of situation, and much shut up from prospect, yet may
be justly called a pleasing retirement. Part of the ancient baronial house
remains, but it has undergone such reformations and changes, that it is now
difficult to ascertain the date of any distinct part of the present edifice.
The center of the west front consists of the great entrance and gateway,
defended by square projecting turrets, crowned with hanging parapets which
cross the angles transversly, like those on the old towers at Lumley, so as to
make an aperture over each face of the square, for the purpose of annoying
assailants. This form indicates that those parts of the two castles were nearly
of the same date. The center is flanked with circular turrets, which now
garnish the wings of the building, of modern construction: The battlements of
the ancient part are ornamented with human figures. In the center are several
shields of arms, but disposed so irregularly as to testify the present building
did not first receive them. In the highest place are the royal arms, three
fleur-de-lis quartering three lions passant, and beneath, in a confused form,
are the arms of Graystoke, Lumley, Brabant, Percy, Ogle, Conyers, and several
others. On the turrets are several shields of arms, among which are those of
Surtees and Bows. The east front has the ancient tower in the center, with a
square projecting front without turrets. It is ornamented with the arms of the
Hiltons, without quarterings, the head of Moses the crest; above which is a
large HILTON CASTLE
view of Hilton Castle figure in relief, of a stag at rest, collared and
chained. There are two uniform wings of modern work, and an elegant portico in
the center, of the highest Gothic style. The mansion is neglected, and contains
nothing within that merits noting. The back grounds are laid out in slopes and
terraces, at the termination of the uppermost of which stands the ruined
chapel, once noted for its elegance and ornaments The present gentleman, John
Hilton, esquire a regular descendant of this ancient family, lives in the place of
his ancestors, which he has adorned and beautified beyond what was done in past
ages; in particular the chapel, famous in this country for its Irish wood, is
so furnished with plate and books, and other necessaries, that it merits the
character of a very beautiful chapel. -- Bourne's Hist. Newcastle, p. 82,
printed 1736.

Hylton, in the reign of k. Athelstan, was in the possession of Sir Wm Hylton,
knt. whose son Adam Hylton, gave to the monastery of Hartlepool a crucifix of
silver, of 25 ounces weight, and caused his arms to be engraven on it, as also
on the gate. He likewise gave the said monastery a cope and vestments, with
silver to make a censor. -- Descrip. of Engl. and Wales, published 1769.

Chapel of Hilton 6l. 14s. 4d. -- Randal's MSS.

Harl. MSS. 1499. This is the pedigre of S. Willyam Hilton, knight, called the
baron of Hilton.

Sir Willyam Hilton, knight, baron of Hilton, married Marie dought. and quoheire
of Stapulton of Westmerland, and heir of Vipont, and by her he had issue
Willyam son and heir. Ellen married to Ewan lord Ogle. Elizabeth married to
Rauff Claxton.

Sir Willyam Hilton, knight, baron of Hilton, son of Willyam, married Margery
dought. of Bows, and by her he had issue Willyam son and heir.

Sir Willyam Hilton, knight, baron of Hilton, son of Willyam, married Sybell
dought. of Thomas Lomely, son and heir of the lord Lumley, and by her he had
issue S. Thomas Hilton, knight; Willyam ijd son: Anne married to S. Rauss
Hedworth, knight.

Sir Thomas Hilton, knight, son and heir of S. Willyam Hilton of Hilton,
married Elisabeth dought. and heir to John Clarvax of Croft, esquier.

Vis. of Norroy, k. at arms, 1530. Hilton chapel within Hilton castle. --
Dedicated to St Katerine. -- Yearly value 6l. 13s. 4d.

The prior and convent of Durham, by indenture, granted to the lords of Hilton
for the time being, for themselves, their wives, and children, free burial in
the chapel of Hilton, or in the cemitery of the same; and Sir Rob. de Hilton
granted to the said prior and convent liberty to gather the tithes of Hilton,
Reston, and Newton, and to carry them through any roads where the lords of
Hilton and their tenants gathered and carried their corn and hay, without let
or hindrance of any one. Sir Robert de Hilton, by another indenture, granted to
the prior and convent of Durham one place in the vill of Hilton, for building a
barn to lay their tithe in. An agreement was made between Germain, prior of
Durham, and Alex. de Hilton, concerning the chapel of Hilton. -- The chapel of
Hilton was resigned into the hands of the prior of Durham.

Chaplains. -- Tho. de Yolton, 1220 -- Will. Harpyn, 1249, p. m. Yolton --
Geoffry de Levesham, 1297 -- T. de Hilton, 1321 -- Will. de Hilton, 1322 --
Will. Byngham -- Joh. Blakewell, 1443, p. m. Byngham -- Rob. Staynton, 1450, p.
m. Blakewell -- Ric. Cresswell, 1462, p. m. Staynton -- Ric. Bowman, 1471, p.
res. Cresswell -- Rob. Spragayne, 1503, p. m. Bowman, exch. with Will. Fabayne,
1508 -- Tho. Stevenson, 1531, p. m. Fabayne -- Jos. Marshall, 1536, p. res.
Stevenson.

The chantry of St Mary, within Hilton castle chapel.

Chaplains. -- Tho. de Scham -- Rob. de Byllingham, 1322. -- Randal's MSS.

The gatehouse, which is all that remains of the old castle, shows how large it
has been, with the chapel, a sine structure, wherein there were chaplains in
constant attendance. -- Gibson's Camden.


. On the west front are three shields of arms; in the center, Hilton's
quartering Vetripont's; on the dexter side, the supporters are lions; on the
sinister side the same arms, the supporters are stags.

We have a description of this castle in the rolls of bishop Nevil, about the
year 1450, when it consisted of a hall, four chambers, a chapel, two barns, a
kitchen, and a house called the gate house. The present center of the building
is five stories in height, and most probably is the edifice described in the
record, comprehending the hall and four chambers. The family of Hilton was not
only one of the most eminent in this province, but also one of the most
opulent, as appears by their possessions mentioned in the notes.

The following account of the Hiltons is taken from a manuscript in the
possession of the Musgraves of Hayton:

Three hundred years before the Conquest, even in the reign of king Athelstan,
one of the Saxon monarchs, the family of Hyltons were settled in England in
great reputation, as appears by a certain inscription at Hartlepool. That upon
the coming over of William the Conqueror, Lancelot de Hylton, with his two sons
Henry and Robert, espoused his cause and joined him; but that Lancelot was
slain at Feversham in Kent. That to the elder son Henry, the Conqueror gave a
large tract of land on the banks of the river Were, not far from Weresmouth; a
reward for his own and his father's valor. That this Henry built Hylton castle
in the year 1072, was one of the deputies that treated with the Conqueror
concerning the four northern counties, and in the service of that prince, was
at last slain in Normandy. That in the reign of Edward III. John Hylton, who
sent four of his sons into the wars of France, under the command of the Black
Prince, was first created baron of Hylton castle, for his gallant defense of it
against the Scots incursions. That this peerage continued in the family for
seven successions, till at last it was forfeited upon account of some unguarded
words, whereof the then bishop of Durham gave the court information, which
William the seventh and last baron of the family spoke against the queen, and
her favorite De Le Pole. That upon the death of this William, which was
thought to have been violent, the crown seizing upon the estate, gave it to the
informing bishop, who held it for some time, to the utter exclusion of the
rightful heir. That in process of time however, Lancelot, the grandson to the
aforesaid William, was restored to his castle and part of his estate, no more
of it indeed than what the bishop thought fit to allow him under this hard
condition, that he and his heirs for ever should hold the moiety that was given
them under certain rents and services to the Sec of Durham, and have the title
of barons (but barons to the bishopric) annexed to their inheritance; and in
that condition it has continued ever since. In the pedigree of the Hyltons
there are several names remarkable for their learning and piety, but almost
innumerable those highly renowned for their martial deeds. War seems to have
been the pleasure, genius, and recreation of the Hyltons, nor has any family
been more lavish of their blood in defense of their country's cause. Since the
time of the Conquest it is remarked of the Hyltons, that one was slain at
Feversham in Kent, one in Normandy, one at Mentz in France, three in the holy
wars under Richard I. one in the same under Edward I. three at the battle of
Bourdeaux, under the Black Prince, one at Agincourt, two at Berwick upon Tweed
against the Scots, two at the battle of St Albans, five at Market Bosworth, and
four at Flodden Field.

This MS. account is given as it came to the author's hands, some principal
errors will appear in the comparison of the records.

BISHOP WEARMOUTH.
view of Bishop Weremouth The Parish of BISHOP WEREMOUTH.
South Weremouth, or as it was afterward called Bishop's Weremouth, to
distinguish it from the seat of the monks on the northern shore of Were, was
not of much inferior antiquity, being restored to the Sea by Athelstan in the
beginning of the tenth century, under the distinguishing appellation of the
delightful villa of South Weremouth, with its appendages, Weston, Offerton, and
Silksworth, together with the two Ryhopes, Birden, Seham, Seaton, Dalton,
Dalden, and Hesilden; which places, by the royal grant, are stated to have been
wrested from the church in former times, "through the malignity of evil men"
Vol. i. p 68, vide note.

Lel Itin. vol viij. Ex antiquo codice Dunelmensis: Elstanus rex Wermuth
australem cum suis appendic^^ ^^^anit S. Cuthberto. Chronica feretri S.
Cuthberti: Ethelstanus rex restituit S. Cuthbert^ (...) Were^ cum undecim
villis. Ethelstanus rex multa ornamenta ecclesiastica dedit ministris S.
Cuthberti.

Were^slu. quod Akelandam and Dunholmum praeterlabitur a Ptolemaeo Vedra a Bed^
^em nunc (...), ^u^c Murus dicitur. Oritur vero in Weresdale, and apud Wermuth
in mare se exone^t. -- Lel. Col. vol. ^^i.


. It is not ascertained how soon a church was built here, but probably the
foundation was not long subsequent to the restitution made by Athelstan, though
no rector or other incumbent occurs in the church records before the beginning
of the thirteenth century. Notwithstanding the severance of Sunderland from
this parish, by act of parliament, by virtue of which Sunderland was created a
separate rectory, as will afterward be noted; yet this is a very opulent
living, being computed worth one thousand pounds a year.

The ancient village stood chiefly on the southern inclination of the hill, on
the crown of which is the church; but from the increasing wealth and population
of Sunderland, the ground which formerly divided the two places is now eagerly
sought after by persons of opulence and trade, who have arranged handsome
villas on each side of the road, so that in a few years the buildings of these
places will meet.

The church Weremouth rectory. -- Dedicated to St Michael. -- In Easington
deanery, and the archdeaconry of Durham. Bishop of Durham patron.

K. books 89l. 18s. 1d. -- y. ten. 8l. 19s. 10d. -- Proc. ep. 1l. 18s. -- Proc.
arch. 2s. -- Real value 800l.

RECTORS. Frater Adam de Marisco, (or Marsh) about 1217 Will. de Dunelmo
Adelmare, (or Ethelmar) 1250, p. m. Dunelmo Rich. de Kirkham, 1252 Will.
Heyremin, (or de Ayreminne) 1317 John de Eston, 1341 Will. de Newport, 1360
Dav. de Wollour, 1366, p. m. Newport Simon Cardinal S'ti Sixti, 1370, p. m.
Wollour Tho. de Newby, 1372, p. res. Simonis D'nus Rob. Gebenens, titulo 12
apost. S. Romans eccl. p'b'r Card. oc. 16 June, 1375 Will. de Packington, 1381
Rog. de Holme, 1390, p. m. Packington John de Denham, oc. 18 March, 1399, (can.
ebor.) p. m. Holme Mr Rich. de Holme, 140 John Newton, 1424, p. m. Holme R. de
Elvet, 1426, p. m. Newton Tho. Leys, 3 Dec. 1431, p. m. Elvet Geo. Retclyffe,
1483 Ric. Nykke, (or Nix) 23 Dec. 1494, p. m. Retclyffe Ric. Wyatt, cl. 8
April, 1502, p' promoc. Henry VIII. See vac. Will. Carther, S. T. P. 1 July,
1546, p. m. ult. incum. Tho. Pattenson, cl. 1548, p. res. Carther Ad. Hallyday,
S. T. B. 1560, p' dep. See vac. Eliz. r. Toby Matthew, S. T. P. dean of Durham,
ind. 28th May, 1590, p. m. Hallyday Fran. Burgoyne, S. T. B. Ap. 1595, p' prom.
Matthew John Johnson, A. M. 25 Feb. 1632, p. m. Burgoyne, p. Tho. ep. Dun. Chr.
Sherwood, S. T. P. 20 Jan. 1643, p. m. Johnson, p. Tho. ep. Dun. Rob. Gray, S.
T. B. 1 Ap. 1652, p. m. Sherwood, p. Tho. ep. Dun. Will. Johnson, A. M. an
intruder, held a court 23 Oct. 1650 Sam. Hammond, a second intruder, held
courts 19th Aug. 1651, and 26th April, 1652 Wm Graves, cl. a third intruder,
held courts 5th Dec. 1654, and 26th April, 1660 Rob. Gray, lawful rector, S. T.
P. 1652, p. m. Sherwood, his first court 2d June, 1661 John Smith S. T. P. 28
July, 1704, p. m. Gray John Bows, S. T. P. col. Aug. 1715 John Laurence, A. M.
1721, p. m. Bows Wadham Chandler, A. M. 1732, p. m. Laurence Henry Bland, A.
M. col. Aug. 1735, p. res. Chandler, for Sherburn hospital Will. Radley, A. M.
col. 8 Sep. 1768, p. m. Bland Henry Egerton, cl. 1776, p. m Radley.
Randal's MSS. The parish register begins Si quis registrum hoc mutilare in
ulla part, vel nomen aliquod delere, addere, aut in falsum immutare, vel
quovis alio modo violare audeat, pro sacrilego habeatur a domino. Tho.
Broughton curatus. -- The above Mr Broughton has kept all the registers in a
most exact manner and they are continued to the present time in the best form
of any parochial registers in the county; the births are inserted as well as
the baptisms. -- Mr Allan's Notes.

There was a chantry of the Blessed Virgin Mary in this church, of the yearly
value of 3l. 15s. 4d. Cui p'tinuit unum burgagium in Sunderland, cum parcella
terrae in posteriori ejus part clausur. et quatuor acrae et dimid. acrae prati
cum pertinentiis. Ra. Parkinson, the last incumbent at the dissolution in 1547,
had a yearly pension of 3l. which he lived to receive in 1553. -- Randal's MSS.


, though disfigured on the outside by modern fashed windows, retains much of
its ancient form within; the architecture testifying that the structure is
nearly as ancient as the days of Athelstan, when the Saxon modes prevailed. The
chancel was repaired and greatly altered by Mr Smith, who came to this rectory
in 1704. The altar rails form a square, thereby admitting many communicants to
the service: The enclosure is six paces in length, and three wide steps ascend
to the rail; the whole is neatly wainscotted, and the east end ornamented with
tabernacle work. The east window is under a pointed arch, and formed of five
lights; there are four south windows, and one to the north, having two lights
each, under pointed arches. From the steps, the chancel on each side is double
stalled with oak, in the cathedral form, ornamented with a carved entablature
in open work. The entrance from the nave is under a lofty pointed arch, rising
from a cluster of small round pilasters; closed with stalls and a handsome wood
screen, suitable to the rest of the chancel. The whole length of the chancel
within the rails and without is nineteen paces. The nave has two regular
ailes, formed by two rows of three round columns, about fourteen feet in
height, uniform, with rolls for capitals, supporting circular arches; there are
four upper windows on each side: The nave and ailes together are fifteen paces
in width, and sixteen in length, regularly stalled with oak, and carved with
fleur-de-lis. The pulpit is lofty, and well ornamented: Near it, in the end
wall of the north aile, is a monument, having the effigy of a man in armor to
the waist, with elevated hands, in high relief; belonging, as it is presumed,
to one of the family of Middleton. The tower rises on short round pilasters,
supporting pointed arches on the sides, and a lofty circular arch toward the
nave. The west end of the nave is galleried. By the various modes of
architecture which are seen in this edifice, it is evident, alterations have
taken place at different periods, but that the old Saxon mode was the original
one.

The rector of Weremouth for the time being is lord of the manor, and holds his
courts, the customs and copyholds of which are of the same nature with the
customs and copyholds of the bishop's manors. The history of this place is
involved in the confusion before noted relative to Monkweremouth, and we are
not able to trace the antiquity with any degree of accuracy, either in relation
to the foundation of the church or its endowment. Camden was overtaken in the
error of William of Malmsbury Lat. edition, p. 576. "In hoc S. Petri.
Monasterio Beda, etc. operam dedit, etc."
, and confounded Jarrow with Weremouth. In bishop Pudsey's time, as appears by
the Boldon Book, the manor of Weremouth was held by the bishop, and in
Weremouth and Tunstall he had xxij villains and six Wermouth and Tunstall.

In Wermouthe and Tunstall sunt xxij villani, and unusquisque tenet reddit and
operatur sicut illi de Boldon.

Sex cotmanni tenent and operantur and reddunt sicut illi de Boldon.

Carpentarius qui senex est habet in vita sua xij acr. pro carucis and hercis
faciend.

Faber xij acr. pro ferramentis carucarum and carbonem quem invenit.

Punder tenet and reddit sicut ille de Boldon.

Duae villae reddunt xx s. de cornagio and ij vaccas de metride.

Dominium est ac firmam cum instauramento xx bovat. and ij hercarior. and cc
ovium.

Et reddit cum molendino xxli. piscariae reddunt vjli. burgum be Wermouth xx s.
-- Boldon Buke.

Wermouth.

Terroe scaccarij. Thomas Menvill tenet quand'm plac. vocat Hynden, pro
applicatione navium and red. ij s.

Persona ecclesiae de Wermouth tenet quand'm pastur. vocatte Hough, etc.

Terroe domin. Johannes Hobson tenet. etc. W s Gray, Stephanus Carter, etc.

Terroe bond. Johannes Hobson tenet. etc. Et pro operib' xij d. Et xiij s.
vjjd. quia plus in omnibus quam pro firma molendini ventritici cum tolnet
cervis ad eosd. term. et pro scatpenys ad fest. pu^is. xjx d. and vj bz de
scataven. and solebat operari sicut illi de Boldon, sicut contin. in quod'm
libro vocato Boldon bok in toto xxxj s. ob. and vj bz aver.

Will. Gray and vij alii tenentes, etc. -- Et quilibet dictorum bond solv. per
annum pro portione sua pro terris in midilmor and smalmor, etc. in toto x s. x
d. -- ^idem ten. bond redd. p' ann. in supplementum antiq. redditus eorum iiij
s. x d. -- Et quilibet, etc. ad fest natalis d'ni ij gallin. and ad sest.
paschae x ova. -- pro j vacca de metrich ad term. S. Martini tantum vj s. --
pro cornage ad fest. S. Cuthberti in Septembr. x s. -- pro wodlades ad fest.
natal S. Johannis Baptistae viij s. viij d. -- Commun. Turnum iij s. iiij d. --
Tenentes bond de Wermouth, Tunstall, Reshop, and Birden, solvunt inter se pro
mo^end. and bracinag. ibid.

Cotag. Robertus Pain, tenet. etc. Et omnes isti cotag. redd. per ann. etc. de
eisd cotag. ad festa natalis d'ni and pasch. viij gall. and xl ova.

Terroe scaccarii. Johannes de Sunderland, etc. facit iiij portacion. in
autumn, etc.

Tunstall

Terroe domin. Walterus Luttyng tenet etc.

Terroe bond. Will's Luttyng tenet etc. Et pro operibus xij d. et pro firma
molend. ventritici ibid. cum tolnet cervis xiij s. viij d. q'ar' plus in
omnibus q'ar. Et vj bz aven. de scat. ad fest. purif. b. Mariae. Et xix d. ad
idem fest. pro scatpenys and solebat operari sicut illi de Boldon, sicut
contin. Boldon Book red. xxxj s. j d.

Will. Dobbie and x alii tenentes, etc. Praedicti tenentes solvunt inter se in
supplimentum antiquae firmae and red. v s. ob. and quilibet bond praedict.
solv. ad fest. purif. M. Mariae vj bz de aven. de scat. unde sum'a x q'eter
iiij bz. -- ij gallin. unde summa xxviij gallin. -- x ova, unde summa xx / vij
ova. -- pro j vacca de metrich. inter se vj s. -- tenent inter se commun.
furnum ibid. and red. p' ann. iij d iiij d. -- De xij s. vj d. ob. p' cornag.
ad fest. S. Cuth. in Sep. and xxjx s. ij d. praedicti tenentes onerantur. supra
infra sirm. bond.

Cotag. Rob. Dixy, etc.

Terroe scaccarij. W's Lutting and alii, etc. -- Hatfield's Survey.


cottagers, whose customs were similar to those of Boldon. There was a
carpenter, also a smith, who held lands for their work; the two places paid xx
s. cornage, and provided two milch cows for the household. The lordship was then
farmed out, with the increase of certain live stock appertaining thereto of
cattle and sheep, which, with the mill, produced 20l. a year: The fisheries
gave 6l. and the borough of Weremouth xx s. In bishop Hatfield's Survey we find
an account taken of the products of this manor, in which more minute
particulars are noted. Thomas Menvylle then held a place called Hynden, for
plying of ships, under the rent of 2 s. and the parson of Weremouth held a
pasture called the Hough: The bondmen paid 19d. for scatpennys; for their
privilege on Middlemoor and Littlemoor 10s. 10d. in the whole, and provided
each two hens and ten eggs: For one milch cow they paid 6s. for cornage x s.
woodlades 8 s. 8d. and for the common furnace 3s. 4d. The bond tenants of
Weremouth, Tunstall, Ryhope, and Birden paid for their mill and brewferm. Among
the rents of the bond tenants of Tunstall we find they paid 19d. for scatpennys
According to Rastal, is a common tallage. -- 39th Henry VIII. signifies a
customary contribution laid upon all subjects according to their ability. --
Hoveden, in the beginning of king Henry II. writes it anlote and anscote. --
See Leg. Gul. Conq. cap. 125, the same words. -- Hoveden, Ao 1088: Rex omne
unjustum scottum interdixit. -- Foret ballivus ad scotta pro reparatione and
sustentatione walliarum, etc. assessa levandum. Ordinatio Marisci Romenciensis,
p. 56.

Bishop weremouth parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L. 26 6 3 L. 4373 16 8
Grey's MSS. Land tax at 4s. County rates 6s. 8d. Bishopweremouth 129 6 8 3 17 2
Vans 19 7 2 0 4 2 Sunderland 117 6 0 1 0 0 Burdon 16 4 0 0 13 1 Tunstall 11 8 0
0 10 3 Silk^worth 29 19 8 1 10 4 Ryhope 27 13 1 1 6 5

Registered estates: -- Burdon, Thomas Huntley 40l. -- East Burdon, Mrs Mary
Bows of Newcastle 10l. -- Sunderland, Nicholas Tailor 30l. Mrs Mary Bows 5l.
1s. 10d. -- Mann's MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 2613 453 1930 from 1760
to 1779 2072 750 2374 Increase 297 444 Decrease 541

Burials in the last year 131. -- Computed number of inhabitants 3930.

Bishop's rents 43l. 15s. 4d. -- Burdon 11l. 8s. -- Ryhope, 42l. 12s. 2d. --
Tunstall 16l. -- Sunderland 12l. -- Fishings 5l.


, and in lot oats, ten quarters and four bushels, twenty-eight hens, seven
score eggs, 6s. for a milch cow, for the common furnace 3 s. 4d. and 12 s. 6 d.
for cornage.

We have observed that the borough of Weremouth is noted in the Boldon Book:
Bishop Pudsey, in the latter end of the reign of Henry II. or in the beginning
of Richard I. granted a charter of privileges to his burgesses of Weremue Reg.
Antiq. Dec. and Cap. Dun. vol. ii. p. 353. Carta recentiff. p. 171.

Erectio burgi de Weremue. "Hug. dei gratia Dunelm. epus priori archidiaconis
baronibus and omnibus hominibus totius episcopatus sui Francis and Anglis
salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse et praesenti carta confirmasse burgensibus
nostris de Weremue liberas consuetudinibus in burgo suo secundum consuetudinem
burgensium de Novo Castello, etc. Hiis testibus g priore. B. archid. Simon
Camer, M'ro Rico. de Coldingeh. M'ro S. Lincoln, Alex. de Hilton. Fo. 354, Bib.
Cotton. Julius, 7047. Mr Ritson.


. There is another grant made by him, 1154, De burgo de Weremue, alias
Weremouth, modo Sunderland juxta mare Reg. 11 Dec. and Cap. 164.
; and by the charter of bishop Morton to Sunderland, it appears that king Henry
III. granted certain privileges to the new borough of Weremouth.

At the Pans, observed in the book of rates, is an ancient seat house of the
Lambton family Assignatio seu confirmatio stalli situat. infra navem eccle^iae
paro'ial de Weremouth epi. etc.

Mr Frevile Lambton for twenty-five or thirty years last past has been owner
in his own right, of an ancient seat house situated in a street called
Bishopwearmouth pans, at the west end of the town of Sunderland near the Sea,
within the parish of Bishopwearmouth, and all that time was and is owner in his
own right, of diverse other houses and sundry parcels of land, situated in the
parish of Bishopwearmouth. The said seat house and houses and parcels of land
are copyhold, and all of them descended to the said Mr Frev. Lambton, by the
death of his father Capt. Thomas Lambton, of South-Biddick, in the county of
Durham, who died Ao 1661. Sir William Lambton, knight, of Lambton hall, was
father of Capt. Thomas Lambton, and at the time of his death, which happened Ao
1644, and for twenty or thirty years and above, was owner of the abovenamed
seat-house, etc. which descended to Capt. Thomas Lambton. Sir William Lambton
and Captain Lambton usually had a steward who lived in the said seat house,
etc. J. Brookbank, LL. D. etc. Frevile Lambton de Hardwick, arm'o confirmat.
eund. stallum seu sedile. In cujus, etc. -- Randal's MSS.


.

SUNDERLAND
view of Sunderland The Parish of SUNDERLAND.
It has been asserted by various writers, that Sunderland, either was so
united with Weremouth, or so insignificant in Camden's time, as caused him not
to mention it. Leland, in his Itinerary, takes no note of it. It is most
probable the general name of Weremouth prevailed so much as occasioned
Sunderland to escape the learned writers observation, especially as in the
charter granted by bishop Pudsey, the borough had the name of Weremouth.

That charter is addressed, among other personages, as priors, archdeacons,
etc. to the bishop's barons, and grants, That the burgesses of Weremouth should
enjoy the like liberties and free-customs, as the burgesses of Newcastle: That
all pleas arising within the borough, except those of the crown, should be
determined there. Disputes between those plying with ships at that port, and
merchants to whom the cargoes were sold, to be determined within the time of
the third influx of the tide, that navigation might not be retarded:
Merchandise brought by sea to be landed before sale, except salt and herrings.
A year and a day's possession of lands, etc. without claim, the claimant being
within the realm, and not under age, a sufficient quietus. A burgess's son
maintained by his father at bed and board, entitled to the like privileges as
the father. A villain remaining and holding lands or tenements in the borough
for a year and a day without interruption, to have the same franchise as a
burgess. A burgess might sell his lands and go where he pleased, if no claim
was subsisting against him. If a burgess was complained against, in a matter
where battle ought to be waged, by a villain, he was to make defense by
thirty-six men, unless the value in suit was one hundred pounds, or the crime
imputed to him ought to be tried by battle. No burgess was compelled to fight
against a villain unless he had forfeited his franchise. There was not to be
within the borough blodwite, merchete, heriet, or blood drawing. The reve or
head-borough was to look after forfeitures touching bread and beer. A burgess
might bring in his corn from the country when he pleased, except at a time of
prohibition or embargo. Whatever a burgess bought he might sell without license
of the lord or consent of his heir. Every burgess had liberty to buy timber and
sire wood equally with the burgesses of Durham. They should enjoy their common
pasture as was originally granted to them, and which the bishop had caused to
be perambulated. Customs of fish were reserved to the bishop, as Brus had from
his people of Hartlepool.

The town of Sunderland stands on a point of land, having a steep descent to
the river, which affords a convenient and safe haven for shipping. It was not
anciently a port of note, yet not totally unfrequented; for in the preceding
charter a provision is contained touching ships plying there: Yet we cannot
form any great estimate of this port, when we observe in Hatfield's Survey,
that John Hedworth had an ancient right of drawing a net in the very haven
Sunderland.

Sunderland est ad firmam and reddit c s.

Rogerus de Andri reddit pro stagno molendini firmato super terr. de Sunderland
j marc. -- Boldon Buke.

Sunderland.

Thomas Menvill tenet burgum de Sunderland cum libera redd. burg. ibid. qui
valet per ann. xxxij s. viij d. and cum piscar. in aqua de Were una cum curia
burgi tolnet. and stallag. cum viij yares d'ni episcopi and cum viij s. de
firma prioris Dunelm. pro j yara voc. Ebyare; and cum viij s. de red. Johannis
Hedworth pro j ya^a vocat ouns yare et cum tract. unius retis in portu dicti
burgi, and soleb. reddere per ann. xxli. modo^ed. vjli.

Johannes Hedworth tenet j mes. cum gardino xij d. j cotag ij s vj d. -- Aliud.
cotag. ij s. vj d.

Johannes Hobson, etc. iij s. iiij d. -- quond'm vast in Wermouth ij d.

Terrae vast. Et est ibid. quaedam plac. quond'm Ricardi Wermouth ad exitum
villae ibid. quond'm de dominic. d'ni ibid. contin. dimid. acr. and solebat
reddere per ann ij s. modo vast. and extra tenur.

Hatfield's Survey. Jarrow Slaka jacet infra com. pal. Dun. and pars orientalis
ejus p'tinct ad manerio de Wessot and altera pars inde ad monasteriu. de
Jarrow, etc.

Will'us de Carilepho ep'us temp. Will'i Conq. consensu and mandato P. P.
Gregorij 7 and ^'s pred. concessit per cartam suam eccl'ae S'ti Cuthberti
maneria and villas de Jarrow, Preston, West^e. etc.

Vide cartam Hugonis Pudsey, ep'i p' erigend. burg. de Weremue nunc Sunderland
in qua p'viso facta est p' navib's ib'm negocian. reservand. custum. piscium. 2
reg. d. and cha. 164.

Vide seperales rot'los p' quos apparet ep'm Dun. he're burgum de Sunderland
and redditu. p' piscariis quod prior Dum. ib'm h'uit. Quodq. epus. Dun. locum
ib'm h'uit in temp. antiquo p' adventu seu appulsu navium ^th certo reddit.
Annis s. 1183, 1345, 1418, and aliis rot'lis sine datu.

Tho. Hatfield epus 1358, dimisit Ri'ca de Hetheworth burgum de Sund. cum
piscariis maneria and Wolton ^are o'iu p'sicua ad d'em burgum p'tin. p' 20 an.
sub red. 20l. 2 reg. d. and chapter 158.

Vide sep'ales rot'los computor qui monstrant epos Dun. habere passagia and les
ferryboates apud Sund. Et computa p' faciendo novos batellos seu eimbos
allocat. 1345, 1406, 1457, 1494, 1502, and 1508.

Vide evidencias prioris Dun. q'd passagia battelli de Sund. est p' firmariu.
levat absque dimissione epi Dun. and injuriose sup' priorem usurpat. nullo
redditu inde d'no ep'o solut. seu priori Dun. 1 Cart. 318. -- Evidenc. p'
passagio int. Monkweremouth and Sunderland, 4 Cart. 299.

Duae commissiones epi emanat. e canc. Dun. p' Langley, ep'm ad inquirend de
nave fract. and merchandiz. restituend. Rot. cl. C. No 27.

Scil't p' Neville ep'm 1438. Rot. cl. M. 50, 51.

Concessio 1438 p' Nevil ep'm d'no Lumley de Wreco maris infra com. Dun.
exceptis piscibus regal.

Et d'cus epus duas concessit licentias p' cariand carbon. ad and a stationib's
seu wharfis epi sup' aquam de Tyne p' mare seu p' terram. 30 H. 6.

Et p' edificand. wharfas and stationes ib'm p' vendendo carb. sup' aquam ill.
reservant. custumas epi. Rot. cl. A. No 87, M. No 59.

D'n's rex Ed. 4. dimisit Rob'tus Bertram burga. de Sund. cum o'ib's proficias
ad inde spectan. Et passag. ultra aquam de Were. Et piscarias aquae pred. He'nd
durante vac. sedis Dun. and quamdiu temporalitates manerent in manib's regis
red. 6l. ann. ad sc'em Dun. Et dc'us rex p'videre cymbam p' d'co passag. Rot.
cl. Laur. epi. M M. No 56.

P'r and conv. Dun. 3 Ed. 4. concess. d'^o R. Bertram p' 30 ann. porco'nem
fundi estimat esse tres parts in campo de Jarrow juxta locum voc Hevynghouse
extra fluxum aquae ib'm unacum terre and fund. infra fluxum ejusdem aquae a
dc'a porc'one terrae usq. ad maximu. aquae refluxum direct se extend juxta
visum and p'ambulacon Thomae Ward mag'ri sive custodis cellae de Jarrrow suis
certis finibus.

Burgus de Sund. conces. p' copiam rot'lor. cur. Rad'o Bows mil. temp.
Bainbrig and k. Hen. 7.

Concessio burgi pred. et ferryboat seu passag. ultra aquam de Wear cum
piscariis de Sund. p' cartam poll Rad'o Bows ar. and sequilis suis sc'd'm
cons. cur. halmot in tam amplu. modo and forma p'ut Rad'us Bows mil. p' annis
dc'i Rad'i ea tenuit. sub red. 4l. 18 Oct. 22 Eliz. 1590. Rot. cl. p. m.
Barnes, 10, 11.

Est une ancient borough consistant de 12 capital burgesses vocat burgesses
and 12 inferior burgesses, voc. stallengers, and chescun freeman inhabitant
ascun. messuages ad common pur 2 chevalles et pur 4 vaches and chescun
stallinger pur un vach. and que la fem. de chescun freeman on stallinger
inhabitant ou mesme le common apres le mort leur barons. Levins, pt 2, 252.
Hinks versus Clerk, les trove en sp'ial verdict.

De vice admirallis epor. Dun. de Sunderland.

Barnes. Will. Whitehead vice adm. and ballivus de Sund. p' vita sub compo inde
reddend. annuatim ad audit. epi. 20l.

Cosyn. Joh'es Tempest arm. vice adm. com. pal. and locum tenens epi official
princip. and judex cur, vice adm. q'mdiu been gesserit 1661. Rot. cl. A. No 17.

Ric'us Matthew genesis judex cur. vice admiralitat. quamdiu been gesserit. Rot.
cl. No 18.

Walterus Ettrick, genesis registarius and scribarius cur. pred. Rot. cl. No 19.

De ballivis epor. Dun. burgi sui de Sunderland.

Baoth. Rad'us Bows ar. consang. epi p' vita. sub feod. p' inde debit solvend.
p' firmar. burgi pred. -- Rot. cl.

Tunstall. Tho Smith bal. villae and burgi de Sund. and collector reddit. and
firmar. ib'm p' vita cum feodo. -- Lib. pat. in audit. offic.

Barnes. Will. Whitehead bal. and vice adm. p' vita.

Vide in Rot. Audit. temp. Morton ep. ubi computatur quolibet anno p' no'em
major and burgij. Bal. de Sund. juxta mare.

Sene'lli epor. Dun. sive cl'ici cur. burg. de Sunderland.

James. Joh'es Richardson genesis sen'lus sive cl'icus cur. quar'cunq. infra
burgum de Sund. quandiu placucrit. Rot. cl. 1, No 103.

Nota presentat. fuit in cur. burgi de Sund. 26 Sep. 1609, p' regalitatibus
wre'cas and ancorag. ib'm.

De ancoragio.

Anchoragium de Sunderland concess. fuit Ev. Williams p' Tobiam ep'm p' l'ras
suas pat. 4 k. Ja. 1.

N. B. Magister domus S'ti Trinitatis apud Novum Castrum obtinuisset h'as
paten. R's esse concessas eidem Evans de ancoragio de Sund. Sed eos allocare
recusavit d'cus epus.

De ballivis aquaticis epor. Dun. de Sunderland.

James. Joh'es Rand. dur. been plito. feod. 1l. 6s. 8d. Rot. cl.

Et ad colligend. p' epo omnia debita and evacuand (ballast) and p' ancorag.
beconag. rivage and al. custom. feod. 1l. 6s. 8d.

C^syn. Commissio emanat no'ie r's temp. Car. 2. direct. quibusd. com'er p'
reformac'one fraudum and abusun. r'one false and incerte mensurac'onis usitat.
in ordac'one carinar. cum carbonibus in portu de Sunderland. Test. Joh'e ep's
d. 7 Oct. 15 Car. 2. Rot. cl. A. No 35. -- Mickleton's MSS.


. Much evidence appears of the bishops of Durham having the borough, and
leasing out the rights and privileges of it; and in right of their regalia they
leased out the passage of the river and ferry-boats Compotum auditor. episc.
and cancellar. ejus d' redditibus burgi and passagii trans rivum per ferryboat
ibid. piscar. ibid. and pro applicatione navium ibid. ac pro batellis and
cymbis annis 1 Hen. 2. -- 19 Ed. 3. -- 7 Hen. 4. -- 5 Hen. 5. -- 36 Hen. 6. --
17, 18, 24 Hen. 7. -- Registro 2 d. etc. 15. 32 Edw. 3. Tho. Hatfield episc.
dimisit Rich. de Hethworth burgum d' Sunderland cum piscariis and Wolton yare
ibidem pro 20 an. red. 20s. p' an. episcopo. -- Rot. M. M. L. Booth ep. No 56,
2 Edw. 4. Dom. rex Edw. 4. sede episc. Dun. tunc vacant, jure ecclesiae
Dunelm. dimisit Roberto Bertram burgum d' Sunderland juxta mar^, ac passagium
trans aquam ibidem and piscar. habend. durante vacatione episc. reddendo 6, ad
scacc. Dunelm. and rex imbuit cymbam. -- Spearman's Inq. p. 24.

22 Hen. 7. Chris. Bainbrigg episc. Dunelm. per copiam 20 hul. cur. halmot.
dimisit Radulpho Bows militi, burgum de Sunderland praed. etc. red. 6l. p' ann.

Rot. A. Matt. ep. No 11. Vide deed poll 18 Oct. 32 Eliz. 1590. Mattheus Hutton
episc. Dun. dimisit Radulpho Bows armig. burgum, passagium trans aquam, piscar
ibidem per redditum 4l. ultra finem solutum, and inveniendam cymbam, exceptis
mercemoniis. The bishops of Durham successively ever since have frequently
renewed these leases of the borough, ferryboat, passage, anchorage, beaconage,
wharfage, plankage, meetage, and tolls of Sunderland port and market and fairs,
and they are now in two leases, (Ao 1729) to wit, the borough, with the courts,
markets, fairs, tolls, anchorage, beaconage, etc. to William Lambton, esquire and
the ferryboat passage, the metage, and tolls of herbs, fruit, and roots, to
Walter Ettricke, esquire for twenty-one years. -- Ibid. p. 25.

The lease in 1661 to Walter Ettricke, was of all those his (the bishop's)
ferryboats of Sunderland, in the county of Durham, and the passage over the
water, port, or river of Sunderland, with free egress, regress, and landing
over the said water, for all carriages and passengers over both sides of the
said water; and also all tolls due and payable for all goods and commodities to
be sold or vended in the said borough of Sunderland; and likewise the profits
and duties upon salt, fruit, roots, victuals, and other merchandises, sold by
any manner of metage imported to the port or haven of Sunderland, except the
metage of salt, etc. imported there for the bishop's use. Register 7, fo. 28 --
18 Feb. 1668 -- 20 Oct. 1679 -- 31 Dec. 1688 -- 1 Feb. 1694 -- The like to Mr
Ettricke, Reg. 8, fo. 112 -- 13 May, 1702 -- 13 Sep. 1710 -- ^ Feb. 1721, to
Anthony Ettricke -- Reg. 9, fo. 486. -- Do 11, fo. 205. -- 3d Feb. 1728 -- 3
Feb. 1735 -- 3 Feb. 1749 -- 14 Feb. 1764, to William Ettricke. -- Reg. 12. fo.
70, 527. -- Reg. 15, fo. 482. -- Reg. 18, fo. 282.


. We do not find any grants of anchorage and beaconage till the time of bishop
Tunstall Cuthbertus Tunstal episc. Dunelm. dimisit -- Smith, proficua
d'anchorage and beaconage. -- Tobias Matthew episc. Dunelm. dimisit Evans
Williams le anchorage and beaconage, etc. Rot. Halm. an. 4 Jac. 1. 1606. --
Spearman's Inq. p. 25.
, so that it is natural to conjecture in his episcopacy, the port was growing
into importance. Commissions of conservatorship of the river Were, etc. were
granted so early as bishop Skirlaw's time, and were repeated by his successors
Com. Walt. ep. 10 Ap. 2 pont. sui and an. 13 Rich. 2. 1390, ad supervidend.
aquam de Wear and gurgites ibidem excessivos reducend. per juratres, etc. Rot
Sirlaw, No 35, dorso. -- Rot. B. Tho. Langley, ep. No 48, Ao 1420 -- Rot. E. No
41, Ao 19 Pont. -- Ibid. No 3, Ao 24 pont. Rot. C. No 63, 9 May, 31 pont. --
Similis commissio per Robertum Neville ep. pro aquis de Wear and Teas, etc.
bis. Rot A. No 51, and No 84. -- Sim. com. per Laur. Booth ep. pro aquis de
Tease, Skerne, Gawnles, Wear, Tyne, and Darwent, etc. sur. stat. d' Westminster. 2
and 3 Rich. 2. Rot. A. No 2, 1468. -- Chapter Bainbrigg ep. No 67, Rot. B. Ao 1507,
pat. Johanni Racket pro vita sua of the conservatorship of all the bishop's
rivers of Tease, Wear, Tyne, etc. within his bishopric, and for preserving
salmon and fry of fish according to the law and custom of England, and the
bishop's royal liberties of Durham. -- Spearman's Inq. p. 27, etc. etc.
. Commissions of sewers issued from the time of king Charles I. 5 Ap. 4 Car. 1.
Rot. 2. Sede vacant post mortem Rich. Neille ep. No 34. -- Rot. 3, Tho.
Morton, ep. No 21, 15 k. Cha. 1. -- Ibid.
; and in the reign of king Charles II. commissions issued for measuring the
keels or lighters, and coal-boats of Sunderland port 7 Oct. 15 Car. 2, 1663.
Rot. A. Joh. Cousin, ep. No 35. -- Ibid.
. In bishop Langley's time there were commissions to enquire after the ^^lmon
fishery, and the same were repeated by his successors; also commissions
touching yares and obstructions in the rivers 3 commissions per Tho. Langley ep
i would inquirend. super defect. piscium aquarum, i. e. d' salmonibus non capiend
in tempore juxta statut. de Westminster. 2 and 3. -- Similis com. p' Neville ep. ac
Booth ep. Rot. A. 1. Rot. A. 50, 88, Rot. X. 32, Rot. M. 23, Rot. E. No 16,
ibid. No 2, Rot. C. No 62, Rot. B. Bainbrig ep. ut sup. -- Breve Rob. Neville
ep. vicecomiti Dun. ad praemuniend. vel scire faciend. separal. personis infra
nominat. ad diminuand. seu amovend separal. yaras erect. in aqua de Wear
contra statut. ante festum S. Bartolomaei apost. prox. sub paena 100 mercar.
epis. solvend. juxta statut. super inquisition. capt. coram Tho. Lomley militi
and sociis suis, justiciar. episc. per commission. suam ad supervidend. aquam
praed. viz. versus Rob. Jackson pro yaris vocat marle yare and chestan yare,
versus Johan. Wessyngton priorem Dunelm. pro drilad yare, eb yare, versus
Johan. Hedworth pro Owens yare, versus Lomley chivilier pro outlaw yare, versus
Williel Bows militem pro Bowden and Biddicke yares, versus Robert. Hilton
militem pro Weydiles yare and Synden yare, quas cum pilis palis and sep'ibus
nimis excessive in profundior. partibus aquae praed. in filo ejus. aquae
posuit, lavaverunt and injuste construxerunt, per quas filus aquae pred.
totalit. est obstruct; ita quod homines commune passagium ibidem cum navibus,
naviculis battellis and keeles habere: -- Nec salmones nec salmoniculi per
filum aquae praed. transire non possunt, prout ante haec tempora transire
solebant contra formam statut. ad nostri grave dampn. and totius communitat.
regiae nostrae libertatis Dunelm. depauperationem manifestam. Rot. B. Neville,
No 87, 1440. -- Ibid.
. Royal fish and wreck of the sea were frequent subjects of enquiry by
commission, and will be noted in the respective places where the facts arose.
Bishop Barnes and his successors appointed a water bailiff of the port of
Sunderland; and sundry prelates by patent appointed a vice admiral and judges
of their court of admiralty Ra. Bows was vice admiral under the bishop in the
reign of queen Elizabeth. -- Ibid.

6th March, Ao 20 Eliz. Vide decree canc. Dunelm. judge Hutton attorn. episc.
etc. and Rob. Woodrington M. D. C. 2 Car. 1. Richard Barnes bishop, per literas
patentes suas constituit Will. Whitehead vice admiral suum, and ballivum de
Sunderland, sub comp. annuatim ad auditum episc. qui vixit usq. an. 2 Jacobi
primi regis. -- Ibid.

Rot. 1, W. James ep. No 118, Ao 1609, vide official. auditor. episc. Bishop
James by patent made John Rand his water bailiff of Sunderland port, and to
collect the ballast dues, anchorage, beaconage, rivage, and other customs and
profits due from ships trading there -- Ibid.

1626, Richard Bartlet. -- 1628, Nich. Whitfield. -- 16 Nov. 1633, bishop
Morton leased to Sir Wm Bellasses, knight, and others, in trust for the use of
the city of Durham. -- 1638, Mich. Crake, a servant to the king, first by his
majesty's patent, afterward, in the vacancy of a lord high admiral, by lease,
and after that by the earl of Northumberland, lord high admiral. -- Bishop
Morton always opposed him. -- 1642, Crake obtained an order of the commons of
parliament, to prohibit the clearing of ships without his fees and warrant. --
1643, the bishop's lessees obtained another order, revoking that to Crake, and
quieting the lessees in the possession until it should be determined by law,
which Crake did not prosecute at law, and so the lessees continued the
possession till the lease expired during the commonwealth. -- 9 Nov. 1649, Col.
Geo. Fenwick purchased of the usurper's trustees for sale of bishops lands,
etc. the reversion for 285l. 9s. 6d. and enjoyed it till the restoration, when
bishop Cousin granted a new lease. Crake, then living, revived his claim, and
the matter was referred by the duke of York, then lord high admiral, to Dr John
Ecton, then judge of the admiralty of England, who, 1st July, 1663, reported
the bishop's claim and right to be good, and therein cited diverse of the
ancient charters and records before noted, to ground and warrant his report,
which was allowed. -- 20 July, 1663, Crake being summoned and not showing
cause. Rot. A. Cousin, No 17, 1661, bishop Cousin, by letters patent, made John
Tempest, esquire his vice admiral, quamdiu se been gesseret. -- Ibid. No 18, by
like patent he made Rich. Matthew, gent. judge of his court of admiralty. -- No
19, he also then made Walter Ettricke, gent. by patent, register of that court;
afterward William Blakiston, esquire Charles Montague, esquire and William Lambton,
esquire were successively vice admirals by patent from the bishop. -- Sir Richard
Lloyd, knt. and Henry Lambton, esquire were successively judges of the court of
admiralty. The high court of admiralty has frequently since the restoration,
admitted of appeals from the bishop's court of admiralty at Sunderland. 16 Dec.
1662, bishop Cousin granted a new lease to Mr Robert Adamson of the borough and
port of Sunderland, and of the anchorage, beaconage, wharfage, ballast shores,
etc. there, for 21 years: Rent 10l. -- 15 Oct. 1676, the lease was surrendered,
and a new lease was granted by bishop Crewe to Edward Arden, esquire Mr Geo.
Forster, and the said Adamson, for twenty-one years at the like rent. -- 15
July, 1682, renewed by lord Crewe to Mr Geo. French. -- Since renewed to
William Richardson, William or Henry Lambton, esquire. -- Ibid.

Rand's patent granted him the ancient see of 26s. 8d. yearly, with all other
sees and duties to the office of water bailiff belonging, in as ample manner as
any water bailiff in any port or river in the north parts of this realm
lawfully enjoyed: And thereby impowers him (inter alia) to collect, demand, and
receive for the bishop's use, all such free customs or usages as to the said
bishop in this port was due, and as in other ports for the like, and conveyance
away of the ballast, and preservation of the said river was, ought, or might be
due or appertaining; and also to take to the bishop's use all rial fish, wrecks
of the sea, customs, usages, and forfeitures whatsoever, which should
thereafter happen to become due to the bishop within the said port or river or
limits thereof, upon any occasion or accident whatever; for which he was to
render an account yearly to the bishop in his exchequer at Durham. Since
Whitfield's time the office of water bailiff has been held by leases granted
by the bishops along with the borough of Sunderland. Mr French's lease
specifies "All that his (the bishop's) borough and town of Sunderland, etc.
with all borough courts, perquisites of courts, and borough rents and other
free rents duties, customs, and profits belonging to the said borough: And all
that port and creek of Sunderland extending itself from the bar and low water
mark of the sea unto the new bridge nigh Lumley park; together with the office
of water bailiff of and within the said port, creek, and haven, and all
anchorage and beaconage, plankage, wharfage, ballast shores, groundage,
moorage, cranage, pickage, stallage, and poundage, with all privileges,
liberties, conveniences, and commodities incident thereto: And all and every
the sum and sums of money, duties, benefits, and profits arising, or any ways
growing due to the bishop or any of his successors, for or in respect of any
ship, vessel, or boat coming into or going out of or anyways arriving,
anchoring, mooring, loading or unloading at or in the port, creek, and haven of
Sunderland aforesaid, or any part thereof, and the benefits, profits,
commodities, advantages and appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging,
except for such ships as should arrive there for the bishop's own use." The
lease has been renewed to the present time. -- Register 8, fo. 560 -- Reg. 9,
fo. 106, 423 -- Reg. 10, fo. 219 -- Reg. 11, fo 129, 313 -- Reg. 12, fo. 276,
525 -- Reg. 13, fo. 287 -- Reg. 14, fo. 246 -- Reg. 15, fo. 476 -- Reg. 16, fo.
324.

We are possessed of various proceedings in the admiralty court, but they are
too voluminous to be inserted.

In dorso Rotul. Hutton ep. in canc. Dun. A. No 11.

Oct. 22, 32d Eliz. R. Bows arm. cepit de d'no epo totum burgum de Sunderland
juxta mare, in tam amplis modo and firma prout Ra. Bows mil. proavus Ra.
Bows, arm. nup' habuit, etc. Iliis testibus Rob. Tailboy arm. Chr. Maire and
aliis.

Ibid. No 10. The bishop by letter of attorney, authorizes his good friend Rob.
Tailboys, to grant to Ra. Bows by copy of court roll, all the borough of
Sunderland, etc. -- Randal's MSS.

19th bishop Neville. Ra. Bowes's grant for life -- Rudd's MSS.

License from bishop Bainbrigg to John Hedworth, to alien lands in Sunderland.
-- Ibid.

John de Neville chiv. d. s. of 10 burg, held by ^ealty and suit at the borough
court. Ao 1 Skirlaw, inq. p. m. -- And John de Hedworth died seized of 12 acres
of land, held in burgagio ^ s. rent and landmail.


. The bishops also granted licenses for building wharfs or staiths for vending
coals.

From all the records referred to it will appear, that it was not till after
the statute of Henry VIII. by which the palatine jurisdiction was restrained
and mutilated, Sunderland became a place of considerable note, and had its
officers of distinction and police: Hartlepool, whilst the bishop of Durham had
naval armaments, was the (...) of the province, where the bishop had his
officers, and received the fees, dues, and duties which in other ports were
paid to the king.

Bishop Morton, desirous of encouraging the trade of Sunderland, in the year
1634, granted a charter of incorporation to the burgesses and inhabitants, by
the title of mayor, twelve aldermen, and commonalty of the borough of
Sunderland Reg. Hunt. penes dec. and cap. Dun.
. The charter states, that Sunderland had beyond the memory of man been an
ancient borough, known by the name of the new borough of Weremouth, containing
in itself a certain part, where ships had plied, bringing and carrying
merchandise, as well to and from foreign parts, as from other ports of this
kingdom: The articles of exportation therein specified are sea coals,
grind-stones, rub-stones, and whet-stones. It also states, that the trade was
then greatly increased by the multitude of ships resorting thither; and that
the borough anciently enjoyed diverse liberties and free customs, as well by
prescription as by virtue of sundry charters from the bishops of Durham,
confirmed to them by the crown; which from defect in form proved insufficient
for the support of the ancient liberties, privileges, and free customs of the
borough, or to that effect. This charter granted the market and fairs, and
appointed the mayor for the time being clerk of the market.

For reasons not pointed out to us, this charter was suffered to expire;
perhaps the miseries of those times, and the dreadful convulsions of the state,
caused it to be neglected. But though the members of the incorporation did not
long preserve their jurisdiction, the privileges granted to the inhabitants
were assumed, and maintained in several suits at law, particularly touching the
herbage of the town-moor, with the soil thereof: This common consists of about
seventy or eighty acres only. In the case of Hicks versus Clerk, Lev. 2d part.
p. 252, the custom is stated, that Sunderland is an ancient borough, consisting
of twelve capital burgesses, called burgesses, and twelve inferior burgesses,
called stallingers, and that each freeman occupying a house had commonage for
two horses and four cows, and each stallinger for one cow; and that the widow
of a freeman or stallinger, being an inhabitant, had the like commonage after
the husband's death. Upon error the judgment establishing this custom was
affirmed See a bill brought in the court of exchequer in the year 1729 or
thereabouts, by Sir William Middleton and William Etterick of Barnes, against
William Etterick of Silksworth, and some other people of Sunderland, and the
depositions in the cause, especially the deposition of the defendant William
Etterick; which will show a right in the bishop of Durham to Sunderland
town-moor, and that the freemen and stallingers are only entitled to the
herbage. -- Gyll's MSS.

1776, June 17. In the court of exchequer, the long contested cause between
Benjamin Hodgkin, plaintiff, and the corporation of freemen and stallingers,
and other defendants, touching the right of the soil of the town-moor of
Sunderland, was finally determined in favor of the corporation; and the
plaintiff's bill, after a full hearing, was dismissed upon the merits, with
costs.

The tides in Were.
F. I. F. I. Spring tides generally flow in the harbor the 1st hour 2 6 ebb 0
9 2d hour 3 6 1 3 3d hour 3 6 1 6 4th hour 2 6 2 6 5th hour 2 6 6th hour 1 6
7th hour 1 3 8th hour 9

Discount of water from new bridge to the bar 23 feet 8 inches and an 8th part
of an inch. -- From new bridge to Allan's s^aiths is two miles and a half, and
the discount of the water is 7 feet 4 inches. -- The stell is about 6^0 yards
in length, about 50 yards in breadth, and in depth 2 feet, and the discount
there of the water is 2 feet 2 inches.


.

King Charles II. in the first year of his reign, directed his commission to
the mayor and four senior aldermen of Sunderland, and to Walter Ettrick, esquire to
administer the oaths of supremacy and obedience to the inhabitants, etc. there
This record was communicated by Mr George Pearson, with a remark that it proves
the burgesses accepted bishop Morton's charter, and that it also operates as a
legal recognition of the grant of incorporation made by the bishop.
. He also, in the twentieth year of his reign, granted his letters patent to
Edward Andrew, esquire to build a pier or piers, with a light-house or
light-houses, and to cleanse the harbor of Sunderland, with power to raise
contributions for effecting those works: And the same letters patent forbid all
masters and commanders of ships or other vessels, to cast ballast out of their
ships or vessels within six fathom water, within the space and limits of one
mile to the southwards, and one mile to the northwards of the mouth or entrance
of the harbor; willing and commanding all officers and ministers of our courts
of admiralty, and vice-admiralty, to take especial cognizance thereof, and
severely punish such as shall offend The letters patent state, that Whereas we
are informed by the humble petition of our well beloved subjects the
inhabitants of the borough and port of Sunderland near the Sea, upon the river
of Weere, in the county palatine of Durham, that the harbor and river there
being very commodiously situate for the shiping of vast quantities of sea
coals, plentifully gotten and wrought there for supply of all our subjects of
our realm of England who can fetch the same, as also of foreign parts, is of
late very much gorged, stopped up, and choked, and by the many sholes, sand
beds, and much breach and rubbish daily increasing in the same, is almost
rendered innavigable, so as the said harbor and river, which in late years did
receive and secure 400 sail of ships at one time, laden with coals and other
goods, cannot now receive any ship of considerable burden without hazard; but
the ship masters, merchants, and cole owners are constrained in part to load
such ships exporting coals, and unload such ships importing other goods, at
sea, near the mouth of the said harbor, to the prejudice of our revenue of the
customs, and the great peril and danger of such ships and goods: And those
ships which are of small draught of water and may go into the said harbor, do
lie long there for their loadings, by reason of the said shoals and sand beds
in the said river obstructing the bringing down of coals and other goods for
their loadings, and being so laden do wait long for spring tides and winds to
carry them to sea, which much enhanceth the price of coals in many parts of our
realm, and is of hindrance to the maritime commerce: And that it would be very
expedient and necessary, and also greatly advantageous and beneficial, not
only to us, our heirs and successors in the advancement of our revenue of the
customs, and to our merchants and seafaring men, in the encouragement of trade
and increase of shipping and navigation, but in the setting up of a convenient
fishing trade there, if the harbor and river belonging to the port of
Sunderland aforesaid were cleansed, etc.


.

The regal jurisdiction of the bishop of Durham being in many instances removed
by the statute of Henry VIII. the conservatorship of the river Were and port of
Sunderland was vested in the powers of the crown, and the necessary revival of
that authority became daily obvious; so that an act of parliament was applied
for and obtained in the 3d year of k. George I. for the preservation and
improvement of the river Were and port and haven of Sunderland, and
commissioners were appointed for twenty-one years There is a power to charge
any sum not exceeding 3 d. a chaldron on the coal owner, and 1 d. on the
fitters. -- In the act of 1726 there is power to borrow money on the credit of
those duties. -- By an act passed in the 32d of George II. the duties were
continued for a further term of 21 years, and were afterward made perpetual.
-- By an act 1st queen Anne, a farthing a chaldron was granted on all coals
shipped at Sunderland, in support of the piers of Whitby, and by several
subsequent laws, that impost was continued, and an additional farthing granted
to continue to June 1, 1781. -- V. coal owners case, 1766, on petition to
parliament.


. In the thirteenth year of the same reign another act was obtained, entitled,
An act for the more effectual preservation and improvement of the river Were
and port and haven of Sunderland, etc. by which additional powers were granted
to the commissioners. In the twentieth year of George II. another act was
obtained and commissioners appointed, who were empowered to survey the river so
far as to a place called New bridge, (being Chester new bridge) to which place
they might make it navigable; and also the port, haven, and harbor of
Sunderland, as the same extends from the promontory or point called Souter
Point, about two miles from Sunderland bar toward the north-east, and so into
the sea to five fathom at low water, and from thence in a supposed direct line,
till it fall opposite to that land called Ryhope Dean, about two miles toward
the south. By subsequent laws the powers of the commissioners have been
continued.

In 1719, Sunderland being increased so greatly in population, that it was
impossible for the inhabitants to be received to the offices of the church at
Weremouth, an act of parliament was obtained for making the town and township
of Sunderland a distinct parish from the parish of Bishopweremouth; in the
preamble of which it is stated, that Sunderland contained six thousand souls
and upwards, and that a beautiful church had been erected, with a vestry-room,
and a dwelling house for a minister or rector to live in, upon a parcel of
ground, part of one of the common fields of Sunderland, and within the manor
and borough of Sunderland, called the Intack, and had enclosed or doled out a
parcel of ground adjoining thereto for a cemetery or churchyard. By this act
Sunderland was made a rectory, the patronage of which should for ever appertain
to the bishop of Durham. A vestry or association of inhabitants was instituted
by this act, consisting of twenty-four persons having freehold estates of the
yearly value of 10l. to be chosen by the parishioners, and to continue in
office three years, and so a succession to be chosen every three years, in
which vestry-men was vested a power to make ordinances and bylaws, for the
regulation of the new parish, to be ratified by two justices, to appoint a
scavenger, and to assess on estates, real and personal, and stock in trade, a
sufficient sum for the purposes therein mentioned, and particularly for paying
to the rector a yearly stipend of eighty pounds, and to the clerk ten pounds,
and a competent sum to the scavenger, to be levied by warrant from two or more
justices of the peace. The rectory to be discharged of first fruits, tenths,
procurations, and synodals; but the tithes of fish, and of corn and hay growing
within the parish, were reserved for the rectory of Bishopweremouth, the new
rectory taking only Easter reckonings, surplice fees, and other small dues.

The trade of Sunderland is very considerable: In the Description of England
and Wales, page 265 Also England Displayed, published by Russell and Owen, 1769.
, it is thus spoken of, It is a well built populous sea port town, having a
fine church, which the late rector, Mr Newcomb, spent the greatest part of his
income in beautifying and adorning. He began by building a dome adjoining to
the east end, into which he removed the altar, placing it under a canopy of
inlaid work, supported in front by two fluted columns of the Corinthian order;
but this gentleman died before he had finished his intended improvements. From
the coal trade the inhabitants derive great wealth: The coal is so remarkable
for burning slow, that it is said to make three fires. The port was formerly so
shallow, that ships were obliged to take in their lading in the open road,
which was sometimes attended with very great danger to the keelmen, who bring
the coals down to the ships; on this account the vessels which loaded here,
were usually smaller than in the neighboring ports; but as they ride in the
open sea, they no sooner get in their lading than they are ready to sail, which
is a considerable advantage, as they have been known to steer from thence, to
deliver their coals at London, to beat up against the wind in their return, and
to get back before the ships at Shields, which were laden before them, had
been able to get over the bar: But this inconvenience has been in a great
measure removed. The town is much improved and increased within these fifty
years. The principal street is of great length, and of considerable breadth,
parallel to which runs another, but narrower, besides a great number of others.
The town, with the adjacent hamlets of Bishopweremouth, Bishopweremouth
salt-pans, Monkweremouth, and the north shore side, contain about twenty
thousand inhabitants. Those who are delighted with sea prospects may here see
twenty or thirty sail of ships coming in with a flowing tide, from the coasting
and foreign parts, fifteen or twenty going out on their respective voyages, and
thirty or forty sail at anchor in the road, taking in their cargoes. Here is a
very fine pier, which affords a pleasant walk, as well as shelter for the
ships, and is said to have cost about 19,000l. They have also deepened the
south channel, by taking up part of the rock. So great is the trade of
Sunderland, that in 1752, there belonged to this port alone about one hundred
and ninety ships, which are chiefly laden with coals, the staple commodity of
the place, and the produce of the adjacent country, whence many people are
employed, and great sums brought in. In the summer season there are about ten
thousand tons of lime and limestone, carried from this river, in small sloops
of about twenty or thirty tons. It is said that there were loaded at this port,
in 1748, 2497 sail of ships: And in the year 1752, besides the small sloops
already mentioned, Coasters. Foreign port. Total. In the quarter ending at
Lady Day 370 15 385 In the quarter ending at Midsummer 1303 64 1367 In the
quarter ending at Michaelmas 1271 65 1336 In the quarter ending at Christmas
480 29 509 Total 3424 173 3597 This account is exactly transcribed from the
custom-house books of that year, and many of these ships were from one hundred
to five hundred tons burden. The amount of the duties of goods exported and
imported from and to foreign parts com. ann. is about 10,000l. And as it is
computed that about 260,000 Winchester chaldrons of coals are carried
coastwise, whereon there is a duty of five shillings a chaldron on delivery,
amounting to 65,000l. the whole revenue arising to the crown from the imports,
exports, and produce of Sunderland, may be reckoned about 75,003l. per annum,
so that possibly, with respect to the duty arising from it, it may be the
sixth, or at least the seventh port in the kingdom.

In addition to the preceding account, it is to be observed, that the chief or
high street of Sunderland is nearly a mile in length, the houses well built
with brick; the low street which runs parallel thereto, and adjoins upon the
quay, is narrow and extremely populous: There are some new streets which run
from the upper side of the high street, containing several elegant buildings.
In regard to the population, in the year 1681, there were 83 burials in
Bishopweremouth, which being multiplied by 30, (the average number which has
been found on general calculations of d^^ths in this county) would make the
number of souls in Weremouth and Sunderland 2490. The number of burials in
Weremouth in the year 2781 was 153, and in Sunderland 382, which on the like
calculation, will give 16,050, to which if we add 4890 for Monkweremouth, the
whole number of souls will be 20,940. By the above account it appears the
increase in population in one century was not less than 18,450 souls. The pier
which was erected at the mouth of the river, in the coal owners case in 1766,
before referred to, on the 21st of December, 1765, had cost 50,000l. and would
then require 30,000l. more to perfect it. There are 350 vessels and upwards
belonging to this port; and from the 5th of July to the 10th of August, 1776,
inclusive, there were cleared at the custom-house 980 sail of ships
coal-loaden, and above 100 vessels with lime: 5700 vessels cleared here in one
year; and this navigation was performed by 1100 different vessels Mr Robert
Walker's minutes. -- Williamson comptroller's clerk and deputy cust.
. There is a sail-cloth manufactory carried on at Bishopweremouth, and in
Sunderland three great roperies, various anchor-smiths forges, and six building
yards, constantly employed. The foreign trade of this port is accurately set
out in the following tables The author was indebted to his much valued friend,
since deceased, George Thompson, esquire surveyor of the customs, for these tables.
:

EXPORTS, 1776.
(Sunderland) Coals Chaldrons. Copperas. Horses. Green Glass. Lady Day quarter
4990 813 -- 3 -- 13 7 260 -- 0 -- 0 Midsummer 10590 1093 -- 2 -- 4 9 4063 -- 0
-- 6 Michaelmas 14172 3331 -- 2 -- 21 0 170 -- 0 -- 0 Christmas 6156 1129 -- 3
-- 18 7 Totals 35912 tons 318 -- 14 -- 0 23 503 -- 0 -- 6

Grindstones 207 cha. -- Earthen ware 67 crates. -- Stockings 472 dozen.
IMPORTS, 1776.

R. flax 165 Tons. 14 1 3. -- Wainscot boards 6492. -- Bolts duck 80. -- Brandy
613 gallons. -- Geneva 99 gallons. -- Millstones 3. -- Pantiles 7500. -- Narrow
Holland linen 0 2 2 else. -- Old iron 12 (tons) 118 1 6. -- Hoops for coopers
2600. -- Deals 828 2 5. -- Ha. deals 26 2 9. -- Battons 330 1 10. -- Pailing
boards 155 0 17. -- M. balks 17 0 21. -- Small balks 17 0 2. -- Pipe staves 31
0 6. -- Handspikes 41 1 12. -- Capraven 1 1 16. -- Wainscot 0 0 24. -- Lath
wood 10 fathom. -- Clapboard 1 2 20. -- Oak plank 35 loads 19 feet. -- Wine 65
3 gallons. -- Small spars 38 0 16. -- Oak timber 6 loads 11 feet. -- Russia
duck 9 2 20 else. -- Russia linen 4 3 10. -- Hemp 4258 1 11. -- Smalts 5817 lb.
-- Spruce beer 17 bar. 10 gal. -- Ends of deals 5 0 0. -- Great masts 10. --
Carraway seed 21 0 20. -- Fire wood 17 fathoms. -- Oars 1 2 0. -- Oak knees 1 2
24. -- Single usser 0 3 6. -- Bound books 33 lb. -- German linens 20 else. --
Open tapes 45 dozen. -- Toys 1 chest. -- Fir timber 1609 load 33 feet.

EXPORTS, 1777. Coals to Holland, Germany, France, and Russia 36056 chaldrons.

Ditto in 1778, 29, 777 chaldrons.

EXPORTS, 1779. Coals to Holland, Germany, France, and Russia 27,438 chaldrons.
-- Copperas 376 (tons) 18 0 3. -- Stockings 177 dozen. -- Earthen ware 153
crates 10 casks. -- Green glass bottles 6584. -- Grindstones 225 chaldrons. --
Hops 12 pockets 13 bags. -- Fire stone 7 tons. -- Mats of tow 97 0 0. -- Dried
fish 1728 2 4. -- Organs 3 cases. -- Anchors 3 (qr.) 1 (ton) 17 0 0. -- Oakum 1
ton. -- Sailcloth 18 bolts 563 else. -- Lint 4 0 12. -- India goods condemned,
342 yards India silk, 6 yards printed callico. -- N. B. During the war the
trade was greatly diminished, but in peace 36,056, or 37,000 chaldrons of coals
was about the mean quantity exported to foreign parts.

IMPORTS, 1779. From Holland: Rough flax (656) 0 2 23. -- Wainscot boards No
4501 1614 inches. -- Geneva 14 tons 251 gal. -- Brandy 7 tons 229 gal. -- 2
marble gravestones, 46 feet superficial. -- 19 sails 865 else. -- 9 gal.
olives. -- Duck or Holland sailcloth 28 else.

From Norway: Deals under 20 feet 266 6 6. -- Half deals 43 3 27. -- Battens
256 3 12. -- Pailing boards 128 3 10. -- Small balks 18 0 6. -- Middle balk 28
3 5 -- Fir timber 1070 loads 41 feet. -- Small spars 25 3 2. -- Handspikes 29 0
9. -- Tar 18 last. -- Oak knees 3 0 0. -- Capravens 1 0 28. -- Fire wood 10
sathom. -- Oars 40 pair.

From Germany: Oak plank 24 loads 21 feet -- Oak timber 17 loads 11 feet. --
Oak knees for shipping 1 2 21. -- Ditto for wherries 1 1 10.

From Sweden: Deals above 20 feet 55 1 23. -- Battens 13 1 13. -- Iron 91
(tons) 14 0 18. -- Rough slax 117 3 18.

The church of Sunderland Sunderland rectory. -- 80l. by act of parliament. --
Dedicated to the Holy Trinity. -- Is not in charge. -- Real value 300l.

The churgh was consecrated the 5th of September, 1719, by John Robinson,
bishop of London, lord Crew then bishop of Durham, through his age and
infirmities not being able to attend that duty. -- Dr Thomas Mangey preached
the consecration sermon.

Rectors. Daniel Newcombe, born in the county of Durham, inducted 25th July,
1719. -- Rich. Swainston, A. M. 17^9 p. m. Newcombe -- George Bramwell, A. M.
1758, p. m. Swainston: He was chaplain to the Countess dowager of Darlington:
Resigned 1762, son Hurworth -- John Coxon, A. M. 1762, p. res Bramwe^

Randal's MSS. Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1760 to 1779 5945 2262
7009

Number of burials in the last year 328. -- Computed number of inhabitants 9840.


, as observed before, is an elegant new structure, built of brick, ornamented
with hewn-stone, has a tower with five musical bells: The sont is of beautiful
Italian marble. No burials are permitted within the church. Above the vestry is
a small parochial library. Besides this church an elegant chapel was erected by
subscription in the year 1769, dedicated to St John: The minister's stipend,
with the clerk's fee, and other inferior officers, are paid by the annual rents
of the pews, which are farmed out: It has a good organ. Much attention was paid
to this laudable institution by John Thornhill, esquire who has the right of
presentation for twenty-one years from the time of consecration. There are also
three dissenting meeting houses, and one mass-house in this place: An hospital
for decayed sailors, and the widows of such, supported by the contributions of
able sailors: Also a school for twenty-four blue coat boys, who are clothed,
and the master paid monthly by the communion money, and the contributions made
at the time of preaching two charity sermons in the year, the whole yearly
product being about sixty pounds.

From the populousness of the country and narrowness of the land here, the
average rent per acre is from three pounds ten shillings to four pounds. There
are few natural curiosities here; those which are usually shown to travelers
are the chalybeat spring on the moor, and the fossils of Boydon Hill.

Near the town are two handsome seat houses, one the seat of Mr Thornhill,
called Thornhill, the other Hynden Lodge, built by -- Maling, esquire

Authors have made various conjectures touching the derivation of the name of
Sunderland, some insisting it is the ancient Saxon Sonderland, signifying a
particular precinct, with privileges of its own; others, that the name is
expressive of a peninsula, severed and separated from the main land; and this
latter appears the most probable, for we see by the ancient records, that in
bishop Hatfield's time Hynden was a place held by Thomas Menvyll for the plying
of ships Vide exemplum An. 19 Ed. 3. 1346. Thomas Menvill occupavit quend'
locum ibidem vocat. Hindon pro aedificando naves, and solvit pro inde episc.
annual. redditum 2s. -- Vide Spearman's Inq.

It was the custom in those days to build their barks in creeks, etc.


: If the sea, in the beginning of the fourteenth century, formed a creek or bay
there, the land on which Sunderland now stands would at high water be almost
totally dissevered from the main; and the deep gulleys show a probability that
such was the case: The shore has greatly changed its figure in the course of
four hundred years, and perhaps some art was used to exclude the sea from that
course, when the haven of Sunderland grew into fame, and the coal trade began
upon Were.

This town has been honored by our kings in giving title of earl to several
noble families, viz. Emanuel lord Scroope of Bolton, who having been first made
president of the king's council in the north by king James I. the 6th of
February, 1618, was by his son Charles I. created earl of Sunderland, the 19th
of June, 1628: But dying without lawful issue, the same king created Henry lord
Spencer of Wormleighton (in respect to his approved loyalty and adherence to
him in the civil wars then on foot) earl of Sunderland, but he enjoyed his
honor a small time, being slain the same year at the battle of Newbury,
leaving a son Robert earl of Sunderland, who died in 1702, and was succeeded by
Charles earl of Sunderland.

Having treated of Sunderland, we must return to those members of the parish of
Weremouth which are still retained. Bainbrigg-holme lies a little to the south
of Weremouth town, but of it we find nothing memorable.

To the southward of Bainbrigg-holme lies Tunstall Inq. p. m. John Hadam. --
Wiseldike p. serve. red. unam rosam rubiam ad fest. nativ. Sc'i J. Bapt.
, under those lofty eminences and sea marks called Maidens Paps. All the lands
in the township of Tunstall are held by lease for lives under the lord bishop
of Durham Rot. B. Tho. Card. No 22 in dorso. Sep. 1528.

Mem'd. Yt the Tuesday next after the Morrow of Holy Rude Day, in the twenty
year of the reign of king Henry VIII. at Tunstall within the p'ishe of
Wermouth, it is agreid and accorded betwixt John lord Lomley of yt oone p'tie,
and Willyam Frankeleyn, clerk, chanceler of the bishopprick of Duresme, Willyam
Bulm knight, sheryff of the sayme, Tho Tempest, knight, steward of the
bishopprick, Willyam Strangway^. clerk, surveyor of the sayme, Rob. Bows,
esquyer, and John Bently, councellor to the most reverend father in Good Tho.
Cardinal, legate of England and bishop of Duresme, of and for the occupacion
of certain grounds within the town and feldes of Tunstall aforesaid, yt is to
say, yt the said lord Lomley shall have and occupy as since grounds as the
tenants of my lord legate grace of Tunstall aforesaid, shall affirm and apoynt
to be the verry p'pre grounds of the said id Lomley, and all other lands in
Tunstall aforesaid, to be occupied by my said ld legate grace tennants of
Tunstall aforesaid, as p'cell of the said ld legate grace lands in Tunstall,
unto since time that the said id Lomley can sufficiently prove by sufficient
evidences any part of the said lands in Tunstall to be and app'teyn to the said
id Lomley as his inheritance, or else that the title of the said ld Lomley by
commission or otherwise be lawfully tried and found for the said lord Lomley. --
Signed by the several partys.

Randal's MSS. Tunstall Division.
Shadforth, etc. cont. ep. Dun. 3 Jan. 1671. Lib. M. p. 70, Registers office.

The bill sets forth, that the complainant, Shadforth, by virtue of three
leases was seized of several farm-holds and lands, reputed to be a moiety of
the whole township, which (with the consent of the bishop) were divided about
eighty years ago; and that the other complainants, Smith, Air, and Dale, by
three other leases are seized of the other moiety of the lands within the said
township, which are undivided.

Anth. Smith, one message or seat house, 58 acres 2 roods and 7 perches, the
south-east part of the Millfield, 40 acres and 15 perches in the west part of
the Ox-pasture, 19 acres and 7 perches in the Lambs or Oxfield, 5 acres 1 rood
and 17 perches in the west part of a close called the Pokes, 5 acres and 15
perches in the south part of the Little Meadow close.

Tho. Air and Edw. Dale, one message or seat house, with the garths and two
cottages, 56 acres and 31 perches, being the north and west parts of the
Mill-field, 43 acres and 27 perches in the east part of the Oxpasture, and the
little close adjoining thereto, 5 acres and 15 perches, being the north east
part of the Little Meadow close, 5 acres 1 rood and 17 perches in the east part
of the Pokes, 17 acres and 17 perches in the west part of the east field.

Anthony Air, one message, two cottages, with several garths, a parcel of
ground called Place Ways, 4 acres and 3 roods, a parcel of ground called
Butfield, containing by estimation 99 acres, a parcel of ground called North
Corn-field, containing by estimation 30 acres: One acre allotted to the mill.


.

To the east of Tunstall, and close upon the coast, lies Ryhope, which was
restored to the Sea of Durham by Athelstan, as observed before. In bishop
Bury's time we find a family took the local name of Reshop Inq. p. m. Wm de
Westhall, died seized of a message and 30 acres of land in the vill of Ruffhop
held in cap. by the service of attending three courts, and 5 s. rent at the
exchequer. Ao 2 Bury, ap Durh. in plen. com. cor. vic. Dun.

Philip de Refhop died seized of a message, etc. ut sup. and also held in cap.
of Roger de Birden a message and 30 acres of land in Birden, by homage,
fealty, and 6d. rent. Inq. p. m. Ao 8, Bury cor. vic. in pleno com. Dun.

Inq. p. m. Philip de Revehop, same premises. Ao 13 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. J.
de Birland in pl. com. Dun.

John Freeman died seized of same premises at Ryhope. Inq. p. m. Ao 25
Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. W. de Menevylle vic. Dun. -- Afterward Agnes Freeman.


, and held considerable possessions here, which appear afterward to have
devolved on a family called Freeman. In Boldon Book it is stated, that in
Ryhope and Birden the bishop had twenty-seven villains, whose services were
similar to those of Boldon Reshop and Birden.

In Reshop and Birden sunt xxvij villani qui tenent operantur and reddunt sicut
illi de Boldon.

El^er de Birden tenet ij bovatas and reddit viij s. and vadit in legationibus
episcopi.

Anfridus ij bovatas quietus dum dominium ad sirmam tenuerit and cum dimiserit
reddit dim. marc. and ibit. in legationibus episcopi.

Tres cotmanni tenent and operantur and reddunt sicut illi de Boldon.

Punderus tenet and reddit sicut ille de Boldon.

Molendinum reddit unam marcam.

Duae villae reddunt xxxij s. de cornagio and ij vaceas de metrid.

Dominium est ad firmam cum instauramento iij carucar and iij harcarior. and
cum dim. carucata terrae sine inscauramento and cum ccc ovibus and reddit
xxviij celdr. de frumento and xxviij celdras de avena and xiiij de ordeo and vj
marcas pro ccc ovibus.

Parva Birdena.

Parva Birdena quam Joh. de Hoctona tenet reddit x s. and quadrigat vinum cum
quatuor bobus and vadit in magna caza cum ij leporarijs. -- Boldon Buke.

Reshop.

Liberi tenentes. Will's de Hoton tenet j mess. and xxxij acr. terrae quondam
Joh's Birden and antea Galsridi clerici per servic. forin. and redd. p' ann. ad
iiij terminos majores v s. -- Agnes Freeman tenet j mess. and xxxij acr. terrae
quond'm Will'i Wheschall pro serve. praed. redd. v s.

Terrae domin. Will's de Reshop tenet, etc. Johannes Uttyng, Will's de Hoton,
Will's de Shaldford, etc.

Terrae bond. Will's de Reshop tenet, etc. and ad fest. purif. B. Mariae vj bz
aven de seat. and pro operibus ad iiij term. xij s. and pro firma molend. cum
tolnet cervis ad eosd. term. xiij s. vij d. q'or plus in omnibus bond, q'ar. Et
pro scatpenys ad fest. purif. xix d. and solebat operari sicut illi de Boldon
in toto p' an. xxxj s. v d. ob.

Johannes Uttyng and xvj alii tenentes tenent singuli eadem and faciunt and
red. ut supra.

Et quilibet praedictor. bond. solv. ad fest. natal. d'ni ij gallin. and ad
fest. pasch. x ova xxxvj gall. and xxxx ova. redd. inter se per ann. ad fest.
Martini pro metrich vj s. -- tenent commun. furnum ibid. and red. per ann. ad
iiij term. iij s. iiij d. -- De xxviij s. viij d. de cornag. ad fest. S.
Cuthberti in Sept. and xxxvij s. vj d. pro wodlades ad fest. natal. S. Johannis
Baptistae onerantur supra infra firm. bond. -- Praedicti tenentes cariant d'no
per ann. dimid. tonell. vini, vel solvunt pro cariagio. -- Et quilibet solv. ad
fest. purif. B. Mariae vj bz aven. de scat. Johannes Diconson tenet xii acr.
terrae vocat Smythland, etc. Ranulphus Cuke, etc. Punderland iiij s. vj d.
xxiiij gallin. vjc ova.

Cotag. Johannes Pereson tenet j cotag. and xij acr. terrae and red. per ann.
vj s. and ad molend. iiij s. vj d. and ad fest. natal. d'ni j gallin and ad
fest. pasch. v ova and solet operari sicut illi de Boldon Galfridus Pashmore,
etc. -- Praedicti cotag. solvunt quolibet anno inter se pro operibus vocat
Horneyeld xij d.

Terrae scaccarij. Willielmus de Shaldeford, etc.

Terrae vast. Ter. vast numerus non excedit ternarium solid. valor.

Birden.

Liberi tenentes. Johannes Reyheved tenet, etc. per servic. sorin. and redd.
etc. -- Henricus Milner tenet, etc. per servic. j rosa. -- Capellanus cantaria
S. Mariae tenet j acr. etc.

Parva Birden.

D'n's de Neville and parcenarij sui tenent villam de Parva Birden et vadit in
magna chaza d'ni episcopi and quadrigat vin^^ cum ^ij bo^us and red. per ann. x
s.

Terrae bond. Thomas Johnson, etc. and pro operibus ad eosdem term. xij s. et
pro ^^^ma molend. cum ^ol^et cervi^ ad eosdem ^erm xii^ s. vij d. qua^ plas in
omnibus bond q'r. Et ad fest p^tis. B. Mariae pro scat^ enys xi^ d. and vj ^z
aven. ad idem festum and sol^bat operari sicut illi de Boldon. Will^s Gib^on
and viij.

Tenantes, etc. Et quilibet praedictor bondo^. solv. ad fest. purif. B. Mariae
vj^bz aven in toto^ ij gallin. and x ova -- ^^ter se pro va^^a de m^trich ad
se^^. S. Martini tantium vj s. ^enent com'unum furuum ibid. and redd. per ann.
i^ s. De xuja v^ij d. pro co^^. ad festum S. Cuthb. in Sept. xlij s. de
wodlades one^antur supra infra forin. bondorum. -- Et praedicti tenentes
carnabunt inter se dimid. tonell. vini per ann. cum prae^^^iti ^uerint

Terrae succarij. Thomas Johnson tenet, etc. cum multis aliis unde j acr. jacet
in campo de West Birden and (...) 10d. in campo de Est Birden, quae ve ^ere
per'escaet Will'i Milner nativi d'ni and red p' ann. etc.

Hatfield's Survey
. Elfer de Birden then held two oxgangs of land, paying eight shillings rent,
and serving on the bishop's embassies: Anfridus had the same service. The two
vills paid thirty-two shillings cornage, and provided two milch cows. The
lordship and demesne were then in farm, with a stock of three hundred sheep,
under the rent of twenty-eight celders or chaldrons of bread corn, the like
quantity of oats, and fourteen of barley, togegether with six marks in money,
for the increase of the flock. Little Birden was then held by John de Houghton,
under x s. rent, and the service of carrying the bishop's wine with four oxen,
and attending the forest chase with two greyhounds. By bishop Hatfield's Survey
we see that Will. de Hoton held lands at Ryhope by foreign service. The bond
tenants paid each six bushels of oats, called the scotoats, or allotted oats,
and in the lieu of work 12 s. and for mill farm and toll or mulcture 13s. 7d.
and for the aid or exchequer money, or as it is called scat-pennys 19d. also
two hens and ten eggs; they contributed to pay 6s. for a milch cow, 3 s. 4d. at
four terms for the common furnace, 28s. 8d. cornage, and 27s. 6d. for
woodloads: They carried yearly half a tun of wine, or paid for the carriage.
John Diconson held twelve acres of land called Smythsland, and Ra. Cuke the
Punderland, rendering besides 4s. 6d. rent, four score hens, and six hundred
eggs. The cottagers, besides other services, paid 12d. for work called hornyeld
The hornyeld was a payment made in forests, for horned cattle depasturing. But
the bishop having no forest there, we think the word is wrong transcribed, and
should be hinegeld, which was a mulct paid as a quatantia for transgressions;
and hinefare in the old books was a fine to the king, si quis occidit hominem
regis; a mulct not unnecessary on such stormy coasts.


.

Here one of the instances on record occurred of the bishop of Durham's
exercising his right to wreck of the sea 5 Oct. 12 Ja. 1614. By an inquisition
then taken before Sir Geo. Selby, knight, sheriff of Durham, virtute officii
sui, it is found that a ship or vessel called a hoy bound from Whitby to
Sunderland was by tempest over set, and that the master and one of the sailors
were drowned, and that two other of the seamen escaped to land in the boat, and
the vessel became derelict, and being so was cast upon Ryhope sands infra
libertatem re^alem ep' atus Dunelm. ut W^eccum. And that John Rand water
bailiff had seized the said vessel and materials to the use of the bishop
ratione praerogative suae; and that the owners had supplicated the bishop to
restore the same.

Lib. M in the Register's office, 551. Ryhope division confirmed the 28th of
June, 1680. The award bears date 22d of February, 1658. After stating the
several allotments, then is noted The farm or tenement of each owner, as known
and enjoyed at the confirmation of the division, 28 July, 1680. -- Among the
persons named we find two freeholders, Anthony Smith for his see simple, etc.
Ra. Goodchild, his see simple, etc. the lands specified.


. In Ryhope is the seat house of John Carr, esquire.

To the southward of Ryhope is Burdon. In bishop Bury's time the family of
Reshope held lands here Vide Ryhope.
, and afterward it gave name to the resident family, and continued their
possession for a considerable time Rog. de Birden held of the bishop in capite,
the manor of Birden, by homage, fealty, and 10 s. rent. -- Inq. p. m. Ao 12
Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. J. de Birland esc. Inq. p m. J. de Birden, Ao 18
Hatfield ap. Dun. cor. Tho. del Ryner esc. -- Inq. p. m. Eliz. fill. Rog. de
Birden, a third part of the manor of Birden, 25 Hatfield. cor. W. de Menevylle
vic. Dun. -- Inq. p. m. Emma wid. of Emice de Escoland, a moiety of the manor,
Ao 36 Hatfield cor. W. del Bows esc. -- Inq. p. m John de Burdon, sen. held by
courtesy of Eng. in right of Alice his wife, daughter of Roger de Birden, a
message and 100 acres in West Birden. -- Inq. p. m. Tho. de Claxton, a
message and 100 acres of land, formerly Rob. de Skelton's, Ao 14, Skirlaw, ap.
Dun. cor. R. Conyers esc.


. In the Survey we see the names of John Rugheved and Henry Milner free
tenants, and also the chaplain of the chantry of St Mary. West Birden, or as it
is called in the Survey, Little Birden, was the estate of the Nevilles with
other parceners, who held the vill by the service of attending the forest
chase, and carrying the bishop's wine with four oxen. It became the estate of
Ralph earl of Westmoreland, who aliened the same with other lands, and obtained
a pardon for so doing in 1430 Maddox Form. p. 3^1, W. Tunstall, W. Horn, and
all is nup' adquisivissent sibi and hered. suis de Rad'o nup' com. Westm'lande
d'no de Neville de Raby and de Middleham, etc.
. The bond tenants paid for work 12s. and for the mill and mulcture 13s. 7d.
for aid or scat-pennys 19 d. and six bushels of oats. Some of the bondsmen paid
only six bushels of oats in the whole, two hens and ten eggs, for a milch cow
6s. for the furnace 2s. 13 s. 8d. cornage, and 42 s. woodloads, and also
carried amongst them half a tun of wine when required. Under the title of
exchequer lands we see the escheated estate of Milner, a neof or native of the
lord.

To the north lies Silksworth, adjoining to which is Ferrington Hall. Robert,
the son of Richard of Ravenswick, granted to his nephew Galfrid, the son of
Galfrid, lands in Silksworth, in the instrument called Silkeswich, and
described to have been the property of Galfrid, the son of Richard, and father
of the then grantee See this record at length under Ravensworth.
. The Menevylles afterward had property here Agnes widow of John de Menevylle
held a message and a carucate of land for life in Silksworth, of the prior of
Durham, or the heirs of Richard de Emyldon: Who was lord of the manor not
known. Inq. p. m. Ao 16 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. W. de Claxton esc.

Peter de Selby who held of the lord bishop in capite, a message and 34 acres
of land in Sylkesworth, without license, aliened the same in see simple to John
de Bulkham, and he aliened to Henry Spencer and John Gawdes without license,
value 40 s. -- Inq. cap. Ao 8 Skirlaw, ap. Houghton cor. W. de Elmedon, esc.

There was an ancient chapel at Silksworth.


. And in bishop Dudley's time, and for several succeeding years, it was the
estate of the Middletons Inq. p. m. Tho. Midilton arm. man' de Silksworth,
Thomas his heir, Ao 4 Dudley.
.

Some confusion appears in the records between Grindon in this parish Grendonia.

Walterus de Roth tenet Grendonam quam episcopus emit and ei pro servitio suo
dedit, and reddit ij bizancias per annum, liberam and quietam ab omnibus aliis
servitiis. -- Boldon Buke.


, and a place of the like name in the southern part of the county; but as far
as we are able to distinguish the same, in the Boldon Book, it is stated, that
the bishop had purchased Grindon, and gave it to Walter de Roth for his
services, he rendering two hawks (duas bizancias) yearly. The family of Hiltons
afterward possessed it, and Alex. de Hilton died seized of the manors of
Forth, Grendon, and Cloncroft Inq. p. m. Ao 16 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. W. de
Claxton esc. Inq. p. m. W. Bows mil. 1 bishop Booth, de manerio de Clowcroft
ten. de Will'o barone de Hilton, etc.
, which he held by the service of one knight's see and suit at the county, in
the time of bishop Hatfield. We find Grindon still remaining in the family, in
bishop Neville's time, when Sir Robert Hilton died seized thereof Exempl. of an
inq. taken on the death of Sir Rob. Hilton, Forth manor, Grendon manor etc.
Rudd's MSS.
. It is now the possession of John Nesham, esquire. Clowcroft became the estate of
the Bowes's.

Nearer to Weremouth, on the turnpike road leading to Durham, lies Low Barnes,
formerly the seat of the Chapmans, now the property of Richard Pemberton, esquire
and a little to the northward is High Barnes, the seat of the Ettrickes In the
records of bishop Langley we find the Carlisles hold a manor called the manor
of Barnwell, with a mill and pool on the rivulet called called Ellyngburn. Inq.
p. m Rob. Carlisle, Ao 19 Langley.
. Near the banks of the river is Pallion, the seat of the family of Goodchilds.
This place in the old records is called Hameldon, or the manor of Pavillion;
was anciently the possession of the Dalden's Inq. p. m. Will. de Dalden, who
jointly with Elianor his wife, held the manor of Hameldon by the quarter part
of a knight's see, Ao 25 Hatfield ap. Dun. cor. Will. de Menevylle vic. Dun.

Inq. p. m. R Coniers mil. Ao 3 Skirlaw, ap. Dun. cor. L. de Lomley esc.


, and afterward of the Coniers's, Sir Robert Coniers having the same in right
of Alice his wife, the manor being granted by Thomas de Norton and another in
settlement, by virtue of which Alice died seized thereof about the second year
of bishop Langley, with limitations to the heirs of her body by the said
Robert; she left one daughter, their issue, who married Tho. Brownfleet Inq. p.
m. Alic^e ^x. Rob. Conyers chiv. manner de Homeldon all is dict. man. de
Pavillion, etc. Ao 2 Langley, ap Dun. cor. P. de Lyndeley esc. in co. Dun. Inq.
p m. Will. Hilton, 1 Booth, manner de Hilton, Usworth, North Bedyk, Bermeston,
Le Ford, Grendon, Clowcroft, et Newton.
. The manor was held of the bishop by military service and suit at the county
court. We find the family of Bows possessed of this manor in bishop Booth's
time; and by inquisitions taken in the first and seventeenth years of that
prelate, on the death of Sir William Bows, knight, and William Bows, esquire his
son, it appears they died seized of the same, thus described, the manor of
Hamyldon, with its appendages, consisting of a message with the appurtenances
called the Barnes, wherein is one hall, with two chambers, one kitchen, two
grainges, one dovecot, two hundred acres of arable land, one hundred acres of
pasture, and twenty acres of meadow; in another inquisition it is coupled with
maneria de Newton juxta Dun. Hamylden, Clowecroft, and Palyon ac piscar, in
aqua de Were voc. Bows water. The ancient records set forth, that the bishops
of Durham had a manor here, called the manor of Hameldon, and in bishop
Hatfield's Survey it is noted as follows: The free tenants are named, among
whom Ralph de Eure, knight, stands first; their services are set forth, and
that of being emissaries appears general. The tenants of the demesne lands are
next noted, and their services. The bond tenants were nine in number, each
holding a message and two oxgangs of land, of fifteen acres each oxgang, and
rendering 16s. for work, for aid or scat-pennys at the feast of the
Purification 19d. for aver-pennys or plow-money at the two feasts of St
Cuthbert and St Nicholas, and the feast of St John the Baptist 12d. for
woodlades at the feast of St John 8 d. for aid or scat-pennys at the feast of
St Martin 15d. at the feast of the Purification six bushels of oats, at the
Nativity two hens, and at Easter ten eggs; and they used to work as the bond
tenants of Boldon: In all 20s. Hameldon.

Liberi Tenentes. Radulphus de Eure miles tenet j mes. and xv acr. terrae
quond'm Will'i Lorimer, per cartam and servic. forin. and vadit in legation,
episcopi and redd. per ann. ad iiij term iiij s. iijd. -- Et j mes. and xxiiij
acr. terrae quond'm Johannis Fabr. per cart. and servic. forin. redd. iiij s.

Robertus Jurdanson j mes. and ij bovat contin xxx acr. and facit iiij
porcation. in autumno and arat and herciat and vadit in legation, episcopi and
redd. per ann. v s.

Thomas de Hexham capellanus j mes. and xij acr. terrae, etc. and vadit in
legationibus d'ni episcopi and redd. per ann. ijs.

Robertus Burg, etc. Tho. Goseson, etc. and vadit in legation, ut supra, etc.

Terrae Dominicae. Johannes Swalwels tenet ibid. xvj acr. de terris dominicis
and redd. per ann. xiij s. iiij d. Robertus Swalwell and xvj alij tenentes
tenent singuli xvj acr. etc.

Cotag. Hugo de Shaldeford, etc. Johannes Swalwels, etc. Will's Sawer and v
alij tenent etc. Et omnes praedicti tenentes cotag. solebant reddere inter se
pro operibus ad festum S. Martini cum cotag. vast. ut inserius xj s. iiij d.
etc.

Terrae bond. Johannes Swalwell tenet j mes. and ij bovat. terrae bovata
contin. xv acr. terrae and redd. per ann. ad iiij term. usual xvj s. pro
operibus, and pro scatpenys ad fest. purif. xjx d. Et pro averpenys ad duo
festa S. Cuth. and natalis S. Johannis Baptistae xij d. Et pro wodlades ad idem
fest. S. Johannis viij d. and pro scatpenys ad fest. S. Martini xv d. Et ad
fest. puris. B. Mariae vj bz aven. de scat. and ad fest. natal. d'ni ij gallin.
and ad fest. Paschae x ova and sol^b. operari sicut illi de Boldon in toto xx s.

Idem Johannes and Rob. Swalwells and sex alij xj mes. and xxij bovat. terrae
and faciunt and reddunt ut supra.

Et sunt ibid. v. terr. bond dimis. ad penyferme quarum quaelibet redd. p' ann.
xiij s. iiij d. in toto lxvjs. viijd.

Iidem tenentes tenent inter se quand'm pastur. vocat. Dovesyd iiij s. --
Shottonesden liijs. iiij d. -- Estmore vijs. -- Morelawe xj s and xxxiiij acr.
and dim. super Grenlawe xxviij s. jx d. quodd'm molend. ventrit cum portion.
terr. vast. and soleb. reddere per ann. vjli. xiij s. iiij d. modo cxiij s.
iiij d. -- reddunt inter se pro j vacca de metrich. ad fest S. Martini vj s. --
Pro cornag. ad fest. S. Cuth. in Sep. cum portion, terr. vast. xx s. -- Pro
communi furno ibid. ij s.

Robertus Burgeys tenet j mes. and vj acr. terrae and dim. acr. prati pro
offic. punder. ibid. and redd. per ann. iijs. and ad fest. natalis d'ni xl
gallin. and ad fest paschae xviij xx ova.

Robertus Brom tenet j firg. ibid. xij d.

Terrae scaccarij. Praedicti tenentes tenent inter se xviij diverse tenur. plac.
toft. and acr. terrae red. cert. red. Tho. Robinson and duo alij tenentes j
toft. cum gardin and ij dimid. acr. terrae.

Terras vast. enumerare non vocat. -- Hatfield's Survey.


Five bond tenements were then let at penny farm, or rack rent. The tenants
held jointly a pasture called Doveside, Shotton's deen, Eastmore, Morelawe, and
lands on Greenlawe. A wind corn mill formerly 6l. 13s. 4d. yearly rent, then
5l. 13s. 4d. They paid amongst them for one milch cow at Martinmas 6 s. for
cornage at the feast of St Cuthbert in September 20s. for the common furnace
2s. The punder held six acres of land, rendering 3 s. rent, forty hens, and
eight score eggs. The common forge paid 12d. rent.

The Parish of SEAHAM.
The next adjoining parish toward the south is SEAHAM, situated upon the sea
shore. The village is small, having one chief mansion, the summer seat of the
family of Milbanke of Halnaby. This is one of the places said to be restored to
the church of St Cuthbert by Athelstan, but by what means afterward aliened,
is not known, as it is a freehold manor. The first family we find settled at
Seaham was that of Hadham, Sir Nich. de Hadham, knight, being possessed of this
manor in 1260 Rot. Bury, sch. xx. Rot. cancellar. de lib'tate epat. Dun de
te'p'e vacac'ois.

Et comp. est, etc. q'd p'd'cus Joh. de Hadham fuit s. in d'nico suo ut de
feodo, die quo obiit de man'io de Scham cum p'tin ad q'd man'ium p'tinet unum
molendinum ventriticum, etc. et ea tenuit de lib'tate ep'atus p'd'ci vac and in
manu regis existen, etc. p' hom. and fid. and co'em sect. ad com. Dun. and
valent p' ann. in o'b's exit vijli. viijd. in quib's comp'henduntur xlij s.
annui reditus de ten'tib's ad voluntat. etc. Tho. f. p'd^i Joh'is est, etc.
her. ejus, etc.

Liberac'o. Rex, etc dil'co sibi W. etc. esc. etc. Sciatis q'd cepimus fid.
Tho. f. and h. Joh. de Hadham defuncti de o'ib's ter. and ten. etc. and ei ter.
and ten. illa reddidimus. Et ideo vob. mandamus quod, etc. eid. T. de o'ib's
ter. and ten. etc. plenam s. h'ere sac. salva, etc. and salva Elizabeth que
fuit uxor p'sati Joh. r'onabili dote sua de ter. and ten. p'dcis s'ed'm legem,
etc. 30 March, 1345. -- Randal's MSS.

Rot. B. Hatfield, Sch. 5, No 7, Dat. 28 May, 1378. Carta Job's de Popham de
custodia h'edis Thome de Hadham. -- Tho. dei gra etc. Sciatis, etc. co'cessimus
and co'misimus dil'co consanguineo n'ro Joh'i de Popham custodiam o'ium terrar.
and ten. cum p'tin. suis que suerunt Thome de Hadham defuncti que de nob.
tenentur in capite, una cum advocac'oe eccl'ie de Seham and reversionib's
quib'scunque cum accederint, quae r'oe minoris etatis Joh'is fill. and he'dis
p'dci Thome ad manus nostras devenerunt. sis'it cum maritagio ejusd. Joh'is
fill. Thome absque disp'agac'one, etc. -- Ibid.

Rot. E. Langley, in dorso No 5, dat. 26 Jan. 1420. Thomas, etc. Quia
accepimus, etc. p' inquisico'em, etc. q'd Thomas Hadham suit s'eitus in d'nico
suo, etc. de medietatibus man'or de Seham and Seton cum Slinglawe and
advocac'oe eccl'ie de Seham cum p'tin, etc. ac uno tosto in ballio boriali Dun.
q'd de nobis tenetur p' s'vicium vocat. Casterwarde te'pe guerre; and de una
clausura in le Croke juxta Brauncepath, etc. Tibi p'cipimus, etc. plenam
seisinam h'ere fac. etc. -- Ibid.


. His posterity continued there for several generations. It appears that
Seaton, situated to the westward, and Slinglaw, were jointly possessed with
Seaham. The Hadhams had aliened a moiety of these manors in the time of bishop
Hatfield, in whose thirty-third year we find by an inquisition taken on the
death of Thomas de Hadham, that he died seized only of a moiety Inq. p. m. Tho.
de Hadham, Ao 33 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. J. de Hyndeley, esc.
: And the alienation was made to the family of Conyers. By an inquisition taken
on the death of Margaret the wife of Sir Thomas Boynton, knight, it is set
forth, that she died seized of a moiety of the manor of Seaham, a fourth part
of the manor of Plawsworth, and thirty-four acres in Whitworth, held by virtue
of the feoffment of John Conyers, brother of Robert Conyers of Ormsby, knight,
to the said Margaret and Robert Conyers, and Alice his wife, and the longest
liver of them; with remainder after their deaths to William son of Jordan de
Dalden, esquire and the heirs male of his body; remainder to Robert Conyers and
Alice, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to John son of Edmund de
Kinllingwyck, and his heirs male; remainder to Robert son of the said Robert
Conyers, and his heirs male; remainder to John his brother, and his heirs male;
remainder to Joan wife of T. de Brounefield, the right heir of Robert Conyers
and Alice Inq. p. m. Marg. etc. Ao 3 Langley, ap. Dun. c. P. de Lyndeley esc.
. In the first year of bishop Neville an inquisition was taken on the death of
Joan, there called Brounestete, in which the moiety of Seaham is described;
whereby it is stated, that William Bows, esquire was her son and heir Inq. p. m.
Johan, etc. ob. sei in d'nico suo ut de feod. d. q. ob. de me'te man'ij de
Seham cum m'ete advocac'ois eccl'ie de Seham cum p't que quid. m'etas te de
d'co d'no ep. p' s. mil. and val. p' an. ult'a repr. c s. and sunt in d'ca
me'te man'ij quid. situs man'ij qui nich. val. p'an. ult'a repr. quinq. mess.
quatuor cot. cum p't que val. x s. p' an. etc. ducent. acr. terrae arab. que
val. lx s. per an. etc. quinq. acr. prati que val. x s. p' an. etc acr. past.
q. val. xx s. p' an. etc. and sic dicta m'etas man'ij de Seham extendit ad
dict. c s. p' an. etc.

About the 12th of king James I. the bishop claiming the goods of felons and
felon de se in the manor of Seton, then belonging to Sir Jerome Bows, a quo
warranto was brought against the bishop to show why he claimed to have bona and
catalla felonum, and of such as stand mute within his said manor: To which the
bishop pleaded, that Durham was a county palatine, and that he claimed the same
and jura regalia therein by prescription, and that the same extended inter Tyne
and Tease, and that the said manor is within the said county: To which plea
there was a demurrer; and after several arguments it was resolved, 1st, That
though a private person cannot claim felons' goods by prescription, yet the
bishop may as parcel of his county palatine: 2d, That though this manor came to
the crown by attainder, yet the bishop did not thereby lose his right. -- 2
Bull. 226. 3 Bull. 156, 335. 3 Bull. refers to some old records in the exchequer,
as to the bishop's claims. -- Gyll's MSS.


. And the family of Bows held the possession for many years Inq. p. m. Will.
Bows, knt Ao 1 Booth, cor. G. Midilton, esc. lands in Seton, and moiety of
Seham, etc.

Inq. p. m. Will. Bows, knt Ao 9 Booth, cor. Joh. Athirton, esc. a moiety of
the manor of Seham, and the advowson.

Inq. p. m. Will. Bows, knt Ao 17 Booth, lands in Seton, and a moiety of
Seham, etc.


. The family of Hadhams continued in possession of the other moiety Inq. p. m.
Joh Hadham, Ao 1 Booth, cor. G. Midilton, esc. a moiety of the manors of Seham
and Seton, with Slinglaw.

Inq. p. m. Will. Hadham, p. quandam cartam suam 1st May, 1452, dedit and
concessit Will'o Lambert mag'ro collegij de Stayndrop, ac vicario de Gainford,
Rollando Hadham presbitero fr'i suo et Peronille ux'^ sue o'ia t'ras and ten.
etc. and dic. q'd Rog'us Conyers Chr. and Johan ux. que suit ux. Joh'is Hadham
defunct. exit. and p'sicua d'cor ter. and ten. etc. a temp'e m'tis p'dei Will'i
p'ceperunt, etc. The Sea vac. 1463.


. Sundry other families possessed parcels of land there. John de Langton held a
message and a carucate of land in Seaton, and two oxgangs of land in Seaham,
by the sixteenth part of a knight's fee, formerly the possession of William
Birrays Inq. p. m. Joh. de Langton, Ao 6 Hatfield, cor. vic. ap. Dun.
. Simon de Esh held thirty-nine acres of land, and ten acres of meadow in
Seaton, and two oxgangs of land in Seaham Inq. p. m. Sim. de Esh, Ao 15
Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. W. de Claxton, esc. in co. Dun.
. And Sir Ralph Eure, knight, held three cottages and four score and fifteen
acres of land in Seaton and Slinglaw, of John de Hadham Inq. p. m. Ra. Eure,
mil, Ao 17 Langley, cor. Rob. Eure, esc.
. To trace the progress of these small parcels would be both laborious and
fruitless.

The present church of Seaham Seaham: Dedicated to St Mary. -- Abb. of Coverham
olim propr. -- The heirs of Mr Robinson.

This vicarage is in the deanery of Easington, and was appropriated to Coverham
abbey in bishop Sherwood's pontificate; but by whom not shown.

King's b. 5 0 5 Proc. arch 0 3 8 Yearly tenths 0 10 0 Real value 300 0 0 Proc.
ep. 0 3 4

RECTORS.
Rich. de Overton, 1293 Hugh de Karliolo, oc. 7 Ap. 1334 Thomas de Hadham
Thomas de Hadham, 1364, p. m. Hadham John de Hadham, 1381, p. m. Hadham Thomas
Stones, 1415. John Whitham, 1436, p. m. Stones Richard Ledyerde, oc. 3 Jan.
1451 Thomas Langton was the last rector
VICARS.
Rob. Chaumer, first vic. 1490 John Sedel, 1501 Thomas Wright, 1545 Thomas
Esterbie, cl. 22 Dec. 1575, Eliz. regina. John Esterbie, 1622 Henry Dobbins, A.
M. 15 Oct. 1661, pr. honoratissima Juliana vicecomitissa dotissa de Campden
Arthur Noel, A. B. 17 March, 1668, p. m. Dobbins Alex. Clarke, 1692, p. m.
Noel, pr. Id Gainsborough Henry Ireland, A. M. 1697, p. m. Clarke John
Robinson, A. M. 14 Sep. 1741, p. m. Ireland, pr. Mrs Robinson John Rotheram, A.
M. p. m. Robinson Richard Wallis, resig. Rotheram
Randal's MSS. There was a chantry in this church dedicated to the Blessed
Virgin Mary. -- Richard Atkinson cantarista, 1501. -- Ibid.

Seaham parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L.6 3 4 L.853 0 0

Grey's MSS. Land tax at 4s. County rates 6s. 8d. Seaton and Slingley 19 11 0 1
0 0 Seaham 26 19 0 1 5 0

Mann's MSS. Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 1^4 64 104
from 1760 to 1779 80 22 84 Decrease 44 42 20

Burials in the last year 6. -- Computed number of inhabitants 180.


, an humble edifice, does not appear from the broken arch which divides the
nave from the chancel to bear any similitude to the original building, that
arch having been very lofty. We were told that in repairing the chancel, a fire
grate and tongs of iron were discovered below the foundations; and that the
walls are constructed of stone and mud, without lime. The nave and chancel are
of an equal width, there being no ailes; the chancel is nine paces in length,
and the nave sixteen, and five paces in width. There are three windows to the
south and two to the north in the nave, and the like number north and south in
the choir, with two small windows to the east. The tower is narrow. In the
church yard is a stone coffin, with a cover, lately dug up; the cover ridged on
the top, as if designed to shut off any water that might come to it; on one
side of the cover is an inscription with some Saxon characters, "Hic jacet
Richardus vic. de Sehaiam." In the list of incumbents we find two Richards in
antiquity, Richard de Overton in 1293, and Richard de Ledyerde in 1451. The
probability that this coffin contained the remains of Overton, rests on the
circumstances of the Saxon character and stone coffins being disused in so late
an era as the fifteenth century; it was a degree of elegance used in ancient
interments to have such coffins. The body was then wound in fine linens.
attired in the most honorable vestments, and laid in spices; things not suited
to mean personages. Richard de Overton was of such consequence, that in the
twenty-second of Edward I. he had the king's letters of protection Vide Prynn,
p. 596.
.

HOUGHTON-LE-SPRING
view of Houghton-le-Spring The Parish of HOUGHTON-LE-SPRING.
To the south-west of the parishes of Seaham and Weremouth lies HOUGHTON. The
village is happily seated at the head of a fine vale, opening toward the west,
and sheltered from the north and east by a chain of hills. The rectorial house
is venerable and extensive; besides which the town contains many large and
handsome modern buildings, inhabited by persons of considerable fortune.

This being one of the great manors of the bishop of Durham, its peculiar
customs are set forth both in Boldon Book and Hatfield's Survey Hoctona.

In Hoctona sunt xiij cotemanni, qui tenent, operantur, and reddunt sicut illi
de Newbotill, and tres alij dimidij cotemanni qui operantur sicut iij
praenominatj de Newbotill.

Henricus praepositus tenet ij bovatas de xxiiij acris pro servitio suo.

Faber xij acr. pro suo servitio.

Carpentar unum tostum and iiij acr. pro suo servitio

Punderus xx acr. and habet travas carucarum de cadem and de Wardon and de
Morton et red'it lx gallinas and ecc ova.

Molendina de Newbotill and de Bedic cum medietate molendini de Raynton xv
marcas.

Dominium iiij carucarum and oves cum pastura sunt in manu episcopi. -- Boldon
Buke.

Houghton.

Liberi tenentes. Isabella qui fuit uxor Roberti de Wessyngton tenet. etc.
quond'm Johannis de Cornhall and ^^dd. per ann. pro servic. forin. xiij s. iiij
d.

Robertus Coigniers miles, and Ricardus de Burnynghill tenent villam de South
Bedyk in qua fuere villani per librum de Boldon and soleb't invenire xxviij
homines ad metend. in autumno and xxxvj quadrig. ad quadrigand. Blada d'ni apud
Houghton modo redd. nihil ideo inquir. red. c s.

Robertus de Carlell tenet moram de Penichore per cartam and servic. forin. and
redd. p' ann. liij s. iiij d. tenet. molend. ibid. p. cartam et servic. forin.
et redd. per ann. xxvj s. viij d. -- tenet certas ter. apud Bernewell ^^ redd.
per ann. ij s. vj d.

Vide inq. p. m. vet. No 835.

Terrae domin. Matildis Galuey and alii, etc.

Terrae bond. Johannes Ferrour tenent j cotag. and j bovat terrae contin. xij
acr. and solebat operari sicut illi ^c Newbotill and redd. per annum, etc. vj s.

Thomas Fery and xxiij alii tenentes, etc. omnes isti bondag. solv. inter se ad
supplend. x marc. de antiqu. red. little xvj d. -- solv. inter se ad. fest.
natalis d'ni xl gallin. and ad fest. paschae lxx ova.

Molend. Tenentes villae tenent inter se medietatem molendini aquatici and alia
medietas pertinet priori Dunelm. redd. cxiij s. iiij d.

Will. Milby tenet bracinag. villae ibid. and redd. per annum x s.

Johannes Ethewyk tenet com'un furnum ibid. and redd. per annum ij s.

Tenentes de Boldon, Whitburn, and Clevedon redd. ibid. per ann. ut quieti sint
de salcat. prati de Houghton xij s. iij d.

Tenentes tenent xiiij acr. and j rod. prati dominical. and redd. per annum xl
s.

Punder ibid. red. pro officio suo ad fest. natal. d'ni xl gallinas and ad
fest. Paschae ijc ova.

Terrae scaccurij. Robertus Portar, etc. -- Magister hospitalis de Kypier tenet
j plac. pro j grang. ibid. and redd. per annum vj d. -- Predicti tenentes
villae tenent inter se quandam pastur. vocat Bradmore and redd. vj s. ^^ d. --
Iidem tenent inter se xiij acr. terrae quondam in tenura bondor. de parva
Birden red v s. vj d.

Hatfield's Survey. Within this manor are Burdon, Tunstall, Richope,
Herringtons East and West, Bishop Wearmouth, Newbottle, Wardenlaw, and
Houghton, all which places attended the bishop's court there. Et rector de
Houghton gandet claus. vocat Courtelose ann. valoris 7l. p' quo debet solvere
expensas prandij p's^n'lo el'co and attendentib's suis bis in anno. --
Mickleton's MSS.


. It comprehends many townships, which perform suit at the bishop's court
there. In the ancient records the services of each district are distinctly
specified. According to the PARSONAGE-HOUSE at HOUGHTON-LE-SPRING
view of Parsonage House Boldon Book there were thirteen cottagers in Houghton,
each of whom held twelve acres of land, and wrought for the lord two days in
each week throughout the year, and four days at harvest with all their family,
except the housewife, and paid one hen and five eggs: There were also three
half-cottagers, who held six acres each, and wrought two days in each week from
Pentecost to Martinmas. Henry praepositus, the reeve or headborough, held two
oxgangs of land, consisting of twenty-four acres each, for his service. The
smith had twelve acres, the carpenter a toft and four acres, the pinder had
twenty acres and a thrave of corn from each carucate of land in Houghton,
Wardon, and Morton, and rendered sixty hens and three hundred eggs. Newbottle
and Biddick mills, with a moiety of Rainton mill, produced fifteen marcs. The
demesne with the stock of sheep and pasture, were in the lord's hands. By
Hatfield's Survey it appears that Will. Milby held the malting or brewery of
Houghton, under the yearly rent of 10s. and that one Elwick had the common
bakehouse at 2s. rent; that there was only one free tenant in Houghton, Isabell
the wife of Rob. de Wessynton, who held lands of 13s. 4d. fee-farm, theretofore
the estate of John de Cornhill; but we are not able to trace down the
possession by the inquisitions post mortem, under the succeeding prelates
Indictm. -- W. C. de, etc. and 18 alii laici ho'ies non h'entes, nec aliquis
eor li'ens terras sen tent'a ad valorem 40s. p' ann. contra formam statuti inde
editi tenent leporarios and quilibet cor. tenet leporarios and leciscas and in
nire lepores investigaverunt and 12 die Januarij, Ao etc. 16, in campo de
Hoghton 6 lepores interseccrunt, etc. Temp. ep. Neville. -- Rudd's MSS.


.

The rectorial house, a handsome stone edifice, stands within a court, having a
porter's lodge at the entrance. The house, which fronts to the south, has by
the present rector, been laid open to a fine view of the country by pulling
down two walls with which it was surrounded. It is flanked on one side by a
chapel, and on the other by an ancient tower. The chapel was built by Mr
Davenport, and stalled and wainscotted with Irish oak at the same time that he
erected the present mansion house. The tower was erected by John Kelyng, clerk,
about the year 1483. He being rector, began to enclose, fortify, and embattle a
house above the lower porch within his rectory, with a wall of lime and stone,
and to make a fortress of it without license: Bishop Dudley pardoned the
offense, and in consideration of a fine paid, granted him license to embattle
the house, and make it a fortress for himself and successors for ever Rot. A.
Dudley, No 87. -- Will's d. g. etc. Sciatis, etc. Joh'es Kelyng, cl. r'r
eccl'ie p'oial de Houghton quad. dom. sup'a p'tam suam inferiore inf'a
rectoriam suam apud Houghton cum muro, etc. includere erigere fundare ac domum
illam batellare, etc. fine, etc. Nos de gra. n'ra, etc. and p' quod. fine, etc.
pardonavimus, etc. Et ult'ius concessimus and lic. dedimus p' nob. and succ.
n'ris etc. p'fat. Joh'i q'd ip'e donum suam p'dcam batellare kirnellare
macheculare and turillare, ac fortallicium inde facere, etc. In cujus, etc.
Dat. etc. 6 die Oct. Ao pont. n'ri 8o A. D. 1483. -- Randal's MSS.

Rectory of Houghton.

This church is in the deanery of Easington, is dedicated to St Michael, and the
bishop of Durham is patron. It is rated in the king's books the highest of any
in England.

K. books 124l. -- Yearly tenths 12l. 8s. -- Proc. ep. 2l. 6s. 8d. -- Proc.
archd. 4s. -- Real value 800l.

RECTORS.
Renaldus, 1131 Rogerus Presbyter, 1147 John Mansell, 1260, pr. by k. Hen. 3,
Ao reg. 45 Rob. de Bekenham, 1294 Manserus Marmeyon, 1330, pr. k. Edw. Sede
vac. Will. de Dalton, 1347, p. m. Marmeyon Will. de Burstall, 1265, p. m.
Dalton John Henlee, d'nus, 1377, p. res. Burstall Tho. Walkington, LL. D. 1390
John de Neuton, p. m. Walkington Hen. Oculshagh, 1427, p. m. Neuton Tho.
Astlegh, 1434, p. m. Oculshagh Henry Gillowe, cl. 30 July, 1470 Prebendary of
Fridaythorpe in York chapter 1479. Ob. 16 Feb. 1482; appointed by his will to be
buried in Houghton churchyard.
Henry Keling, cl. 1412, p. m. Gillowe Alex. Lygh, cl. 1490 Rob. Kent, S. T. P.
4 Dec. 1500, p. res. Lygh Will. Frankeleyn, S. T. B. oc. 14 May, 1528 Bernard
Gilpin, S. T. B. circ 29 Oct. 1558 E. registro Barnes, p. 2. Geo. Swalwell
ordained deacon by bishop Barnes 6 Oct. 1577, was reader of Houghton-le-Spring.
Afterward being reconciled to the Roman Catholic church, he was apprehended
and kept above a year prisoner in Durham goal; at last being brought to his
trial, he was arraigned with two missionary priests, John Boast and John
Ingram. The jury brought him in guilty of death, for being proselyted to the
church of Rome. Ingram suffered at Newcastle, Boast at Durham, and Swalwell at
Darlington, 26 July, 1594, and his body thrown into a hole near the gallows. --
Chapter Hist. vol. ii. p. 175.


Emanuel Barnes, S. T. P. 5 Mar. 1583, p. m. Gilpin R. Bellamye, in Med. D. A.
M. 25 Jan. 1584, p. res. Barnes Rob. Hutton, S. T. B. 1589, p. res. Bellamye
Aug. Lyndsell, S. T. P. 7 Ju. 1623, p. m. Hutton Peter Heylin, S. T. B. 1632,
nom. by k. Cha. I. Hamlet Marshall, S. T. P. 29 Aug. 1633 John Barwick, S. T.
B. 1645, p. m. Marshall Will. Sandcroft, S. T. B. 7 Dec. 1661, p. res. Barwick
Geo. Davenport, A. M. 23 Dec. 1664, p. res. Sandcroft Robert Clarke, A. M.
1677, p. m. Davenport Henry Bagshaw, S. T. P. 13 Dec. 1677, p. res. Clarke
George Wheler, knt, S. T. P. 15 Jan. 1709, p. m. Bagshaw Thomas Secker, A. M.
col. 12 Feb. 1723, p. m. Wheler Rich. Stonhewer, A. M. col. 4 Jun. 1727, p. r.
Secker John Rotheram, A. M. col. 30 Oct. 1769, p. m. Stonhewer Elected proctor
with R. Fawcett, D. D. rector of Gateshead for the clergy of the archd. of
Du^h. 1774. He published "The force of the Argument for the Truth of
Christianity, drawn from a collective View of Prophesy," 1752. -- This was in
answer to Dr Conyers Middleton's Examination of the bishop of London's
Discourses on Prophesy. An excellent performance. -- " A Sketch of the one
great Argument, formed from the general concurring Evidences for the "Truth of
Christianity, 1754." In this ingenious tract he shows that a general harmony
runs through the whole system of revelation. -- "An Essay on Faith, and its
Connection with good Works," 1766. -- "An Apology for the Athanasian "Creed."
etc.



Randal's MSS. 1343, 17 Edw. 3. Bulla sup' redd. eccl. de Houghton infra
Dunolm. diocesin disponendis.

Rymer, tom. v. p. 391. 1375, 49 Edw. 3. Bulla de composico'e int' reg. and
papa, etc. -- Ibid. tom. vij. p. 834.

1330, 4 Edw. 3. Contra Ambaldum card. ad conscientiam papae serenandam. --
Ibid. tom. iv. p. 455.

E. coph. book, E. p. 290, Halm. ap. Houghton, 17 Maij, Ao p. Laur. 8o 1463.

Tho. Asteley, cl. r'r eccl'ie p'oial de Houghton repit. de d'no 1 claus. juxta
rec'oria ib. sicut modo in tres p'tes dividitur, etc. H'end, etc. p' termino
vite ejusd. Tho. redd'o inde p' an. d'no epo 33s. 4d. and p'posito de Houghton
p'tep'e existen. 3s. 4d. tam p' gramine quam p'faeno p' expens. equor. sen'li
temp'e cur. emend, etc. -- Randal's MSS.

Halm. ap. Houghton, Ao p. Laur. 13o Lib. ibid. 1470.

Hen. Gillowe, cl. and r'r de H. etc. cepit de d'no quodd. vast. in co'i via
sup' austral' fossam int. dom. d'ni Rob. Benet exp'te orientali and le Clayhole
juxta metas exp'te occidentali continen. in longitudine lx virgat, and in
latitudine viij virgat, etc. -- Ibid.

Shirburn dimisio, 1470.

De Hen. Gillowe, cl. p' p'cell terr. voc. Brentopetmore inclus, infra capu.
vet'is Dun. etc.

Lib. K. p. 32. Halm. ten. ap. H. 10 Apr. Ao Cristofori primo, 1508.

Ad hanc curam venit Rob'tus Kent, cl. r'r, etc. and cepit de d'no iij clausur.
quar. prima voc. Shepeclose, sc'da Rucheclosse and t'ia le Bradclosse, etc.
necnon aliam p'cel. terr. inclusa in le Bradclosse voc. le Greve acre p'tin.
officio p'positi dict. ville. H'end, etc. p'trib's supra dict. clausur. xl s.
etc. and p' p'dict. p'cell terr. voc. Grevys acre vj s. viij d. Proviso semp'
q'd p'dcus. R. r'cor d'ce eccl. and o'es succ. sui rectores d'ce eccl. deinceps
supp'tobit o'ia on'a capital. sen'li ac cli'ci sen'li and eor. servient. in
o'ib's viz. in cibis potu lect. necnon stabilum p' equis cum feno pane equino
avena and stramine temp'e halmot. sub paena, etc. -- Ibid.

Ibid. lib. p. 264, Ao 1512.

Jurat. presentant q'd doctor Kent, r'cor eccl. de H. incrocliavit de ter. d'ni
ad borial. p'tem ville ibid. and jac. ad terram suam xij d.

Rot. A. Tho. Card. No 96. Ind. facta Will'o Frankeleyn, cl. de tribus
clausuris (Sheipclose, Rusheclose, and Braideclose) p' term. 99 ann. -- Ibid.

E. Bibliotheca Harleiana, No 1499, 23.

The arms of master Frankeleyng, archdeacon of Durham, gevyn to him for
recoveryng ye castle of Norham of the Scotts hands by his prowess and
policy. See Frankeleyn's letter to card. Wolsey, in Fiddes's Life, p 457, and
in the Collections, p. 165.

Reg. Fox, p. 34. Instrumentum resignac'ois mag'ri Alex'i Lygh r'coris eccl.
p'roch. de Houghton. Ibid. p. 35. Decretum an. pension. assign. resignanti. --
Ibid.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 1429 238 1161 1760 to
1779 1804 572 1518 Increase 375 234 357

Number of burials in the last year 70. -- Computed number of inhabitants 2100.

By an accurate survey of the whole parish, taken by order of the present
rector in the year 1783, it appeared there were within the parish

Males. Females. Total. 2392 2347 4739 By a like survey in the year 1786 2430
2467 4897 Increase 38 120 158


. About eighty years after Kelyng's time, Bernard Gilpin expended upon the
rectory and out-buildings near three hundred pounds, as he informs us in his
will; but the greatest improvements were made by Mr George Davenport, who
continued rector from 1664 to 1677; he rebuilt the mansion house and chapel at
his own expense, as well as the garden walls, and repaired the offices.

The church stands on a rising ground, in the center of a square area, formed
by the buildings of the lower part of the town: It is in the form of a cross,
with the tower in the center. The chancel is in length fourteen paces to the
steps which ascend to the communion table, and within the rail four paces; the
width six paces. It was some years ago wainscotted, and stalled on each side,
probably by Mr Davenport; for on the north side is a shield bearing the arms of
bishop HOUGHTON HALL.
view of Houghton Hall Cousin, and on the south side another bearing the arms of
Davenport. The wainscot being much decayed, was removed by the present rector,
and the chancel is now fitted up with plaster in an elegant style. The stalls
too, being much decayed, have been repaired. The east window, consisting of
five lights, is under a pointed arch. There are beside five other windows in
the chancel, one of four lights under a flat arch, three under pointed arches,
divided by a small pilaster, and an adjoining one under a flat arch. The tower
stands on four columns, giving an interior square of six paces, opening on
every side to form the cross, and lead to the four limbs of the building. The
nave is twenty-four paces in length from the pillars of the square, and has
regular ailes formed by rows of three uniform clustered columns supporting
pointed arches, which at the western extremity spring from pilasters of similar
form with the pillars; the whole having great symmetry, and being of beautiful
architecture. The width of the nave, with its ailes, is twelve paces. The side
lights are regular, four on each side, and modern. The west window consists of
five lights under a pointed arch. The reading desk is placed against the north
west corner pillar, and the pulpit opposite to it. There is at present in
agitation a plan for rebuilding the stalls and seating the church, many of
which are now ruinous and much decayed; for removing the old organ, and
introducing a new one in a gallery to be erected against the north wall of the
church. The organ is placed in the south limb of the cross. The windows at the
extremities of the cross are under pointed arches: One limb of this cross, but
whether the north or south we cannot ascertain, is called Trinity porch. The
nave is ceiled and stuccoed, and very clean.

There were two guilds instituted in this church, one dedicated to the Holy
Trinity, the other to the blessed Virgin. In the records we find Cop. Book, E.
p. 394.
that Rob. Hudeson of Morton, with Rob. Smyth of Hoghton, and John Peerson,
were fined on the 14th of November, in the twelfth year of bishop Laurence,
1468, for attempting to found a fraternity at Houghton, without the bishop's
license, contrary to the act of Mortmain: But the same bishop, in the
nineteenth year of his pontificate, granted license Rot. A. Booth. No 70, 71.
to Henry Gillowe, clerk, Henry Radclyff, esquire William Byrdon, prior of
Fynkelehalgh, Edmund Saunderson, and Will. Rothom, to found to the praise of
God and honor of the most Holy Trinity, a guild, consisting of themselves and
other persons of both sexes, in the parish church of Houghton, and to elect
yearly from among themselves a master or custos, and to have a common seal,
with power to plead and be impleaded, and to purchase lands, etc. to the yearly
value of ten pounds, notwithstanding the statute of Mortmain. Bishop Booth, in
the nineteenth year of his pontificate, also granted to Henry Gillowe, clerk,
Henry Radclyffe, esquire William Rotham, and John Pany, actuated by a spirit of
piety and charity, to sound to the praise of God and the honor of the most
Blessed Virgin Mary the mother of Jesus, a fraternity or guild.

There was also a chantry in this church dedicated to St Margaret and St
Katharine: Yearly value 3l. 15s. Henry Nollop, the last incumbent of St Mary's
chantry, had a pension of 3l. p' annum, which he lived to receive in the year
1553.

The births of the several children of Sir William Belasis, of Morton-house, in
the parish of Houghton-le-Spring, in the county of Durham, knight, by his wife
Margaret Selby.

1. Mr Richard Belasis, born at Newcastle upon Tyne, on Easter Tuesday, April
14, 1612 2. Mrs Margaret Belasis, born at Whitehouse, on Friday June 4, 1613 3.
Mrs Elizabeth Belasis, born at Morton, on Tuesday September 2, 1614 4. Mrs Mary
Belasis, born at Morton, on Saturday August 30, 1615 5. Mrs Timothea Belasis,
born at Morton, on Saturday December 7, 1616 6. Mr William Belasis, born at
Morton, on Wednesday December 30, 1617 7. Mr Charles Belasis, born at Morton,
on Monday February 15, 1618 8. Mr John Belasis, born at Morton, on Saturday
January 22, 1619 9. Mr Brian Belasis, born at Morton, on Monday June 4, 1621
10. Mr George Belasis, born at Morton, on Tuesday December 24, 1622 11. Mrs
Dorothy Belasis, born at Morton, on Monday December 22, 1623
Monuments and inscriptions in the church of Houghton-le-Spring, in the county
of Durham.

On a brass plate over a raised monument, fixed in the south wall of the
chancel, whereon are engraven the portrait of a woman and her twelve children,
and also the arms of Belasis and Lilburne in pale.

Here under restithe the bodyye of Margery
Belassis wife to Richard Belassis of Henknol
Who had unto him vii sons and 4 daughters
Then she becominge widow so continued
The rest of her life the space of 58 years bestowing
her whole time only in hospitality
And releife of the poor and being of the
Age of LXXXX deceased the XX of August 1587.
Hic jacet Gulielmus Bellasys de Mortonhouse in comitatu Dunelm. Eques auratus.
Qui uxorem duxit Margaretam filiam natu maximam, et unem cohaeredum Georgij
Selby de Whitehouse in comitatu praedicto militis. Ex qua quidem Margareta, sex
filios et quinque filias procreavit, et postquam officium vice comitis hujus
comitatus palatini Dunelm. sub tribus episcopis successive, et bis sub domino
rege, episcopatu vacant, gesserat, hanc vitam pro meliore commutavit tertio
die Decembris, Anno Domini 1641. Et aetatis suae 48. Dicta Margareta in piam
charissimi conjugis memoriam hoc posuit monumentum.

On a mural monument, on the south side of the chancel.
H S E

On a flat monument of black marble in the chancel.
"Here lies the body of the reverend and charitable Mr George Davenport, late
rector of this church, who died July the 6th, 1677. He rebuilt the parsonage
house, the chapel, and the walls about the gardens, and repaired the
outhouses. He built one half of the hospital in the churchyard; and
bequeathed for the maintenance of 3 poor people in it 160l. also 40l. to the
poor stock, and 10l. to be given to the poor at his funeral. He was a great
benefactor to the Bough church, and gave 70 manuscripts to the bishop's library
in Durham.

If the soul's transmigration were believed
You Would say good Gilpin's soul he had received,
And with as liberal hand did give, or more,
His daily charity unto the poor,
For which with him, we doubt not he is possessed
Of righteous men's reward, eternal rest.
The righteous shall be in eternal
Remembrance
Ps. 112.6."
N. B. The arms are similar to those of the family of Davenport in Cheshire, as
blazoned in King's Valeroyal.

At the upper end of the south transept is a table or altar monument of free
stone, over part whereof is erected a low gallery, belonging to the estate of
Hetton-on-the-Hill. At the west end of the monument the following inscription
is cut in raised characters* divided by an escutcheon, on which is relieved a
boar resting against a tree, with a crescent cut on the side of the boar; the
upper part of the escutcheon is very plainly to be seen, but the under part not
come at without difficulty.

BERNERDs GILPIN RE CTOR HV IVS ECCLIOE OBIIT QVA RTO DIEM ARTII AN. DOM. 1583.
Gilpin's tomb adjoins to an altar tomb, on which lies the effigy of a man in
armor, with a shield on his left arm; there is no inscription to denote what
personage was interred here, but tradition reports this is the tomb of Sir John
Le Spring, knight, of an ancient resident family that had taken the local name
De le Spring. Collyns, in the 3d volume of his Peerage, page 244, gives the
following account of the same figure: In the church at Houghton is yet
remaining a figure of a knight in armor, in a praying posture, with his sword
by his side, reposing his head on a cushion, and at his feet a lion. This is
said to be for Sir Rowland Belasise, (of Bewley, knt) knighted at the battle of
Jews in Sussex, 48th king Henry III. when the king was taken prisoner by Simon
Montfort earl of Leicester, and other barons.

On other stones.
Here lies interred the body of Nicholas Conyers, esquire high sheriff of this
county, chief of the family of the Conyers of the house of Boulby, in
Yorkshire. He dyed at South Biddick, March 27, 1686. His age 57.

See here his dust shut up, whose generous mind
No step before in honors path could find:
Truth, faith, and justice, and a loyal heart,
In him showed nature, which in most is art.
Here lies the body of Major Tho. Lilburne, who was one of the instrumental
persons in his majesty's happy restoration. He departed this life the 25th of
March, Anno Domini 1665.




The reader perhaps expects some short anecdotes in this place, of that
excellent man Bernard Gilpin; we have selected several particulars given by
William Gilpin, A. M. of Queen's College, Oxford, and others his biographers.

Bernard Gilpin, descended from a good family in Westmoreland, was born at
Kentmire in that county, in the year 1517 His father's elder brother was slain
in the battle of Bosworth field, being heir in the fifth descent to Richard
Gilpin, who in the reign of king John was enfeoffed in the lordship of
Kentmire-hall, by the baron of Kendal, for his singular services.
. From his earliest youth he was inclined to a contemplative life; was
thoughtful, reserved, and serious. His first years were spent at a public
grammar school, from whence, at the age of sixteen, he was removed to Oxford,
and entered upon the foundation at Queen's College. He applied himself closely
to his studies, and made a considerable proficiency in the learning of the
times. Having determined to study divinity, that he might read the scriptures,
he set out with great industry to gain a thorough knowledge of the Greek and
Hebrew languages, in which he was much assisted by Mr Neal, a fellow of New
College, and afterward professor of Hebrew in Oxford.

At the usual term he took the degree of master of arts, and about the same
time was elected fellow of his college: But shortly after, on account of his
learning, was made choice of among those who were appointed to supply the
college newly founded by Cardinal Wolsey, and to which he was accordingly
removed.

As Mr Gilpin was bred in the Roman Catholic religion, he continued a
considerable time steady to that church, and in defense thereof held a
disputation against Hooper, afterward bishop of Worcester, in the reign of
Henry VIII. But when Edward VI. mounted the throne, Peter Martyr went to
Oxford, and there read divinity lectures in a strain to which the university
had been little accustomed. Mr Gilpin's credit in the university was become
considerable, the Popish party were therefore very solicitous to engage him to
side publicly with them; and when they made the most pressing applications to
him for that purpose, they found his zeal much cooler than their own. He was
not indeed satisfied with the Reformers, having had few opportunities of making
himself acquainted with their arguments: But on the other hand he never was
bigoted in his religion. While his mind was in so unsettled a condition, he
thought himself but ill qualified to espouse either side publicly. Such
importunity was however used with him, that at length he yielded, and appeared
next day against Peter Martyr.

Mr Gilpin entered into the controversy against his inclination: He resolved to
lay aside, as much as possible, the temper of a caviller, and to place truth
before him as the sole object of his pursuit, from which he was determined not
to be drawn aside either by prejudice or novelty. The disputation was therefore
soon over; for Mr Gilpin had nothing of that pride of heart which leads men to
defend suspected opinions, but gave up his cause with that grace which always
attends sincerity. He owned publicly that he could not maintain it, and
determined to enter into no more controversies till he gained full information
of the subject Peter Martyr took notice of this difference of behavior, and
frequently said, that he was not much troubled either for Weston, Morgan, or
the rest, (Gilpin's fellow disputants) but as for that Gilpin, (said he) I am
very much moved concerning him; for he does and speaks all things with an
upright heart. The rest seem to me to be men who are carried away as it were
with every blast of ambition and covetousness. But Gilpin, resting firmly upon
gravity and manners, and the testimony of a most laudable life, seems to
honor with his own goodness the cause which he undertaketh. Martyr would
likewise tell his friends, that it was the subject of his daily prayers, that
God would be pleased to touch the heart of this pious priest with the knowledge
of true religion.


. He communicated some of his doubts to bishop Tunstall, who was his mother's
uncle, and had always expressed great regard for him, and also conferred with
Dr Redman Dr J. Redman, or Redmayne, was nearly related to bishop Tunstall, and
eminently distinguished for his learning, the interests of which he greatly
promoted at Cambridg by his influence and example. Mr Ascham, in his
Schoolmaster, says, At Cambridge, in St John's college, in my time I do know,
that not so much the good statutes, as two gentlemen of worthy memory, Sir John
Cheke and Dr Redman, by their own example of excellency in learning, of
godliness in living, of diligence in studying, of council in exhorting, by good
order in all things, did breed up so many learned men in that one college of St
John's at one time, as I believe the whole university of Louvain in many years
was never able to afford.


, of whose virtue and learning he had formed an high opinion.

As an academic life afforded the most leisure for study, so Mr Gilpin was most
inclined thereto: He had too just a sense of the duty of a clergyman to be
unacquainted with the qualifications requisite for its discharge, and too mean
an opinion of himself to think he was yet master of them: He judged more
learning was necessary in that controversial age, than he had yet acquired; and
his chief argument with his friends, who were continually soliciting him to
leave the university, was, that he was not yet sufficiently instructed in
religion himself, to be a teacher of it to others. These thoughts continued him
at Oxford till the thirty-fifth year of his age; but about that time the
vicarage of Norton, in the diocese of Durham, falling vacant, his friends
prevailed upon him to accept it, though not without much difficulty.
Accordingly a presentation passed in November, 1552. But before he took
possession of his benefice, he was appointed to preach before king Edward VI.
who then resided at Greenwich; Sir William Cecil having obtained for him a
general license for preaching.

Mr Gilpin having staid some time in London, repaired to his parish, and
immediately entered upon the duties of his function. He failed not as occasions
offered, to use the king's license in other parts of the country; but his own
parish he considered as the place where his chief care was due. Here he made it
his principal endeavor to inculcate moral virtue, and to dissuade from those
vices which he observed most prevalent. He seldom handled controverted points,
being afraid, lest endeavoring to instruct, he might mislead. At length he
thought he had engaged too soon in his office, and that he could not properly
discharge the duties of it; his mind was not satisfied, whilst he merely gave
his hearers moral instructions, overspread as the country was with disputed
articles of faith, and he conceived he acted improperly in pretending to be a
teacher of religion, if he was unable to oppose the prevalent errors. These
thoughts made every day a greater impression upon him, and at length growing
quite unhappy, he wrote an account of his situation of mind to bishop Tunstall,
who was then in the Tower. The prelate thereupon advised Mr Gilpin to provide a
trusty curate for his parish, and to spend a year or two in Germany, France,
and Holland, by which means he might have an opportunity of conversing with
some of the most eminent professors, both Protestants and Papists. This advice
gave Gilpin much satisfaction; for a conference with some of the learned men
abroad was what he had long earnestly desired. His principal objection to the
scheme was, that it would prove too expensive: But as to that, Tunstall wrote
to him, that his living would do something toward his maintenance, and he
would supply deficiences. This, however, did not remove the difficulty; Mr
Gilpin's notions of clerical duty were so strict, that he thought no excuse
could justify non-residence for so considerable a time as he intended to be
abroad. He could not, therefore, think of supporting himself with any part of
the income of his living. He was determined to go abroad, and resolved, if he
staid the shorter time, to rely only upon his own frugal management of the
little money he had, and to leave the rest to the bishop's generosity.
Accordingly he resigned his living in favor of a worthy man, with whose
abilities and character he was well acquainted, and then set out for London, to
receive his last orders from the bishop, and to embark. The account of his
resignation got to town before him, and gave Tunstall, who was anxious for his
kinsman's thriving in the world, great concern. "Here are your friends," said
he, endeavoring to provide for you, and you are taking every method to
frustrate their wishes: But be warned; by these courses you will presently
bring yourself to a morsel of bread. Mr Gilpin begged the bishop would
attribute what he had done to a scrupulous conscience, which would not permit
him to act otherwise.

Before he took leave of the bishop, the latter put into Mr Gilpin's hands a
treatise he had written upon the Eucharist, desiring he would cause it to be
printed under his inspection at Paris. Soon after which he embarked for
Holland, and upon his landing, went immediately to Mechlin, to visit his
brother George, who was at that time pursuing his studies there. But after a
few weeks he went to Louvain, where he resolved to settle for some time. He
made frequent excursions to Antwerp, Ghent, Brussels, and other places in the
Low Countries; where he spent some weeks with men of reputation, who held both
sides of the controversial tenets; but he made Louvain his chief place of
residence, for which city he always expressed a more than common affection.
Louvain was then one of the most distinguished places for students in divinity;
some eminent divines on both sides of the question resided there, and the most
important topics of religion were discussed with great freedom.

Mr Gilpin's first business there was to get himself introduced to those of
eminence for learning; to whom his own address and seize were no mean
recommendations. He was present at all public readings and disputations;
committed every thing material to writing; re-examined all his opinions;
proposed his doubts in private to his friends; and in every respect made the
best use of his time.

Whilst he was thus prosecuting his studies, he and the Protestants in those
parts were alarmed with the melancholy news of the death of king Edward, the
unsuccessful attempt in favor of lady Jane, and the accession of queen Mary:
But it came attended with one agreeable circumstance; an account of bishop
Tunstall's release from the Tower, and re-establishment in his bishopric. Soon
afterward Mr Gilpin received a letter from his brother George, entreating him
to come to Mechlin, to confer on an affair of importance. On his arrival he
found his brother had received a letter from the bishop, informing him, that he
had found a benefice of considerable value vacant in his diocese, which he
wished he could persuade his brother Bernard to accept, imagining he might by
this time have got over his former scruples: And accordingly George used his
utmost endeavors for this purpose, but without effect; Bernard continuing
inflexible in his resolution, not to accept of any benefice without discharging
the duties of it. He therefore returned to Louvain; but, however, thought it
incumbent on him to give the bishop his reasons for not accepting his kind
offer. The bishop was not offended at this letter; for the unaffected piety of
it disarmed all resentment, and led him rather to admire a behavior, in which
the motives of conscience showed themselves so superior to those of interest.

Mr Gilpin continued some time longer at Louvain, daily improving in religious
knowledge. But while he staid in the Low Countries, he was greatly affected
with the melancholy sight of crowds of his dejected countrymen arriving daily
in those parts, to avoid the bloody persecution then carrying on in England. It
gave him, however, some pleasure to find, though he was unable personally to
assist them, yet his acquaintance in the country furnished him with the means
of being useful to many of them by his recommendations.

When he had been about two years in Flanders he left Louvain, and went to
Paris, where his first care was printing the bishop's book, which he performed
entirely to his satisfaction. During his stay at Paris he lodged with Vascosan,
an eminent printer, to whom he had been recommended by his friends in the
Netherlands. This learned man showed him great regard, did him many friendly
offices, and introduced him to the most considerable persons in the city.

Mr Gilpin having spent three years abroad, returned into England in 1556,
whilst the persecution was still carrying on against the Protestants. Bishop
Tunstall received his kinsman with great kindness, and soon after his arrival
gave him the archdeaconry of Durham, to which the rectory of Easington was
annexed. He immediately repaired to his parish, where he preached with great
boldness against the vices, errors, and corruptions of the times; and by virtue
of his office of archdeacon, he also took great pains to reform the manners of
the clergy. His free reproofs soon roused the ecclesiastics of those parts
against him, and put them upon every method in their power to remove so
inconvenient an enquirer. The popular clamor amongst them was, that Gilpin was
an enemy to the church, a scandalizer of the clergy, and a preacher of false
doctrines; and that religion must suffer from the heresies he was daily
uttering, if he was suffered any longer Some found great fault, for that I
preached repentance and salvation by Christ; and did not make whole sermons, as
they did, about transubstantiation, purgatory, holy water, images, prayers to
saints, and such like.

An account of the family of GILPINS, from a paper in the hands of Mr Rob.
Sober, of Sherburn, near Durham, without date. Randal's MSS.

Will. Gilpin **** d. of Tho. Acay, bailiff of Kentmore Richard **** d. of
Fleming of Rydale William Eliz. Lancaster Daughter of Thomas Lancaster of
Socbred, whose ancestor was baron of Kendal.
Richard Doro. Thornborowe Daughter of Sir Rowlande Thornborowe, knight, of
Rampsele. -- He had a daughter married Ducket, and another married Sir Henry
Bellingham.
William slain at Bosworth field Enwine Daughter of Thomas Layton, esquire of
Delmaine. He had several sons, Anthony, Thomas, Sir William, Sir Bryan, Sir
Cuthbert, Sir Richard, all famous men and warriors, some of them knights of
Rhodes. Also several daughters, who intermarried with Redman, Carleton,
Clyborne, Vaux.
Mar. Layton William Eliz. Washington George They intermarried with Gilpins,
Laytons, Whartons, Cowpers, Caireses, Bensons, and Mallorys. George, at the
time of making out the pedigree, is said to be living and owner of the ancient
house of the Gilpins, Kentmore hall.
William **** Sandforth George 2d son 3d son 4th son 5th son 6th son 7th son 3
daughters George Randall Bernard of H. le Spring Richard Cecily m. Maude Mary
m. Wharton Margaret m. Selthorp *** 2d wife Randall Sykes Richard John Francis
George Bernard 2 daughters Thomas Edward Oliver 1st daugh. m. Bellingham 2d
daugh. m. Askewe 3d daugh. m. Aglonbie John Robert Margaret Isabella


genealogy


. In short, a charge of heresy, consisting of thirteen articles, was drawn up
against him, and he was accused in form before the bishop of Durham. But
Tunstall, who was much practiced in the world, easily found a method of
dismissing the cause in such a manner as to protect his nephew, without
endangering himself. The malice of his enemies could not rest, and they created
him so much trouble, that not being able to undergo the fatigue of duty, he
begged leave of the bishop to resign either the archdeaconry or his parish,
which his lordship thought fit: To which the bishop answered, that the income
of the former was not a support without the latter, and that he could not
consent to their being separated. Upon this Mr Gilpin resigned both of them;
but the bishop soon after presented him with the rectory of Houghton-le-Spring.

This extensive rectory, containing no less than fourteen villages, had been as
much neglected in that dark age, as the cures in the north then generally were.
All ancient customs and ceremonies were carried higher than in most other
places, and were considered as the essentials of religion. And it is said,
through the designed neglect of bishops and justices of the peace, king
Edward's proclamations for a change of worship had not even been heard of in
this part of the kingdom, at the time of that prince's death.

Such was the condition of the parish of Houghton when it was committed to the
care of Mr Gilpin; described by his biographers and other writers, to be then a
waste so miserably uncultivated, that the greatest industry seemed necessary to
bring it into any kind of order; and the greatest resolution was requisite in
the attempt. But when the good of mankind was concerned, this true christian
minister had resolution to attempt whatever industry could accomplish. He was
grieved to see ignorance and vice prevail: But he did not despair. The people
crowded about him, and heard him with great attention, perceiving him to be a
teacher of a very different kind from those to whom they had been accustomed.

When Mr Gilpin took possession of Houghton, he found the parsonage-house gone
so to decay, that he could not reside in it; part of it was sitted up as soon
as possible for his reception, but he continued improving and enlarging it till
it became suitable to his hospitable temper, a proper habitation for a man who
never intended to keep what he had, to himself. Soon after his acceptance of
the rectory of Houghton, Tunstall urged him to accept of a stall then vacant in
the cathedral church of Durham, telling him, that there lay not the same
objection to this as to the archdeaconry, it being quite a sinecure, and
therefore he would have no reasonable pretense for refusing it. But Mr Gilpin,
unwilling to accept it, told the bishop, that by his bounty he had already more
wealth, than, he was afraid, he should give a good account of. He begged,
therefore, he might not have an additional charge, but that his lordship would
rather bestow this preferment on one by whom it was more wanted.

Mr Gilpin now lived in a retired manner, and gave no immediate offense to the
clergy; the experience he had of their temper made him more reserved. Indeed he
used more caution than he could afterward approve; for in his future life he
would often tax his behavior at this time with weakness and cowardice. But all
his caution was ineffectual; for he was soon formally accused before the bishop
of Durham, who again found means to protect him. The malice of his enemies
succeeded in part; for Tunstall's favor from this time visibly declined, and
he struck him out of his will, of which he had before made him the executor.
This loss gave Mr Gilpin little concern: He was sorry, indeed, to see the
bishop disgusted; he acknowledged his great obligations to him; and would have
given up any thing to have him satisfied, except his conscience. But good
conscience, he was assured, was his best friend; and he was resolved not to
part with it for any mortal friend upon earth.

His enemies, in the mean time, were not thus silenced. Enraged at this second
defeat, they caused thirty-two articles to be drawn up against him in the
strongest manner, and laid before Bonner bishop of London. Here they went the
right way to work: Bonner was a man suited to their purpose; and accordingly
gave immediate orders for his apprehension. Mr Gilpin being no stranger to the
burning zeal of the bishop of London, had no sooner notice of the persecution,
than he prepared for martyrdom: He caused a long garment to be provided, that
he might go in the more decent manner to the stake, and set out for London. In
his way thither he broke his leg, which put a stop for some time to his
journey. The persons in whose custody he was, it is said, took occasion from
thence maliciously to retort upon him an observation that he would frequently
make, that nothing happens unto us but what is intended for our good, asking
him, whether he thought his broken leg was so intended? He answered meekly, he
made no question but it was: And indeed so it proved in the strictest sense;
for before he was able to travel, queen Mary died, and he was set at liberty.
Whether all the particulars of this story are true or not, thus much however is
certain, that the account of the queen's death met him upon the road, and put a
stop to any further prosecution.

Mr Gilpin being thus providentially rescued from his enemies, returned to
Houghton, through crowds of people, expressing the utmost joy, and blessing God
for his deliverance. The following year he lost his friend and relation bishop
Tunstall; but he soon experienced, that worth like his would naturally procure
friends. When the popish bishops were deprived, the earl of Bedford recommended
him to queen Elizabeth for the bishopric of Carlisle, and took care that a
conge d'elire should be sent down to the dean and chapter for that purpose: But
Mr Gilpin declined this promotion; and when much pressed to assign his reasons
for refusing it, he said, that if any other bishopric but Carlisle had been
offered to him, he possibly might have accepted it: But in that diocese (said
he) I have so many friends and acquaintance, of whom I have not the best
opinion, that I must either connive at many irregularities, or draw upon myself
so much hatred, that I should be less able to do good there than any one else.
Mr Gilpin persisting in his refusal, the bishopric was at length given to Dr
Best. The year after he had an offer made him of the provostship of Queen's
College in Oxford; which he likewise declined.

In the mean time Gilpin continued to reside at Houghton, discharging the
duties of his function in the most exemplary manner. When he first took upon
himself the care of a parish, he laid it down as a maxim, to do all the good in
his power there; and accordingly his whole conduct was only one straight line
drawn to this point. He set out with making it his endeavor to gain the
affections of his parishioners. Many of his papers show how material a point he
considered this. To succeed in it, however, he used no servile compliances: He
studied that his means should be good as well as his end. His behavior was
free without levity, obliging without meanness, and insinuating without art. He
condescended to the weak, bore with the passionate, and complied with the
scrupulous; and in a truly apostolic manner, "became all things to all men." By
these means he gained upon his neighbors, and convinced them how heartily he
was their friend.

To his humanity and courtesy he added an unwearied application to the
instruction of those under his care. He was not satisfied with the advice he
gave in public, but used to teach in private; and brought his parishioners to
come to him with their doubts and difficulties. He had a most engaging manner
toward those whom he thought well-disposed: Nay, his very reproof was so
conducted, that it seldom gave offense; the becoming gentleness with which it
was urged, made it always appear the effect of friendship. Thus, with unceasing
assiduity, did he employ himself in admonishing the vicious, and encouraging
the well-disposed, by which means, in a few years, he made a greater change in
his neighborhood than could well have been imagined. A remarkable instance
what reformation a single man may effect, when he has the pious purpose
earnestly at heart!

But his hopes were not so much in the present generation, as in the
succeeding. It was an easier task, he found, to prevent vice than to correct
it; to form the young to virtue, than to amend the bad habits of the old: He
employed much of his time, therefore, in endeavoring to improve the minds of
the younger part of his parish; suffering none to grow up in ignorance of their
duty, but pressing it as the wisest part to mix religion with their labor, and
amidst the cares of this life, to have a constant eye upon the next. He
attended to every thing which he conceived might be of service to his
parishioners. He was assiduous to prevent all law suits. His hall, it is said,
was often thronged with people, who came to submit their differences to his
judgment. He was not much acquainted with law, but could decide equitably, and
that satisfied: Nor could his sovereign's commission have given him more weight
than his own character. His hospitable manner of living was the admiration of
the whole country. He spent in his family every fortnight forty bushels of
corn, twenty bushels of malt, and a whole ox, besides a proportionable quantity
of other kinds of provision. Strangers and travelers found in his house a
cheerful reception: All were welcome that came; and even their horses had so
much care taken of them, that it was humorously said, If a horse was turned
loose in any part of the country, it would immediately make its way to the
rector of Houghton's.

Every Sunday, from Michaelmas till Easter, was a sort of public day with him.
During this season he expected to see all his parishioners and their families.
For their reception he had three tables well covered: The first was for
gentlemen, the second for husbandmen and farmers, and the third for day
laborers. This piece of hospitality he never omitted, even at seasons when its
continuance was rather difficult to him: He thought it his duty, and that was a
deciding motive. When he was absent from home, no alteration was made in his
family expenses: The poor were fed as usual, and his neighbors entertained:
And he was always glad of the company of men of merit and learning, who greatly
frequented his house.

When lord Burleigh, then lord treasurer, was sent by queen Elizabeth to
transact some affairs in Scotland, that celebrated statesman resolved, on his
return, to pay a visit to Mr Gilpin. Amidst the hurry of this journey he could
not resist the desire of seeing a man whose name was every where so
respectfully mentioned. His free discourse from the pulpit to king Edward's
court, had early recommended him to this noble person; from which time the
great distance between them had wholly interrupted their acquaintance. Lord
Burleigh's return was so sudden, that he had no time to give any notice of his
intended visit. But the economy of so plentiful a house as Mr Gilpin's was not
easily disconcerted. He received his noble guest with so much politeness, and
treated him and his whole retinue in so affluent a manner, that the treasurer
would often say, he could hardly have expected more at Lambeth.

While lord Burleigh staid at Houghton, he took great pains to acquaint himself
with the order and regularity with which every thing was managed. The house
contained a very large family; and was besides continually crowded with persons
of all kinds, gentlemen, scholars, workmen, farmers, and poor people: Yet there
was never any confusion; every one was conducted to a proper apartment, and
entertained, directed, or relieved, as his particular business required. He
could not but please this wise lord, who was so well acquainted with the
effects of order and regularity in the highest sphere, to observe them even in
this humble one. Here too he saw true simplicity of manners, and every social
virtue regulated by exact prudence. The statesman began to unbend; and he could
scarcely avoid comparing, with a kind of envious eye, the unquiet scenes of
vice and vanity at which he was frequently present, with the calmness of this
amiable retreat. At length with reluctance he took his leave; and with all the
warmth of affection, embracing his much respected friend, told him, He had
heard great things in his commendation, but had now seen what far exceeded all
that he had heard. If, added he, Mr Gilpin, I can ever be of any service to
you, at court, or elsewhere, use me with all freedom as one you may depend on.
When he had got to Rainton-hill, which rises about a mile from Houghton, and
commands the vale, he turned his horse to take once more a view of the place;
and having kept his eye fixed upon it for some time, his reverie broke out into
this exclamation: There is the enjoyment of life indeed! Who can blame that man
for not accepting a bishopric! What does he want to make him greater, or
happier, or more useful to mankind!

Mr Gilpin continued to discharge the duties of his ministerial office in the
most conscientious, benevolent, and laborious manner. But notwithstanding all
this painful industry, and the large scope it had in so extended a parish, he
thought the sphere of his benevolence yet too confined. It grieved him to see
in the adjacent parishes so much ignorance and superstition, occasioned by the
shameful neglect of the pastoral care in the clergy of those parts. He was
induced to supply, as far as he was able, what was wanting in others. For this
purpose every year he regularly visited the most neglected parishes in
Northumberland, Yorkshire, Cheshire, Westmoreland, and Cumberland; and that his
own parish, in the mean time, might not suffer, he was at the expense of a
constant assistant. In each place he stayed two or three days; and his method
was, to call the people about him, and lay before them, in as plain a way as
possible, the danger of leading wicked, or even careless lives; explaining to
them the nature of true religion; instructing them in the duties they owed to
God, their neighbor, and themselves; and showing them how greatly a moral and
religious conduct would contribute to their present, as well as future
happiness.

As Mr Gilpin had all the warmth of an enthusiast, though under the direction
of a very calm and sober judgment, he never wanted an audience, even in the
wildest parts; where he roused many to a sense of religion, who had contracted
the most inveterate habits of inattention to every thing of a serious nature.
Wherever he came, he used to visit the gaols and places of consinement, few in
the kingdom having at that time any appointed minister; and by his labors, and
affectionate manner of behavior, is said to have reformed many very abandoned
persons in those places. He likewise employed his interest for criminals, whose
cases were attended with any hard circumstances, and often procured pardons.

Redesdale and Tinedale, in Northumberland, of all barbarous places in the
north, were at that time looked upon to be the most barbarous; before the
Union, the common theater where the Scots and English were continually acting
their bloody scenes: Inhabited by a kind of desperate banditti, rendered fierce
and active by constant rapine, warfare, and alarms; they lived by theft, and
used to plunder on both sides of the barrier. In this dreadful country, where
no man would then even travel that could help it, Mr Gilpin never failed to
spend some part of the year. He generally chose the Christmas holidays for this
journey, because he found the people at that season disengaged, and most easily
assembled. He had set places for preaching, which were regularly attended. If
he came where there was a church, he made use of it; if not, of barns, or any
other large building, where crowds of people were sure to follow him, some for
his instructions, and others for his charity.

The disinterested pains he took among those barbarous people, and the good
offices he was always ready to do them, drew from them the warmest and
sincerest expressions of gratitude. Indeed he was little less than adored among
them. One instance that is related, shows how greatly he was revered: By the
carelessness of his servant, his horses were one day stolen: The news was
quickly propagated, and every one expressed the highest indignation at the
fact. The thief was rejoicing over his prize, when by the report of the country
he found whose horses he had taken. Terrified at what he had done, he instantly
came trembling back, confessed the fact, and returned the horses.

We have already spoken of Mr Gilpin's generous and hospitable manner of
living. The value of his rectory was about four hundred pounds a year: An
income at that time very considerable, but yet in appearance very
unproportionate to the generous things he did: Indeed he could not have done
them, unless his frugality had been equal to his generosity. His friends,
therefore, wondered to find him, amidst his many great and continual expenses,
entertaining the design of building and endowing a grammar school: A project,
however, which his exact economy soon enabled him to accomplish, though the
expense of it amounted to upwards of five hundred pounds The charter or letters
patent granted by queen Elizabeth, 2d April, 1574, for founding Kepier school,
in Houghton-le-Spring.
ELIZABETHA, Dei gra. Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, regina fidei defensor,
etc.
Omnibus, etc. salutem
sciatis q'd nos ad humilem petico'em fideliu. Johannis Heathe, de Kepier, in
co. n'ro Dunelmi, arm. et Bernardi Gylpyne rectoris de Houghton in le Spring in
dicto co. Dun. cl'ici schola grammaticali et domo eleemosynar. infra parochiam
de Houghton, predictam erigendis et in perpetuum forte stabiliendis erigendis
tam pro perpetua educatione, etc. pueror et juvinu. ibid. institutendorum quam
pro sustentaco'e relevamine et victu pauperorum egenorum et infirmorum de g'ra
n'ra, etc. volumus concedimus et ordinamus p' nob. etc. quod de cetero cel'o
sit et erit in d'ca p'ochia de Houghton in le Spring una schola grammaticalis
ac dom. eleemosynarum s'ie hospitali in honorem beatissimae Trinitatis que
vocabitur libera schola grammaticalis ac domus eleemosynarum de Kepier in dicto
co. Dun. etc. ac scholam and domum eleemosynarum predictam de uno magistro s'ie
pedagogo et uno hypodidascalo seu subpedagogo e quibusd. pauperib. egems et
infirmis perpetuo duratur. erigimus. etc. et ordinamus p' presents.

Et ut intentio nostra predicta meliorem fortiatur, etc. volumque statuimus et
ordinamus quod de caetero imposterum sint and erunt duo discreti et probi
homines qui erunt et vocabuntur gub'natores dictae liberae scholae
grammaticalis et domus eleemosynarum praedict. ac possessionum, etc.

Et ideo sciatis quod nos assignavimus, etc. et predictos Johannem Heathe et
Bernardum Gylpyne fore et esse primos et modernos gubernatores dictae liberae
sch. gramatical. ac dom eleemosynar. predicta ac omnium et singalor.
possessionum, etc. durante vita naturali eor.

Et quod iidem gubernatores et succ. etc. sint et erunt unu' corpus corporatum
et politicum imposterum ac cosdem gubern. et succ. suos per nomen gubernatorum
liberae scholae gramatical. ac domus eleemosynarum de Kepier, etc.

Et ulterius volumus et ordinamus, etc. q'd iidem gubernatores, etc. et succ.
sui habeant et habebunt successionem perpetuam et per idem sint, etc. habiles
et in lege capaces ad h'endum perquirendum et recipiend. sibi et succ. suis,
etc. maneria terras tenementa, etc.

Et ulterius volumus, etc. et co'cedimus, etc. presatis gubernatoribus et succ.
suis quod he'ant commune sigillum, etc.

Et q'd i'pi gub'natores, etc. per nomen predictum possint et habiles sint
placitare et implacitari, etc.

Et ulterius, etc. damus, etc. presatis gubernatoribus et succ. suis quod, etc.
habeant et habebunt plenam potestatem et authoritatem de tempore in tempus
eligendi deligendi no'iandi et appunctuandi pedagogum et hypodidascalum, etc.
ac eosd. pedagogum et hypodidascalum amovendi ac alios magis idoneos seu alium
magis idoneum in eor. seu eorum alterius loco sive locis loc'adi seu
constituendi, etc.

Et ulterius, etc. co'cedimus prefato Joh'i Heathe ac heredibus suis ac
Bernardo Gilpine rectori dicte eccl'e de Houghton le Spring, et succ. suis q'd
etc. habeant et habebunt plenam potestatem et authoritatem de tempore in tempus
durante vita eor. eligendi no'iandi et appunctuandi per script. suum sub
sigillis suis duos probos discretos et habiles viros, etc. fore et esse
gubernatores, etc. modo et forma subsequenti (viz) unum eorum fore et esse
gubernatorem immediate post mortem predic'i Joh. Heathe, alterum vero eorum
fore et esse gubernatorem immediate post mortem dicti Bernardi Gylpyne.

Et si contigerit alterum predictorum modernorum gubernatorum mori, nulla hujus
modi electione, etc. q'd tum superviveus eor. ex assensu et consensu heredi's
succ. ipsius sic prius morientis exinde habeat, etc. plenam potestatem et
authoritatem de tempore in tempus durante vita sua naturali eligendi, etc. per
scriptum suum sub sigillo suo unum probum idoneum et habilem virum fore et esse
unum gubernatorem predictae liberae, sch. etc. loco et vice ipsius sic. prius
morientis.

Et quod post mortem praedicti Johannis et Bernardi haeredes ipsius Joh.
successores ip^ius Bernardi rectores, etc. in perpetuum habeant and habebunt
plenam potestatem et authoritatem de tempore in tempus toties quoties necesse
fuerit eligendi, etc. per scriptum suum sub sigillis suis gubernatores sive
gubernatorem predictae libere scholae, etc. juxta suas discretiones suas, ac
etiam gubernatores eosd. sic eligendos vel eorum alterum amovendi deprivandi
sive expellendi de tempore in tempus toties quoties necessarium sive expeditum
fuerit.

Et ulterius, etc. concedimus, etc. quod quando et quoties imposterum
contigerit nullam hujusmodi elecc'oem etc. gubernatores sive gubernatorum
predictae liberae scholae et fore sive esse infra tempus, etc. post mortem
resignationem cessionem sive deprivationem alicujus gubernatori predictae
liberae scholae, etc. quod tunc et toties ep'us Dun. et succ. sui pro illa vice
tantum habeat and habebit plenam potestatem et authoritatem eligendi, etc. per
scriptum suum sub sig. suo gubernatorem in loco et vice illius sic mortui
resignati deprivati sive amoti et quod praedicti moderni gubernatores de
tempore in tempus durante vita eor. naturali faciat et facere valiant et
possint idonea et salubria statuta decreta et ordinac'oes in scriptis
concernentia sive tangen. electionem moderationem gubernationem et directionem
paedagogi et hypodidascali et scholarium libere scholae praedictae ac etium
egenorum pauperum et infirmor. domus eleemosynar. p'dce et eor. cujuslibet
tempore existente et stipendia et salaria eorund. pedagogi et hypodidascali ac
omnia ab. quecunque eand. liberam sch. etc. pro continuatio. ejusd. scholae ac
domus eleemosynar. predictae appu'ctuat. etc. assignat. etc. tangentia sive
quocunque modo concernentia que quidem statuta decreta et ordinationes sic
fienda concedimus, etc. inviolabiter observari de tempore in tempus perpetuum
facerint. Et ulterius ut idem gubernatores, etc melius et uberius liberam
scholam, etc. necnon sumptus et onera eor. manu-tenere et supportare valiant et
possint, etc. dedimus et concessimus red. quibuscunque subdatis ligeis nostris,
etc. maneria rectorias messuagia terras tenementas decimas redditus reversiones
servitia possessiones revertiones ut hereditamenta quecunque ad annum valorem
quinquaginta librar. vel minus infra parochiam de Houghton in le Spring in
dicto co. Dunelmen. sen alibi, etc. ut alibi ubicunque infra dominationem et
potestatem nostram presatis modernis gub. praedictae liberae sch. grammatical.
et dom. eleemosynar. de Kepier ac possi'on. revertion. licite. et impune dare
concedere vendere alienare assignare valiant et possint iisdem gubernatores et
succ. suis, quod ipsi hujusmodi maneria rectorias terras tenementa decimas
redditus reversiones servitia possessiones reventiones vel hereditamenta ad
annum valorem quinquaginta librar. vel minus, de nob. hered. et succ. nostris
aut de aliq. corpore corporato seu politico, aut de aliquib. subditis nostris
licite et impune in posterum habere recipere et perquirere valiant et possint
sibi et succ. suis in perpetuum similiter lic. dam. et concedimus specialiter
statuto de terris et ten. ad man. mortuam non ponendis, aut aliquo al. statuto
actu ordinatione seu provisione in contrarium inde, etc. non obstante.

In cujus rei testimonium has l'ras n'ras fieri fecimus patentes, test me ipsa
apud Gorambury sc'do die Apri. ao regni n'ri decimo sexta.

P' breve de privato sig. POWLE.
Gorambury, near St Alban's, the seat of Sir Nich. Bacon, lord keeper
1616, August 14th, -- 13th James I. -- In the court of chancery at Durham.
John Heath, esquire and Christ. Wharton, gentleman, governors of the free grammar
school and alms house of Kepier, in the parish of Houghton, exhibited their
bill against Thomas Chambers, gentleman, and others, alleging, that in right
of the said school, they were seized of a portion of tithes of corn and grain,
commonly called gilley-tithes, renewing within the townships of Cleadon and
Whitburn, in the parish of Whitburn, let for 7l. yearly, praying that the
defendants, who have confounded and converted the said lands to their own uses,
may be compelled to make good the rent thereof, being and otherwise to be
relieved in the premises.

In answer, the defendants alleged, that the said portion of tithes, has time
out of mind, been taken only out of corn, renewing in three parcels of ground
called the East Hall field, the West Hall field, and the Middle Hall held.

28 March, 13 James, A. D. 1616. Decreed by Sir Rich. Hutton, knt. serj. at
law, and chancellor of the county palatine of Durham and Sadberge, that the
governors should let the gilley-tithes to the defendants and tenants of the
lands, out of which the gilley-tithes were issuing, for twenty-one years, for
6l. a year, payable at Pentecost and Martinmas.

An appointment of Francis Myddleton, of Offerton, esquire to be a governor of
Kepier school, in Houghton-le-Spring.
Know all men by these presents, that we John Tempest, of Sherburn, in the
county of Durham, esquire heir and successor of John Heathe, late of Kepier, esquire in
the same county, and Thomas Seckar, A. M. and rector of Houghton in le Spring,
in the said county, do by these presents, elect, nominate, and appoint Francis
Myddleton, of Offerton, in the said county of Durham, esquire to be one of the
modern governors of the free school and alms house of Kepier, in Houghton in le
Spring aforesaid, in the room and place of John Spearman, late of Hetton in le
Hole, in the said county of Durham, esquire In witness, etc.

A rental of the rents, revenues, and possessions of the free school and alms
house in Houghton-le-Spring.

L. s. d. The gilley-tithes of Bishopweremouth, let commonly per annum 2 0 0 A
yearly pension out of the parsonage of Gateshead 2 13 4 The like out of
Whickham rectory 1 6 8 The like out of Ryton rectory 1 6 8 These tithes and
pensions were granted by John Heath, esquire at or about the time of the
foundation. A yearly pension out of the parish of Easington 2 3 4 The
gilley-tithes of Chester, let in 1747 for (but are growing less and less) 4 16
1 A rent charge in lieu of gilley-tithes, out of some lands in Cleadon 6 0 3
The gilley-tithes of Ryehope let coin's annis for about 5 0 0 These were
purchased of John Heath by Bernard Gilpin, and by him granted to the school
about the time of the foundation. A rent charge out of Pensher, in the parish
of Houghton 1 16 8 A rent charge out of Pelow 0 10 0 Purchased of Thomas Myllet
by Bernard Gilpin, and by him granted to the school at the time aforesaid. A
house in Houghton, purchased by Bernard Gilpin, and granted to the school, let
at 5l. per ann. subject to taxes, sesses, and bishops rent 5 0 0 A copyhold
close in Wolsingham, purchased and granted as aforesaid, by Bernard Gilpin, and
let at the yearly rent of 9 0 0 A pension out of the manor of Cocken, granted
by Mr Wm Carr in or about the year 1570 of per annum 2 0 0 A garth in Ryehope
for reception of tithes 0 6 8 A pension out of St Nicholas' in Durham, granted
by John Heath 0 13 4 All these are of the original foundation, amounting to 44
13 0 A cross fine in Houghton, being a rent charge out of Mr Lambton's lands in
Houghton, long in possession of the school, but by whom or when given unknown,
amounting yearly to 1 5 0 An annual rent charge out of the estate left by the
will of Dr Bagshaw, rector of Houghton, date unknown 5 0 0 50 18 0

A legacy left in money by the will of Sir George Wheler, knight, and which was
laid out by (the bishop of Oxford) Dr Seeker, successor to Sir G. Wheler, in
the rectory of Houghton, in the purchase of an estate at Renton, held by lease
under the chapter at Durham, and let by the rector at 35l. per annum subject to
large fines, out-rents, etc. one half of which is left to the school, and the
other half to Davenport's hospital, but not paid by the rector to the school.

Masters of Houghton school.
Robert Copperthwaite, cl. A. B. was the first master Chapter Ranson, oc. master by
Gilpin's will in 1582 Anthony Array, cl. A. M. 1607 Ralph Hawden, A. M. licenced
24 Sep. 1631 John Sage, cl. licenced 8 Dec. 1632 George Cant, licenced 26 April
1639 -- Lever 1682 William Stobert, clerk 1686 Gilbert Nelson, clerk 1692
resigned 1737 Thomas Griffith, A. M. 1738 William Cooper, A. M. 1777 resigned
1786 -- Fleming 1786
The statutes of the school.
It would be useless to incumber the work with a full transcript of the
statutes; the following material parts must suffice:

When the school does want a master the governors may send to Mr Provost of
Queen's Col. Ox. and request him that he would procure some northern man in
any wise master of art, either in his own house or some other, etc. Then follow
rules for conducting the school, etc. and the restrictions upon the master,
inter all is, He shall meddle with and occupy no other temporal livings, etc.
shall let his gillie-tithes to the most advantage he can, provided that he
shall not let his tithes above three years, reserving no less rent than with
the rest belonging to him will make up yearly his 20l. wage; and also he shall
not take any fine before hand. And if any other livings belong to him, he shall
farm them forth to others, that they may be no hindrance to his teaching; yet
if it so happen that he shall take any spiritual living, then he shall not have
the benefit of his school above one year after his induction. Then follows an
order touching the master's marriage, which is to be with the consent of both
governors and two justices of the peace.

Rules concerning the usher follow in this place. His election shall be wholly
in the governors' hands, unless by special authority and direction unto the
master there be power granted to him from the governors to choose, etc.

There shall be one play day in a week, either Tuesday or Thursday, save only
certain days in the spring, for the scholars to exercise their bows, in
matching either with themselves or strangers, in the Oxpasture or in
Houghton-moor, etc. At times of breaking up the scholars must pay to their
master every one a penny for ferelatoc silver, and none shall be enforced to
give more, but upon their own good will.

"There shall be a register book, etc. which once a year shall be brought to
the governors, etc." And then if the governors can charge the master or usher,
by proof or testimony of the country, by the church wardens of Houghton, by the
gentlemen, of negligence in teaching, of misbehaviour, of breach of any
statute, either to punish them by fine, etc. or otherwise, if their faults be
intolerable and notorious, to expel them of their livings.

Item, there is further of the rents, etc. so much as will yearly find five
poor scholars and three poor men or women, allowing them 7d. a week, 7d. over
which may be divided, etc.


. His school was no sooner opened than it began to flourish; and there was so
great a resort of young people to it, that in a little time the town was not
able to accomodate them. He put himself, therefore, to the inconvenience of
fitting up a part of his own house for that purpose, where he seldom had fewer
than twenty or thirty children. Some of these were the sons of persons of
distinction, whom he boarded at easy rates; but the greater part were poor
children, whom he not only educated, but clothed and maintained: He was
likewise at the expense of boarding in the town many other poor children,
several of whom he brought every year from the different parts where he
preached, particularly Redesdale and Tinedale. For the maintenance of poor
scholars, whom he sent to the universities, he yearly set apart sixty pounds.
This sum he always expended, and often more. His common allowance to each
scholar was about ten pounds a year, which for a sober youth was at that time a
very sufficient maintenance, so that he never maintained fewer than six. By his
will it appears, that at his death he had nine upon his list, whom he took care
to provide for during their stay at the university.

As to his school, he not only placed able masters in it, procured from Oxford,
but likewise constantly inspected it himself. And that encouragement might
quicken the application of his boys, he always took particular notice of the
most forward: He would call them his own scholars, send for them often into his
study, and there instruct them himself. One method used by him to fill his
school was a little singular. Besides those whom he sent from his own school to
the universities, and there wholly maintained, he likewise gave to others, who
were in circumstances to do something for themselves, what farther assistance
they needed. By which means he induced many parents to allow their children a
liberal education, who otherwise would not have done it. He considered himself
as their proper guardian, and esteemed himself bound to the public for their
being made useful members of it, as far as it lay in his power. With this view
he held a punctual correspondence with their tutors; and made the youths
themselves frequently write to him an account of their studies. So solicitous
indeed was he about them, that once every year he made a journey to the
universities, to inspect their behavior. And this uncommon, care was not
unrewarded; for many of his scholars became ornaments to the church, and
exemplary instances of piety Among those of note who were educated by him,
these three are particularly mentioned; Henry Ayray, George Carleton, and Hugh
Broughton.

Henry Ayray became afterward provost of Queen's College in Oxford; where he
was in great esteem for his abilities, and exemplary life.

George Carleton was a man of worth and learning, and very deservedly promoted
to the Sea of Chichester. He published several pieces, which are enumerated by
Anthony Wood, and in particular the life of his benefactor Bernard Gilpin.

Hugh Broughton was a very learned man, and particularly skilled in rabbinical
learning. Broughton is said to have been so laboriously studious, that unless
he were prevented by something very extraordinary, he studied twelve or
fourteen hours, and often sixteen hours a day. He had a contest with Theodore
Beza. He died in 1662, as we are told by the famous Dr Lightfoot, who declares
himself a child in comparison of this great master of Hebrew and rabbinical
learning, and mentions an offer that was once made to him of a cardinal's hat.


.

Every Thursday throughout the year he caused a very large quantity of meat to
be dressed, wholly for the poor; and every day they had what quantity of broth
they wanted. Twenty-four of the poorest were his constant pensioners. Four
times in the year a dinner was provided for them, when they received from his
steward a certain quantity of corn, and a sum of money; and at Christmas they
had always an ox divided among them.

In the distant parishes where he preached, as well as in his own
neighborhood, his generosity and benevolence were continually showing
themselves; particularly in the desolate parts of Northumberland. When he began
his journey, (says an old manuscript life of him) he would have ten pounds in
his purse, and at his coming home he would be twenty nobles in debt, which he
would always pay within a fortnight after. In the gaols he visited he was not
only careful to give the prisoners proper instructions, but used also to
purchase for them such necessaries as they wanted.

Of his benevolent temper the following instance is preserved. One day
returning home, he saw in a field several people crowding together, and judging
something more than ordinary had happened, he rode up, and found that one of
the horses in a team had suddenly dropped down, which they were endeavoring to
raise, but in vain, for the horse was dead. The owner of it seemed much
dejected with his misfortune; and declaring how grievous a loss it would be to
him, Mr Gilpin bade him not to be disheartened; "I Will let you have," says he,
honest man, that horse of mine, and pointed to his servant's. "Ah! master,"
replied the countryman, "my pocket will not reach such a beast as that." Come,
come, said Mr Gilpin, take him, take him; and when I demand my money, then thou
shall pay me.

Toward the latter part of his life, Mr Gilpin went through his duty with
great difficulty. His health was much impaired; for the fatigue he had
undergone so many years had broken his constitution. Thus he complains in a
letter to his friend: To sustain all these travels and troubles I have a very
weak body, subject to many diseases; by the monitions whereof I am daily warned
to remember death. My greatest grief of all is, that my memory is quite
decayed: My sight fails; my hearing fails; with other ailments, more than I
can well express. While he was thus struggling with an advanced age, and much
impaired constitution, there happened a very unfortunate affair, which entirely
distroyed his health. As he was crossing the marketplace at Durham, an ox ran
at him, and pushed him down with such violence, that it was imagined the
bruises he received would have occasioned his death. He lay long confined; and
though he again got abroad, he never recovered the little strength he had
before, and continued lame as long as he lived. But sickness was not the only
distress which the declining years of this excellent man had to struggle with.
As age and infirmity began to lessen the weight and influence he once
possessed, the malice and opposition of his enemies prevailed more: And he
experienced much ingratitude and ill usage, at a time when he was already
sinking under a weight of cares.

His pious resignation under such evils was not long exercised. About the
beginning of February, 1583, finding himself very weak, and sensible his end
must be drawing near, he told his friends his apprehensions, and spoke of his
death with that happy composure which attends the conclusion of a good life. He
was soon after confined to his chamber; but his senses continued perfect to the
last. A few days before his death he desired his friends, acquaintance, and
dependents might be called into his chamber; and being raised in his bed, he
addressed himself to them in a very pathetic manner, earnestly exhorting them
to the practice of piety and virtue. He also sent far several persons who had
hitherto made no good use of his advice, and upon whom he imagined his dying
words might have a better effect. But his speech began to saulter before he had
finished his exhortations. The remaining hours of his life he spent in prayer,
and conversation with some select friends, mentioning often the consolations of
Christianity; declaring they were the only true ones, and that nothing else
could bring a man peace at the last. He died on the 4th of March, 1583, in the
sixty-sixth year of his age.

He is described to have been tall of stature, slender, and hawk-nosed. In his
diet he was temperate, or rather abstemious. His parts were good; his
imagination, memory, and judgment lively, retentive, and solid. His
acquirements were considerable; for by unwearied application he had gained so
great a store of knowledge, that his biographers have said he was ignorant of
no part of learning at that time in esteem. In languages, history, and
divinity, he particularly excelled. He read poetry with a good taste; and was
himself, according to bishop Charleton, no mean poet. His temper was naturally
warm; and in his youth he sometimes gave way to passion; but at length he
entirely corrected that infirmity. His disposition was naturally serious; yet
among his particular friends he was cheerful, and sometimes facetious. His
general behavior was very affable. His severity had no object but himself; to
others he was humble, candid, and indulgent. He had extraordinary skill in the
art of managing a fortune; looking upon himself barely as a steward for other
people, and observing that his own desires should not exceed what calm reason
could justify. Extravagance was considered by him as a species of injustice;
and amidst his employments he found leisure to look into his affairs, well
knowing that frugality is the support of charity. His intimacies were but few;
for it was his endeavor, as the spirit of Christianity required, to dilate
rather than to contract his affections: Yet where he professed a particular
friendship, Mr Gilpin was a religious observer of its offices: Was the most
candid interpreter of the words and actions of others. Where he plainly saw
failings, would make every possible allowance for them: Used to express a
particular indignation at slander; often saying, it more deserved the gallows
than theft: Was remarkably guarded when he spoke of others; considering common
fame as the falsest medium, and a man's reputation as his most valuable
property: Ever displayed the greatest sincerity, as well as humility, in his
transactions with others: But the principal virtues, and distinguishing parts
of his character, were his conscientious discharge of the ministerial office,
extensive benevolence, and exalted piety. The constant tenor of his life was so
uniformly agreeable to the strictest rules of morality and religion, that it
gained him among his contemporaries the title of the Northern Apostle. In his
charitable distributions, he had no measure but the bounds of his income, of
which the least portion was always laid out on himself: Was the more
particularly careful to give away in his life time whatever could be saved for
the poor, as he had often seen and regretted the abuse of posthumous charities.
It is my design, at my departure, (said he, writing to a friend) to leave no
more behind me than what will serve to bury me, and pay my debts. What little
remained he left wholly to the poor, except a few slight tokens of remembrance
bequeathed to his friends. His uncommon benevolence made him deservedly styled
the father of the poor In the rebellion of the earl of Westmoreland, Mr Gilpin
retired to Oxford, and in his absence the rebels who had possessed Durham,
scattered themselves as far as Houghton, and seized his barns and cattle, the
chief of the plunderers being a person whom he had saved from the gallows. On
Mr Gilpin's return his intercessions saved from execution many of the poor
deluded vassals, who bad followed their lords.

Extract from his will.
I give to my successor and his successors after him, first the great new
brewing lead in the brew house, with the guilefat, and math tub, likewise in
the kiln a large new steep lead, which receives a chaldron of corn at once;
likewise in the lard-house, one great salting tub, which will hold four oxen or
more. I give to the poor of Houghton 20l. and nine of my oxen, the other nine I
bequeath to my three executors.


.

Houghton school-house is pleasantly situated on a dry rising ground, in the
churchyard, fronting to the west: The master's house adjoins it on the south
Extract from the will of Sir George Wheler, knight, rector of Houghton.
"And as to the arrears of rent, and all sum and sums of money, which shall be
due at or after my decease out of my several spiritual promotions, I give and
dispose thereof as follows: To the poor of the parish of St Oswald's in Durham,
the sum of 20l. To the poor of the parish of Houghton-in-the-Spring, the like
sum of 20l. And if it happens that there shall be any sum or sums of money
remaining of the arrears of my said spiritual promotions, either in the dean
and chapter's hands, parish of St Oswald's, or Houghton or any of them, over
and above what is so bequeathed to be paid out of my said spiritual promotions,
I bequeath all such sum and sums of money to my successor to the parish of
Houghton aforesaid, in trust that he shall therewith buy a piece of land, or
dispose of it to interest; the rent or interest of which I will shall be
equally divided between the schoolmaster and usher of the said town of Houghton
for the time being, and the poor of that part of the alms house which was built
by my predecessor Mr Geo. Davenport, to be laid out in clothes and other
necessaries, as my said successor shall think fit."

N. B. At Sir Geo. Wheler's death there remained of his spiritual promotions,
besides what he had bequeathed to be paid out of the said arrears, the sum of
589l. 2s. 1d. and which was paid to Dr Seeker, the immediate successor in the
rectory of Houghton, at different times whilst he was rector there, subject to
the trust in Sir Geo. Wheler's will. Dr Secker did, with 586l. 13s. 4d. part of
the said sum, and with the sum of 293l. 6s. 8d. the money of John Smailes, of
East Rainton, maltster, making together 880l. purchase of John Brough, a
farmhold in the township of East Rainton, for the remainder of a term of 21
years, holden by lease under the dean and chapter of Durham at the yearly rent
of 2l. 13s. 4d.

15th Oct. 1726. John Brough, and William Brough his brother, a legatee named
in the will of John Brough their father, assign the said lease and premises to
Dr Secker, and it being agreed upon the purchase, that two-thirds in value of
the premises should be allotted to Dr Secker in trust, the money advanced by
him being two-thirds of the purchase money, and the rest of the premises being
one-third, should be allotted to John Smailes. Dr Secker, by an indorsement on
the said assignment, dated the 29th July, 1727, declared that all that part of
the premises on the west side of the common lane leading to and from Durham,
the mansion house, barn, stack-garth, and fold, the east part of the house
called the Redhouse, with the appurtenances were taken in Dr Secker's name, in
trust for the school master and usher of the said town of Houghton.


. The school is well lighted, and fitted with convenient stalls from north to
south. Over the door is the following inscription: SCHOLA DE KEEPIER Kepier,
nigh Durham, as observed before, was the seat of the Heaths; and it is
conjectured, in compliment to Mr Heath, this was called Kepier school.

AB ELIZ. ANGLIAE REGNINA
Ao MDLXXIV. FUNDATA
EX PROCURATIONE J. HEATH, AR.
ET B. GILPIN, RECT. ECCL. HOUGHTO.
Christ. Hunter, M. B. of Durham.
C. H. M. B. ALUMNUS POSUIT.
Ao MDCCXXIV.


A little way to the south of the schoolmaster's house, and on a line with it,
is an hospital Mr Davenport, as believed, left an estate for the maintenance of
this hospital about the time aforesaid, of the annual value of 6l. 13s.

And Dr Bagshaw left a rent charge out of copyhold estates at Houghton, 2l.

A moiety of the Rainton estate, purchased with Sir Geo. Wheler's legacy, 2l.
13s. 4d.

There was a rent of 26s. 8d. paid out of the town chamber of Newcastle; but
this benefaction has been lost many years ago.

Extract from the will of Dr Henry Bagshaw, rector of Houghton.
Whereas I have surrendered into the hands of the lord of the manor of Houghton
aforesaid, according to the custom thereof, my two copyhold closes, situate
lying and being in Houghton aforesaid, commonly called the Broad Meadows and
Slipper Thorn, with the appurtenances, to the use of Mr Ra. Gowland and Mr Rob.
Chilton, to hold to them their sequels in right and assigns with a defeazance
underwritten, that the same was in trust, and to and for such uses,
limitations, intents, and purposes as by my last will and testament in writing,
or by my deed in writing, lawfully executed before credible witnesses, I should
limit, devise, and appoint, as by the said surrender and defeazance may more
fully appear. In pursuance thereof I do hereby devise, direct, and appoint, and
limit, that the said Ra. Gowland and Rob. Chilton shall pay all the rents and
profits arising out of the said closes that come to their hands within fourteen
days after the receipt thereof in manner following, that is to say for ever,
the clear yearly sum of three pounds to the principal schoolmaster of Houghton
aforesaid, and the clear yearly sum of forty shillings to the usher of the same
school for the time being, for the better maintenance of the said schoolmaster
and usher. And my will is, that the yearly sum of forty shillings be given to
Mr Davenport's part of the hospital of Houghton aforesaid, for ever, and the
yearly overplus or profits of the said closes over and above the said sum of
seven pounds per annum, and taxes and out rents, I will and hereby devise, that
my servant Rob. Chapman shall enjoy the same during his life, and after his
death, that the said overplus shall be yearly distributed at Christmas to the
poor of the township of Houghton aforesaid. And my will is, that the said R.
Chapman be tenant for life of the said two closes, so as he pay the clear sum
of seven pounds yearly by half yearly payments, to the trustees appointed for
these my charities, or by their order in such manner as before directed, over
and above the bishop's rent, taxes, and charges of future surrenders; and that
the same closes shall not be plowed but upon absolute necessity for the
improvement thereof. And I do hereby direct, that when either of them the said
Ra. Gowland or Rob. Chilton shall die, the survivor of them shall surrender the
said two closes to the use of the then rector of the parish of Houghton
aforesaid; and the governors of the school and hospital there, and the trust
aforesaid, shall be and remain, and the premises to be surrendered by the
surviving trustee to the other two succeeding the deceased from time to time
for ever on the trusts in this my last will and testament mentioned and
declared concerning the same, and the charge of the said surrenders to be paid
out of the overplus rent."

N. B. A surrender was never made by Mr Gowland, who survived Mr Chilton.


, erected for the reception of six poor people, and separated from the master's
house on the north by a garden belonging to the school. The building is formed
with a center and two wings; in the center are two chambers, and two in each of
the wings. On the north wing is the following inscription: -- George Lilburne,
esquire built the moiety of this hospital at his own charge, and endowed it with
ten pounds per annum for ever, for the maintenance of three poor people, Anno
Dom. 1668 Out rents charged on houses in Sunderland.
. At the west end of the south wing, and which is called Davenport's end, being
founded by Mr George Davenport Extract from the will of George Davenport, A. M.
rector of Houghton.
17th Sept. 1676. -- Geo. Davenport, by his will of this date, amongst other
things gave to the poor of Wigston in Leicestershire, where he was born, 20l.
to be added to the poor stock there. To the poor of the parish of Houghton 40l.
to be added to their stock; and 10l. to be distributed amongst them at his
burial or soon after: Then follow these words:

"Furthermore it is my will, that if I live not to endow the late built
hospital at Houghton, with lands or other revenues of 10l. or thereabout yearly
value, then my executors shall pay to the governors of Kepyer school and alms
house the sum of 160l. to purchase lands, or a yearly rent charge of 10l. for
the maintenance of three poor people. I will may be chose by the said
governors, with the advice of the rector of Houghton, out of the poor
inhabitants of the said parish of Houghton." He appointed his nephew John, son
of Stephen, executor and residuary devisee, forbids all preaching at his
funeral, and wills that his funeral expenses should not exceed 20 marks.


, rector of this parish, is the following inscription. All things come of thee,
O Lord, and of thine own have we given thee William Sharp, M. A. vicar of
Sherburn in Dorsetshire, and a native of this parish, intended to be a
considerable benefactor to this alms house. But finding his death approaching,
and wishing to avoid the interference of the mortmain act, he desisted from his
purpose of bequeathing a legacy to this and other charitable uses in his
parish, and determined to leave his estate to a near relation, Miss Dorothy
Spearman of Durham, with a paper containing hints of the several charities he
had in view. But drawing up his will himself, without the help of a person
skilled in the law, it appeared that Miss Spearman had only her life in the
estate, and that it would pass at her decease to Mr Sharp's heir at law. This
induced Miss Spearman, upon considering his several intended charities, and
finding those to the alms house to be the most useful and considerable, with
(...) generosity, immediately to purchase 600l, stock in the 3 per cent.
consolidated annuities, and to settle it upon Mr Lilburn's end of the alms
house, by which it is raised in value to an equality with the other parts of
the alms house. This is recorded on a stone now fixed on the north end of the
alms house, in the following terms: The charitable intention of the reverend
William Sharp, M. A. carried into effect by Miss Dorothy Spearman, his heiress
by will, added to the revenues of the alms house 18l. per annum.

Houghton-in-the-Spring parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L. s. d. L. s.
d. 39 2 5 5146 10 5

Grey's MSS. Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Cocken 9 16
0 0 9 10 East and Middle Herrington 21 18 10 0 13 4 East Renton 17 4 0 0 16 8
Eppleton 10 10 0 0 10 9 Houghton-le-Spring 54 5 0 2 2 3 Hetton 13 6 8 1 1 5
Murton house, etc. 9 15 2 0 8 4 Moor house 4 13 6 0 5 6 Moorsley 9 19 6 0 9 9
Little Eppleton 3 13 10 0 4 1 Newbottle 22 15 6 1 0 0 Offerton 15 4 10 0 15 0
Painsher 41 19 9 1 14 10 West Herrington 17 7 3 0 16 4 West Rainton 26 11 0 1 1
10 Warden Law 7 16 8 0 8 0

Registered estates: -- Herrington, Matthew Smith 50l. Sir Richard Smith 60l.
-- Middle Herrington, Sir R. Smith 57l. -- Low Marley, Sir R. Smith 10l. --
Mann's MSS.

Bishop's rents.
Newbottle 36 17 0 Warden Law 4 13 4 Middle Herrington 3 2 0 Houghton 36 6 7

Dean and chapter's rents.
East Rainton 23 14 4 West Rainton 27 3 10 Moor house 2 13 4


.

The order in which the several members of this parish are placed in the book
of rates presents us with MORTON, there called Murton House, which gave a local
name to the resident family in bishop Bury's time Petrus de Morton, Ao Bury, 4o
Inq. p. m.

Morton.

In Mortona sunt xvj firmarij qui tenent xxv bovat. unaquaque de xij acr. and
reddunt xiij d. de unaquaque bovata, et operantur xx diebus in autumno cum j
homine de unaquaque bovata et herciant viij diebus cum j equo de singulis ij
bovatis. Et faciunt iiij porcationes sicut illi de Wardon; et quadragant. vj
diebus bladum et faenum. Et faciunt viij ladas ad Dunolm. in anno vel viij ad
Alclet. Et de unaquaque caruca. villae arant apud hoctonam j acr. et reddunt
gallinas et ova sicut illi de Wardon. -- Boldon Buke.

Morton.

Terrae bond. Willielmus Stephenson tenet j mess. et ij bovat. terrae. Bovat.
contin. xij acr. redd. per annum xvi d. ad iiij term. usual. et us. pro
operibus; et unaquaque bovat. sol. operari xx diebus in autumno cum j homine,
et herciat viij diebus cum j equo de singulis ij bovat. et facit iiij
porcationes in autumno cum tota familia domus, excepta housewiva, et quadrig.
vj diebus blada et faenum; et unaquaque bovat. villae atat apud Houghton dim.
acr. terrae et facit viij ladas ad Dunolm. vel iiij ad Aukland, et reddit j
gallin. ad festum natal. d'ni et v ova ad fest. paschae et cariabit d'no et
senescallo suo et sacit opera ad molend. consueta in toto vj s. viij d.

Tho. Richardson et iij alii, etc. et faciunt et solvunt ut supra. -- Iidem
redd. etc. inter se xxij gallin. et ad fest. etc. xx / vx ova.

Terrae scaccarij. Willielmus Stevenson, etc. -- Iidem tenent. inter se
medietat. molend. aquat. de Newbotill et redd. per annum pro portione sua et
iiij bovat. in terrae de Heryngton ad iiij term. iiijli. vj s. viij d.

Tenentes dictae villae solv. annuatim pro operibus domin. quae solent solvere
tenentib. de Newbotill. iiij s.

Et dicti tenentes redd. per ann. pro officio punder ad fest. natal. d'ni et
pasch. xx gall. c ova.

Hatfield's Survey.
. By the Boldon Buke we observe, that those who held lands, etc. in Morton,
were styled firmarij, though they performed servile duties. There were sixteen
of those farmers, who held twenty five ox-gangs of land, each ox-gang
containing twelve acres, the rent being 8d. for each ox-gang. They wrought
twenty days in harvest, with one man for each, and harrowed eight days, with
one horse for every two ox-gangs: They made four portions like the tenants of
Wardon, with all their families, except the housewife, besides the twenty days
work in autumn, and they carted or led six days hay and corn, and carried eight
loads yearly to Durham or Auckland of the lord's baggage. For every carucate of
land, they plowed one acre at Houghton, and rendered for each ox-gang one hen
and five eggs. In Hatfield's Survey they are called bond tenants, and the
service of carriage is there explained to be either for the lord or his
seneschal; and that they performed the usual work at the mill. The office of
punder was executed among themselves, for which they paid annually xx hens and
100 eggs. The family of Lomley, in bishop Langley's time, held the manor of
Morton, and Morton house was the seat of a family of Belasise Inq. p. m. J.
Lomley chiv. Ao 15 Langley. -- A recovery against Sir J. Lomley, Morton inter
al. Ao 15 Tunstall. -- Pardon of alienation, 1 Aug. 1607, by fine from Sir John
Lomley, lord Lomley, and Catherine his wife, to Geo. Smith, et al. Morton inter
al. -- Rudd's MSS.
.

PENSHAW, or, as it is written in the ancient records, Pencher Pencher.

Willielmus Besseth habet Pencher in excambium pro terra quam pater suus habuit
in Middelham exceptis ducentis and septuaginta quatuor acris and dimid. tam de
terra culta quam de mora quas de episcopo tenet. in capite pro quibus reddit
quatuor marcas and pro quodam molendino duas marcas.

Risiduum autem villae tenet de Jordana de Scou^land de quo tenebat terram de
Middilham. -- Boldon Buke.

For Hatfield's Survey, vide Houghton.


, is noted in the Boldon Book to be the property of William Basseth, who had
the same in exchange for lands in Middleham, except 274 acres and a half of
cultivated and moor lands, which he held of the bishop in capite, rendering
four marks, and for the mill two marks: The rest of this vill he held of Jordon
d'Escoland, of whom the exchanged lands of Middleham were held. Penshaw came to
the family of Carlisles soon afterward; for in the fifth of bishop Hatfield,
by an inquisition taken on the death of Cecilia, the widow of Nicholas de
Carlisle, it appears she died seized of the lands and tenements called
Bernewell, of six marks rent, rendering this further service, that she should
provide for the great chase one man and two greyhounds; and that she also held
the whole vill of Penshaw, except the above lands of the heirs of d'Escoland.
And thereby it is stated, that Robert the son of Hugh Carlisle was her heir,
which Robert is named in Hatfield's Survey Vide notes to Houghton.
. Roger de Esh held lands under the Carlisles Inq. p. m. Rog. de Esh, chiv. 2
marc. and unius paris cirotecar. albar. Ao xo Hatfield, cor. R. de Bows, vic.
Dun.

Inq. p. m. Hugh de Carlisle, Ao 20 Hatfield, cor. W. de Meneville esc. in co.
Dun.


. And in the twenty-fifth year of that prelate, the family of Lambtons had
acquired lands there Inq. p. m. Rob. son of Rob. de Lambton, William his
brother and heir, Ao 25 Hatfield, cor. Wm de Meneville, vic. Dun.
; though the chief property remained in the Carlisles Inq. p. m. Rob de
Carlesle, Ao 5o Joh. ep. cor. W. del Bows esc. -- Inq. p. m. Rob. Carlesle
ten. d'co d'no. E. in c. man' de Barnwell, cum p't and molendinum and stagnum
sup' rivulum voc. Ellyngburn juxta Herington, etc. p'pin'quior. campo de Bedyk
de t'ris cultis and mores p' hom. and sid. and s. inveniendi unum h'oiem cum ij
leporijs ad magnam chaceam, etc. and villam de Pencher, etc. -- Ao 19 Langley.
-- Inq. p. m. T. Karlele, Ao D'ni 1430, ded. and concessit Jacobo Aynsle and
Rob'to Hete o'ia t'ras and ten. sua in Blackburn and sexies viginti and quatuor
decim acras, etc. p'pinquiores campo de Bedick, etc. d'ni Dun. E.
antecessoribus ipsius T. Karlele concess. etc. inter Neubotill and Pencher p'ut
in quad. c'ta Hugonis quond. E. D. before declarat. etc. and ded. and
concessit N'o Tremdon, etc. o'ia terras ten. etc. que idem Tho. h'uit in villis
and campis de Pencher, Elencrost, Usserton, Dun. Grendon, and Hartlepoole, Ao
30 Langley.
, till the thirtieth of bishop Langley, about which time Roger Thornton
obtained that family's possessions at Penshaw Una cum bosco voc. Pencher wood
q. ten. de Tho. Karlile. Inq. p. m. R. Thornton, and inq. p. m. Rog. Thornton,
14 Booth. Eliz. wise of Geo. Lomley heir.
, and the Lambtons the other part. In 1459 Inq. p. m. Joh. Carlesle mil. Ao 4
Booth. Inq. p. m. Tho. Lambton, etc. piscar. de Shiphaugh cum p'tin. in
Pencher, Ao 16 Booth. Inq. p. m. Ao 4 Dudley, W. Lambton.
, we find a Sir John Carlesle, knight, who claimed under settlement, part of
the ancient estate of Penshaw, and left a son and heir John; after which period
that family is not named in the records before us.

A new chapel was built at Penshaw some time about the year 1754, and William
Sisson, A. M. now living, was the first curate nominated thereto Penshaw
chapel. -- First subscription 200l. -- Queen's bounty 200l. -- Second
subscription 200l. -- Queen's bounty 200l. -- A lot 200l.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1779 345 1085 695

Number of Burials in the last year 33. -- Computed number of inhabitants 990.


. The etymology of the name of this place is evident, being compounded of Pen
and shaw, a woody mount or hill. This eminence is the property of General
Lambton, and now bears oak and other timber on its skirts, and contains
limestone and freestone quarries, with several valuable mines of coal. The
prospect from thence is extensive and noble, comprehending many of the chief
objects in the eastern part of the county, with a beautiful tract of country
toward the south and west, in which the city of Durham and Chester are
particularly conspicuous.

SOUTH-BIDICK, the seat of Mrs Mary Lambton, lies on the banks of the river
Were. By the Boldon Book it seems as if this manor had anciently appertained to
the Sea of Durham; for it is thereby stated, that the villains of South-Bedic
held their vill in firm, rendering five pounds rent, and providing eight score
men at harvest, and thirty-six carriages to lead corn at Houghton. But in the
second year of bishop Bury, by an inquisition taken on the death of Alianora de
Colleye, it appears she died seized of the manor of South-Bedyk, juxta
Newbotelle, held of the bishop in capite, by homage, fealty, and the quarter
part of a knight's see, with suit at the county; so that it seems from thence
the manor had been aliened from the Sea South-Bedic.

Villani de South Bedic tenent villam suam ad firmam and reddunt quinq. libras
and inveniunt viij xx homines ad metend. in autumno, and xxxvj quadrigat. ad
quadrigand. bladam apud hoctonam. -- Boldon Buke.

For Hatfield's Survey, vide Houghton.

Inq. p. m. Ao 2 Bury, cor. vic. in pleno com. Dun.


. By Hatfield's Survey we find the manor had passed to two parceners, for it is
therein set forth, that Robert Conyers, knight, and Richard de Burnynghill held
the vill Inq. p. m. Wm de Burnynghill, Ao 16 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. W. de
Claxton esc.
, in which the record states, there were villains as in the Boldon Book, but
there were no services, which ought to be inquired of. In the subsequent
records the name is Biddick Water Ville. We find one moiety of the manor passed
to the family of Dalden in the time of bishop Hatfield Inq. p. m. W. de Dalden,
who held jointly with Elianora his wife, and to the heirs of his body, a moiety
of the manor of Biddick Water Ville. Ao 25 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. W. de
Menevylle vic. Dun.

Inq. p. m. R. Conyers mil. who held a moiety of the manor in right of Alice
his wife. Ao 3 Skirlaw, ap. Dun. cor. L. de Lomley esc.

Inq. p. m. Hugh de Burnynghill, who held a moiety, etc. with Johan his wife,
by the grant of John de Eseby, chap. etc. Ao 16 Skirlaw, ap. Dun. cor. R.
Conyers chiv. esc.

Inq. p. m. Alicia wife of R. Conyers chiv. Ao 2 Langley, ap. Dun. cor. P. de
Lyndley esc.

Inq. p. m. Joan wife of Hugh de Burninghill. Ao 9 Langley, etc.

License to John Hedworth, esquire to alien Michal-Bedyk, all is Bedykfurd, and
South-Bedyk. Ao 1 Bainbrig. -- Rudd's MSS.

Pardon of alienation for Geo. Bows, esquire and his wife, to Henry Lyndley, of
the manor of Bedyk Water Ville. Ao 12 Matthew. -- Ibid.


. In later years the manor was again united in the possession of the Hedworths,
and after them of George Bows, esquire

Of BURN, or BURNT MOORS, we find nothing memorable.

HETTON, or HETTON-LE-HOLE, the seat of the honorable Thomas Lion, late
belonging to the family of Spearman, an excellent mansion, though in a low
sequestered situation. In bishop Hatfield's time this was the possession of the
family of Brackenburys Inq. p. m. Pet. de Brackenbury, who held jointly with
Cecilia his wife, the manor of Hetton for life, with remainder to Thomas his
son by his wife Agnes, under half a knight's fee, and service at the county,
value 40l. Ao 4 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. W. de Mordon vic.

Inq. p. m. Cecilia. Ao 25 Hatfield, etc.


. By marriage settlement it passed to the Tylliols, being settled on William
Laton and Isabella his wife, and the heirs of her body to be begotten by Laton,
and by whom she had issue Elizabeth, the wife of Peter Tylliol, esquire Inq. p. m.
Isabella q. s. ux. W. Claxton mil. pred. Isab. ten. d. q. ob. man. de Hetton,
cum p't ex dono et concessione W. Lamberd, Tho. de Brakenbury, et Rob. Coup.
Capni f'ct. d'cis Isabelle et he dib's de corpore suo et corp'e W. Laton nup'
viri sui p'creat q'd quid man. ten. de d'no E. p. s. m'etis un. seodi mil. val.
xxli. et q'd Eliz. ux. Petri Tylliol chapter est F. et. H. p'dcor Will'i de Laton
et Isab. de corp'ib's suis p'creat. etc. Ao 15 Langley.

Inq. p. m. R. Eure mil. ij cot. et x acr. in Hetton, which he held of W. de
Laton. Ao 17 Langley.

Inq. p. m. Pet. Tylliol chiv. d. q. ob. f. s. p' leg. Anglie ut de jure Eliz.
ux. etc. Rob. fill. Pet. et Eliz. est her. Ao 29 Langley.

Inq. p. m. Rob. Tylliol, 30 Langley. Et est in eod. m'io q'd situs m'ij qui
nil. val. p' an. ultra repr. et sunt ibid. xxij mess. que val. p' an. ult.
repr. c s. at sunt ibid. xxviij bovat. terrae arab. que val. p' an. ult. repr.
viijli. et sunt ibid. xxx prati que val. p' an. etc. xl s. et sunt ibid. xl
acr. bosci que val. per an. etc. xl s. et sunt ibid. cc acr. pastur. que val.
p' an. etc. xl s. et sic d'c'm man' de Hetton in toto se extendit ad dict.
xlli. etc.


. Male issue failing in Robert their son, the manor passed to parceners, his
sisters, Isabella the wife of John Colvill, and Margaret the wife of Chapter
Moresby. A moiety of the manor afterward reverted to a branch of the Tylliol
family Inq. p. m. W. Tylliol. arm. Ao 4 Dudley, etc. Philicia ux. Will.
Musgrave arm. et Margar. fill. et her.

Inq. relating to the manor of Hetton, temp. ep. Tunstall. -- Rudd's MSS.


, but again passed to parceners, the daughters of Will. de Tylliol.

There are two places of the name of EPPLETON, the one called Great Eppleton,
the seat of the Mascall family, but formerly the property of Thomas Shadforth,
esquire the other Little Eppleton, a seat of Ralph Gowland, esquire In the ancient
records the manor is called Applynden, and gave name to a resident family
before bishop Bury's time Inq. p. m. Tho. de Applynden. The manor of Applynden
held by service of one-third of a knight's fee. Rob. son of Tho. son of Johanna
heir, paid 8 marks to the hospital of Kepier. Ao 7 Bury. In pleu. com. Dun.
cor. Joh. de Menville vic. -- Inq. p. m. Tho. de Applynden. Ao 16 Hatfield.
. In the time of bishop Skirlaw it was the estate of William Heron lord of Say,
and continued in that family for several generations Inq. p. m. Gerard. Heron
chiv. 13s. 4d. to Kepier hospital, val. 20 marks. Ao 16 Skirlaw, ap. Dun. cor.
R. Conyers esc. -- Inq. p. m. W. Heron chapter lord of Say held in fee-tail to him
and the heirs male of his body. Ao 17 Skirlaw. -- Inq. p. m. Nich. Heron, who
held in fee-tail to him and the heirs male of his body; remainder to the right
heirs of John Heron, father of John Heron, knight, father of Nicholas, 75s. 6d.
rent to the master of Kepier hospital. Ao 3 Langley. -- Inq. p. m. John Heron
cxiijs. iiijd. rent to the hospital of Kepier. Ao 15 Langley.


.

Of MOORSLEY we find nothing memorable.

By the ancient records it is difficult to separate the HERRINGTONS, which,
being three, East, West, and Middle Herrington, appear in some confusion. In
the Boldon Book Herington.

Duae parts de Herington quas Hugo Hermas tenet. redd. xx s. de cornag. and ij
parts j vaccae de metrich. and ij parts j castelmanni and viij. scaceldr. tam
brasij quam farinae and avenae and arant and herciant iiij acras apud Newbotill
and faciunt operationes hominum in autumno.

Drengus pascit canem and equm quantum ad duas parts drengagij pertinet. --
Boldon Buke.

Heryngton.

Tenentes in Dringag. Thomas Colvyll miles tenet de jure uxoris suae haeredis
Thomas de Esh duas parts manner. de Est Heryngton per servic. forin. and redd.
per ann. ad iiij term. usuales pro c^^ nag. xxs. et red. ad fest. S. Martini
pro ij partibus j vaccae de metrich. iiij s. and red. pro operibus xij d. -- Et
^ed. ad fest. Puris. B. Mariae iiij quar. aven. x bz. de scat. farin. aven. and
ij quarter de scatmalt. -- Et solehat invenire unum hominem vocat. castelman
and arare and herciare iiij acr. terrae apud Newbotill, and facit operationes
cum xij hominibus in autumno. -- Et dat. xij d. pro operibus autumnal.
tenentibus terr. domin. de Newbotill. -- Et ipse and tenentes sui ibid.
sequentur curiam d'ni vocat halmotea, and ibi placitabunt and recipient rectum
and justiciam in tot^ per ann.

Thomas de Heryngton tenet j mes. and xl acr. terrae ibid. de haereditate per
servic. forin. quantum pertinet ad ij parts dringag. and vadit in magna chacea
d'ni episcopi cum ij partibus ij leporarior. and quadrigat, ij parts unius
ton. vini and sequitur placita and vadit in legation. episcopi and pascit canem
and equum and operatur ad molend. opera consueta and redd per ann. ad iiij
term. v s.

Terrae scaccurij. Praedictus Thomas Colvill tenet de jure uxoris suae j plac.
vocat. le Haynyng contin. c acr. terrae per estimation. and redd. per ann.
xxxvij s. ij d.

Willielmus Robinson tenet j mes. and ij bovat. terrae and red. per ann. cum
iiij d. pro operibus autumn. firmarijs dominica. de Newbotill xij s. iiij d.

Rogerus Atkynson and Will's Atthall tenet ij mes. and ij bovat. terrae red.
per ann. cum iiij d. pro operibus ut supra xij d. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Inq. p. m. Joh. Denum. Ao 10 Beaumont, ap. Dun. in plen. com. Dun. co. Joh. de
Hanby vic. Dun.


only one Herrington is named, of which Hugh Hermas then held two parts,
rendering xx s. for cornage, two parts of the value of a milch cow, and two
parts toward a castleman; also rendering eight chalders of malt, and the like
of meal, and oats, plowing and harrowing four acres at Newbottle, and working
at harvest. It appears that this was of dringage service, as the holder fed dog
and horse in proportion to two parts of a dringe. In bishop Beaumont's time
John Denum was possessed of Woodhall in West Herrington, with a carucate of
land and five acres of wood, held of the bishop in capite; and also Roger de
Eshe was seized of East Herrington and Middle Herrington, and John D'Arcy of
West Herrington, under whom Denum held parcels thereof in East Herrington, by
homage, fealty, and suit of court, and service at the mill, under a thirtieth
part mulcture, and in Middle Herrington by dringage service: For lands in West
Herrington he did homage and fealty to D'Arcy Inq. p. m. John D'Arcy chiv. ob.
s. man' West Herrington, by the courtesy of England, held in cap. of the bishop
of Durham by homage, fealty and half a knight's fee: And also the manor of
Herverton, John D'Arcy his son and heir. Ao 10 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor. R. de
Bows vic. Dun.

Inq. p. m. Isab. widow of Rich. Morrison, 40 acres in Middle Herrington, held
of the bishop in cap. and held of the lord of Hilton 10 acres on Grendon moor,
by a rose and 5 s. rent to Matild. de Acton. Ao 14 Hatfield, ap. Dun. cor W. de
Claxton chiv. vic. Dun.

Inq. p. m. Joh. fill. Joh. Pinchard, land in Middle Herrington, held of the
bishop in cap. 100 part of a knight's fee.

Inq. p. m. Joh. de Denum. Ao 33 Hatfield, cor. J. de Hyndeley esc.

Inq. p. m. John de Herrington. Ao 5 Joh. ep. Dun. cor. R. de Laton esc.


. In Hatfield's Survey, under the title of tenants in dringage, it is set
forth, that Tho. Colvyll, knight, in right of his wife, heiress of Tho. de
Eshe, held two parts of the manor of East Herrington by foreign service,
rendering yearly for cornage 20s. for two parts of a milch cow 4s. and for work
12d. also four quarters of oats, ten bushels of scat or scac oat meal, and two
quarters of malt; also providing according to custom one castleman, and plowing
and harrowing four acres at Newbottle, and working with twelve men at harvest,
paying 12d. for harvest work at Newbottle on the demesne there. And that he and
those holding under him, should follow the lords court called the halmote, and
there plead and be impleaded, and receive right and justice. We find thereby
that a family had assumed the local name, and that Thomas de Herrington held
lands of inheritance there by foreign service, as much as appertained to two
parts of a dringe, attending the bishop's great or forest chase with two parts
of two greyhounds, leading two parts of a ton of wine, attending the court,
serving in the bishop's embassies, feeding dog and horse, and working at the
mill as the custom was. Colvyll also, in his wife's right, held a place called
Hayning, containing by estimation 100 acres. Will. Robinson also in this early
period, held a message and two oxgangs of land there. The estate of Thomas de
Eshe, by Johan his daughter and heiress, came to Robert de Bland her husband,
in the time of bishop Skirlaw Inq p. m. Rob. de Bland, who held of the right
and inheritance of Johan his wife, who was the daughter and heiress of Tho. de
Eshe, the manor of Herrington, with its members in Herryngton-dale, of the
bishop in dringage. Vide Eshe.

Inq. p. m. Joh. de Fernelaw and Alicia his wife, daughter and heiress of John
de Castle, lands in Middle and West Herrington, held of Rob. D'Arcy. Ao 8
Skirlaw, ap. Chester, cor. Rob. de Laton chiv. esc.

Inq. p m. Bertram Monboucher, lands in West Herrington, held of Rob. D'Arcy.
Ao 12 Skirlaw, ep. Dun. cor. T. de Claxton esc.


. The estate of D'Arcy, in the tenth year of bishop Langley, was settled in
trust for Robert D'Arcy and Margaret his wife, and the heirs of their bodies
Vide inq. 10 Langley, ap. Dun. 18 May, cor. Will. de Claxton esc.
, who failed in issue, and left two sisters his coheiresses, one of whom,
Isabell, was the wife of Rolland D'Arcy, and the other Elizabeth, the wife of
John Percy Inq. p. m. Marg. D'Arcy. Ao 29 Langley.
. Roger Thornton became possessed of the estates of the family of Herrington in
East and Middle Herrington Inq. p. m. Rog. Thornton de NC. sup' Tynam market.
Ao 24 Langley.

License for John Hedworth, esquire to alien lands in West Herrington in bishop
Sever's time. -- Rudd's MSS.

Special liberty to Richard Hedworth, son and heir of John, of a third part of
the manor of West Herrington. Ao 9 Barnes. -- Ibid.


, which came to the Lumleys by the heiress of the Thorntons. There is a
handsome mansion house belonging to the family of Robinsons, at Middle
Herrington.

The next place, in the arrangement of the book of rates, is NEWBOTTLE, a
beautiful village on a fine elevated situation, a little to the north-west of
Houghton. In the Boldon Book it is set forth, that Newbottle consisted of
sixteen cottagers, who each held twelve acres of land, and worked two days in
every week throughout the year, made four portions of land in autumn, in which
work all the family except the housewife, were to labor, and each cottager
rendered one hen and five eggs. There were three other cottagers, who held six
acres each, and wrought two days in the week between Pentecost and Martinmass.
The greve or headborough, and smith, had each twelve acres, their fee of
service, and the punder had twelve acres, and also a thrave of corn from every
carucate of land in Newbottle, Biddick, and Herrington, and rendered 40 hens
and ccc eggs. The demesne, which consisted of four carucates of land, with the
sheep and pasture, were then in the bishop's hands. Hugh Boynton, with sundry
others, held the demesne lands at the time of Hatfield's Survey, containing 312
acres. There is nothing very singular in that survey relative to Newbottle,
save that we do not find one tenant in capite there Newbotill.

In Newbotill sunt xvj cotemanni quorum unusquisque tenet xij acr. and operatur
p' totum annum duobus diebus in ebdomeda et facit in operatione sua iiij
porcationes in autumno cum omni familia domus except. houswyva, and reddit unam
gallinam and v ova.

Et tres alii cotemanni quorum unusquisque tenet vj acr. and operatur a Pentec.
usq. as festum S. Martini ij diebus in ebdomeda.

Johannes filius Henrici tenet j toftum and xij acr. pro xij d. in excambium
terrae quam prius habere solebat in Herington.

Praepositus tenet xij acr. pro suo servitio. Faber xij acr. pro suo servitio.

Pundere xij acr. and habet de unaquaque caruca de Newbotill and de Bedic and
de Herington unam travam bladi and reddit xl gallinas and ccc ova.

Dominium iiij carucar. and oves cum pastura sunt in manu episcopi. -- Boldon
Buke.

Newbotill.

Terrae domin. Hugo de Boynton and tenet xiij acr. -- Johannes Wilkinson xiij
acr. -- alii tenentes cccxij acr. Praedicti tenentes tenent inter se j acr.
terrae de eisd'm domin. and red. per ann. ut sup. xviij d.

Terrae bond. Hugo Boynton cum multis aliis, etc. -- Iidem tenentes redd. pro
vij acr. terrae punder. ad fest. natal. d'ni paschae xvj gall. and liij xx ova.

Terra in mora. Willielmus Shilton tenet, etc. cum aliis, etc. Iidem tenentes
solv. inter se pro operationibus cotmannor. and redd. per ann. viij s --
Commun. furnum ibid. and redd. per ann. iij s. iiij d. -- Medietatem molendini
de Newbotill and redd. per ann. iiijli. vj s. viij d.

Terrae scaccarij. Willielmus de Shilton and xx alii tenentes, etc.

Dominic. Plac. Johannes Goryng tenet j cotag. infra dominicam plac. etc. etc.
-- Hatfield's Survey.

Lib. M. Register's office, Durham.

Newbottle division ins. manner. de Houghton-le-Spring, 29th Nov. 1691, p. 64.

All claimed as copyholders or leaseholders under the bishop, and paid him 10l.
for his interest or consent to the confirmation of the division. -- Hodgson's
MSS.

The Hall moor and Dobmire moor divided. The Chiltons and Wilsons were
principal claimants. The particulars too tedious to be inserted here.


. Many genteel families reside here.

WARDON, or as it is called in the Boldon Book, WARDONA, consisted of nine
firmarij or tenants, who held eighteen oxgangs of land, (each oxgang containing
thirteen acres and a half) rendering 8d. for each oxgang. They wrought twenty
days in autumn with one man for each oxgang, and harrowed four days with one
horse for every two oxgangs: In the service of twenty days in autumn they made
up four portions of land with all their family, except the housewife; and they
carted corn two days, and one day hay, and for each oxgang paid one hen and
five eggs. In Hatfield's Survey is nothing singular relative to this place,
wherein was not one tenant in capite Wardona.

In Wardona sunt jx firmarij qui tenent. xviij bovatas unamquamque de xiij
acris and dim. and redunt viij d. de unaquaque bovata; and operantur xx diebus
in autumno cum j homine de unaquaque bovata; and herciant iiij diebus cum j
equo de singulis ij bovatis. Et faciunt iiij porcationes cum omni familia
domus, excepta husewyva infra praedictus operationes xx dierum; and quadrigant
ij diebus bladum and uno die fenum. Et de unaquaque bovata reddunt j gallinam
and v ova. -- Boldon Buke.

Wardon.

Johannes Air tenet, etc. and solebat operari sicut illi de Boldon and redd.
etc.

Terrae bond. Johannes Arnold, etc. Robertus Wright, etc. Will's Porter, etc.
-- Predicti tenentes reddunt inter se pro lx acr. terrae, etc.

Terrae scaccarij. Will's Porter, etc. tenentes ibid. solv. inter se ad festa
natal. d'ni and pasch. xviij gallin. ^ijx xx ova. -- Solv. punder iiijx xx de
Houghton ad eadem festam xl gall. xij xx ova.

Hatfield's Survey.
. In our attention to the city of Durham certain conjectures were formed
touching the tradition, that Wardon hill was the ground where St Cuthbert's
remains were miraculously staid on the return from Ripon, previous to the
settlement at Durham; in that place were noted the uncertain evidence of
ancient writers, and we presumed to give an opinion, that Wardon was not the
place pointed out by the writers of antiquity. Those who treat of our church
history do not mention that any particular veneration was paid to the saint's
resting place, till the time of prior Hugh of Darlington, who built a camera, a
hall, and chapel at Wardelau, or Wadele. Wardon was from very early times part
of the possessions of the Sea, but never of the convent, so that the prior had
no right to enter therein, and build a lodge or hall for the use of the
cloister. The hill of Wardon is a considerable eminence, rising gradually from
all sides but toward the east, where it is more steep: There are no remains of
buildings to be discovered on any part of it. The similitude of name to that of
the place mentioned by old writers, has led to the error; but if we consider
the names Wardon and Wardona, we shall be led into two probable conjectures
touching their etymology, either that the eminence commanding an extensive
prospect by sea and land, was the station of the warden of the north, in some
conflicts with the Danes or Scots, and was called the Warden's Law, or Mount;
or that this being a mark and guide for sailors, when the small vessels of the
ancients kept close under the shores, and for want of the compass dared not in
dark weather to trust themselves to an open and stormy sea, it was the point of
view which struck the eye on passing the promontory of Flamborough or Souter
Point, and guided to the mouth of the river Were, gaining thereby the name of
Were-Dun, or the Hill of Were. It is left to the reader to judge of these
conjectures, we having discovered no degree of evidence to support the
tradition, that by miraculous interposition, here began the leading events
which were to aggrandize the present city of Durham.

We find little in the records of the Sea touching EAST and WEST RAINTON, they
being chiefly the possessions of the convent of Durham. Bishop Bainbrigg
granted to prior Thomas and the convent Rot. B. No 64.
, free warren in Rainton park; bishop Fordham gave them license Sch. 10, No 13.
to acquire lands in East Rainton, the estates of John Bap and Walter
Tailliour, held under the priory; and bishop Neville did the like Rot. M. No 53.
, as to other lands A conveyance from John Richardson, of Durham, to John
Heath, of Ramside, gent. of all tithes of corn and grain, line and hemp, within
the town fields and territories of East Rainton. Temp. bishop Mathews

Rudd's MSS. There was a chapel at West Rainton, and a chantry therein
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, called our lady's chapel. -- MSS. Chapter Hunter, M D.

In 1471, the prior of Durham presented Thomas Roy to this chantry, out of
regard to the queen of England, but upon this condition, that he should not
leave the chantry unserved three whole months. -- Richard Gallaway, the last
incumbent of St Mary's chantry, received a pension of 4l. An. 1553.

Our Lady's chapel of West Rainton 7l. -- Randall's MSS.


.

MOOR HOUSE appears to have been part of the possessions of the Lumleys in
bishop Langley's time Inq. p. m. Joh. de Lomley. Ao 15 bishop Langley.
.

COKEN, the seat of Ralph Carr, esquire lies in this parish, on the banks of the
river Were, where the river forms a beautiful curvature, almost to enclose the
enchanting scene. The mansion house is ancient, but the situation elevated and
fine. Mr Pennant, from some inadvertency, speaks of it as being the seat of St
Godric's austerities; Finchale, where the hermitage stood, being on the
opposite side of the river. We repeat part of the description given by that
judicious traveller. 12 July, saw Coken, the seat of Mr Carr; a most romantic
situation, laid out with great judgment: The walks are very extensive,
principally along the sides or at the bottom of great dells, bounded with vast
precipices, finely wooded; and many parts of the rocks are planted with vines
and other fruit trees, which I was told bore well, but late. The river Were
winds along the hollows, and forms two very fine reaches, at the place where
you enter these walks. Its waters are very clear, and its bottom a solid rock.
The view toward the ruins of Finchal abbey is remarkably great; and the walk
beneath the cliffs has a magnificent solemnity, a sit retreat for its monastic
inhabitants. This was once called the Desert, and was the rude scene of the
austerities of St Godric, who carried them to the most senseless extravagance.
A sober mind may even at present be affected with horror at the prospect from
the summits of the cliffs into a darksome and stupendous chasm, rendered still
more tremendous by the roaring of the waters over its distant bottom. The house
and adjacent grounds are situated on an eminence, on three sides washed by the
river, and toward the east bounded by deep dells, filled with stately forest
trees. The southern side of this peninsula is laid out in pleasure grounds; one
wide and extended terrace runs along the summit of the cliffs, another at their
feet: From the upper terrace fine openings in the wood afford prospects of the
adjacent lands; and in one point of view, you look down upon the solemn vale
scattered with the ruins of the monastery and abbey. The lower terrace is
formed on the shelves of the rocky shore, from whence the cliffs rise
perpendicular near an hundred feet, crowned with hanging oaks, which strike
their roots into the fissures of the rock, and stretch a solemn umbrage over
the walk. From this terrace the ruins of the religious edifice appear in all
their majestic beauties, shut in by rising grounds fringed with woods; the
river falls over a rocky channel in troubled streams, and the murmurs of the
waters are repeated by a soothing echo. For religious contemplation, recluse
piety, and self-denial, never was place better adapted; much pity it was ever
disgraced by unmeaning severity and hypocrisy! Various are the beautiful scenes
this walk affords; description is languid; to visit the place is the only means
of forming ideas of its picturesque excellencies. Proceeding along the eastern
side of the eminence, the walk is carried on the summit of a deep and wooded
dell, which relieves the eye for some time before you enter upon the northern
rocks, which are shaken, rugged, and truly august; mighty volumes hang over
your head, as if the wind which shook the oaks would rend the precipice and
tumble it into the vale. Several deep grottos formed by nature, are shadowed
with trees suspended from their roof; hasty streams fall from the cliffs, and
with a hollow clamor increase the pleasing solemnity of the vast scene. The
river forms a canal near a mile in length, through an avenue of rocks and
hanging forests; the spire of Chester church the terminating object. The woods
are noble, consisting chiefly of oaks of a great age: Nature has lavished
beauties on this place, and what art has done with an excellent taste, has
smoothed her brow where art was wanted, and opened to the eye those beauties
her wildness would otherwise have concealed. In the time of bishop Galfrid, one
Aellafus, a priest, gave Coken to the church of Durham. This is to be
understood only of part of the territory now called Coken. The first lay person
we find in the ancient records possessed of lands in Coken, is Alexander de
Kibblesworth, of whom the family of Birtley, in bishop Hatfield's time, held
lands there; they also held other lands in Coken of the priory of Durham Inq.
p. m. William son of Wahanc de Birtley, Ao 21 Hatfield.
. Alexander held of the prior of Finchale a moiety of the vill of Coken Inq. p.
m. Alex. de Kibblesworth. Ao 23 Hatfield. -- Inq. p. m. John de Kibblesworth,
Ao 25 Hatfield. In this inq. it is said he held a moiety of the vill of Coken
of the lord prior of Durham, rendering a pound of pepper.
; on the death of John his son, the family possessions fell to five daughters
his coheiresses. The Lumleys had lands there in bishop Langley's time.

OFFERTON was one of the places given by Athelstan to the Sea of Durham, as an
appendage of Weremouth. In bishop Beaumont's time the vill of Offerton was the
possession of John de Denum Inq. p. m. John de Denum, Ao 10, Beaumont.
; but from that period we find few traces of it in the records. The
mansion house, the seat of Francis Middleton, esquire lately deceased, is
pleasantly situated on the brow of a hill, commanding an extensive prospect up
the valley north-eastward.

The Parish of DALTON,
properly called DALTON-LE-DALE, the small village with the church lying in a
very deep and narrow valley, within a mile of the sea: The scenes are romantic,
but for want of wood, are deficient in that richness which is so pleasing in
the valleys further from the ocean. The church is small, and without ailes.
There are two table monuments in the chancel, one with a recumbent effigy in
stone, of a person in armor, but without an inscription.

Nearer to the sea lies DALDEN; the vale still deep and narrow, with some
little wood, which fringes the margin of the brook: The old tower or house of
Dalden is in ruins, and so much destroyed as to furnish no idea of its former
consequence: From the situation it appears to have been merely strengthened
against wandering robbers. Dalden gave name to a resident family so early as
bishop Hatfield's time, when we find William de Dalden held the manor of the
lord de Percy, by homage, fealty, and a knight's fee, for which the lord Percy
made suit at the bishop's county Inq. p. m. 25 Hatfield.
. It became the possession of the Bowes's, who held of Henry earl of
Northumberland Inq. p. m Matildis ux. Will. Bows chiv. Ao 15 Langley. -- Inq.
p. m. W. Bows mil. Ao 1 Booth. -- Inq. p. m. W. Bows arm. 17 Booth. Et dic.
ult'ius q'd d'cus Will'us in d'co Bre. no'iat p' c'tam suam jur. in evidenc.
ost. dedit man'ium de Dalden cum suis p't, etc. Henrico and Thome Fairchare
he'nd. and tenend. p'de'm man'ium de Dalden, etc. cum suis p't p'sat Henrico
and Thome and head. suis imp'p'm virtute cujus doni p'dict. H. and T. suerunt
inde seiti in d'nico suo ut de fo. q'd quid. man'ium de Dalden cum suis p't.
te. de d'ce d'no ep. causa sorif'cur. sact. p' Henr. nup' com. Northumbr. set
p' que s'a J. penitus ign. etc.

Livery to Geo. Bows, esquire son and heir of Sir Ralph Bows of Dawdon, alias
Streatlam, alias Cowton. -- 6th Apr. Ao 9, Tunstall.


, and afterward came to the Blakistons of Blakiston, and Winyard Pardon to Sir
Tho. Blakiston, knight and bart. for alienation to Sir Wm Blakiston of Wynyard,
knight, dated 26 June, 13 Ja. I. of the manors of Blaxton, Coxhowe, and Dalden,
and land in Thorpthewles. As to Blaxton to the use of Sir William for life;
remainder to Sir Thomas his eldest son in tail male; remainder to Sir William's
second son John, in tail male; remainder to the third son Ralph, in tail male;
remainder to the fourth son Francis, in tail male; remainder to the fifth son
William, in tail male; remainder to the youngest son Marmaduc, in tail male;
remainder to the right heirs of Sir William. And as to Coxhowe and Dalden, to
the use of Sir Thomas in tail male, with like remainders to his brothers. Dated
2d Aug. 1615.

At this time Sir Thomas is called esquire, so that he was knighted or made a
baronet between the date of the settlement and this pardon, which is not a year.

10 Feb. 1615. License to Sir Thomas Blakiston of Daldon, knight and baronet,
to alien to Robert Collingwood of Hetton on the Hill, a moiety of the manor of
Daldon. -- Rudd's MSS.


. A moiety was sold off to Collingwood of Hetton, from which family the
Milbankes were purchasers.

Dalton was one of the places given to the Sea of Durham by Athelstan. Bishop
William de Carilepho annexed the church to the convent. The family of Lumley
had lands at Dalton 1082. Carta 1 'ma in eccl. Dun. fo. 70. Vide note to p.
178, vol. i. Annals of W. de Carilepho. Pardon of alienation from Sir John
Lumley, lord Lumley, and Catherine his wife. 1 Aug. 1607. -- Rudd's MSS.

Ordinatio vicariar. de Ellingham, Dalton in valle and Brankton. E. Cartuar.
II. Eccl'ie Dun. fo. 3, 1273. Officialis, etc. pateat, etc. q'd cum a ven. pre.
Rob'to dei gra. epo, etc. nobis sit injunctum ut de vic'iis eccl'iar. de
Dalton, etc. ad p'natum pr. and conventus Dunelm. spectantibus. In quibus, etc.
ordinamus and taxamus in hunc modum. Vic'ia vero de Dalton in toto alt'agio
ipius eccl. viz. decima Lanae Agnor. faeni molendinor. and pisc'iar ac aliis
minutis decimis and obvencoib's ad ipsam eccl'iam p'tin. una cum area
competenti in villa de Dalton ad edificand. salva cam'ario Dun. decia faeni de
Morton, etc. -- Randal's MSS.

This is a discharged living in the deanery of Easington, and dedicated to St
Andrew. -- The dean and chaper of Durham patrons.

Tenths 12s. 0d. -- Proc. ep. 4s. -- Clear yearly val. 40l. 17s. 11d. -- Real
value 90l.

Appropriation. Angl. Sac. vol. i. p. 733.

VICARS.
Gilbert de Billingham, oc. vic. 1180 Ingelramus, 1273 Rob. de Herrington Will.
de Norton, 1347, p. m. Herrington Rich. de Wolveston, 1373 Tho. Crokay, 1405
Rich. Knapton Rog. Moreby, 1425, p. m. Knapton Tho. March, 1438, p. res. Moreby
Rich. Rasch, 1445, p. res. March Will. Aclyff, 1464, p. res. Rasch Will.
Nicholl, 1477 John Ledell, 1485 Tho. Fell, 1486 Rob. Forest, 1526, p. m. Fell
Anth. Fawell, 1530, p. res. Forest Edw. Baits, cl. 1560, p. m. Fawell Franc.
Trollop, cl. 1562, p. res. Baits Rob. Forster, cap. 1564, p. res. Trollop
Sampson King, cl. 1583, p. m. Forster Rich. Clement, 1605 Math. Cowper, cl. A.
M. 1621, p. m. Clement Sam. Bolton, A. M. 1662, p. res. Cowper Tho. Sharp, cl.
1665, p. res. Bolton, (over the vicarage door inscribed Tho. Sharp edif. 1665)
was pr. 29th March Pet. Wilson, A. M. 1715, p. m. Sharp Edw. Herne, A. B. 1732,
p. m. Wilson Will. Dunne, A. M. 1740, p. m. Herne Tho. Drake, A. M. 1761, p. m.
Dunne, he received from Dunne's executors 27l. dilap. Nich. Hornsby, A. M.
1774, p. res. Drake Jos. Watkins, A. M. 1775, p. res. Hornsby -- Pixall, p.
res. Watkins
Randal's MSS. Dalton parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L. 9 16 6 L. 1201
18 8

Grey's MSS. Dean and chapter's rents. -- Cold Hesledon tithe 5l. -- Morton
tithe 5l. 6s. 8d. -- Dalton tithe 5l. 6s. 8d. -- Morton tithe hay 9s. 4d. --
Dalton tenements 12l. 15s. 6d. -- Murton 13l. 4s. 5d.

Land tax at 4s. County rates 6s. 8d. Cold Hesleton 12 2 0 0 11 0
Dalton-le-Dale 11 4 0 0 11 8 Dawdon 22 11 4 1 2 9 East Morton 20 18 10 1 0 0

Mann's MSS Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 134 28 96 1760
to 1779 102 44 59 Increase 18 Decrease 32 37

Number of burials in the last year 5. -- Computed number of inhabitants 150.


.

In bishop Langley's time the manor of Hesleton near Morton was the estate of
the Lumleys Inq. p. m. John de Lomley. Ao 15 Tunstall, a recovery against Sir
John Lumley, lord Lumley for the manors of Hesleden, etc. -- 1 Aug 1607. Pardon
for alien. from Sir John Lumley, lord Lumley, and Cath. his wife, by fine to
Geo. Smith and another for lands in Hesleden, alias Cold Hesleden. -- Rudd's
MSS.


.

PEDIGREE OFTHE FAMILY OF BELLASIS, etc.
(A) Richard, knighted by King Chas. I. buried at Stranton, Margaret, d. of Sir
William Lambton. Was buried at Stranton.
William, was a great favorite of the Duke of Monmouth. Catharine, d. of Sir
Tho. Davison, of Blakiston. Margaret, only child. Elizabeth, d. of John
Brandling, Esquire of Middleton, near Leeds. Richard, a Barrister at law, ob. s. p.
Thomas, a col. in the army. A d. of *** Gore, Esquire Henry Belasyse, Esquire living in
Cheshire, A. D. 1794. Aet. 84. *** d. of *** Glynne, of Wales. Rowland died
unmar. Was knighted by King William, ob. 1719, bur. at Brancepeth, Aet. 71.
Henry, Elizabeth Benson, mother to Lord Bingley. Mary, died Aetat 17. William,
of Brancepeth Castle, ob. 10th Feb. 1769. *** Billings. An only daughter died
unm. April, 1774. Fleetwood Shuttleworth, neice to Sir Rich. of Forcet, Knt.
Catharine, m. Henry Talbot, of Burroby, Esquire Mary, m. Sir Th. Lorraine, Bart.
William, Martha, d. of Sir Henry Curwen, of Workington, Knt. William, died
unmar. Richard, of Houghton, died 1st Nov. 1721. Margaret, d. of Lodowick Hall,
of Chilton, Esquire ob. 1st April, 1728. Thomas, ob. 27th Aug. 1751. Alice, d. of
R. Hilton, of Durham, wid. of Chr. Blacket of Newham. Martha Maria, only daugh.
Richard Bows, of Darlington, surgeon. 1 Charles. 3 Margaret. 2 Martha. 4
Thomas now of Darlington, attorney at law. 5 Frances. 6 Bellasyse. William,
Jane, d. of Seth Loftus, of Whitehall, county of York. Charles. Mary, ob. 6th
May, 1791. John, died unm. Margaret, m. Mich. Hall, of Chester, Esquire Elizabeth,
m. John Fern, of Newcastle, Esquire Dorothy died unmar. Bridget Henrietta, d. of
Sir Hugh Bethel, Knt. Charles, m. Cath. d. of Sir Robert Layton. John, Brian,
George, all died unmar. Marg. married Simpson of Pittington. Elizabeth, married
Davison of Blakiston, Knt. Dorothy, m. Millar, of Whitwell. Mary, m. Sir John
Delaval, Bart. Timothea, m. Sir Ra. Davison, of Durham. Sheriff of Durham, ob
3d Dec. 1641, Aetat 48.



genealogy Pedigree of the Family of BELLASIS, of Morton, or Murton; and
Oughton, or Owton, in the County of Durham.
N. B. In Sir George Norroy's visitation, we find this family's pedigree twice
stated; we have therefore given them together with a continuation to the
present time. (This refers to VOL. II. PAGE 574.) Henry Bellasis of Newborough,
in the county of York, Margaret d. of Sir Will. Fairfax of Gilling. Sir Hen. of
Newborough. Tho. of Morton. Margaret, d. of Will. Lee of East Brandon. William,
sheriff of Durham, ob. 3d Dec. 1641, vid. epitaph, Margaret, d. and coh. of
Will. Selby of Whitehouse. Richard, born 14th April, 1612, Aetat 3, Ann. 1615.
William, b. 30 Dec. 1617. Charles, 15th Feb. 1618. John, 22d Jan. 1619. Brian,
4th June, 1621. George, 24th Dec. 1622. Margaret, 4th June, 1613. Elizabeth, 2d
Sept. 1614. Mary, 30th Aug. 1615. Timothea, 7th Dec. 1616. Dorothy, 22d Dec.
1623. Mary. Joan. Margaret. James. Dorothy, m. Tho. Metham. SECOND STATEMENT.
Sir William Ballasis, of Newborough, Knt. ob. 1604. Marg. d. of Nich. Fairfax,
of Gilling, Esquire Sir Henry created Bart. 22d May, 1611. Ursula, d. of Sir Tho.
Fairfax, of Denton. Thomas, the 1st viscount; vid. Edmondson. Edmondson makes
him marry a Margaret Leigh, daughter of Will. Leigh, Esquire
Brian, ob. Aet. 65, bur. at Straton. Catharine, d. of Sir John Darcy, Knt. Sir
William, of Owton, and Morton, Margaret, d. of Sir George Selby, of Whitehouse.
(A) Charles. both died unmar. Richard. Dorothy, m. Geo. Salvayne, of Croxdale,
Esquire James, ob. s. p. m. Mary, d. of Hen. Tunstall, of Scargill, co. York; and
2dly, Isa. d. of Tho. Chaytor, of Butterby. Left his estate to his brother's
children. See his monument in Straton church. Edmondson takes no note of him.



genealogy

The Parish of EASINGTON.
The adjoining parish to the south is Easington. In the Boldon Book Esynton and
Thorp.

In Esyntona and Thorp sunt xxxj villani and unusquisque tenet, reddit and
operatur sicut villani de Bodoga.
Simon tenet dimid. carucat and reddit x s. and vadit in legationibus episcopi.
Galfridus Cokesmaht tenet. dimid. carucat. and reddit x s. and vadit in lega.
ep'i.
Carpentarius carucarum tenet viij acr. pro servitio suo.
Faber viij acr. pro servitio suo.
Punderus tenet viij acr. and reddit xxiiij gallinas and v c ova.
Duae villae reddunt xxx s. de cornag. and ij vaccas de metrid.
Molendina de Esynton and de Scoton reddunt viij marcas.
Dominium est ad firmam cum instauramento iiij carucarum and ij hercarior. and
redd. xxiiij marc.
Oves cum pastura sunt in manu episcopi. -- Boldon Buke.
Esyngton.

Liberi tenentes. Will's de Swalwells tenet, etc. Will's Fairlie, Janyn de
Thorp, Johannes Burdon, Johan's Watson, Tho. Menvill, Alanus Smyth, etc. Et
omnes tenentes praedicti vadunt in legationibus d'ni ep'i.

Walterus de Shykworth tenet, etc. Will's Guy, etc.

D'na Isabella de Claxton tenet manner. de Pespole quond'm Will'i de Denoun
redd. xiij s. iiij d. -- Eadem Isab, reddit pro praedicto manner. ad fest. S.
Cuthberti in Sept. j par. calcar. etc. -- Ead'm Isabella tenet campum vocat.
Boisfeld quond'm Rob'ti de Bosco, solebat reddere per annum i s. modo redd.
etc. xiij s. iiij d.

Walterus Hawyk tenet campum vocat. Flemyngfeld In mora de Esyngton qui solebat
reddere per annum lxxix s. viij d. modo redd. per ann. xiij s. iiij d.

Walterus de Ediracres tenet manner. de Ediracres per cert. servic. compraehens
in carta sua and redd. per annum xiij s. iiij d.

Terrae domin. Will's Swalwells tenet xv acr. terrae de domin. etc. Will. Hull
and xx alii tenentes tenent cclxxxv acr. terr. domin. in diverse parcel. Iidem
tenentes tenent inter se vj acr. terrae de eisd'm domin. invent. per mensurat.
prout patet per antiqu. rentale, pro quibus solebat reddere per ann. viij d.
modo dimit. cum domin. Iidem tenent iiij acr. etc. -- Deficiunt xx acr. de
dicti domin. quae sunt in tenura omnium tenent supra. -- Omnes praedictae
terrae domin. dimittuntur tenentibus villae per novam dimiss. redd. in groso
xviijli.

Terrae bond. Will's Swalwells tenent j mess. and ij bovat. terrae, bovata
contin. xv. acr. and redd. per ann. ad iiij term. pro operib. xi s. ix d. Et
pro scatpenys and averpenys ad fest. purif. B. Mariae xix d. Et pro scatpenys
vocat. per tenentes maltpenys xv d. Et pro averpenys ad duo festa S. Cuthberti
and ad fest. natalis S. Johannis Baptistae xij d. and pro wodlades ad idem
festum S. Johannis viij d. Et ad fest. purif. B. Mariae vj bz aven. de scat. Et
ad fest. natalis d'ni ij gall. and ad fest. Pasch. x ova. Et solebat operari in
omnibus sicut illi de Boldon, sicut contin. in quod'm libro vocat. Boldon Buk.
and pro operibus solvit xiij d. ad fest. S. Michaelis, etc. xxviij alii
tenentes tenent xxxi mes. etc. and faciend. and solvend. ut supra. Iidem
tenentes solvunt pro cornag. ad fest. S. Cuthberti in Sept. tantum xxx s. --
Pro castelmen ad iiij terminos majores xl s. -- Cariabunt unum tonellum vini.
-- Solvunt pro j vacca de metrich. ad fest. S. Martini tantum xij s.

Cotag. Alanus Smith, etc. and facit iiij opera autumnal. pret. operis ij d.
etc. Adam Glede and xij alii tenentes, etc. and faciunt opera and redd. ut
supra. -- Walterus Worshall tenet j cotag. etc. and colligit gallin. and ducit.
ad manner. infra Tynam, etc. -- Thomas Emerson, etc. and colligit gallin. and
ducit ut supra. -- Pet. Emerson tenet, etc. quae quond'm fuere parcel. unius
bond. and redd. etc. scatpenys, averpenys, pro wodlades, iij bz aven. de scat.
ij gall. and x ova, sed nihil red. pro castelmen. -- Praedicti tenentes tenent
inter se ij cotag. de xvj cotag. superius quae non inveniuntur ad praesens,
soleb. reddere per ann. iiijli. xix s. x d. and redd. pro dictis cotag. xij d.
-- Hatfield's Survey.

Tuisela.

Walterus Buggethorp tenet villam de Tuisela in escambium pro medietate de
C^xtona, and reddit xxxs. et vadit in magna caza cum j leparario, and quando
commune auxilium venerit debet dare ij s. ad plus. -- Boldon Buke.

Etherdacres.

Adam filius Johannis tenuit Etheredefacres in escamb um pro terra quam pater
suus tenuit in magna Halctona, postea vendidit medictatem ejusdem villae
Nigillo fratri Johan's Clerici ad tenend. de episcopo in capite et reddit pro
cadem medietate dimid. marc. Et Drote de Midilham pro altera medietate quam
habet in vadimonium de praedicto Adam, reddit similiter dimid. marc. -- Ibid

Within this manor are Cashop, Shadforth, Sherburn, Shotton, and Easington, all
which places attend the bishop's court here. Rector ib'm gaudet quoddam claus.
vocat. Filly More Close ann. valoris 7l. p' sumptib. cur. exsolvendis. --
Mickleton's MSS.

Inq. p. m. Joh. Fayrey, etc. Et sugabit namea cum ball'io d'ni ep'i and
testisicabit summonicoes and super- Intend. car. etc. Ao 6 Bury.

Hiis diebus Ealfredus filius Britulfinei fugiens pyratas venit ultra montes
versus occidentem, quaerens misericordiam S. Cutheberti and Cutheardi episcopi,
ut praestarent sibi aliquas terras, Gutheardus autem ei praestitit has villas
Elington, Sileton, Thorep, Horeden, Yoden, duas Ceatton, Yoden australem,
Holom, Hoton, Tumlington, Billingham, cum suis appendiciis; Scrufuton. -- Lel.
Col. vol. ii. p. 374.


it is mentioned jointly with Thorp, a place a little to the southward. There
were thirty-one villains, who held their lands, and performed their services
like those of Boldon. By that record it appears there were only two free
tenants, Simon and Galfrid Cokesmaht, who held each half a carucate of land,
and served on the bishop's embassies. The carpenter, smith, and punder each
held lands for their services, and the two vills rendered 30s. cornage, and
provided two milch cows. The demesne was let out, but the pasture and sheep
stock were in the hands of the bishop. In bishop Bury's time we find one John
Fairey was possessed of a message and a parcel of land in Easington, held of
the bishop in capite, by the singular service of aiding the bishop's bailiff to
drive goods distrained, attesting summonses, and superintending the carriage of
a dole of wine annually. This family held their small possession for some ages.
In Hatfield's Survey the free tenants are named, and all performed the service
of embassy. The demesne lands are therein stated to be upwards of 300 acres. It
appears there were only twenty-nine bond tenants, who occupied thirty-two
messuages, each holding two oxgangs of land, computing fifteen acres to an
oxgang, and paying for work xi s. ix d. for aid, scat, or scac. pennys, and
plow-pennys, at the feast of the Virgin 19d. for scotpennys, called by the
tenants in that district malt-pennys 15 d. and for aver or plow-pennys at the
two feasts of St Cuthbert, the feast of the Nativity, and John the Baptist 12d.
for woodloads 8d. and at the feast of the Purification six bushels of lot oats,
at the feast of the Nativity two hens, at the Passover ten eggs; and in lieu of
other work 13 d. They also paid 30s. cornage, 40s. for castlemen, 12s. in lieu
of one milch cow, and carried a ton of wine. In the service of the cottagers
was that of collecting the hens, and carrying them to the bishop's manors. The
parcels of freehold in Thorp and Easington being very small, it would not be a
profitable labor to trace a succession of possessors, we find among them the
Guys, Daltons, and Claxtons.

The town of Easington stands on an elevated situation, the land gradually
inclining toward the sea. At the upper end of the town, on an eminence, is the
church, a lofty building; a sea mark for mariners. The chancel of this church
is twelve paces long and six wide, with three steps ascending to the table; is
ceiled, stuccoed, and neatly wainscotted, with some tabernacle work above the
table. The east window is formed of three lights, under a pointed arch, with
rose work tracery; and there are three windows to the south, of two lights
each, under pointed arches. The chancel is divided from the nave by a pointed
arch, rising from corbles, and closed with a neat screen, ornamented with
foliage and open work in oak. You descend by four steps into the nave, the
length of which is eighteen paces; divided uniformly by two side ailes, formed
by three pillars on each side, supporting pointed arches, the whole width being
thirteen paces; the pillars are light; on the south side two are octagonal and
one round, and on the north side two round and one octagonal: The capitals are
formed by two tresses of square projections, and one roll, which has a good
effect. The pulpit is supported by the first south pillar. The belfry rises on
a circular arch, and the tower is about sixty feet in height. The nave is
lighted by three windows in the south aile, and four upper windows on each side
of the center aile; and is stalled with oak, ornamented with fleur-de-lis. In
the south aile is a burial vault for the family of Conyers of Horden On a mural
monument, above the Horden seats.

P. M. S. P. R. Sir Chr. Conyers bur. 12 Oct. 1692. Sir Christopher is set on
his feet in the vault, but for what reason unknown.


Wm Stanton fecit London A noted sculptor, from whom Le Neve received many
monumental inscriptions.

. The manor belongs to the bishop, and a court is kept here. The customs and
copyholds are of the same nature with those of the bishop's other manors.

In the year 1762 Dr Sam. Dickens began to alter and repair the old and much
decayed rectory house, at a very considerable expense.

There were two chantries in this church: One the chantry of St Mary, value 4l.
11s. 4d. -- The other of Our Lady of Pity (as it is called) in Bidow, value
5l.

John Trendon and John Levesham, supposed to belong to Our Lady of Pitie's
chantry.

By an inq. in the 13th of bishop Hatfield, 1357, it was found that Adam Neuman
of Little Eden, alienated without the bishop's license, 1 mess. and 21 acres of
land, in the same vill, in mortmain, to the chantry of the Blessed Mary of
Easington, value 10s. -- Randal's MSS.

Geo. Burnell last incumbent of St Mary's chantry, had a pension of 4l. p' ann.
which he received in the year 1553. -- Willis.

Essington, a manor pertcyninge of ancient time to the byshopryke of Durham;
for when one Nicholas resigned in time of Henry III. he had this town, Howden,
and Stocton appointed for his sustentation duringe his life. -- Lambarde's
Dict. p. 109.

Gabr. Clarke, D. D. by will, dated 8 May, 1662, gave 60l. to buy a lease of
10l. per ann. for the schoolmaster of Easington. Inq. of Chapter Uses, 1684.

Rot. A. Fox, No 126. Lr'ae pat. f'ctae R. Laburn, q'd ipse xl acras terre de
gleba ecclie suae de Esyngton jacentes juxta Hallefeld, etc. includere, etc.
1501.

Liber M. 91. In the register's office, Durham.

Easington and Little Thorpe division, 22 Aug. 1672.

Complainants claimed as freeholders, copyholders, and leadsholders.

1st award. Easington moor. This division is recited in the decree, and appears
to have been made in the year 1656.

2d award. Division of Little Thorp lands. 23 Mar. 1659.

3d award, 30 Apr. 1661. Easington moor.

4th award, 23 Jan. 1661. Concerning the allotments of Forster and Paxton.

5th award, 23 March 1665. Division of Easington, Cow Close, and Easington,
all is Thorp Lee.

The allotments are numerous. Hodgson's MSS.


.
Easington parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L. 24 9 4 L. 2901 4 4 Grey's
MSS. Land tax at 4s. County rates at 6s. 8d. Easington 67 14 4 3 9 1 Haswell 37
16 6 1 18 4 Hauthorn 18 14 0 0 17 8 Shotton 39 0 0 1 18 11 Mann's MSS.

Bishop's rents. -- Shotton 24l. 18s. 2d. -- Easington Col. 1l.

Bap. Mar. Bur. State of population from 1660 to 1679 515 109 420 from 1760 to
1779 518 129 449 Increase 3 20 29

Burials in the last year 25. -- Computed number of inhabitants 750.


. And in certain stalls, called the Pespool seats, is a fine recumbent figure
of a female, in Stanhope marble; the breast and mantle scattered over with
parrots, like the effigies of the Lumley family in Chester church. On the south
side of the nave are stalls belonging to Horden estate, now the property of
John Burdon, esquire and opposite thereto stalls belonging to High Eden estate, the
property of General Lambton This town gives name to the deanery and ward. The
rectory was united to the archdeaconry of Durbain by bishop Kirkham about the
year 1255.

King's books 100l. -- Yearly tenths 10l. -- Proc. ep. 2l. -- Bishop of Durham
patron.


. In the church is preserved some old armor, consisting of an iron helmet,
buckler, and other things, such as are frequently met with in the churches on
the borders; which perhaps belonged to such castlemen as the manor was bound to
provide by the tenure, or to the proper parochial guard; for as the steeples or
towers of churches were to be kept in repair by the ancient laws of the church
tenures Vol. i. p. 93.
, as the fortress of such parish, so it is probable armor was provided for the
men of such fortress.

The manor house of HORDEN is in ruins. John Fitz Marmaduke, grandson of Sir
William de Lumley, one of the barons that signed the memorable letter to the
pope in the 29th of Edward I. was lord of Horden Seagar's Baron. MSS. --
Collins's Peerage, vol. iii. p. 104.
. On an inquisition taken in the second year of bishop Bury, it is stated that
the demesne lands of Horden, consisting of cccc acres, were worth per annum
xxiiij l. 31 acres of meadow at 3 s. an acre 4l. 13s. an orchard xs. and that
the villenage rents of the manor amounted to 6l. 10s. 3d. In the 16th year of
bishop Hatfield, Agnes the widow of John de Menevylle held of the bishop in
capite, for the life of lord Thomas de Holland comes de Horden, two parts of
the manor of Horden, with a reversion expectant to William the son of John de
Menevyll, by the twentieth part of a knight's fee: Also about 100 acres called
Boysfield, a moiety of the manor of Pespool, rendering a spur, or 3d. and the
manor of Hessewell, (except a message and sixty acres) held of the lord Ralph
de Neville, by military service and suit of court at Brancepeth Inq. p. m.
Agnes.
. In the 28th of the same prelate, William de Menevyll died seized of the
estates before mentioned; but in the inquisition it is said, he held the manor
of Horden in capite of the bishop, and the manor of Hessewell of "the barony of
Brancepeth." He left one daughter Isabella his heiress, who intermarried with
William Laton, and afterward with William Claxton A grant of Lamesley, Horden,
Blakiston, Eighton, Silksworth, and Hamildon, from Robert the son of Richard de
Ravensworth, to Galfrid the son of Galfrid his nephew. -- Vide Ravensworth.
Orig. pen. Sir H. Liddell.

Concord of a fine levied before the justices at Durham, 1391. John de Claxton,
Thomas de Claxton, and Robert de Harlosay, cl. quer. and Rad. de Lomley, knt.
deforc. de decim libratis redditus cum p'tin. in Horden. Ex orig. penes Tho.
Gyll ar. -- Randal's MSS.

Inq. p. m. Will. Claxton mil. 25 Langley. The manor of Horden is thus
described. The site of the manor: A close called the park, another close
called Hawklawe, 30 acres, 400 acres of demesne, 23 acres of meadow, 200 of
pasture; a certain wasted vill called the vill of Horden, in which are eight
ruined messuages and eight cottages, 200 acres of tillage land thereto, six
acres of meadow, and 200 acres of pasture, subject to a rent charge of 20l.
granted by Isabel his mother.


, as appears by an inquisition taken on the decease of her mother, in the
twelfth year of bishop Skirlaw Inq. p. m. Isab. widow of William Menevylle.
. The last of the Claxton family possessed of Horden, noted in the
inquisitions, was Sir Robert Claxton, knight, in the seventh year of bishop
Dudley, who, leaving four coheiresses, Elizabeth the third daughter married
Richard Conyers, and he being called of Horden, we presume that manor went to
her in the partition of her father's estates. John Conyers, son and heir of
Chr. Conyers, esquire had special livery of this manor in the year 1614 Rudd's MSS.
; he was created a baronet the 14th of July, 1628. His son Chr. Conyers died in
1693, and was the last Conyers of Horden, that we have met with.

FLEMING FIELD, in Hatfield's Survey, is described to be in Easington moor, and
the property of Walter Hawyk. In the book of rates it is joined with Shotton.
Shotton, in the Boldon Book called Scotton, had seventeen villains, who
performed their services like those of Boldon. The smith held fifteen acres,
and the punder eight. The demesne was farmed with the increase, having two
hundred sheep, under the rent of twenty-four chalders of corn, the like of
oats, and twelve of barley, with four marks in money for the sheep Scotton.

In Scottona sunt xvij villani, and unusquisque tenet reddit and operatur sicut
villani de Boldon.

Robert Chet tenet ij bovat. and reddit v s. and facit iiij porcationes in
autumno and arat and herciat unam acr. and vadit in legationibus episcopi.

Willielmus Lorimarius tenet i bovatum and reddit tres solidos and vadit in
legationibus episcopi.

Saddoc j bovatam pro iijs. and vadit in legationibus.

Faber ^nam bovatam de xv acr. pro suo servitio.

Tota villa reddit xj s. de cornag. and j vaccam de metrid.

Pundere Thomas tenet viij acr. and reddit xl gallinas and ccc ova and iiij s.

Dominium est ad firmam cum instauramento iij carucarum and cc ovium and reddit
xxiiij celdr. de frumento and totidem de avena and xij de ordeo and pro ovibus
iiij marc. -- Boldon Buke.

Nothing in Hatfield's Survey.


. The family of Denums held Shotton in the time of bishop Hatfield Inq. p. m.
Edmund de Denum, Ao 18 Hatfield, ap. Dun. Tho. de le Rener esc.
; but their estates devolving on females, the next proprietor we find in the
records is John the son of Thomas de Carrowe, knight Inq. p. m. Ao 6 Fordham,
cor. W. de Bows esc.
; who leaving a daughter his heiress, the next person noted is William Sayer,
who died seized thereof in the twelfth year of bishop Skirlaw Inq. p. m. apud
Segefield, cor. F. de Claxton esc.
. In bishop Langley's time the Eures had possessions in Shotton Inq. p. m. Rob.
Eure mil. Ao 17 Langley.
. Here is a neat mansion house belonging to the family of the Thompsons Shotton
division, 15th August, 1673, lib. M, p. 184, in the register's office: The sea
vacant. The freeholds are distinguished. Twenty pounds was paid to the
attorney general on his majesty's behalf for confirmation of this division.
.

LITTLE EDEN was the estate of the Hawicks, under whom several persons held
portions of land within the manor, in the time of bishop Hatfield Inq. p. m.
Edmund de Denum held of Johanna the lady of Little Eden, etc. Ao 18 Hatfield,
etc. -- Inq. p. m. Johanna wise of Walter Hawyck, Ao 26 Hatfield. -- Inq. p. m.
John de Carrowe, held of Walter de Hawick 1 cumin, Ao 6 Fordham. -- Inq. p. m.
John Lawrenson of Seton, Ao 16 Skirlaw.


. In the eleventh year of bishop Langley, it appears this manor had been
conveyed in trust, to create certain limitations to Walter Hawick for life;
with remainder to Walter his son, and the heirs of his body; with remainders to
William his brother, and the heirs of his body; and remainders over to Walter's
right heirs: And that the manor was held of the bishop of Durham, by military
service and the eighth part of a knight's fee Ao 1 Langley, Walter Hawyck
enfeoffed Robert de Wycliff and another. -- Also tenements at Whetlaw, held by
the twentieth part of a knight's fee. -- Inq. p. m. Walter Hawick, Ao xl
Langley. -- Inq. p. m. Rob. Eure mil. 17 Langley.
. In the seventeenth of bishop Booth, by an inquisition taken on the death of
Robert Rhodes, it is stated that he died seized of this manor in fee-tail, in
right of Johan his wife, daughter and heiress of Walter Hawick; with remainder
to the heirs of the body of Johan; remainder to the right heirs of John
Trollop, esquire That the manor consisted of ccc acres of land, and c acres of
pasture. Trollop afterwerds died seized thereof in the first year of bishop
Dudley. Sir William Bulmer purchased Little Eden, with lands in Mordon, in the
reign of king Henry VIII Pardon granted to Sir William Bulmer, for purchasing,
etc. without license. Ruthall ep.

Rudd's MSS. In the year 1781, a whale was cast on shore within this manor,
which measured in length sixteen yards two feet and seven inches, and was in
circumference at the fins fourteen yards. The fin was in length four yards and
two feet, and the breadth one yard and six inches. The breadth of the forked
part of the tail was five yards and ten inches. -- Newcastle newspapers, 9th
June, 1781.


.

The manor of EDDERACRES gave name to the resident family very early; for in
bishop Hatfield's Survey it is noted to be the possession of Walter de
Ediacres. It was the possession of John del Halle de Elvet, who held the same
of the bishop in capite, by homage, fealty, and thirteen shillings and
four-pence rent for all services; and he dying without issue, left a sister
Alicia, whose husband was the first that assumed the local name Inq. p. m. John
dell Halle, Ao 5 Hatfield, apud Dun. cor. Will. de Mordon vic. -- Inq. p. m.
Alicia de Ethyrdacres, Ao 2 Fordham, cor. R. de Laton esc.
.

Bishop Pudsey granted the vill of HASWELL to the monks of Finchale. The
records are greatly perplexed touching this place, a confusion arising between
Great and Little Haswell. In 1338, in the episcopacy of bishop Bury, Talbot de
Northalverton, by his deed, granted to John the son of Adam de Menevyll and
Agnes his wife, and their heirs, a rent charge out of the lands in Great
Haswell, which John the son of Henry de Kellaw, by his deed, gave to Lucie de
Hessewell, and which John had of the gift of Thomas son of Ralph Beanfour and
Euseme his wife, by fine in the court of bishop Beaumont. This instrument shows
us a race of ancient proprietors Ex orig. penes Tho. Gyll arm.

Omnibus hoc scriptum visur. vel auditur. Talbotus de Northalverton capell's
salt'm in d'no cum nup' Joh'nes fill. Henrici de Kellawe p' cartam suam dedisset
Lucie de Hessewell omnes terras and tenement. in Magna Hessewell que idem
Joh'nes h'uit de dono Thome fill. Radulphi Beanfour and Euseme ux'is ejus p'
finem in cur. d'ni Lodywyc nup' ep'i Dun. H'end, etc. reddendo, etc. noveritis,
etc. Hiis testibus Rob'to de Lambeton, Walt'o de Lodeworth, Joh. Harpyon,
Walt'o de Hawyck, Jordano de M'ley, and aliis dat. ap. Hessewell, etc. 1338.

Irrotulamentum cujusd. indenture inter Joh'em pr. Dunelm. and Ric'um
Catlyngson arm. Rot. B. Neville, No 66.

Haec indent. etc. testatur q'd p'dictus R. recepit de p'd'cis pr. and cap. die
confecois p'sentium sexaginta sex f. etc. in plenam satisfacco'em, etc. sex
solidor, etc. redditus quem p'dcus Ric'us clamat versus p'dcos pr. and
capit'l'm de quatnor acr. prati in Hessewell grainge, quas pred. pr. and
capit'l'm h'ent in escamb^o p' uno messuagio and triginta acris terrae cum
p'tin. in territori's villarum de Magna Hessewell and Parva Hessewell, etc.
Dat. 20 Sep. 1431, etc.

Morti'zacio div'sar. terrae and ten. p. pr. Dun. adquisit. concessa. Rot. A.
Dudley, No 77.

In Cletlam, P'va Hessewell, Volveston, Ferye, Billingham, Acley, Morton
Tinmouth, Hebarne, baronia de Elvet juxta Dun. burgo Dun. and ballio australi
Dun. burgo de Elvet juxta Dun. vet'i burgo Dun. vico S'ti Egidii juxta Dun.
etc. 1 Apr. 1483.


. The next record, as to date, is an inquisition taken on the death of Henry
brother of Walter Freeman of Sherburn, in the fifth year of bishop Hatfield,
touching lands in the vill of Haswell, set forth to be held of the lord Ralph
de Neville, by fealty and suit at the court at Brancepeth. In the twenty-eighth
year of the same prelate, William de Meneville died seized of the manor of
Hessewell, held of the barony of Brancepeth, by military service and suit at
Brancepeth court. As observed in the account given of Horden, his daughter
Isabella married Claxton, and carried the family possessions to that house Rot.
B. Neville, No 66. Itrotulam. cujusdem indenturae, etc. being an exchange
between the convent of Durham and Rich. Catlyngson of Durham, esquire of certain
rents issuing out of Haswell grainge, and Great and Little Haswell. -- Randal's
MSS.


.

PESPOOL was the estate of Edmund de Denum, which he held of the bishop in
capite, by homage and fealty, and 13 s. 4d. rent. He failing in issue, his
estates descended to four coheiresses his sisters Inq. p. m. Edmund de Denum,
Ao 7 Hatfield, apud Dun. cor. R. de Bows vic.
. In bishop Hatfield's Survey it is stated, that the lady Isabella de Claxton
then held the manor formerly William de Denum's, and that she rendered to the
bishop for the same a pair of spurs; that she also held Boisfield, paying one
shilling rent. The large possessions of the Claxtons, as observed under Horden,
passed to the Conyers.

HAWTHORN, in the time of bishop Beaumont, was the estate of the Merleys and
Beanfours; and by an inquisition taken in the tenth year of that prelate, it
appears that Ralph de Merley died seized of lands there, held of William de
Merley in capite, by homage and fealty, and a pound of cumin, and other lands
held of the heirs of Ralph Beanfour, rendering a pound of pepper, or 8 d. and
also the manor of Broomy-whome, which he held, paying 18s. to the hospital at
Allerton Johan widow of John de Merley died seized of the manor of
Brymmingholme by the feoffment of John to the heirs of his body, and in default
remainder to his right heirs for ever; which manor is held of William de
Lambton, charged with 13s. per annum to the hospital of Alverton and 12d. to
Gilbert Eglin and Eliz. his wife, and the heirs of Elizabeth. Also a close
called the Waste, near the said manor, held of the bishop in capite, and 13s.
4d. rent. Also sixteen oxgangs of land in Hawthorn, fourteen of which were held
of Ra. Lomley, esquire and the rest of John de Kirkby, Alicia wife of Robert
Barryarde, and Joan wife of William Pegge, heiresses. Ao 12 Skirlaw, apud Dun.
cor. T. de Claxton esc.


. By a succeeding inquisition, Broomy-whome is stated to be held of William de
Lambton. We also find the families of Lumley, Darcy, and Menevylle possessed of
estates at Hawthorn in bishop Skirlaw's time Inq. p. m. Tho. de Menvyll. Lands
at Hathorn, held of Rob. de Darcy, Ao 17 Skirlaw, apud Dun. cor. R. Coniers
chiv. esc.
: And afterward the family of Claxtons held large possessions there Inq. p. m.
Isab. ux. W. Claxton, Ao 15 Langley. -- Inq. p. m. W. Claxton mil. Ao 25
Langley, etc. A recovery against Sir John Lumley, lord Lumley, for the manors
of Hawthorn, etc. Ao 15 Tunstall.

Rudd's MSS.
. In Hawthorn arose one of those instances of the bishop's exercising royal
jurisdiction within his principality, observed in the annals of the prelates,
by his claiming royal fish cast upon this coast Bishop Fordham awarded his
commission, dated 4 Nov. 1387, directed to Roger de Fulthorpe and others,
flating "Quia datum est nobis intelligi quod licet wreccum maris cete
sturgeones porpeis et thulepolts per maris ten periem ad terram per costeram
maris infra precinctum nostre regie libertatis Dunelm. projecta nobis et
ecclesie nostre Dunelm. virtute n're regie libertatis tanquam proficuum regale
aebeant pertinere nosque et predecessores nostri episcopi Dunelm. a tempore quo
non extat memoria hujusmodi wreccum cete sturgiones po^peis et thulepolles
habere consueverimus" And stating that Robert Brown of Hawthorn, and certain
other malefactors, had seized and carried away "quendam piscem nostram vocat
porpeis precij centum solidorum ad terram nuper inf^a precinctum nostre regie
libertatis predicte per ma^is temperium apud Hawthorne projectum and ad nos
ratione ejusdem regie libertates tanquam prosicuum regale pertinentem;"
appoints them four three, or two of them his justices to enquire by the oath of
good and lawful men of his county, the names of the malefactors, "et de
transgressione predicta p^enius veritatem et ad candem transgressionem audiend.
and terminand. secundum legem and consetudinem regni Anglie and n're regie
libertatis." And commands the sheriff to summon a jury for the above purpose.

Records at Durham.
The town of Hawthorn is pleasantly situated on a dry hill, within half a mile
of the sea: The shore is rocky, and broken into a multitude of deep caverns:
The offing is full of rocks and shoals, so that in stormy weather it is
tremendous to mariners, whilst the heavy breaker shakes the sounding coast. In
the mouth of a deep and narrow creek, where the rocks are the most broken,
rugged, and romantic, admiral Milbanke built a summer retreat, which he called
Sailor's Hall; at high tide it almost hangs over the waves, and looks upon the
most stormy and shaken part of the shore. The placidness of a summer evening's
calm, when the moon is reflected on the smooth bosom of the ocean, is highly
pleasing to the contemplative eye; but when the storm lifts the distracted
waves, with a horrid gloom confounds the elements, and mixes the spray even
with the clouds; when the winds groan in the caverns, and the hoarse billows
thunder along the beach; when the shrill cries of distress and wreck strike the
ear from wretches without succor; when the affrighted cattle bellowing leave
the hills, and driving showers sweep the disconsolate landscape, little remains
to make such a situation eligible. On the south side of Hawthorn-dean is an
eminence called the Beacon Hill, where fires were formerly raised, to keep
mariners at a distance from this dangerous coast.

In this part of the country are retained some ancient customs evidently
derived from the Romans, particularly that of dressing up a figure of Ceres
during harvest, which is placed in the field whilst the reapers are laboring,
and brought home on the last evening of reaping, with music and great
acclamation. After this a feast is made, called the mell supper, from the
ancient sacrifice of mingling the new meal.

The Parish of PITTINGTON.
The next adjoining parish toward the west is Pittington. This was one of the
places given by bishop William de Carilepho to the monastery of Durham, and
confirmed to them by bishop Richard de Marisco, in the second year of his
episcopacy.

The church Pittington vicarage.

This is an ancient vicarage: The church is dedicated to St Lawrence. It is in
the deanery of Easington, a discharged living, and a peculiar to the dean and
chapter.

Clear yearly value 48l 3s 11d -- Tenths 1l 9s 5d -- Proc. ep. 6s -- Synd. 11s
-- Bishop Crewe's legacy 10l -- Real value 90l.

A modus of three pounds twelve shillings is paid at Old Michaelmas to the
vicar of Pittington, by the owner of Ludworth, in lieu of all vicarial tithes
in kind.

VICARS.
Richardus Presb. de --, 1147 Peter de Derlyngton, 1230 Eudo, 1235 Yvo, 1285
William de Billingham, 1297 John de Dalton, 1309 Hugh de Corbrig, 1329 Thomas
de Throcklington, 1340 Sir Hugh de Prendstret, 1345 Richard de Aukeland, 1356
William Baty, 1358, p. res. Aukeland Reginald Porter, 1388 John Appelby, 1407
William Winlawton, 1419 John Gresmire, 1422 Robert Bates, 1439 Willam Maymorne,
1452, p. res. Bates William Laybourn, 1458 George Johnson, 1481 Thomas
Patenson, A. M. 1507, p. res. Johnson William Greffeson, A. M. 1499, p. res.
Patenson Thomas Patenson, A. M. 1507, p. res. Greffeson Robert Jackson, 1510,
p. res. Patenson Ralph Whitehead, 1528, p. m. Jackson William Whitehead Sir
Robert Forest, pres. 1530, p. res. Whitehead Nicholas Merley, S. T. B. 1548, p
m. Forest Roger Watson, S. T. P. 1560, p. depriv. Merley Robert Murrey, 1562,
p. m. Watson William Murrey, cl. 1594, p. m. Murrey Richard Thursbye, A. M.
1621, p. res. Murrey George Shaw, A. M. 1631, p. res. Thursbye Chr. Thompson,
A. M. p. m. Shawe Chr. Thompson, A. M. p. m. Thompson John Powell, A. M. 1717,
p. m. Thompson William Thompson, A. B. 1718, p. res. Powell Arthur Shepherd,
1730, p. m. Thompson Samuel Viner, 1770, p. m. Shepherd James Deason, ol. 1772,
p. res. Viner.
Randal's MSS. There were two chantries in this church, one dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, the other to St Katherine.

Copyhold book, E. p. 534, halm. apud Houghton, 10 November, 1472.

Thomas Hesildon gave to the chaplain of St Mary's chantry in Petyngton, one
cottage with its appurtenances, to be held by him and his successors chaplains,
and died; and Mary his widow married John Colthard Scot, and he sold the
aforesaid cottage to John Semer, contrary to the will of the donor. -- Ibid.

John Kirkman, the last incumbent of St Mary's chantry, had at the suppression,
Ao 1547, a pension of four pounds per annum, which he received in 1553. --
Willis.

MONUMENTS IN THE CHURCH.

On a marble within the altar rails. Sub hoc Marmore quiescit: On another
marble before the altar, all in capital letters,

Juxta jacet Elizabetha filia ejus unica and haeres, Thomae Conyers uxor merito
dilectissima and prole laeta, cui sorores invidae praeripuere diem and
pulcherrimam (dum licuit aspectare) formam libilina praepropere donarunt animam
caelo semper maturam and ornatam. Ipsa lubens reddidit suis exuviis olim
redonandam. Ea morum suavitate erga omnes vixit, ut videretur utriusq. sexus
delitiae and amor, sui ornamentum ingens and exemplar a paucis imitabile:
Ablata tandem ex oculis singulorum excitavit defiderium and querimoniam suis
tulit damnum irreparabile Obiit 18 Julij, MDCLXXXXV. Aetat. 24.

Etiam hic jacet Susanna filia Henrici Firebrace et uxor. Thomae Hall. obiit 28
Nov. 1715.

Hic jacet Elizabetha uxor, Geor. Baker, armig. et filia Tho. Conyers, armig.
Obiit 5o die Julii, 1725. Aetat. 35.

Pittington parish. Book of rates. Value of lands. L. s. d. L. s. d. 18 5 6
2319 13 0

Grey's MSS. Dean and chapter rents: -- First prebend tithe 2l 16s 8d -- Fourth
prebend tithe 2l -- Shadforth tithe 7l 6s 8d -- Hetton tithe 1l 13s 4d -- North
Sherburn tithe 7l -- Haswell tithe 1l 3s 4d -- South Sherburn tithe 3l 10s --
Ludworth tithe 1l 7s 8d -- Pittington tenements, cottages, quarry, mill, and
hallgarth 41l 3d

Bishop's rents: -- Sherburn 23l 1s 3d -- Shadforth 20l 13s 3d

Land tax at 4s. in the pound. County rates at 6s. 8d. Pittington 47 1 5 2 7 4
Sherburn 20 1 0 0 18 10 Shadforth 41 4 8 1 17 6 Sherburn house 1 0 4

Registered estates: Anthony Huntley 5l -- George Errington 7l 10s -- Mann's
MSS.

Bap. Mar. Bur State of population from 1660 to 1679 from 1769 to 1779

Number of burials in the last year -- Computed number of inhabitants


stands on elevated ground, with a spacious yard. There are marks of antiquity
in this edifice, which has apparently undergone much mutilation and frequent
repairs. The chancel is nearly fourteen paces in length and six in width: On
the north side are two arches, now built up, which show it formerly was of
greater extent. The east end is lighted by three long narrow windows; but to
the south is a large window, ornamented with tracery. The chancel is separated
from the nave by a heavy round arch without ornament. The body or nave of the
church has two side ailes, and is in length about eighteen paces, the ailes
being little more than three paces wide: The south aile has undergone much
alteration; the pillars have been restored in modern times, and support five
pointed arches: Three windows, of two lights each, under pointed arches, give
light to this side. The north aile is also formed by a row of four pillars;
that to the east is flat, supporting a pointed arch; the other three are of the
old Saxon architecture, short, with plain capitals, the shafts fluted and
otherwise ornamented: They support four circular arches, ornamented with the
zig-zag mouldings, and seem to be of nearly the same date as the nave of Durham
cathedral: This aile is lighted with two windows under pointed arches. The
tower is low, and supported by buttresses, forming an oblong square of five
paces east and west, and seven paces north and south. In the yard are two
remarkable monuments of personages unknown. The one is the recumbent effigy of
a man in armor Vide cut of monument in Whitworth church yard, exactly similar
to this: One of the effigies in Chester church is also like it.
, the visor having only a transverse gash or aperture: The sword in the right
hand, with the point elevated to the visor, and the shield on the left arm
covering the breast. The other is a stone in the coffin form, inscribed in the
Saxon character, with the following distich: NOMEN ABENS CRISTI TVMVLO
TVMVLATVR IN ISTO
QVI TVMVLVM CERNIT COMMENTHET CVM PRECE CRISTO.


Near the churchyard are the remains of the hall, built by Hugh Whitehead, the
last prior and first dean of Durham. There are the foundations of several
adjoining buildings, which show that this was a large and commodious mansion,
having orchard grounds and several other conveniences Vide Rot. E Langley, No
38, in dorso de Gresmire.
.

In this parish is the elegant mansion house of Geo. Baker, esquire called Ellimore
Hall; and a neat country seat, the residence of Ralph Shipperdson, esquire called
Hallgarth.

LUDWORTH gave name to a resident family so early as the time of bishop Bury:
Walter de Ludworth, knight, died seized of the manor in the third year of
bishop Hatfield, together with four carucates of land, held of the bishop in
capite,, by the quarter part of a knight's fee. He also held a message and
sixteen acres of land there, of the prior of Durham Inq. p. m. Ao 3 Hatfield.
. Bishop Langley, in the year 1422, granted his license to Thomas Holden,
knight, to fortify his house of Ludworth; which is situated on the brow of a
hill, at the head of the valley in which Shadforth lies. By the remains of the
tower it appears to have been a gloomy miserable mansion, whose loop holes and
casements almost totally excluded the light of day; which is more singular, as
bishop Langley exhibited many elegant pieces of architecture Tho. etc. Sciatis
q'd de gra. n'ra. concessimus and lic. dedimus p' nob' and succ. n'ris quantum
in nob. est dil'co armig'o n'ro Tho. Holden q'd ipe man'ium suum de Ludworth in
co. Dun. muro de Petra and calce firmare kirnellare batillare et turrillare and
man'ium illud sic firmatum kirnellatum batellatum et turrillatum tenere possit
sibi et he'ib's suis imp'p'm si'e occ'oe v'l impedimento n'ri vel succ. n'ror
Justic. esc. vic. aut al. ballivor. seu min. n'ror v'l succ. n'rorum quor.
cunq. In c. etc. Pat. D. etc. 6 d. Aug. an. p' n'ri sexto decimo. -- Rot. E.
Langley in dorso, No. 50.

Lic. pr. Dun. etc. Rot. E. Langley, No 14. Quinquaginta et sex acr. terrae et
quatuor acr. prati cum p'tin in Ludworth, etc. -- Ibid.


. In 1428, the prior of Durham had license to exchange lands acquired in
Ludworth, with Thomas Holden, knight, for land in Wyndigates, West Merrington,
and the borough of Elvet. Ludworth became the estate of the Lumleys, and Sir
John Lumley, lord Lumley, suffered a recovery of the manor in the fifteenth
year of bishop Tunstall Cursitors Rolls -- Rudd's MSS.
.

SHADFORTH is a long village, lying in a deep valley. In the ancient records it
is mentioned as being a member of Querringdonshire Queringdonshire.

In Queringdonshire, sunt in North Sherburne and Shadeferde and Cazehope lj
villani et unusquisque tenet reddit et operatur, sicut illi de Boldon.

Praeterea in North Sherburn tenet Ulkillus ij bovatas pro xl d. de firma et
vadit in legation. episcopi.

In Shaldefirde tenet Thomas ij bovatas pro xl d. de firma et vadit in
legationibus episcopi.

In Cazhope tenet Willielmus de Kent iiij bovatas pro dimid marc. et vadit in
legationibus episcopi.

In South Sherburn tenet Christianus Cementarius lx acr. quas episcopus ei
dedit de mora pro v s. et ij bovatas quae suerunt Arkilli pro xiiij d. set de
his quietus erit dum fuerit in servitio episcopi de opere cementarij.

Watlingus cum Savia uxor. ejus tenet iiij bovatas et redd. dimid marc.

Praeterea v firmarii tenent ibid. unusquisque xij acr. et reddit ij s. et j
gallinam et xx ova et facit iiij porcationes in autumno et arant de unaquaque
carucata eorum j acr.

Praeterea sunt ibid. x cotemanni quorum unusquisque tenet vj acr. et operantur
a festo S. Petri ad vincula usq. ad festum S. Martini duobus diebus in ebdomeda
et a festo S. Martini usq. ad festum S. Petri ad vincula uno die in ebdomeda.

Faber tenet ibid. xij acras pro ferramentis ij carucarum fabricandis.

Punderus de Querringdonshire tenet xx acras et reddit vj xx gallinas et mill
ova.

Dominium de Sherburn est ad firmam cum instauramento ij carucarum et ij
hercariorum et reddit vj libras.

Dominium iiij carucarum de Queringdon et oves cum pastura sunt in manu
episcopi.

Praepositus tenet ibid. j bovatam pro servitio suo.

Faber xij acr. pro servitio suo.

Queringdonshire reddit lxiiij s. de cornagio and iij vaccas de metride. --

Boldon Buke. Queringdon

Magister hospitalis de Sherburn tenet Grang. de Queringdon, cum dominic.
pratis et pastur. ad firmam, et redd. per annum ad term. S. Mart. and Pent.
xviijli. xviij s.

Cassop

Thomas Clerk de Elvet tenet j mess et iiij bovat. terrae contin. xv acr.
quond'm Johannis de Birtley et ante Johannis Freman et vadit in legationibus
d'ni episcopi et redd. per annum vj s. viij d.

Shald-fird

Liberi tenentes Radulphus de Eure miles tenet j mess. et vij acr. et dimid
terrae ibid. vocat. Thomasland, quond'm Thomae de Tesedale per servic. sorin.
et vadit in legationibus episcopi redd. x d.

Isaacus Bonner tenet, etc. per servic. praedict. Haeres Johan. Freman, etc.
per servic. praedict.

Terrae bond. Robertus Aleynson tenet j mess. et ij bovat. bond. bovat. contin.
xv acr. et redd. per annum xvj s. viz. per bovat. viij s. pro operibus. Et ad
fest. Purif. pro scatpenys xix. Et ad fest. S. Martini pro scatpenys, vocat per
tenentes maltpenys ut in libro de Boldon xv d. Et pro averpenys ad ij fest. S.
Cuthbertis and natal. S. Johannis Baptistae xij d. and solebat operari sicut
illi de Boldon in omnibus and pro illis operibus ultra reddit. praedict. solvit
pro arar. ad fest. S. Michaelis xvj d. and pro operibus autumnalibus xij d. and
pro averrepes ad idem fest. S. Michaelis xij d. Et pro quolibet hom an. xxi. 12
d. and quolibet pagetto infra aetatem pra^dict ad idem fest. vj d. in toto
xxiij s. iiij d. Idem Robertus and xv alii tenentes tenent, etc. et faciunt et
redd. ut supra. Et quilibet praedictorum bond. solv. ad fest. Purif. B. Mariae
ultra sum' praedict. vj bz. aven. et ad fest. Natal. D'ni ij gallin. et ad
fest. Paschae x ova. Praedicti Tenentes red. inter se pro una vacca de metrich
ad fest. Martini vi s. Pro cornag. ad fest. S. Cuthberti in Septembr. xxv s vj
d. -- Pro wodlades ad fest. natal. S. Johannis Baptistae xij s. -- lidem tenent
inter se com'un furnum ibid. and redd. p' annum ij s. -- Tolnet cervis. et
redd. per annum ij s. viij d. -- Pro tertia part officij punder quae soleb't
reddere p' annum x s. modo vj s. viij d.

Cotag. Robertus Taillor tenet j cot. etc. et redd. etc. pro operibus ix d. --
Margareta del Hall tenet, etc. quod suit quond'm forg. villae, etc.

Terrae scaccarij. Robertus Aleinson cum aliis, etc.

Sherburn

Liberi tenentes. Johannes de Killerby tenet j mes. et ij bovat. terrae quond'm
Alani de Shirburn et vadit. legation. d'ni episcopi bovat. contin. xv acr. et
redd per annum iij s. iiij d. -- Johannes de Hesilden, etc.

Terrae bond. Stephanus de Cashop tenet j mes. et ij bovat. terrae et redd. per
annum ad iiij term. pro operib' xvj s. Et pro scatpenys ad fest. Purif. xix d.
Et pro maltpenys ad fest. S. Martini xv d. Et pro averpenys ad ij festa S.
Cuthberti et festum S. Johannis Baptistae xij d. Et pro Wodlades ad festum S.
Johannis Baptistae viij d Et solebat operari sicut illi de Boldon, et pro
operibus ultra redditum praedictum pro arrur. ad fest. S. Michaelis xvj d Et
pro operibus autumnal. xij d. Et pro averpenys ad idem fest. vj d. -- In toto
praeter aven. gali^. et ova. xxiij s. iiij d.

Johannes de Herington et ix alii tenentes tenent xi mess. et xxij bovat.
terrae et faciunt et reddunt ut supra.

Et sunt ibid. vj bond. et dimid. dimiss. ad penyferme quorum quilibet redd. p'
annum xx s.

Praedicti tenentes redd. inter se pro j vacca de metrich. ad fest. S. Martini
vj s. Pro cornag ad fest. S. Cuthberti in Septembr. xxiiij s. Pro tolnet
cervis. per annum ij s. viij d. Pro officio punder vj s. viij d. -- Et
quaelibet ij bovat. terrae bond. redd. per annum ad fest. Natal. D'ni ij
gallin. et ad fest. Pasch. x ova. et ad fest. Purif. B. Mariae vj bz. aven. de
scat. -- lidem tenent inter se commun. furnum ibid. et redd. per annum xij d.
-- Commun. sorig. ibid. et redd. per annum x d.

Cotag. ^mma Lymebrynner tenet, etc. et redd. pro operibus, etc. -- Thomas
Nalum and vij alii tenentes, etc. -- Omnes tenentes ibid. tenent inter se j
plae. ad forg. cum incremento, etc.

Terrae ^^ceurij. Praedicti tenentes tenent, etc. lxi acr. -- xiiij bond. de
Shirburn redd. per ann. pro v acr. et j rod terrae apud Blakhamside v s. ij d.
-- Praepositus villae ibid. qui pro tempore fuerit, tenet j rod terrae sup' le
Brokes pertin. ad officium suum and redd. per annum ij d. -- Magister
hospitalis de Sherburn tenet j parcel. pastu^. dictae villae inclus. infra
pratum suum ibid. et redd. per annum dictae villae xij d. et d'no episcopo vj d.

Hatfield's Survey.
; and in the Boldon Book it is stated, that Shadforth, North Sherburn, and
Cassop had fifty-one villains, whose services were similar to those of Boldon.
In Shadforth only one free tenant (Thomas) is named, who held two oxgangs of
land, rendering 40 d. fee-farm rent, and serving on the bishop's embassies. In
bishop Hatfield's Survey we find that Sir Ralph Eure, knight, had acquired the
lands, of Thomas de Tesedale Inq. p. m. Marg. ux. Tho. de Tesedale, Ao 5 Bury.
; and there were two other free tenants, Isaac Bonner and the heir of John
Freeman. Sixteen bond tenants held each a message and two oxgangs of land,
each oxgang containing fifteen acres, rendering 16s. a year, to wit, 8s. per
oxgang for work; and at the feast of the Purification 19d. for scat or
scacpennys, and at the feast of St Martin for scatpennys, called by the tenants
maltpennys, 15d. and for averpennys at the feast of St Cuthbert and St John the
Baptist 12d. They performed their labor like the bond tenants of Boldon in all
things; and beside the rents before stated, they paid for plow money at
Michaelmas 16d. for harvest work 12d. and for averpennys at Michaelmas 12d. for
every man of the family 12d. and for those under age 6 d. Also each bond tenant
rendered to the lord six bushels of oats, at the feast of the Nativity two
hens, and at Easter ten eggs; for a milch cow they paid amongst them 6 s. for
cornage, 25s. 6d. for woodloads 12s. for the common furnace 2s. for toll, etc.
2s. 8d. and for the third part of the office of punder 6s. 8d.

In the twenty-ninth year of bishop Hatfield we find a resident family had
assumed the local name Inq. p. m. Joh. de Shadforth.
. The family of Eure or Ever held their possessions here for several
generations Inq. p. m. R. Eure mil. Ao 17 Langley.

Shadforth division, 26th August, 1635, Lib. K. register's office, p. 273. --
Hodgson's MSS.


.

NORTH and SOUTH SHERBURNE are noted in the Boldon Book as members of
Queringdonshire, and probably took their names from the shire brook or burn.
Ulkillus held two oxgangs of land in North Sherburn, paying 40d. and serving on
embassies. In South Sherburn, Christian Cementarius held 60 acres of moor land
of the bishop's gift, rendering 5s. and two oxgangs of land, which were
Arkills, for 14d. but which rents were not demanded whilst he served the bishop
in opere cementarij, perhaps as seedsman, or sower of corn on his demesne.
Watlingus, with Savia his wife, held four oxgangs, rendering half a mark.
Besides those were five farmers, who held each twelve acres, rendering 2 s. one
hen, and twenty eggs, making four portions of seed land in autumn, and plowing
one acre for each carucate of land. Also ten cottagers, who each held six
acres, and wrought from the feast of St Peter ad vincula, to the feast of St
Martin two days in each week, and the other half of the year one day in the
week. The smith held twelve acres. The demesnes of Sherburn were then in farm,
with the increase, rendering vi l. The services of the bond tenants in
Sherburn, as set forth in Hatfield's Survey, are similar to those in Shadforth.

There is an ancient seat house belonging to the family of Tempests at Sherburn
Sherburn division, 26th August, 1635. Lib. K. in the register's office, p. 262.
.

SHERBURN HOSPITAL
depiction of Sherburn Hosiptal

Among the pious works of the opulent prelate Hugh de Puteaco, or Pudsey, there
is none surviving to this age of such importance as the foundation of Sherburn
hospital, designed for the reception of sixty-five poor lepers, with a master
and other officers to superintend the same, which great and godly work he
effected about the year 1181, when that dreadful malady prevailed grievously in
this land. He dedicated the house to Christ, the Blessed Virgin, Lazarus, and
his sisters Mary and Martha Shyrburne -- Clarus sons Lat. Lel. -- Scyreburna,
Saxon. -- Here is an hospital of poor men, which Hugh Puteac, the joly bishop
of Durham, builded in the reign of K. Hen. II. -- Lambarde's Topog. Dict. p.
326.

Our Saxon ancestors dedicated many buildings to what they esteemed pious, and
very few to charitable uses solely. Bishop Tanner has not noticed so many as
six established by them; but we ought not to conclude, from this omission, that
they were regardless of their fellow creatures laboring under the various
calamities incident to human nature, who were unable to help themselves. In
general, the poor were supported by the religious societies, and the members of
each were enjoined by the rules of their respective orders, and the express
directions of their founders and benefactors, to relieve the wants and
distresses not only of the necessitous and infirm in their neighborhood, but
of traveling people also. From neglect or the nauseousness and infection of
diseases, the wretchedness of the poor would perhaps not be sufficiently
relieved, which induced the benevolent to found hospitals for the more
immediate and greater relief of distempered objects. Within 100 years after the
Conquest, 59 hospitals were erected in this kingdom; and before the end of the
reign of Henry III. they were increased to 131.

The leprosy was a disorder very prevalent in Europe during the tenth and
eleventh centuries; and its spreading was doubtless the cause of establishing
many hospitals. Some persons have conjectured that in Christendom they amounted
to 15000 in number; but without assenting to so vague a calculation, it is
certain, that in England there was hardly a large city, or a capital town, near
which there was not one at least of these lazar-houses erected: We indeed find
none within the walls, for as the distemper was so violent as to be judged
infectious, the afflicted persons were denied all public commerce.

Hospitals were originally designed for the relief and entertainment of
travelers upon the road, and particularly of pilgrims, and therefore were
generally built by the way-side. -- Burn's Eccl. Law, vol. ii. p. 455.

From the situation of Sherburn Hospital we may conjecture, that it was partly
intended for this benevolent purpose, as well as for the reception of lepers.

The leprosy was much more common in this part of the globe formerly than at
present, and perhaps near half the hospitals that were in England were for
lepers. At the five gates of Norwich were five houses of this sort; and lepers
were so numerous in the twelfth century, that by a decree in the Lateran
Council under pope Alexander III. 1179, they were empowered to erect churches
for themselves, and to have their own ministers (lepers, we may suppose) to
officiate in them. This shows at once how infectious and offensive their
distemper was; and on this account, in England, where a man was a leper, and
dwelling in a town, and would come into the church or among his, neighbors,
where they were assembled, to talk with them to their annoyance or disturbance,
a writ lay* de leproso amovendo. -- Fitzh. Not. Brev. p. 520, 521.

What follows is remarkable. The writ is for those lepers who appear to the
sight of all men that they are lepers, by their voice and their sores the
putrefaction of their flesh, and by the smell of them. And so late as the reign
of Edw. VI. multitudes of lepers seem to have been in England; for in 1 Edw.
VI. c. 3, in which directions are given for carrying the poor to the places
where they were born, etc. we read the following clause: Provided always that
all leprous and poor bedrid creatures may; at their liberty, remain and
continue in such houses appointed for lepers or bedrid people as they now be
in. -- Burn's Hist. Poor Laws, p. 68.

In the reign of Hen. I. the leprosy (by some called Elephantiasis) ran by
infection all over England, and it is believed that the disease first came into
this island out of Egypt, which more than once had spread itself into Europe,
first in the days of Pompey the Great, afterward under Heraclius, and at other
times, as may be seen in history, but never (so far as I have read) did it
before that time appear in England. -- Camd. Brit. Leicestersh. p. 417, edit.
1772. -- Mr Allan's notes preceding his printed collections relating to
Sherburn Hospital.


.

The present buildings retain little of the ancient order: In the chapel only,
we find remains of the age in which the founder lived. It appears that the
hospital was destroyed by the Scots, and restored by Thomas de Hessewell, the
master thereof, who held that office between the years 1330 and 1339 E. Regist.
2o Dec. and Cap. Dun. Bibl Cotton. Julius, fo. 99.

Thomas de Hessewelle rector. ecclesiae de Seggefeld et magister hospitalis de
Sherburn idem hospitale restituit auxit etc. Scotorum depredationibus et
encendiis, etc. collapsum. pro quo institutentur duo capellani ultra numerum
consuct. an. 1329.

MASTERS OF SHERBURN HOSPITAL.
The first person appointed to preside over this hospital was Ernald or Arnald,
chaplain to bishop Hugh, and probably put in at the foundation, 1184.

Arnald de Anclent Ernaldus de Aclent sined to the king in 140 palsreys, with
Sackbut's, Lorain's, Giltspur's, and Peacock's crests, such as would be for his
credit. -- Madox Hist. Exch. quart. edit. vol. i. p. 273. 14th king John, 1213.
occurs about 1200, who, under the title of rector of the house of lepers, made
a composition with Philip Ballon, parson of Bishop-Middleham, concerning the
tithes of the township of Garmondsway, in the year 1203, How long he continued
we know not. Vide Burton's Monasticon Ebor. p. 354.


Sir Martin de Sancta Cruce is the next we meet with, who is sometimes styled
proctor, and sometimes rector in the year 1245. To Sherburne house he
bequeathed his Argenteus Textus Argenteus Textus is mentioned by several
authors to signify the New Testament; it was wr^tten also in golden letters,
and carefully preserved in the churches. -- Jacob's Law Dictionary.
, and Capa de panno ad aurum. scilicet Baudekin Baudekin (Baldicum and
Baldekinum) cloth of Baudekin or gold: It is said to be the richest cloth, now
called brocade, made with gold and silk, or tissue upon which figures in silk,
etc. were embroidered anno 4 Henry VIII. c. 6. Erat pann^s (...) rigidus,
plur^atoque opere intertextus. But some writers account it only cloth of silk.
, cum Vestimento p'enario de panno Yspanioe ad aurum, and these he would have
remain in the hospital: He also assigned ten shillings a year for a pitance
(pitancia) on his anniversary, wherever he should have sepulture Grant of lands
at Wytton-le-Weare from William de Hamsterley to Martin de Sancta Cruce, master
of Sherburn house.

Release of an annual rent of five shillings a year, from Alexander de Kellawe
to the master and brethren of Sherburn house, for Raceby near Garmundsway.


. It appears he was buried at Sherburn; for on the 14th of September, being the
day of the exaltation of the holy cross, all the brethren and sisters had that
pitance Pitance, a little repast, or resection of fish or flesh, more than the
common allowance.
in memory of him every year, till bishop Kellaw reduced it to five shillings
and five pence.

Master Roger de Seyton probably succeeded him; he occurs by the name of custos
about the year 1269 or 1270 Release of common of pasture in Smallmor, from
Agnes the wife of Robert de Rummeseye, to the master and brethren of Sherburn
hospital.
.

William de Insula was the next rector in 1302.

Lambert de Torkyngham Obligatio abbatis de Alba-landa custodi domus de
Schirburn pro decimis garbarum de New biging et Staynton, 1317.
, otherwise Tricklingham, succeeded before 1317; for in the month of August
that year he as custos, lets the tithes of grain in Newbiging and Staynton to
William abbot of Blanchland.

Thomas de Hessewell Grant of lands in South Sherburn (now called Tann-hills),
from John Harpyn to the master and brethren of Sherburn hospital, 1331.
was in possession of the house before 1330. He is the first we meet with
called by the name of master.

Thomas de Nevill succeeded in November, 1339. Died before the 18th of July,
1362, and was succeeded in the prebend of Bole, in the church of York, by
Adrianus Cardinalis.

Alan de Shuttlyngton, otherwise Shotlyngton, presbyter, on the death of Thomas
Nevill was collated by bishop Hatfield to this hospital, the 15th of August,
1362.

Thomas de Bernolby, chaplain, on Shuttlyngton's resignation was collated by
bishop Hatfield the 17th of August, 1367: He occurs again as master the 24th of
September, 1380, which is all we know of him.

John de Waltham Grant of free warren in Sherburn, Whitwell, Garmondsway, and
Ebchester, (by John Fordham, bishop of Durham) to the master and brethren of
Sherburn hospital, 8th May, 1384.
we presume succeeded by the collation of bishop Fordham. He was master May
8th, 1384, when he had liberty of free warren granted him in all his demesne
lands of Sherburn, Whitwell, Garmondsway, and Ebchester; and on the 10th of
July following he had the bishop's license to receive a message with the
appurtenances in Ebchester for the better support of the hospital,
(notwithstanding the act of mortmain) from Sir John de Neville, knight lord of
Raby. Resigned the hospital before the 26th of June, 1391, (it is apprehended
rather in 1388) on being made bishop of Sarum by papal provision.

John Burgeys Carta de licentia pro domino Johanne de Neville domino de Raby,
alias concessio terrarum in Ebchestre hospitali de Sherburne, 10 Julii, 1284.
E. Rot. Fordham, Sch. 6, No. 5.
dean of Lanchester, 1383, which he resigned: Occurs master of this hospital
before June 1391, and probably in 1388, was removed by bishop Skirlaw for
mal-administration.

Alan de Newark, clerk, Grant of the mastership of Sherburn hospital to Alan de
Newark, by W Skirlaw, bishop of Durham, Jan. 3, 1403.
was collated by bishop Skirlaw the 3d of January, 1403, on the removal of John
Burgeys. His last act, whilst master of the hospital, was granting a long lease
of some lands in Gateshead to John Boterell, dated the 1st of May, 1309.

John Newton, of Litchfield diocese, presbyter, was collated to the hospital by
bishop Langley, the 19th of January, 1409, void by the cession of Alan de
Newark: Was a bad man, and by granting corrodies, annual pensions, and other
iniquitious practices, he almost ruined the hospital estate, and shamefully
suffered the buildings and outhouses to go to decay: He seems to have been a
favorite of bishop Langley, who did not see, or at least connived at his
faults and ill conduct in the management of this house.

Nicholas Dixon, presbyter, was one of the executors of Ralph Neville earl of
Westmerland in 1424. Collated by bishop Langley to this hospital the 28th of
November, 1427.

John Marchall, LL. B. on the resignation of Nicholas Dixon was collated to the
mastership by bishop Langley the 23d of July, 1433. The last time he occurs as
master is the 18th of April, 1458, when he was fined for not doing suite and
service at the bishop's halmot court at Wolsingham.

When Marchall died or resigned we cannot find. Alexander Lyghe came in about
1490; from 1433 to 1490, a period of fifty-seven years, is a space too great to
be allowed him, though he might die an old man: His immediate successor is yet
unknown, there being no episcopal registers remaining from the death of Langley
till bishop Fox's time.

Alexander Lyghe Collation of John Else to to the vicarage of Kellow, 1499, on
the nomination of Lyghe.
, Lie, Legh, or Lee, for so we find his name variously spelt, was employed in
many affairs by king Richard III. He was collated to Sherburn hospital by
bishop Sherwood about 1489, being then rector of Houghton-le-Spring. Also made
temporal chancellor of Durham by the same bishop 1490; soon after, viz. the
next year, was struck with the palsy, and had a coadjutor (Robert Kent, D. D.)
assigned to manage the affairs of the hospital and his church at Houghton,
which he resigned the 3d of December, 1500, and the hospital in 1501; had an
annual pension of 60l. assigned out of the profits of Houghton living during
his life It was customary for bishops to grant incumbents grown old and infirm,
and for past services, the favor of resigning, provided the next successor
should pay them a pension for life: This practice at length grew into great and
scandalous abuse, resignations being made on any frivolous and unjustifiable
occasion. It often drew the clergy into simoniacal contracts, diminished the
value of benefices, by laying the burden of pensions on them, and defrauded the
right of patrons.


.

Robert Dykar, clerk Grant of mastership to Robert Dykar by Richard Fox, bishop
of Durham, 17th July, 1501.
. was collated to this hospital by bishop Fox, the 17th of July, 1501, on the
resignation of Alexander Lyghe. Though bishop Fox commended Dykar for his care
and diligence in keeping up the buildings of the hospital, etc. (as may be seen
in his instrument of collation) yet as soon as the bishop was translated to
Winchester, he suffered the house to run to ruin and decay, embezzelled the
hospital goods, and shamefully converted all the revenues to his own private
use. When and where he died we know not.

Dr Roderick Gundisalve Grant, etc. Rymer's Foedera, vol. xiii. p. 167.
, of Puebla in Spain, orator from the Spanish court, or in the modern phrase,
charge des affairs, was presented to this hospital on the death of Rob. Dykar
by king Henry VII. on the 11th of May, 1507, (daring the vacancy of the sea) to
hold the same during pleasure: But how long he continued master or for what
services done, he obtained the grant of this house, we have not discovered, or
whether he resigned or died possessed K. Hen. 7. being a frugal prince, chose
rather to reward foreigners, who had been sent here on legations, and under
some pretense of service to our court, with preferments that cost him nothing,
than to impair his treasure, by making pecuniary presents to them. Thus he
bestowed the bishopric of Bath on Adrian de Castello, and of Worcester on
Sylvester Gigles, both strangers, for past services: In like manner, we
conjecture, Gundisalve was gratified with this hospital, as an equivalent for
some particular services which he had performed for the king in the Spanish
court.


.

Geoffrey Wren, clerk Lease of waste ground at Ebchester to Geoffrey Wren,
master of Sherburn hospital, by Thomas Wolsey, bishop of Durham, 17th of
December, 1524. Rot. A. Tho. Card. No. 48.
, probably succeeded, but in what year is uncertain. Died the 5th of April,
1527, and was buried in St George's chapel at Windsor.

Edward Fox, S. T. P. was born at Duresley in Gloucestershire, educated at Eton
school, and admitted of King's college, Cambridge, the 27th of March, 1512,
whereof he was made provost the 27th of December, 1528, and continued so till
his death. He was prebendary of Osbaldwick in York cathedral, the 8th of
November, 1527, and w^ suppose was collated to this hospital the same year.
Died at London the 8th of May, 1538.

Thomas Leghe, L. D. was collated to this hospital by bishop Tunstall the 14th
of September, 1535, on the promotion of Edward Fox to the Sea of Hereford. He
died in 1545, and was buried in the church of St Leonard's Shoreditch, London,
with this inscription on a flat stone,

"Sir Tho. Liggh, Doctor of Law, 1545." The collation of Thomas Leghe to the
mastership of Sherburn hospital by bishop Tunstoll, 14th Sept. 1535. F. reg.
Tunstall, p. 22.

Grant of the next presentation to the vicarage of Bishopton, by the master and
brethren of Sherburn hospital, April 20, 1541. E. reg. Tunstall, p. 34.




Anthony Bellassis, alias Bellassyse, succeeded Dr Leghe about the year 1545:
Was the younger son of Thomas Bellassis of Henknowle in this county, esquire and
ordained a priest by bishop Tunstall the 7th of June, 1533. On the dissolution
of the monasteries he obtained a grant of Newborough abbey, in the county of
York, valued at 457l. 13s. 5d. which he afterward gave to his nephew Sir
William Bellassyse, knight, and is now the scat of earl Fauconberg Tanner's
Notitia.
. -- Died in July, 1552 A note of the miserable abusyon of lands and goods
given unto the hospital of Sherburn, only for the sustentation of poor people,
which is now abused. This appears to be wrote about the time of Henry VIII. or
Edward VI.

The first foundation of Sherburn house was for sixty-five layseris, with a
master, who had rule of all together, and kept continual residence there, etc.

But is there neither poor man, poor woman, neither yet priest nor clerk, nor
child, sound of the house charge, saving only two preests, two clerks, and two
children, which the sermor does keep by reason of his lease.

And all the residue of the revenues of the house, being only poor men's
livings, goes all together to the private use of the master.


.

Richard Read was of New College, in Oxford, doctor of laws, an able civilian
of his time. Anthony Bellasis dying in July, 1552, (the bishop then in prison)
Richard Read was put in master by the king, but notwithstanding this the bishop
collated in his own right Anthony Salvayn. On bishop Tunstall's restoration
Read quietly quitted his pretensions to the hospital, and Anthony Salvayn took
possesion thereof.

THOMAS LEAVER PREACHER TO KING EDWARD THE SIXTE HE DIED IN IVLY 1577.

Anthony Salvayn The collation of Anthony Salvayn, B. D. etc. 13th August, 1552.
E. reg. Tunstall, p. 43.
was a younger son of Gerrard Salvayn of Croxdale, in this county, esquire collated
to Sherburn hospital the 13th of August, 1552. Was deprived before the 29th of
November, 1559, (for on that day John Henshawe was installed in the prebend)
and enjoined to remain in the town of Kirkbymoorside, in the county of York, or
elsewhere in the said county, the city of York excepted, so that he pass not
above five miles northward. He is said to be meanly learned, but of estimation
in the country. -- See Strype.

Ralph Skynner was of New College, in Oxford, the 12th of July, 1536. In 1559
was presented to the mastership of this hospital, on the deprivation of Anthony
Salvayn, by Dr Grindall visitor of the bishopric, the Sea of Durham being then
vacant, and in queen Elizabeth's hands. He was recommended to the queen by
archbishop Parker. He died on the 21th of January, 1562, as appears by a MS.
note, but where buried we cannot learn, though Willis supposes at Sedgefield,
but without any foundation, as there appears no account of it in the parish
register Wood's Athenae, vol. i. p. 688. -- Rymer's Foedera, vol. xv. p. 543.
-- Willis' Cath. -- Strype's An. vol. i. p. 327.
.

Thomas Lever was born in Lancashire. Collated to Sherburn hospital the 28th of
January, 1562. On a journey home to the hospital of Sherburn, (which he was
permitted to retain on account of the scarcity of preachers, though deprived of
his prebend for nonconformity) falling sick by the way Vide Strype's Annals,
vol. ii. p. 513.
, died at Ware the beginning of July, 1577, his body was brought to and
interred adjoining the south wall within the altar rails of the chapel of
Sherburn hospital, under a blue marble stone, whereon is cut a cross story with
a bible and chalice, denoting him (as is conjectured) an itinerant preacher
through England, and on a brass plate an inscription as in the margin.

Ralph Lever brother to Thomas Lever the last master, and an exile with him in
Switzerland Strype's Annals, vol. i. p. 319. -- Wood's Ath. vol. i. p. 356,
671. -- Willis, etc.
. On the 16th of July, 1577, was collated to the mastership of this hospital.
He was a troublesome nonconformist, and very disobedient to his patron in
trifles and frivolous masters. Died in 1585 The collation of Thomas Wright, A.
M. to the vicarage of Sockburn by bishop Pilkington, through lapse of the
master and brethren of Sherburn hospital not presenting in due time, 8th of
August, 1570.

The collation of Francis Trollop, clerk, to the vicarage of Sockburn, by
bishop Pilkington, through lapse of the master and brethren of Sherburn
hospital not presenting in due time, 22d of April, 1572.

The protest and refusal of bishop Barnes to institute George Swalwell to the
vicarage of Kellow, on the presentation of the master and brethren of Sherburn
hospital, 26th of July, 1580.


.

In his time an act of parliament passed in the 27th year of queen Elizabeth,
1584, for the incorporation of this hospital, by the name of Christ's hospital
in Sherborne near Durham.

Valentine Dale, LL. D. Wood's Ath. vol. i. p. 669 and 707. -- Vide his letters
in Strype's Hist. Reform. vol. ii. p. 244, and append. p. 52, No. 27. --
Rymer's Foedera, vol. xv. p. 779, 781. -- Camden's Annals of queen Elizabeth,
1588. -- Dugdale's Bar. vol. ii. p. 394. -- Collins' Peerage, vol. vi. p. 63.
. of All Souls, Oxford. On the 22d of March, 1584, was presented to the
mastership of Sherburn hospital by virtue of an advowson granted to Henry and
John Goldsmith of York, gentlemen, by bishop Barnes, for one turn only. He died
in his house near St Paul's, London, the 17th of November, 1589, and was buried
in the parish church of St Gregory Grant by bishop Barnes to John Goldsmithe
and Henry Goldsmithe of the next presentation to the mastership of Sherburn
hospital for Valentine Dale, 20th of April, 1582.

The presentation of Valentine Dale, LL. D. to the mastership of Sherburn
hospital, by John Goldsmithe, 22d of March, 1584.

Dispensation of absence for Valentine Dale, and to be admitted by proxy into
the mastership of Sherburn hospital, and to hold and execute the same by
deputy, (he being a layman in the queen's service) notwithstanding the act of
parliament of the 27th of her reign, requiring the master thereof to be a
preacher, having no cure or charge of souls elsewhere, 17th of April, 1585.

Procuration of Valentine Dale for John Maddocks and John Bernes his proctors,
to exhibit his presentation and letters of dispensation of absence from queen
Elizabeth before bishop Barnes, and to be admitted into the mastership of
Sherburn hospital by proxy, 17th of April, 1585.

Institution and decree of letters mandatory by bishop Barnes, to induct
Valentine Dale by proxy into the mastership of Sherburn hospital, 22d of April,
1585.

The citation of bishop Barnes for visiting Sherburn hospital in the time of
Valentine Dale master, 4th of June, 1585.


.

Immediately after the death of Dr Dale, bishop Hutton bestowed the hospital on
a nephew of his, viz. Robert Hutton, B. D. a noted tutor, and senior fellow of
Trinity College, Cambridge, who declined accepting the same, and interceeded
for Dr Bellamy, then a prebendary of Durham, by way of exchange.

Robert Bellamy born in Yorkshire; was of Exeter College. In November, 1589,
was collated to the mastership of this hospital by bishop Hutton, having
exchanged his rectory of Houghton-le-Spring and prebend for it. This bishop in
his letter to the lord treasurer Burleigh, calls him an honest man, c preacher
and a physician, fit to have charge both of the souls and bodies of the poor
impotent sick persons of that hospital. He died about December, 1608, and is
characterized with others of the college of Durham, in a Latin manuscript poem,
written about 1584, and preserved among Anthony a Wood's papers in the
Ashmolean museum, entitled, Iter Boreale, written by Dr Richard Eedes, canon of
Christ church, and afterward dean of Worcester Bishop Hutton's letter to the
lord treasurer Burleigh, praying that his lordship would be a means to satisfy
the queen concerning his presenting Dr Bellamy to Sherburn hospital, 30th of
March, 1590.
My most humble duty remembered, etc. I am now to crave your lordship's favor
more than ever in my life, for I understand by Mr Secretary, that her majesty
is much offended with me for the bestowing of Sherborn house, the matter is
this: Immediately after the decease of Dr Dale I bestowed the hospital of
Sherborn house upon a kinsman of mine, one Mr Robert Hutton, a bachelor of
divinity, and one of the senior fellows of Trinity college, in Cambridge, and
this year head lecturer in that house; but because the living chiefly
consists upon husbandry, and he a mere scholar, I was content at his suite to
bestow that hospital upon Dr Bellamy, an honest man, a preacher, and a
physician, to have charge both of the souls and bodies of the poor impotent
sick persons of that hospital, and Dr Bellamy to give over one of his benefices
and his prebend in Durham to Mr Hutton; this was done in November and the
beginning of December last, for after I did receive a letter from Mr Secretary,
that her majesty's intention was to qualify Sir Henry Lee with a dispensation,
and to bestow upon him the said house; I did answer, that I being patron by
statute, (whereunto her majesty had given her royal assent) with best advice
had already given it as fully and effectually as I could; so the matter slept
from that time until the beginning of March, when I did receive to my great
grief another letter from Mr Secretary, that her highness was greatly offended
with me for the bestowing of it, because I knowing her majesty's determination,
had presumed to bestow it without her leave: I answer that which was most true,
as I shall answer before the living God, that I had given it before Mr
Secretary's letter signifying her majesty's pleasure did come unto my hands,
and that I did it with the testimony of a good conscience, to bring into this
ignorant country two godly preachers by two benefices which Dr Bellamy did
resign; but this week I did receive a third letter from Mr Secretary,
signifying that he had acquainted her majesty with my answer, wherewith her
highness was nothing satisfied, but that her majesty's resolution was that I
should restore Dr Bellamy to all his former livings, and he to give over the
hospital, and that I should send up forthwith to the court Mr Hutton, to
compound with Sir Henry Lee for the hospital, and then he to have the same,
which thing if it please your good lordship lies not in me to do, for I am not
patron of all Dr Bellamy's livings, and he refuses to give over the hospital
which he does lawfully possess, and Mr Hutton was instituted and inducted into
his benefice and prebend Co^l^ted the 4th of December, and instituted the 13th
of December, 1589, to the rectory of Houghton-le-Spring, and the third prebend
in Durham cathedral.

The recognizance of Robert Bellamy, master of Sherburn hospital, for delivery
of the stock of cattle, corn, hay, etc. belonging to the said hospital, at his
resignation or death, 22d of April, 1605.
Memorand. quod Rob. Bellamy, clericus, in medicinis doctor, magister
hospitalis Christi in Sherburne prope Dunelm. in com. Dunelm. coram reverendo
in Christo patre Tobia episc. Dunelm. in cancellar. Dunelm. personaliter
constitut. recognovit se debere serenissimo et potentissimo in Christo principi
Jacobo Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, etc. regi, etc. octingent. libras bonae et
legalis monetae Angliae solvend. eid. domino regi haeredibus vel successoribus
suis, et nisi ita fecerit, vult et concedit quod vicecomes Dunelm. fieri faciat
praedict. summam octingent. librarum de omnibus maneriis, messuagiis, terris et
tenementis praedicti Robert Bellamy, haeredum executorum vel administratorum
suorum in com. Dunelm. test Thoma Calverley, ar. cancellar. Dunelm. apud
Dunelm. vicesimo secundo die Aprilis anno regni dicti domini regis Angliae,
Franciae et Hiberniae tertio, et Scotiae tricesimo octavo, 1605.

The condition of this recognizance is such, that whereas the right reverend
father in God Tobye, by divine providence bishop of Duresme, the sixteenth day
of April, in the year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred fourscore and
nineteen, in his diocesan and ordinary visitation then depending, did make, set
down, and cause to be delivered in writing under his hand and seal to the above
named Robert Bellamy, clerk, doctor of physic, then and now master, and the
brethren of Christ's hospital in Sherburne nigh Duresme, in the county of
Duresme aforesaid, certain ordinances and rules specially concerning the stock
of corn and hay to be left at the death, resignation, or removal of each master
of the said hospital, by them and their successors to be observed and kept: In
which ordinances and rules amongst other things, it is ordained to this effect,
viz. That as well for the performance of the same ordinances and rules, as for
the due preservation, safety, and delivery of all other the whole stock of
cattle, goods, plate, stuff, utensils and implements, belonging to the said
hospital, according to an inventory thereof made after the death of Master
Valentine Daile, doctor of the laws and master of requests to the late queen's
majesty, and late master of the said hospital, as well the said master then and
now being, as every other master that shall succeed, before the time of his
induction or real possession of or in the said hospital, and before he shall
take or receive any profits or commodities, or any way intermeddle with the
government or charge thereof, shall acknowledge one recognizance in the sum of
eight hundred pounds of lawful English money to the king's majesty's use in the
chancery at Duresme, before the chancellor of the county palatine of Duresme
for the time being, as by the same does and may appear.

If therefore the said Robert Bellamy, clerk, now master of the said hospital,
his executors, administrators, and assigns, shall from henceforth on his and
their behalf, well and truly perform and observe the said ordinances and rules,
and every part and parcel thereof; and also shall duly preserve and safe
deliver, within ten days next after he the said Robert Bellamy shall happen to
die, or by resignation, or by any other manner of avoidance whatsoever, become
not master of the said hospital, all such other the whole stock and store of
goods, cattle, plate, stuff, utensils and implements, and every part thereof
not mentioned in the said ordinances, as belong or ought to belong to the said
hospital, in the name of the stock, store, goods, cattle, plate, stuff,
utensils, and implements whatsoever of the same hospital, or by any other name
whatsoever, according to the said inventory thereof made after the death of
Master Valentine Daile aforesaid, late master of the said hospital, now
remaining in the register of the said reverend father the bishop of Duresme,
and of the full several values or prices thereof mentioned to the next
succeeding master after him, and the brethren of the said hospital, or to such
other person or persons as the reverend father lord bishop of Durham for the
time being shall under his hand and seal appoint and authorize for the receipts
thereof, to and for the use of the said succeeding master and brethren of the
said hospital, that then this obligation to be void, otherwise to remain in
full force and virtue.

ROBERT BELLAMY.


in the beginning of December last, and as I hear, has already compounded for
first fruits, yet I have sent my servant to Mr Hutton at Cambridge, where he is
preparing for his removing to his benefices, now at Easter, and willed him to
make his present repair thither, and to answer for himself: Thus stands the
matter. Now my humble suite is unto your honor, for your accustomed favor,
first, that Dr Bellamy and Mr Hutton be not compelled to give over their
livings, which as I take it, they do lawfully possess; secondly, that the
hospital appointed by her majesty and the whole parliament to a preacher, and
the relief of the poor, may not ^^ converted to worse uses, which is like to
be, if Sir Henry Lee be compounded withal; thirdly, that her majesty be not
offended with me for doing that, which I thought I might do lawfully, and did
with the testimony of a good conscience, I beseech your honor, that as you and
my lord grace of Canterbury were the means without my suit, for my placing in
this country, so at my earnest humble suit, you will be a means to defend me in
my well and lawful doings, thus with humble thanks to God for restoring you to
health again, and to your honor for your great favor toward me at all times,
I humbly take my leave.

Your lordship's most bounden MATTHEW. DUNELM.
Aukland, 3^th of March, 1590.


.

Thomas Murray Wood's Ath. vol. i. p. 398. -- Rymer's Foed. vol. xvi. p. 631.
-- See his epitaph Le Neve's Monum. Angl. p. 86, No. 163.

4 Jan. 1606. Ego Thomas Murray, arm. admittendus ad hospitale Christi de
Shirburne prope Dunelmum his articulis libenter ex animo subscribo quatenus me
concernunt. Thomas Murray.

Subscrip. Book of bishop James, Consist. Court, Durham.
, esquire a Scotchman, descended from the ancient and honorable family of the earl
of Tullibardine, was collated to this hospital in 1606, though contrary to the
act of the 27th of Elizabeth, as being a mere layman, and not even in deacon's
orders. He was a gentleman of so fine accomplishments that king James I. made
choice of him as preceptor. He died on the 9th of April, 1623, being then newly
cut for the stone, and was buried in the chapel of Eton college.

William Shawe, A. M. was collated to this hospital the 11th of July, 1623, by
bishop Neile, on the death of Thomas Murray. He had seven acres of land
allotted to him in right of the hospital, upon a division of the townfields of
Sherburn. Died before September 1636.

John Machon, A. M. born in Staffordshire; was collated to the vicarage of
Hartburn in Northumberland, the 24th of September, 1632, and resigned it for
this hospital, into which he was inducted the 24th of September, 1636. During
the civil wars between the king's army quartered at Durham, and the parliament
army stationed at Quarrington, the hospital was plundered of its cattle and
goods, also of many of its old charters and muniments, and Mr Machon was much
abused and dispossessed, and one John Fenwick, a tradesman in Newcastle and
guide to the Scottish army, was put in master, who soon after got an order from
Oliver Cromwell to put in his son John Fenwick, a layman, to be master there,
whereby Machon was kept out of the hospital eighteen years. After the
restoration of king Charles he petitioned the king to be restored, and enjoyed
it till his death in December 1679: Was buried in the hospital chapel without
any memorial.

The former masters of this hospital were obliged to leave their successors
stock to the value of 400l. but bishop Crewe in consideration of Mr Machon's
great losses, and seventeen years banishment, by an order dated the 13th of
September, 1676, decreed, that Machon should only leave to his successor 200l.
in cattle, hay, corn, etc. which rule every succeeding master has been allowed
to follow Bishop Morton's letters of institution for John Machon, A. M. to the
mastership of Sherburn hospital, 23d of September, 1636.

The bishop's testimonial of John Machon's taking the oaths, and subscribing
the articles, on his collation as master of Sherburn hospital, 23d of
September, 1636.

Bishop Morton's mandate to induct John Machon, A. M. into the office of master
of Sherburn hospital, Sept. 23, 1636.

The order of bishop Cousin to John Machon, master of Sherburn hospital, to
admit none but maimed seamen and soldiers into the hospital, pursuant to an
order of the king and council, 7th of August, 1666.

An inventory of the stock of cattle, plate, and household goods, belonging to
Sherburn hospital, delivered to John Machon the master, 24th of September,
1636. First CATTLE of diverse sorts.
Imprimis. L. s. d. 43 draught oxen at 3l. a piece 129 0 0 4 Stots of 3 years
old at 24s. 4 16 0 21 young beasts of 2 years old at 24s. 25 4 0 20 kyne and 2
bulls at 23s. 4d. 25 13 4 9 kyne at 26s. 8d 12 0 0 7 mares at 30s. 5d. 10 12 11
2 fillies and 1 colt 2 years old at 26s. 8d. 4 0 0 1 filly 1 year old 0 10 0 1
stoned horse 2 10 0 21 calves of 1 year old at 10s. 10 10 0 21 score ewes at
4l. 84 0 0 13 score hogs at 46s. 8d. 30 6 8 90 wethers and 50 tups at 4l. each
score 28 0 0 old swine and 10 pigs 3 6 8 370 9 7

Item, all the winter corn and spring corn at the death of the said master Dr
Shaw, sown and to be sown (according to the ordinances) upon the lands in
tillage at Byersgarth and Garmansloap.

Household stuff as follows: In the hall and great chamber.
14 tables and boards 6 quishings 4 cup towels 4 dressing boards 13 forms 6
joined stools 11 chests 11 tressils 1 ambrie cupbord or side table for plate 1
porr of iron 1 teaster bed with vallence of green and red with 5 curtains 1
pair of fire tongs 1 sharn or canabie 1 counter 1 round table 1 feather bed 30
coverlids 6 mattrasles 2 covering's 29 blankets 3 boulsters 6 codds 3 codd
waiers 39 bed stocks
Linen.
11 pair of sheets 6 table cloths of 6 yards long each 4 towels 12 napkins 2
cupboard cloths
Pewter and brass.
2 laver basins 1 chafer 3 candlesticks 2 boiling pots 3 posnetts 3 great pans
2 little pans 1 great furnace pot 1 brazen mortar and pestal 1 laddle 1 scummer
1 chafing dish 12 plates 12 dishes 12 sawcers
In the buttery.
12 silver spoons 1 almorie chest for linen 1 great knife 8 leather sacks 12
hogsheads for beer 4 dreeping tubs 8 cruses 4 wood cans
In the brewhouse.
1 mash fatt 1 brewing lead 1 lead trough 2 ale tubs 2 kettles 4 baskets 1
cestern 1 long trough 2 tubs
In the larder.
2 oxen and an half in salt 4 bacon sticks 1 lead cestern to salt beef in 1
slaughter 3 slaughter ax 1 flesh bill
In the poultry.
34 capons 41 hens 8 cocks 15 geese 1 gander 14 ducks 2 drakes
In the smithy.
1 smith's stithy 2 working hammers 2 shoeing hammers 1 pair of tongs 1 pair of
bellows 1 tool for cart nails 1 tool for nails 1 tool for small nails
In the kitchen.
1 brand iron 2 hand irons 1 roasting iron 1 iron poaker 1 whetstone 2 pair of
pothooks 3 spitts 1 stone mortar and pestal 1 paistry board 1 capon coffer 1
steeping tub 1 frying pan 1 dressing knife 1 kitchen knife


Item, a communion cup part gilt, which Margaret Leaver, widow to Ralph Leaver,
late master there, did freely give to the hospital for ever.

In the boulting house.
1 boulting ark 2 tubs for levening 3 moulding boards 2 other tubs 1 boulter
In the store house.
3 quarters of a hundred hops 8 stone of iron 5 pound lint 3 pound of lintseed
4 horse tra^es 4 wain hoops of iron 1 pair of weights 5 hooks of iron 6 bowls 2
skeels 1 brand iron 2 pair wool cards 1 spinning wheel 2 heckles for line
Wains and plows.
5 coop wains 5 long wains 5 plows
At Garmandsway.
1 brass cauldron 1 brass kettle
In the kill house.
1 lead steep 1 kiln hair cloth 1 iron chimney
Also, the said John Machon now master of the said hospital, does acknowledge
himself to have received of the aforesaid David Miles, the sum of twenty pounds
of current money of England, besides the aforesaid stock of cattle and goods,
according to an order set down by the right reverend father William lord bishop
of Duresme for the consideration then mentioned; which said sum of twenty
pounds he the said John Machon does acknowledge, and himself promise for him,
his executors, administrators, and assigns, to leave the same to the use of the
succeeding master and brethren at what time soever he shall become not master
of the said hospital.

The order or allowance of bishop Crewe, for John Machon, master of Sherburn
hospital, to leave only 220l. value in cattle, hay, corn, stock in husbandry,
and silver plate, on account of his great losses in the late rebellious times,
13th of September, 1676.


.

John Montague, the fourth son of Edward Montague, earl of Sandwich, by his
lady Jemima daughter of John lord Crewe. In 1680 had the mastership of this
hospital conferred on him by bishop Crewe. Died unmarried at London, on the 23d
of February, 1727 The order and consent of bishop Crewe, that Dr Montague,
master of Sherburn hospital, shall not be obliged to leave more than 200l.
stock to his successor, 9th of July, 1720.

The charter, grant, and conveyance from John Trollop, Esquire to John Spearman,
esquire his heirs and assigns, (inter alia) of the donation, presentation, right of
patronage, and free disposition of the place of Thornley Brother in Sherburn
hospital. 4th of December, 1679.

The certificate of the master and brethren of Sherburn hospital, to John
Spearman, esquire of the deprivation of John Laws (Thornley Brother), for
recusancy, and being a papist convict, and for Mr Spearman to present another
in his place, 4th of August, 1682.

The quarterly accounts and payments of Dr Montague, master of Sherburn
Hospital, for the year 1726. RECEIPTS.
L. s. d. Candlemas 121 8 11 May Day 156 8 7 Lammas 186 14 11 Martinmas 151 16
3 616 8 8

PAYMENTS.
The annual deductions and expenses of the brethren, curate, etc. 112 13 4 To
an ox for the bishops 10 0 0 To the prescriptive rent 3 10 0 126 3 4 The clear
income to the master, besides fines on the renewal of leases for lives and
years as they drop and fall in 490 5 4 616 8 8

House expenses and the dieting and washing sixteen inn-brethren and a chaplain
for the year 1686, Dr Montague master.
The yearly rent of land kept for that purpose 100 0 0 Servant's wages 32 18 0
Brewer's sallary 2 0 0 Market woman 0 8 0 Washing per year 3 0 0 Scaling and
dressing the ground 1 10 0 Whins for baking 1 5 0 Charges of harvest 22 13 0
One fat ox 12 0 0 Repairs of the stock in exchanging two oxen 2 13 4 The four
festivals 4 10 0 Housekeeping the whole year at 30s. a week 78 0 0

PAYMENTS.
Salary to the out-brethren 30 0 0 Salary to the inn-brethren 16 0 0 To the
chaplain 25 0 0 To the clerk 2 0 0 Chimney money 3 9 0 Dean and chapter's rent
and acquitance 0 2 6 Bishop's rent and acquitance 0 7 0 Tithe rent for South
Sherburn 3 10 0 Plumber's salary 2 0 0 Wine for the communion 0 10 0 My lord
bishop's fat ox 10 0 0 Mr Delaval the deputy-master's salary 20 0 0 To the
master, deducting for repairs and charity at the gate 279 13 8 The rents being
in all this year Fines for renewal of leases 653 9 6

A rental of the lands and tithes of Sherburn hospital in the year 1717, Dr
Montague, master LAND RENTS.
John Woodifield for a farm at Garmonsway 100 0 0 Robert Hutchinson for a farm
at Garmonsway 87 0 0 Thomas Hasswell for a farm at Garmonsway 67 0 0 Ralph Bird
for a farm at Garmonsway 27 15 0 Thomas Fatherley's farm nigh Sherburne 38 12 0
John Kirton's farm nigh Sherburne house 52 0 0 Mark Pickering's farm nigh
Sherburne house 21 0 0 Thomas Brass and son for Whitewell house 15 0 0 John Day
for a close at Byer's garth 6 0 0 Robert Johnson for an out-rent out of
Ebchester 16 5 4 Sir William Blacket out of lands at Bedburne 4 0 0 Thomasiue
Busby out of lands at Kelloe 1 0 0 John Woodifield out of lands at Whitton 2 11
8 Nicholas Swainston out of lands at Whitton 2 11 8 Mr Searl out of lands at
Whitton 2 11 8 W. Dickeson and C. Ovington for lands at Byar's g. 3 10 0 W.
Thompson for a close at Sherburne house 1 0 0

WHITTON HAY TITHE.
Thomas Hutchinson 0 1 6 John Chipchase 0 1 2 Gilbert Spearman, esquire 0 2 0

CORN TITHE RENTS.
Thomas Davison, esquire for Thorpe Thewles 14 1 4 Mr Anthony Salvin for Sockburn
and Bishopton 15 16 8 Mr William Wilkinson 7 10 0 Mrs Davison for Winyard 2 3 4
Mr Laurence Tatham for Bishopton 3 6 8 Mrs Todd for Stillington 2 13 4 Mrs
Kennett for part of Coxhoe 2 13 4 Cassop township 4 2 8 Mr Forcer for town of
Kelloe 3 17 4 Robert Hopper for Quarrington 3 0 4

TITHE WOOL AND LAMB.
John Cornsorth for Quarrington 24 0 0 John Chipchase for Whitton 13 0 0 George
Clayton for Bishopton 6 0 0 John Banks for Sockburne 5 0 0 John Robinson for
Stillington 1 10 0

PRESCRIPTIONS AND HOUSE RENTS.
Mr Gilbert Spearman a prescript rent for Thornley 1 13 4 Mr Baker a prescript
rent for 0 9 0 Mr Gray a house rent in Durham 0 5 0 Mr Hindmarsh a house rent
in Gateshead 0 2 8 Mr Hagdon's house 0 2 8 Mr Gascoigne's house 0 11 8 The
demesne lands per annum 160 0 0 Fines for renewal of leases uncertain 720 1 4

1713, December 12. A lease granted by the master of Sherburn hospital to
Thomas Peirson, of the demesne lands at the annual rent of 152l. the lessee to
pay 289l. 13s. 3d. for stock of cattle, and 188l. 12s. 2d. for hay and corn, to
leave like quantity of butter, cheese, beef, coals, cynders, whins, and manure,
as mentioned in the schedule. -- To provide meat, drink, washing, fireing, and
coals, for fifteen inn-dwelling brethren. -- To give alms of a farthing a piece
per week, to all poor people that come to ask alms. -- To provide for the
chaplain one dinner and beer; and provide for an old blind woman, and for Mrs
Hodges, meat, drink, washing, lodging, and wringing. -- The lessor to allow
yearly 23l. for the expenses of the chaplain, blind woman, and Mrs Hodges.


.

Thomas Rundle, fellow commoner of Exeter college in Oxford; resigned the
rectory of Sedgefield on being collated to this hospital in March 1727. He was
talked of for the vacant archbishopric of Dublin in October 1742; but this high
station he never enjoyed. Died 14th of April, 1743.

Wadham Chandler, A. M. upon Dr Rundle's resignation was collated to the
mastership of this hospital the 1st of August, 1735. Died the 2d of January,
1737. He was a younger son of the bishop of Durham.

Robert Stillingfleet Bond from Robert Stillingfleet, master of Sherburn
hospital, to pay to his successor the sum of 200l. for the use of the said
hospital, 4th of August, 1738.

Bishop Chandler's order or allowance for Robert Stillingfleet, master of
Sherburn hospital, to be accountable only for the goods of the said hospital,
according to an inventory then made thereof, lodged in the bishop's registry at
Durham, 29th of April, 1748.

A schedule of the goods belonging unto Christ's hospital in Sherburn, in the
county and diocese of Durham, 29th of April, 1748.

Chapel plate and linen. One silver slaggon, one silver chalice, one small
silver salver, one table cloth, and one napkin.

In the master's lodgings. One large silver tankard.

In the chaplain's apartment. One bedstead with green curtains, one feather
bed, bolster, and pillow, three blankets, and one quilt.

In the brethren's hall. One long sir table and two forms, one large
back-settle, and two small ones, one iron pan, one washing tub and staff, one
pair of tongs.

In the tenant's house and kitchen. One pair of large grate bars, one cinder
grate, a smoke jack, three iron spits, a pair of iron racks, an iron oven, an
iron furnace pot, a brass pan, two kettles, an iron pot, an iron crane with
three crooks, an iron coal-rake, a beef-fork, two tin pudding-pans, three
pewter dishes, one old copper quart, one long oak table, two forms, a dresser
with shelves, a small dresser with shelves, two cheese shelves, a salt box.

In the parlour. One iron grate, a pair of tongs, a square table, an armed
chair.

In the parlour chamber. One old bedstead with curtains torn, a round table, a
pair of grate bars, and a fender.

In the little parlour chamber. Grate bars, a chest which divides into two
parts, a round sir table.

In the servant's room and flour room. Two old bedsteads, and a tempsing table.

In the dairy. One long table twelve shelves, two cheese troughs, a leaden milk
trough, a butter tub and caser, four wooden milk bowls, leaden butter weights.

In the buttery. Four shelves, two cheese vats, four curd vats, a fyle, and two
wooden dishes.

In the passages and cellar. Two cheese presses, two sinkers, a hen pen, a
large sir press for cloths, a leaden beef trough, two gantrees, eleven
hogsheads.

In the brewhouse. A large boiler, a masking tub and a leaden trough under it,
a leaden cooler, a large gylevut, a small gylevat, a water tub, three flat
tubs, a long hand, a shirer, a hop basket and bearer, a long trough and a short
one, a coal-rake and poker, two funnels and a strum.

In the pantry. Two chests, a set of shelves, a leavening tub.

In the granary and malthouse. One bushel and a shovel, a cistern, a grate, and
a hair cloth.

At Biarsgerth. One pair of old stings, two old coop carts, one small sock,
three coulters, three yokes, three large swingle trees, six iron draught teams,
four large bolts and shackles, a small bolt and shackles, three horse foams,
two iron grapes, two oat riddles, one wheat riddle, one barley riddle, a peck,
a bing, two ox harrows, two horse harrows, two drags, one ox rack, one long
rack under the hovel.

ROBERT STILLINGFLEET, master.
, son of Dr James Stillingfleet, dean of Worcester; educated at Wadham college,
Oxford; was collated to the mastership of this hospital in June 1738, when he
resigned Ryton. Died at Bristol August 3d, 1759.

David Gregory, D. D. the first professor of modern history at Oxford,
appointed by king George I. the 18th of August, 1724; was collated by bishop
Trevor to this hospital the 15th of September, 1759. His benevolence was
diffusive and general; while master of this hospital he did not confine the old
men as heretofore to the strict allowance, which good as it might have been
when anciently settled on them by their founder, was now become a sad and
scanty pittance, but as far as it was in his power, made them enjoy the sense
and spirit of the benefaction. He demolished all the little wretched huts in
which they were huddled together, and erected a handsome commodious stone
edifice, making it to consist of twenty different apartments, that each might
have one entirely to himself; and also constructed a large room in the center
of the building for their common reception, and comfortably provided it with
every necessary accommodation: For this purpose he cut down and sold a large
wood at Ebchester belonging the hospital, as it is said, adequate to the
expense. He died the 16th of September, 1767.

Mark Hildesley, D. D. was of Trinity college, Cambridge, and bishop of Sodor
and Man. He was collated to this hospital by bishop Trevor, the 21st of
September, 1767, and died at Bishop's Court in the Isle of Man, the 7th of
December, 1772, aged 74 years.

Thomas Dampier, a native of Somersetshire, educated at Eton school; was a
prebendary of Durham, which he resigned on being collated to this hospital by
Dr Egerton, late lord bishop of Durham, wherein he was inducted by proxy the
10th of March, 1773. Installed dean of Durham in June 1774, having before
resigned the hospital to his son the present dean of Rochester. He died the 2d
of August, 1777.

This inspeximus taken in the time of bishop Hatfield.


. The hospital stands at the foot and west side of a large square area or
green, containing near an acre, and consists of a neat but low building, having
a hall in the center, and two wings formed into lodgings: On the east side of
the area, which is a hanging plain gradually descending to the west, is the
master's house, and a dwelling for the chief farmer: On the north side is a
porter's lodge and gateway, in the center of the boundary wall; and on the
south side, at the east corner, stands the chapel, which adjoins to the garden.
You enter the chapel through the tower; the nave is now totally disused, the
chancel only receiving the congregation; the nave is lighted by three narrow
windows to the so^th, under circular arches, and ornamented with small round
pilasters, belted and capitalled like those in the east part of Durham
cathedral, and apparently of equal date. The pulpit and desk are placed on each
hand of the entrance into the chancel, which is much more modern than the nave;
it is lighted by three windows on the north and south sides, all under pointed
arches: In the center south window are the arms of the Montagues in painted
glass. The east window is new, consisting of five lights and some elegant
tracery, with painted glass: In the roses of the upper tracery are the arms of
Neville. In the center light is the figure represented on the hospital seal,
above which are the arms of lord Crew, and those of the Sea. The chancel is
neatly stalled on each side for the brethren. Within the altar rails toward
the south wall is the tomb of Thomas Lever, who died in 1577. The situation of
this hospital is remarkably healthful, it is surrounded with dry and fertile
lands, and stands about two miles distant from Durham.

The FOUNDATION CHARTER is to the following effect.
(E. Reg. II. penes Dec. and Cap. Dun. p. 323.)
Universis sanctae matris ecclesiae filiis, nos Thomas, etc. Dunelmensis
episcopus, etc. intimamus quod inspecto registro tempore bonae memoriae Antonii
Dunelmensis episcopi praedecessoris nostri penes nos remanente, ordinationem
vicariae de Kellowe nostrae Dunelmensis dioceseos tenorem qui sequitur
continentem comperimus in eodem.

Hugo Dei gratia Dunelmensis episcopus dilectis filiis Germano priori
Dunelmensi, Burchardo et Willielmo archidiaconis, et omnibus clericis, etc.

Divina commiseratione commoniti domum hospitalem leprosorum faciendam mente
concepimus, et de loco partim quo fieri debet edocti, domum ipsam in honorem
salvatoris et beatae Mariae semper virginis, et sancti Lazari sororumque ipsius
Mariae et Marthae, cum quibusdam eidem hospitali beneficiis ad sustentationem
assignatis, juxta pontem de Shirburne prope Dunelmum aedificavimus.

Statuimus igitur, ut in ecclesia ibidem in honorem praedictorum sanctorum
consecrata* et in capella interius infra domum infirmorum in honorem sancti
Nicholai constructa, divina semper a tribus presbyteris et quatuor clericis ad
serviendum ibidem statutis pro temporali pace praedictorum et requie sempiterna
celebrentur.

Sed et quinque conventus leprosorum, (hoc est) sexaginta quinque numoer semper
ad minus, ibi victu pariter et vestitu procurentur, et eorum procurator, qui
eos et eorum possessiones custodierit, etc.

Ad eorum itaque sustentationem, etc. dedimus, etc. de dominico nostro villam
ipsam de Shirburne, cum molendino et pasturis et aliis rebus per rectas divisas
ad ipsas pertinentibus, de quibus, etc. sexaginta tantum solidi reddi solebant.

Et super Darwentam fluvium, qui forestam nostram dividit a vicinis, Ebchester,
locum (viz.) anachoritarum, ad animalia fratrum infirmorum usibus ibi
nutrienda, et ad eorum pastores ibidem procurandos, licentiam dedimus de sartis
proficiendis unam carucatam terrae arabilis, quae octies viginti acras tantum
in se contineat.

Et duas bovatas terrae in Wytton, quae antiquitus pro servitio capellae
ejusdem villae datae fuerunt. Et septem alias bovatas in eadem villa, quas de
Galfrido filio Ricardi et Auberico, sicut cartae venditorum testantur, emimus.

Et villam de Garmundsway cum omnibus ad eam pertinentibus, quas sumptibus
propriis acquisivimus, reddendo inde pro tertia part singulis annis
imperpetuum Radulpho filio Paulini de Eboraco et haeredibus ejus quatuor marcas
pro omni servitio, duas (viz.) ad Pentecostam, et duas ad festum Sancti
Martini, sicut ejusdem Radulphi carta testatur.

Confirmamus eis etiam unam carucatam terrae juxta Garmundsway, etc. quae
Raceby vocatur, etc.

Et praeterea unam carucatam in Shoreveton, cum pastura ad mill oves, etc.
quam Thomas filius Stephani filii Burnolfi praedictis leprosis, etc. in puram
et perpetuam elemosinam dedit, etc. sicut Monachi Rievallenses eam, etc.
habuerunt, etc. Et praeterea unam bovatam terrae in eadem villa, etc. quam
Robertus praedicti Thomae patruus eis in puram et perpetuam elemosinam dedit,
etc.

Et insuper eis donavimus ecclesiam de Kellow juxta ejus parochiam
consistentem, et ecclesiam de Grendon quam novam et recenter in honorem beati
Thomae Martyris construximus; sed etiam ecclesias de Sockburn et Bishopton,
quas dilectus filius noster Rogerus de Coyners assensu Roberti filii et
haeredis sui eidem hospitali dedit, etc.

Hiis testibus, Germanus was elected prior of Durham in 1162, and died in 1186.
Germano priore Dunelmensi, Burchard, archdeacon of Durham, died the 6th of
December, 1196. William succeeded John as archdeacon of Northumberland about
1180.
Burchardo et Willelmo archidiaconis, Symone Camerario, magistro Richard de
Coldingham was vicar of Elvete in Durham, and died in 1198, or 1200.

From the above circumstances we may six the date of the foundation charter of
Sherburn-house about the year 1181 or 1182.


Ricardo de Coldingham, magistro Willelmo de Blesensi, magistro Stephano
Lincoln, Willelmo filio archidiaconi, Willelmo de Hoveden, et pluribus aliis.

In quarum inspectionis et comparationis testimonium has nostras literas
fecimus patentes sigilli nostri impressione communitas. Datum in manerio de
Aucland ix. Kal. Julii An. Dom. 1349.

The following CONSTITUTIONS were ordained by the founder, and afterward
confirmed by bishop Kellawe E. registro 2do antiquo pen. Dec. and Cap. Dunelm.
p. 324.
.
Hae sunt constitutiones hospitalis domus leprosorum de Shirburne, etc.

Imprimis ergo statuit dictus Hugo episcopus, ut in capella dictae domus ad
serviendum Deo et sanctae Mariae Magdalenae et beato Nicholao, sint continue
tres sacerdotes et quatuor clerici, duo scilicet ad serviendum altari sanctae
Mariae Magdalenae hebdomadario modo, quorum unus hebdomada sua celebrabit
cantando missam tempori congruentem et alius hebdomada illa pro fidelibus et
vice versa tertius deputabitur officio sancti Nicholai et continue celebrabit
pro defunctis, et haec erit missa sororum leprosarum infra quarum domum a
latere australi sita est dicta capella.

Quartum capellanum apposuit tempore suo dictus Ricardus Dunelmensis episcopus,
quem deputavit officio beatae Mariae Virginis in capella nova quam in honorem
beatae Mariae Virginis construxit a latere aquilonari majoris capellae ubi
quartus sacerdos cotidie celebrabit missam de beata Maria Virginis cum
solempnitate, et haec erit missa fratrum leprosorum et cotidie ultimo
celebrabitur, tum propter fratres debiles et mane surgere non valentes, tum
propter sacerdotes qui expletis officiis sibi deputatis, omnes dictae missae
intererunt. Diebus vero dominicis et in majoribus solempnitatibus ultimo
celebrabitur magna missa in majori capella ubi omnes intererunt tam clerici
quam sacerdotes, et illis diebus tantum aperientur ostia leprosorum tam fratrum
quam sororum, ut in domo fratrum omnes conveniant, et in continuo silentio
intrabunt et redibunt, praeeunte fratres leprosos eorum priore, et priorissa
subsequente sorores leprosas, et sic missa celebrata domum suam intrabunt
sorores et claudetur earum ostium.

Statuit etiam dictus Hugo, ut dictae domus procurator semper sacerdos
praesiciatur et religiosus, si bonus inveniatur, vel secullaris si melior
inveniatur, qui dictis sacerdotibus de dictis officiariis in omnibus
necessariis providebit, et missam, quam voluerit, et ubi, celebrabit, qui in
rectura ita modeste se habeat, ut numerum trium equorum non excedat nisi aliter
cogat necessitas. Istorum etiam sacerdotum officiis et eorum sustentamentis,
deputati sunt tres clerici vel quatuor, nisi procurator fuerit sacerdos, qui
dictis sacerdotibus in divinis officiis ministrabunt quorum unus ad minus erit
diaconus.

Omnes vero sacerdotes et clerici simul in camera juxta capellam sita jacebunt,
praeter unum quem procurator secum in camera sua habere voluerit, et omnes cum
procuratore in aula prandebunt et coenabunt, nisi aliter cogat necessitas.

Decrevit etiam idem Ricardus, ut in tempore hyemali surgant dicti sacerdotes
in media nocte ad officium nocturnum perficiendum, quo completo, usque mane
dormiant, et tunc iterum in silentio ad ecclesiam redeant et officia divina
tempori congruentia, signo prius in qualibet hora pulsato, cantando compleant:
Aestivo autem tempore ita surgant, ut officium nocturnum compleatur in
diluculo, et sic in loco pausent et post modo prescripto ad divina officia
redeant.

Idem etiam statuit, ut continue in majori ecclesia in presentia corporis et
sanguinis domini sit ignis perpetuus; et quod semper in majori missa in majori
capella celebretur, et in missa beatae Mariae Virginis, accendantur duo
luminaria ad minus.

Decrevit etiam idem episcopus, ut secundum statuta Hugonis quondam Dunelmensis
episcopi predecessoris sui quinque conventus leprosorum, sive sexaginta et
quinque, continue ibi vivant, et de bonis dictae domus pascantur et vestiantur;
et quod quilibet frater vel soror habeat unum panem in die quinque marcas
ponderantem, et unam galonam cerevisiae, ita quod quilibet eorum habeat unam
galonam in diem. Et quod iidem tribus diebus in hebdomada vescantur carnibus,
et quatuor diebus piscibus; ita quod unum ferculum, five de carne, sive de
pisce, sive de caseo, sive de butiro, duobus been sufficiat: Providit etiam ut
in majoribus solempnitatibus per annum habeat duo sercula, (videlicet) in
quatuor primus diebus Natalis Domini, in die Circumcisionis, in die Epiphaniae,
in die Purificationis, in die Sancti Cuthberti, in Quadragesima (et in illo die
solent dare salmones recentes pro uno ferculo si inveniri possent, sin autem,
pisces recentes, si inveniri possent) in die Annunciationis, etc. in die Sancti
Michaelis (sed illo die dantur aucae pro ferculo, et quatuor habent unam aucam
pro ferculo; quod si die Veneris vel die Sabbati contigerit, dantur die
Dominico proxime sequenti) in die Omnium Sanctorum, etc.

De vestimentis etiam providetur, quod quilibet eorum habeat per annum tres
ulnas de panno laneo, videlicet de russeto vel albo, et sex ulnas de panno
lineo, et sex ulnas de canvays, in communi ad manutergia facienda; et
unusquisque quatuor denarios ad soculares, et sexies per annum unguentum ad
soculares, et tres petras cepi per annum. In Vigilia Omnium Sanctorum habebunt
quatuor trussas straminis, et quatuor in Vigilia Nativitatis Domini, et quatuor
truncos ad quatuor ignes; in Vigilia autem Pasche quatuor trussas straminis; in
Vigilia Pentecostes quatuor fasces juncorum, et quatuor in Vigilia beati
Johannis Baptistae, et quatuor in festo beatae Mariae Magdalenae.

Quando habebunt carnes recentes vel pisces recentes, vel ova, habebunt unam
mensuram salis continentem vicessimam partem unius rasarii Three rasers made a
quarter. -- Hatfield's Survey.

Et viij rasers farimae aven. unde iij rasers faciunt quarter'm.


.

In carniprivio habebunt unum rasarium frumenti ad faciendum simulam.

Cum unus obierit, quod de domo percepit, domui relinquat, et alius pro eo
gratis recipiatur de terra episcopi, si ibi tot inveniantur leprosi; sin autem,
aliunde recipiantur, cum Deus non sit acceptor personarum.

Fratres de communi consensu priorem eligant sibi de se, et sorores priorissam,
qui sub magistro eorum eos regulariter custodiant.

Regula leprosorum talis est: Fratres leprosi per se maneant, similiter sorores
leprosae per se, ubi quatuor habeant ignes ad quos quotidie a die Sancti
Michaelis, usque in diem omnium sacro sanctorum habebunt duas sportas petarum,
prout predicitur, illis diebus quibus habent fercula duplicia; et a die omnium
sacro sanctorum usque ad diem Pasche, habebunt quatuor sportas quolibet die; et
duas sportas petarum praeter praedictas illis diebus quibus habent fercula
duplicia. Sporta vero petaram debet continere quinque rasaria frumenti et duas
kenones. In Vigilia vero Nativitatis Domini habebunt quatuor magnos truncos ad
quatuor ignes, et unusquisque erit unicis quadrigatae; item in aestate quum
ducuntur petae habebunt fracturas reliquarum petarum.

Si autem aliquis frater leprosus vel soror languerit, ita quod de eo
desperatur, habebit ignem et candelam et omnia necessaria quantum oportuerit
donec melioretur vel moriatur. Item die quo aliquis sepelietur, potus et cibus
detur sepelientibus; similiter eorum scissor die quo scindit pannos suos,
habebit cibum et potum: Habebunt etiam quolibet die dominico per annum december
panes albos, scilicet, quinque fratribus et quinque sororibus, qui dispositione
prioris et priorissae debent dari magis languentibus. Sciendum etiam quod
habebunt in qualibet hebdomada per annum bis vel semel ad minus pisces recentes
si inveniri poterint, sed aliquando per defectum piscium dentur allecia rubea,
aliquando caseus, aliquando butirum, secundum tempora, et quum dantur allecia,
unicuique dentur tria, quum vero butirum vel caseus tunc detur omnibus in
commune pondus unius petrae et dimidium. A Pascha vero usque ad Pentecosten per
defectum piscium, casei et butiri, dentur aliquando ova, unicuique scilicit
tria: A Pentecoste usque ad festum Sancti Michaelis non dantur allecia rubea;
sed been cavendum est quod nec putridum, nec corruptum vel morticinum illis
erogetur. Item in quadragesima habebunt duo rasaria fabarum ad assandum; in
festo Sancti Michaelis duo rasaria pomorum: Item debent habere coquinam et
coqum ad eorum cibum faciendum, et focale ad coquinam sufficiens et utensilia
convenientia, scilicet, unum plumbum et duas ollas oereas, unum tabulam, unam
tinam, unum alveolum, duas cunas ad cerevisiam eorum suscipiendum, duas cunas
ad balneandum: Item habebunt haec utensilia in domo, quatuor plumbos, quatuor
patellas, quatuor tripotes, duos alveos, unum beseech, et unum tribulum ad
sepeliendum mortuos: Item facient aliquando olera, aliquando porretum,
aliquando fabas secundum tempora, et quando facient olera, habebunt quotidie
praeter Sabbatum, unam mensuram grossae farinae avenarum, continentem septimam
partem unius rasarii; sed omni die Sabbati habebunt illam mensuram et dimidium
pultium ad faciendum gruelam: Habebunt etiam pultes in Vigilia omnium Sacro
Sanctorum, Nativitatis Domini, Ascensionis, Johannis Baptistae, Assumptionis,
die cinerum: Item habebunt diebus piscium ad eorum coquinam, unam mensuram
salis continentem sexagesimam tertiam partem unius rasarii ad potagium
saliendum: Item vetula quae ministrat infirmis, habebit qualibet hebdomada tres
panes frumenti, et unum ferculum carnium vel piscium secundum tempora.

Item habebunt duas Lotrices quae lavabunt pro omnibus aliis operibus qualibet
die Sabbati eorum capita, et bis in septimana eorum pannum, et cotidie eorum
utensilia.

Item habebunt unum capellanum de praedictis quatuor capellanis assignatum ad
divina facienda, confessiones audiendas, et ea quae sacris pertinent ad plenum
persequenda, et ad evangelium legendum in domibus leprosorum diebus dominicis
et aliis festis majoribus languentibus qui non possunt ire ad ecclesiam,
similiter et ad exequias mortuorum faciendas.

Item habebunt in festis solempnibus in eorum capella luminarium competens dum
celebrant divina, et similiter thus horis debitis: Dominicis vero diebus
aspersionem aquae benedictae, panem benedictum, et alia quae decent.

Item conceditur quod communes servientes eorum et speciales possint ire et
redire sine impedimento, et vendere non placentia, et emere placentia, et alia
negotia expedire.

Item conceditur illis quod amici eorum et benevolentes possint sine
impedimento eos visitare et consortare, et cum eis moram per noctem facere,
scilicet long venientes et advenae; noti vero et propinqui die quo veniunt
recedant.

Item omnes domus eorum been cooperiantur et nullum nocumentum patiantur,
similiter, ductus aquae eorum ita conservetur, ut nullum defectum aquae
patiantur, licebit etiam eis sine impedimento ire et redire ad soveam juxta
cimiterium ubi colligunt aquam ad purgandas eorum domus.

Item portae eorum non debent claudi ante pulsationem collationis.

Item habebunt f^retrum ad mortuos ferendos: Omnes autem fratres et sorores qui
fortes sunt, de nocte surgant ad matutinam, et intrent in capellam suam et
horas suas more suo dicant, videlicet, pro matutinis xxvi. pater noster,
scilicet, tresdecim pro matutina diei, et tresdecim pro matutina beatae Mariae;
pro prima, quatuordecim, pro nona quatuordecim; pro vesperis, octodecim; pro
completorio, quatuordecim; ita ut medietatem dicant pro horis diei, et
medietatem pro horis beatae Mariae.

Postea quilibet eorum dicat viginti et quinque pater noster pro peccatis
propriis, et totidem pro animabus episcoporum Dunelmensium, et omnium fidelium
defunctorum, ita ut tam de die quam de nocte centum et sexaginta pater noster
compleant.

Illi autem qui debiles sunt in lectis se erigant, et ibi matutinas suas
dicant; debiliores in pace jaceant, et quod dicere possunt dicant: Qualibet
hora pulsetur signum eorum tam de die quam de nocte, et ante prandium et post,
quod pulsabit unus de sanioribus fratribus huic officio deputatus, qui preces
eorum dicet; post completorium maneant in silentio, donec in crastino prima
pulsetur et dicatur, nisi aliter cogat necessitas, ut infirmitas vel aliquod
humanitus.

Ad eorum observantiam detur eis ferula, cujus custodiam habebit prior ut modo
scholarium inde corrigat inobedientes, et statuta transgredientes, et excitet
desides et negligentes.

Si quis autem inveniatur inobediens et contrarius et per ferulam noluerit
corrigi, detrahantur ei victualia usque panem et aquam tantum, semel, secundo,
tertio, et si adhuc perseveraverit inobediens et contumax, a communione fratrum
ejiciatur, et alius pro eo statim substituatur.

Cum aliquis frater vel soror obierit, quilibet eorum dicet pro eo infra
triginta dies proxime sequentes ccc. pater noster, exceptis orationibus
quotidianis.

Omnes fratres veniantin capella sua ad disciplinam tribus diebus in hebdomada,
scilicet, in quadragesima et adventu domini; scilicet secundo, quarta, et sexta
feria, nisi aliter cogat necessitas, vel intervenerit magna solempnitas.

Idem faciant sorores in capella sua praesente priorissa cum sacerdote donec
omnes vapulent.

Procurator autem dictae domus audiet quater in anno computationes suas,
scilicet in quatuor quarteriis anni de servientibus suis.

Habebunt etiam praedicti fratres et sorores annuatim quinque solidos et
quinque denarios in die exaltationis Sanctae Crucis, die anniversario Dom.
Martini de Sanctae Cruce quondam praedictae domus procuratoris.

Haec omnia statuit Ricardus Dei gratia Dunelmensis episcopus et carta sua
confirmavit, et inviolabiliter observari praecepit.

By these constitutions it appears that the chapel first erected was dedicated
to God, Mary Magdalen, and St Nicholas, and was served by three priests and
four clerks, part to officiate at the altar of Mary Magdalen; and as the
hospital was to receive both sexes, other part to officiate at the altar of St
Nicholas, where the women were to hear mass, the chapel being situated at the
south door of their house; so that it seems the men and women had houses at
separate sides of the area. Bishop Kellaw, for greater decorum, built a new
chapel on the north side of the great chapel, which he dedicated to the Blessed
Virgin, and where he ordered mas^ to be celebrated daily to the brethren, and
to this service he appointed a fourth priest. On dominical days and great
solemnities, he ordered service to be performed by all the priests to both men
and women; the men being preceded by their prior, and the women by their
prioress. The procurator or master was not confined to be in clerical orders;
but was restrained to that moderation that he should not keep more than three
horses without some urgent necessity. The priests and clerks were to lie in the
chamber next the chapel, unless the master required one to lodge in his
chamber: And the master and all others were to dine and sup in the hall. Bishop
Kellaw appointed the times of service, and the burning of lights before the
altar. The number of lepers to be entertained being sixty-five, the mess was
directed, each to have a loaf and a gallon of beer daily; three days in the
week flesh meat, and four days fish, so that one dish of meat, fish, cheese or
butter, should serve two: But on great days two dishes were to be provided,
particularly on quadragesima day they were to have fresh salmon or other fish,
if they could be had, for one dish; and on Michaelmas-day they should have
geese, a goose to every four; but if that festival happened on a weekly fast
day, the goose feast was to be postponed to Sunday. They were allowed yearly
three yards of woollen cloth, russett or white, six yards of linen, and six
yards of canvas, with other necessaries, as trusses of straw and bundles of
reeds, with four yole clogs for the vigils of our Savior. The brethren were to
choose their prior, and the sisters their prioress. They were allowed fires from
Michaelmas-day to the day of All Saints; the measure of the peats Fuel cut from
the mosses of moor lands.
being fixed. Certain rules were ordained for the sick, for funerals, and
prayers. From Pentecost to Michaelmas red herrings and salted viands were
prohibited. Two washers were appointed, and an allowance for the nurses who
attended the sick; and each member was allowed in money at two days in the year
five-pence, and once in the year five shillings.

It is presumed the hospital continued to be regulated and governed by the
foregoing rules till the time of bishop Langley, when great abuses were
complained of, the pious institution being converted into private emolument,
and the buildings suffered to go to ruin, that prelate issued his commission
Commission to enquire into dilapidations of Sherburn hospital, by Thomas
Langley bishop of Durham, 4th of September, 1429.
, dated the 4th of September, 1429, directed to William Chaunceller, his
temporal chancellor, and others, to visit and examine the dilapidations in the
hospital erections, and to enquire of the abuses of the charity. Upon the
commissioners reporting the miserable condition and poverty thereof, the bishop
thought proper to apply to pope Eugene IV. instead of the king, for redress,
who readily granted a faculty or commission to the bishop, to make new rules
and ordinances for the better government thereof, which he accordingly made on
the 22d day of July, 1434, and thereby appointed, that the future master should
be in clerical orders, and that he should keep four chaplains, four clerks, or
singing men, and two boys, chaunters; and ordained certain rules for the
celebration of divine service, and for the conduct of the priests, clerks and
boys Nova ordinatio sive reformatio hospitalis de Shirburn, per Thomam Langley
episcopum, ex commissione Eugenii papae quarti, 22 Julii, 1434.
. He directed that a tablet should be hung over the high altar, inscribed with
the names of bishop Pudsey, bishop de Marisco, and himself, as also with the
name of Martin de Sancta Cruce, that mass might be said for them. It thereby
appears, that the leprosy (for the relief of those under which affliction this
hospital was founded) was at that time almost eradicated, for he directs, that
in remembrance of the original foundation, two lepers should be received into
the hospital, if they could be found, but to be kept apart from the rest of the
people admitted to the house: To those, thirteen poor people were to be added,
to be provided with meat and drink of ten-pence value every week, or tenpence
of ready money at their own option, and have yearly the sum of 6s. 8d. for fuel
and clothes, and to mess and lodge in the same house, and daily to attend mass.
Upon the death of a brother, another poor man to be chosen by the master within
fifteen days, under the penalty of paying a mark to the fabric of the church at
Durham. An old woman of good character was to be provided at the master's
expense, to attend the brethren, wash their linen, and do other offices. The
master to have the care of all the goods and buildings of the hospital, and to
take an oath for the due performance of all things stipulated by those
ordinances.

We hear of no further abuses of the charity till the time of bishop Tunstall,
when Anthony Salvin, then master, in 1557, presented a petition to that
prelate, praying that a commission of enquiry might issue, with interrogatories
ad perpetuam rei memoriam, which commission was accordingly issued, and
depositions were taken thereon the 27th of April, 1557, and duly returned.

SIGILLVM HOSPITALIS CHRISTI IN SHEREBVRNE
seal

In the twenty-seventh year of queen Elizabeth (1584, chap. 15) an act was
passed for the incorporation of this hospital, and for the better regulation
thereof, entitled

AN ACT
For the incorporation of the hospital of Christ, in the town of Sherborne, in
the bishopric of Durham, whereby it was enacted, that the brethren of the said
hospital and their successors, by the name of The master and brethren of
Christ's hospital, in Sherborne, near Durham, in the county of Durham, shall
have succession perpetually, and plead and be impleaded by that name, and by
that name shall hold and for ever enjoy, not only all those lands, tenements,
and liberties, and other hereditaments whatsoever, which by any name or names
whatsoever have been heretofore, to and for the said hospital given and
limited, which they do now hold or possess, as to the said hospital belonging;
but also all other lands, tenements, or hereditaments, which shall hereafter be
lawfully given or granted to them (holden in free-burgage or soccage, and not
by knight's service or in capite) shall be holden of the crown in
frankalmoigne; and that the said master and brethren and their successors for
ever, shall have a common seal; and that all leases then after to be granted of
any lands, etc. belonging to the hospital, other than for the term of
twenty-one years, or three lives, shall be void, etc.

That the bishop of Durham for the time being shall have the nomination,
collation, admission and institution of the master of the said hospital; the
person that shall be so nominated, admitted master, being a preacher, having no
cure or charge of souls elsewhere.

And the brethren, in number thirty, from time to time as often as any of their
places shall become void, except the place of Randal White, (Thornley Brother)
the master of the hospital to have the nomination, collation, admission and
institution of the said brethren, in number thirty, except before excepted.

And that from time to time, as often as the said brother's place of the said
Randal White, or such others as shall succeed him therein, shall become void,
that -- Trollop Owners of Thornley manor; now the inheritance of Charles
Spearman, esquire
and his heirs shall have the nomination.

And that the master of the said hospital for the time being, shall for the
further and better maintenance of the brethren of the said hospital, pay yearly
to every of the brethren of the said hospital ten shillings, over and besides
their pensions, portions, livings, and dividends heretofore accustomed.

And that for the good order and government of the said master and brethren of
the said hospital and possessions, such ordinances and rules not being
repugnant to the laws of this realm now in force) as shall be from time to time
made and set down by the bishop of Durham under his hand and seal in writing,
shall be by the said master and brethren observed and kept.

And for performing thereof, the said master and brethren now being, shall take
their corporal oaths; and every master and brother hereafter to be admitted
into the said hospital, shall take the said oath before his admission or
institution before the bishop of Durham for the time being.

Saving to all and every person and persons, bodies politic and corporate, etc.
all such right, etc. as if this act had never been had or made.

Provided always, etc. that all leases hereafter to be made, of any of the
demesne lands of the said hospital (which at this present are not in lease or
demised for years, life or lives) shall be utterly void and of none effect to
all intents and purposes.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that if any person which shall hereafter be
master of the said hospital, do or shall during the time that he is or shall be
master thereof, accept or take any benefice or living ecclesiastical; that then
and immediately from and after such acception or taking of any such benefice or
living, every such master shall cease to be master of the said hospital, and
the said hospital shall be void to all intents and purposes, as if the said
master were dead, any dispensation, license, toleration, qualification, or
faculty whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

In the thirty-fifth year of queen Elizabeth (1593) a commission of charitable
uses was issued, to which articles of enquiry were annexed, and whereon an
inquisition was taken the 4th of May, 1594, touching this and other hospitals
in the county, with other matters Commission to enquire of charitable uses of
all colleges, hospitals, almshouses, rooms, and other places for relief of poor
aged and impotent people within the bishopric of Durham, 35th Eliz. Nov. 13,
1593. -- A similar commission is recommended at this day.
.

Bishop Matthew, on a visitation held in the year 1595, made ordinances and
rules for the better regulation and government of this hospital, among which,

It is ordained, that all and every the brethren appointed by the said statute
or foundation, shall willingly and presently (the cause of infirmity by the
said master to be approved only excepted) without delay, repair home, meet and
come together at and within the said hospital at two several times in the year
yearly, viz. the seventh day of September, being the day of her majesty's
birth, and the seventeenth day of November, being the day of her highness's
coronation; at which time the master of the said hospital shall not only allow
and perform to all and every the brethren so assembled, sufficient meat and
drink for two days space, but also shall make before them some godly christian
exhortation, to persuade them to godliness and obedience, and a continual
thankfulness for the great benefits of her majesty bestowed on them and that
hospital.

The master henceforth shall not admit nor receive any married man having his
wife alive, usually to lodge and continue within the precinct of the said
hospital, and shall not permit their wives or children, or other friends and
acquaintance to resort into the said hospital; and that the said master shall
not permit any of the said brethren to gadd or range abroad, without especial
cause allowed and license obtained, either by the master or his curate.

If any of the said brethren either resident or absent, shall become a stubborn
or disobedient person, a disturber of the common peace in that society, a
despiser of the present state, a maintainer of factions, a drawer from
obedience, a seducer from religion, a whisperer or spreader of lies, or a
common frequenter of infamous or defamed persons or places; every such person
convented or convicted thereof before the master there under the testimony of
four or five of the brethren then present, shall, according to the quality of
his offense be punished or expelled, according to the order of the said
foundation.

And if any of the brethren there resident, either in weakness of stomach,
desire, or by wilful contempt, refuse and dislike the prescript-diet of the
house, then the master of the same hospital shall suffer or compel the same
party to his own private provision elsewhere; giving and allowing yearly unto
the said party or parties each one forty shillings, to be paid by ten shillings
a quarter, as others absent formerly have been wont to receive; provided
always, that no brother shall make sale of his place on pain of present
expulsion.

Lastly; it is ordained by the said reverend father, that all the stock of
goods and chattels, corn, hay, utensils, and implements of the said hospital
whatsoever, shall be delivered by the former master if he be living, or by his
executors or assigns if he be dead, unto the successor and brethren by an
inventory tripartite, as was done lately after the death of master Dr Daile,
whereof one part to remain with the bishop of Duresme, and another part with
the successor, and the third part with the former master and his executors;
and to this purpose every new master before his admission shall become bound
to the lord bishop of Duresme for the time being in a bond of eight hundred
pounds or more, for the performance, safety, and delivery of all the said stock
of goods and chattels, corn, hay, utensils, and implements whatsoever belonging
to the said hospital, at every change of the master, according to the
aforesaid inventory, and the commendable examples of his predecessors the
former masters of the said hospital.

Allowances of diet for the poor brethren of the said hospital.
At breakfast on work days. One kind of milkness, one loaf of bread, weighing
about twenty-four ounces to four, and small beer sufficient.

At dinner. On Sundays and Thursdays two kinds of flesh meat, one roasted on
Sundays, (...) and on the other days two kinds of milkness and one of milk, and
another of fish or flesh as best may be provided, and each day to four a loaf
of tempsed bread, weighing xxiiij ounces, and a loaf of brown bread, weighing
xxiiij ounces, and single beer sufficient.

At supper. To have as at dinner two kinds of meat, and their bread and beer in
like manner.

At afternoon drinkings. Every one to have a piece of bread cut to him by the
butler if it be required, and a jug of beer amongst them that are there present
at the buttery door.

Provided always, that none carry or convey any meat, drink, or bread from the
table, save only to the buttery, upon pain of losing his commons three days for
the first time, and a fortnight commons the second time, and expulsion the
third time, when any shall be convicted thereof; and if any of them do mislike
of these orders, or become discontented with this diet, the same to be put to
his own provision, and upon request made to the master in good manner, the same
to have such allowance abroad, as the said reverend father the bishop of Durham
for the time being shall set down, if he be thought worthy to have any thing at
all.

Provided likewise, that none of the said brethren presume to depart at any
time out of the precincts of the said hospital and demesnes thereabouts for any
occasion, without the special license of the master himself, (if he be at home
and about the house, or of his chaplain in his absence) upon pain of loss of
two days commons for the first time, and one week's commons for the second
time, and expulsion for the third time, as men undutiful and unworthy of her
majesty's bounty in that society, etc.

Bishop Crewe, on his visitation in 1703, made other rules and orders. And
afterward bishop Chandler visited in August, 1735, and made new statutes,
which, remaining unaltered at this time, are presented to the reader.

ORDINANCES AND RULES, For the good order and government of Sherborn Hospital,
in the County of Durham.
Ordinances and rules for the good order and government of the master and
brethren of Christ's hospital at Sherborne, near Durham, and their possessions,
delivered to them the twenty-sixth day of August, by Edward, by divine
providence lord bishop of Durham, at his primary visitation of the said
hospital, which was begun August the 14th, 1735, and continued by several
adjournments to that day.

EDWARD, by divine providence lord bishop of Duresme. To our well beloved in
Christ, Wadham Chandler, clerk, master of arts, master of the said hospital,
Richard Gray, John Whitfield, and the rest of the brethren.

If the changes incident to all persons and things did not insensibly introduce
deviations from the original constitutions of societies also, and make frequent
reviews of the laws whereby they should be governed necessary, for preserving a
consistency between men's practices and their rules, yet the present condition
of Christ's Hospital at Sherburn in particular, would demand a speedy provision
to be made against some evils the house labors under, and which by longer
neglect may grow to be very detrimental to it.

For having in our visitation upon the place discovered that all the local
statutes made by our predecessors, since the foundation of the said hospital by
queen Elizabeth, with consent of her parliament, were either lost, concealed,
or of no validity, for want of a ratification under the episcopal seal, as is
required by her act; that their stocks of cattle and corn were destroyed and
consumed in the time of the civil wars, by the two armies in the neighborhood
of Sherburn house; that no inventory has been since taken of their goods, nor
bond given by the entering master, for any sum of money to be paid to every
succeeding master, as a fund in readiness for the occasions of the said
hospital, and as was wont formerly to be given, we judged no time was to be
lost in settling new rules, without which no society can well subsist, which
may also be effectual for securing what goods and chattles are still remaining,
and prevent further ruin to their common estate, which in a long chancery suit
at this distance of time, after a succession of two or three masters, under a
defect of full proofs, must be hazarded with small prospect of success.

In drawing up these rules, we have revived as many ordinances of the first
founders as could be adapted to the present state of things, and followed those
of our late predecessors where we could presume of their intentions by their
articles of visitation which we have seen, and these rules so collected and
hereafter following, we, by the authority given us by act of parliament, as
well as the antienter constitutions of the first founders, bishops of this
diocese, do for ourselves and successors, order and appoint to be the standing
rules to be observed by all the members of the said hospital, until such time
as any of our successors shall see cause, or in their wisdom think proper to
alter or amend them.

And to prevent confusion by a disagreement of these with any former rules,
(should any such come to light hereafter) we, after the example of our worthy
predecessor Thomas Langley in his new ordination of the said hospital, rescind
and annul all former constitutions, rules, and ordinances, made by any of our
predecessors, and do substitute these in their place, as the only rules they
shall be bound to obey. Given at our castle at Durham, the twenty-sixth day of
August, being one of the days and places to which we adjourned our visitation
of the said hospital, in the eighteenth year of our consecration, fifth of our
translation, and in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
thirty-five.

Concerning the MASTER.
1. The master shall be always a person in holy orders, of the degree of master
of arts at least, a licensed preacher, and one who is capable of business and
applies himself to it, especially for the maintenance and prosperous estate of
the hospital.

2. The master or his deputy appointed by him to act in his name, shall usually
reside within the said hospital, for the better ordering and governing the
members thereof, according to an ancient constitution of Tho. Langley bishop of
Duresme; saving to the said bishop his ordinary jurisdiction over them.

3. The master if he be not constantly resident in person, shall often repair
thither to preach and read lectures on catechetical heads to them, and to
enquire and hear the complaints of the brethren when they have any, and see
them redressed.

4. The common seal shall be kept by the master only, in a box locked up, and
not to be trusted with the deputy, and the master shall be always present when
the seal is put to any instrument.

5. The counterparts of the leases shall be preserved in the custody of the
master himself, and as often as there shall be occasion to trust any writing
out of his hands, he shall take a note for the safe delivery of it.

6. No demise of lands anciently used to be demised, shall pass otherwise than
by the common seal; and no demise of lands not demiseable by queen Elizabeth's
foundation, shall be accounted valid in law, though it be duly sealed with the
common seal.

7. Upon sealing of any lease, twelve-pence and no more shall be given to every
member that attends to sign the lease.

8. The demesnes at Sherburn shall never be demised by lease for years or
lives, but the whole or at least the greatest part thereof shall continue in
the occupation of the master or his deputy, steward or agent, so that there
shall always be maintained on the ground a full stock of young cattle of all
kinds, and a sufficient quantity of hay and stores of corn and other grain in
the granaries, to answer all occasions of the house.

9. Upon the death, cession, or resignation of every master, so much of his
stock and stores of all sorts, as shall be prized to the value of two hundred
pounds, shall be delivered over to the succeeding master, who shall be legally
entitled thereto from the preceding master, his heirs, or executors, or the sum
of two hundred pounds for and in lieu and in full satisfaction for the same.

10. For the better securing of this two hundred pounds, or stock or stores to
the value thereof, every master soon after his induction, shall be bound to the
bishop of Duresme in the penalty of four hundred pounds, for the payment of two
hundred pounds, or stock and stores of that value to his lawful successor,
which bond shall be lodged in the registry of the bishop's consistory court, to
be delivered up and cancelled upon performance of the condition by the
preceding master.

11. An exact inventory shall be taken by every master at his coming into his
place of all the plate, household goods, kitchen and brewing vessels, utensils
in the dairy, cellar, and for husbandry, linen, bedding, and all other
furniture, as well belonging to the house of the master, as the houses of the
brethren, and three copies made thereof and signed by the said master, the one
to be lodged in the registry aforesaid, with the bond for two hundred pounds,
the other to be preserved by the master himself, and the third to be kept by
the heirs or executors of the preceding master, who is obliged to leave the
same as he received them at his entrance, according to the said inventory.

12. The original of these statutes to be safely locked up in the same box with
the common seal, to be delivered with the said seal to the next lawful
successor by the predecessor or his executors or administrators, and a book
shall be prepared for common use, wherein these statutes and ordinances, as far
as they concern the brethren, shall be fairly written, with queen Elizabeth's
act of foundation in the 27th year of her reign, and such other rules as shall
hereafter be made by any succeeding bishop. -- These rules concerning the
brethren are to be read to the inn-brethren at a full meeting once a year.

13. A quarto book shall be carefully kept by the master or his deputy, wherein
shall be fairly entered the names of all the present members, and the time of
their coming in, and when and before whom they were sworn; and as often as any
of them die, the brother who succeeds him shall have his name entered, his
country, parish, his age, and the day of the year of his being sworn, and by
whom, and whom he succeeds, and till this be done, no person shall be reckoned
a brother or member of Sherburn-house.

14. As many brethren shall be lodged within the house, as the ancient lodgings
will permit, and have usually for many years past resided therein.

Of the BRETHREN.
15. In filling up the vacant places of the inn-brethren, a preference shall be
often given to the out-brethren, who in the master's opinion deserve to be
taken into the house, yet so as that it shall be a matter of choice and
discretion in the master, and not of obliga^ion to proceed in that way.

16. These qualifications shall be required in every man that is admitted into
Sherburn house as a brother; that he be a single person who has lived well and
creditably in the world, and is not at this time worth twenty pounds; that he
be born in the county of Durham, unless by special allowance of the bishop, the
county be dispensed with; and particularly that such as have lived within the
manors, and been tenants to the lands of the bishopric or hospital estate, if
in other respects they be as well qualified, shall have the preference; that he
be of the age of fifty-six or upwards, never under; that he be not then
laboring under any sickness, or incurable or infectious disease, though the
lame and impotent should be considered in the first place.

17. He shall be a constant member of the church of England by law established,
and continue so.

18. To this end we order, that every man that desires to be a brother, shall
present a petition to the master, setting forth his case, with a certificate of
his age, under the hand of the minister of the parish where he was born, and
another certificate of his peaceable social disposition, and sober behavior,
and conformity to the church of England for some years last past, under the
hands of credible gentlemen and others, neighbors to the place where he has
last lived; which petitions and certificates shall be filed by the master, to
be produced when he shall be called upon.

19. No one shall be treated as a brother and member of this corporation, or
entitled to any profits as such, who has not first taken his corporal oath for
performing such ordinances and rules as have been, and shall hereafter be made
and set down by the bishop of Duresme, under his hand and seal in writing, for
the good order and government of the master and brethren of the said hospital,
which said oath shall be taken before the bishop, if he happens to be at that
time in the city of Durham, or else before his spiritual chancellor, or the
chancellor's principal surrogate, without fee.

20. Within a month after every vacancy, the master, if he be in the country,
shall be bound to put in a new brother, or within six weeks at most, if the
master be far absent; and upon the master's neglecting to fill up the place
within that time, it shall be in the power of the bishop to name a brother
without the master, who shall be accordingly admitted.

21. No woman, child, male relation or friend, shall be suffered to abide with
him in the room or lodging of any brother, on any account, except a nurse to
take care of the sick.

22. No brother shall presume to be absent from prayers, to go abroad, much
less to lie out of the house, without leave of the master or his deputy, which
shall be sparingly allowed, and the time of absence not above two or three
days, and the leave to be noted in a book kept for that purpose.

23. The brethren shall attend duly morning and evening prayer, sermons on the
Lord's day, and the holy sacrament of the Lord's supper, as often as it shall
be administered, and they shall be there early at the beginning of the
respective offices, and continue there to the end: And the better to know who
performs this duty, the clerk of the chapel shall keep a weekly roll, with the
names of the brethren, and prick at the name of every one present, and on
Monday morning deliver this roll to the master or his deputy, in order to their
receiving admonition or correction according to the heinousness of their
offense.

24. The chaplain of the said hospital shall be constant in reading the morning
and evening service, according to the liturgy of the church of England, and
preach every Lord's day, and mostly upon catechetical heads, and administer the
holy sacrament four times in the year at least, of which the solemn festivals
of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide, shall be three of the times; he shall be
diligent in visiting the sick, and exhorting the well, as often as he knows of
their doing amiss.

25. For the employment of their thoughts on the week days, a Bible and Whole
Duty of Man shall be provided for every inn-brother, which upon the death of
any of them, shall go with all the furniture of his chamber (bought by the
master) to his successor; and they shall be often put in mind of daily prayers
in secret in their own rooms.

26. No brother shall be allowed to be a drunkard, a fornicator or unchaste, a
caballer or mischief-maker, profane, a despiser of God, religion or divine
worship, injurious or unsociable to his fellows, disrespectful, saucy, or
disobdient to the master, or in a word, be guilty of any notorious crime, or
live a disorderly offensive life.

27. In all these cases the master to whom the power and authority of governing
the brethren and servants of the house is committed, shall by himself or his
deputy, or the chaplain, correct and punish the offender, according to the
quality and degree of the offense, (that is to say) at first, by a serious
admonition and warning, and then by suspending him from his diet for two,
three, or more days, according to the master's pleasure: Provided that the
suspension be never longer than three weeks at a time, and the value of the
diet of the suspended person be divided among such of the brethren as are not
offenders; and if after the exercise of such discipline, any brother shall go
on to offend in the same way, the master shall then carry his complaint of him
to the bishop, that he may be removed, or otherwise punished as the bishop
shall think fit.

28. We ordain, that the said brethren who are well and sound, do eat together
at dinner in their common hall or room, according to a constitution of Thomas
Langley to that effect, unless for reasons to be given to the bishop, he shall
dispense with this rule for any time. One of the brethren shall be chosen by
themselves to say grace before and after meat, or give God thanks for the
bountiful provision he has made for them, and for raising up such benefactors
to them.

29. The woman that is to wash their clothes, etc. shall be of middle age, of
good fame and conversation, as the same also is required of all the other
servants and ministers belonging to the house.

30. We do revive and enforce the late orders concerning the manner of diet of
the brethren throughout the year, with some few alterations, as annexed in a
separate paper, which we order to be transcribed and hung up in the hall where
the brethren eat.

31. Lastly, as to the relief of poor travelers at the gate, which has been
customary, and no doubt piously intended, we give no injunctions; idle vagrants
should be discouraged and punished, necessitous travelers on their honest
occasions supplied, but care should be taken that such as have no legal
settlement be not made burdensome to the hospital, by an indiscreet relief, as
is directed by an act of parliament for ascertaining of settlements.



