THE EARL of ESSEX. A TRAGEDY. As it is ACTED at the THEATER ROYAL IN
COVENT GARDEN.

WRITTEN BY Mr. HENRY JONES.

LONDON: (...) for R. DODSLEY in Pall Mall. 1753. Price One Shilling and Six
Pence.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP, Earl of CHESTERFIELD, etc. ^^ight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter.
MY LORD,
THAT You may be induced to read this Dedication through, I shall begin by
assuring You, that I do not ^^^end to pay You one Compliment. To ^^^ise You is
unnecessary on all hands; Your Lordship, it is offensive, and for (...) Public,
they do not want to be informed (...) Your Character: It lives, at present, in
(...) Mouths of all Men, and Posterity will find (...) the History of EUROPE.

My Design, My LORD, is to express my (...) Gratitude, not to delineate Your
Merit. (...) Your LORDSHIP first took Notice of me, (...) original Obscurity,
whence You brought (...) into Life, and have since continued to encourage me by
Your Countenance and Favor; and I cannot help confessing, that (...) have a
kind of honest Pride in having (...) known, that Your LORDSHIP thought m^
worthy to be taken under Your Protection.

These, my LORD, are the general Obligations that I owe You, of which I have
eve^ wished to raise some Monument, that man remain as long as my Name shall be
remembered; but I have more particular Reasons for presenting You with this
Tragedy, as it w^^ Your LORDSHIP first pointed out to me t^^ Subject, and, when
it was finished, gave (...) the first Assurance of its Success, by Yo^^
Approbation. I could not therefore (...) taking Advantage of this Opportunity,
to (...) knowledge, publicly, all these Favors; and to assure You, that I am

Your Lordship's most Obliged, Most Obedient, and Very Humble Servant, HENRY
JONE^

To Mr. HENRY JONES, on his Tragedy of the Earl of ESSEX.
AS ancient Heroes are renowned in Song,
For rescuing Virtue from th'Oppressor's Wrong,
So shall thy Fame, who snatched this well-wrought Tale,
From Dulness' gloomy Power, over Time prevail.
Long had these Scenes, wound up with dext'rous Art,
In spite of Reason, gained upon the Heart;
Thawed every frozen Fountain of the Eye,
We wept, 'till even Sorrow's self was dry;
Yet Judgment scorned what Passion had approved,
And the Head wondered, how the Heart was moved,
But, with a Fate reversed, thy Work shall boast,
That soundest Judgments shall admire it most,
Clothed in the easy Grandeur of thy Lines,
The Story brightens, as the Diction shines.
Renewed with Vigor as in Age it is grown,
The wondering Scene sees Beauties not it is own.
Thus, worn with Years, in Afric's sultry Vales,
The crested Snake shifts off his tarnish'd Scales;
Assumes fresh Beauties, brighter than the old,
Of changing Colors, intermixed with Gold:
Reburnish'd, basks beneath the scorching Ray,
Shines with new Glories in the Face of Day,
^arts fiercer Lightning from his brandished Tongue,
^olls more sublime, and seems, at least, more young.
No more shall Noise, and wild, bombastic Rage
^surp the applauding Thunder of the Stage;
^ustain no more shall pass for true Sublime,
^or Nonsense musically float in Rhyme;
^or, in a worse Extreme, shall creeping Prose,
^or Nature and Simplicity, impose:
By thee reformed, each vicious Taste shall fail,
And Critic Justice hold aloft her Scale.
Whence beams this dazzling Luster on thy Mind?
Whence this vast Fund of Knowledge in Mankind,
Unlettered Genius? Whence have thou been taught
This Dignity of Style, this Majesty of Thought,
This rapid Fire, by cool Correctness ruled,
And every learned Elegance, unschool'd?
Say, has great Shakespeare's transmigrated Shade
Informed thy Mass, or lent thee friendly Aid?
To him, blessed Bard! untaught, 'twas also given,
TO ascend, on native Wings, Invention's brightest Heaven, Alluding to the
Prologue to Henry V.

Assuming Phoebus' Port; and, in his Train,
The Muses all, like Handmaids, not in vain,
Crouch for Employment. --
The Passions too, subservient to his Will,
Attentive wait on his superior Skill;
At the Command of his enchanting Art,
Unlock the bursting Floodgates of the Heart,
And in the rapid, headlong Stream, bear down
The vanquished Soul, and make it all his own.
Happy, the Clime, distinguished be the Age,
When Genius shoots spontaneous for the Stage;
Not too luxuriant, nor too trimly neat,
But, in loose Wildness, negligently great.
O may the generous Plants, so wondrous rare,
Never want the tender Hand of fost'ring care;
But, like Apollo's favorite Tree, be seen,
For ever flourishing, for ever green.
McNAMARA MORGAN

PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mr. BARRY.
OUR desperate Bard a bold Excursion tries,
Though Danger damped his Wing, he dared to rise;
From Hope, high raised, all glorious Actions spring;
It Is hence that Heroes conquer, Poets sing.
Even he may feel the soul-exalting Fire,
Fame prompts the humblest Bosom to aspire.
Without a Guide this rash Attempt he made,
Without a Clue from Art, or Learning's Aid.
He takes a Theme where tenderest Passions glow,
A Theme, your Grandsires felt with pleasing Woe,
ESSEX' sad Tale he strives to cloth anew,
And hopes to place it in a stronger View.
Poets, like Painters, may, by equal Law,
The labored Piece from different Masters draw,
Perhaps improve the Plan, add Fire and Grace,
And strike the impassioned Soul through all the Face.
How far our Author has secured a Claim
To this exalted Palm, this wished for Fame,
Your generous Sentiments will soon declare:
Humanity is ever prone to spare.
'Twere Baseness then your Candor to distrust;
A BRITISH Audience will, at least, be just.
A flattering Truth he fearful must confess,
His sanguine Friends made Promise of Success;
But that, he fears, their ardent Wishes wrought,
Since partial Favor seldom sees a Fault.
Then bear, like patient Friends, this first Essay,
His next shall thank you in a nobler Way.

PERSONS.
MEN.
The Earl of ESSEX, Mr. BARRY. Earl of SOUTHAMPTON, Mr. SMITH. Lord BURLEIGH,
Mr. SPARKS. Sir WALTER RALEIGH, Mr. USHER. Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr.
BRANSBY.
WOMEN.
Queen ELIZABETH, Mrs. BLAND. Countess of RUTLAND, Mrs. CIBBER. Countess OF
NOTTINGHAM, Mrs. VINCENT.
Lords, Ladies, and Attendants.

THE EARL OF ESSEX.
ACT I.
SCENE, an Antichamber in the Palace.

Enter BURLEIGH and RALEIGH. BURLEIGH. THE Bill, at length, has passed opposing
Numbers,
Whilst Crowds seditious clamoured round the senate,
and headlong Faction urged its Force within.

RALEIGH. (...) is, my Lord. -- The wished for Day is come,
^h^n this proud Idol of the People's Hearts
^^all now no more be worshipped. -- Essex falls.
^y Lord, the Minute's near that shall unravel
^^e mystic Schemes of this aspiring Man.
^^w Fortune, with officious Hand, invites us
(...) her, and opens wide the Gates of Greatness,
The Way to Power. My Heart exults; I see,
I see, my Lord, our utmost Wish accomplished!
I see great Cecil shine without a Rival,
And England bless him as her Guardian Saint.
Such potent Instruments I have prepared
As shall, with speed, o'erturn this hated Man,
And dash him down, by Proof invincible.

BURLEIGH. His Day of Glory now is set in Night,
And all my anxious Hopes, at last, are crowned.
Those Proofs against him, Raleigh --

RALEIGH. All arrived.

BURLEIGH. Arrived! how? when?

RALEIGH. This very Hour, my Lord:
Nay more, a Person comes, of high Distinction,
To prove some secret Treaties made by Essex,
With Scotland's Monarch, and the proud Tyrone.

BURLEIGH. How say? to prove 'em?

RALEIGH. Ay, my Lord, and backed
With Circumstances of a stronger Nature.
It now appears his Secretary Cuff,
With Plunt and Lee were deep concerned in this
Destructive Scheme, contrived to raise this Lord,
And ruin Cecil, O it is a subtle,
A deep-laid Mischief, by the Earl contrived,
In Hour malignant, to o'erturn the State,
And (Horror to conceive!) dethrone the Queen.

BURLEIGH. These gladsome Tidings fly beyond my Hopes!
The Queen will listen now, will now believe,
And trust the Counsel of her faithful Burleigh.
Let this most lucky Circumstance be kept
A Secret still from public Observation. --
Dispose 'em well, till kind Occasion call
Their Office forth, lest prying Craft mean while
May tamper with their Thoughts, and change their Minds:
Let them, like Batteries concealed, appear
At once, both to surprise and to destroy.

RALEIGH. This ^^^den Shock, my Lord, this weighty Stroke
Must press him headlong down to deep Destruction:
Indignant Fate marks out this dreaded Man,
And Fortune now has left him.

BURLEIGH. Thank the Changeling!
His servile Faction soon will stand aghast,
And sink, at distance, from his threatening Fall.

RALEIGH. His head strong Friend, the bold Southampton too,
Now finds his rash Endeavors all defeated;
And storms at thee and the impeaching Commons.

BURLEIGH. Let him rave on, and rage. -- The Lion in
The Toils entangled, wastes his Strength, and roars
In vain; his Efforts but amuse me now. --

RALEIGH. What Triumphs in my Soul shall reign, to see
This sanguine and o'erbearing Man brought down
Beneath my Envy; nay, below my Scorn.
How young Ambition swells my rising Hopes!
It Is Heaven, O Cecil, calls, through England's Voice,
And Justice, bending from above, invites us.

Enter GENTLEMAN. GENTLEMAN. My Lord, the Lady Nottingham desires
With much Impatience to attend your Lordship.

BURLEIGH. What may the Purport of her Business be!
Her tender Wishes are to Essex tied
In Love's soft Fetters, and endearing Bands:
For him, each melting Thought awakes Desire,
And all her Soul is lavished on that Lord. --
This unexpected Visit much surprises me!
What can it mean? She would not come to pry
And pick out Tales for Essex's Ear! -- Why let her;
I Am armed secure against her Arts and Cunning.
Besides, her Errand comes too late; for now
Her Minion's doomed to fall. -- Conduct her in:
Exit Gent. And you, my Raleigh, watch Southampton's Steps;
With Care observe each Movement of his Friends;
Let no Advantage on that Side be lost.
Exit Ral. Southampton's Essex' second Self; he shares
His headlong Councils, and adopts his Schemes;
His daring Heart, and bold, ungoverned Tongue,
Are both enlisted in the rash Designs
Of this proud Lord, nor knows a Will but his.
A Limb, so fixed, must with the Body fall.

Enter Lady NOTTINGHAM. NOTTINGHAM. Thrice hail to rescued England's guiding
Genius'
His Country's Guardian, and his Queen's Defense.
Great Burleigh, thou whose Patriot Bosom beats
With Albion's Glory, and Eliza's Fame;
Who shield'st her Person, and support'st her Throne:
For thee, what fervent Thanks, what offered Vows,
Do prostrate Millions pay!

BURLEIGH. Bright Excellence,
This fair Applause too highly over-rates,
To much extols the low Deserts of Cecil.

NOTTINGHAM. What Praises are too high for Patriot-Worth;
Or what Applause exceeds the Price of Virtue?
My Lord, Conviction has at last subdued me,
And I am Honor's Proselyte; -- too long
My erring Heart pursued the Ways of Faction;
Lown myself to have been your bitt'rest Foe,
And joined with Essex in each soul Attempt
To blast your Honor, and traduce your Fame.

BURLEIGH. Though never my wishing Heart could call you Friend,
Yet Honor and Esteem I always bore you;
And never meant, but with Respect to serve you.
It grieves me, Madam, to have thus offended,
Where most my Wishes labored to oblige.

NOTTINGHAM. I know your Honor and your Virtues well;
Your public Plans, designed for England's Good,
And ad your private Merit's Weight. -- But, Oh,
How blind is Reason in the Maze of Passion!
I sought your Ruin, labored for your Fall.
But it Repentance may atone for Guilt,
Or Self-reproach for sharpest Penance pass;
No mortal Breast ever felt more Woe than mine,
And burleigh now may rank me for his Friend.

BURLEIGH. That (...) a Worth of Soul should be abused (...)
Could accuse my Heart but of a Thought
(...) you Wrong? If any Purpose ever
against your Welfare in my Soul arose,
That looked with Malice on your shining Merit,
Your matchless Beauty, or your brighter Virtues;
Then let me live despised, a Proverb made
To every passing Slave; nay more, the Scorn
And trampled Footstool of the Man I hate.

NOTTINGHAM. It is enough, my Lord, I know it well,
And feel rekindling Virtue warm my Breast;
Honor and Gratitude their Force resume
Within my Heart, and every Wish is yours.
O Cecil, Cecil, what a Foe have thou,
A deadly Foe, whilst hated Essex lives.

BURLEIGH. I know it well, but can assign no Cause.

NOTTINGHAM. Ambition's restless Hand has wound his Thoughts
Too high for England's Welfare; nay, the Queen
Scarce sits in Safety on her Throne while he,
The audacious Essex, freely treads at large,
And breathes the common Air. Ambition is
The only God he serves, to whom he would sacrifice
His Honor, Country, Friends, and every Tie
Of Truth, and Bond of Nature; nay, his Love.

BURLEIGH. I find this Business works as I would have it.
Aside The Man that in his public Duty fails,
On private Virtues will disdainful tread,
As Steps to raise him to some higher Purpose;
In vain each softer Wish would plead with him,
No tender Movement in his Soul prevails,
And mighty Love, who rules all Nature else,
Must follow here in proud Ambition's Train.

NOTTINGHAM. Pronounce it not, my Soul abhors the Sound,
Like Death. -- O Cecil, will you kindly lend
Some Pity to a Wretch like me!

BURLEIGH. Command,
Madam; my Power and Will are yours. I feel
Your Wrongs, I feel the base Returns you have met
From this ungrateful and disloyal Man,
Though often your Goodness screen'd him from Reproof;
Believe me worthy to partake your Grievance,
Accept my Service, and employ my Power.

NOTTINGHAM. Will Cecil's friendly Ear vouchsafe to bend
It Is great Attention to a Woman's Wrongs,
Whose Pride and Shame, Resentment and Despair,
Rise up in raging Anarchy at once,
To tear with ceaseless Pangs my tortured Soul?
Words are unequal to the Woes I feel,
And Language lessens what my Heart endures.
Passion repulsed with Scorn, and proud Disdain,
Recoils indignant on my shrinking Soul,
Beats back my vital Springs, and crushes Life.

BURLEIGH. Madam your Wrongs, I must confess, are great;
Yet still. I fear, you know not half his Falsehood.
Who, that had Eyes to look on Beauty? Who,
That had a Heart to feel that Beauty's Power?
Who, but the false, perfidious Essex, could
Prefer to Nottingham a Rutland's Charms?
Start not. -- By Heaven I tell you naught but Truth,
What I can prove, past doubt; that he received
The Lady Rutland's Hand, in sacred Wedlock,
The very Night before his setting out
For Ireland.

NOTTINGHAM. O may quick Destruction seize 'em!
May Furies blast, and Hell destroy their Peace!
May all their Nights --

BURLEIGH. I pray have Patience, Madam,
Restrain a while your Rage, Curses are vain.
But there is a surer Method to destroy him;
And if you will join with me, it is done: he falls.

NOTTINGHAM. Ha! say thou, Burleigh! speak, my Genius, speak
Be quick as Vengeance' self to tell me how.

BURLEIGH. You must have heard the Commons have impeached him
And we have Proofs sufficient for his Ruin.
But then the Queen -- you know how fair he stands
In her Esteem; and Rutland too, his Wife,
Has full Possession of the Royal Ear.
What then avail Impeachments or the Law's
Severest Condemnation, while the Queen
May snatch him from the uplifted Hand of Justice.
Here then, my Nottingham, begins thy Task.
Try every Art to incense the Queen against him,
Then step between her and the Lady Rutland*
Let not her Fondness find the least Access
To the Queen's Heart to counterwork our Purpose.
Observe Southampton too, with jealous Eye;
Prevent, as much as possible his Suit:
For well I know he will not fail to try
His Eloquence on the Behalf of Essex.

NOTTINGHAM. It shall be done; his Doom is fixed; he dies.
O 'twas a precious Thought! I never knew
Such Heartfelt Satisfaction! -- Essex dies,
And Rutland, in her Turn, shall learn to weep.
The Time is precious; I Will about it straight.
Come Vengeance, come, assist me now to breathe
Thy venomed Spirit in the Royal Ear.

Exit Nottingham BURLEIGH. There spoke the very Genius of the Sex.
A disappointed Woman sets no Bounds
To her Revenge. Her Temper's formed to serve (...)

Enter RALEIGH. RALEIGH. The Lord Southampton with ungoverned Rage,
Resents aloud his disappointed Measures:
I met him in the outward Court; he seeks
In haste your Lordship, and forgetting Forms,
Pursues me hither, and demands to see you.

BURLEIGH. Raleigh, it is well -- Withdraw -- Attend the Queen;
Leave me to deal with this o'erbearing Man.

Ex. Ral. Enter SOUTHAMPTON. SOUTHAMPTON. Where is the Man, whom Virtue calls
her Friend?
I give you Joy, my Lord! -- Your quenchless Fury
At length prevails, -- and now your Malice triumphs:
You Have hunted Honor to the Toil of Faction,
And view his Struggles with malicious Joy.

BURLEIGH. What means my Lord?

SOUTHAMPTON. O Fraud! shall valiant Essex
Be made a Sacrifice to your Ambition?
Oh it smells foul indeed, of rankest Malice
And the vile Statesman's Craft. -- You dare not sure
Thus bid Defiance to each Show of Worth,
Each Claim of Honor: dare not injure thus
Your suffering Country in her bravest Son?

BURLEIGH. ^ut why should stern Reproach her angry Brow
^et fall on me? Am I alone the Cause
That gives this working Humor Strength? Do I
^^^struct the public Voice to warp his Actions?
Justice untaught, shall poize the impartial Scales,
And every curious Eye may mark the Beam.

SOUTHAMPTON. The specious Shield which private Malice bears,
Is ever blazoned with some public Good;
Behind that artful Fence, sculk low, concealed,
The bloody Purpose, and the poisoned Shaft;
Ambition there, and Envy, nestle close;
From thence, they take their fatal Aim unseen;
And honest Merit is the destined Mark.

BURLEIGH. Your warm distempered zeal puts rashly by
The cool directing Hand of wholesome Reason.
No Imputation ^oul shall rest on me;
My honest Purposes defy aloud
The slander-spreading Tongue of busy Faction,
To cast its Venom on my fair Report,
Or tell Posterity, Thus Cecil did.
My Country's Welfare, and my Queen's Comma
Have ever been my guiding Stars through Life,
My sure Direction still. -- To these I now
Appeal; -- from these no doubt this Lord's Miscond^^^
Has widely strayed, and Reason, not reviling,
Must now befriend his Cause.

SOUTHAMPTON. How ill had Providence
Disposed the suffering World's oppressed Affairs,
Had sacred Right's eternal Rule, been left
To crafty Politicians' partial Sway?
Then Power and Pride would stretch the enormous (...)
And call their arbitrary Portion, Justice:
Ambition's Arm, by Avarice urged, would pluck
The Core of Honesty from Virtue's Heart,
And plant Deceit, and Rancour in its Stead:
Falsehood would trample then on Truth and Hono^
And Envy poison sweet Benevolence.
Oh, it is a goodly Groupe of Attributes,
And well befits some Statesmen's righteous Rule!
Out, out upon such base and bloody Doings!
The Term of Being is not worth the Sin;
No human Bosom can endure its Dart.
Then put this cruel Purpose from thee far,
Nor let the Blood of Essex whelm thy Soul.

BURLEIGH It Is well, my Lord! your Words no Comment need;
No doubt, they have well explained your honest Meaning:
It Is clear and full. -- To Parts, like yours, Discretion
Would be a Clog, and Caution but Encumbrance.
Yet mark me well, my Lord, the clinging Ivy
With the Oak may rife, but with it too must fall.

SOUTHAMPTON. Thy empty Threats, ambitious Man, hurt not
The Breast of Truth. Fair Innocence, and Faith,
Those Strangers to thy practiced Heart, shall shield
My Honor, and preserve my Friend. -- In vain,
Thy Malice, with unequal Arm, shall strive
To tear the applauded Wreath from Essex' Brow;
His honest Laurei, held alost by Fame,
Above thy blasting reach, shall safely flourish,
And bloom immortal to the latest Times:
Whilst thou, amidst thy tangling Snares involved,
Shall sink confounded, and unpitied fall.

BURLEIGH. Rail on, proud Lord, and give thy Choler vent:
It wastes itself in vain; the Queen shall judge
Between us in this warm Debate. To her
I now repair, and in her royal Presence
You may approve your Innocence and Faith.
Perhaps you will meet me there. -- Till then, farewell.

Exit. SOUTHAMPTON. Confusion wait thy Steps, thou cruel Monster:
My noble and illustrious Friend betrayed,
By crafty Faction and tyrannic Power!
His sinking Trophies, and his falling Fame,
Oppress my very Soul. I Will to the Queen,
Lay all their Envy open to her View,
Confront their Malice and preserve my Friend.

Exit. The QUEEN discovered sitting on her Throne. RALEIGH, Lords, and
Attendants. QUEEN. Without consulting me! presumptuous Man!
Who governs here? -- What! am not I your Queen
You dared not, were he present, take this Step.

RALEIGH. Dread Sovereign, your ever faithful Commons
Have, in their Gratitude, and Love for you,
Preferred this salutary Bill against him.

Enter BURLEIGH. QUEEN. You, my Lord Burleigh, must have known of this.
The Commons here impeach the Earl of Essex
Of practicing against the State and me.
Methinks I might be trusted with the Secret.
Speak, for I know it well, 'twas thy Contrivance.
Ha! was it not? You dare not say it was not.

BURLEIGH. I own my Judgment did concur with theirs.
His Crimes, I fear, will justify the Charge,
And vindicate their Loyalty and mine.

QUEEN. Ha! tell not me your smooth, deceitful Story!
I know your Projects, and your close Cabals.
You Would turn my Favor into Party Feuds,
And use my Scepter as the Rod of Faction:
But Henry's Daughter claims a nobler Soul.
I Will nurse no party, but will reign over all,
And my sole Rule shall be to bless my People:
Who serves them best has still my highest Favor;
This Essex ever did.

Enter SOUTHAMPTON. Behold, Southampton, What a base Portrait's here! The
faithful Essex
Here drawn at large, associating with Rebels
To spoil his Country, and dethrone his Queen.

SOUTHAMPTON. It is not like. -- By Heaven the Hand of Envy
Drew these false Lines, distorted far from Truth
And Honor, and unlike my noble Friend
As Light to Shade, or Hell to highest Heaven.
Then suffer not, thou best of Queens, this Lord,
This valiant Lord, to fall a Sacrifice
To Treachery and base Designs; who now
Engages Death in all his horrid Shapes,
Amidst a hardy race inured to Danger:
But let him, face to face, this Charge encounter,
And every Falsehood, like his Foes, shall fly.

QUEEN. To me you seem to recommend strict Justice,
In all her Pomp of Power. But are you sure
No subtle Vice concealed assumes her Garb?
Take heed, that Malice does not wear the Mask,
Nor Envy deck her in the borrowed Guise.
Rancour has often darkened Reason's Eye,
And Judgment winks, when Passion holds the Scale.
^mpeach the very Man to whom I owe
My brightest Rays of Glory! Look to it, Lords,
Take care, be cautious on what Ground you tread;
Let honest Means alone secure your Footing.
Raleigh and you withdraw, and wait our Leisure.
Exeunt Ral. and South. Lord Burleigh, stay; we must with you have farther
Conf'rence. -- I see this base Contrivance plain.
Your Jealousy and Pride, your Envy of
His shining Merit, brought this Bill to Light.
But mark me, as you prize our high regard,
And Favor, I command you to suppress it:
Let not our Name and Power be embarrass'd
In your perplexing Schemes. 'Twas you began,
And therefore you must end it.

BURLEIGH. I obey.
Yet humbly would entreat you to consider
How new, unpopular, this Step must be,
To stand between your Parliament's Enquiry
And this offending Lord. -- We have such Proofs --

QUEEN. Reserve your Proofs to a more proper Season,
And let them then appear. But once again
We charge you on your Duty and Allegiance,
To stop this vile Proceeding; and to wait
Till Essex can defend himself in Person.
If then your Accusations are of Force,
The Laws, and my Consent, no doubt, are open.
He has my strict Command, with Menace mixed,
To end effectually this hated War,
Ere he presume to quit the Irish Coast.

BURLEIGH. Madam my Duty now compels me to --

QUEEN. No more! see that my Orders be obeyed.
Exit Bur. Essex a Traitor! -- it can never be --
His grateful and his honest Soul disdains it. --
I know him hot, ambitious, rash, impatient;
But then he is firmly anchored in his Duty:
Though stormy passions toss him to and fro.
Can he prove false? so high advanced, so honored,
So near my Favor -- and -- I fear, so near
My Heart! -- Impossible. -- This Burleigh hates him,
And, as his Rival, therefore would destroy him:
But he shall find his narrow Schemes defeated.
In vain their fraudful Efforts shall combine,
To shake my settled Soul, my firm Design;
Resolved to lift bright Virtue's Palm on high,
Support her Grandeur, and her Foes defy.
Exit.
ACT II.
Enter BURLEIGH and RALEIGH. BURLEIGH. ESSEX arrived! Confusion to my Hopes!
His Presence will destroy me with the Queen.
I much suspect he had some private Notice,
Perhaps, a punctual Order to return.
He lurks too near her Heart. -- What Is to be done?
Prepare the Witnesses with Speed; apprize
The Lady Nottingham. -- Southampton's Pride,
And Rutland's too, will lift the Crest again.
But fly, my Raleigh, send me Nottingham.
Exit Ral We must alarm the Queen with new Commotions
In many Parts of her Dominions raised:
All this, and more, must now be passed for Truth.
This sudden Blow has struck me to the Soul;
It Is gone too far, he dies -- proud Essex now,
Or Cecil falls. Now is the important Crisis --
Keep up thy usual Strength; my better Genius,
Direct my Steps to crush my mortal Foe.

Enter QUEEN and RALEIGH. QUEEN. It cannot be! -- Returned without my Leave!
Against my strict Command! -- Impossible!

RALEIGH. Madam, the Earl is now at Court, and begs
An Audience of your Majesty.

QUEEN. Amazing!
What! break his Trust! desert his high Command!
Forsake his Post, and disobey his Queen!
It Is false -- invented all. -- You wish it so.

BURLEIGH. Madam, I wish some other Rumors false.
Reports, I fear, of great Concern to you.

QUEEN. What Rumors, what Reports? Your Frown would much
Denote: your Preface seems important -- Speak.

BURLEIGH. Some new Commotions are of late sprung up
In Ireland, where the West is all in Arms,
And moves with hasty March to join Tyrone,
And all his Northern Clans. A dreadful Power!
Nay more, we have Advices from the Borders
Of sudden Risings, near the Banks of Tweed!
It Is thought, to favor an Attempt from Scotland.
Mean while, Tyrone embarks six thousand Men
To land at Milford, and to march where Essex
Shall join them with his Friends.

QUEEN. In League with James!
And plotting with Tyrone! It cannot be.
His very Pride disdains such Perfidy.
But is not Essex here without my Leave!
Against my strict Command! that, that is Rebellion.
The rest, if true, or false, it matters not.
What Is to be done? -- admit him to my Presence?
No, no -- my Dignity, my Pride forbid it.
Ungrateful Man, approach me not; rise, rise
Resentment, and support my Soul! Disdain,
Do thou assist me. -- Yes, it shall be so.

BURLEIGH. I see she muses deep; her Mind works upwards,
And paints it is struggling Efforts in her Face.
Tyrone's Invasion wakes her Fear and Anger,
And all her Soul is one continued Storm.

QUEEN. For once my Pride shall stoop; and I will see
This rash, audacious, this once favored Man;
But treat him as his daring Crimes deserve.

Enter SOUTHAMPTON. SOUTHAMPTON kneeling. Permit me, Madam, to approach you
thus;
Thus lowly to present the humble Suit
Of the much injured, faithful, Earl of Essex:
Who dares not, unpermitted, meet your Presence.
He begs, most gracious Queen, to fall before
Your royal Feet, to clear him to his Sovereign,
Whom, next to Heaven, he wishes most to please.
Let Faction load him with her laboring Hand,
His Innocence shall rise against the Weight,
If but his gracious Mistress deign to smile.

QUEEN. Let him appear.
Exit South Now to thy trying Task,
My Soul! put forth, exert thy utmost Strength,
Nor let an injured Queen be tame. -- Lie still,
My Heart! I cannot listen to thee now.

Enter ESSEX and SOUTHAMPTON. ESSEX. Forgive, thou, injured Majesty, thou best
Of Queens, this seeming Disobedience. See,
I bend submissive in your royal Presence,
With Soul as penitent, as if before
The all-searching Eye of Heaven. But, Oh, that Frown
My Queen's Resentment wounds my inmost Spirit,
Strikes me like Death, and pierces through my Heart.

QUEEN. You have obeyed, my Lord! you have served me well!
My deadly Foes are quelled! and you come home
A Conqueror! your Country bids you welcome!
And I, your Queen, applaud! -- Triumphant Man!
What! is it thus that Essex gains his Laurels?
And is it thus you have borne my high Commission?
How durst you disregard your trusted Duty,
Desert your Province, and betray your Queen?

ESSEX. I came to clear my injured Name from Guilt,
Imputed Guilt, and slanderous Accusations.
My Shame was wafted in each passing Gale,
Each swelling Tide came loaded with my Wrongs;
And Echo sounded forth, from Faction's Voice,
The Traitor Essex. -- Was It not hard, my Queen,
That whilst I stood in Danger's dreadful Front,
Encountering Death in every shape of Terror,
And bleeding for my Country? -- Was It not hard,
My mortal Enemies at home, like Cowards,
Should in my Absence basely blast my Fame?

QUEEN. It is the Godlike Attribute of Kings
To raise the Virtuous, and protect the Brave.
I was the Guardian of your Reputation,
What Malice, or what Faction then could reach you?
My Honor was exposed, engaged for yours:
But you found Reason to dislike my Care,
And to yourself assumed the wrested Office.

ESSEX. If aught disloyal in this Bosom dwells,
If aught of Treason lodges in this Heart,
May I to Guilt and lasting Shame be wedded,
The Sport of Faction, and the Mark of Scorn;
The World's Derision, and my Queen's Abhorrence.
Stand forth the Villain, whose envenomed Tongue
Would taint my Honor, and traduce my Name,
Or stamp my Conduct with a Rebel's Brand!
Lives there a Monster in the Haunts of Men
Dares tear my Trophies from their pillar'd Base,
Eclipse my Glory and disgrace my Deeds?

QUEEN. This ardent Language, and this glow of Soul,
Were nobly graceful in a better Cause;
Where Virtue warrants, and where Truth inspires.
But injured Truth with Brow invincible
Frowns stern Reproof upon the false Assertion,
And contradicts it with the Force of Facts.
From me you have appealed, ungrateful Man;
The Laws, not I, must listen to your Plea.
Go stand the Test severe, abide the Trial,
And mourn too late the Bounty you abused

Exit Queen, Southampton, etc. ESSEX. Is this the just Requital, then, of all
My Patriot-Toils and oft-encounter'd Perils,
Amidst the Inclemencies of Camps and Climes?
Then be it so. -- Unmoved and dauntless, let me
This Shock of adverse Fortune firmly stand.
But yet, methinks, it is somewhat sudden too.
My Greatness, now deprived of each Support,
Which bore so long its envied Weight aloft,
Must quick to ruin fall, and crush my Hopes.

Enter SOUTHAMPTON. SOUTHAMPTON. Alas, my Lord, the Queen's Displeasure kindles
With Warmth increasing, whilst Lord Burleigh labors
TO inflame her Wrath, and make it still burn fiercer.

ESSEX. I scorn the Blaze of Courts, the Pomp of Kings;
I give them to the Winds and lighter Vanity:
Too long they have robbed me of substantial Bliss,
Of solid Happiness, and true Enjoyment.
But lead me to my mourning Love, alas!
She sinks beneath oppressing Ills, she fades,
She dies for my afflicting Pangs, and seeks
Me sorrowing in the Walks of Woe. -- Distraction!
O lead me to her, to my Soul's Desire.

SOUTHAMPTON. Let Caution guide you in this dangerous Step.
Consider well, my Lord, the Consequence --
For should the Queen (forbid it Heaven!) discover
Your private Loves, your plighted Hands, no Power
On Earth could step between you and Destruction.
Lock up this Secret from the prying World.

Enter BURLEIGH. BURLEIGH. My Lord of Essex, it is the Queen's Command
That you forthwith resign your Staff of Office;
And, further, she confines you to your Palace.

ESSEX. Welcome, my Fate; let Fortune do her utmost;
I know the worst, and will confront her Malice,
And bravely bear the unexpected Blow.

BURLEIGH. The Queen, my Lord, demands your quick Compliance.

ESSEX. Go then, thou gladsome Messenger of Ill,
And, joyful, feast thy fierce rapacious Soul
With Essex' sudden and accomplished Fall.
The trampled Coarse of all his envied Greatness,
Lies prostrate now, beneath thy savage Feet;
But still the exalted Spirit mounts above thee.
Go, tell the Queen thy own detested Story;
Full in her Sight disclose the snaky Labyrinths,
And lurking Snares you plant in Virtue's Path,
To catch Integrity's unguarded Step.

BURLEIGH. How ill repaid are public Toils and Cares,
Where active Honesty with Station joined,
Incurs but Calumny, and foul Reproach!
Your Country has impeached, your Queen accused you;
To these address your best Defense, and clear
Your questioned Conduct from disloyal Guilt.
What Answer to the Queen shall I return?

ESSEX. My Staff of Office I from her received,
And will to her, and her alone, resign it.

BURLEIGH. This bold Refusal will incense the Queen;
This Arrogance will make your Guilt the stronger.

Exit. SOUTHAMPTON. Sustain, my noble Friend, thy wonted Greatness;
Collect thy Fortitude, and summon all
Thy Soul, to bear with Strength this crushing Weight,
Which falls severe upon thee; whilst my Friendship
Shall lend a helping Hand, and share the Burden.
I Will hence with Speed, and to the Queen repair,
And all the Power of warmest Words employ
To gain you yet one Audience more, and bring
Her Majesty to milder Thoughts, Farewell.
Exit.
ESSEX. As newly waked from all my Dreams of Glory,
Those gilded Visions of deceitful Joys,
I stand confounded at the unlook'd-for Change,
And scarcely feel this Thunderbolt of Fate.
The painted Clouds, which bore my Hopes aloft,
Alas, are vanished now to yielding Air,
And I am fallen indeed! --
How weak is Reason, when Affection pleads?
How hard to turn the fond deluded Heart
From flattering Toys, which soothed it is Vanity?
The laurell'd Trophy and the loud Applause,
The Victor's Triumph, and the People's Gaze,
The high-hung Banner, and recording Gold,
Subdue me still, still cling around my Heart,
And pull my Reason down.

Enter RUTLAND. RUTLAND. O let me fly
To clasp, embrace, the Lord of my Desires!
My Soul's Delight, my utmost Joy, my Husband!
I feel once more his panting Bosom beat,
Once more I hold him in my eager Arms,
Behold his Face, and lose my Soul in Rapture.

ESSEX. Transporting Bliss! my richest, dearest Treasure!
My mourning Turtle! my long absent Peace!
O come yet nearer, nearer to my Heart!
My raptured Soul springs forward to receive thee:
Thou Heaven on Earth, thou Balm of all my Woe!

RUTLAND. O shall I credit then each ravished Sense?
Has pitying Heaven consented to my Prayer?
It has, it has, my Essex is returned!
But Language poorly speaks the Joys I feel;
Let Passion paint, and Looks express my Soul.

ESSEX. With thee, my sweetest Comfort, I Will retire
From splendid Palaces, and glittering Throngs,
To live embosom'd in the Shades of Joy;
Where sweet Content extends her friendly Arms,
And gives increasing Love a lasting Welcome.
With thee I Will timely fly from proud Oppression,
Forget our Sorrows, and be blessed for ever.

RUTLAND. O let us hence, beyond the Reach of Power;
Where Fortune's Hand shall never part us more.
In this calm State of Innocence and Joy,
I Will press thee to my throbbing Bosom close.
Ambition's Voice shall call in vain; the World,
The thankless World, shall never claim thee more,
And all thy Business shall be Love and me.

ESSEX. The Queen, incensed at my Return, abandons me
To Cecil's Malice, and the Rage of Faction.
I Am now no more the favorite Child of Fortune:
My Enemies have caught me in the Toil,
And Life has nothing worth my Wish but thee.

RUTLAND. Delusive Dream of fancied Happiness!
And has my fatal Fondness then destroyed thee!
Oh! have I lured thee to the deadly Snare
Thy cruel Foes have laid? Oh! have I put
Thy Life in Peril? My officious Tears
Would needs inform thee of their wicked Schemes,
I dreaded Cecil's Malice, and my Heart,
Longing to see thee with Impatience, listened
To it is own Alarms; and Prudence sunk beneath
The Force of Love.

ESSEX. Forbear, my only Comfort;
O tell me not of Danger, Death, and Eurleigh,
Let every Star shed down it is mortal Bane
On my unshelter'd Head: Whilst thus I fold
Thee in my raptured Arms; I Will brave 'em all,
Defy my Fate, and meet it is utmost Rigor.

RUTLAND. Alas! my Lord, consider where we are.
Oh! it is the Queen's Apartment; Death is here:
I came to thee through Peril's ambush'd Path,
And every Danger risqu'd for thy Embrace.
Each precious Moment is by Fate beset,
And Time stands trembling whilst we thus confer.

ESSEX. Then let us hence from this detested Place;
My rescued Soul disdains the House of Greatness,
Where humble Honesty can find no Shelter.
From hence we'll fly, where Love and Virtue call,
Where Happiness invites, -- that Wish of all;
With sweet Content enjoy each blissful Hour,
Beyond the Smiles of Fraud, or Frowns of Power.

ACT III.
Enter BURLEIGH and NOTTINGHAM. NOTTINGHAM. MY Lord, I Have sought you out with
much Impatience.
You Have had an Audience of the Queen; what followed?

BURLEIGH. Soon as I told her Essex had refused
To yield his Dignities, and Staff of Office,
Against her high Command, pronounced by me,
She seemed deprived of Reason for a Moment;
Her working Mind betrayed contending Passions,
Which, in her altered Face, appeared by Turns.
She paused, like Thunder in some kindling Cloud,
Then instant burst with dreadful Fury forth:
And has the ungrateful Wretch defied my Mandate?
The proud, audacious Traitor scorned my Power?
He dares not sure. -- He dies -- the Villain dies!
Then, sudden, softened into milder Sounds,
And called him rash, unhappy, gallant Essex!
On me her Fury fell, my crafty Plans
Against his Reputation, Fam cand Life,
Had driven him to Extremes -- my Malice did it,
My Envy was his Bane; with all that Passion
Or Fury could suggest. -- I begged to know
Her Royal Will concerning Essex, urged
Again his Insolence. -- Amazed a while
She stood, and wist not what to do. -- At length
Collecting all her Mind* these Words she uttered; --
Let him to the Tower -- I instantly withdrew,
But soon was countermanded, and desired
To bring the Earl of Essex to her Presence.
I like it not, and much I sear she will stand
Between this high Offender and the Laws.

NOTTINGHAM. Is Essex then secured?

BURLEIGH. Madam, he is;
And now comes guarded to the Court.

Enter GENTLEMAN. GENTLEMAN. Madam, the Queen
Is in her Closet, and desires to see you.

Exit. NOTTINGHAM. I attend her.

BURLEIGH. She wants, no doubt, to be advised by you.
Improve this fair Occasion, urge it home.
She mast be quickened by repeated Strokes
Of fresh indignities, by Essex offered
TO her Royal Person, and Prerogative.
Be circumspect and cautious! mark her well.

NOTTINGHAM. I know her Foible. Essex long has had
An Interest in her Heart, which nothing can
O'erturn, except his own ungoverned Spirit.
It is, indeed, the Instrument, by which
We work, and cannot fail, if rightly used.

BURLEIGH. Madam, the Queen expects you instantly.
I must withdraw, and wait the Earl's Arrival.

Exeunt. QUEEN Discovered. QUEEN. Ill-fated, wretched Man! perverse and
obstinate!
He counterworks my Grace, and courts Destruction.
He gives his deadly Foes the Dagger to
Destroy him, and defeats my friendly Purpose,
Which would, by seeming to abandon, save him.
Nor will he keep the Mask of Prudence on
A Moment's space. -- What! must I bear this Scorn?
No. Let me all the Monarch reassume!
Exert my Power, and be myself again! --
O ill performing disobedient Heart! --
Why shrink'st thou fearful from thy own Resolve?
Enter NOTTINGHAM. Thou come in time, I Am much disturbed, abused,
My Nottingham, and would complain to thee,
Of Insolence, Neglect, and high Contempt.
Essex presumed to dictate Laws within
My Palace Gates. How say thou, Nottingham?

NOTTINGHAM. Surely, my gracious Queen, it cannot be!
His Heat and Passion never could impel him
To take so bold a Step, to such rash Guilt:
Methinks his very Honor should prevent it.

QUEEN. Thy open honest Mind untutored seems
In Life's ungrateful and degenerate School;
Where stubborn Vice in every Form appears,
Mocking Correction's ineffectual Rod.
It is, indeed, an Evil hard to bear,
This haughty Man has wantoned with my Grace,
Abused my Bounty, and despised my Favors.
That giving Goodness should profusely flow
To Enrich the surly Glebe, where only Thorns
And noxious Weeds will spring!
Resentment, then, shall in her turn prevail;
To angry Laws I Will give this Victim up.

NOTTINGHAM. His Conduct has, I fear, been too unguarded;
His hasty Temper knows not where to stop.
Ambition is the Spur of all his Actions,
Which often drives him over his Duty's Limit.
(At least his Enemies would have it so)
But Malice, Madam, seldom judges right.

QUEEN. O Nottingham, his Pride is past enduring;
This insolent, audacious Man forgets
His Honor and Allegiance. -- And refused
To render up his Staff of Office here,
Beneath my very Eye.

NOTTINGHAM. Presumptuous Man!
Your faithful Subjects will resent this Pride,
This Insolence, this Treason to their Queen;
They must, my gracious Sovereign. -- It Is not safe
To shield him longer from their just Resentment.
Then give him up to Justice and the Laws.

QUEEN. You seem well pleased to urge Severity. --
Offended Majesty but seldom wants
Such sharp Advisers. -- Yet no Attribute
So well befits the exalted Seat supreme,
And Power's disposing Hand, as Clemency.
Each Crime must from its quality be judged;
And pity there should interpose, where malice
Is not the Aggressor! Hence, I Will hear no more.

NOTTINGHAM. Madam, my Sentiments were well intended;
Justice, not Malice, moved my honest Zeal.
My Words were Echo's of the public Voice,
Which daily rises with repeated Cries
Of high Complaint, against this haughty Lord.
I pity from my Heart, his rash Attempts,
And much esteem the Man.

QUEEN. Go, Nottingham,
My Mind's disturbed, and send me Rutland hither
Exit Not. O vain Distinction of exalted State!
No Rank ascends above the reach of Care,
Nor Dignity can shield a Queen from Woe.
Despotic Nature's stronger Scepter rules,
And Pain and Passion in her Right prevail.
O the unpitied Lot, severe Condition,
Of Solitary, sad dejected Grandeur!
Alone condemned to bear the unsocial Throb
Of heartfelt Anguish, and corroding Grief;
Deprived of what, within his homely Shed,
The poorest Peasant in Affiction finds,
The kind condoling Comfort of a dear
Partaking Friend. --
Enter Countess of RUTLAND. Rutland, I want thy timely
Counsel. I Am importuned, and urged to punish --
But Justice, sometimes, has a cruel Sound,
Where Mercy may with Prudence meet, and both
Agree to soften Rigor. -- Essex has,
No doubt, provoked my Anger, and the Laws;
His haughty Conduct calls for sharp Reproof,
And just Correction. Yet I think him guiltless
Of studied Treasons, or designed Rebellion.
Then tell me, Rutland, what the World reports,
What Censure says of his unruly Deeds.

RUTLAND. The World with Envy's Eye beholds his Merit.
Madam, it is Malice all, and false Report.
I know his noble Heart, it is filled with Honor.
No traitorous Taint has touched his generous Soul;
His grateful Mind still glows with pure Affection;
And all his Thoughts are Loyalty and you.

QUEEN. I grant you, Rutlana, all you say, and think
The Earl possessed of many splendid Virtues.
What Pity it is, he should afford his Foes
Such frequent sad Occasions to undo him.

RUTLAND. What human Heart can unafflicted bear
Such manly Merit in Distress; such Worth
Betrayed; such Valor in the Toil, beset
By cruel Foes, and Faction's savage Cry?
My good, my gracious Mistress, stretch betimes
Your saving Arm, and snatch him from Destruction;
From deadly Malice, Treachery, and Cecil!
O let him live to clear his Conduct up!
My gracious Queen, he will nobly earn your Bounty,
And with his dearest Blood deserve your Mercy.

QUEEN. Her Words betray a warm unusual Fervor!
Me e Friendship never could inspire this Transport.
Aside. I never doubted but the Earl was brave;
His Life and valiant Actions, all declare it:
I think him honest too, but rash and headstrong.
I gladly would preserve him from his Foes!
And therefore am resolved once more to see him.

RUTLAND. Oh, it is a godlike Thought, and Heaven itself
Inspires it, Sure some Angel moves your Heart,
Your royal Heart, to Pity and Forgiveness.
This gracious Deed shall shine in future Story,
And deck your Annals with the brightest Virtue;
Posterity shall praise the princely Act,
And Ages yet to come record your Goodness.

QUEEN. I Will hear no more. -- Must I then learn from you
To know my Province, and be taught to move,
As each designing Mind directs. -- Leave me.

RUTLAND. Her Frowns are dreadful, and her Eye looks Terror.
I tremble for my Essex! Save him, Heaven!

Exit. QUEEN. Her Warmth has touched me home. My jealous Heart
My fearful and suspicious Soul's alarmed.

Enter BURLEIGH, RALEIGH, and others. BURLEIGH. The Earl of Essex waits your
Royal Will.

QUEEN. Let him approach. -- And now, once more, support
Thy Dignity, my Soul; nor yield thy Greatness
To strong usurping Passion. -- But he comes.

Enter ESSEX, SOUTHAMPTON, Guards. ESSEX. Permitted thus to bend, with
prostrate Heart,
kneels. Before your sacred Majesty; I come
With every grateful Sense of royal Favor,
Deeply engraved within my conscious Soul.

QUEEN. I sent my Orders for your Staff of Office.

ESSEX. Madam, my envied Dignities and Honors
I first from your own royal Hand received;
And therefore justly held it far beneath me
To yield my Trophies, and exalted Power,
So dearly purchased in the Field of Glory,
To Hands unworthy. No, my gracious Queen,
I meant to lay them at your royal Feet;
Where Life itself a willing Victim falls,
If you command.

QUEEN. High swelling Words, my Lord, but ill supply
The Place of Deeds, and Duty's just Demand.
In Danger's Onset, and the Day of Trial,
Conviction still on acting Worth attends;
Whilst mere Professions are by Doubts encumbered.

ESSEX. My Deeds have often declared, in Danger's Front,
How far my Duty and my Valor lead me.
Allegiance still my Thirst of Glory sir'd,
And all my bravely-gather'd, envied Laurels,
Were purchased only to adorn my Queen.

QUEEN. Yet Fact over Fallacy must still prevail,
And Eloquence to simple Truth give Way.
Your guilty Scorn of my entrusted Power,
When with my mortal Foes you tamely dally'd,
By hardy Rebels braved, you poorly sought
A servile Pause, and begged a shameful Truce.
Should Essex thus, so meanly compromise,
And lose the Harvest of a plenteous Glory,
In idle Treaties, and suspicious Parley?

ESSEX. O deadly Stroke! My Life's the destined Mark.
The poisoned Shaft has drunk my Spirits deep.
Is It come to this? Conspire with Rebels! Hah!
I Have served you, Madam, with the utmost Peril,
And ever gloried in the illustrious Danger;
Where Famine faced me with her meagre Mein,
And Pestilence, and Death brought up her Train.
I Have fought your Battles, in Despite of Nature,
Where Seasons sicken'd, and the Clime was Fate.
My Power to parley, or to fight, I had
From you; the Time and Circumstance did call
Aloud for mutual Treaty and Conditions;
For that I stand a guarded Felon here. -- A Traitor,
Hemmed in by Villains, and by Slaves surrounded.

QUEEN. Shall added Insolence, with Crest audacious,
Her Front uplift against the Face of Power?
Think not that injured Majesty will bear
Such Arrogance uncheck'd, or unchastiz'd.
No public Trust becomes the Man who treads
With scornful Steps in Honor's sacred Path,
And stands at bold Defiance with his Duty.

ESSEX. Away with Dignities and hated Trust,
With flattering Honors, and deceitful Power!
Invert the eternal Rules of Right and Justice;
Let Villains thrive, and outcast Virtue perish!
Let Slaves be raised, and Cowards have Command!
Take, take your gaudy Trifles back, those Baits
Of Vice, and Virtue's Bane. -- It Is clear, my Queen,
My royal Mistress casts me off; nay, joins
With Cecil to destroy my Life, and Fame.

QUEEN. Presuming Wretch! Audacious Traitor!

ESSEX. Traitor!

QUEEN. Hence from my Sighr, ungrateful Slave, and learn
At distance to revere your Queen.

ESSEX. Yes; let
Me fly beyond the Limits of the World,
And Nature's Verge, from proud Oppression far,
From Malice, Tyranny, from Courts, from you.

QUEEN. Traitor, Villain!
Strikes him.
ESSEX. Confusion! what, a Blow!
RestraingoodHeaven! down, down, thou Rebel Passion,
And Judgment take the Reins. Madam, it is well --
Your Soldier falls degraded.
His Glory's tarnish'd, and his Fame undone.
O bounteous Recompense from royal Hands!
But you, ye Implements, beware, beware,
What Honor wronged and honest Wrath can act.

QUEEN. What would the imperious Traitor do! My Life
Beyond thy wretched Purpose stands secure.
Go, learn at leisure what your Deeds deserve,
And tremble at the Vengeance you provoke.
Exeunt Queen, Burleigh, Raleigh, etc. manent Southampton and Essex.
ESSEX. Disgraced and struck! Damnation! Death were glorious
Revenge! Revenge!

SOUTHAMPTON. Alas, my Friend, what would
Thy Rage attempt? Consider well the great
Advantage now your rash, ungoverned Temper
Affords your Foes. The Queen incensed will let
Their Fury loose. -- I dread the dire Event.

ESSEX. Has honest Pride no just Resentment left!
Nor injured Honor feeling! Not Revenge!
High Heaven shall hear, and Earth regret my Wrongs.
Hot Indignation burns within my Soul!
I Will do some dreadful Thing, -- (I know not what!
Some Deed as horrid, as the Shame I feel)
Shall startle Nature, and alarm the World;
Then hence, like Lightning, let me furious fly
To hurl Destruction at my Foes on high;
Pull down Oppression from its Tyrant Seat,
Redeem my Glory, or embrace my Fate.
Exeunt.
ACT IV.
Enter QUEEN, NOTTINGHAM. QUEEN. NOT taken yet!

NOTTINGHAM. No, Madam, for the Earl
Of Essex leagued with desperate Friends, made strong
And obstinate Resistance; till at length
O'erpower'd by Numbers and increasing Force,
He sled for Shelter to a small Retreat,
A Summer House upon the Thames; resolved
To perish rather than submit to Power.

QUEEN. O Wretch detested! O unheard of Treason!
Conspire against my Life, within my View!
My Reach! so near my very Palace Gates!
Persidious Monster! -- What can Prudence do,
Or human Wisdom more than judge from Outside,
And flattering Likeness? Kings can see no farther.
High Heaven, alone, can read the Heart, in all
Its utmost Frauds, and mystic Characters.
O where shall Majesty bestow its Favors,
Since Essex has a Traitor proved to me,
Whose Arm has raised him up to Power and Greatness,
Whose Heart has shared in all his splendid Triumphs,
And feels even now his traitorous Deeds with Pity?
But hence with Pity and the Woman's Pangs;
Resentment governs, and the Queen shall punish.

Enter BURLEIGH. BURLEIGH. Illustrious Queen, the Traitors all are seized.
The Intelligence was true. Their black Debates
Were held at Drury-house. The dire Result
Was this; that Essex should alarm the Citizens
To open Mutiny, and bold Rebellion;
On this pernicious Errand went the Earl,
Joined by his desperate and seditious Friends.
Their Purpose was to seize your Royal Palace,
And sacred Person; but your faithful People,
As by one Mind informed, one Zeal inspired,
Rose up at once, and with their Virtue quelled them

QUEEN. Thanks to their honest, to their loyal Hearts.
But say, were any Persons else concerned
Of high Distinction, or of noted Rank?

BURLEIGH. Yes, Madam, many more, seduced of late;
Among whom the bold outhampton foremost stands,
Precipitate and rash; whose Power, though great,
Lags far behind his Will to do you hurt.
They Are now our Prisoners and are sat secured;
But Essex with Southampton, and the rest
Of greater Note, I would not dare dispose of,
Without your Royal Mandate; and they now
Attend without, to know your final Pleasure.

QUEEN. Is this the just Return of all my Care?
My anxious toilsome Days, and watchful Nights?
Have I sent forth a Wish, that went not freighted
With all my People's Good? Or, have I Life
Or Length of Days defir'd, but for their Sake?
The Public Good is all my Private Care.
Have I not ever thought the meanest Subject,
Oppressed by Power, was, in his just Complaint,
Above a King? What British Bosom has
By foreign Tyranny been grieved, whose Wrongs
I have not felt as mine, as mine redressed?
Or have I justly made a single Man
My Foe? Then could I think this grateful Isle
Contained one Traitor's Heart? But, least of all
That Essex' Breast should lodge it? Call the Monster,
And let me meet this Rebel, Face to Face.
Do you withdraw and wait within our Call.
Exit Burl. etc.
Enter ESSEX. You see we dare abide your dangerous Presence,
Though Treason sits within your Heart enthroned,
And on that Brow Rebellion lowrs, where once
Such boasted Loyalty was said to flourish.
How low the Traitor can degrade the Soldier!
Guilt glares in conscious Dies upon thy Cheek,
And inward Horror trembles in thine Eye.
How mean is Fraud! how base Ingratitude!

ESSEX. Forbear Reproach, thou injured Majesty,
Nor wound, with piercing Words, a Heart already
With Anguish torn, and bleeding with Remorse.
Your awful Looks, alone, are armed with Death,
And Justice gives them Terror.

QUEEN. Hapless Man!
What Cause could prompt, what Fiend could urgetheeon
To this detested Deed? Could I from thee
Expect to meet this base Return? From thee,
To whom I ought to fly, with all the Considence
That giving Bounty ever could inspire,
Or seeming Gratitude and Worth could promise?

ESSEX. Alas, I own my Crimes, and feel my Treasons;
They press me down beneath the Reach of Pity.
Despair alone can shield me from myself.
Oh let the little Space I live be cursed
With countless Woes; let Death unpitied, come;
My Name be mentioned with the utmost Scorn!
If all my Life can feel, or Fame can suffer,
May serve to mitigate my Queen's Displeasure.

QUEEN. My Pride forbids me to reproach thee more:
My Pity rather would relieve thy Sorrow.
I see Conviction, and severe Remorse,
Within thy Mind, at work. But much I fear
That Death alone can calm the raging Conflict.
The People's Clamours, and my special Safety,
Call loud for Justice, and demand your Life.
But if Forgiveness from an injured Queen
Can make the few short Hours you live more easy,
I give it freely from my pitying Heart;
And wish my willing Power could grant thee more.

ESSEX. O Sounds angelic! Goodness undeserved!
My swelling Heart can keep no Bounds, my Soul
Flows over. -- And will my gracious Queen forgive me?
Oh let me prostrate thus before you fall,
My better Angel, and my Guardian Genius!
Permit me, royal Mistress, to pronounce
My faithful Sentiments, my Soul's true Dictates;
Vouchsafe your Essex but this one Request,
This only Boon, he will thank you with his last,
His dying Breath, and bless you in his Passage.

QUEEN. Rise, my Lord.
If aught you have to offer can allay
Your Woes, and reconcile you to your Fate,
Proceed; -- and I with patient Ear will listen.

ESSEX. My real Errors, and my seeming Crimes,
Would weary Mercy, and make Goodness poor:
And yet the Source of all my greatest Faults
Was Loyalty misled, and Duty in Extreme.
So jealous was my sanguine Heart, so warm
Affection's Zeal, I could not bear the least
Suspicion of my Duty to my Queen.
This drove me from my high Command in Ireland,
This too impelled me to that rude Behavior
Which justly urged the shameful Blow I felt.
And this (O fatal Rashness!) made me think
My Queen had given her Essex up, a Victim
To Statesmen's Schemes, and wicked Policy.
Stung by that piercing Thought, my Madness flew
Beyond all Bounds, and now alas has brought me
To this most shameful Fall; and, what is still worse,
My own Reproaches, and my Queen's Displeasure.

QUEEN. Unhappy Man! My yielding Soul is touched,
And Pity pleads thy Cause within my Breast.

ESSEX. Say but, my gracious Sovereign, ere I go
For ever from your Presence, that you think me
Guiltless of all Attempts against your Throne,
And sacred Life. Your faithful Essex never
Could harbor in his Breast so soul a Thought.
Believe it not, my Queen. By Heaven I swear,
When in my highest Pitch of Glory raised,
The splendid Noon of Fortune's brightest Sunshine,
Not Ages of Renown, could yield me half
The Joy, nor make my Life so greatly blessed,
As saving yours, though for a single Hour.

QUEEN. My Lord, I think you honest. Nay, I own,
Whatever Coldness I put on, was meant
To save you from the Malice of your Foes.
I judged your Crimes, what you yourself pronounced 'em,
The rash Effect of an intemp'rate Zeal.

ESSEX. Was ever Wretch like Essex, thus undone
By Goodness in Excess, and lavished Grace!
Oh I could tear my erring Heart with these
Revenging Hands! -- What Blessings have I lost!
What Clemency abused! -- Now could I wish
For lengthened Life -- indeed, for endless Years.
A whole Eternity's too short, to show
My pious Sorrows, and atone my Folly.

QUEEN. Too well the Passage to my Heart he finds;
And Pity's Hand lets in the dangerous Guest.
How weak is Reason, when opposed to Nature!
Aside. My Lord, I would convince you that I still
Regard your Life, and labor to preserve it;
But cannot screen you from a public Trial.
With Prudence make your best Defense; but should
Severity her Iron Jurisdiction
Extend too far, and give thee up condemned
To angry Laws, thy Queen will not forget thee.
Yet, left you then should want a faithful Friend,
(For Friends will fly you in the Time of Need)
Here, from my Finger take this Ring; a Pledge
Of Mercy, having this, you never shall need
An Advocate with me; for whenever
You give, or send it back, by Heaven I swear,
As I do hope for Mercy on my Soul,
That I will grant whatever Boon you ask.

ESSEX. O Grace surprising! most amazing Goodness!
Words cannot paint the Transport of my Soul.
Let me receive it on my grateful Knees,
At once to thank and bless the Hand that gives it.

QUEEN. Depend, my Lord, on this; 'twixt you and me
This Ring shall be a private Mark of Faith
Gives the Ring. Inviolate. Be consident, cheer up,
Dispel each melancholy Fear, and trust
Your Sovereign's Promise; she will never forsake you.

ESSEX. Let Providence dispose my Lot as 'twill,
May watchful Angels ever guard my Queen;
May healing Wisdom in her Counsels reign,
And firm Fidelity surround her Throne;
May Victory her dreaded Banners bear,
And joyful Conquests crown her Soldiers Brow;
Let every Bliss be mingled in her Cup,
And Heaven at last become her great Reward.
Exit.
QUEEN. Who waits there?

Enter BURLEIGH and OFFICERS. Guard your Prisoner safe. It Is done;
And yet foreboding Tremors shake my Heart.
Something sits heavy here, and presses down
My Spirits with it is Weight. What can it mean?
Suppose he is condemned, my royal Word
Is plighted for his Life; his Enemies
No doubt will censure much. -- No Matter, -- let 'ern.
I know him honest, and despise their Malice.
Unhappy State, where Mercy and Compassion
Too often meet with Clamor and Reproach;
But Princes must endure, for public Good,
The narrow Censures of misguiding Crowds.

Enter Countess of RUTLAND. RUTLAND. Where is the Queen? I Will fall before her
Feet
Prostrate, implore, besiege her royal Heart,
And force her to forgive.

QUEEN. What means this Frenzy?

RUTLAND. O gracious Queen, if ever Pity touched
Your generous Breast, let not the cruel Ax
Destroy his precious Life; preserve my Essex,
Preserve, from shameful Death, the noble, loyal,
O save the brave, -- the best of Subjects. -- Save
My Life! my Hope! my Joy! my All! my Husband!

QUEEN. Husband! What sudden deadly Blow is this!
Hold up, my Soul, nor sink beneath this Wound.
You beg a Traitor's Life!

RUTLAND. O gracious Queen!
He ever loved, -- was ever faithful, brave. --
If Nature dwells about your Heart, O spurn
Me not; my Lord! my Love! my Husband bleeds!

QUEEN. Take her away.

RUTLAND. I cannot let you go.
Hold off your Hands. -- Here on this Spot I Will fix,
Here lose all Sense; still let me stretch these Arms,
Inexorable Queen, he yet may live.
O give him to my poor afflicted Heart!
One pitying Look, to save me from Distraction.

QUEEN. I Will hear no more. I Am tortured -- take her hence.

RUTLAND. Nay, force me not away. -- Inhuman Wretches!
O Mercy! Mercy! -- Then to thee, good Heaven,
(My Queen, my cruel Queen, denies to hear me)
To thee I call, to thee for Mercy bend.
Melt down her Bosom's frozen Sense to feel
Some Portion of my deadly Grief, my fell
Distraction. Turn, O turn, and see a Wife,
A tortured Wife. --

QUEEN. Why am I not obeyed?

RUTLAND. Nay, do not thus
Abandon me to sell Despair. Just Heaven,
That sees my Sorrows, will avenge the Wrong,
This cruel Wrong, this barbarous Tyranny.
Forced off.
QUEEN. Wedded to Rutland! Most unhappy Pair!
And Oh ill-sated Queen! Never till now
Did Sorrow settle in thy Heart it is Throne.
Now black Despair it is cloudy Curtain draws
Around thy setting Peace, where, Joy, alas
No more shall dawn, nor smiling Hope return.
Recall my Pledge of Safety from his Hands,
And give him up to Death! -- But Life or Death
To me is equal now. Distraction dwells
Within my tortured Soul, and Furies rend it.
Unhappy State, where Peace shall never come!
One fatal Moment has confirmed my Doom,
Turned all my Comfort to intestine Strife,
And sill'd with mortal Pangs, my future Life.
Exit.
ACT V.
Enter RALEIGH, and Lieutenant of the Tower. RALEIGH. THeir Peers, with much
Indulgence, heard their Plea,
And gave them ample Scope for their Defense;
But naught availed, their Crimes were too notorious.
They bore their Sentence with becoming Spirit;
And here is the Royal Mandate for their Deaths. --
The Lady Nottingham! -- What brings her hither!

Enter NOTTINGHAM. NOTTINGHAM. Lieutenant, lead me to the Earl of Essex.
I bring a Message to him from the Queen.

LIEUTENANT. He Is with his Friend the brave Southampton, Madam,
Preparing now for their expected Fate.
But I Will acquaint his Lordship with your Pleasure.
Ex.
RALEIGH. What means this Message? Does the Queen relent?

NOTTINGHAM. I fear she does: for such a War of Passions,
Such varying Tumults never strove within
Her Breast till now. Sometimes she rails at Essex,
And calls him Villain, Traitor, dooms him dead;
Yet in a Moment turns again to Pity.
At length she sent me to the ungratesul Earl,
To learn if he could offer aught that might
Induce her Royal Mercy to Forgiveness.
Go you to Court, for Cecil there expects you.
I Have promised to acquaint him with what passes
'Twixt me and Essex ere I see the Queen.

RALEIGH. Madam, I go.
Exit.
NOTTINGHAM. Now Vengeance steel my Heart!
Offended Woman, whilst her Pride remains,
To Malice only, and Revenge will bow;
And every Virtue at that Altar sacrifice.
But see, he comes, with manly Sorrow clad.
There was a Time, that Presence could subdue
My Pride, and melt my Heart to gentle Pity.
I then could find no Joy but in his Smiles;
And thought him lovely as the Summer's Bloom;
But all his Beauties now are hateful grown.

Enter ESSEX. ESSEX. Whether you bring me Death or Life I know not.
But, if strict Friendship and Remembrance past
May aught presage to my afflicted Heart,
Sure Mercy only from those Lips should flow,
And Grace be uttered by that friendly Tongue.

NOTTINGHAM. My Lord, I Am glad you think me still your Friend.
I come not to upbraid but serve you now;
And pleased I am, to be the Messenger
Of such glad Tidings in the Day of Trouble,
As now I bring you. When the Queen had heard
That by the Lords you were condemned to die,
She sent me, in her Mercy, here to know,
If you had aught to offer that might move
Her Royal Clemency to spare your Life.

ESSEX. Could any Circumstance new Luster add
To my dread Sovereign's Goodness, it is the making
The kind, the generous Nottingham it is Messenger.
O Madam, could my glowing Heart express
Its grateful Sentiments, 'twou'd speak such Language
As Angels utter, when they praise their Maker.

NOTTINGAAM. It Is well, my Lord; but there is no Time to spare,
The Queen impatient waits for my Return.

ESSEX. My Heart was wishing for some faithful Friend,
And bounteous Heaven has sent thee to my Hopes.
Know then, kind Nottingham (for now I Will trust
Thee with the dearest Secret of my Life
It Is not long since the Queen (who well soresaw
To what the Malice of my Foes would drive me)
Gave me this Ring, this sacred Pledge of Mercy;
And with it, made a solemn Vow to Heaven,
That, whenever I should give or send
It back again, she would freely grant whatever
Request I then should make.

NOTTINGHAM. Give, give it me,
My Lord, and let me fly on Friendship's Wings,
To bear it to the Queen, and to it add
My Prayers and Influence to preserve thy Life.

ESSEX. O take it then, -- it is the Pledge of Life,
The precious Spring that drives my Vital Stream
Around, and keeps my Heart still warm: it is
The Door of Breath, the Hope of Joy, the Shield
Of Friendship. -- O it is my dear Southampton's
Last, last remaining Stay, his Thread of Being!
Which more than Worlds I prize. -- O take it then,
Take it, thou Guardian Angel of my Life,
And offer up the Incense of thy Prayer!
O beg, entreat, implore her Majesty,
From public Shame, and ignominious Death,
And from the obdurate Ax, to save my Friend.

NOTTINGHAM. My Lord, with all the Powers that Nature gave,
And Friendship can inspire, I Will urge the Queen
To grant you your Request.

ESSEX. Kind Nottingham,
Your pious Offices shall ever be
My servent Theme; and if my doubtful Span
Relenting Heaven should stretch to Years remote,
Each passing Hour shall still remind my Thoughts,
And tell me that I owe my All to thee.
My Friend shall thank you too for lengthened Life.
And now I Will fly with Comfort to his Arms,
To let him know the Mercy that you bring.
Exit.
NOTTINGHAM. Yes, you shall feel my Friendship's Weight fall heavy
Upon your guilty Soul, ungrateful Man!
Your salse, disdainful Heart shall pay the Fine
Of Love neglected, and of Beauty scorned.

SCENE the Court.

Enter QUEEN, BURLEIGH. QUEEN. Ha! is not Nottingham returned?

BURLEIGH. No Madam.

QUEEN. Dispatch a speedy Messenger to haste her.
My agitated Heart can find no rest,
So near the Brink of Fate. -- Unhappy Man!
Enter NOTTINGHAM. How now, my Nottingham, what News from Essex?
What says the Earl?

NOTTINGHAM. I wish, with all my Soul,
The ungrateful Task had been another's Lot,
I dread to tell it. -- Lost, ill sated Man!

QUEEN. What means this Mystery, this strange Behavior?
Pronounce -- declare at once; what said the Earl?

NOTTINGHAM. Alas, my Queen, I fear to say; his Mind
Is in the strangest Mood, that ever Pride
On blackest Thoughts begot. He scarce would speak.
And when he did, it was with Sullenness,
With hasty Tone, and down-cast Look.

QUEEN. Amazing!
Not feel the Terrors of approaching Death!
Nor yet the joyful Dawn of promised Life!

NOTTINGHAM. He rather seemed insensible to both,
And with a cold Indifference heard your Offer;
Till warming up, by slow Degrees, Resentment
Began to swell his restless, haughty Mind,
And proud Disdain provoked him to exclaim
Aloud, against the partial Power of Fortune,
And Faction's Rage. -- I begged him to consider
His sad Condition, nor repulse with Scorn,
The only Hand that could preserve him.

QUEEN. Ha!
What! said he nothing of a private import?
No Circumstance -- no Pledge -- no Ring!

NOTTINGHAM. None, Madam,
But with contemptuous Front disclaimed at once
Your prosser'd Grace; and scorned, he said, a Life
Upon such Terms bestowed.

QUEEN. Impossible!
Could Essex treat me thus? You basely wrong him,
And wrest his Meaning from the purposed Point.
Recall betimes the horrid Words you have uttered!
Confess, and own the whole you have said was salse.

NOTTINGHAM. Madam, by Truth, and Duty both compelled,
Against the Pleadings of my pitying Soul,
I must declare (Heaven knows with what Reluctance)
That never Pride insulted Mercy more.
He ran over all the Dangers he had past:
His mighty Deeds; his Service to the State;
Accused your Majesty of partial leaning
To favorite Lords, to whom he falls a Sacrifice;
Appeals to Justice, and to future Times,
How much he feels from proud Oppression's Arm.
Nay, something too he darkly hinted at,
Of jealous Disappointment, and Revenge.

QUEEN. Eternal Silence seal thy venomed Lips!
What have thou uttered, Wretch, to rouse at once
A Whirlwind in my Soul, which roots up Pity,
And destroys my Peace?
Ha! he desies me then! Audacious Traitor!
Let him this Instant to the Block be led.
Exit Not. Upbraid me with my fatal Fondness for him!
Ungrateful, barbarous Russian! Oh Elizabeth,
Remember now thy long established Fame,
Thy envied Glory, and thy Father's Spirit!
Accuse me of Injustice too, and Cruelty!
Yes, I Will this Instant to the Tower, forget
My regal State, and to his Face confront him:
Confound the audacious Villain with my Presence,
And add new Terrors to the uplifted Ax.
Exit.
SCENE the Tower.

ESSEX and SOUTHAMPTON discovered. ESSEX. O name it not, my Friend shall live,
he shall;
I know her royal Mercy, and her Goodness
Will give you back to Life, to length of Days,
And me, to Honor, Loyalty, and Truth.
Death is still distant far.

SOUTHAMPTON, In Life's first Spring,
Our green Affections grew apace, and prosper'd;
The genial Summer swelled our joyful Hearts,
To meet and mix each growing fruitful Wish.
We Are now embarked upon that stormy Flood
Where all the Wise and Brave are gone before us,
Ere since the Birth of Time, to meet Eternity.
And what is Death, did we consider right?
Shall we, who sought him in the Paths of Terror,
And faced him in the dreadful Walks of War;
Shall we, astonished, shrink, like frighted insants,
And start at Scaffolds, and their gloomy Trappings?

ESSEX. Yet still I trust long Years remain of friendship. --
Let smiling Hope drive Doubt and Fear away,
And Death be banished far; where creeping Age,
Disease and Care, invite him to their Dwelling.
I feel Assurance rise within my Breast,
That all will yet be well.

SOUTHAMPTON. Count not on Hope --
We never can take Leave, my Friend, of Life,
On nobler Terms. Life! what is Life! A Shadow!
Its Date is but the immediate Breath we draw;
Nor have we Surety for a second Gale.
Ten thousand Accidents in Ambush lie
For the embodied Dream.
A frail and fickle Tenement it is;
Which like the brittle Glass, that measures Time,
Is often broke, ere half its Sands are run.

ESSEX. Such cold Philosophy the Heart disdains;
And Friendship shudders at the moral Tale.
My Friend, the fearful Precipice is past,
And Danger dare not meet us more. Fly swist,
Ye better Angels, wast the welcome Tidings
Of Pardon, to my Friend; of Life and Joy.

Enter LIEUTENANT. LIEUTENANT. I grieve to be the Messenger of Woe.
But must, my Lords, entreat you to prepare
For instant Death. Here is the royal Mandate
That orders your immediate Execution.

ESSEX. Immediate Execution! -- What, so sudden!
No Message from the Queen? or Nottingham?

LIEUTENANT. None, Sir.

ESSEX. Deluded Hopes! O worse than Death!
Persidious Queen, to make a Mock of Life!
My Friend, my Friend destroyed! O piercing Thought!
O dismal Chance! -- In my Destruction ruined!
In my sad Fall undone! Why could not mine,
My Life atone for both; my Blood appease?
Can you, my Friend, forgive me?

SOUTHAMPTON. Yes, O yes,
My Bosom's better Half, I can. With thee
I Will gladly seek the Coast unknown, and leave
The lessening Mark of irksome Life behind.
With thee, my Friend, it is Joy to die! it is Glory!
For who would wait the tardy Stroke of Time,
Or cling like Reptiles to the Verge of Being,
When we can bravely leap from Life at once,
And spring triumphant in a Friend's Embrace?

Enter RALEIGH. RALEIGH. To you, my Lord Southampton, from the Queen
A Pardon comes: Your Life her Mercy spares.

ESSEX. For ever blessed be that indulgent Power
Which saves my Friend. This Weight taken off, my Soul
Shall upward spring, and mingle with the Blessed.

SOUTHAMPTON. All-ruling Heavens, can this, can this be just?
Support me, hold, ye straining Heart Strings hold,
And keep my sinking Frame from Dissolution.
O it is too much for mortal Strength to bear,
Or Thought to suffer! No, I Will die with thee.
They shall not part us, Essex.

ESSEX. Live, O live,
Thou noblest, bravest, best of Men and Friends!
Whilst Life is worth thy Wish, till Time and thou
Agree to part, and Nature send thee to me;
Thou generous Soul, farewell; -- live and be happy;
And, Oh, may Life make largely up to thee
Whatever Blessing Fate has thus cut off
From thy departing Friend.

LIEUTENANT. My Lord, my Warrant
Strictly forbids to grant a Moment's Time.

SOUTHAMPTON. Oh must we part for ever! -- Cruel Fortune!
Will thou then tear him hence? -- Severe Divorce!
Let me cling round thy sacred Person still,
Still clasp thee to my Bosom close, and keep
Stern Fate at Distance.

ESSEX. O my Friend, we'll meet
Again where Virtue finds a just Reward,
Where factious Malice never more can reach us.
Recall thy Reasoh, be thyself once more. --
I fear it not. -- This hideous Monster, Death,
When seen at Distance, shocks weak Nature's Eye;
But Reason, as it draws more near, defies it. --
I thank thy Sorrows, but could spare 'em now.
I need not bid thee guard my Fame from Wrongs:
And, Oh! a dearer Treasure to thy Care
I trust, than either Life or Fame -- my Wife.
Her bitter Sorrows pierce my Soul; for her
My Heart drops Blood! -- Oh, she will want a Friend.
Then take her to thy Care; do thou pour Balm
On her deep-wounded Spirit, and let her find
My tender Helps in thee. -- I must be gone,
My ever faithful, and my gallant Friend. --
I prithee leave this Woman's Work. -- Farewell. --
Take this last, dear Embrace. -- Farewell for ever!

SOUTHAMPTON. My bursting Breast! -- I fain would speak, but Words
Are poor. -- Farewell! --
But we shall meet again, embrace in one
Eternal Band, which never shall be loosed.
Exit.
ESSEX. To Death's concluding Stroke, lead on, Lieutenant.
My Wife! -- Now Reason, Fortitude, support me;
For now, indeed, comes on my forest Trial.

Enter Countess of RUTLAND. Oh thou last, dear Reserve of Fortune's Malice;
For Fate can add no more! -- Oh come thou then
In this dread Hour, when all my straining Thoughts
Are struggling in the tenderest Ties of Nature;
Oh come thou now to arrest my parting Soul,
And force it back to Life!

RUTLAND. Thou sole Delight,
Thou only Joy which Life could ever give,
Or Death deprive me of, my wedded Lord!
I come, with thee determined to endure
The utmost Rigor of our angry Stars,
To join thee, fearless, in the Grasp of Death,
And seek some Dwelling in a World beyond it.

ESSEX. Too much, thou Partner of this dismal Hour,
Thy generous Soul would prompt thee to endure;
Nor can thy tender, trembling Heart sustain it.
Long Years of Bliss remain in Store for thee,
And smiling Time his Treasures shall unfold
To bribe thy Stay.

RUTLAND. Thou cruel Comforter!
Alas! what is Life! what is hated Life to me?
Can aught beneath this starry Hemisphere,
Which Earth's Extent, and Nature's Wealth can yield,
Which proud Ambition stretches to enjoy,
Or Passion pants or, recompense thy Loss?
Alas, this Universe, this goodly Frame,
Shall all as one continued Curse appear,
And every Object blast when thou art gone.

ESSEX. O strain not thus the little Strength I Have left,
The weak Support that holds up Life, to bear
A few short Moments more, its Weight of Woe,
Its Loss of thee. O turn away those Eyes,
Nor with that Look melt down my fixed Resolve;
And yet a little longer let me gaze
On that loved Form. Alas, I feel my Sight
Grows dim, and Reason from her Throne retire;
For Pity's Sake let go my breaking Heart,
And leave me to my Fate.

RUTLAND. Why will thou still
Of parting talk; since Life its thousand Gates
Unbars to let us through together. Death
Is but a Step that reaches to Eternity.
O that the friendly Hand of Heaven would snatch
Us both, at once, above the distant Stars!
Where Fortune's venomed Shafts can never pierce,
Nor cruel Queens destroy! -- Nay look not so.

ESSEX. The awful Searcher, whose impartial Eye
Explores the Secrets of each human Heart,
And every Thought surveys, can witness for me,
How close thy Image clings around my Soul;
Retards each rising Wish, and draws me back
To Life, entangled by thy loved Idea.
When fell Necessity those Ties shall break,
For quickly break they must -- when I from Earth
On Faith's white Angel Wings to Heaven shall soar,
Thy lasting Form shall still my Mind possess,
Where Bliss supreme each Faculty o'erwhelms,
And raptured Angels glow. --

LIEUTENANT. My Lord, the Time
Too far is stretched, it now grows late.

ESSEX. Lead on.

RUTLAND. Stay, stay, my Love, my dearest, dying Lord!
Ah whither would thou go? Ah, do not leave me!
Alas, I Will hasten to attend your Flight;
And Nature gives Consent we should not part.
I feel each Faculty for Fate prepare,
And my quick Soul would fain set out before you.
O precious Pangs! -- O dear Distress! -- still closer
To thy quick throbbing Heart let mine complain,
And on thy laboring Bosom breathe my last.
Faints.
ESSEX. Thou sinking Excellence! thou matchless Woman!
Shall Fortune rob me of thy dear Embrace,
Or Earth's whole Power, or Death divide us now!
Stay, stay, thou spotless, injured Saint, and take --

LIEUTENANT. My Lord, already you have been indulged
Beyond what I can warrant by my Orders.

ESSEX. Oh let me on her dying Bosom fall,
Embrace her spotless Form. -- One Moment more
Afford me to my Sorrows. -- Oh! look there! --
Could bitter Anguish pierce your Heart, like mine,
You Would pity now the mortal Pangs I feel,
The Throbs that tear my vital Strings away,
And rend my agonizing Soul. --

LIEUTENANT. My Lord.

ESSEX. But one short Moment more, and I attend.
Ye sacred Ministers, that Virtue guard,
And shield the Righteous in the Paths of Peril,
Restore her back to Life, and lengthened Years
Of Joy; dry up her bleeding Sorrows all:
O cancel from her Thoughts this dismal Hour,
And blot my Image from her sad Reembrance.
It Is done. --
And now, ye trembling Cords of Life give way:
Nature and Time let go your Hold; Eternity
Demands me.
Exeunt Essex, Lieutenant.
WOMAN. She returns to Life, see! help!

RUTLAND. Where has my lost benighted Soul been wandering?
What means this Mist that hangs about my Mind?
Through which Reflection's painful Eye discerns
Imperfect Forms, and horrid Shapes of Woe.
The Cloud dispels, the Shades withdraw, and all
My dreadful Fate appears. -- O where is my Lord?
My Life! my Essex! O whither have they taken him?

Enter QUEEN and Attendants. QUEEN. To Execution! fly with Lightning's Wings,
And save him. Hah! by whose Command was this?
Stop, stop the fatal Blow. -- My Fears were true.
Exit one of the Attendants.
RUTLAND. Thou saving Angel sent from Heaven! my Queen,
My gracious Queen, be quick! -- the bloody Burleigh!
A Moment may destroy him. Stretch thy Arm,
Defend, defend, O shatch him from the Blow!
Preserve my Husband! O Elizabeth,
Look down upon me. Angels move her Heart
To pity, save him, save him, gracious Queen.

QUEEN. Be calm, he shall not die. Rise up. I came
To save his Life.

RUTLAND. It Is Mercy's Voice that speaks.
My Essex shall again be mine. My Queen,
My bounteous, gracious Queen has said the Word.
May Troops of Angels guard thy sacred Life,
And, in thy latest Moments, wast thy Soul
To meet that Mercy, in the Realms of Joy,
Which now thy royal Goodness grants to me.

Enter BURLEIGH. BURLEIGH. Madam, your Orders came, alas! too late.
Ere they arrived the Ax had fallen on Essex.

RUTLAND. Ha! dead! What Hell is this that opens round me?
What Fiend art thou that draws the horrid Scene?
Hah Burleigh! bloody Murderer, where is my Husband!
O where is my Lord, my Essex?
Destruction seize and Madness rend my Brain.
See, see, they bend him to the fatal Block;
Now now the horrid Ax is lifted high,
It falls, it falls, he bleeds, he bleeds, he dies!

QUEEN. Alas, her Sorrows pierce my suffering Heart.

RUTLAND. Eternal Discord tear the social World,
And Nature's Laws dissolve! expunge, erase
The hated Marks of Time's engraving Hand,
And every Trace destroy! Arise, Despair,
Assert thy rightful Claim, possess me all!
Bear, bear me to my murdered Lord, to clasp
His bleeding Body in my dying Arms;
And in the Tomb embrace his dear Remains,
And mingle with his Dust for ever.
Exit.
QUEEN. Hapless Woman!
She shall henceforth be Partner of my Sorrows.
And we'll contend who most shall weep for Essex.
O quick to kill, and ready to destroy,
To Burleigh. Could no Pretext be found, no Cause appear,
To lengthen Mercy out a Moment more,
And stretch the Span of Grace? O cruel Burleigh!
This, this was thy dark Work, unpitying Man!

BURLEIGH. My gracious Mistress, blame not thus my Duty,
My firm Obedience to your high Command.
The Laws condemned him first to die; nor think
I stood between your Mercy and his Life.
It was the Lady Notingham, not I.
Herself confessed it all, in wild Despair,
That from your Majesty to Essex sent,
With Terms of proffered Grace, she then received
From his own Hand a fatal Ring, a Pledge,
It seems, of much Importance, which the Earl,
With earnest Suit, and warm Entreaty, begged her,
As she would prize his Life, to give your Majesty.
In this she failed -- in this she murdered Essex.

QUEEN. O barbarous Woman!
Surrounded still by Treachery and Fraud!
What bloody Deed is this? Thou injured Essex!
My Fame is soiled to all succeeding Times:
But Heaven alone can view my breaking Heart;
Then let it is Will be done. --

From hence let proud, resisting Mortals know
The Arm parental, and the indulgent Blow.
To Heaven's corrective Rod, submissive, bend,
Adore it is Wisdom, on it is Power depend;
Whilst ruling Justice guides eternal Sway,
Let Nature tremble, and let Man obey.

EPILOGUE.
By an Unknown Hand. Spoken by Mrs. CIBBER.
NEWS! News! good Folks, rare News, and you shall know it --
I Have got Intelligence about our Poet!
Who do you think be is? -- You Will never guess;
An IRISH BRICKLAYER, neither more or less.
And now the Secret's out, you cannot wonder,
That in commencing Bard he made a Blunder.
Has be not left the Better for the Worse,
In quitting Solid Brick for empty Verse?
Can he believe the Example of Old Ben,
Who changed (like him) the Trowel for the Pen,
Will in his Favor move your Critic Bowels?
You rather wish, most Poct's Pons were Trowels,
Our Man is honest, sensible, and plain,
Nor has the Poet made him pert, or vain:
No Beau, no Courtier, nor conceited Youth;
But then so rude, he always speaks the Truth:
I told him he must flatter, learn Address,
And gain the Heart of some rich Patroness:
It Is she, said I, your Labors will reward,
If you but join the Bricklay'r with the Bard;
As thus -- Should she be old and worse for Wear,
You must new- case her, front her and repair;
If cracked in Fame, as scarce to bear a Touch,
You cannot use your Trowel then too much;
In short, whatever her Morals, Age or Station,
Plaster and white-wash in your Dedication.
Thus I advised -- but he detests the Plan:
What can be done with such a simple Man?
A Poet's nothing worth and naught availing,
Unless he will furnish, where there is a Failing.
Authors in these good Times are made and used,
To grant those Favors Nature has refused.
If he will not fib, what Bounty can be crave?
We pay for what we want, not what we have. --
Nay though of every Blessing we have store,
Our Sex will always wish -- a little more. --
If he will not bend his Heart to this his Duty,
And sell (to who will buy) Wit, Honor, Beauty;
The Bricklay'r still for him the proper Trade is,
Too rough to deal with Gentlemen and Ladies. --
In short -- they will all avoid him and neglect him,
Unless that you his Patrons will protect him.

FINIS.

