Rebellion Extinguished: A Thanksgiving-Sermon, PREACHED AT BARTON
UNDER-NEEWOOD, in the COUNTY of Stafford, October the 9th, 1746.

On Account of the Deliverance of these KINGDOMS from the Calamities of an
INTESTINE WAR.

By THOMAS VAUGHAN, A. M. Vicar of ECCLES in Lancashire.

The King shall rejoice in thy Strength, O Lord; exceeding glad shall he be, of
thy Salvation, Psalm. xxi. 1. LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR; and are to be Sold
by WILLIAM SANDBY, at the Ship, opposite to St. Dunstan's Church, in
Fleetstreet. 1746.

[Price Sixpence.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EARL GOWER, Viscount TRENTHAM, AND LORD PRIVY SEAL,
etc. THE FOLLOWING DISCOURSE, Is most humbly dedicated, By His LORDSHIP'S Most
dutiful, Most obedient, And much obliged Humble Servant,

THOMAS VAUGHAN.

1 SAMUEL XII. 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth, with all your
Heart; for consider how great Things he has done for you.
IF all the Affairs of this lower World were either whirled about, by the
Giddiness of Chance, or entirely governed by the Sullenness of Fate, it would
strike a Damp upon all our Spirits; and this World, to all rational Beings that
can fear and estimate, all future Contingencies, would be, a most gloomy, and
melancholy Place.

And if all the wonderful, and surprising Revolutions, in this Life, depended
upon the Policy, and Wisdom of those that are the Agents, in bringing mighty
Things to pass, (since the greatest Weights, many times, are supported by the
most slender Wires, and Success in all extraordinary Undertakings, depends upon
the happy Concurrences of innumerable Acdidents, upon favorable Seasons, and a
thousand Circumstances, as various and uncertain as the Weather;) the nicest
Politicians would be lost, and disappointed; and they, in the Psalmist's
Phrase, would reel to and fro, and be at their Wits end.

But, how wise soever vain Men would be, this World is no more governed, than
it was created by Chance; and he that made it, is only able to govern it. We
are neither under the Power of Chance, nor determined by positive, and
inexorable Fate; we do not depend upon politic Institutions; but are now
assembled to give Glory unto the Great God, who rules the Armies of Heaven, and
the Inhabitants of the lower Regions; whose Power is infinite, and whose Mercy
is over all his Works; who is the Hope of all that dwell on the Earth, and of
them that remain in the broad Sea, Ps. lxv. 5. The Lord is King, the Earth may
be glad thereof; yea, the Multitude of the Isles may be glad thereof, Ps.
xcvii. 1. We will rejoice in thy Salvation, and triumph in the Name of the Lord
our God. We will offer unto him the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and tell out his
Works with Gladness, Ps. cvii. 22. And no Nation under Heaven had ever more
Reason to do so, than we have upon this present Solemnity.

And the signal Instances of God's Providence, are so illustriously visible,
that we cannot, but with the deepest Gratitude, adore him that sits above
the Water Floods, and remains a King for ever, Ps. xxix. 9. Oh! that Men
would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders that he does
for the Children of Men, Ps. cvii. 21.

In order to this, I would earnestly recommend, the Advice of Samuel, a wise,
an experienced, a faithful Governor, who scorned to be bribed, or to raise his
Fortunes upon the Ruins of the People; who abhorred all Artifices to enrich
himself, and solemnly appeals to all the People, as Witnesses of his Integrity:
Here I am, produce your Evidences, I offer myself to a public Trial, before
the Lord, and before his Anointed. Ver. 3. Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass
have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or at whose Hand
have I received any Bribe, to blind mine Eyes therewith? and I will restore it
you. And he received this public Testimony, Thou have not defrauded us,
neither have thou taken ought of any Man's Hand. And they ratify the Sentence,
the Lord is Witness.

This admirable Person, who had long governed them with such Courage and
Fidelity, that the worst of his Enemies could, in no Case, charge him with
Maladministration; yet all his Merits were ungratefully slighted, and the
People, (that never want Occasion to pick Quarrels with their Governor) whilst
they acquit the Judge, yet murmur at his Age; for that had disabled him to
travel his usual Circuits; and they charged his Sons for perverting Judgment,
and he must resign the Government to please the People. But these high
Provocations had no ill Effect upon him. Oh! the vast Difference betwixt those,
that have no Aims but the public Good, and those that have private Interests
of their own to serve! He cheerfully resigns it, but with unparalleled,
condescending Goodness; after he showed them that he was still the Favorite of
Heaven, how ungratefully soever they used him upon Earth. At his powerful
Prayers, God terrified them with Thunder, and softened them with Rain, and
prepared them for the most concerning Advice.

Notwithstanding the highest Ingratitude, and Barbarity to his Person and
Family, the brave aged Judge thus addresses himself to all the People: As for
me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you,
Ver. 23.

All the Injuries that they had done him, could not raise the least Thought of
Revenge; he would not offend Almighty God, by any thing that looked like
Resentment. Let them despise his Council, if they pleased; yet he, who was very
well acquainted with what would most contribute to a national Prosperity; after
he had excellently reasoned, before the Lord, of the righteous Acts, that he
did to them, and to their Fathers, leaves this Advice with them: Only fear the
Lord, and serve him in Truth, with all your Hearts; for consider how great
Things he has done for you.

Permit me, therefore, to reflect upon these several Parts which are expressed
in the Text.

First, The great Things God has done for us. Secondly, The Duty of
considering how great they are. Thirdly, The Obligation that lies upon us, to
fear and serve him, in Truth, with all our Hearts; that has wrought such
wonderful Works.
Should I look back to former Generations, and peruse the Histories of our
Church, and Nation; both the one, and the other, have subsisted by Miracles;
and the Indications of God Almighty's Goodness, have been writ, in the
brightest and the clearest Characters; writ, as it were, with a Sunbeam; with
equal Perspicuity and Certainty, that we have not been left to Guesses and
Conjectures. But we might, upon sure Grounds, take up the Expressions of the
Royal Prophet, Ps. xxxi. 23. Thou have, O God! showed us mavelous Kindness in
a strong City, in thy holy Church: And that Church may apply those Words to
itself, The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliverer; my Shield, the
Horn of my Salvation; my high Tower, and my Refuge; my Savior; every Thing
that can imply Security and Protection, Ps. xviii. 1.

For, first, if this be a Character of the Divine Aid, that God lets Things
come to the utmost Extremity, before he makes bare his Arm; and so the
Psalmist, in a very pathetical, but unusual Address, seems, instead of
petitioning, to dictate and prescribe: Thou shall arise, and have Mercy upon
Sion, for why? The Time is come, to favor her; yea, the set Time is come; and
why? Thy Servants think upon her Stones, and it pities them to see her in the
Dust, Ps. cii. 13, 14.

And if it be a very good Reason why God should then appear, that they may know
that this is thy Hand, and thou Lord have done it; I need not look abroad for
foreign Instances, since we have so many flagrant ones at Home.

We cannot forget how miserably we were distressed on every Side; without were
Fightings, and within were Fears; we all lay trembling under ambiguous
Expectations, impatiently waiting the Event of the Enemies Attack by Sea or
Land. And when vast Armies were ready to invade us, and our never enough to be
lamented Divisions gave Force, and Spirit, to their Enterprises; all their
sanguine Hopes were wonderfully disappointed, by Him, that has the secret
Springs of Nature in his Hands, and can turn and manage them as he pleases: The
Winds kept the formidable Navies in their Harbors; and they could not move,
without his Permission, whom the Winds and the Sea obey.

Secondly, It is another evident Character of God Almighty's appearing for a
Nation, when several Events, that are managed by different Persons, and in
different Places, do happily conspire, to complete a national Joy.

When the Illustrious young Hero, (Duke WILLIAM, Generalissimo of his Majesty's
Forces in North-Britain) had spent the Season of the Year so far, that he had
been fatigued with long Marches, and the People were faint and weary; that
then, he should have the Courage to attempt, and be successful, in so difficult
an Enterprise, as to storm strong Garrisons, and take fortified Towns; and
slay, and take Prisoners at the Battle of Straghallen-Moor, (near
Culloden-House) above three thousand Rebels, and six hundred Prisoners, and put
the rest to Flight, when the Rebels were superior in Number to us, was a
grateful Surprise, to all that heard it. Blessed be the Lord, who did not give
us as a Prey unto their Teeth. This is the Lord's Doings, and it is mavelous
in our Eyes, for which we will rejoice and give Thanks. And we cannot but break
out in the famous Epinikion of the celebrated Deborah, Judges v. 31. So let all
thy Enemies perish, O Lord! But let them that love him, be as the Sun, when he
goes forth in his Might.

What an amazing, though joyful Sight, must it be to the King's Army? to see the
robust Highland Rebels (those Gygantick Sons of Anach) fall before the British
Fire, like sturdy Oaks reft before a Sheet of irresistible Lightening. Thanks
be to God, who has given us the Victory over the Enemies of his true Religion,
established amongst us; Enemies, whose wicked Designs were, to set up
Superstition and Popery, Idolatry, and arbitrary Power, in its stead: For they
intended Mischief against thee, and imagined such a Device, as they were not
able to perform: Therefore did thou put them to Flight, and the Strings of
thy Bow have thou made ready against them: Be thou exalted, Lord, in thy own
Strength, so will we sing, and praise thy Power. Ps. xxi. 11, 12, 13. But, as
if Europe was not a Theater wide enough for the English Triumphs, they are
extended to the remotest Regions, Cape-Breton, in North America, has seen, and
felt, the the English Courage; and those Vessels of the French, which were
looked on as invincible, have been taken.

Thirdly, Another Character of God Almighty's appearing for a People, is, when
some of the Nimrods, some of the successful Troublers of the World, that come
up to the Prophet Isaiah's elegant Description, Chap. xiv. 13. Thou said, in
thy Heart, I will ascend into Heaven, and I will exalt my Throne above the
Stars of God; I will ascend above the Heights of the Clouds; I will be like the
Most High: That resolve to extend their Empires, and aim at Universal Monarchy,
by Fraud and Violence, by Blood and Rapine; that are swelled with Panegyricks,
and flattered by Devices; whilst they are compared to the vast Luminaries of
Heaven; and are told, that they can no more be interrupted, in their Victories
and Triumphs, than the Course of the Sun can be arrested. When such a Prince as
this, feels the Weight of that Omnipotence which he has defied; when his
powerful Navies are disabled, and his Treasures exhausted, and he restrained
from his bloody Persecutions, it is natural to apply, in the Prophet's Words,
How art thou fallen from Heaven, O! Lucifer, Sun of the Morning. Is this the
Man that made the Earth to tremble? that did shake Kingdoms? that made the
World as a Wilderness? and destroyed the Cities thereof? For if the Lord of
Hosts do purpose, who shall disannul it? and if his Hand be stretched out, who
shall turn it back? Isa. xiv. 12, 17.

So that if the Seasonableness of Events, when Things are almost at a Crisis;
if the Concurrence of various prosperous Events, in distant Places, and
Countries, and Nations; and the Preservation of Persons of that Figure, and
Eminency, that the Success does depend very much upon them, as the proper
Instruments to procure it: If the stemming the impetuous Torrent, and putting a
Check to the Overflowing of Ungodliness, Rebellion, and Oppression; and
reducing these extravagant, and exorbitant Plunderers and Rebels: If these be
Employments worthy of Providence, Not unto us, O Lord! not unto us, but to thy
great Name, be ascribed the Glory and Praise, Psalm. cxv. 1. We have Reason to
conclude, that God has done great Things for us: Which was the first Part I
proposed to speak to.

I now proceed to the second.

The Duty of considering how great they are.

How great are the Calamities we are freed from? How great is the Happiness
that we enjoy? Both the one and the other require our calm, and serious
Reflections; as we would escape the Prophet Isaiah's severe, but just Reproof,
Isa. v. 12. The Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and the Pipe, and Wine, are in
their Feasts; but they regard not the Work of the Lord, neither consider the
Operations of his Hands.

Is it nothing in our Eyes? that God has showed a more distinguishing Care of
us, than of any Nation in the whole World besides? that he has so frequently
interposed, and snatched us from between the very Teeth, and Jaws of the
Destroyer?

I need not lead you into ancient History; I must prescribe some Limits, for I
would not launch into a Sea of Matter.

Be pleased to consider, how lamentable our Case had been, if the united Powers
of France and Spain had as much disabled our naval Forces, as we have done
theirs, since the War first broke out: Had their Success been equal to ours,
how miserable, beyond Expression, had our Condition been? A powerful Navy are
the best Walls, that can encompass an Island. It is an illustrious, and a
terrible Defense. It is our Glory at Home; it is our Honor and Security
Abroad: It looks in our Channel like a lovely Valley of tall Cedars: It has a
sweet, and awful, and majestic Presence.

And if this (which God of his infinite Mercy forbid) should ever be destroyed,
how wretched, how contemptible, how weak, how poor, and inconsiderable a Nation
should we be? How would our neighboring Kingdoms clap their Hands, and hiss at
us? How should we become a Byword, and a Proverb of Reproach, to all that are
round about us?

Is it nothing to us, that our restless, our powerful, our implacable Enemies,
have not yet been able to extirpate the Northern Heresy, (as they style it)
that is, the Protestant Religion? Neither by open Violence, nor insidious and
treacherous Attempts? That with all their Art, they have not been able to root
up our Foundations, and introduce Superstition and Idolatry, and destroy the
Products of the blessed Reformation; which consists in rejecting, what for many
Years had been superadded, to the Christian Religion, and received its glorious
Finishing from an IMMORTAL QUEEN, whose Memory grows every Year more
illustrious; and whose Name (at so great a Distance) is poured out, like
precious Ointment, and sheds a refreshing Fragrancy upon all the People.

Is it nothing, that our civil Rights, are inviolably secured? That we enjoy
the Fruit of our Ancestors Labors, and the Effects of our own Industry? That
our admirable Constitution, and our excellent Laws, render us happy, to the
Envy of our Neighbors; as happy as good Men could desire to be, and as secure
from bad, as the Justice, and the Wisdom of the Laws can make us?

Is it nothing? that the Seasons of the Year, which were lately so strangely
altered, that the heavenly Bodies seemed angry, and displeased, and refused
their favorable Aspects? Ill News and bad Weather, made Men restless, and
uneasy; and the great Reviver of Mankind, the Sun, looked sullenly, and was
generally wrapped up in dismal Clouds. Is it nothing? that our Scarcity (fresh in
all your Memories) is turned into Plenty? That some Men begin to repine at it,
as their Burden; and complain as vehemently, for the Cheapness of the Fruits of
the Earth, as they did, not long since, for the Scarcity, and Dearness of them.
O! consider this, and lay it close to your Hearts; and improve it, in your most
devout and grateful Acknowledgments.

And let it always be remembered, for the Honor of this Day, When Characters
engraved in Brass shall disappear, as if they were written in Dust; when
Elogies committed to the Trust of Marbles, shall be illegible, as whispered
Accents; when Pyramids dissolved, shall want themselves a Monument to evidence,
they were once so much as Ruin. I say, let it be recorded, for the Honor of
this Day; let it be wrote with an Iron Pen, and Lead, in the Rock for ever, Job
xix. 24. that the Battle (near Culloden-House, April 16. 1746) was terrible and
decisive; that the Highland Rebels were conquered; that the French, who joined
them, were taken Prisoners; that those to whom Quarter was given, were
ungrateful; and that his ROYAL HIGHNESS, WILLIAM, Duke of Cumberland,
Generalissimo of the British Forces, at that Battle, behaved with the Conduct
and Bravery of an Hero Vid. Life of Scipio Africanus, by Photius, p. 763.
.

It is observable, that our Church, in her Benedicete, calls upon Darkness
itself to praise the Lord. The Recollection therefore, of our former Disasters,
is not inconsistent with a Thanksgiving. God grant it may fix and settle, the
strong and lasting Obligations, that lie upon us, devoutly to fear him, who has
wrought such wonderful Works for us. Which is the last Part of this present
Undertaking.

Although the omnipotent Power, and the infinite Justice of God, seem to be the
only Objects of our Fear, yet there is an Expression in Hosea iii. 5. They
shall fear the Lord, and his Goodness. Tremble at the undeserved, and
stupendous Emanations of it; and dread the Abuse of it in any kind: For the
Transports of Success, have sometimes more terrible Effects, than the
Desolations of War. And may that never be said of us, which the Prophet Jeremy
upbraids the Jews with, Chap. vii. Ver. 10. We are delivered to do all these
Abominations. Good God! delivered to steal? to murder? to commit Adultery? to
swear falsely? to burn Incense to Baal? and walk after other Gods? For these
are the flaming Guilts that the Prophet charges home upon them. Why, the Saws
and Harrows, the Engines of Slavery and Captivity, had been much more eligible,
than a Deliverance thus employed. God Almighty planted Fear in all our Natures,
with a gracious Design to make us wise. He has placed that Passion, as a
wakeful Sentinel, to discern, at a Distance, the Approaches of our Enemies; to
see when, and which Way they come; and give us Cautions to avoid them, or to
prepare for their Attacks. Only fear the Lord, therefore, (as the Text directs)
and serve him in Truth, with all your Hearts; for consider how great Things he
has done for you.

Let it never be said of us, that we blemish our Festival, by Intemperance and
Excess, by Lewdness and Profaneness. Let us observe it with all imaginable
Decency; as those that fear their God, and honor their Prince. Let not our
extravagant Behavior at our Feasting, kindle God's Wrath against us. These
joyful Days, should engage us in all charitable Offices. Let us open both our
Hands, and our Hearts, and send Portions to the Poor; that there may be no
Heart sad, when God has given us such a triumphant Occasion for our public
Joy. And the sincerest Expressions of it, are discovered, in serving him in
Truth, with all our Hearts.

To him, our most gracious, and merciful God, our Shield, and our Rock, and our
mighty Deliverer, who has set us free from the Northern Rebels, and, we hope
and trust, from French Tyranny, and Popish Superstition, a Yoke which neither
we, nor our Fathers, were able to bear; who has frustrated the Counsels, and
blasted the Designs of wicked and unreasonable Men; and made their mischievous
Councils, and Devices, to be of none Effect; who brings to light the hidden
Things of Darkness, and has hitherto preserved our Religion, and civil
Interests, in Despite of all the malicious and restless Designs of our
Adversaries.

Unto God, who has saved us, with so great Salvation, let us give Thanks, from
the Ground of the Heart: And that he may accept this Sacrifice of Praise, I
shall once more entreat you to comply with the Advice in the Text; for fear of
the Judgments threatened in the following Verse.

Only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth, with all your Hearts; for consider
how great Things he has done for you. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye
shall be destroyed, both ye and your King.

FINIS.
The following Sermons printed for, and sold by WILLIAM SANDBY, at the Ship
over against St. Dunstan 's Church in Fleet Street.
I. THE Gospel an actual Friend to the Liberties of Mankind: An Assize Sermon
preached at Lancaster, before the Honorable Sir Thomas Dennison, Knt. one of
the Justices of the King's Bench, and the Honorable Charles Clarke, Esquire one of
the Barons of the Exchequer, on Thursday the 31st of July, 1746. By William
Smith, A. M. Rector of the Parish of the Holy Trinity in Chester, and Chaplain
to the Right Honorable the Earl of Derby. II. The Wickedness of a Factious
Disposition: A Sermon preached at the Parish Church of St. George the Martyr,
Sept. 1, 1745. on Occasion of the Rumor of an Invasion in Scotland. By
Strickland Gough, M. A. Rector of Swafield, and Vicar of Swinstead in
Lincolnshire. III. The Causes of our National Dangers and Distresses assigned:
In a Sermon preached at the Cathedral Church of Worcester, December 18, 1745,
being the Day appointed for a General Fast. By Richard Meadowcourt, A. M. Canon
of Worcester. The Second Edition. IV. Christianity founded on Argument: A
Sermon preached before the University of Oxford, on Palm Sunday, 1743. By John
Cookesey, A. M. Rector of the united Parishes of St. Anthony and St. John
Baptist, London.

