AN ACCOUNT OF A MOST Efficacious Medicine FOR SORE EYES.

[Price SIXPENCE.]

AN ACCOUNT OF A MOST Efficacious Medicine FOR SORENESS, WEAKNESS, And SEVERAL
OTHER DISTEMPERS of the EYES.

BY Sir HANS SLOANE, Bart. Physician to his Majesty, etc.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for DAN. BROWN, at the Black-Swan, without Temple Bar.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
THIS Account of my most Effectual Medicine for the Cure of Sore and Weak Eyes,
is now made public for the Benefit of Mankind; and most humbly Dedicated to
your MAJESTY, by,

Your MAJESTY'S, Most Dutiful, and Most Obedient, Subject and Servant, HANS
SLOANE.

AN ACCOUNT OF A MOST Efficacious Medicine FOR SORE EYES.
THROUGH an earnest Desire to be useful in my Profession, the Practice of
Physic, to which I was led by a strong natural Inclination, I was always very
attentive to Matters of Fact, and the real Cures that fell under my
Observation. Of these I saw many performed upon sore Eyes by Doctor Luke
Rugeley: whereupon I applied to a very understanding Apothecary of his
particular Acquaintance and mine, and endeavored, though without Effect, to
procure some Knowledge of the Medicine he made use of. After the Doctor's Death
I still pursued my Enquiry, by searching into his printed Books, and Manuscript
Papers, and particularly into a very curious Materia Medica left by Him: but
all in vain; 'till at length a Person, whom I believe he had employed in making
his Medicine, came to me; and for a pecuniary Reward, joined to a Promise of
not divulging it to his Prejudice, delivered me up the genuine Receipt, in the
Docctor's own Handwriting; which, as I reformed, improved, and used it many
Years, is as follows.

THE RECEIPT.
TAKE of prepared Tutty, one Ounce; of Lapis Haematites prepared, two Scruples;
of the best Aloes prepared, twelve Grains; of prepared Pearl, four Grains. Put
them into a Porphyry, or Marble Mortar, and rub them with a Pestle of the same
Stone very carefully, with a sufficient Quantity of Viper's Grease, or Fat, to
make a Liniment; to be used daily, Morning or Evening, or both, according to
the Convenience of the Patient: as hereafter directed.

This Medicine I soon tried, and, though a Composition, found it so
surprizingly beneficial, that by the right Use of it not one in five Hundred
missed of a Cure: unless their Disorder proceeded from a Venereal Taint.

Several Years after I had been in Possession of this Secret, in turning over
some Manuscripts of Sir Theodore Mayerne, I found he had known the same
Ointment, or Liniment, and had entered it in his Pharmacopoea, under his own
Name: though I afterward discovered, that it was not originally his, but had
been communicated to him by Sir Matthew Lister, a Member of the College of
Physicians; who had performed a Cure with it on a Lady Savile, which Sir
Theodore thought a very extraordinary one. And it is very probable, that he
afterward communicated it to Dr. Thomas Rugeley, Father of Dr. Luke Rugeley:
as I find they were Cotemporaries, and Friends.

The Method, which has best succeeded with me in facilitating the efficacious
Use of this Liniment, is to bleed, and blister in the Neck and behind the Ears,
in order to draw off the Humors from the Eyes; and afterward, according to the
Degree of the Inflammation, or Acrimony of the Juices, to make a Drain by
Issues between the Shoulders, or a perpetual Blister. And for washing the Eyes,
I generally recommend Spring Water: which I think preferable to any spirituous
Lotion, whether simple or compound. And the best inward Medicines I have
experienced to be Conserve of Rosemary Flowers; Antiepileptic Powders, such as
Pulvis ad Guttetam; Betony, Sage, Rosemary, Eyebright, wild Valerian Root,
Castor, etc. washed down with a Tea made of some of the same Ingredients: as
also Drops of Spirit. Lavendulae composit. and Sal volat. oleos.

If the Inflammation returns, drawing about six Ounces of Blood from the
Temples by Leaches, or Cupping on the Shoulders, is very proper.

The Liniment is to be applied with a small Hair Pencil, the Eye winking or a
little opened.

In prosecuting the Cure of sore Eyes, I have been sometimes surprised by want
of Success; 'till at length I found, that the Cause was a lurking intermitting
Fever, every Fit of which affected the Eyes, and rendered their Disorder
obstinate: wherefore upon taking off the Fever by a proper Use of the Bark, the
Cure has been effectually performed.

This Medicine has cured many, whose Eyes were covered with opake Films, and
Cicatrices left by Inflammations and Apostems of the Cornea; which, though they
happen to Persons of all Conditions, yet are more common among the poorer Sort
of People: many of whom were so totally deprived of Sight, as to be under a
Necessity of being led to me; and after some time could perfectly well find
their Way without a Guide, to my great Satisfaction. And it is not only very
beneficial in such Cases, but also where there is an excessive Pain in the
Eyes, shooting thence up into the Head: as I particularly remember in a great
Lady, who had such Pains in her sore Eyes, and Head, that she had, when I first
saw her, taken about fifty Drops of Laudanum thrice in twenty four Hours, if I
remember right; of which Complaints she and many others have been relieved by
this Medicine, without the Help of any Opiate.

Monsieur Anisson, who was sent hither with the Duke d'Aumont, Commissioner for
settling a Treaty of Commerce with England, brought me recommendatory Letters
from some Friends in France. I observed a great Soreness and Weakness in his
Eyes: of which the Application of my Medicine very soon cured him. Whereupon he
assured me, that he would procure me from the King his Master any Reward I
should think fit to ask for the Secret; he being accustomed to oblige his
Subjects that way: but I answered him, that I was then bound by a Promise to
conceal it.

It is to be observed (contrary to the common Practice, and to the Opinion
which I myself entertained in my earlier Days, and communicated to the Public
in the Introduction to my Natural History of Jamaica) that Cathartics,
especially with the Addition of Mercury, are prejudicial in the Diseases of the
Eyes, which are cured by this Medicine.

It is also worthy of Remark, that People afflicted with weak Eyes are
over-fond of Hoodwinking, or covering them from the Light; which sometimes
retards the Cure, by keeping their Eyes too warm: and therefore I have
constantly advised them to throw away these Coverings, as soon as they could
possibly bear the Light.

I was intimately acquainted with Dr. William Stokeham, a very ingenious
Gentleman, Physician to King William III. who had formerly spent some Years at
Padua, and had been acquainted with the most eminent Physicians of that
University, and also with Tachenius of Venice, one of the greatest Chemists of
the last Age. He told me, he had learnt the great Virtue of Viper's Grease or
Fat, in the Cure of Discases of the Eyes; which is recommended for that Purpose
by Daniel Ludovicus, in his Book De Pharmacia moderno seculo applicanda,
Gothae, 1671. 12o. And this, indeed, I judged so very reasonable, that I
substituted that Grease, or Fat, in the Place of the Hog's Lard, which was in
the original Receipt; and found, that it added so much to the Efficacy of the
Medicine, as to make it do, what I thought, Wonders. And as I was not bound to
Secrecy, with regard to this Improvement, I communicated it to the late Dr.
Arbuthnot: who, after repeated Trials of that Fat alone on sore Eyes, had so
high an Opinion of its Virtues, that he looked on it as equally beneficial with
the whole Medicine.

I have since read in some Missionary Letters, that Serpent's Fat is used by
the East-Indians, for the same Purpose.

It is an Observation made by many Naturalists, that those Serpents cast their
Skins every Year, and with them the Coverings of their Eyes: but how far, or
whether at all, their Fat is concerned in this Phenomenon, I leave to others
to determine.

One of the most eminent and learned Chirurgical Authors, to whom I had a
particular Regard in my Practice, cautions his Readers against the Use of Oil
in Discases of the Eyes: by which, I suppose, he meant Olive-Oil. Agreeable to
this Caution, I confess, I never used any Oil, either alone, or mixed with
other Medicines, for the Eyes; being unwilling to try Remedies, whose Effects
were doubtful, and may possibly be pernicious: which I afterward observed to
be the Case with regard to Olive-Oil, when used by some People (to whom I had
given the Liniment) in order to make it more liquid, upon drying; for the
Liniment, in that State, has caused very considerable Complaints. This, in my
Opinion, proceeds from some hot, sharp Particles, contained in the Oil; though
it is generally reckoned very soft and mild in outward and inward Use: for I
remember, when at Montpellier, I was informed by Monsieur Magnol, and others of
my Acquaintance there, that the feeding of tame Rabbits with Olive Leaves, in
want of other Food, has caused their making bloody Urine.

I had formerly, as already said, promised Secrecy with regard to this
Medicine: which I have religiously kept 'till now, that I think myself, for
many Reasons, abundantly absolved. I have had some other Medicines of the like
Nature communicated to me under the same Restriction: and exclusive of these
few Cases, I cannot charge myself with making the least Mystery of my Practice.
For in Consultations, in a Number of Cases of Importance, I have been always
very free, and open; far from following the Example of some Physicians of good
Morals and great Reputation, who have on many Occasions thought proper to
conceal Part of their own acquired Knowledge, alleging the Maxim: Artis est
celare Artem. And that I have not been inclined to conceal or monopolize
Medicines of great Use, the following Instance will sufficiently show.

Sir Robert Southwell, a very worthy President of the Royal Society, who was a
Patron to many Persons of Merit, and among others to Captain Dampier, told me,
that the Captain in Conversation let him know, that his Family, at Exmouth in
Devonshire, had a secret Medicine, whereby they infallibly cured all Men and
Beasts, bit by mad Dogs and other Creatures. Whereupon I earnestly entreated
Sir Robert to use his Interest with the Captain, to procure, if possible, a
full Account of it, as a Matter of great Consequence to the Public. Sir Robert
readily complied, and at his Request Captain Dampier obtained from his
Relations the Account thereof, which I published entire in the Philosophical
Transactions No. 237, with all the necessary Circumstances to be observed:
several of which were afterward omitted by the Abridgers of that Paper. But
soon after the said Account had been put into my Hands, having assured Sir
Robert, that Jews-Ears, mentioned therein as a principal Ingredient of the
Medicine, must be a Mistake, inasmuch as that Vegetable is pernicious, taken
inwardly; I desired him to procure a Sample of the Herb so named in the
Account, in order to examine what it was, and likewise a Dose of the Medicine,
to know the Quantity to be taken. This occasioned both the one and the other to
be sent up from the Family; by which means I discovered, that it really was,
not Jews-Ears, but, the Lichen cinereus terrestris of Mr. Ray, who had first
publicly taken notice of it, in his Catalogue of English Plants, printed in the
Year 1670: He at the same time wondering, that it had escaped the Observation
of all former Botanists. And this Instance, by the by, shows the Usefulness of
observing non-descript Simples; which may possibly be found, as his since was,
to be of great Importance to the Welfare of Mankind. This Point being settled,
I accompanied the Publication of the Letter, or Account, with a Remark; without
which, as manifestly appears, it either would have had no Effect, or have been
of bad Consequence. I at the same time acquainted Mr. Petiver, Mr. Doody, Mr.
Rand, and other Botanists, with the Discovery of this Matter; and recommended
to them to provide a Quantity of this Lichen, sufficient to answer all
Occasions. It was accordingly made use of with the same Success, with which it
has ever since been attended.

THE END.

