AN ADDRESS TO YOUNG MINISTERS.

BY JOHN BROWN, LATE OF HADDINGTON.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CHAPMAN, NO. 151, FLEET STREET. 1799.

PRICE THREE PENCE.

AN ADDRESS TO YOUNG MINISTERS.
MY DEAR FRIENDS,
WHEN I am gradually stepping into the eternal state, to appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, permit me to beseech you, as you wish to promote his
honor, and the eternal salvation of your own and your hearers' souls,

1. See that ye be REAL CHRISTIANS yourselves. I now more and more see, that
nothing less than REAL, REAL Christianity is fit to die with, and make an
appearance before God. Are ye then indeed born again, born from above, born of
the Spirit? created in Christ Jesus unto good works? -- new creatures in Christ
Jesus, having all old things passed away, and all things become new? Are ye
indeed the circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, habitually reading,
meditating, praying, preaching, conversing with your hearts, under the
influence of the Holy Ghost? Have you no confidence in the flesh, no confidence
in your self-righteousness, your learning, your address, your care and
diligence, your gifts and graces; -- but being emptied of self, in every form,
are poor in spirit, less than the least of all saints, and the least of all
God's mercies; nay, the very chief of sinners in your own fight? Has it
pleased God to reveal his Son in you? and to instruct you with a strong hand,
to count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ as your Lord, and to count them but dung, that you may win him and be
found in him, not having your own righteousness, but the righteousness which is
of God by faith, -- and to know the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, -- and to press toward the mark for the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. If you be, or become, graceless
preachers or ministers of the gospel, how terrible is your condition! If you
open your Bible, the sentence of your redoubled damnation flasheth into your
conscience from every page. If you compose your sermon, you but draw up a
tremendous indictment against yourselves. If you argue against, or reprove
other men's sins, you but aggravate your own. If you publish the holy law of
God, you but add to your rebellion against it, and make it an awful witness
against your treacherous dissimulation. If you announce its threatenings, and
mention hell with all its insupportable torments, you but infeoff yourselves in
it, and serve yourselves heirs to it as the inheritance appointed you by the
Almighty. If you speak of Christ and his excellencies, fullness, love, and
labors, it is but to trample him under your feet. If you take his covenant and
gospel into your mouth, it is but to profane them, and cast them forth to be
trodden under foot of men. If you talk of spiritual experiences, you do but
despite to the Spirit of grace. If you commend Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
invite sinners to new covenant fellowship with them, you but treacherously stab
them under the fifth rib, and betray them with a kiss, and from your heart cry,
This is the heir, the God, come let us kill him. While you hold up the glass of
God's law or gospel to others, you turn its back to yourselves. The gospel,
which ye preach to others, is hid, -- is a savor of death unto death to you,
the vail remaining on your hearts, and the God of this world having blinded
your minds. -- Without the saving, the heart-transforming knowledge of Christ
and him crucified, all your knowledge is but an accursed puffer up, and
murderer of your own souls. And, unless the grace of God make an uncommon
stretch to save you, how desperate is your condition! Perhaps no person under
heaven bids more unlikely to be saved, than a graceless minister; -- his
conscience is so overcharged with guilt, so seared as with an hot iron, and his
heart so hardened by the abuse of the gospel. -- Alas! my dear pupils, must all
my instructions, all the strivings of the Holy Ghost, all your reading, all
your meditations, all your sermons, all your evangelical principles, all your
profession, all your prayers, as traps and snares, take and bind any of you
hand and foot, that you may be cast, as unprofitable servants, into utter
darkness, with all the contents of your Bible and other books, -- all your
gifts and apparent-like graces, as it were, inlaid in your conscienes, that, as
fuel or oil, they may for ever feed, or enrage the flames of God's wrath upon
your souls! After being set for a time at the gate of heaven, to point others
into it, -- after prophesying in Christ's name, and wasting yourselves to show
others the way of salvation, and to light up the friends of our Redeemer to
their heavenly rest, -- must your own lamp go out in everlasting darkness, and
ye be bidden, Depart from me, I never knew you, ye workers of iniquity? -- Must
I, must all the churches behold you at last brought forth and condemned as
arch-traitors to our Redeemer? Must you, for ever, in the most tremendous
manner, sink into the bottomless pit, under the weight of the blood of the
great God our Savior, -- under the weight of murdered truths, murdered
convictions, murdered gifts, murdered ministrations of the gospel, and murdered
souls of men!

2. Ponder much, as before God, what proper FURNITURE you have for the
ministerial work, and labor to increase it. To him that has shall be given.
Has Jesus bestowed on you the Holy Ghost? What distinct knowledge have you of
the mysteries of the kingdom? What aptness have you to teach, bringing out of
the good treasure of your own heart, things new and old? What ability to make
the deep mysteries of the gospel plain to persons of weak capacities, and to
represent things delightful or terrible, in a proper and affecting manner? What
proper quickness in conceiving of divine things; and what rooted inclination to
study them, as persons devoted to matters of infinite importance? What peculiar
fitness have you for the pulpit, qualifying you, in a plain, serious, orderly
and earnest manner, to screw the truths of God into the consciences of your
hearers? With what stock of self-experienced truths and texts of inspiration
did, or do you enter on the ministerial work? Of what truths, relative to the
law of God, -- or relative to sin, Satan, or the desertions and terrors of God,
has your soul not only seen the evidence, but felt the power? What
declarations, promises, offers and invitations, of the glorious gospel, have
ye, with joy and rejoicing of heart, found and eaten, and therein tasted and
seen that God is good? Of what inspired truths and texts can you say, Even so
we have believed, and therefore we speak: what we have seen and heard with the
Father, and tasted and handled of the word of life, that we declare unto you.
Thrice happy preacher, whose deeply experienced heart is, next to his Bible,
his principal note-book!

3. Take heed that your CALL from Christ and his Spirit to your ministerial
work be not only REAL but EVIDENT. Without this you can neither be duly excited
or encouraged to your work; nor hope, nor pray for divine success in it; nor
bear up aright under the difficulties you must encounter, if you attempt to be
faithful. If you run unsent by Jesus Christ and his Spirit, notwithstanding the
utmost external regularity in your license, call and ordination, you, in the
whole of your ministrations, must act the part of a sacrilegious thief and
robber, a pretended and treacherous ambassador to Christ and his Father, and a
murderer of men's souls, not profiting them at all. What direction, -- what
support, -- what assistance, -- what encouragement, -- what reward, can you
then expect? Ponder, therefore, as before God: Have you taken this honor to
yourselves? or, Were ye called of God as was Aaron? Has Jesus Christ sent you
to preach the gospel, and laid upon you a delightful and awful necessity to
preach it? While he powerfully determined you to follow providence, and avoid
every selfish and irregular step toward entrance into the office, as a mean of
eating a piece of bread, or enjoying carnal ease and honor, did he breathe on
you, and cause you to receive the Holy Ghost, -- filling you with deep
compassion to the perishing souls of men, and a deep sense of your own
unfitness for such arduous work, and fervent desire, that if the Lord were
willing to use you as instruments of winning souls, he would sanctify you, and
make you meet for his work? -- Perhaps, providentially shut out from other
callings, to which you or your parents inclined, did you, in your education, go
up bound in the Spirit by the love of Christ burning in your hearts, and
constraining you cheerfully to surrender yourselves to poverty, reproach, and
hatred of men, for promoting his name and honor, and the salvation of men in
the world? -- What oracles of God, powerfully impressed on your soul, have
directed and encouraged you to his work? -- Know you in what form Jesus Christ
gave you your commission? Whether to open the eyes of the Gentiles, and turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, -- that they
may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among them who are
sanctified by faith in him? -- Or, to go make the heart of this people fat,
their ears heavy, and to shut their eyes.

4. See that your END in entering into, or executing your office, be single and
disinterested. Dare you appeal to him, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and
who searches the hearts and tries the reins, to give to every man according
to his works, that you never inclined to be put into the priest's office, that
you might eat a piece of bread, and look every one for his gain from his
quarter; that ye seek not great things for yourselves; that ye covet no man's
silver, gold, or apparel; that ye seek not men's property, but themselves, that
you may win them to Christ for their eternal welfare; that ye seek not your own
honor, ease, or temporal advantage, but the things of Christ and his people;
that ye seek not honor, or glory of men, but the honor of Christ and his
Father, in the eternal salvation of souls; and have determined to prosecute
this end through whatever distress or danger the Lord may be pleased to lay in
your way?

5. See that your minds be deeply impressed with the NATURE, EXTENT, and
IMPORTANCE of your ministerial work, -- that therein it is required of you, as
ambassadors for Christ, -- as stewards of the mysteries and manifold grace of
God, -- to be faithful; to serve the Lord with your spirit, and with much
humility in the gospel of his Son: to testify repentance toward God and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, not keeping back or shunning to declare every
part of the counsel of God, -- or any profitable instruction, reproof, or
encouragement; and not moved with any reproach, persecution, hunger or
nakedness, -- to be ready, not only to be bound, but to die for the name of the
Lord Jesus, in order to finish your course with joy. Bearing with the
infirmities of the weak, and striving together in prayer, that the word of the
Lord may have free course, and be glorified, and your messages provided by God
and made acceptable to your hearers, you must labor with much fear and
trembling, determined to know, to glory in, and make known, nothing but Jesus
Christ and him crucified, -- preaching the gospel not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, as men-pleasers, but with great plainness of speech, in
demonstration of the Spirit and with power -- speaking the things which are
freely given you by God, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but in
words which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual,
-- as having the mind of Christ, always triumphing in HIM, -- and making
manifest the savor of the knowledge of him in every place, that you may be a
sweet savor of Christ in them who are saved, and in them who perish; -- as of
sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God, speaking in Christ, and through the
mercy of God, not fainting, but renouncing the hidden things of dishonesty; --
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, or
corrupting the truth, but manifesting the truth to every man's conscience, as
in the sight of God; -- not preaching yourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord,
and yourselves servants to the church for his sake, always bearing about his
dying, that his life may be minifested in you; -- and knowing the terror of the
Lord, and deeply impressed with the account which you and your hearers must
give to him of your whole conduct, in the day of judgment, -- awed by his
infinite authority, and constrained and enflamed by his love, you must persuade
men, beseeching them to be reconciled unto God, and making yourselves manifest
to God and to their conscience, -- and, as their edification requires, changing
your voice, and turning yourselves every way, and becoming all things to all
men, in order to gain them to Christ, -- jealous over them with a godly
jealousy, in order to espouse them to him, as chaste virgins, -- travailing in
Birth, till he be formed in their hearts. You must take heed to your ministry
which you have received in the Lord, that you may fulfill it; -- stir up the
gifts which were given you, -- give yourselves wholly to reading, exhortations,
and doctrine; -- and take heed to yourselves and to the doctrine which you
preach, that you may save yourselves and them that hear you; -- watching for
their souls, as they who do and must give an account for them to God, --
rightly dividing the word of truth, and giving every man his portion in due
season, faithfully warning every man with tears, night and day, teaching every
man, particularly young ones, and laboring to present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, -- and warring, not after the flesh, nor with carnal weapons, but
with such as are mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds and
casting down imaginations, and subduing every thought and affection to the
obedience of Christ. Having him for the end of your conversation, and holding
fast the form of sound words in faith in, and love to him, -- not entangling
yourselves with the affairs of this life, nor ashamed of the Lord or of his
cause or prisoners, but ready to endure hardships as good soldiers of Jesus
Christ, ye must go forth without the camp, bearing his reproach, and, exposed
as spectacles of sufferings to angels and men, must not faint under your
tribulations, but feed the flock of God which he has purchased with his own
blood, and over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, -- preaching the
word in season and out of season, reproving, rebuking and exhorting with all
long-suffering and doctrine, -- taking the oversight of your people, not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre of worldly gain, or larger
stipends, but of a ready mind, -- neither as being lords over God's heritage,
but as examples to the flock, -- exercising yourselves to have a conscience
void of offense toward God and toward man, -- having a good conscience
willing in all things to live honestly, -- exercised to godliness, -- kindly
affectioned, disinterested, holy, just, and unblameable, -- prudent examples of
the believers in conversation, in charity, in faith and purity, -- fleeing
youthful lusts and following after righteousness, peace, faith, charity, -- not
striving, but being gentle unto all men, -- in meekness instructing them who
oppose themselves, -- avoiding foolish and unlearned questions, -- and old
wives fables, -- fleeing from perverse disputings and worldly mindedness, as
most dangerous snares; and following after righteousness, godliness, faith,
love, patience, meekness; -- fighting the good fight of faith, and laying hold
on eternal life, -- keeping your trust of gospel truth and ministerial office,
and without partiality or precipitancy, committing the same to faithful men,
who may be able to teach others; -- and, in fine, faithfully laboring, in the
Lord, to try, and confute, and censure false teachers, publicly rebuke, or
excommunicate open transgressors, restore such as have been overtaken in a
fault in the spirit of meekness, -- and having compassion on them, to pull them
out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh, and never
conniving at, or partaking with any in their sins. Who is sufficient for these
things? May your sufficincy be of God; and as your days are, so may your
strength be.

6. See that ye take heed to your spirits, that ye deal not TREACHEROUSLY with
the Lord. In approaching to, or executing the ministerial office, keep your
hearts with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of eternal life or
death to yourselves and others. Building up yourselves on your most holy faith,
and praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto the eternal life. If you do not
ardently love Christ, how can you faithfully and diligently feed his lambs --
his sheep? Alas! how many precious sermons, exhortations and instructions are
quite marred and poisoned by coming through the cold, carnal, and careless
heart of the preacher, and being attended with his imprudent, untender, and
lukewarm life? If you have not a deep-felt experience of the terrors of the
Lord, -- of the bitterness of sin, vanity of this world, and importance of
eternity, -- and of the conscience quieting and heart-captivating virtue of
Jesus' bleeding love, how can you be duly serious and hearty in preaching the
gospel? If, all influenced by a predominate love to Christ, your heart be not
fixed on everlasting things, and powerfully animated to an eager following of
peace and holiness, how can you, without the most abominable treachery, declare
to men their chief happiness, and the true method of obtaining it? If your
graces be not kept lively, your loins girt, and your lamps burning, all
enkindled by the heart-constraining love of Christ, how cold, carnal and
blasted must be your sacred ministrations? If your work, as ambassadors of
Christ, be to transact matters of everlasting importance between an infinite
God and immortal, but perishing, souls of men; if the honors and privileges of
it be so invaluable, what inexpressible need have you of habitual dependence on
Christ by a lively faith? What self-denial, what ardent love to Christ and his
Father, what disinterested regard to his honor, what compassion to souls, what
prudence, what faithfulness and diligence, what humility and holy zeal, what
spirituality of mind and conversation, what order, what plainness, what
fervor, what just temperature of mildness, and severity; -- is necessary in
every part of it! -- If, while you minister in holy things, your lusts prevail
and are indulged, you have less of real or lively Chistianity than the most
weak and uncircumspect saints under your charge; -- if your evil heart of
unblief fearfully carry you off from the living God, and you can live
unconcerned while the powerful and sanctifying presence of God is withheld from
yourselves or your flocks, -- how sad is your and their case! -- If your
indwelling pride be allowed to choose your company, your dress, your victuals,
-- nay, your text, your subject, your order, your language; -- if it be allowed
to indite your thoughts, and, to the reproach and blasting of the gospel of
Christ, to deck your sermon with tawdry ornaments and fancies, as if it were a
stage play, and to blunt and muffle up its sharp arrows with silken smoothness
and swollen bombast; -- if it be allowed to kindle your fervor, and form your
looks, your tone, your action; -- or to render you enraptured or
self-conceited, because of subsequent applause; -- or sad and provoked, because
your labors are contemned, how dreadful is your danger and that of your
hearers! How can ministerial labors originating in pride, spurred on by the
fame of learning, diligence or holiness, -- hurt the interests of Satan, from
whose influence they proceed? -- If pride be allowed to cause you to envy or
wound the characters of such as differ from, or outshine you, or to make you
reluctant to Christian reproof from your inferiors, how fearful is your guilt
and danger! Pride indulged is no more consistent with a Christian character,
than drunkenness and whoredom. -- If you take up or cleave to any principle or
practice in religion, in the way of factious contention, how abominable to God
is the sower of discord among brethren! If you undervalue the peace and
prosperity of the church of Christ, and are not afflicted with her in all her
afflictons, how cruel and unchrist-like your conduct! If, in justly proving
your opponent deceivers and blasphemers, you, by your angry manner, plead the
cause of the devil, will God accept it as an offering at your hands? If you are
slothful in studying or declaring the truths of Christ, -- if to save labor or
expense, you are inactive or averse to help such as have no fixed
ministrations, or to contrive or prosecute projects for advancing the kingdom
of Christ, and promoting the salvation of men, how great is your baseness, and
fearful your hazard! -- -- Think, as before God, did Jesus Christ furnish you
for, and put you into the ministry, that you might idle away, or prostitute
your devoted time, tear his church, conceal or mangle his truths, betray his
interests, or starve and murder the souls of men? Are not your people the flock
of God, which he purchased with his own blood? Will you then dare to destroy
his peculiar property and portion, and attempt to frustrate the end of his
death? Did Jesus die for men's souls? And will you grudge a small labor or
expense to promote his honor in their eternal salvation? If the Son of God was
crucified for men, -- crucified for you, will you refuse, through his Spirit,
to crucify your selfishness, your pride, your sloth, your worldly and covetous
disposition, in order to save yourselves and them that hear you. -- While your
own salvation and the salvation of mulitudes are so deeply connected with your
faithfulness and diligence, -- while the powers of hell and earth to set
themselves in opposition to your work, that, in your falls, they may triumph
over Christ, your Master, and his church, -- while so many eyes of God, angels
and men, are upon you, why do you ever think or speak of eternal things, of
heaven and hell, of Jesus's person, offices, righteousness, love and free
salvation, without the most serious and deep impression of their importance?
While, perhaps, you preach your last sermon, and have before you, and on every
hand of you, hundreds or scores of perishing souls, suspended over hell by the
frail thread of mortal life, not knowing what a day or hour may bring forth, --
souls already in the hands of the devil, and, as it were, just departing to be
with him in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, -- souls already
slain by the gospel of our salvation blasted and cursed to them, partly by your
means, why do not tears of deep concern mingle themselves with every point you
study, every sentence you publish in the name of Christ? -- When multitudes of
your hearers, some of them never to hear you more, and just leaping off into
the depths of hell, are, in respect of their needs, crying with an exceeding
bitter cry, Minister, help, help, we perish, -- we utterly perish, -- pluck the
brand out of the burning fiery furnace, -- why spend your devoted time in idle
visits, unedifying converse, useless reading, or unnecessary sleep? -- What, if
while you are so employed, some of your hearers drop into eternal flames, and
begin their everlasting cursing of you for not doing more to promote their
salvation? When Jesus arises to require their blood at your hand, how accursed
will appear that knowledge, which was not improven for his honor who bestowed
it! that ease, which issued in the damnation of multitudes! that conformity to
the world which permitted, or that unedifying converse which encouraged your
hearers to sleep into hell in their sins! -- that pride or luxury which
restrained your charity, or disgracefully plunged you into debt! -- Since, my
dear pupils, all the truths of God, all the ordinances and privileges of his
church, -- the eternal salvation of multitudes, and the infinitely precious
honor of Jesus Christ and his Father, as connected with the present and future
ages of time, are entrusted to you, how necessary, that, like Jesus, your
Master, you should be faithful in all things to him who appointed you? -- If
you do the work of our Lord deceitfully, -- in what tremendous manner shall
your parents, who devoted and educated you for it, -- your teachers who
prepared you for it, the seminaries of learning in which you received your
instruction, -- the years which you spent in your studies, -- all the gifts
which were bestowed upon you, -- all the thoughts, words, and works of God in
the redemption of men, -- all the oracles, commands, promises and threatenings
of God, which direct, inculcate or enforce your duty, -- all the examples of
Jesus Christ, and all his apostles, prophets and faithful ministers, -- all the
leaves of your Bible, all the books of your closet, -- all the engagements you
have come under, -- all the sermons which you preach, -- all the instructions
which you tender to others, -- all the discipline which you exercise, -- all
the maintenance which you receive, -- all the honors which you enjoy or
expect, -- all the testimonies which you give against the negligence of your
parents, masters, ministers or magistrates, -- all the vows and resolutions
which you have made to reform, -- and all the prayers which you have presented
to God for assistance or success, -- rise up against you as witnesses, in the
day of the Lord!

7. See that ye, as workmen who need not be ashamed, earnestly labor RIGHTLY
TO DIVIDE the word of truth, according to the capacities, needs, and particular
occasions of your hearers, giving every one of them their portion in due
season. Never make your own case, your inclination or honor, but the need of
souls, and the glory of Christ, the regulator of your choice of subjects.
Labor chiefly on the principal points of religion. To bring down the
fundamental mysteries of the gospel to the capacities of your hearers, and
inculcate on their consciences the great points of union and fellowship with
Christ, regeneration, justification and sanctification, will require all your
grace, learning and labor. Never aim at tickling the ears or pleasing the
fancies of your hearers, but at convincing their consciences, enlightening
their minds, attracting their affections, and renewing their wills, that they
may be persuaded and enabled to embrace and improve Jesus Christ as freely
offered to them in the gospel, for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. Labor to preach the law as a broken covenant, -- the gospel of
salvation, -- and the law as a rule of life, -- not only in their extensive
matter, but also in their proper order and connection. It is only when they are
properly connected, that the precious truths of God appear in their true luster
and glory. It is at your infinite hazard, and the infinite hazard of them that
hear you, if you even by negligence, either blend or put asunder that law and
gospel which Jesus Christ has so delightfully joined together. No where is it
more necessary to take heed, than in preaching up the duties of holiness. Let
all be founded in union to and communion with Christ, all enforced by the
pattern, love, righteousness and benefits of Christ.

8. You have stated yourselves public witnesses for Jesus Christ, who profess
to adhere to, and propagate his injured truths, -- and to commemorate with
thankfulness the remarkable mercies, which he has bestowed on our church and
nation, -- and to testify against, and mourn over our own and our father's
fearful backslidings from that covenanted work of reformation once attained in
our land. See that ye be judicious, upright, constant and faithful in your
profession. I now approach death heartily satisfied with our excellent
Westminster Confession of Faith, Catechisms, and Form of church government, --
and cordially adhering to these Covenants, by which our fathers solemnly bound
themselves and their posterity to profess the doctrines and practice the duties
therein contained. I look upon the Secession as indeed the cause of God, but
sadly mismanaged and dishonored by myself and others. Alas! for that pride,
passion, selfishness, and unconcern for the glory of Christ, and spiritual
edification of souls, which has so often prevailed! -- Alas! for our want of
due meekness, gentleness, holy zeal, self-denial, hearty grief for sin,
compassion to souls in immediate connection with us, or left in the established
church which became distinguished witnesses for Christ. Alas! that we did not
chiefly strive to pray better, preach better, and live better than our
neighbors. -- Study to see every thing with your own eyes, but never indulge
an itch after novelties: most of those, which are now esteemed such, are
nothing but old errors, which were long ago justly refuted, varnished over with
some new expressions. Never, by your peevishness, contentions, eagerness about
worldly things, or the like, make others think lightly of the cause of God
among your hands. If I mistake not, the churches are entering into a fearful
cloud of apostasy and trouble. But he that endures to the end shall be saved.
Be ye faithful unto the death, and Christ shall give you a crown of life. But
if any man draw back, God's soul shall have no pleasure in him.

9. Always improve and live on that blessed encouragement which is offered to
you as Christians and ministers in the gospel. Let all your wants be on Christ.
My God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ
Jesus. Cast all your cares on him, for he cares for you. Cast all your burdens
on him, and he will sustain you. If your holy services, through your
mismanagement, occasion your uncommon guilt, his blood cleanses from all sin.
You have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
propitiation for your sins. If you be often difficult how to act, he has said,
The meek will he guide in judgment: the meek will he teach his way. -- I will
instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shall go. I will guide thee
with mine eye set upon thee. I will lead the blind in a way which they know
not. -- If you be discouraged because of your rough way and your want of
strength, he has said, When the poor and needy seek water and there is none,
and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of
Israel will not forsake them. I will open rivers in high places. Fear not; for
I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee: Yea,
I will help thee: I will uphold thee the right hand of my righteousness. Fear
not, worm Jacob, -- I will help thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. I will wake
thee a new sharp threshing instrument, -- and thou shall thresh the mountains.
My grace shall be sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in
weakness. As thy days are, so shall thy strength be. -- If your troubles be
many, he has said, When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee:
-- the rivers shall not overflow thee: When thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, nor shall the flame kindle upon thee. -- If your incomes be
small and pinching, Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might
be rich. He shall see his seed, the travail of his soul, and be satisfied: and
he has promised, I will abundantly bless her provision, and satisfy her poor
with bread. I will satiate the soul of her priests with fatness. A salary of
remarkable fellowship with Christ and of success in winning souls is the most
delightful and enriching. -- If your labors appear to have little success, be
the more diligent and dependent on Christ. Never mourn as they that have no
hope. Let not the eunuch say, I am a dry tree. Jesus has said, I will pour
water on him that is thirsty, and floods on the dry ground. I will pour my
Spirit on thy seed, and my blessing on thine offspring. A seed shall serve him.
The whole earth shall be filled with his glory. The kingdoms of this world
shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ. Believe it on the
testimony of God himself: believe it on the testimony of all his faithful
servants, and, if mine were of any avail, I should add it, that there is no
Master so kind as Christ; no service so pleasant and profitable as that of
Christ; and no reward so full, satisfying and permanent as that of Christ. Let
us therefore begin all things from Christ; carry on all things with and through
Christ; and let all things aim at and end in Christ.

FINIS.

