A Full and Just ACCOUNT OF THE Present State OF The Ottoman Empire In all its
Branches: WITH The Government, and Policy, Religion, Customs, and Way of Living
of the Turks, in General. FAITHFULLY RELATED From a Serious OBSERVATION, taken
in many Years TRAVELS through those Countries.

By AARON HILL, Gent.

Coelum, non Animum mutant, qui trans mare Currunt.
Hor. Epist. 11. L. 1. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold, by
John Mayo, Stationer and Printer, at the Printing-Press in Fleet Street, Anno
Domini, 1709.

ANNE R.

WHEREAS our Trusty and Welbeloved AARON HILL, Gent. has Humbly Represented
unto us, that he has, with great Care, Labor, and Expense, Compiled and
Prepared for the Press, a Book, Entitled, The Present State of AETHIOPIA,
EGYPT, the Three ARABIA's, PALESTINE, and the Whole OTTOMAN EMPIRE, and has
therefore Humbly besought us, to Grant him our Royal Privilege, and License,
for the Sole Printing and Publishing thereof; for the Term of Fourteen Years.
We, being willing to give all due Encouragement to Works of this Nature,
tending to the Improvement of Useful Knowledge, are Graciously Pleased to
Condescend to his Request: And we do therefore, by these Presents, Grant unto
him, the said AARON HILL, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, OUR ROYAL
LICENSE, for the Sole Printing, and Publishing, the Present State of AETHIOPIA,
EGYPT, the Three ARABIA's, PALESTINE, and the Whole OTTOMAN EMPIRE, aforesaid,
for the Term of Fourteen Years from the Date hereof, strictly Forbidding all
our Subjects, within our Kingdoms and Dominions, to Reprint the same, either in
the like, or in any other Volume or Volumes, whatsoever, or to Import, Buy,
Vend, Utter, or Distribute any Copies thereof, Reprinted beyond the Seas,
During the aforesaid Term, of Fourteen Years, without the Consent, or
Approbation, of the said AARON HILL, his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, under
his or their Hands and Seals, first had and obtained, as they will answer the
Contrary at their Peril, whereof the Commissioners, and other Officers of our
CUSTOMS, the Master, Wardens, and Company of STATIONERS, are to take Notice,
that the same may be Entered in the Rigister of the said Company, and that DUE
OBEDIENCE be rendered thereunto.

Given at our Court at St. James's, the Nineteenth Day of February, 1708/9. In
the Seventh Year of Our Reign. By Her Majesty's Command, SVNDERLAND.

portrait of Aaron Hill Mr. AARON HILL. Aetatis Suae 24 Ao Domi 1709
H. Hulsbergh Sculp.
^NE SOLUM FORTI P^OPRIUM



THE DEDICATION, To The QUEEN.
MADAM,
WERE it Possible for me to offer at your ROYAL FEET, a Tribute, so Important,
as to MERIT your MAJESTY'S Acceptance, I had never paid my Debt of Duty, in so
poor a Manner; But, since the Smile of HEAVEN, upon the WIDOWS MITE, Instructs
us, that the WILL, not POWER, must Enrich the Offering; I am almost led to
hope, YOUR MAJESTY will Stoop to the Reception of so Low a Present, when you
shall be pleased to know, it is all, I have to give; For LIFE, and FORTUNE are
so firmly Yours already, that I cannot hope to taste the Length of one, or Worth
of the other, but by holding BOTH in Your MAJESTY'S Disposal.

THE Sacred Power of PIOUS MAJESTY, Commands not only Love, and Loyalty, from
Subjects, and Dependants, but (as the Attractive Virtue of the Wondrous MAGNET
draws the Sturdy IRON to its Sway,) may Challenge an Authority, to Rule the
Salvage Minds of Independent Infidels. The Mighty Glories of your MAJESTY'S
Successful Reign have bent more Kingdoms than You Govern, to an Envy of the
BRITONS, Happy in Your Influences; And Experience Taught me, that while
BRITAINS NAME is NOW the Praise, and Wonder of such Nations, as BEFORE scarce
knew it, The Prodigious Honor, paid Her NAME, is only owing to the Virtues of
Her MONARCH.

TO whom then, MIGHTY QUEEN, should I Address my Self for a Protection of my
Labors, but to the THRONE of MAJESTY, where CRITIC'S Malice, and the Sting of
CENSURE cannot Reach me, and where HEAVEN has seemed to Point our Marks of
Duty, and Humility to lie, as by the Seat of MERCY, and the VICEROY of
OMNIPOTENCE.

BE therefore pleased, Great Ruler of the HEARTS, as well as PERSONS of Your
People, to accept this humble Offering, which I lay, with Duty at Your GRACIOUS
FEET; For, as the small Improvement, many Years continued Travels, through the
Rougher Corners of the World, have made me Conscious of, may so be Crowned with
the Great Honor of YOUR NOTICE, all my Future Aims, and Utmost Applications
shall be, how to make my Self attain one Step above the Character, which now I
can with Honesty, and Faithfulness, lay hearty Claim to, of,

MADAM, YOUR MAJESTY'S Most Dutiful, but least Deserving Subject, and Servant,
AARON HILL.

THE PREFACE.
IT was an admirable Observation of Sir ROGER L'ESTRANGE, That a Book, that
Faced the World without a PREFACE, should be looked upon, as much Unfinished,
as a BEAU, who comes to Court without a PERRIWIG; For it is not only grown a
kind of Law, by long continued Custom, but is even become a Necessary Labor
for the Vindication of a Man, who dares assume the Name of Author, from the not
alone Sharp Criticisms, but Reflections, and Scurrilities, he will be sure to
meet with.

WE Live, it seems, in a Fault-finding Age, and it is almost become a Crime, or
Argument of Softness, (a New-fashion'd Word for Folly) in a Gentleman, to Read
a Book, with any other Aim, than to Condemn, or Censure what he Understands not.

I AM sure, I have just Reason to affirm a Truth, I have been taught by the
Ingratitude, (I would not willingly make use of a more Sharp Expression) of
some Countrymen of mine, who, by the Baseness of their Tempers, and Malicious
Aims of Disappointed Envy, took, I hope, more Pains than Usual, to Convince me,
that my Native BRITAIN, could produce as Barbarous, and Sordid Wretches, as I
ever met with in my Conversation with the Infidels.

THE Reasons, which induced me to Address the World, with an Account of what I
had observed, in Traveling so many Years together, were not Vanity, Ambition,
Mercenary Hopes, or any of the Common Motives, which urge Great Numbers on to
Write, and build them up to the Fond Name of Author: Heaven indu'd me with a
Soul, too Honest to become a Prostitute to the Poor Dross of Interest; Nor were
my Circumstances such, as might reduce me to a Want of those Advantages, which
have too often made a Good Man, Infamous.

HENCE, Perhaps, I found so many Enemies, for we are now Unhappily Divided into
such Disordered Factions, Open Discords, and Unaccountable By-Interests, that
Honesty it Self is measured by Opinion, and the Scale of Merit is Out-ballanc'd
by Partiality; so that, when a Man is recommended to the World, as worth
Regard, The first Examination, made about him is, Who sides he with? And a
Report is given of his Capacity, or Principles, according to the Party, he may
Chance to Vote for.

POSSIBLY, I have been represented, as a Zealous Stickler for some Party, or
perhaps, been thought to Side with None, as not too fond of Either; which of
these have made me Enemies, I cannot determine, or if I have Enemies at all,
since it may be, it is the Fashion to Discourage VVriters, for endeavoring to
take more Useful Pains than other People. Be it one, or the other, I can only
say, I should (if any) be exempt from Prejudice on that Account, since I have
been so little Resident in England, that I never yet found time to think on
Parties, any further than to wish there were no Ill-divided Ones, so much as
dreamed of in the Kingdom.

MY Friends Persuasions, when I came from Traveling, engaged me to comply with
their Desires, in Publishing this Book, which I more readily Assented to,
because I knew, I could say somewhat more, than had been seen, or told the
World by Former Travelers, and I was naturally led to hope, my Youth might
plead a Pardon for my Errors, since an Author, who attempts to Write at Four
and Twenty, might (I thought) be readily Excused for more Mistakes, than will,
I hope, in the Succeeding Sheets, disgust the Reader.

BUT, there are a sort of People, who appear such Zealous Devotees to Malice,
that no Reasonable Plea is Proof against 'em, Innocence it self is spurned by
their Presumption, and they are so over-fond of Warring against Common Sense,
Humanity, and Goodness, that, they generally blind their Judgments to indulge
their Vices, and Attack the Castle, where it is ablest to Repulse them.

THIS has been my own Good-Luck, and the Ill-Fortune of my Censurers, whose
Weak Objections, spread abroad for Ends, I am about to mention, were so
Innoffensively Ridiculous, as to swell up with huge, and threatening Venom, but
then burst like Toads, with their Self-dangerous Poison. Yet though they hurt not
me, their Guilt and Baseness is not less, than if I had been made a Sufferer by
their Groundless Malice: For as the Poet has it, (...)
(...)
Who hurts me not, is not the Righteous Man,
But He, who will not hurt me, when he can.


THE Society of Booksellers have in a manner, quite engrossed the Press, and
the Unhappy Circumstances of some Authors, having given them Opportunities to
impose on their Necessities, by Purchasing for almost Nothing, their Ingenious
Labors, and by making all the Gain their own Sole Property, Instructed them,
like Sting-less Drones, to feed upon the Honey of Industrious Bees; they made
Advantages of such Occasions, and Encroach'd so far, by gradual Advances, that
they us 'd all Authors, as they did their Poor Ones, and assumed not only the
Prerogative of Purchasing, for Inconsiderable Sums, the Brightest Copies, but
pretended to be Judges of the Work it Self; when, probably, they knew not, what
it Treated of.

HENCE they were Encouraged to Impose upon the Town, by Printing Old Books,
with New Titles, Selling Others at a Double Rate; and Authors, knowing, they
could reap no Profit from the Publication of their Writings, left 'em wholly to
the Bookseller's Direction; whence the Press was commonly Corrected, and the
Book exposed to Public View, with as much Nicety, and Learning, as became a
Bookseller's Capacity.

BY having Printed some Few Little Essays of my own, the Common way, I went as
far, as any Line could reach, toward Fathoming the Conscience of a Bookseller,
or Two, and thence became Acquainted with their Customs, well enough to care,
as little as I could, for Dealing with them; and, unwilling to have This Book
come out, as Uncorrect, as it might probably have done, and see the Town
imposed on, by too High a Price, or let the Book come out too meanly Printed,
or on Common Paper, I resolved to have it in my Power, to use the Buyers, as I
would be used my Self; and therefore, at my own Charge, undertook the Printing
it, but was advised, (that I might run as little Hazard of a Loss, as
Possible,) to do it by Subscription.

BUT I was not thus delivered from the Imposition of the Booksellers, who
pretended it their Right to have Two Books Gratis for Six Subscriptions; I
refused to grant 'em this Extravagant Demand, and gave 'em often Public Notice
of my Resolution, whereupon, they made it their Endeavor to decry the Book
with Open Malice, and discourage it as much as possible: But lest their
Curr-like Howlings should be scorned, alone, as Insignificantly Noisy, they
procured some Little Pensioners of theirs to Act the Mastiff, and by joining in
the Consort, bark the Base to their poor Trebles.

THE Justice of the Thing was, what they least regarded, 'twas enough for them
to say, 'twas Bad. Though being asked the Cause, they could reply no more than,
that 'Twas so, because it was so. Argument was a strange Plant, to their thin
Gardens. But it must be held, as an Undoubted Maxim, That it would be an
Unpardonable Crime, should they promote an Author's Undertaking, who refuses to
promote their Lawless Interest.

SOME have had the Simple Honesty to bring their Money to the Printer in a
Rage, and Swear, they never had Subscribed, but that their Customers obliged
'em to it; owning freely, that they did the Book the greatest Injury, they
could, because the Author had refused to give 'em Two in Six for Nothing.

WELL, Sirs, go on with your Endeavors, I am above the Reach of your
Detraction; Gain I sought not, and for other Matters, let the Book henceforward
speak, in its own Vindication, I am only grieved for those Unhappy Writing
Gentlemen, too much Depressed by Fortune, and thence Subject to your Tyranny.

I was grown so weary of the Mentioning the Booksellers, that I had resolved to
say no more about 'em, when a certain Humor of a Member of that Good
Fraternity, who has the Sign of the Green Dragon for Distinction, made me laugh
at the Remembrance, and record him for an admirable Bargain-Maker.

HE had, with much ado, my Promise, by a Friends Entreaty, to allow him Eight,
as he desired, with a Proviso, he should take 'em all Unbound. But though he was
Solicitous for nothing more, before I granted it, he humm'd a while, with a
Wise Air of Contemplation, when I sent him Word, he might Subscribe so, and
replied, He thought, that Nine 'twixt Man and Man, were very Reasonable. Had I
granted those, he would have asked for Ten, and so increased, till I had found,
if possible, the Measure of his Conscience.

MY Book lay Open, at the Printers, as it passed the Press, for free Perusal,
and the Booksellers, and their Adherents, had thereby, an Opportunity to raise
Objections, with Pretense of having read the Sheets, but, as I never heard one
Censure yet, deserving Confutation, or indeed, requiring more than Common
Sense, to Overthrow it, so I thought it only fit to let 'em Sink without
regard, to their Original Obscurity. But if there shall be found a Gentleman,
who meets with any thing, He justly may Object against, Let him be pleased to
hint it, in a Letter for me, Directed to the Printer's House; and then, to
Satisfy the World and him, I shall not think my Time Ill-spent, to Print it,
with as large an Answer as is Necessary, in the Preface, I shall Publish, with
the next Edition.

AND now, I leave the Booksellers to their Advantages, assuring them, I owe
them no Ill Will, and only say thus much, to Justify my Book against their
Calumnies; If Profit could have bribed my Tongue, or Hopes of their Good
Character have stifled my Affection to Plain-Dealing, I had never been so Open,
in my Declarations of their Artifices; Justice always guides my Pen, nor can
Rewards, Desire of Praise, or Fear of any Man's Ill-Word, divert my Course of
Truth, from its Direct, and Uncorrupted Channel, Contrary to the Assertion of
the Celebrated Juvenal. Jvu. Sat. 10.
-- Tanto major Famae sitisest, quam Ipsam,
Virtutis; Quis enim virtutem amplectitur
Praemia si tollas?
So much more Powerful is the Thirst of Fame
Than the Neglected Virtue's Honest Aim;
For who Courts Virtue, or can long Obey,
When the Rewards, She gives, are snatched away?


I shall only add, that, as it is evidently True, The Methods, I have taken,
were as Just and Honorable, as was possible, The Malice, which inclined these
People to oppose 'em, was a Plain Effect of something in their Principles, not
altogether reconcilable to Justice; For where Honesty Encounters Honesty, a
Sympathetic Harmony is found between 'em, and we have the Words of an
Experienced Greek, to teach us, that, (...)
One Good Man never Hates another.


SOME Snarlers do, and many more may Cavil at the Style, I have made use of,
and the Weightiest Arguments, they bring against it, are, that it appears
Affected, and Elaborate; That it is Dressed in a Romantic Air, and that in
short, it is so like Poetry, that it runs into Blank Verse Measure, and becomes
a kind of Prose-Poetic Composition.

IT IS methinks, ungratefully received, if Censured, on so Weak a Groundwork;
For, I doubt not, but the Learned Reader will perceive no greater Difference in
the Style, throughout the Book, than where it is purposely designed, according
to the Various Natures of the Subjects, Treated on; and a Judicious Taste will
easily distinguish, that the Language flows more negligently, than it Climbs
Affectedly, in all the Treatise.

BESIDES, allowing, I had taken Pains, by an Elaborate Bent of Application, to
Compose a Style, which I might be Deceived in thinking Good, 'twou'd be but
Generous, and becoming the Humanity of all, who read it, rather to excuse the
Real Errors, than create Imaginary Ones, because the Fault, I had committed,
could proceed from Nothing, but an ardent Inclination, to endeavor more than
Ordinary, the Satisfaction of the Reader.

AS for its being Dressed in a Romantic Air, were that Malicious Accusation
full as Just, as it is Absurd, I cannot see the Reasons, why it should be looked
upon, as an Objection. Every Body Knows, the Language of Romances differs from
more Serious Writings, only in the Fine Descriptions, Florid Speeches, Artful
Turns, and Winning Eloquence, which are made use of, to Adorn and Recommend a
Feigned Relation; and by Covering the Flaws, occasioned by its Want of Truth,
excite as Noble Thoughts, and raise as Emulative an Esteem of Honor, in the
Reader's Soul, as if 'twere Real. And if the abovenam'd Ornaments can Shine so
Brightly, in a False Account of Things, and Places, surely when they are
Additionally Strengthened by the Truth, as well as Novelty, of what they Treat
of, upon Second Thoughts, those Selfconfounding Critics, who have Censured me,
on this Account, will find, that, what they aimed, as an Abuse, has proved a
Compliment.

AND just as Weak an Argument is that, which blames my Language, as Poetical;
For I would only ask those Gentlemen, who broke their Shins, by Stumbling upon
that Objection, What was the Original Design of Poetry; and, if they know so
much, they will Answer me, 'Twas Introduced for Pious Ends, and Practiced first,
to Win Mankind from Guilt and Follies, by the Sweet Insinuation of Harmonious
Doctrine; for the Force of Numbers bears a kind of Unresisted Charm, which,
having first bewitched the Senses, penetrates the Ear, and Warbles Smoothly
through the Soul, dissolving Passion in a Flood of Pleasure.

WELL then, this granted me, must consequently speak it undeniable, That Poetry
is Fittest to Command Attention, and it follows, that the nearer, Prose can
Imitate it, so much more 'twill tempt the Soul, to listen to its Eloquence, and
if that be all the Ill, my Style is Guilty of, I may presume, the World will
easily forgive me.

EPITHETS are certainly the Life of an Expression, and if using them a little
oft'ner, and more Artfully, than commonly we do, will not alone adorn our
Language with a Smoother Cadence, and Compleater Harmony, but add a Sparkling
kind of Vigor to the Style, they are used in, why should Men persist in an Old
Error, rather than submit to take Example, from the Practice of another.

I know not any Book, before my own, that has been Writ this way, and
consequently could not hope to Introduce a Novelty, without encount'ring
Ever-arm'd Ill Nature; Even were my Style as free from Faults, as I could Wish
it, 'twou'd have Enemies, because it is New, and how can any Lower Aim that way,
expect to Prosper Unoppos'd, when, even the Glorious Reformations of our
Church, and Government, have many Foes, who dare Reproach 'em.

AMONG the Few, who I heard, were Wise enough to think the Arguments,
fore-nam'd, a Proof of their Capacities. There is it seems, a kind of Talking
Spark, who holds an Office in the Exchequer, very fond of Raillery; He thinks,
that he has Wit enough to make Atonement for his Want of Memory, or I should
take the Liberty to Blame him, for forgetting, he attempted once to make
himself an Author; But the Itch, that Juvenal calls Scribendi Cacoethes,
wanting Force to lift him higher, than the Character of Horace's Promissor
Hiatu, he fell down, like Icarus, and Drowned himself in Infamy, thence losing
all Right of Pretense to Censure Others, by the Miserable Insufficiency of his
own Labors.

SATYR is a kind of dangerous Edg'd-Tool, and, like a Razor in a Monkey's Paw,
will cut the Fingers of a Fool, who trys to use it; Wit, like Fame, is very
Coy, and Hates a Ravisher, She Sports, and Wantons, like the Nimble Dolphin, in
her Native Channel, but, like Herrings, Dies immediately, and Stinks, out of
her own Element.

THERE are a sort of People, to so Silly a Degree, the Enemies of their own
Character, that Silence, though the only Skreen, to hide their Want of Common
Sense, is most a Stranger to their Daily Practice; These are to be Pitied, and
it would be Happy, since they are Blind of Soul, could there be found a Mental
Occulist, of Skill enough, to Couch the Catataracts of their Obscured
Capacities, that when their Eyes of Reason, would permit their Judgment to see
Clearly, they might borrow a Latin Dictionary, and try to Construe the Two
Verses, following. Juv. Sat. 2.
-- Felicia tempora, quae Te
Moribus opponunt, habeat jam Roma pudorem!


THAT I might not alone Inform, but please my Reader, I have taken care in the
Succeeding Sheets, to Introduce as many Stories, as I could, with different
Aims, for some are Moral, some Diverting, others Melancholy, and of all Kinds
some. The only Fault, which can be found with this, is, that it is Digressive
from the Subject of my Book: It Is true, and so are all the Moral, and
Occasional Reflections, scattered up and down, yet doubt I not, but, as the
Last will be acceptable to Honest People, on account of the Good Doctrine, they
contain, (and which I ever hope to bear in my Remembrance) so the First will
find a Welcome, for the Diversion, they may give Unprejudiced Perusers.

AS some may like my Book the better, others will, I question not, complain,
that my Quotations from the Classic Authors are too frequently Applied; to this
I need reply no more, than that they struck my Memory, as I was Writing, and
were thence Transcribed, as they occurred by Accident: Yet this I dare be
pretty sure of, that there is none, will Censure me for the Respect, I bear the
Classics, in so often mentioning their Thoughts, but such Poor Wretches, as for
want of Taste, are made Incapable of Prizing, or, for Want of Learning, cannot
Understand them.

AS I have little Reason to believe my Judgment, any ways Superlative, I will
not say, but I have Injured them in the Translation; Where the Lines would bear
a Literal Version, I have rend'red the Expressions English, Word for Word, but
where I could not come so near the very Words, without destroying all the
Harmony, I thought it better, to make Use of the Assistance of a Paraphrase,
yet still preserved Entire, the Genuine Sense of the Original.

A Literal Translation commonly appears Confined, Uneasy, Close, and Awkward,
like a Streight-Lac'd Lady in her New Made Stays, but when the Version has put
on an Easy Paraphrase, and the Fine Lady is completely Dressed, with Ribbons,
Manteau, and her Looser Ornaments, though they are still the same, they were
before, they brightly double Former Graces, and become Adorned with an
Attractive Majesty.

ONE Sucking Critic, after having turned the Book over and over, at the
Printers, with a Design to Practice the Discerning Art, he had so lately taken
on him, fixed at last upon this Translation of the following Line, Coelum, non
Animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt,
Men, who over Seas, to Distant Countries roll,
Often Change their Climate, but Retain their Soul.


NOW says he, did ever any Mortal see so Silly a Translation? I am sure, this
Author can be no Great Scholar, for Coelum here is Latin for Heaven, and you
see, there is no such Word, as Heaven, in the whole Two Verses.

O Tempora! O Mores! to how strange a Length Extends Ill Nature, Malice, and
Hypochrisy! Who knows, which way to please a World, that only can be pleased by
their own Actions! Vanity is grown the Epidemic Plague, which robs us of our
Judgment, and a Daily Proof of the Opiniated Blindness of Mankind in General,
serves to show us the Necessity of Learning, that, (...)
The Maxim, KNOW YOUR SELF, is really grown
Useful in every Place, thought so in None.


PRETENDING to Condemn all Actions, but our own, is common now, from even the
Courtier to the Cottage, and Deceit is Dressed in such an Air of Honesty, they
cannot often be distinguished from Each Other; Ignorance, Assisted by a Grave
Assurance, passes current for the Depth of Learning; Censure is Esteemed a
Proof of Judgment, and Pretended Merit Elbows from her Throne the Real Virtue.
Were but Seneca now living, justly might he add more Sharp Invectives to the
following Exclamation. Sen. Tra. Hip.
O vita fallax! abditos sensus geris,
Animisque pulchram turpibus faciem induis,
Pudor Impudentem celat, Audacem Quies,
Pietas Nefandum.
-- O thou Fallacious Life!
What Hidden Faculties in thee we find!
With a Fair Face thou Cloak'st a Sordid Mind;
A Modest Air Disguises Impudence,
Bullies, to Peace make Counterfeit Pretense,
And Pious Carriage hides the Sinful Wretch.


I hope, I need not Fear, that any Man will Carp at my attempting to Translate
at all, the Authors, I have Quoted, since the Book will probably be read by
many, who can only Understand the English, and the Men of Letters, reading the
Original, may, if they please, pass over the Translation.

THE Stretch of Malice is so very wide, that it has Seized, among my Censurers,
a Pastor of the Church, of which, though an Unworthy, I Am an Honest Member, and
am therefore very Sorry that, to Justify my Self from the Aspersions of his
Tongue, I am obliged to do a thing, so much against my Nature, as expose the
Follies, (I am loath to think 'em Worse) of one, who has the Honor to Officiate
in the Cause of Christ, and thence should rather Merit the Profound Respect, my
Nature teaches me to bear the Cloth, I hope, he will not long be so Unworthily
Possessed of; Men, though never so Religious, are not wholly free from Mortal
Frailties, He may, possibly, Repent hereafter, though I see, as yet, but little
Likelihood of such an Alteration.

I must own, I was surpised, beyond Expression, when, (after having urged him
to forbear some False, and Scurrilous Reflections, on a Dr. G -- th.
Gentleman of Worth, and Learning in a high Degree,) I saw him Strike his Fist
upon the Table, and cry out in Passion, before many Witnesses, Endeavor not to
Justify him, he is a V -- -n, R -- -e, and R -- -l, and I Will run him down, with
all the Spite, and Malice, I am capable of uttering. And, to do the Lecturer
Justice, he is as Capable of Both, as any Man in Christendom.

I had not wondered to have heard this Speech from some Robust, and Brawny
Grenadier; But when Mr. D -- b -- ns, a Parson, uttered it, from whom I looked
for better Doctrine, I was frighted at the Emphasis, he put on his Expression,
and starting backwards with uplifted Arms, could scarce forbear repeating, Et
Tu, Brute! as the Dying Caesar did to his Assassinate.

NAY thought I, if you, who from a Pulpit, every Week Instruct the World, can
thus by your Example, contradict your Precepts, you may be as well, for ought I
know, a Breaker of the Whole Contexture of Religion, which you Preach, and live
a Life of Wickedness in every kind, as well as this. If so, I must declare with
Juvenal. Juv. Sat. 2.
Ultra Sauromatas fugere hinc libet, and Glacialem
Oceanum, quoties aliquid de Moribus audent,
Qui Curios simulant, and Bacchanalia vivunt.
Beyond the Tartars Realms I wish to be,
Or even more Northward than the Green-land Sea,
As often as Wretches dare Good Council give,
Who look like Saints, but more like Atheists Live.


IT IS true, I have less Cause to wonder at the Public Defamations, he is
pleased to make, on my Account, because he told me to my Face, that I had
better not have Contradicted him, for he had a Considerable Acquaintance, and
would do my Book more Injury than I imagined; and, I thank his Conscience, he
has tried to keep his Word in this Particular.

I had not mentioned him, in Reverence to his Gown, but that the Credit, he
obtains thereby, might easily incline all such, as know me not, to judge, he
speaks as Truly, as he ought to do. Juv. S. 14.
Fallit enim Vitium, specie Virtutis and umbra.
For Vice, when Dressed like Virtue, often Deceives.


A Holy Aspect, and the Justly Venerable Character of Clergyman, may easily
delude Unthinking Multitudes, to Groundless Censures of Unguarded Honesty. They
know him not, and are Deceived, by his Pretending to be free from Malice;
therefore, I owed this Justice to my own Vindication; for his admirable
Dissimulation, and Set Airs of Gravity are, as Persius says, Persius, Sat. 3.
Ad Populum phaleras; Ego te intus, and in cute novi.
Trappings to please the Mob; But I Have looked in,
And know thy Well-cloak'd Conscience through thy Skin.


I hasten from a Subject, so unpleasing, as Complaint, to the more Generous
Call of Humble Gratitude, which tells me loudly, that I cannot mention the
Advantages, I had of other Travelers, without Rememb'ring, and Acknowledging
to whom I owed them, and declaring to my Reader, that whatever I know, and far
the Worthiest Part of what I saw, was due to the Unmerited, but Boundless
Generosity of that Glory to his Country, The Right Honorable the LORD PAGET,
many Years Residing at Constantinople, as Ambassador Extraordinary, and so
Wisely Managing that Slippery Post, that he deserves in all Respects, the Lofty
Character, he bears in Turkey, of, The only Man, who ever could Preserve the
Favor of the Turks, and Interest of his Country, both together.

I went Abroad so very Young, that, after having Sail^d a Voyage, and made use
of Accidental Opportunities to Visit Egypt, Palestine, and other Eastern Parts,
I came to Constantinople time enough, to owe the Best Improvements of my
Education, to the Generous Care of this Wise Nobleman, whose Instructions and
Example, gave me first a Notion of the World, and under whose Protection I was
afterward so Happy, as to see it to Advantage, having had the Honor to attend
him, from the Turkish Court to England, in a Journey over Land, through almost
all the Celebrated Parts of Christendom.

THE Great Discretion, Sure Dispatch, and admirable Policy, wherewith he
managed the Important Business of his Embassy, were such, as won him so
Uncommon a Respect, from all the Turkish Ministers of State, that under the
Extensive Umbrage of his Interest, any Man, who took upon him the Protective
Name of Englishman, was sure to meet, in every Part of their Dominions, more
Civilities, and Toleration, than the Christian Travelers, of any other Country
whatsoever, could pretend to hope for.

HENCE a Thousand Marks of Favor were Conferred, at several Times, on many of
our Countrymen, and hence I snatched the Lucky Opportunity of Seeing, with some
other English Travelers, in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Two, the
Great Seraglio at Constantinople, so much farther, than had been before
permitted; The Grand Signior being then at Adrianople, and his Ladies with him,
at his Palace in that City.

I have little now to add, but that I wish with all my Heart, the Reader could
be promised a sufficient Share of Satisfaction, in the Perusing the succeeding
Sheets, to make Atonement for the Tedious Time, the Book has been expected.
Malice is so very Prevalent, and every Man so naturally apt, to put the Worst
Construction on another's Actions, that there are but Few, who would omit so
fair an Opportunity of Justifying a Delay, so unavoidable, from the Examples of
the Greatest Men, who ever Published Books this way.

BUT, as I seek not the Applause, and very heartily despise the Censures of the
Snarling, Ignorant, and Ungenerous Vulgar, I Address my Plea to such alone, as
Learning, or a Native Nobleness of Soul has Qualified, for Serious, and
Impartial Judges, and those (I dare presume to hope) will easily perceive, that
if the Book has been a little longer, than it was Proposed, in coming out; it
was no Fault of mine, but owing to the Common Slowness of Proceeding, used in
all Books, Printed by Subscription.

HOWEVER, as the Great Encouragement, I met with, from the Numbers of
Subscribers to this First Impression, leaves an Inconsiderable Quantity for
Sale, I am already Printing off a Second Edition, with the utmost speed
imaginable, and have taken care, to use such Means, in hastening on the Press,
that if I set another Time, it shall be, when I find my Self assured, that I
can keep it Punctually.

AS I have heard no more Objections, that the very Weak Ones, I endeavored to
Confute, in the Beginning of the Preface, I can now enlarge no further, in
Defense of Book, or Author, but, since I have made so fair an Offer, of
Obliging all Objectors with the utmost Satisfaction, Truth can give them, I
would willingly persuade my Self to hope, that none will be so Groundlessly
Ill-natured, as to force a War with one, who holds the Peaceful Palm before
him, as a Tutelary Mark, for the Protection of his Labors.

NOTHING sure is Blacker, than Detraction; Hells Wide Storehouse yields no
Sin, of a more Damning Nature; and methinks, no Subject of a Christian Country,
should indulge his Malice, by a Blushless Declaration of Egregious Falsehoods,
with Design to Stain a Good-Man's Character, when the Speaking Well of, nay,
the Using Well those very Men, who most Abuse us, is by the Divine Decree of
Christ Himself, Enjoined us, as a Duty, and the very Maxim of a Heathen in the
following Verses, serve to Shame the Daily Practices of many Men, who openly
Avow a Zealous Love of Conscience, and Religion. (...)
(...)
It Is a Good Custom to Speak Well of all,
But Cruel to Abuse, even such, as really Fall.


HOWEVER, if it is possible, there should be found a sort of Men, who out of
Blind Affection to the Dictates of Ill Nature, are resolved to Damn, what ever
they Read, and only Read for that Base Purpose, I shall look upon them, as
Unworthy, not of the Resentment only, but the very Notice of an Honest Man, and
even Content my Self to say with Persius. Pers. Sat. 3.
-- Gigni
De nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse reverti.


A LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
A.
HER most Gracious Majesty, the QVEEN. John Ashlin, in Bedford-street. John
Affleik Esquire Two Books. Duke of St. Albans, Duchess of St. Albans. Mr. Edward
Armourer, Henry Ashurst, Esquire Robert Auchmuty, Fleet Street. George Atkins, of
Islington. Joseph Alleine, Coleman-street. Reverend Mr. Henry Austin, of
Bromley. Earl of Abercorne. Mr. Richard Arnold. Jonathan Aylworth, Gent. Mr.
John Acton. Richard Allen. Right Honorable, The Lord Arran. Mr. Thomas Akers.
Richard Amson, Gent. Nathaniel Axtell, Esquire.
B.
JOhn Bruere, Fleet Street. Earl of Berkely. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of Bathe.
Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Bar. Thomas Boteler, Esquire Mrs. Joan Bradshaw. John
Brewer, Esquire Duke of Buckingham. George Burton, Gent. Mr. Samuel Barkeley,
Apothecary. Mr. Timothy Bows. Mr. James Bowls, Seven Books. Langham Booth,
Esquire Hugh Bethel, Esquire Mr. Bridgeman, in the Poultry. Mr. William Bryon,
Cornhill. Mr. Sloman Bryon. Thomas Baker, Esquire Mr. John Busfeild. Charles
Bishop, Boswel Court. Sir St. John Brodrick, of Surrey, Knight. Charles Badham,
Minor. Mr. Edward Barker, Apothecary. Mr. Charles Bowls, Southwark. Mr.
Borderie, Two Books. Jeremiah Buckingham. Mr. Anthony Baron. Richard Bytheway,
Esquire Edmund Bromwich, Gent. Thomas Bagshaw, of Derbyshire, Esquire William
Bearcroft. Mr. Daniel Brown, Seven Books. Mr. Bedford, of Castle-Yard. Duke of
Beauford. Mr. George Bloodworth. M -- Baines. Charles Burd, Gent. George Bell,
Gent. Mr. Jonah Benjamen, Gent. Mr. Francis Brown, in Crutched-Fryers, Wine
Cooper.
C.
Sir John Crisp, Bar. Lord of Craigens. The Honorable Colonel Cornwall. Sir
Michael Cole, Knight. Henry Cornwel, Esquire John Churchill, Esquire Thomas Chambers, Esquire
John Carrance, Esquire Mrs. Sarah Church. James Cavendish, Esquire Charles Crisp, Esquire
The Right Honorable Lord, Charlemont. John Cren^-osstey, Esquire Lady Francis
Clarges. Robert Child, Esquire Mr. Cross, of Westminster. Mr. Cole. John Cholmley,
Esquire Southwark. William Coward, M. D. Mr. Isaac Chauncy. Richard Cox. Sir
Alexander Cairnes, Bar. The Right Honorable, Lord Capel. Mr. Joseph Cerda,
Merchant. Michael Cartwright. The Right Honorable, Earl of Cholmondeley. Mr.
John Cowsell. Mr. John Carr, Norfolk. Patricius Chaworth, Esquire Mr. Thomas
Curtis. Captain Sampson Coclough. Andrew Cole, Gent. Twelve Books. William
Carent, Esquire Edmund Cradock, Gent. Mr. Joseph Cooper. The Right Honorable, The
Lord Conesby. Mr. John Clark. Mr. Richard Cooper, of Shrowsbury. Mr. John Coke.
Mr. Richard Chiswell, of London, Merchant.
D.
JAcob Davers, Esquire William Daws, M. D. Dr. Charles Davenant. Edmund Dunch, Esquire
Earl of Denbigh. Sir Thomas Dalyson, Bar. Mr. William Durrad, Mercer. Mr.
William Dilton, Fourteen Books. Duke of Devonshire. Mrs. Mary Dutton. James
Diskeen, Gent. Mr. Drift. Mr. Joseph Dash. Samuel Devischer. Gent. William
Donning, Esquire Mr. Robert Done. The Right Honorable Lord Day. William
Dickinson, Gent. His Grace the Duke of Douglass. The Right Honorable, The Lady
Donnegal. Mr. William Dandy, of Cliffords-Inn, Gent.
E.
ARthur Everard, Esquire Thomas Ellis, Esquire Mrs. Ann Eeles. Richard Eston,
Aldersgate Street. The Right Honorable, Earl of Essex. Mr. John Evans. Mr.
John Essington. Mr. Nathaniel Estwick. Mr. Thomas Eedes. Anthony Earbery, Gent.
F.
LOrd Viscount Fitzharding. Mr. Benjamin Fox. William Feilder, Gent. The Right
Honorable, Lord Viscount Fermannagh. Mr. Henry Frith, of Long Acre. Mr. Finch,
of the Minories. The Right Honorable, Lord Forbus. William Fortescue, Esquire Mr.
Stephen Fouchers. Mr. Lawrence Fashions.
G.
THE Right Honorable, Lord Marquis of Granby. Mr. Thomas Grahme, Apothecary.
Mr; Isaac Guiger, in Mark-Lane. Sir James Gray, Bart. John Groves, Esquire Mr.
Le-Grand. Richard Graham, Gent. Mr. John Grace. Mr. John Gay. Captain John
Goodwyn. William Gosselin, Esquire Seven Books. William Gosselin, Esquire again Seven
Books. The Reverend Mr. Devereux Goodinge, of St. Dunstans, West. Mr. Thomas
Glegg. The Right Honorable, Countess of Grenarde. Joseph Girdler, Esquire John
Gibbons, Gent. Mr. Charles Green, Newgate-street. Mountague Garrard Drake, Esquire
Mr. John Gough. Sir William Gordon. Mr. Roger Gathorn.
H.
MRS Katherine Humphreys. Sir William Hustler. The Right Honorable, Lord
Halifax. Arthur Hill, Esquire Mrs. Elizabeth Hastings. Jonathan Holloway, Esquire Mr.
Thomas Harvey. James Hays, Esquire Colonel James Harcourt. Colonel Henry Hawker.
Robert Howard, Esquire Mr. James Hurst. Mrs. Hammond. Reverend Mr. Nathaniel Hough.
Francis Hays, Gent. Mrs. Mary Hutchins. Mr. James Holland, Fourteen Books. Mr.
Halton, Cateaton-street. Mr. Henry Hyches, Bedford-street. Robert Herne, Gent.
Mr. Robert Harris. Mr. George Holmes. Mr. Helliers, Merchant. Sir James How,
Bar. Mr. Thomas Himore. The Honorable, Sir Thomas Hanmore. John Harris, Esquire
George Huxley, Gent. The Rev^rend Mr. Charles Humphreys, A. M. Rector of
VVest-VVickham, in Kent.
I.
THE Right Honorable, Lady Jermyn. Mr. Arthur Jesserys. Mr. Isaac Jacobs,
Merchant. William Jordan, Esquire Thomas Jennison, Esquire Mr. Thomas Jones. Mrs. Grace
Johnson. Edward Jones, Gent.
K.
THE Right Honorable, Earl of Kilmarock. The Reverend, Mr. James King. Captain
James Kirk, Seven Books. John Kirby, Gent. Charles Killegrew, Esquire Major Robert
Kempe, Two Books. Abel Ketelbey, of the Middle Temple, Esquire Mr. Elisha Kirkal,
Engraver. Alexander Kellet, Gent. Mr. Thomas Knapper, Paper-maker.
L.
CHarlwood Lawton, of the Middle Temple, Esquire Mr. Henry Lombard. Edward Loveday,
Esquire Mrs. Hannah Lowther. Joseph Lombard, Gent. Mrs. Elizabeth Lord. Richard
Loyd, Esquire Richard Loyde, Gent. William Landale, Esquire Mr. James Lane. Francis
Lynn, Esquire Mr. Thomas Lumpkin. Mr. Thomas Lacy. Mr. James Loughton. Mr. James
Lamming. John Langley, Gent.
M.
Sir Thomas Mainwairing, Bar. Sir Winwood Mowet, Bar. Sir Humphry Miller, Bart.
Captain Richard Marsh. Ralph Miller, Esquire William Morrison, Esquire Mrs. Grace
Miller. Mrs. Elizabeth Miller. Christopher Musgrave, Esquire Mrs. Margaret
Masseinberg. Mr. George Moult, Chemist, Two Books. Henry Meriton, Esquire Mr.
Edward Molins, Eighteen Books. Mr. Samuel Micklewright. Mr. John Marten,
Surgeon. Mr. James Marten, Apothecary. Mr. Benjamin Marten, Bread-street. Mr.
James Moseley. Mr. Miles, of St. Mary Hill. Mr. Moody, Devonshire-street. Mr.
Thomas Merrifield. Mr. Robert Man. John Mills, Gent. Mr. John Moore,
Apothecary.
N.
JOhn Norkett, Esquire Duchess of Northumberland. Robert Norris, Esquire Mrs. Newton.
Mr. Abraham Norton. The Honorable Thomas Newport, Esquire Mr. Erasmus Norwich,
Junior. Edward Nevil, Esquire Seven Books. Lady Sophia Napier. Fettiplace Not, Esquire
Sir David Neirn.
O.
THomas Owen, Esquire The Right Honorable, Countess of Orrery. Morgan Owen, Esquire
Thomas Owen, Gent. Charles Orby, Esquire Reverend Dr. Only. Mr. Edmund Ogden. Peter
Otger, Gent. Abraham O Neal, Esquire Duke of Ormond. Duchess of Ormond. Mr. John
Owen, of Hempsted.
P.
RIght Honorable, Earl of Peterborow, Six Books. Right Honorable, Lord Paget.
Mr. Alexander Pendarves. Right Honorable, Lord Pelham. Mr. John Pennington.
Joseph Powel, Gent. Mr. Azariah Pinney. Messire Robert Pierce, Merchant, at
Oporto. Mr. William Price, Seven Books. Sir John Percival. Mr. George Prescott.
Right Honorable, Lord Peaseley. James Perry Esquire Seven Books. Captain Eustace
Peacock. Mrs. Ann Peck. William Peirson, Esquire Thomas Pooly, Esquire Mr. John Pacey.
Q.
DUke of Queensborough.
R.
Sir William Robinson. James Rawlinson, Esquire Seven Books. Mr. Edward Roe,
Attorney. Mr. Charles Reyner. Mr. Andrew Raymond, Seven Books. Mrs. Mary
Roberts. John Robinson, Gent. Mr. Thomas Row. Charles Rogers, Junior. Henry
Rutherford, of Southwark. Mr. George Roberts. Mr. Read, Woollen Draper. Mr.
Thomas Robinson, Dean-street. Mr. Humphry Robyns, of Oxford. Mr. Thomas Rayner,
Cheapside. Mr. Isaac Redhouse, Twelve Books. Mrs. Mary Rich. Mr. Rouse,
Druggist. The Honorable Russel Roberts. Right Honorable, The Lord Ranelaugh.
Mr. Samuel Ryley. Mr. George Reynolds. The Right Honorable, Arabella, Countess
Dowager Rivers.
S.
Mr. John Street. Mrs. Charlot Sheffeild. Henry Savage, M. D. Gilbert Shelden,
Gent. Mrs. Katherine Shuttleworth. Reverend Mr. Sprat, Archdeacon of
Rochester. Mr. John Smith, Apothecary. Mrs. Singer. Mrs. Ann Suffeild. Mr. John
Steventon, Goldsmith. James Smith, Gent. Twelve Books. Mrs. Elizabeth Sparks.
Samuel Swale, Esquire Right Honorable, Earl of Sunderland. Mr. John Stroud, in
Broad-street. Mr. James Senhouse, Esquire Thomas Sydenham, Esquire Seven Books. Mr.
Robert Stonyclift. Mr. Charles Seward. -- Southwell, Esquire Mr. Jacob Smith. Mr.
James Smith, Seven Books. Mr. Henry Sedgwick. Mr. James Swan, Fourteen Books.
Mrs. Katherine Sherlock. Mr. Charles Stratham, Merchant. John Stratham, Esquire
Seven Books. Mr. Samuel Shalcrosse, of Leicestershire. Humphry Senhouse, Esquire
Mr. John Scarf. Right Honorable, The Earl of Seafeild. Mr. Charles Seger. Mr.
Robert Sutton. Mr. John Stuart, Merchant of London. William Salmon, M. D. John
Smith, Gent.
T.
LIeutenant Colonel Trelawny. Mr. William Trueman. Richard Tie, Esquire Richard
Took, Esquire Seven Books. Reverend Mr. Marcus Tollet. Richard Tolson, Esquire Mr.
Benjamin Tailor. Mr. Thomas Tompyon, Fleetstreet. Mr. Benjamin Took, Seven
Books. Mr. Tilly, Cheesmonger. Mrs. Bridget Thacker. Mr. Thorogood. Mr. Thomas
Tanner. Honorable, Brigadier Tatton Mr. John Tailor. Mr. Richard Tailor.
V.
WIlliam Vane, Esquire Henry Vaughan, Esquire Mrs. Mary Vaughan. Mr. John Vry. Mr.
Humphrey Vaughton. Mr. John Vpton.
W.
WIlliam Baynham, in Spittle-Fields, Seven Books. Charles Weld, of the
Inner Temple, Esquire Sir John Wentworth, Bar. Sir William Wentworth, Bar. Right
Honorable, Lord Warrington. Sir Nicholas Williams, Bar. Lady Wrey Honorable
Colonel George Wade. Richard Wyche, Esquire James Willis, Esquire Mr. Thomas Walwyn.
Mr. John Williams, of the Queens Printing House. Mr. George Walwyn. William
Wrightsun, of Gray's Inn, Esquire Reverend Mr. Willick, German Minister. Mr. Edward
Warren, Birchen Lane. Right Honorable, Countess of Warwick. Mr. Wheeler.
Francis Wilkinson, Esquire Mrs. Susannah, Wilkins. Mrs. Sarah Wilkins. Mrs. Mary
Walwyn. Anthony Wilson, Esquire Mrs. Laetitia White. Mr. Ambrose Warren, Two Books.
Reverend Mr. Whitfeild, of Ludgate, etc. Mr. Joseph Whitehead. Mr. Joseph
Windham, Cornhill. Mr. Robert Welborne. Mr. Cornelius Wittenoom. William Wogan,
Gent. Two Books. Mr. John Wharton. Mr. Robert Warman, Criplegate. Walter West,
Gent. Nathaniel Wickham, M. D. Seven Books. Mr. N. Weld. Sir Edmund Warcuppe,
Knight. Francis Woodcock, Gent. Mr. John White. Mr. Thomas Wilson, Apothecary.
Doctor Waller, of Newport-Pagnel. Mr. Gamaliel Webb. The Reverend, Mr. Edward
Waddington. A. M. Mr. Robert Worsley, in Queens-street.
Y.
Mr. John Yarwell, Pellmell. John Young, Esquire Edward Yates, Esquire Seven Books. Mr.
John Young, Druggist.
THE HEADS Of the Two and Fifty CHAPTERS Are as follow.
I. OF the vast Extent of the Turkish Empire. Page 1. II. Of the Turkish
Policy. P. 5. III. Of the Civil Government of the Turks. P. 9. IV. Of their
Government Military. P. 18. V. Of their Naval Force. P. 29. VI. Of the Tenets
of their Faith, and how differing from the Persians. P. 38. VII. Of the
Ceremonies of the Turkish Religion. P. 46. VIII. Of the several Sects, into
which they are divided. P. 58. IX. Of the Turkish Studies, and how far Learning
is encouraged among them. P. 65. X. Of the Turkish Morals. P. 76. XI. Of their
Trade, Foreign and Domestic. P. 85. XII. Of the Turkish Habits. P. 92. XIII.
Of their Wives, Concubines, Ways of Courtship, and Forms of Marriage. P. 96.
XIV. Of the Turkish Women in general. P. 109. XV. Of the Turkish Customs, and
Ceremonies in Conversation. P. 116. XVI. Of the Turkish Funerals. P. 124. XVII.
Of the Public and Private Buildings in Turkey. P. 129. XVIII. Of the City of
Constantinople. P. 135. XIX. Of the Grand Signior's Seraglio. P. 147. XX. Of
his Revenues. P. 170. XXI. Of the Greeks in their Modern State. P. 173. XXII.
Of the Grecian Religion. P. 182. XXIII. Of the Armenians, and their Religion.
P. 185. XXIV. Of the Copties. P. 190. XXV. Of the Zinganees, or the Race of the
Gypsies. P. 194. XXVI. Of Sestos and Abidos, the Castles commanding the
Hellespont, now called Dardanelli, and of the Ruins of Old Troy. P. 202. XXVII
Of the Islands in the Aegean Sea. P. 207. XXVIII. Of Alexandria in Egypt. P.
219. XIX. Of Aethiopia, and the Source of the Nile, with the Cause, Manner and
Continuance of its Annual Inundation. P. 222. XXX. Of the Government of Egypt.
P. 227. XXXI. Of the Learning and Morals of the Egyptians. P. 230. XXXII. Of
the Beasts, Birds, and Serpents of Egypt. P. 233. XXXIII. Of the Cities of
Grand-Cairo, Memphis, and Babylon. P. 237. XXXIV. Of the Pyramids of Egypt, and
several new Discoveries therein, never yet Published. P. 245. XXXV. Of the
Trade of Egypt. P. 259. XXXVI. Of the Revenues of Egypt, and to what Uses
applied. P. 262. XXXVII. Of the Egyptian Mummies, found in the Ancient
Sepulchers of their Dead. P. 263. XXXVIII. Of that Part of Egypt, formerly the
Land of Goshen, and of the Passage of Caravans through the Libyan Deserts. P.
272. XXXIX. Of the present State of the Holy Land. P. 275. XL. Of Jerusalem,
the Sacred Antiquities therein contained, and the Entertainment of Strangers in
the Christian Monastery on Mount Calvary. P. 278. XLI. Of the Cities of
Palestine, as they now are. P. 291. XLII. Of the River Jordan, and the Lake of
Sodom and Gomorrah. P. 296. XLIII. Of the present State of the Christian
Religion in Palestine. P. 299. XLIV. Of Arabia the Stony. P. 303. XLV. Of
Arabia the Desert. P. 307. XLVI. Of Arabia the Happy. P. 312. XLVII. Of the Red
Sea. P. 314. XLVIII. Of the Turks Pilgrimage to Mahomet's Tomb, with their
Ceremonies at Mecca and Medina Telnaby. P. 317. XLIX. Of the Arabians, their
Government, and Way of Living. P. 325. L. Probable Conjectures concerning the
Ten Tribes of Israel, which were carried away Captive, by Shalmanezer, King of
Assyria, 2 Kings Chap. 17. P. 328. LI. Instructions to the Traveller, who would
make a Safe and Profitable Journey into those Parts. P. 332. LII. The
Conclusion. P. 338.
The following ERRATA, which escaped the Press, the Reader is desired to
Correct with his Pen, and pardon accidental Literal Faults, from the same
Occasion.
IN the two last Lines of the last Paragraph of Page 257, read, instead of
round with stately Chambers, etc. round stately Chambers, etc. indented with,
etc.

In the Preface, Page 14. Line 2. for Prentence, read Pretense.

In the Body of the Book, Page 3. Line 46. for Balsora read Balsara. P. 26 l.
17, r. Incapacitated. p. 36 l. 16, r. addressed. P. 96, for (...) r. (...) P.
115 l. 1, r. Quey P. 119, for Numquam r. Nunquam. P. 125 l. 1, r. (...). P.
143, r. (...) and (...). P. 150 l. 22, for dicisis r. decisis. P. 167 l. 11, r.
Congratulatory. P. 168 l. 11, r. Scene for Scent. P. 169. in the last line of
the Greek, add (...) after (...). P. 171 l. 37, r. Incapacitated. P. 196 l. 12,
for Degree, r. Decree. P. 204 l. 11, r. Corn. P. 226, for (...) r. (...). P.
206 l. 35, r. L'Histoire de L'Asie. P. 245, r. (...). P. 320 l. 48, r. Rabbiie,
instead of Babile. P. 321 l. 18, for Declaration, r. Declamation.

The Present STATE OF AETHIOPIA, etc.
CHAPTER I. Of the Vast Extent of the Turkish Empire.
The Cause of the Turks Success.
THE Turks arrived at their amazing Grandeur from so obscure an Origin, that the
invaded World stood wondering at their Growing Fortunes, while they should have
endeavored to repulse, by a vigorous Opposition, the bold Incursions of their
encroaching Numbers. And as at this Day they owe the quiet Possession of their
former Acquisitions to the Supine Negligence, and Civil Discords of the
Christian World; so the same Neglects, and dissonant Interests and Affections,
first built their Glory on the Entire Subversion of our Jarring Ancestors. But
'twill be needless to insert here any more of their History than will be found
necessary, for the more easy Comprehension of their present Condition.

The Origin of the Turks.
WHETHER pushed on by Famine, or expelled by the prevailing Power of contending
Neighbors, is altogether uncertain, A Body of Adventurous Scythians forsook
their Country, in the Year of Christ; 844, and, inured to Hardships by the
daily Prospects of Familiar Dangers, passed over the Caspian Mountains, and
wrested forcibly the Possession of ARMENIA MAJOR from its surpised
Inhabitants. From the Appellation of its New-come Masters, it received its
present Name of TVRCOMANIA, who strengthened by the daily Accession of their
Wandering Countrymen, grew strongly planted in their Conquered Habitation, and
were, soon after, able to send 3000 Men, under the Command of Tangrolipix the
Chief of the Selzuccians, a Family Eminent among them, to the Assistance of
Mahomet the Persian Sultan, who by their prevailing Valor, gave a happy turn
to his declining Fortune: But the Babylonian Caliph being Overthrown,
Tangrolipix offering to withdraw his Forces, was detained unwillingly by the
Arbitrary Power of his ungrateful Ally: This bred a warm Resentment in the
Turkish Soldiers, who retiring to a Wood, increased their Numbers by a daily
Reception of deserting Persians; Their Advancement to the Empires of Persia and
Babylon.
till at last, they Overthrew the Sultan in a bloody Battle, and by the mutual
Consent of both Armies, Tangrolipix, in place of the deceased Mahomet, was
declared Sultan of Persia and Babylon. Stupendous Fortune favored the
Attempts of his active Successors, till the Glorious Expedition of the United
Christians redeemed the Conquered Syria from their Usurped Dominion. Their Ruin
by the Tartars.
Various was their future Fortune, sometimes Gaining, sometimes Losing, till the
Empire of Tangrolipix was wholly Subverted by an unexpected Inundation of the
Conquering Tartars; They rise again.
To whom the Flying Turks abandoned the Possession of their enlarged Dominions,
and joining with their Countrymen of the Selzuccian Race in Asia Minor, they
followed the Fortunes of the Successful Aladine, who Invading the neglected
Corners of the Grecian Empire, then Warring with the Latins, Possessed
himself of Cilicia and the Neighboring Countries, Erecting, at Sebastia, the
Arbitrary Throne of a New-won Kingdom.

Are entirely ruined in all Parts.
BUT they enjoyed not long a quiet Possession of their easy Conquests, for the
^arring Sons of Aladine dismembered their Dominion by a mutual Opposition to
each others Interest, till the fourth King from the Founder of that Monarchy,
became a Tributary Vassal to the Victorious Tartar, who had now entirely broken
their large Empire in the Greater Asia, as the Successful Mamalukes had drove
their Countrymen out of Egypt: But the Tartars neglecting their numerous
Acquisitions, the remaining Turks seeing no Power to prevent their Wills,
divided with their Interests, the dismembered Country; And he that had Strength
enough to take Possession, enjoyed the Government of whatever Part his
Inclination led him to make Choice of.

ERTOGRIEL, the Son of Solomon, a Principal Member of the Oguzian Family, had,
with an unexpected Supply, successfully Assisted Sultan Aladine in a doubtful
Battle; and was Rewarded with the Possession of Siguta, a Bithynian Lordship,
in which he settled his separated Family, whose unstable Residence had, till
then, obliged them to wander through the various Mazes of an uncertain Fortune:
And after a long and peaceable Possession, having gained the Affection of
Christians and Turks by his mild Disposition, he died in the Year of Christ,
1289, and left behind him three Sons, Osman, Saragutin, and Iundas.

The Rise and Antiquity of the Ottoman Empire.
OSMAN was Elected by the Oguzians to his Fathers Government, who taking the
opportunity of resenting some Outrages committed by the Neighboring Greeks,
Invaded their Dominions, Overthrew their Armies in several Pitched Battles, and
having made himself Master of the City of Nice, was, after the Death of
Aladine, Elected to the Dignity of Sultan, and reigning 27 Years, he wrested
from the Greeks, Cappadocia, Bithynia, and most of the Fortified Towns which
bordered on the Euxine Sea, till in the Year 1300, he chose Neapolis for his
Regal Seat, and from thence we date the Original of the present Turkish Empire.

Then successive Conquests.
OSMAN was Succeeded by his Son Vrchan, whose successful Attempts on the
Grecian Provinces, so much enlarged his Dominions, that he fixed his Seat of
Empire at the Great City of Prusa; which retained that Honor until Mahomet the
First, after several Acquisitions in the European Greece, removed it to
Adrianople. The Successors of this Prince continued their Invasions on the
remaining Branches of the Grecian Empire, till by the unparalleled Negligence
of the State, then disagreeing with their Emperor, they lost their Ancient
City Constantinople, to the prevailing Forces of a Second Mahomet; who by this
additional Glory, was justly Honored with the Title of Great; the Loss of
their Metropolis was fatally succeeded, by an entire Subversion of their
Shattered Empire.

Continuation of their History.
THE Successors of Mahomet by yearly Acquisitions enlarged their Territories in
Europe and Asia; which at last not contenting them, the Victorious Selym
extended his Dominion over Syria and Egypt; bringing the Arabians under his
Authority, and raising the Foundation of a Larger Power, on the bloody Ruin of
the Subverted Mamalukes; since when, the latter Sultans have added to their
Dominions most of the Islands in the Aegean Sea; Rhodes, with those Noble
Knights, who so vigorously Defended the Seat of their Order, submitted at last,
to the Irresistible Power of the Successful Solomon; Cyprus was obliged to fall
before the Conquering Armies of the Second Selym; and since then, so
prodigiously have they spread their Conquests, that they now enjoy a free, and
unmolested Possession of the Noblest Parts of Asia, Europe, and the Remoter
Africa, on which Extensive Foundation, they have certainly built the most
absolute Empire, and Arbitrary Monarchy, that has ever flourished since the
Worlds Original.

Extent of the Turkish Empire.
FOR First, the Western Part of its European Dominion, is extended to the very
Borders of the once-lost Hungary, stretching to the Adriatic by the Ragusean
Confines, bounded on the South by the Mediterranean Sea, on the East with
Pontus, Propontis and the Aegean, even to the Scythian Chersonesus; Poland and
Russia scarce bound its Northern Limits. Within this vast Extent of Empire are
contained, the fertile Territories of the famed Romania, Servia, Rascia, and
Bulgaria: Valachia and Moldavia pay Tribute to its Power; Albania, Epirus,
Macedonia, Bosnia and Greece, are now entirely Turkish; and the fruitful
Islands of the Aegean Sea, with those of Candy, Rhodes, and Cyprus, acknowledge
now no Lord but him.

Their Empire in Asia.
HIS Asiatick Territories contain that vast Tract of Land between the Euxine,
Cilician, and Aegean Seas; viz. Bithynia, Pontus, Phrygia, Galatia, Lycia,
Cappadocia, Pamphylia, Cilicia, and the vast Extent of Armenia Minor;
stretching Northward from Colchis to Catai, and Eastward to the inaccessible
Mountains of the Hardy Georgians. Armenia Major is now mostly theirs;
Babylonia, Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Coelosyria, and Palestine, are altogether in
the Turks Possession, as are the vast Dominions of the Three Arabia's.

Their Dominions in Africa.
IN Africa it stretches along the unmeasured Coasts of the Mediterranean, from
the Red Sea to the inmost Parts of the Mauritanian Country, including Tripoli,
Tunis, Fez, Algiers, and Morocco, so vastly Large are the usurped Dominions of
these encroaching Infidels: But that the Reader may more plainly comprehend the
Whole by a Measure of some Parts, I have Calculated the following Account for
his more particular Satisfaction.

PALVS Moeotis entirely his, spreads full a Thousand Miles into the Land; The
Circuit of the Euxine or Black-Sea contains at least Two Thousand Six Hundred
Miles; Three Thousand Two Hundred Miles scarce compass Egypt; and as much of
the Mediterranean Coast as is subject to the Turk, contains above Seven
Thousand Miles in compass; From the Caspian Derbent to Aden on the Red Sea is
Three Thousand and odd Miles; and near Four Thousand Miles from Tremessen in
Barbary to Balsora on the Persian Gulf. So that the amazing Conquests of the
Macedonian Alexander are swallowed at a Morsel, by the swifter Acquisitions of
a Modern Empire; The stupendous Victories of the successful Jews outdone by
these; The mighty Power of the Egyptian Monarchs entirely baffled by the
Turkish Soldiers; The Grecian Empire, once so famous for its Military
Achievements, divided into Provinces by One far Greater; Athens, Sparta,
Corinth, Lacedaemonia, and those numerous Governments, so famed for their
abounding Virtues, are all involved in one Common Ruin, and the Glorious
Actions of their Prodigious Hero's forgotten and unimitated, by the broken
Spirits of their supine Posterity.

The Conveniences of their Metropolis.
NOR wants this vast Dominion any thing that is requisite for the strenuous
Support of its exalted Splendor; its very Situation seems to speak it built
upon the Loftiest Columns of Universal Monarchy; for its equal Division between
Europe and Asia, has placed it in the Center of the Surrounding World, whereby
they are ever ready to enlarge their Conquests either way, and have fresh
Supplies still near at hand, to reinforce their broken Troops in every Corner;
while his Imperial City, the Ancient Constantinople, standing so Commodiously
on the extremest Limits of those joining Regions, is officiously attended by
Two Neighboring Seas, whose meeting Waters gliding by the Walls of the
Magnificent Seraglio, bring Wealth and Honor to this Potent Lord, and lay the
various Treasures of the Earth, at the Worshipped Feet of their Illustrious
Monarch.

The Titles of the Turkish Emperor.
NOTHING can in a more lively manner express the Sense they have of their
extended Power, than that affected Vanity with which their haughty Sultans
swell their Titles, as "King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Ruler of the East and
West, and of all Parts of the World, Prince of the Holy and Chaste City
Jerusalem. Shining with the Brightness of God, Thrice happy Lord of the
Refulgent Mecca, Tamer of Infidels, and Scourger of the Unbelieving Race of
Christian Vassals; Lord of the White and Black Seas, The most Mighty and
Invincible Sultan, who has Power from God to Rule all People with a Bridle, and
to break open the Gates and Bars of all Cities and Strong Places, into whose
Almighty Hands, are delivered all the Ends of the World, none excepted." These
and many suchlike Titles, are proudly Challenged by the Imperious Ottomans,
who, in former Times, have Blasphemously presumed to take upon them the very
Attributes of the Almighty: But of late they are become more Modest, which may
proceed from the numerous Disappointments, that in the Modern Wars, have so
frequently baffled their presumptuous Armies, and by curbing the Designs of
their ambitious Sultans, taught 'em better how to know themselves and prize
their Neighbors; yet, notwithstanding the Inglorious Reigns of several Modern
Emperors, have added nothing to their Territories, they still continue in a
full Possession of their former Acquisitions, and are not only able to Defend
their own, but Conquer other Countries, should the Warlike Spirit of some more
Active Sultan once lead 'em out to Action.

CHAP. II. Of the Turkish Policy.
THE Political Maxims of an Arbitrary Government, may not improperly be
compared to the spreading Roots and twisting Fibers of some Tall Oak, whose
elevated Height exposing it to double Danger, by the raging Force of Stormy
Winds among its Branches, has no Security but the Rooted Depth, by which it is
supported against the strongest Efforts of contending Tempests; and certainly a
Government so vastly Large, so inexpressibly Rich, and so strangely different
from all other, must be supported strongly by some uncommon Policy; without
which Guard, the daring Ambition of aspiring Princes, and the formidable
violences of intestine Discords, would like some surprising Earthquake, break
fiercely through the Bands of Duty, and by their factious Consequences involve
the Empire in most inevitable Ruin.

THAT I may with greater ease Describe the solid Foundations, upon which the
Turks have built their Safety, 'twill be necessary to divide their Maxims into
Two Parts. The First, are those by which the Sultan supports securely his
unrivaled Grandeur, and the sure Dominion of his extensive Empire. The Second,
are such Notions as are taught his Subjects with the earliest Rudiments of
their common Knowledge, and diffuse with ease a certain Awful Duty, or almost
Idolatrous Veneration through the whole Country for the Person of their Emperor;
and are the only causes of that mild Obedience and miserable Servitude, with
which they own themselves his Slaves, and endeavor vigorously to exert an
uncommon Industry, in hopes to gain some Mark of Favor from the inestimable
Bounty of their Common Master.

The first Maxim of the Turkish Policy.
I shall begin with the Sultan, whose first Maxim of Policy is to Depopulate as
much as may be the remoter Parts of his wide Empire, the more effectually to
strengthen its Center. The Reasons upon which this Maxim is founded.
The Reasons he gives to prove the Usefulness of this Maxim are these, First,
That Countries far distant from his Eye, might with more ease and less danger
be induced to some fatal Rebellion, were the Number of their Inhabitants but
any way proportionable to the Convenience of their Situation. Secondly, By the
miserable and barren Condition of a dis-peopled Country, 'twould be found a
matter of inconceivable difficulty, for an Invading Enemy to penetrate their
Empire with a numerous Army; since their Troops without the chargeable
Inconvenience of vast quantities of Provisions, would never be able to subsist
in a Country, whose flying handful of Inhabitants, would immediately convey
what little Stores their Poverty afforded them, to Woods and Mountains, and
Places inaccessible to People unacquainted with the Passes of the Country:
Another Reason is, the utter impossibility, which Discarded Favorites (by this
Means) find to escape the Anger of their Offended Sultan; for knowing no Place
capable of Assisting or Concealing them, unless they Retire to some Christian
Country, they rather choose a voluntary Resignation of their Lives and Fortunes
to the undisputed Will of their Great Master; and quietly submit their Necks to
the Sword of the Executioner.

BUT considering on the other side, that the Strength and Glory of a Prince
does chiefly consist in the Numbers of his People, he is ever careful not only
to draw to the Center the Conquered Inhabitants of his disp^opled Frontiers;
but by the subtle Bait of some inveigling Privileges, is constantly attracting
innumerable Quantities of Tributary Christians, to Embrace the Doctrine of
their Fallacious Religion, and by becoming Members of the Mohammedan Faith,
enjoy the Possession of some little Marks of Distinction, purposely denied to
their more honest Fellows, who bravely prompted by the Dictates of their
Virtue, can without concern despise those gaudy Trifles of a fansied Happiness,
and dare prefer the heavy Chains of honest Slavery, to all the guilty Pleasures
of an Apostates Liberty.

Second Maxim.
HIS Second Maxim is, That the only way to preserve a Domestic Quiet, is to
employ the Heads and Hands of his Subjects in some Foreign War: Its Reasons.
The numerous Advantages which accrue from this Maxim are so Conspicuous as
scarce to need an Explanation; for by this means he is continually enlarging
the Bounds of his Dominions, or at least improving the vast Numbers of his
Soldiers, in an Instructive Practice of all the various and necessary Points of
Military Discipline: By these means he preserves himself secure from the sudden
Violence of Domestic Rebellion; for the search of Glory firing the Breasts of
Officers and Soldiers, they unanimously bend their utmost Endeavors to
increase the Power of their extended Empire, which a lazy Peace might rather
prompt them to Destroy: For the working Brains of Men inured to War and Danger,
will abhor the Rust of idle Sloth, and stir up gradually an Ambitious Fire in
the Breast of the Soldier, to lay a sudden hold on some inviting Opportunity,
and raise himself to Power and Honor, upon the bloody Ruin of his surpised
Commander.

Third Maxim.
IN the Administration of his Justice he holds it a necessary Maxim, that a
tedious Legality is far more dangerous than a swift Injustice: Its Reasons.
His Reasons for this are, First, The Fear and Awe which so rigid a manner of
Proceeding infuses strongly into the Hearts of his Subjects, making them ever
ready to obey his most irrational Commands with an unexampled Willingness; and
terrifying their Reflections with so deep a Sense of his Power, as to deter
them from the smallest Inclination to a dangerous Disobedience; and Secondly,
though some by so hasty a Severity may unjustly suffer, yet Numbers are by their
Examples frightened from Villainous Actions, whose Natures and Necessities, would
otherwise incline them, to a constant Practice of the blackest Vices.

Fourth Maxim.
ANOTHER Maxim teaches them, That Learning is of all things the most dangerous
to an Arbitrary Monarchy. Its Reasons.
For First, Was Knowledge encouraged by the happy Advantages of a liberal
Education, the Genius of their People would soon become much more refined, and
consequently the gross Absurdities and fictitious Lessons of their Alcoran, be
looked upon with Indignation, when compared with the Brighter Doctrine of the
Christian Religion. They would soon discover the fallacious Dreams and vain
Delusions of their fansied Paradise, and throw off (with their Ignorance) the
dull Stupidity of their slavish Ancestors, they would soon perceive the
Felicity of other Nations in a Glorious Liberty, and casting off the Yoke they
had so long submitted to, attempt unanimously some wondrous Revolution, and
weary of a shameful Fate in their so long Subjection to a Tyrannical
Government, redeem their Honor with their long lost Liberties, and Triumph in
the Ruin of their Subverted Sultan. Another Reason for this Maxim is, a Notion
commonly received in Turkey, that the Use of Letters is altogether inconsistent
with the rougher Genius of a Warlike Nation; and that Learning if encouraged
would lull their Faculties in a silent love of Study, till sinking in the soft
indulgence of a Philosophical Solitude, they would neglect entirely the more
noble Practice of those Martial Exercises, whose successful Application has
bravely raised them to the glorious Empire, which now distinguishes them from
the less Powerful World.

Fifth Maxim.
BUT above all these, there is One Maxim the constant Care and Security of the
Turkish Sultans, and that is to be served by such Men as they can Raise without
Envy, and Destroy without Danger. This they put in Practice by admitting none
to the Honor or Trust of great Preferments, but such as have been brought up
under the strictest Discipline of a Seraglio Education: They are generally the
Sons of Christian Parents, taken Captives by the wandering Incursions of the
Roving Tartar, and sent by way of the Black Sea to Constantinople as to a
Common Market: Out of great Numbers of these there are Yearly Chosen a certain
Quantity for the Grand Signior's Seraglio, where at their first Admission they
are carefully Instructed in the Rudiments of the Turkish Language and Religion.
Thence proceeding gradually as qualified in Body or Mind, from the laborious
Practices of the meanest Drudgeries, to the loftiest Studies of their more
Polite Accomplishments, till their Knowledge and Experience increasing with
their Years, they are Preferred at last to some Place of Honor about the
Person of their Emperor, and thence advanced as Occasion offers to the
Government of some Principality, a Seat of Justice, or Command in the Army,
whichsoever their Genius has chiefly seemed to bend them to: Its Reasons.
And by these Means being Educated from their Infancy with a servile Awe upon
their Spirits, their Endeavors are entirely bent to please their Sultan; and
starting from so severe a Discipline to the Seat of Power, without Friend or
Parent to assist them in their Enterprises, they have no possibility of
attempting with the smallest likelihood of Success the least Design against the
Interest of their Sovereign: But besides this, The Grand Signior has another
Method no less Politic, to prevent them from making an ill use of the
Authority he trusts them with; and that is the frequent Change of Officers,
often calling them from one Government to take Possession of another in some
far distant Part of the Country; by which means having no time to fix an
Interest with the People that are under them, they are absolutely debarred from
the smallest Hopes of Success in an Attempt against the Person or Power of
their Sultan, who seldom continues them so long as Three Years in one Place;
and as if in that time there was danger of a Revolt, takes care by other
Methods to render it still more impracticable, for giving them no Money, when
he prefers them to a Government, and themselves Possessing nothing but what
they receive from his Bounty, they are obliged to borrow great Sums on Credit
to furnish out their Equipage, for which the Christian Merchants exacting often
Cent per Cent Interest; they have no other way to pay these Debts, than by a
barbarous Oppression of the Provinces they are sent to, and knowing their time
to be but short, they seldom fail by Arbitrary Methods to enrich themselves for
ever after, by a Three Years Plunder of the poor Inhabitants; by which means
they become odious to the People, who would be so far from assisting them
against the Sultan, as readily to embrace the smallest Opportunity for
revenging their Misfortunes in the Death or Ruin of their Tyrannick Governor;
By which the Grand Signior's Power stands more unshaken than that of Christian
Princes, who have too often suffered by the Ambitious Inclinations of
Rebellious Subjects.

THESE are the most noted Maxims of the Eastern Policy, whereby the Turkish
Emperors maintain an uncontrolled Authority over their so vast Dominions:
Others there are, which being taught the People as Essential Points of Duty and
Religion, oblige them quietly to bend their Necks, and calmly stoop to the
galling Yoke of an Ignoble Slavery.

Sixth Maxim.
AND First, Obedience to the Sultan's Will is taught them as a Duty, the neglect
whereof, will draw down the Curses of God and Mahomet upon themselves and their
Posterity: His Word must ever be a settled Law, and Infallibility a peculiar
Perfection of his Nature: None dare believe he errs, and though his Actions
appear altogether inconsistent with Reason or Humanity, they must rather
question the perspicuity of their Senses, than presume to think he ever can be
guilty: Nay, so widely has this crafty Lesson spread its Doctrine, that to die
by the Hand or Mandate of their Emperor, is looked upon by these deluded
Wretches as a never failing Passport to the Gates of Paradise; and so Sacred a
Veneration do they pay to the Person of this Idolized Sultan, as if his People
were destined as an inferior Species of Mortality, to serve the mighty End of
his Creation: The better to support this awful Sense of Fear and Duty, the
Expounders of their Law have fixed a Notion in the Superstitious Breasts of the
Common People, that they can never pay too deep a Veneration to the Person of
their Emperor, since the good or evil Fate of the Turkish Empire depends
entirely on the Preservation or Extinction of the Ottoman Family.

Seventh Maxim.
ANOTHER Maxim among the Turks declares, That Merit is the only valuable
Nobility, Its Reasons.
whereby the Meanest of their People exert their utmost Industry in the pursuit
of Honor, as knowing they must owe their Fortune to their own Personal Worth,
and not the Hereditary Possession of Lands and Tenements from the successful
Labors of industrious Ancestors, for the Grand Signior is the common Heir to
all Men's Estates, and distributing some small Part among the Children, leaves
them to cut out their own way to Riches and Preferment, and throws in the
remainder amongst the numerous Heaps of his own prodigious Treasure.

Eight Maxim.
ANOTHER Opinion not a little conducive to the Turkish Interest is, That those
who die in Battle against a Christian Enemy are immediately Transported into
Paradise, as a Reward for their Courage. Its Reasons.
It Is no great difficulty to guess the Effects of such a Notion on the
thoughtless Crowd, who are thereby at all times willing to Invade a Christian
Country, and hurried forward to a zealous Madness by so encouraging a Doctrine,
fall rashly on, and prove too often fatal Instruments of Death and Vengeance.

Ninth Maxim.
THERE is another Maxim of their Policy, which seems to have been owing to the
vast Successes of their Arms in the Infancy of their Empire, and that is, To
look upon Prosperity as an infallible Sign of God's owning the Justice and
Legality of their Endeavors: Its Reasons.
By these Means they have encouraged their Armies to a constant Assurance of
repeated Successes, from the favorable Consequences of one single Victory, and
drawn in prodigious Numbers of Voluntary Soldiers to the assistance of a Cause,
which such propitious Omens had induced them to believe must necessarily
entitle them to the Smiles of Providence.

Tenth Maxim.
THERE is a Law amongst the Turks, which I believe was introduced from an
ancient Maxim of their Political Government, strictly prohibiting all Subjects
to the Grand Signior from Traveling for Improvement of their Knowledge and
Experience, into any Country not under his Authority, especially such Parts of
the World as are enlightened by the Heavenly Rays of Christian Doctrine; and so
very nicely is this Law observed amongst them, that he who is accused of having
broken it without a positive Order or Permission from the Court, is often
punished in an Exemplary manner, and his Goods and Chattels forfeited thereby,
to whatsoever Use the Sultan shall assign them.

Its Reasons,
THE numerous Advantages arising to their Government from so strict a
Prohibition of a Custom, so diverting to the curious Inquisitions of our
Europaean Gentlemen, are so obvious to the Judgment of a Common Reader, that
they hardly need a farther Explanation; since every Body must perceive, the
chief Design of this so useful Maxim was to Cloak the Fallacies of their
deceitful Doctrine, from the hoodwinked Eyes of its Professors, whose clouded
Apprehensions, fatally Illuminated by a Christian Conversation, might probably
be brought to an entire Discovery of that inglorious Servitude in which they
live, and tempt their Courage to assume new Fire, and redeem their Minds from
an Erroneous Superstition, while they bravely changed the base Subjection of
their Insulted Bodies for the generous Enjoyment of a Nobler Liberty: And how
far the continuance of this subtle Maxim may be serviceable to their Interest,
does beyond dispute appear in the good Effects it has hitherto produced; and
the frequent Insurrections and intestine Jarrs that almost Yearly happen on
such of their Frontiers, as by their nearness of Situation to the Christian
Countries, have rendered their Inhabitants no ways Strangers to the difference
of their Government.

MANY besides these are the Political Maxims of the Turkish Nation, but I shall
content my self with having named the Chief, and those on which they build the
Pillars of their Constitution; and will proceed in the next Chapter to give as
full an Account as I can of the peculiar Form and artful Management of their
Civil Government.

CHAP. III. Of the Civil Government of the Turks.
IT IS Perhaps the most difficult Undertaking a Man can put himself upon, to
write of the numerous Intricacies of Foreign Governments, and particularly One
like that of Turkey; the Native Haughtiness of whose Insulting People, and
their coy Deportment to the Traveling Subjects of a Christian Country, are so
many inaccessible Barriers to the Curiosity of their Observations: But it is a
Task yet more difficult to endeavor a satisfactory Description of that Part of
their Constitution which composes this Chapter, since the Offices of their
Religion are so closely interwoven with those of their Law, that it is almost
impossible to treat of either without involving both in a promiscuous Confusion.

HOWEVER that I may the more easily avoid the disagreeable Obscurity of so
unnecessary a Conjunction, I shall gradually proceed to an Account of the
Places of Trust and great Offices of their Empire, as they now differ from, or
are dependant on, each other.

BY the foregoing Chapters, the prodigious Power and unlimited Authority of the
Turkish Sultan has been fully taught the Reader: But though his Rule is
Arbitrary, and his Sway Despotick and Tyrannical, he submits the Management of
his Large Dominions to the depending Government of a deputed Viceroy; and
indeed it has ever been the Custom of the Eastern Emperors to Constitute some
favored Subject in a Degree of Honor next themselves, a Custom by many
Authors condemned, as owing its Institution to the slothful Disposition of some
Inglorious Monarch, wholly given up to Ease and Luxury; The Policy of
Constituting a Viceroy a great Support of the Sultans Power.
but in my Opinion founded on the subtle Maxims of a deeper Policy; for by these
means, the Emperors may not only, when they please, unbend their Minds from
the fatiguing Cares of an entangled Government, but when the growing Anger of
their injured Subjects provoke them to a Resentment of their oppressive
Cruelties, they throw the odium of their own Injustice upon their Guiltless
Viceroy; who skreening the Miscarriages of his Imprudent Sultan from the
Revenge of a Rebellious Multitude, becomes himself the Object of their Hatred,
and lays the Foundation of his Masters Safety, on the Peaceful Consequences of
his own Destruction.

The manner of Creating a Grand Vizier.
THIS Officer among the Turks is distinguished by the Title of Vizier Azem, or
Counselor in Chief to the Grand Signior, from whom all Power is immediately
derived to him, and by whom he is Created without any other Ceremony than the
delivery of a large Golden Seal, whereon is Engraved the Name and Age of the
then Reigning Sultan; this Seal he always carries in his Bosom, and becomes
thereby Invested with an Authority almost as Arbitrary and Unlimited as that of
the Emperor himself.

The Antiquity of this Office.
AMVRATH the Third was the Institutor of this Office, at a time when breaking
into Europe, he conferred the Dignity of General and Chief Counselor on one
Lala Schabin his Tutor, since which time his Successors have continued to
appoint some favored Subject to the Dignity of Vizier Azem, and honor those
Officers with the Name of Tutor as often as they hold Conversation with them.

His Business and Authority.
THE Vizier Azem, as in Title, so in Power, is the Head and Mouth of the Turkish
Law; to him Appeals are brought from all their Courts of Judicature, and by him
the former Sentences of Inferior Judges are frequently disannulled, and the
Cause decided in favor of the Party who before had lost it. There lies no
Appeal beyond him, unless to the Person of the Grand Signior; and that so very
difficult, that it is very rarely put in Practice. The manner of Appealing to
the Grand Signior.
The manner of doing it is so odd and different from the Europaean Customs, that
the Reader will be inclined to pardon the Digression if I describe the Ceremony
as briefly as is possible: At certain Hours of the Day, when the Gates of the
Seraglio are set open for the Admittance of great Numbers of Citizens and
Others, whose Business with the Officers of that Place require their daily
Attendance there, the Persons who would complain of any grievous Injury they
have suffered, and which the Injustice or Connivance of the Grand Vizier has
refused to redress, enter hastily the Outward Court, and putting Pots of Fire
upon their Heads run swiftly forward, nor dare the greatest Officer presume to
stop them, till they arrive in the Presence of the Grand Signior, and humbling
themselves at his Feet, declare the weighty Wrongs they labor under, and
implore the gracious Mark of his unquestioned Justice in a kind Redress of
their Oppressive Injuries.

THERE is a private Divan or Court of Justice held in the Palace of the Vizier
Azem every Wednesday and Thursday; on the other Days (excepting Friday, which
is the Turkish Sabbath) the Divan is kept in an open Chamber of the Seraglio,
whither the Vizier is magnificently Attended by a great number of Pursuivants
and Sergeants; at his Arrival he is saluted with the noisy Acclamations of the
People, and guarded by a sort of Soldiers, maintained purposely for that Use,
to his Place upon the Bench; where being Seated with the Cadeelescheer or Lord
Chief Justice, and Six Viziers of the Ben^, who are Grave Men that have
formerly born Offices in the Government, and are skilled in the Knowledge of
their Law, but not permitted to give their Opinions on any Point unless
demanded by him. He listens to the Judgment of the Lord Chief Justice, who
hears and determines all Causes, unless the Vizier shall disapprove his
Sentence, and Reverse it as he thinks is most agreeable to the Justice of the
Cause, or his own private Inclinations.

THUS much may serve as to the Judicative Power of the Grand Vizier, but is far
from expressing the utmost Limits of his Authority, which extends its self so
far beyond that of the other Great Officers of the Empire, that though he cannot
by virtue of his own immediate Order take off their Heads, or recall them from
their Governments, he has so great an Interest in the Grand Signior, that he
can, without the smallest Difficulty obtain his Warrant for the Displacing or
Beheading any Officer at Court or elsewhere, who has unfortunately disobliged
him, or stands obnoxious to the danger of his Envy.

IN time of War he has the Command in Chief of the Sultan's Armies, and leads
them where he pleases, without the least necessity of waiting for his Master's
Order. He gives Audience to the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, Receives and
Answers the Contents of their Memorials, and is in short the only Master of the
Executive Power over the Grand Signior's whole Dominions.

The Splendor of his Court.
ANSWERABLE to the vast Authority of this great Officer is the pompous State in
which he Lives; his Court consisting frequently of Five and Twenty Hundred
Servants, including the Officers about him; when he appears Abroad he is
distinguished not only by the Splendor of his Equipage, but the bearing on the
fore part of his Turbant Two large Feathers, set on with a great Knot of
Diamonds and other Jewels of inestimable Value, the peculiar Mark of his
Degree, the Bashaws being permitted to wear but One, and the Sultan himself
never appearing with more than Three: Three Horse-tails are carried before him
on a lofty Staff, another distinguishing Mark of his Authority. Great Numbers
of stately Horses adorned with Trappings of Gold and Silver set thick with
Precious Stones are led before him; his Stirrops held by the obsequious Hands
of his surrounding Slaves, and his Garment kissed with the most profound
Respect by endless Crowds of prostrate Officers, whose servile Souls incline
their Actions to the basest Practice of a vile Subjection to Men by Fortune
placed above them, while they basely Triumph over the miserable Wretches that
are under their Command, with all the haughty Marks of an insulting Arrogance.

His Revenues and Advantages.
PRODIGIOUS and beyond Belief are the amazing Profits arising from this Post to
the Coffers of its Possessor: For though the Revenues of the Grand Vizier, or his
immediate Salary from the Crown does scarce exceed Five Thousand Pounds per
annum, it is yet impossible to guess the vast Advantages it brings him; for
besides the great Sums of Money he receives from the Numbers of his
Petitioners, who, be their Business of what nature it will, dare never move it
empty Handed, there are daily Rivolets of Plenty from all Parts of the Empire
flowing to his Treasury: No Subject to the Grand Signior dares enter on a Place
of Power, till by the moving Rhetoric of some considerable Present he has
bribed the Favor of the Grand Vizier; without which he is always sensible his
Head will surely pay the Forfeit of his Avarice. There are certain times of the
Year, when all the Governors of Provinces are obliged to send Presents to the
Sultan, after the manner of our New-Years-Gifts, and though there is no
Obligation which compels them at that time to remember the Vizier, a fatal
Experience of the Consequences of such a Neglect has often convinced them,
that, it is highly Dangerous to forget him; The Rulers of the Remotest Branches
of the Turkish Empire are Obliged to Court his Favorable Representation of
their services with the Persuasive Oratory of their Golden Messengers, and in
short no Man who omits his Duty this way can reasonably hope a long Possession
of his Honors or Preferments.

BY these means a Vizier of a Covetous Disposition, who loses no Advantage he
may Reap from his Authority, has such Incredible Opportunities of Increasing
his Wealth, that many at the Death which generally Attends their short lived
Splendour, have been found Possessors of such Immense Heaps of Treasure as have
Equaled if not exceeded that of the Grand Signior their Master; But those very
Riches which still render this High Office desirable in the Emulative Breasts
of the Turkish Candidates, are the very Poison of its Pleasures, and to a
Genius blessed with a serious Contemplation on the Frailties of Humanity would
open all the dangers of its Gaudy Glories and rather frighten him from their
search than allure him to their Possession.

The Office of Vizier, a Dangerous Station.
FOR few there are who long enjoy the Slippery Honors of this wished
Preferment; the Sultan's Policy forbids a long Permission of such unbounded
Power, and urges him to frequent changes of such dangerous Officers, nor are
there many, who survive the loss of this High Post, for having some time served
like a necessary Sponge to gather Riches for the Sultan's use, he Squeezes them
at last into his own vast Treasure; and to free himself from all the fears of
their Resentment, invents some Plausible pretense to take them off and put
others in their Place, to grow up Gradually to the same Fate their Predecessors
met with

IMMEDIATELY under the Vizier are these three Officers, viz. The Muftee, the
Ries-Effendie, and the Tefterdar Bashaw. Of the first of these I shall take
occasion to speak largely, in the Chapter relating to the Turkish Religion, as
being High Priest, and consequently not properly to be Treated of under this
Head, further than as he is concerned in the Interpretation of their Civil Law,
and of that in its due Place. The Office of Ries-Effendie:
The Ries-Effendie, is Secretary of State and in constant Attendance on the
Person of the Vizier, by whose Orders he dispatches Innumerable quantities of
Patents, Decrees, Commissions and other Instruments, over all Parts of the
Turkish Empire: Its Profits.
This Officer has Places of great Trust and Profit under him, and by the
Multiplicity of his Business Collects such Sums of Money to his own Possession,
as often Equal the Riches of the Vizier himself.

The Tefterdar;
THE Tefterdar Bashaw, is Lord Treasurer of the Public Revenues; he Pays the
Salaries of all great Officers Depending on the Sultan; by him the Soldiery is
Weekly Paid, and all Public Disbursements made. His Profits and Danger.
This is an Office of great Honor and Advantage, but has the same Fate Entailed
on its Possessors with those abovenam'd, and exposes them not only to the
Danger of their Emperor's Hatred, but often Sacrifices their Lives and
Fortunes to the Fatal Malice and Inordinate Caprices of a Discontented People.

The Muftee:
I undertook to say as much of the Muftee, in this Place as concerned his
business in the Management of their Laws; His Dignity.
He is an Officer of great Authority, Nominated to that Dignity by the Sultan's
voice, who ought to choose a Man of Exemplary Piety, Untainted Virtues and
Humility, and more Especially of undoubted knowledge in the explanation of
their Law: His opinion in matters Civil and Criminal, as well as in Affairs
relating to the State is given by Subscribing Yes or No, with the humble
Addition of God knows better, to a Paper in which the Question is for that
purpose Stated, and though he gives his Judgment in a Persuasive not Compulsive
manner, his Sentence is notwithstanding wholly Decisive, and the Judges Verdict
Regulated accordingly, without the tedious Trouble of a further Appeal, or any
Dilatory Practice whatsoever, for the Religion of the Turks, having Placed in
this Man a Perspicuity of Judgment almost equal to the Peremptory Doctrine of a
Roman Infallibility, no Subject dares dispute the Muftee's Wisdom, nor will the
Emperor himself contemn his Counsel, for he seldom undertakes a distant War,
or any other Business of Weighty Moment, till the Approbation of this Religious
Man has Sanctified the Action. When Matters of Difficulty are Debated before
the Sultan, the Muftee is always Present at the Council, and his advice
required with the utmost Veneration; The Odd manner of Punishing them.
but as his Honors are Superior to most other Officers of the Empire, so is
his Punishment (when his Demerits have required it) in an Exemplary manner more
Surprising, for in a Castle at Constantinople, which the Turks distinguish by
the Name of the Seven Towers, there is purposely exposed a Brazen Mortar of
uncommon Shape and Magnitude, into which the Muftee when convicted of
High Treason, or Unwarrantable Practices, is Publicly thrown Headlong and
Pounded to Death with a Massy Iron Pestle.

The Office of Cadeelescheer.
THE next Office below the Muftee, is that of Cadeelescheer, or their Lord Chief
Justice, His Power.
whose Authority though Originally confined to the Soldiery, extends its self at
present to the Determination of all sorts of Law Suits whatsoever, with
Submission to the Pleasure of such Superior Powers, to whom there lies an
Appeal from the Tenor of his Sentence, for the Military Body of the Turkish
Nation enjoy this Privilege beyond the Civil, that though themselves are Subject
to none besides their own Commanders, the Authority of their Officers extends
Promiscuously over all sorts of People, insomuch that all Commissioned Officers
of the Turkish Army are by Virtue of the Commission they possess, Entitled to
the Office of Justices of the Peace over all parts of the Empire, a Policy not
a little Advantageous to the Grand Signior, by the vast Encouragement it gives
the Soldiers, who ever were and must be still the Pillars of his Government,
this Office of Cadeelescheer is a step from which they often Mount to that of
Muftee, nor can any Man be Legally Entitled to the one, who has not first
Discharged with Universal Praise the Duty of the other.

The Mollah.
THEY generally rise to the Preferment of Cadeelescheer from the Office of a
Mollah, the Advantages of which Post are different according to the Places over
which they Exercise their Power; some are Judges in Chief over whole Provinces
and have under their Command the Kaddees or Judges of Stately Towns and
Villages; others there are, whose Government is Confined to Poor and
Inconsiderable Places, having under them the Tattered Judges of a few Distressed
and Miserable Cottages.

The Kaddee.
THE next Inferior Officer is the Kaddee abovementioned or the Lowest sort of
Judges among the Turks; the Profits arising from this Post are more or less
according to the Places under their Jurisdiction, but is Considerable as being
the First Step toward obtaining the Dignity of Muftee, a Preferment Eagerly
desired by the Politest of their People.

THUS much may have served to give the Judicious Reader a Sufficient Idea of
the Fountain of Civil Government now Exercised in the Court of Turkey, whence
slow Innumerable Streams of Policy, to the Channels of remoter Governments,
possessed in their several Degrees by Beylerbeys, Sangiack Beys, Bashaws, Beys
and Aga's, every one of which Offices I shall largely Treat of in their
respective Places.

The division of their Empire.
THE Formidable Empire of these Successful Infidels is divided into Twenty Two
Parts, each Division of so vast Extent, as exceeds the Magnitude of many of our
Europaean Kingdoms, and governed by its Beylerbey, or Archduke, for of all
Christian Titles there is none which can more nearly express the nature of that
Office; every one of these Arch-Dukedoms is divided into certain unequal
Numbers of Sangiacks or Provinces, some containing Twenty, some not more than
Seven, Ten, or Fifteen, according to which Numbers the Arch-Dukedoms are more
or less Profitable to their Governors; The Sangiack Bey.
over every Province there is placed a Ruler, distinguished by the Title of
Sangiack-Bey, or Lord Provincial: These depend upon, and are subservient to,
the several Archdukes under whom they live.

The Bey.
INFERIOR to the Lords Provincial are the Beys, or Lords of the several
Partitions into which the above-named Provinces are divided; The Aga.
These have under them another sort of Lords, distinguished by the Name of
Aga's, or Captains of a certain Number of Towns or Villages and their
Dependencies, all which Officers have their several Courts of Justice, peculiar
to the different Nature of the Governments they hold, and yet are linked
together in the joint Promotion of one Common Interest, and a firm Obedience to
the Sacred Will of their Great Lord the Sultan.

The Bashaw.
BESIDES these Arch-Dukedoms severally Subject to their respective Beylerbeys,
there are certain Parts of the Empire independent on those Divisions, and
altogether Subject to the Government of Bashaws, a Title almost equal to that
of Prince, and generally born by such Men as having gradually Ascended from the
meanest Offices, have inured their Minds and Bodies to the roughest Changes
that can befall Mortality, and having proved their Knowledge by a successful
Disintangling the occurring Intricacies of State and War, distinguishably Shine
by the conspicuity of their Merits, and Succeed alternately to the Highest
Offices of their Unshaken Empire.

BUT that I may explain more fully the unimagin'd Grandeur of the Turkish
Emperors, I will particularize the several Governments of all the Beylerbeys,
and the Number of those extensive Provinces over which they preside; that by
considering the numerous Opportunities the Grand Signior is Master of, whereby
to Reward the Fidelity of his Subjects, the Reader may no longer wonder at the
Support of his Authority.

The 22 Arch-Dukedoms of the Turkish Empire.
THE Twenty Two Arch-Dukedoms before mentioned are distinguished among the Turks
by the following Names, Anatolia, Caramania, Diarbekir, Scham, Siwas, Esrum,
Pascha, Childir, Cheruzul, Halep, Marash, Kibros, Tripoly, Terbozan, Kars,
Musul, Rika, Rumeeli, Kupudan, Bosna, Grand-Cairo and Babylon; of which the
Governors of the Two Last receive their Salaries from the Treasury of the
Sultan: The Salaries of the Bashaws of Cairo and Babylon.
The First, which is the Highest Government in the Grand Signior's Dominions,
has a Yearly Revenue of Three Hundred Thousand Pounds; the Salary of the Last
exceeds not Six Thousand Pounds per annum; but the numerous Advantages which
accrue from his Perquisites afford him daily Opportunities of amassing vast
heaps of Riches.

THE remaining Twenty have a certain Yearly Income, appointed them out of the
Annual Revenues due from their Provinces to the Coffers of the Sultan, which
though inconsiderable in it self, is constantly multiplied into Fifteen or Twenty
times its quantity, by the griping Arts and avaritious Practices whereby these
Arbitrary Governors oppress their People. The fixed Allowances which they may
justly Claim are these which follow.

The respective Salaries of the Archdukes of Turkey.
l. The Beylerbey of Anatolia has a Yearly Salary of 3000 Caramania 2500
Diarbekir 4000 Scham 3000 Siwas 2931 Esrum 4050 Pascha 4010 Childir 2890
Cheruzul 3000 Halep 2730 Marash 2000 Kibros 1500 Tripoly 2400 Terbozan 2320
Kars 2500 Musul 1900 Rika 1800 Rumeeli 3654 Kupudan 2192 Bosna 1608.

THESE are the certain Salaries settled by the Grand Signior on the several
Beylerbeys abovementioned, but as I hinted before, are seldom the twentieth
Part of the Profits into which they improve their Employments.

THE Provinces contained in these Twenty Two Arch-Dukedoms are at least Two
Hundred and Sixty Four, every one of which, as I said before, has a Lord
Provincial over it, whose Profits may be computed about half as much as those
of the Beylerbeys their Superior Governors: The Beys and Aga's possessing
smaller Salaries in a just Proportion to the Inferiority of their Offices: The
Bashaws are all entitled to Revenues agreeable to their Power, and both the one
and the other are alike unbounded.

BY the prodigious Sums of Money amassed this way, which any Curious Reader may
nearly compute by the Account abovementioned, and which, in comparison with
the Sultan's Revenues, are as so many small Canals to the unfathomed Ocean; you
may guess at the surprising Grandeur and inexhausted Riches of the Ottoman
Emperors, which shall be particularly Treated of in a more proper Place; I
shall now proceed to inform the Reader in what manner the Turks Administer
their Justice, and how the Forms of Law are practiced by that People.

A Maxim of Tacitus.
'TWAS the Opinion of Tacitus that those Governments have most Laws who have
least Policy, and the strenuous Support which the Turkish Empire receives from
few but necessary Maxims, does in a great measure justify the Truth of his
Assertion; for they have no confounding Volumes of one Lawyers Observations
upon the Remarks of another, no COKE upon Littleton, to explain the different
Interpretations of a Thing, that is, or ought to be the same: The Reports of
such a Judge, or such a Lord Chancellor, have here no Power to guide the
Sentence of a Court of Justice, by the prevailing Virtue of some forgotten
Precedent: The speedy dispatch of Turkish Justice.
Their Laws are few, but always put in Execution with the utmost Severity; and
though the Sentence Pro or Con depends entirely upon the undisputed Will of an
Arbitrary Judge, whereby the Subject is deprived of that indulgent Liberty we
taste in Britain, and sometimes Sacrificed to the mercenary Interest of a bribed
Decider, he has yet this Happiness superior to us, that he always loses a
Cause before the melancholy Consequences of a tedious Controversy has disabled
him to support that Loss, and depriving him of all possible means of a future
Subsistence, unfortunately sink both the Cause and the Client in promiscuous
Ruin, by one single Act of an unexpected Injustice.

THE Truth of this will evidently appear by the speedy Dispatch of their
decisive Sentence, having no Form of Law but this which follows. Their Deeds
and Instruments.
Whatever Land, Moneys, Goods, or any of the common Benefits of Life are bought
by, or given to a Subject of the Grand Signior's Dominions, or any other
Inhabitant of that Empire, must be confirmed to his Possession by virtue of a
Sealed Instrument called an Hodget, which being Signed by the Kaddee or Judge
of the Place they live in, does certainly entitle them to as firm a Property as
all the Deeds of Gift, Releases and other endless heaps of Parchment now in use
amongst us; such an Instrument being once produced admits of no evasive Quirk
to weaken its Authority; no Word misplaced, or Name mistaken by the adding or
omitting some single Letter can baffle the Legality of a Subjects Endeavors by
the Shock of a Nonsuit, but where the Justice of a Cause is undeniably
conspicuous they very rarely suffer by a partial Sentence; though where the Case
is doubtful or obscure, the native Avarice of a Turkish Judge will generally
incline him to a favorable Opinion of that Side from whence most Money
challenges his Gratitude; Bribery common among them.
nor is the Curse of Bribery esteemed so black a Crime in this Country as in the
Western World, most Men practicing it in a public and audacious Manner,
wheresoever their occurring Interests make it Useful.

Women's Oaths not taken.
WOMEN'S Oaths are never taken but against a Christian, nor a Christians against
a Turk. Among themselves the concurring Evidences of a plurality of Witnesses
decide a Controversy. Their Punishments are either Bodily or Pecuniary; the
first are rarely suffered when not deserved, but the latter sometimes inflicted
unjustly by the malicious Prosecution of revengeful People, or the partial
Sentence of some poor and avaritious Magistrate.

The Office of a Saubashaw:
THERE is no City which has not its Saubashaw or Head Constable over it, whose
proper Business it is, to inspect as secretly and as narrowly as possible the
Behavior of the Inhabitants, having his inferior Officers in every Corner to
detect the Misdemeanors of offending People, and seizing their Persons,
deliver them over to such Punishments as upon Conviction of their Guilt shall
be judged agreeable to the nature of their Offenses.

THE Corporeal Punishments in use among the Turks are different, according to
the several Crimes for which they are imposed; the most Common, and that which
is inflicted on Slaves, Servants, and the Practicers of Petty-larcenys, is the
Bastinado, or beating them on the Soles of the Feet. The method of putting this
in Execution is as follows.

Their manner of Excecuting the Punishment called Bastinado.
FIVE or more Officers seizing the Offender by the Arms, conduct him roughly to
some smooth piece of Ground or Grass-plat, where throwing him upon his Back,
the heaviest among them sitting down upon his Breast, prevents him from
springing upwards to avoid the Blows, when two others by the help of a large
Stick like the handle of a Broom, bored through at both ends, to receive a Rope
there fastened by two Knotts, and hanging down in a bent Form like that of a
Bow, lift his Legs from the Ground, and rolling the Stick downwards as far as
the Rope permits them, prevent them from moving either one way or the other;
this done another with a stiff Hazel Wand gives him as many Strokes upon the
naked Soles of his Feet as he was ordered to undergo, which are sometimes
several Hundred, and have often proved Mortal to the guilty Party.

A Comical Story of an English Merchant.
I cannot forbear the Crime of a small Digression, to divert my Reader with the
Comical Relation of a certain Passage, which once in this Country afforded me
the pleasure of a very agreeable Amusement: There was an English Merchant who
had for many Years been troubled with the Gout, in a very violent and uncommon
Degree, nor could the daily Application of the richest Medicines procure him
Ease, much less the Cure he sought in vain for, insomuch that being in a manner
transported by the sharpness of his Pain, he became so very peevish that he
could neither talk, walk, or sit still in Comfort: The pressure of this
Gentleman's extraordinary Affairs requiring his presence at Adrianople, he
undertook the Journey with a great deal of uneasiness, and met at the Entrance
of a Town called Baba, a considerable Party of Turkish Soldiers, who were
marching toward Constantinople; the Officer, as is common in those Parts, took
the liberty as he passed, to express himself a little disrespectfully in
contempt of the Christians in the Merchant's Company; and he, unqualified at
that time by the peevish Effects of his Distemper, to bear it patiently, made
an ill Use of his Skill in the Turkish Language, and returned the Salutation as
roughly as it was sent him: The Inhabitants of that Country are of all others
least able to bear Reflections on their Government or Religion; and the Officer
of these Men, forgetting that himself had been the Aggressor, resented the
Affront so very highly, that he ordered the Merchant to be taken from his
Horse, and undergo the Punishment of One Hundred and Fifty Bastinadoes in the
manner above written: Vain was Resistance against a Number so much Superior,
and Complaints were altogether useless in a Country where the speedy Execution
of an Arbitrary Order is the highest Qualification they believe themselves
capable of: In short, the poor Merchant submitted aukwardly to the unwelcome
Novelty, and was so sorely beaten on the Soles of his Feet, that for many Days
he was obliged to continue in a House at Baba, nor was he able to stand upright
for a long time after; but the Jest of this Story comes in the Conclusion, for
the Bastinadoes it seems having frightened away his Gout, his Distemper went off
with his Bruises, nor was he ever troubled with the return of one single Fit
from that time forward: The unexpected Consequence of this lucky Beating,
obliged the Merchant at his return to Constantinople to seek industriously
after the Author of his Cure, that he might thank him for the Favor, but not
being able to find him out, he contented himself with a grateful remembrance of
the weighty Obligation, and to this Day (if he be still alive) as constantly
Drinks to the Health of his Turkish Doctor as he sits down to his Table.

BUT to return to the Subject in hand, they have several Punishments peculiar
to the Military and other Orders, which shall be described hereafter in their
proper Place: One now in common Use amongst them is Impaling Alive; that is,
thrusting in a sharp Pole at their Fundaments, Their manner of Impaling Alive.
and Forcing it out at the Upper Parts of their Body, and so Fastening the Pole
upright in the Ground they leave them in some High way as Miserable Examples to
Deterr others from the like Practices.

Other Punishments in use there.
STRANGLING in a very Expeditious manner is the Death whereby they distinguish
Suffering Noblemen. Hanging they seldom use; Breaking on the Wheel very Rarely;
but the most common way of Execution is, Beheading the Condemned Person with a
Broad Scymetar, while he Kneels upon a large Heap of Sand to that end provided.
Other kinds of Punishments there are in Turkey, but such as being very rarely
put in Practice, are altogether needless to be here mentioned and for that
reason purposely omitted.

CHAP. IV. Of the Government Military.
IF the general Experience of the knowing World allows it as a necessary Maxim,
that every Effect of Nature and Morality must be Supported by those very Causes
to which they owe their First Production, it will follow Undeniably that a
Government not Gradually Raised from the continued Improvements of some
unresisted Colony, but founded Violently upon the Bloody Ruin of a Conquered
People, must Slacken by Degrees that Nervous Strengh by which it Flourished,
when the long neglects of Idle Peace Corrupt its Natives with the Love of
Pleasure, and draw them by Degrees to Hate the Practice of those Successful
Arms, by whose Unequalled Force their Braver Ancestors had Cut a Passage to
Meridian Glory.

The Effects of Peace of dangerous consequence to Warlike Governments.
IT IS this alone to which the Persian, Grecian, Roman, and every other Glorious
Monarchy, have owed their Downfall; and it is the same Indulgence of a Slothful
ease has Rusted all the Powerful Springs of Turkish Discipline, and cheered
Exceedingly the Drooping Spirits of the Eastern Christians, with Reviving hopes
to see the Happy Restoration of their Religion, and their Liberty in the Entire
Subversion of their Usurping Tyrant, for that persuasive Poverty which once
Inclined the Turkish Soldiers to a Scorn of dangers, has now no more the Power
to Urge a Brave Defiance of the Shocks of War, since they are all Possessors of
a Rolling Plenty, the want of which provoked 'em Chiefly to their Ancient
Actions.

A great decay in their Military Discipline.
BUT though the present Managment of their Military Discipline falls greatly short
of what in former Ages spoke them Matchless, they are not yet so sensibly
Decayed, as to become an easy Conquest, were the United Arms of Warlike
Christendom now bent against them; for though their Soldiers are not now Inured
to War and Hardship, nor by the Frequent Victorys they were used to gain,
familiar with the Face of Ruin and continual Contest, they are not less in
Number than they were, nor all so Ignorant as their Majority. The Turkish
Policy permits no loss of Power by the loss of Soldiers, and is perhaps the
only Government that ever grew Stonger by the Death of Subjects; for having
Numbers ready upon all Occasions to Supply the Room of such as Die, their
Places are Improved to double Worth by a surprising Management peculiar to the
Turks, which shall be told the Reader in its proper Place. They have no
occasion on declaring War, or losing Battles, to dispatch their Officers for
fresh Recruits about the Country, and supply with raw unpollish'd Rusticks, the
Places of well disciplined and skilful Soldiers; They have formidable standing
Armies, in every Corner of their Empire, which from time to time supply the
Vacancies of their contending Bodies, which like the boundless Ocean though
discharging endless Depths of Water appears no less in Ebb than Flow, but
stands the same in every Season, never subject to perceptible Diminution.

IN describing the present Establishment of the Ottoman Forces, I will begin
with that Order of Foot Soldiers commonly known by the Name of Janisaries; for
the peculiar and remarkable Privileges whereby they are distinguished from the
ordinary Militia, may justly entitle them to the Honor of a Preference. The
derivation and Original of the Word Janisary.
Janisary is nothing but a Corruption of the Word Yani-Cherr, which in the
Turkish Language, signifies a New-Order; they took their Original from the
Death of one Hodgy Bectash, an Old Religious Man of an exemplary Life and
Conversation, in the Reign of Sultan Amurath, the third King of the Turks: This
Man had long endeavored to dissuade that Prince from dangerously exposing his
Person, by too near a Familiarity with the Subjects of Servia, often
Prophesying the sudden Death which afterward befell the Sultan upon the
Overthrow of Lazarus the Despot of that Country, when walking out to view the
Heaps of Slain, one Miles Corbelitza, a Christian Soldier, rising heavily from
a Mount of Carcasses, made shift to stagger in the Pangs of Death, and by
expressive Motions of his Head and Hands desired admittance to the Person of
the Emperor, who thinking he designed to beg his Life permitted him to such a
near Approach, that the undaunted Servian, falling on his Knees as if he would
have sued for Mercy, snatched out a Dagger from his bleeding Bosom, and
striking it with violence to the Sultan's Heart, revenged successfully his
Countries Wrongs, and lived and died like Israel's Sampson a double Scourge to
an Ambitious Enemy.

THE Death of Bectash immediately succeeded that of Amurath, for having often
prophesied the Blow and not preventing it, though near the Sultan's Person, he
was cut in pieces by the furious Guards, as a Party in the Treason; but
foreseeing easily, what Fate would soon befall him, he rent off a long Sleeve,
which he wore continually on his Right Arm, and putting it upon the Head of one
of the Soldiers, cried out prophetically in the Turkish Language, Life from my
Death shall like a Phoenix spring,
To Guard from Dangers your Succeeding King.


THIS said, he Fell, a bloody Victim to the Soldiers Anger, but had his
Prophecy completely verified in the First Year of the next Sultan's Reign, who
reflecting seriously on the Fate of Bectash, resolved to take some Method of
perpetuating his Memory, and Instituted a New Order of the Militia, by the Name
of Janisaries, who to this Day in Imitation of the Sleeve which Bectash put
upon the Soldiers Head, are all obliged to wear a Headpiece faced with
pollish'd Steel, to which is fastened a large piece of Buff, that falling in a
moderate Breadth from the Crown of their Head spreads gradually wider to the
middle of their Backs.

The ancient Care to supply the Empire with Janissaries.
THE Institution of this famous and formidable Militia, was Founded Originally
on the surest Pillars of a deep but barbarous Policy, for Officers were
continually dispatched to make triennial Seisures of the Christian Children,
Inhabiting the Countries unhappily fallen under the galling Yoke of Turkish
Slavery: These miserable Wretches thus violently ravished from their sorrowful
Parents, were distributed in Parties over all the Empire, till they reached the
Age of Sixteen Years, at which time, completely versed in the Knowledge of the
Turkish Language and Religion, they were severally disposed of, in the many
Seraglio's belonging to the Grand Signior, where for the space of Five or Seven
Years, they were inured to Hardships by the laborious Practice of continual
Drudgeries, such as cleaving Wood, bearing Burdens, working in Gardens, and
every other toilsome Exercise; till having learned the Art of Patience, and
submissive Resignation to the Will of their Superiors, they were instructed
diligently in the Art of War; and as the Death of other Janissaries afforded
Vacancy, succeeded gradually to their Posts and Privileges, where Practicing
with an emulative Courage, the Dictates of their Education, they give a fatal
Proof how much the present Ties of Life exceed the Bands of weaker Nature; for
not retaining the minutest Notion of their Parents or their Country, they bend
entirely the Endeavors of their Arms for the wished Promotion of their
Sultan's Interest; and have in former Ages, by the Excellence of their
Discipline and Greatness of their Courage, been Chief Supporters of the Turkish
Glory; and by the Just Rewards their Valor won, distinguished Honorably as
the Flower of that Empire.

The present neglect of that Order occasioned by their former Insolence.
BUT far below the ancient Spirit of this Martial Order is the grovelling Genius
of the Modern Janissaries, who tasting largely of the Sweets of Power in the
black Successes of their bold Resentments, grew madly Insolent, and so familiar
with Rebellion, that having died their Weapons in the guiltless Blood of many
Sultans, they became so terrible to succeeding Emperors, that they have long
endeavored by the subtle Force of undiscovered Policies, to Raise some Milder
Order on the Ruin of the Former; least like unhappy Rome's Pretorian Cohorts,
the rough Effects of their audacious Violence should one Day Ruin that
declining Empire, whose Defense alone was the true Design of their Original
Institution.

Their Number and Privileges.
THEIR Number was at first confined to Seven Thousand, but is now improved to
more than Forty Thousand lawfully Enrolled; besides vast Numbers who, by the
winning Virtue of an annual Present, to the Officers of this Order, become
Possessors of those innumerable Privileges, which exempt the Janissaries from
Taxes, Prosecutions, or any other Ties of Justice, so that being owned on all
Occasions by the Muster Masters of that Militia, they stand secure above the
Law, and practice Villainies by the favorable Connivance of an uncontrolled
Authority.

Their Way of Living.
THERE are now One Hundred Sixty Two Chambers or large Buildings called Odaes at
Constantinople, for the Lodging of the Janissaries, but none in any other Part
of the Empire, because the Sultan's having ever looked upon this Order, as the
Safety and Support of their Authority, took care to have them always near their
Persons, a Design well laid, but fatal in its Consequences. Over every Chamber
is an Officer appointed, under the Title of Oda Basham, or Inspecter of the
Chamber. The Creation of a Janizary is a peculiar Prerogative of this
advantageous Office, and the manner wherein it is performed deserves Remark.

The manner of their Creation.
WHEN the Persons to be Chosen have gradually proceeded through the tedious Counse
of their probationary Labors, they are Summoned in their Places, to a Personal
Appearance before the Muster Master of that Order, who having Registered their
Names in Rolls of Parchment, presents them Ceremoniously to the Inspecter of
that Chamber into which they are to be admitted, who making them pass by
according to their Seniority, the Younger holding up the Elder's Garment,
strikes every Man a Blow upon the Ear, to remind him of the Duty and Subjection
he then takes upon him, and without the trouble of any additional Formality
declares them Janissaries.

Their Pay.
THEY receive their Pay proportionable to their Merit, beginning with little
more than a Penny a Day, and increasing their Allowances upon every worthy
Action, till they reach the Salary of Seven Shillings per Week, which is the
utmost Pay a Janizary can pretend to, till the Seniority of their Years, or
peculiarity of their Actions, advances them to the Offices peculiar to their
Order, and makes their Riches equal to their Authority: But by the way, the
Reader must observe this Pay is only an additional Encouragement to excite
their Valor, for they have not only daily Meals provided in their Chambers,
with all the other Necessaries of Life, but receive an annual Present of a Suit
of Clothes from the Bounty of their Emperor, which is generally made of very
good and serviceable Green or Violet colored Cloth, the Form whereof may fully
be perceived, by turning to the Cut relating to the Grecian Wedding, described
at large in the One and Twentieth Chapter of this Book.

The Power and Interest of their General.
THERE is an Officer appointed over this Militia, distinguished by the Title of
Yani-Cherr Aga, or General of the Janissaries, whose suspected Power alarms the
Court with such preventive Jealousies, that the Sultan takes a constant Care to
give that Charge to one entirely in his Interest: A Policy whose Effects have
often saved the Modern Emperors from the threatened Violences of their fierce
Rebellions: The boundless Power of this Arbitrary Officer extends it self to
the decision of every intervening Accident, in favor of, or judgment against
them: The common Punishments of their less heinous Crimes are generally ordered
by their Inferior Officers, and executed by the Cooks of their respective
Chambers; The way of Executing a Janizary.
but if any of that Order is detected in a Guilt deserving Death, he is
condemned immediately by the Sentence of his General, and thrown at Midnight
with the greatest Secrecy imaginable with Weights about his Neck into the
middle of the Sea.

Their Arms abroad and at home.
THEIR Arms in War are Scymetars and Muskets wherewith they Fight on Foot,
surrounding always the Person of their Emperor, or in his Absence the Vizier
or General, they seldom Fight in other Order, than the Figure which of old
composed the Macedonian Phalanx. When at Home they are appointed a the Guards
of Honor to the Christiam Ambassadors, to keep perpetual Watch in all the
Gates and Avenues of their Imperial City; to Accompany and Protect, such
Strangers as are Curious to behold the Rarities of the Country, from the
barbarous Insolences of the rude Inhabitants; which they will do with all
imaginable Courtesy and Fidelity, for the small Reward of half a Crown a Day,
and sometimes les^. They bear no other Arms at Home than a small Dagger called
Hanjarr, which with a large smooth Cane, not much unlike the largest Staffs
belonging to our Constables, are known so commonly, and so extremely feared by
all who meet them, that no Man dares presume to offer the least Affront to any
Christian guarded by a Janizary, least his Blood should pay the Forfeit of his
Insolence.

A Story of a Janizary at Constantinople.
I remember with concern that at my first Arrival in that Country, while I was a
perfect Stranger to their Nature and their Language, I was prompted by the
Curiosity of my Temper, to walk about the Streets of Constantinople, and make
my Observations on the Place and its Inhabitants, under the undoubted Convoy of
a faithful Janizary; we were passing on a Causway in a Public Street, when the
Misfortune of a Rude and Ignorant Potter, led him on to stop our Way, by the
means of an Ass that he had laden with brittle Ware to Sell his Customers
about the City: The Janizary had already passed the Door of a large Shop, from
whence the poor Fellow drove his Ass upon the Causway, and prevented me from
following my Convoy; there was a fair Descent not much beyond him, whereby he
might have gone down to the middle of the Street, had he turned his Asses Head
the other way, but whether moved by a Religious Zeal which naturally teaches
them to hate a Christian, or by the Native Haughtiness of his unpollish'd
Temper, he pressed his Ass with fury forward, and the Passage wanting breadth
to give him room, obliged me roughly to the inconvenient trouble of an
unwilling Squeeze to give him all the way I could, but finding the unwelcome
pressure of the Asses Panniers a little incomodious, I was forced to lay my
Hands upon the Creature's Side, and pushing forward somewhat violently and
unexpectedly together, both the Potter and his Panniers fell headlong from the
Causway, which was almost Five Foot high, into the middle of the Street, almost
half a Foot deep in Mud and Water: The Fellow somewhat hurt by the roughness of
his Fall, and very much enraged at the Destruction of his Glasses, drew out a
long Knife, which he wore within his Girdle, and running to the Causway
endeavored furiously to reach my Legs with a revengeful Wound: The Janizary,
who had heard the Fall, and was come back to my Assistance, leaped swiftly
down, and drawing his Hanjarr in hasty Passion, struck it to the Hilt in the
poor Fellows Shoulder, who falling on his Knees amidst the Dirt, cried out with
lifted Arms, O God, and Mahomet his only Prophet, in what have I Offended to be
made the Victim of a Cursed Infidel. Nay to so unreasonable a Degree was he
transported by his Passion, that finding no Redress, he threw the Mud upon his
Face, and rolled himself about in Blood and Water, while the Janizary marched
forward unconcerned and stately, leading me untouched, through Crowds of People,
who though their Eyes declared their Anger, were obliged to hide their Thoughts
in the deceitful Postures of a mild Neutrality.

A dangerous Privilege of the Militia.
AMONG the numerous Privileges peculiar to the Janissaries, there is one a little
inconsistent with the cautious Policy of the Turkish Government, that is a
Permission of increasing their Common Treasury, by the successive Additions of
what Sums of Money their Aga's or Generals die possessed of, and the Grant of
very considerable Profits, arising from the Tenure of several large Tracts of
Land in Anatolia. How dangerous it is to Assign such Power and Riches, to a
Standing Army ever Quartered in the Metropolis of their Empire, the Turkish
Sultans have experienced dearly, by the frequent Effects of that audacious
Insolence, which having long been nourished by the dictates of their Plenty,
has often Fleshed the Lawless Janzaries in the Murder of their Sovereigns: Nor
do they only study their Revenge in the Success of their Rebellion, since it is
the never failing Interest of this Order, to outlive the Reigns of many
Sultans; Their Abuses of an Interregnum.
for besides the sure Addition of a daily Penny to their former Pay, they gain
an uncontrolled Authority, to Rob and Plunder during the space of a small
Interregnum, violently Possessing as a lawful Prize whatever Goods they lay
their Hands on; and committing boldly black Outrages with the plausible
Pretense of Grieving out of measure for the mournful Death of their Indulgent
Master.

THE melancholy Consequences of this Abuse of Power, have as is before
declared, induced the Government to study Means of ruining this Order, which
not being able to accomplish by the dint of Force, they have invented many
subtle Wiles to Weaken Gradually the Foundations of their Power; for whereas
the Matchless Discipline of Ancient Janissaries gave bright Examples to
Inferior Orders, they are now admitted frequently without the Gradual Labors
of Probationary Servitude. Marriage once denied 'em with the Strictest
Prohibition, is not only Suffered but Encouraged by their Officers; Trades are
followed, and the Weekly Musters Slighted by Permission, insomuch that their
Unfurnished Chambers, once the Nurseries of Successful Valor, can furnish few
at Wars great Summons, who do not Artfully decline the Service, by the
prevailing Pleas of Wife and Family, or some mean Shift, whose common Practice
has already Weakened and will in time Entirely Ruin the declining Columns of
that Dwindling Order.

The Turkish Spahee's.
NEXT to the Janissaries, I proceed to speak of that Order of the Turkish Horse,
commonly distinguished by the Name of Spahee's and divided into two Bodies, viz.
the Europaean, and the Asiatick. These Light Horse Men, were in Ancient times
the Noblest Cavalry the World could boast of, Rich and Formidable by the Plenty
they were Masters of, never coming into the Field without the Stately Splendor
of a Numerous and Magnificent Attendance, and Shining Brightly over all the
rest of their Militia by the vast advantages they made of their Acquaintance
with, or Interest in, the Greatest Officers of the Empire, The Reasons of their
late Decay.
but Poisoning their Loyalty with the increase of their Authority, they
Sacrifis'd their Honor to the Dictates of Ambition, and Insolently Practiced a
continued Lesson of Mutiny and Rebellion, 'till the common Fate of Falling
Treachery Involved their Order in a general Ruin, and from the Towering Pyramids
of their Unrivaled Grandeur, reduced them Gradually to a common Level with the
Inferior Orders of the Turks Militia.

Their Pay and Opportunities of Increasing it.
AT present the Number of Spahees exceeds not Five and Thirty Thousand, who
Receive a Quarterly Payment in the Presence of the Vizier Azem, a Custom
Introduced by the Famous Kupriuli, to prevent the Black effects of those
Intestine Discords, common Formerly, from their Pay Day Quarrels; The lowest
Salary of a Turkish Spahee is at the Rate of one Shilling a Day, to which they
become Entitled to upon their first Promotion to that Office, and increase
their Pay by Gradual Steps, such as the Favor of their Officers, the Addition
of 2 Pence or 3 Pence a Day for the Head of every Enemy they bring their
General, as much for the Information of a Spahee's Death out of the Pay of the
Deceased, a Custom Politickly Instituted to prevent the Fashionable Cheats
Imposed on Christian Princes by their Military Officers. Besides which casual
Opportunities of Increasing their Allowances, they Receive the Additional
Reward of 4 Pence a Day upon the Accession of every New Sultan to the Throne of
his Predecessors, so that by the Favorable turns of Merit or good Fortune they
go on Increasing by Successive Additions, till they attain at last their Ne
plus Vltra, and sit down contentedly in the full Possession of Eight Shillings
and Four-Pence per Day.

Their Arms in War.
THE Common Arms in use amongst these Horsemen are numerous and convenient, and
so strangely differing from one another, that it is a Sight Completely curious
to observe a Disciplined Spahee, as fully Armed as War requires him. For first
a Glittering Helmet rather Graces than Defends their Heads, a Back and Breast
Piece Guard their Bodies, and on their Shoulders Hangs a Bow with a Capacious
Quiver of their Eastern Arrows, their Girdles often hold 4 Horse-Mens Pistols,
a long Light Musket Slung like ours, hangs Neatly at their Sides, and on their
proper Thigh, is Fast'ned a Large Weighty Scymetar, werewith when Broken in
upon Disordered Enemies they do Prodigious Execution, and Riding short in
strong and spacious Stirrops, lift themselves with ease beyond their Saddle,
and extend a Blow with double Fury: Besides these Arms, they bear upon the left
side of their Horses beneath the Girt, another strong and broader Back-Sword;
which with an Iron headed Mace, for that purpose fastened on the contrary side,
they use promiscuously as they see Occasion.

Their Discipline rather desperate than regular.
THEIR Discipline is mean and insignificant, for they never Form their Bodies
according to the politer Practice of the Christian Nations, into Regiments or
Companies, Rank, File, or any other Order, but uniting strongly into one gross
Multitude, observe attentively the Nod of their Commanders, and repeating
loudly Exclamations upon God, under the Expressions Allah, Allah, fall rashly
on with speed and vigor; and if repulsed in their two first Endeavors, to
break the Order of their Enemies, repeat with desperate Rashness their
dangerous Attempt, and if repelled that fatal time, forget their Courage, and
disperse confusedly in all the hurry of a shameful Flight.

Their Punishments.
IN War, the Charge of those Rich Wagons, which contain the Money for the
Payment of the Troops, is constantly committed to the Custody of the Spahees;
whose place it is to stand on Horseback as Sentinels of Honor with a Janizary
on Foot, at the end of every Rope which supports the stately Pavilion of their
Sultan, or in his Absence the Vizier his General. When their Crimes deserve the
Punishment of Death, they suffer privately like the Janissaries, but when
Demerits of a lower Nature, call for Punishments of smaller Rigor, they are
bastinadoed on their Feet as is before described, while offending Janissaries
feel the Cudgel on their fleshy Buttocks, that the one may Ride and the other
Walk without uneasiness; by which means neither is prevented from the Service
of his Sultan.

SO much shall serve to have spoken of the two extraordinary Orders of the
Turkish Militia, who receive immediate Salaries from the Treasures of the
Sultan. I shall now proceed to Calculate as nearly as is possible the
prodigious Numbers of their Cavalry, whose formidable Bodies have so often
struck a panick Fear through the despairing Armies of contending Governments.

Zaims and Timariot^, what ^hey are.
THE main Support and sinewy Foundation of their Military Power, are the Orders
distinguished in their Language by the Names of Zaim and Timariot; the First of
which in Rank and Title is no ways Inferior to an Earl in Christendom, the
last may justly be compared with our Europaean Barons, and both not much unlike
those Persons, who in England possessed Estates in Capite, or the ancient
Tenure of Knight's Service.

Their Use and Duty.
IT ever was, and still continues a Custom amongst the Turks, immediately after
having Conquered the Dominions of an Enemy, to parcel out the Lands into
certain large Divisions; and bestow them instantly upon such of their Officers
as had successfully distinguished themselves in the Reduction of that Country:
These Men in return for the Possession of their Lands, are besides the
necessary Duties of a Rustical Improvement, obliged continually to maintain a
settled Number of Men and Horses completely Armed, and ready at a Minutes
warning for the Call of War; to which they go themselves attended by their
several Numbers when the Grand Signior or Vizier appear in Person in the Field;
but generally go or stay, according to the Dictates of their various
Inclinations, when the Armies are Commanded by some Inferior General.

The Charge incumbent on a Zaim.
OF these the Zaims, as noblest in their Quality are richest in their
Possessions, and consequently Taxed with a proportionable Weight of Care and
Charges. The lowest Charge incumbent on a Zaim, is Four complete and qualified
Horsemen, and the highest Nineteen. The highest of a Timariot is Four, and the
smallest One: But many of these Men, ambitious of Preferment, and desirous to
be taken notice of, for over-acting their Parts of Loyalty and Obedience, will
often double, sometimes treble their Proportion of the Soldiers.

THAT the Reader may be able to compute the Number of the Ottoman Forces, I
will proceed to make a reasonable Calculation of these Horsemen, from the
several Farms belonging to the Two and Twenty Provinces heretofore mentioned.

In the Province of Anatolia are rekon'd 629 Zaims, and 8570 Timariots.
Caramania 073 2165 Diarbekir 118 0873 Scham 128 0560 Siwas 108 3029 Ezrum 122
5548 Pascha 185 0826 Marasch 027 0512 Cyprus 040 1067 Tripoly 063 0570 Rika 060
0666 Terbozan 056 0398 Halep 117 1044 Childir 106 0959 Kupudan 124 1152 Rumeeli
075 8194 Bosna 063 1621 Kars 078 2111 Musul 058 1340 Kibros 094 2450 Babylon
180 7924

The Militia peculiar to Grand Cairo.
GRAND CAIRO is omitted here, as having a Militia peculiar to its self, to be
treated of hereafter, consisting of Twenty Thousand Horse and Eighty Thousand
Foot, kept constantly to be ready upon all Occasions; so that in the One and
Twenty Arch-Dukedoms abovementioned are contained at least, Three Thousand
Five Hundred and Four Zaims, and Fifty One Thousand Five Hundred Seventy Nine
Timariots; and the Charges incumbent on the First of these, being as I have
said before from Four to Nineteen Men, we may reasonably conclude, that the
Grandeur of One making full amends for the Deficiency of the Other, they come
attended to the Field at the rate of Ten Followers to each Man, which added to
their Masters, complete the Number of Thirty Eight Thousand Five Hundred and
Eighty Men.

A Calculation of the Number of the Turkish Horse.
THE lowest Quota of a Turkish Timariot as has been told already, being One Man
and the highest Four; and indeed there remaining few of the Former, since the
vast Improvements made of ancient Farms, we may with reason judge Timariots to
bring, one with another, Three Men besides themselves to serve in War; which
make in all, the Number of Two Hundred and Seven Thousand, Three Hundred and
Eight Fighting Men; which added to the Zaims, Spahees, and Egyptian Soldiers
aforementioned, complete their Cavalry and form a Standing Army consisting of
at least, Three Hundred Thousand Eight Hundred and Eighty Eight accomplished
Horsemen.

NOR is this large Account of their Prodigious Numbers Swollen beyond the fixed
Reality of their Existence, I might rather have advanced my Calculation in a
High Degree, from the Natural Dictates of Conspicuous Probability, but shall
Content my self with having given my Reader an Account, Sincerely void of all
Extravagancies, and those Fashionable Practices (whether Justly or Unjustly, I
shall not here dispute) so Unfortunately Imputed to the too Prolifick Fancy's
of our Modern Travelers.

The Order of the Tukish Infantry called Azapi.
PROPORTIONABLE to the Cavalry is the Unnumbred Infantry of the Turkish Nation,
which consists of several Degrees in Honor or advantage, and all Maintained in
War and Peace without the smallest Burden on the Sultan's Treasury, the most
Unvalued, Numerous, and Unpolished Soldiers of the Turkish Army, are the
Azapi, an Order void of Form or Discipline, who in the Storming Towns,
defending Trenches, or Attacking Armies are like useless Blocks of Timber
Pushed upon their Ruin, that falling Dead by Thousands they may as it were make
Blunt the Weapons of the Enemy, and with their Bodies fill a Ditch or form a
Bulwark for the Passage or Defense of their more Valued Followers.

BESIDES these General Bodies of the Turks Militia, every Province has some
Peculiar Order for its own Defense, nor do the Guards of Viceroys and
Provincials form an Inconsiderable Part of their Unshaken Strength and Power;
no Bey, Bashaw, or any distant Governor, believing himself secure without the
Guard of certain Thousands of Soldiers Appropriated to his Service, who when
the Common Danger, or their Masters Loyalty speaks 'em necessary, are sent to
serve their Country, where any Seat of War requires their Presence.

THERE are, besides these mentioned Orders several other sorts of Soldiery,
such as Gunners, Armourers, Baggage-Guarders, etc. of which in Constantinople
only, may be Reckoned constantly the Number of 12 or 14 Thousand, whereby the
Reader may be able to guess, what Proportionable Swarms must be Distributed in
all the Spreading Corners of that Spacious Empire.

The Turks Auxiliary Forces from Valachia and Moldavia.
THE Subjects of Moldavia and Valachia are Obliged to send Auxiliary Forces to
the Assistance of the Turks, whenever their occasions Press 'em to Require
it, the Settled Quota of each Country is about Eight Thousand Men, Commanded
always by their Respective Princes, nor can the Weightiest Plea of Incapacited
Poverty, Exempt 'em from that Duty.

The Duty of the Tartar Han, in respect to the Grand-Signior's Service.
BUT the Greatest aid, the Turks Receive from their depending Allies, is the
fixed Supply of Fifty Thousand Horse, a Tribute due to the Occasions of the
Sultan, from the Petty Tartar, to be led by the Young Han his Son, or the Chief
Minister of the Country, when the Turkish Army is Commanded by the Grand
Vizier, or any other General, but when the Emperor Commands in Person, the
Tartar Han or Prince himself must come and join him with a Furnished Army of an
Hundred Thousand Men.

HAVING Dwelt so long upon those Numerous Orders whose Unnumber'd Multitudes
Compose that Formidable Power whereunto in former Ages the Successful Turks
have owed their Fortune, it may not be Esteemed Unnecessary to describe
particularly that Accomplished Discipline so strictly Practiced in the Longest
Marches of their Numerous Army.

THOUGH the Turkish Management of their Body Military has been Rendered void of
Form and Discipline by the Mistaken Representations of some too Hasty
Travelers, yet a Person who observes with a Curious Impartiality, the Artfull
methods of their Warlike Government, will soon percieve a Matchless Order Shine
Conspicuously throughout their Camp, whose Good effects Produce continually
such Happy Consequences, as will more than make a full Atonment for their known
Deficiency in the Art of War,

The use of Wine denied Soldiers of the Turkish Army upon pain of Death.
FOR First, the use of Wine is there Denied 'em by so Strict a Prohibition, that
the Smallest Quantity, when Discovered, is a certain Sacrifice of that Man's
Life who has it in Possession. Hereby those frequent Quarrels and Audacious
Villainies so Fatal and Pernicious to the Christian Armies are Perpetually
avoided, and the Noisy Clamours of Tumultuous War, Subservient Calmly to the
Milder Influence of a Peaceful Quietude, no Rapes or Murders Plead for Justice
to the Base Abettors of a Countenanced Disorder, no Hopes or Prospect of
Unlawful gain can Tempt the Officers of a Turkish Army, to the Loose
Permission of Licentious Insolences; all is Mild and Serene and Silent, and
the Horrid Face of Gloomy War Disguised or Painted by the Brighter Marks of
Form and Discipline.

IT IS for this the Officers of any Marching Troops throughout the Turks
Dominions, Dispatch continually from Place to Place, a certain Number of the
Trustiest Janissaries, to Search the Towns through the which their Men must
Pass, and Seal or Stave what Buts of Wine or other Spirituous Liquor they find
therein, at Least 4 Days before their Camp Arrives.

A Curious sort of Torches used in Turkey.
ANOTHER Custom Prevalent amongst the Turkish Armies is to March 'em constantly
from Town to Town, and never suffer them in Peace or War to Lie so long in any
Place, as to Contrive such Mischiefs as our Christian Soldiers by their
Tempting Opportunities do too often Study, and find means to Execute; nay so
Careful are their Chiefs to prevent Disturbances, that they will rather Travel
all Night long than give their Men the means of Plundering those Miserable
Wretches on whom they Quarter; and indeed it is a Sight Extremely Pleasant to
behold 'em Marching through the Thickest Gloom of Winter Nights, with so
Innumerable a Quantity of Bright Illuminations as almost Rival Day it self with
their Extended Luster; nor are these Lights like our small Torches, but
Composed of Large and Massy Balls of Flax and Cotton, dipped in Tarr or
Turpentine, or oftener a sort of Oily, and Bituminous Wood, which certain Arabs,
Purposely Attending on the Turkish Camp, and there Distinguished by the Name of
Massalageelar, bear aloft in Iron Cages, carried on a Tall and Elevated Staff
not much unlike those Ancient Lights Described in Old and Valuable Tapesttry.

The form wherein the Turkish Generals Pitch their Camps.
AND now, since I have so often mentioned the Turkish Army, 'twill no ways
favor of a Disgressive Prolixity, if I Describe at Large that Graceful Order
and unthought Magnificence wherewith they Pitch their Camps in every Place they
come to. First then, the Large Pavilions of the Sultan, Grand Vizier, or any
other General then Marching at their Head, are Pitched directly in the midst of
some Extensive Plain, Surrounded at Submissive Distance by the Tents of his
Lord Treasurer, Chief Steward, Secretary and the Master of the Ceremonies;
these Five Pavilions Placed as I have said before, at a Respectfull Distance,
Extend themselves upon a vast Spot of Ground, leaving in the Middle one fine
open Square, in whose delineated Center stand a double Row of stately Pillars,
which support a lofty Canopy, under which all Punishments when ordered by the
General, are put in Execution: Here come the Officers of the Army, either led
by Business or desire of Conversation, and walking up and down in several
Companies, form agreeably a sort of Promenade, diverting, though irregular.

The Turkish Treasury, how Guarded in the Camp.
NOT far from hence are placed those valuable Chests which bear the Treasure for
the Soldiers Payment, pil'd in gradual Order one upon the other, and rising in
a Form directly circular: These Chests are guarded both within and without, by
certain Chosen Horsemen, who all Night long, keep strict and formidable Watch,
with Spears and Firearms.

THE Two abovementioned Quarters are surrounded by the graceful Tents of the
Bashaws, Beys, Beylerbeys, Sangiacks, and Aga's, whose stately Form and vast
Magnificence can never be imagined, but by such whose ocular Demonstration have
convinced 'em of their Grandeur; for though the Turks delight but little in the
outward Ornament of Houses, nor aspire in the least to overdo each other in the
Europaean Custom of Polite and Solid Architecture, yet do they far more exceed
us in the rich Ornaments and Contrivances of their Pavilions, than we outshine
their homely Hutts, and miserable Cottages, by the stupendous Fabrics of our
finest Marble, and the most lasting Statelyness of our most celebrated Edifices.

The wonderful Conveniences of the Turkish Pavilions.
IT IS every way impossible to describe at large those tripple Walls, vast Rooms
of State, innumerable Apartments, Kitchens, Butteries, Cellars, and convenient
Offices, wherein those Tents abound which form the Courts of some considerable
Officers in their Army; their Rooms are square, and full of Windows, neatly
formed to open always from the Windy Quarter; and in short, nothing either
Useful or Ornamental is omitted to complete them.

The Quarters of the Zaims, Timariots, etc.
BEHIND their Masters lie, in measured Order, a prodigious Number of the Zaims,
Timariots and Beylerbeys, in Proportion to the Sultan's Army, who with their
Horses, Camels, Mules and Carriages, appear a huge and formidable Body, of
well-skill'd and disciplined Soldiers.

Quarters of the Janissaries.
THe Chosen Glories of the Turkish Camp compose its Front, consisting chiefly of
the bravest Janissaries, and such accomplished Volunteers, as having fully
qualified themselves by a long Experience for the Duty of an Office, expect
impatiently some profitable Employment, by gradual Succession to the vacant
Posts of such as fall, or by the long-wish'd Favor of some Great Commander.
These encompass at an aweful Distance, the Yani-Cherr-Aga, or General of the
Janissaries, whose Place and Power I have lately spoken of, in the foregoing
Part of this Chapter.

The Spahees Quartered in the Rear.
THE Rear of their Army is generally composed of the Politest Spahees, who with
many other Regular and Well-appointed Horsemen, of the most Esteemed and
Honorable Orders, maintain their Posts in case of need with wonderful Alacrity
and Resolution, making Good the Retreat of their disordered Fellows, by bravely
Sacrfising their Lives and Liberty, for the preferable Interest of their Sultan
and his Country.

Station of the Baggage and heavy Artillery.
IT IS generally under the Guard of these above-named Horsemen, that the Baggage,
Camels, and heavy Artillery belonging to the Army are safely Convoyed; and
really when a Man who seriously reflects on what he sees, becomes a Witness of
the numberless Attendants, Trains, and Carriages of the Turkish Armies, he
cannot but with Wonder bless that God, who curbs in Mercy the Ambitious Arms of
this prodigious Government, and has kindly placed a powerful Hook in the
presumptuous Nostrils of their Great Leviathan.

THUS have I at large described the fatal Instruments of those depopulating
Slaughters, whose raging Violence in former Ages, raised the Monarchs of a
ravished Empire, to the loftiest Throne of undivided Power and arbitrary
Tyranny, which the World supports; and still continue to maintain the Swords
Prerogative, whereby without respect to Justice or Religion, the Turkish
Sultans trample proudly on the softer Dictates of Nature and Morality; removing
violently whatever Rubs obstruct their Will; and to whose Inhumane Practices
nothing can be more applicable, than the Precepts of Photinus, expressed as
follows in the Eighth Book of Lucan. Sceptrorum vis tota perit, si pendere justa
Incipit; evertitque arces respectus honesti.
Libertas Scelerum est, etc.
Scepters lose Power when Kings Religious grow,
And valued Honesty does Towers o'erthrow;
Free Villainy Supports an enviod Reign,
And unsheathed Weapons, unshock'd Power Maintain.
He who in Wicked Actions takes delight,
Is Safe no longer than they Crown his Sight.
The Pious Man in Courts should never dwell,
Virtue and Sovereign Power agree not well;
But he who meanly thinks such Sin a Shame,
Let him for ever fear, and miss the Road to Fame.


CHAP. V. Of their Naval Force.
The convenient Situation of Constantinople, in respect to Navigation.
LET us now proceed to search a little into those extraordinary Conveniences
for attaining the highest Perfection in the Art of Navigation, so peculiar to
the Capital of the Turkish Empire, that it seems as if the Hand of Providence
had fixed at Constantinople the happy Seat of Universal Monarchy, and blessed its
Neighborhood with all the mighty Helps that bounteous Nature can afford a
Country, or the Hand of Art can possibly require, to extend Dominion over all
the World, and spread Authority through distant Climates, vainly separated by the
Watery Deserts of a Stormy Ocean.

NOT all the Kingdoms of the Christian World, should they resolve to join their
Forces, and partake promiscuously of one another Blessings, could afford
conjointly more Materials for Maritime Improvements, than grow commodiously
within the beckon of the Turks Metropolis; Timber whence brought them.
for round the Shores whose ragged Cliffs encompass the Euxine or Black Sea,
stand endless Numbers of Tall Woods, whose stately Timber felled for Use,
supply the City through the Thracian Bosphorus, with the finest Wood required for
Building.

Canvas, Hemp Tar, Pitch, Tallow and Biscuit.
CANVAS for Sails, and Hemp for Rigging well what Ships they build, they have
beyond all possible Necessity, from those Parts of Egypt which surround
Grand-Cairo. Valachia, Moldavia, Epirus and Albania, supply them plentifully
with Tallow, Pitch, and Tarr, the best in Europe; as for Biscuit it abounds
incredibly through every Corner of their vast Dominions.

The prodigious Magnitude of the Arsenal at Constantinople.
THEIR Ports and Arsenals for building Ships are Numerous, and Convenient beyond
Imagination; that at Constantinople is so vastly Large and full of Volta's or
Docks for Building, as to be capable of Fitting out above One Hundred and
Thirty Five Vessels at one and the same time; nor are the other Arsenals and
Harbors of his Empire, less Convenient or Magnificently Splendid, in
proportion to the several Magnitudes of the respective Towns or Places where
they are; Whence supplied with Gally Slaves.
and as for Gally-Slaves to tugg laboriously at the toilsom Oar, they neither do
nor can want fresh Supplies, while the Barbarian Pirates or dreadful Ravages of
the Inhumane Tartars, present or sell them yearly Thousands of such unhappy
Wretches, as have fallen unwarily into their Hands, and so become the wretched
Victims of their insatiate Avarice.

NOW may my Reader be induced to fancy from the Accounts abovementioned, that
the Relation I shall give him of the Turkish Fleets will be proportionable to
their Conveniences for encouraging above the Christian World, the useful Art
of Navigation; but he will find his Error with a deep Surprise, when he
perceives their Naval Force, not only unimprov'd by an industrious Application,
to an equal Balance with the Christian Navies, but on the contrary, every way
Inferior to the Maritime Improvements of those Poor Republics, whose small
Extent and insignificant Possessions, do scarce entitle them to the Name of
Governments, when looked upon in Competition with the far superior Power of
Confederated Christendom.

Why the Turks grew weak in Navigation.
YET is this great Misfortune rather owing to their Ignorance than Idleness,
having frequently Attempted to Equip vast Navies, and with some Success Invaded
Hostile Nations with their sometime Formidable Squadrons, but their want of
Knowledge in the Arts of Building, Rigging, or the Management of Vessels, still
occasioned Yearly Losses to the Sultan, by their dreadful Shipwracks when they
met with Tempests, or more dreadful Overthrows when driven by the Turns of
Chance to stand the Shock of a more Skillful Enemy, in the destructive Trial of
some decisive Battle.

Galleys now chiefly used.
IT IS for this alone they have of late dis-us'd their Large Maa-humes or Ships
of War, and fallen wholly into building Galleys and Galleasses, so that
trusting rather to the Oar, than their Strength or Courage, they preserve their
Navies from those shocking Dangers which so often broke 'em, when they vainly
thought themselves a Match by Sea as well as Land for Christian Enemies.

THERE are notwithstanding now at Constantinople so many Tall and Stately Ships
of War, as might compose a Navy of Five or Six and Thirty Sail, from Twenty
Four to One Hundred and Sixteen Guns; but these are never sent Abroad for Use
but Oftentation. The Form of Turkish Ships of War.
They are beyond imagination high and broad, their Sterns and Heads built high,
one Deck above another, for Convenience of Lodging Officers, but so unweildy by
their Form, and so unfit for Stormy Weather by the Green unseason'd Timber
which is used about 'em, that though they put to Sea, with Drums and Trumpets
Sounding, endless Crowds of Sailors Shouting, and their Streamers Flying with a
rich Magnificence, they soon return Unrigg'd and Shattered, less in Number as
in Splendor, bearing shamefully the ragged Marks of Weakness and Disorder in
their tattered Sails, and Planks just gaping to admit the Ocean.

THE Turkish Galleys, which as I said before, are what they most depend on, are
jointly subject to the same Misfortunes with their Larger Vessels, and utterly
unable to resist the Fury of a Winter Sea, wherefore being-fix'd in dry Docks
belonging to the Arsenal, till the sharp extremity of that unfavour'd Season is
a little over, there are Orders given to the Sultan's Admiral, distinguished by
the Name of Capitain-Bashaw, to call 'em from their Stations, and with all
imaginable Expedition put to Sea, and Cruise all Summer.

The manner of their raising Seamen.
PROCLAMATION is immediately hereupon, Issued carefully over all the Turks
Dominions bordering on the Black and Midland Seas, that such as hold their
Lands in Tenor of Sea Service, shall suddenly Repair with their respective
Quotas to their several Posts on Board their Galleys, this is done with utmost
speed, and generally brings together about Two Thirds of that great Number
which their Fleet requires upon all Occasions.

The Pay of a Turkish Sailor.
TO fill the Vacancies which still require supply, they List immediately
prodigious Numbers of a sort of Mariners, there distinguished by the Name of
Tchurmah, who are kept as Slaves by People in the Towns which border on the
Sea, and hired to serve the Summer out on board the Galleys, where for Six
Months Drudgery at the laborious Oar, they receive a good Allowance of
Provision for the Voyage, and about the Sum of Five and Twenty Pounds at their
Return, which is the sole Right and Property of their respective Masters, who
live an Idle and Inglorious Life, upon the toilsom Labors and unpitied
Miseries of their Fellow Creatures.

IN case there still requires a fresh Recruit, they send a certain Number of
their sturdiest Seamen, to rove from Place to Place, about the Provinces which
border on their Capital, and there Impress the lustiest Clowns they find
amongst them, till by this Addition they complete the Number which the Service
of the Sultan then demands.

An admirable Policy.
THESE last are called Azaps or Clowns, and as least Useful to the Necessities
of their Emperor, are still least Burdensome to his Treasury, for though their
Pay is equal to the rest, it Costs the Government not one sole Farthing, for
out of every Five and Twenty Families they claim a Right to one Azap, and for
his Maintenance that Summer, the other Four, and Twenty Houses are obliged to
raise an equal Sum of Money to reward his Service.

BESIDES these several Orders of the Turkish Seamen, there remains another to
be spoken of, which consists of those condemned Delinquents of the Christian
Churches subject to their Tyranny, whose Crimes or evil Fate have chained their
Bodies to the Oar of Slavery, whence Death alone has Power to free them; these,
with such of the Maltese, Venetian, Spanish, or Italian Mariners, as have
unfortunately been the Prize of War, are kept Misery of Galley-Slaves.
together void of Hope in endless Misery, never to enjoy their Ravished Liberty
till the Pitying Sea demands their Bodies, Worn and Meagre by continual
Labors, or the Happy turn of a Successful Battle, shall with Joy give back
again that Darling Blessing which it once took from 'em.

The Yearly Voyage of the Turkish Fleet of Galleys.
THE Turkish Galleys thus Equipped, set Sail for a large Port upon the Hellespont
now called Gallipolis. Their Number never exceeds one Hundred nor can the
Mighty Power of the Turkish Sultan maintain a greater Fleet, though often
Attempted. Hence they Sail as War or Business leads their Admiral, from Isle to
Isle round all the Tributary Islands of the Archepilago, to awe the Natives
from Rebellion or Disorder; or Preserve their Shoars from the Repeated Insults
of their Christian Enemies, till having spent the time Allotted for their
Absence, they return again to the Port of Constantinople, and Discharging all
their Hired Seamen, Place the Galleys in their former Stations, and retire to
their Respective Habitations, till Approaching Spring Invites their Officers to
Renew their Care, and Summon Back the Mariners to their Abandoned Duty.

Beyes of the Archipalago.
BESIDES the Fleet Immediately depending on the Sultan's Admiral, there are a
certain Number (under Twenty) of the Lords or Governors of the abovenam'd
Islands, who by the Tenure of their several Governments are still Obliged to
Join the Navy every Summer, with each a well appointed Galley under his
Command, when every Prize they Chance to Take is the undoubted Right and
Property of their Sultan, but when in Winter, they continue Cruizing, after the
Return of their High Admiral and his Navy, whatever Prize their Fortune gives
'em, is their own by Law, and by themselves Possessed as Lawful Booty.

A great Oversight in their Governments.
THE Fatal cause of that Unsinew'd Weakness in the Turkish Nvay, may not be
Improperly Assigned to their Unskilful Practice in the Art of Navigation,
guiding with a sort of Listless Application, their Unpolished rules of Maritine
Improvements, and so Confiding in the sure Perfection of the Christian
knowledge in that useful Science, that without the least Examination into the
Pretensions of a Renegado, they Immediately advance him to the Post of Gunner,
Sail-Maker, Carpenter or Boatswain, never doubting his Accomplishment in a
Study which they look upon as natural to the Natives of a Christian Country.

I know not whether it proceeds from a mean Despair of being able to Exceed or
Equal us in Sea Affairs, or is the Luxurious Effect of their Prodigious Plenty,
and those Rich Dominions they Possess by Land, which Tempts their Inclinations
to a Gross and Unmolested Enjoyment of their Unmeasured Wealth, and draws away
their minds from that Industrious Application, they must long time use before
they can Attain a full Perfection in that neglected Science. But Plain and
Undeniable Demonstration, convinces us that they Affect not in the least
becoming Formidable by a Powerful Navy, never Venturing into distant Oceans,
and very Rarely out of sight of Land, Sailing always by Direction of certain
False and Ill-design'd Sea-Charts, Mechanically Drawn without the Smallest
knowledge of a Mathematical Proportion, and as a Cloak to Shroud the Shameful
Ignorance which Reigns among them, make Frequent use of an Inglorious Proverb,
A Turkish Proverb.
viz. That God has given the Land to their Possession, and thought fit to
leave the Sea to the Dominion of the Infidels.

IN former Ages the Grand Signior could by Virtue of his great Authority at any
time Oblige the Algierines, with those of Tunis, Tripoly, Morocco, Fez, and
other Parts of Africa, to come with Powerful Ships of War to his Assistance;
The Pirates of Barbary Independent on the Grand-Signior.
but the Princes of those Country's having lately much Increased their Power as
well as Policy, find constant Means by some Excuse to Quitt his Service, nor
Approach his Empire, but in Order to Recruit their own, with Fresh Supplies of
Men and Plunder, while they Frequently Attack such Grecian Islands as are
under the Protection of the Turkish Sultan, and Artfully contrive to Play the
Pirate by Lying off at Sea without the Reach of any Fort or Castle, that upon
Complaint by those they Injure to the Officers of the Grand Signior, those
Avaricious Ministers who Underhand receive their Shares of all the Booty, may
have a fair Pretense for the Refusing to demand a Legal Satisfaction, as
knowing it beyond their Power to Revenge the Injury.

HAVING lately spoken of the Miserable Fate wherein such Wretches find
themselves Involved, as are by the Unhappy Chance of War become the Slaves of
an Inhumane Enemy, it may not be Unwelcome to Relate a Story, of the
Particulars whereof I was Informed by many People who were Witnesses to the
Truth of most of its Uncommon Passages.

A strange Story of a Turkish Slave redeemed from Servitude.
SIGNIOR PIETRO CORNARO a Young Accomplished Gentleman of an Ancient Family,
and considerable Fortune in the City of FERRARA in Italy, was led not many
Years ago, to Travel through the Various Provinces of his Celebrated Country,
that by Improving his Experience he might Entirely Satisfy his Eager
Curiosity, and Enrich his Mind with such Refined Notions, as would distinguish
his Perfections from the far less Qualified and common Conversation of his
Fellow Citizens.

HE came amongst other Places to Leghorne, and took up Lodgings at an Inn, in
order to Observe the Rarities of that well Peopled City, and Happening to be
Placed in an Appartment that Opened to the Public Street, would often take a
Morning Walk about his Room, and looking Frequently upon the Street, Divert
himself Agreeably by a Curious Observation of whatever Passed before him.

A Privilege of Slaves in Leghorne.
IT IS a Custom of the Town abovementioned, to Enlarge the Turks who serve 'em as
their Slaves, and give them Liberty to Ply as Porters, or betake themselves to
any other Toilsome Drudgery, Obliging them to Pay their Masters such a Daily
Sum of Money as is Judged convenient, and Permitting them to keep the little
Overplus to serve Occasionally their own Necessities.

A Virtuous Curiosity.
DIRECTLY Opposite to Signior Pietro's Chamber was a Bench, on which he often
saw a Melancholy Turk sit Thoughtfull and Dejected, Leaning Pensively his Head
upon his Hand, and Dropping now and then a Silent Tear, which he Endeavored
Secretly to Wipe away with a large Knott of Ropes the Wretched Badge of his
Unfortunate Employment. The Frequent Repetition of this Mournful Practice,
though begun too Early for a Public Observation, was perceived with Wonder by
the Compassionate Italian, who Earnestly desirous to become Acquainted with the
reasons of his Sorrow, sent at last a Messenger to Fetch him, and having
Carried him Directly to his own Appartment, Discoursed a while and Asked him
several Questions in the Italian Language, wherein the Turk had then Attained
Considerable Knowledge, and Receiving Answers Modest and Particular, Proceeded
to demand the manner of his being Taken, and how long he had continued in that
State of Slavery.

WITH wringing Hands and elevated Looks which seemed to blame his Stars for
his unpitied Misery, The poor, disconsolate Mohammedan began his Tale, and
watered his Complaint with showers of Tears, whose falling Streams spoke
piercing Proofs of his ungovernable Sorrow: I am, says he, an honest Musse^man,
never Friend to War or Rapine, but became a Sacrifice to both, in an unlucky
Visit to an Aged Father, then in Health, and Peace, at Cyprus; now perhaps laid
Cold and Breathless in some gloomy Grave, and may have broke his Heart to hear
my Misery.

THESE sad Complaints were followed mournfully by a sincere and full Account of
every Accident which had concurred unfortunately to reduce him to this Slavery;
he soon at large informed his kind Inquirer, that he had sorrowfully spent Four
tedious Years in that Condition, which had left Three Wives, Two Sons now Men,
and Nine small Children, drowned in Grief for his unlucky Loss, and wholly
destitute of any means whereby to know his present Habitation.

THE pitying Breast of Signior Pietro, framed for tender and compassionate
Impressions, melted generously with Sympathetical Concern, to hear the wretched
and forlorn Condition of this complaining Infidel, and asking him his Name, and
other things he thought convenient, he gave him Money and dismissed him kindly,
with a Word or two of Comfort.

A generous Compassion.
THE Turk returned disconsolately back to the unwelcom Practice of his daily
Labors, and the tender-natur'd Signior Pietro, seriously reflecting on his
weighty Sorrow, and considering that the Will of Providence, or some unthought
of Turn of fickle Chance, might one Day make the Case his own, and teach him by
the bitter Proofs of sad Experience, how to pity others Miseries, by the
insupportable Extremity of his own Misfortunes; he resolved to do a noble Act
of Christian Charity, and making Interest with the Governor of the Town, found
means to get the Turk Released, for the Ransom of about One Hundred Forty Five
Duccats.

NEVER could more welcome and surprising News rejoice the Heart of Humane
Sufferer, than that which brought the happy Turk the News of his Delivery; with
rapid Transports of ungoverned Joy he fell upon his Knees, embraced the Feet of
his adored Redeemer, and with numerous Vows of hearty Gratitude, entreated
Signior Pietro to inform him how he might return twice told that friendly Sum,
which had so generously purchased him his valued Liberty.

An honorable Liberality.
THE Good Italian wished him well, but told him he expected no Return, yet if
his Soul was Noble and would urge him to be Grateful, he only asked his solemn
Promise that he would at his Return, Redeem from Slavery some Christian
Gentleman, whom he should think did most deserve it, and send him back as soon
as possible, to visit once again his Native Country; This last Agreement was in
fine c^ncluded on, and the delivered Turk, supplied with Clothes and all things
necessary, embarked on board an English Vessel bound for Turkey, and returned
successfully to his former Habitation.

THERE passed about Three Months beyond the Day of the Mahometan's Departure
from Leghorne, when Signior Pietro, having been the greatest Part of that time
in Venice, pleased extremely with the City and its People, became enamored of
a Lady Young and Beautiful, called Maria Margarita Delfino, who had for several
Years resided in that Town, under the Roof and Care of a substantial Merchant,
youngest Brother to her Father, who with her Sisters, and the major Part of her
Relations, lived at Malta: Nothing could dissuade the Amorous Italian from a
violent Expression of his growing Passion; he solicited her Uncle with
incessant Importunities, and at last engaged him to permit him to Address her,
upon this Condition, that he should accompany his Niece and him to Malta, there
to gain her Father's Approbation of his Person and Condition. This he promised,
and continued Four Months daily visiting the Object of his Affection, till he
gained entirely her Consent to Marry him when she was Authorized to do it by
her Father's Order; and it seems their Sympathetic Ornaments of Mind and Body,
pointed out the Match, and spoke 'em only Worthy of each others Value.

A strange Misfortune which befell a Lover and his Mistress.
THEY Embarked upon a Vessel Bound for Malta, and belonging to that Island,
which they were almost arrived in Sight of, when a Turkish Gally met and
boarded them, making undistinguished Prize of all her Cargo, and transporting
Signior Pietro, with his Mistress and her Uncle into threatened Slavery, landing
them at Smyrna, together with the Valuable Prize in which they took them.

OH! Strange Uncertainty of Humane Life, blind, mad Event of fickle Fortune!
How much in vain do thoughtless Mortals boast the Blessings of a Worldly
Grandeur, when the sudden Turns of War, or Accident, destroy Tyrannically, in
one poor Moment, the stateliest Pillars of that fansied Greatness upon which
Foundation we so vainly Build our Hopes of Happiness!

A very odd and surprising Turn of Fortune.
I forgot to tell you that the Three Companions in this miserable State, had
changed their Clothes, for course and rougher Habits, when they saw the Danger
they were falling into, that being so disguised they might expect a Ransom from
a smaller Charge than otherwise would serve 'em; so that being taken with the
Common People they were like them, in Chains, conducted to the Public Market,
where the Slaves are Bought and Sold like Sheep or Oxen; Signior Pietro and the
young Ladies Uncle were tied together, and placed with many more to wait the
Purchase of the fairest Bidder; opposite to them the Poor, Unhappy Lady stood,
half dead with Fear and Anguish, with a numerous Crowd of Christian Women,
Young and Old, expecting every Moment to be Bought, and torn away from any
hopes of seeing ever more her Lover and Relation.

A grating Trial of a Lover's Patience.
WHO could now express the swelling Grief, conflicting Passions and tumultuous
Agonies, wherewith these poor desponding Lovers viewed each other, yet not
daring to discover their Concern, for fear their Love should double their
Misfortunes; till at last a young and graceful Turk came up to the disconsolate
Maria, and bargaining immediately with the Officer who kept her, paid the
Money, and throwing on a Veil he brought on purpose, took her from the rest,
and carried her away with an extraordinary Satisfaction.

MANY a Complaining Look did the despairing Lady give her Friends, who answered
her with all the mournful Marks of silent Lamentation, and were now,
(especially the Lover) so confounded with their Misery that they stood
insensible like Marble Statues, looking steadfastly upon the Ground, and took no
notice of the many Purchasers, who walked about from Place to Place to view the
Persons of the wretched Captives.

WHILE they stood thus fixed in Contemplation on the transitory Blessings of a
Mortal Life, there came a Turk from Stall to Stall enquiring earnestly of every
Officer, what Quality and Country their several Slaves laid claim to, and
examining particularly the Slaves themselves to the same Effect, at last he
came to Signior Pietro, who holding down his Head, the Turk stooped forward to
look upon his Face, a Courtesy not often put in Practice by those barbarous
People, who when a Slave refuses to hold up his Face will generally take them
roughly by the Chin, as when a Jockey looks upon a Horses Mouth, and rudely
force 'em to expose their Countenances. A lucky Accident.
The Turk no sooner saw the Face, but starting back in great Surprise, he raised
his Arms and Eyes toward Heaven, and half transported at the strange
Discovery, cried out aloud, I thank thee Holy Prophet thou have guided well my
lucky Footsteps. The grieved Italian looking up at this surprising Exclamation,
saw before his Eyes that very Man, whom in Leghorn he had so kindly freed from
Slavery; no Pen can tell the Raptures he must needs conceive at this so happy
Meeting, swift Embraces followed their Surprise, and when the Wonder of the
Turk would give him leave to speak again, he thus address himself to Signior
Pietro.

A memorable Piece of gratitude.
I promised thee, said he, thou best of Christians, that I would certainly
redeem such Slave from Servitude as I should judge did more than any else
deserve that Blessing; and now, thank Mahomet, in thee, I have discovered him;
with that he ordered him who guarded them to send some Person to receive his
Ransom, and conduct him presently to his own House: The overjoyed Italian heard
with Pleasure the Design of his accomplished Gratitude, but told him, if he
would be doubly kind, he might Redeem his Friend who suffered with him, and
they would find some speedy Means to reimburse his utmost Charges; the
Proposition was embraced as soon as offered, and a Person being sent to take
the Money, received immediately the Ransoms he demanded, and returning to the
Market left the Gentlemen in the Care of their Redeemer.

Another strange Surprise.
THE Turks Two Sons, when told the Accident by which their Father met the Man to
whom before he owed his Liberty, expressed sincere and grateful Joy, and bid
them welcome with an inexpressible Civility, and after having heard the manner
of their being Taken, and their sorrowful Complaint for loss of an unhappy
Virgin, whom they loved so dearly; he who was the Eldest of the Two cried out
with earnestness, Now by the Religion of our Prophet and his People, my
Father's House contains this Virgin; and thereupon proceeded to inform them, he
had bought that very Morning a young Christian Slave, to wait upon his Mother
and his Father's other Wives, that she had given the same Account as they had
done of the particulars of her Captivity, that she was then above among the
Women, and he would for satisfaction fetch her down that very Moment.

IT IS easy to imagine the Disorder of their Breasts, possessed alternately by
Hope and Fear; which raged impetuously and racked their Minds, till Doubt gave
way, and boundless Joy overspread their Souls to see the Person they so lately
lost, conducted to their Arms by him to whom the Laws of Turkey gave her up as
lawful Purchase.

THEY staid a Week with their kind Landlord, who would not rest till he had
likewise Ransomed Two Men Servants, and a Maid who waited on the Lady; these
together with as many of their Goods and Clothes as he could purchase from the
Turk who took them, he bestowed again upon their lawful Owners; gave them a
considerable Sum of Money and contrived to get them Passage on a Vessel of
Marseilles then Bound for Malta.

SIGNIOR PIETRO, the young Lady, and her Uncle frequently Endeavored to Oblige
this Honest Turk to take their Bills, or find some other method to secure his
Money; but he Persisted in a Positive Refusal of their smallest Proffers,
telling Signior Pietro the Debt was Paid before it was Contracted; and would
often lay his Hand Devoutly on his Bosom, and with a Zealous Sigh repeat this
Proverb. A Turkish Proverb.
The God of Heaven has given us Plenty, that we may give from God where need
requires it.

Moral reflections on the Instability of Fortune.
THIS Story, tho Digressive from the Subject of the Chapter, may perhaps, so far
divert the Reader as to make a full Atonement for its Undesign'd Prolixity;
since a Moral Observation may thereby be made, and Teach us happily so well to
use our Charitable Opportunities, that we may reasonably Hope, if once our Fate
should Chance to be Inverted, duly to receive that Measure of Compassion,
which our former Mercy Heaped Abundantly on those who wanted it, always bearing
in our Memories, that the Transitory Smiles of Worldly Fortune, though they make
a Blessing Great, can never make it Fixed or Permanent; that KINGS and BEGGARS
are alike the Sport of Chance; and those who Rule to Day may Serve to Morrow,
while the Blanks and Prizes of our Frail Mortality, Proclaim Alternately the
Good or Ill of Humane Life uncertain as a Lottery.

BUT to return to what I Undertook to speak of: Such as before Described is now
the Greatest Naval Power which the Turkish Sultan's Boast Possession of; and
while the Reader may be led to Wonder at the Blindness of those Enemies to
Christendom, he would do well to Praise the Mercies of that God, who by his
Undeserved and Boundless Providence vouchsafes to Curb the Wild desires of an
Ambitious Government, by not Permitting them to know their Interest, and
Improve those vast peculiar Opportunities, their Provinces afford them, to the
Terror or Destruction of his Church and People.

A Powerful Navy the Glory of a Nation.
THE Numerous Advantages a Nation gains, defended Formidably by a Warlike Navy,
are beyond dispute the Pillars of her State, and chief Promoters of her envied
Glories; since a People strengthened by a Powr'full Fleet, not only reap
Advantages from Foreign Traffic, and become thereby Immensely Rich at home,
but are Enabled fully to extend their Conquests to the spacious Earths remotest
Corners, and become free Denizons of all the Countries of the Habitable World.

The decay of Naval Force among the Turks, an Omen of their Downfall.
THAT therefore these Aspiring and Ambitious Infidels, instead of having gained
a double knowledge of the useful Art of Navigation as their daily Conquests
swelled their Empire, have extremely Slackened their once-warm Endeavors, and
begin to slight Marine Improvements, may well be looked upon as an undoubted
Proof of their declining State and Sinking Grandeur, and many reasonable Causes
join to Prompt a Christian's hope, that he may live to Triumph in the downfall
of a Throne whose Black Foundation fixed its Greatness on the Bloody Overthrow
of Injured Princes, and the Undistinguished Slaughter of Invaded Nations.

NOR are the Turks insensible of their Weakness; they know they lie entirely
open to the Insults of the Muscovites, who lately forced a Passage through the
Euxine Sea, and sent a Ship of 70 Guns, which brought on Board the Czar's
Ambassador, and coming to an Anchor at the Point of the Grand Signior's
Seraglio, saluted and surpised the City with a whole Broadside, never was
there seen a greater Consternation, which continued with uncommon Hurry and
Destraction till 'twas Publicly Proclaimed he came to bring their Emperor a
Compliment from Moscovy; since that, they have repaired some Castles on the
Entrance of the Bosphorus and Black Sea, but never built one Vessel more, nor
taken any requisite Precaution in order to withstand the growing Danger, which
alarmed their Fears from so undreaded and remote a Corner.

CHAP. VI. Of the Tenets of their Faith, and how differing from the Persians.
The Turkish Alcoran, or Body of their Faith.
THREE Noted Books among the Turks, Direct their Faith and Dictate their
Religion: The ALCORAN, or Body of their Law and Faith, was first Compiled by
the Impostor Mahomet, assisted by the Pen of Sergius a Monk; this Book is
written in Arabian Verse, but rough and inharmonious, nor must be either read
or written in another Language; it is like the Gospel amongst Christians Sacred
and Incontrovertible, and approached Devoutly with a zealous Kiss, nor must be
touched by Christians, or the unwash'd Hands of Turks themselves. The Titles
under which it passes are agreeable to their Opinion of its Doctrine, such as
Light of God, Sole Guide to Paradise, and Divine Director unto Heavenly Glories.

The Second Book of their Religion.
THE Second Book, which teaches their Religion, is the Assonah, or sure
Traditional Decrees of their Enlightened Prophets, Ebubeker, Omar, Haly and
Ozmyn: The Third, by whom 'twas written.
The Third is called, The Necessary Consequences of the Books of Life; or, True
Interpretation of the Prophet's Pleasure: Which last was written by the Ancient
Caliphs of Egypt and Babylon, whose vast Authority the Power of the Sword and
Change of Governments has centur'd in the Muftee of the Modern Turkish Empire.

The Five Articles required to Constitute a True Mohammedan.
NOW though these Three above-named Books, contain the total Sum of their
fallacious Doctrine, yet are they inverted greatly by the various Explications
and directly opposite Opinions of their Expounding Doctors: But notwithstanding
their Divisions into numerous Sects, which Teach peculiar Doctrines to their
several Adherents, there is a certain Standard of their Faith, containing Five
Religious Articles, of Fundamental Piety and Indispensible Necessity; which are
required to Constitute a True Mohammedan, and allowed by all, sufficient Proofs
to gain a Man of any Party or Opinion whatsoever, the valuable Character of a
True Believer: The First, is frequent Cleansing with a Pot of Water all the
outward Parts of their polluted Bodies: The Second, is to Pray Five times each
Day they live: The Third, to keep one Month in Twelve a Strict and Holy Fast:
The Fourth, to give according to their Wealth a large Proportion to the Poor
Believers: And the Fifth, to Visit once at least before they Die, the
Celebrated Tomb of their Impost'rous Prophet, or depute some Holy Person in
their Stead, and Bear his Charges going and returning through the Numerous Stages
of that commanded Pilgrimage.

The main Profession of the Turkish Faith.
THE only Great and Noted Article of the Turkish Faith is centred fully in the
following Profession, Allah Ekbirr, Esaked hu enlah Ilah he Illallah ve esked
hu enai Muhammed weesuul: The meaning of which Words in our Language may be
expressed as follows, I verily believe there is but one God, and Mahomet is the
Prophet of that God. Other Rites and Ceremonies are only looked upon as Trials
of Obedience, and never reckoned necessary Rules to guide their Faith, or
forfeit, though omitted, their assured Salvation.

Certain other Principles of their Religion.
AMONGST these last may be esteemed the Duty of their Circumcising Children,
their abstaining zealously from Blood and Swines-flesh, their observing Friday
as an holy Sabbath, their refusing Images or Pictures in their Churches, and a
Number more of their Religious Customs.

A pleasant Notion of the Turks, concerning the Creation.
THOUGH they acknowledge God in all his Attributes, of Great, Good, Just,
Omniscient, Omnipresent, and Incomprehensible, they deny with violence the
Doctrine of the Trinity; and not distinguishing the Sacred Union of that
Heavenly Mystery, are blindly led to think we Worship Three distinct and
separated Godheads: They believe that God Created both the World and all Things
in it, and relate a pleasant Story, how he formed Man of various sorts of
colored Clay, which having lain for many Thousand Years neglected in the Sun,
he breathed into him the Breath of Life, and being much delighted with his new
Creation, made the Angels Kneel down and Worship him; But when the innate Pride
of haughty Satan urged him to deny his God's Decree, by boldly daring to
dispute his Will, the kindled Anger of the Great Almighty threw him headlong
down to Hell, with all those Angels which appeared his Friends; for which, they
say, the envious Devils have since that, been unrelenting Enemies to Humane
Happiness.

Their Opinion of our Savior.
THOUGH they dissavow with Heat the Noblest Principles of opposite Christanity,
they do not only speak respectfully of Jesus Christ, but own him as a Prophet
far beyond the Hebrew Moses, and inferior only to their worshipped Mahomet,
whom he preceeded with inferior Share of Inspiration, as he succeeded Moses
with a greater Portion. They deny his Crucifixion.
They call him in their Books The Breath of God, but own not his Divinity, nor
can be brought to credit his asserted Crucifixion, which they say was
inconsistent with the Justice of a God, so Holy and Impartial; they can by no
means think he would permit a Prophet, whom he had endu'd with Virtue to resist
all Sin, Cure worst Diseases, Raise the Dead, and do all other Miracles, to be
made a Sacrifice to so Unworthy, Base, and Cursed a People as the Jews then
were, and die so Vile a Death, as Christian Doctrine says he suffered.

A strange Opinion of the Turks concerning Judas.
THE better to defend this Error in their Faith, they have contrived a subtle
Story, how, when Christ was led to die, Almighty God translated him invisibly
to a Place in Heaven, and deceived the Eyes of the deluded Jews by such
prevailing and mistaking Blindness, that they seized on Judas who betrayed him
to their Hands, and taking him for the departed Jesus, nailed him to the Cross,
and Executed him instead of our Redeemer.

No Jew permitted to turn Turk till he becomes a Christian.
THEY believe him to have been a Virgins Son, and that his Mother Mary Bore him
at her Breasts; Conceiving not by Humane Help, but by the virtuous Odor of a
certain Rose: They will not suffer him to be Blasphemed, but own he will return
to Judge the World some Years before its Dissolution. Nay, so great a
Veneration do they pay his Memory, that they refuse to let a Jew turn Turk,
till he has first espoused the Christian Faith, and will from thence become a
perfect Mussulman.

THEY quite deny the Doctrine of Eternal Punishment, believing every Man
attended constantly in Life and Death by Two contending Angels, One whereof is
White and Kind; the Other Black, Severe, and Cruel. Such they say as die
Religiously are transported soon to Joys in Paradise, while such as live a
Careless, Loose, Debauched, and Sinful Life, shall long be tortured by their
Sooty Angel, and receive a great and tedious Punishment for all past
Wickedness, before their White and Friendly Angel can prevail to lift 'em from
the Flames of Hell, and bear 'em pure and free from Stain, to taste the Bliss
their Paradise affords them.

THE gross Absurdities of their politest Notions of a Future State, are such as
will undoubtedly surprise the Reader with a wonder at their Ignorance, but are
not, if considered rightly, void of Crafty and Designing Subtilties, since to
the rude and barbarous Natures of those unpolished, gross, and sordid People,
who were first deluded by the Turkish Superstition, nothing could have been a
fairer Mark to draw away their Minds, than those alluring Prospects of a Carnal
Pleasure, which so entirely suited their extravagant Desires and unrefin'd
Capacities.

The Turks odd Notion of a general Judgment.
THE Common Notion prevalent in Turkey, of a General Judgment and its necessary
Consequences is ridiculously Founded on the following Particulars; They say,
the winding of a frightful Horn shall shake the World to single Atoms, by the
raging Force of unresisted Earthquakes, God alone shall Judge all Mortals,
Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, appearing severally at the Head of their respective
Followers, to intercede with the Almighty for the Pardon of their Sins: The
Line or Bridge of Justice.
That Cain shall lead the Numbers of the Damned, all laden heavily with
Satchels full of Crimes upon their burdened Shoulders, to pass upon a small
and slippery Rope, thence called the Line of Justice, that the greatest Sinners
shall be forced to tumble on the Right-side into prodigious Flames and scenes
of Torment, there to be, till having expiated all their Guilt, they shall be
taken suddenly to Seats in Paradise, while Hell, the Devil and his wicked
Angels, shall become annihilated by the Power of Heaven.

THOSE whose Sins are less in Weight, and fewer in their Number, falling gently
to the Left of this above-named Line of Justice, shall be taken in a nearer way
to endless Bliss, and undergo but very small and trifling Punishments, to
purify their Natures for the Taste of Happiness.

Reward of Virtue.
BUT as for those whose Pious Lives, and Exemplary Virtues have deserved on
Earth no just Reproof, they shall be poised in Passage by their Guardian
Angels, and attain successfully their Throne of Joy, without the trouble of the
smallest Stay in either of those Places, not unjustly called the Turkish
Purgatories.

The odd Chimera's of the Turkish Paradise.
PARADISE is by the Turks conceived a spacious Land, overspread engagingly with
lofty Palaces, inviting Shades, soft murmuring Fountains, cooling Grotta's,
verdant Bowers, and slow'ry Meadows, adorned magnificently with Trees of Gold
and Rocks of Diamond; amidst whose soft alluring Charms, the never-fading Joys
of Love must bless their Hours with constant Pleasure, giving each his lovely
Mistress, rich in Beauty, and accomplished Sweetness both of Mind and Body,
never subject to the Earthly Passions, or Deficiencies of Nature, Pure and
Perfect in their Forms and Substance, daily gaining back their robbed
Virginities, to bestow again on those to whom before they lost 'em, ever
blooming in the Flower of Youth and served obsequiously by the attendant Duty
of divinely Featured Boys, or Angels, and in short, Enjoying in their fansy'd
Paradise, the very Height of those Extravagant desires, which are on Earth, the
wild and vain Effects of an Insatiate, Wanton, and Luxurious Appetite.

Predestination, Strictly held in Turkey.
PREDESTINATION, in its Highest (...) Extended Pitch, is by the Turks most
Zealously Mantain'd, nay, to such strange degrees of Height does this Opinion
lift 'em, that they Scruple not to look on God as the Unquestioned Author, both
of Good and Evil.

THEY all Unanimously Acquiesce in one Belief: That every Man Receives upon his
Forehead, at his time of Birth, the Undisputed Mark of all his Future Good or
Ill, that there is Written both the Time and Manner of his certain Death, nor
can he Possibly by any means, avoid the Fate to which the Will of God has so
Ordained him, and herein they seem Exactly to agree with those Expressions of
the Famous Seneca, in his Tragedy of Oedipus. A Quotation from Seneca, Relating
to Predestination.
Fatis Agimur, Cedite Fatis,
Non solicitae possunt Curae
Mutare, etc.
Guided by Fate, we must Subservient be,
Nor can our Care Subvert one fixed Decree;
Whatever our Mortal Race does Undergo,
Whatever we think or Act, from Heaven must Flow,
All Natures Springs move one Appointed Way,
And the First Hour Points out the Latest Day.


A very Strange and Humerous Custom of the Turkish People.
THEY hold the Name of God so Sacred and Inviolable, that they seldom speak of
the divine Omnipotence, without a Reverend Stroaking down their Beards, and
Faces; nay so Careful are they to Preserve from Disrespect the Power of God,
that when they find the Smallest Piece of Paper fallen in the Street, the
Gravest Man among them will with Reverence stoop to take it up, and Thrust it
Closely into some small Nook, or Crevice, in the Walls or Houses as they pass
along: A Stranger would be very much Surpised to see the outward Cases of the
Turkish Buildings Crammed as full as Possible of little Rough and Rumpled Scrips
of Brown and Writing Paper.

Their Reasons for it.
THE Reasons which they give Inquiring Christians for the Practice of this Odd
and Trifling Ceremony are Diverting and Particular; for First, they Judge it an
unseemly Action to permit the Feet of Men, or Beasts, or Highway Mud, which
fills their Streets, to Touch, or Soil with their Polluted Filth a thing
whereon the Name of God might Probably be Written.

THE other reason which Excites the Walking Turks to Narrow Searches for such
bits of Paper, is a Notion they have got amongst them, that before they come
within the Walls of their delightful Paradise, they must be all Obliged to
Walk Barefooted over a large and Glowing Plain of Red-Hot Iron, without
Permission to have any thing Beneath their Feet, but all those Former Bits of
Paper, which they Saved on Earth, from being Trampled on by the Polluted Tread
of Men or Horses.

The Turks Ungrateful for their Women's Favors.
WOMEN are but rarely suffered to appear in Mosques, and then are placed all
over Veiled, behind a large and darkened Lettice, for the Turks however fond of
Female Conversation, and wholly given up to wanton Dalliances, and the warm
Caresses of their Women's Persons, are so far from placing like our amorous
Christians, Flames and Darts, Death, Wounds, and Lightning in a Ladies Eye,
that they inhumanely deny their Dovelike Women, even so much as one poor Place
in that enchanting Paradise, which we like more indulgent Lovers, make our
Mistresses the sole Disposers of.

The Turkish Ladies are denied a Place in Paradise.
THE fine Virginity-restoring Ladies I so lately spoke of, are not such as here
on Earth the Turks Enjoy, but fine, new-form'd, and shining Creatures,
purposely Created for the Place they dwell in; while the poor forgotten Objects
of their Worldly Love remain without, in Places far less Bright and Glorious,
nor are allowed one distant View of those transporting Joys, in whose
Possession their once-lov'd and stately Lords now live in Raptures.

AND now, to give you British Ladies an enlivening Taste of Turkish Arrogance to
your deserving Sex, and let you see how little Cause you have to grieve, that
we possess a just and mild Pre-eminence by Natures Laws, and those of
Matrimony, I Will venture to Translate a famous Song, now much in Vogue among the
celebrated Beaux, and Belles of Turkey: You Will pardon Ladies if it wants the
Spirit of a Good Translation, since where the Subject does not please, the
jaded Pen will very rarely reach Perfection. The Song should seem to have been
made by some successless Lover, on his meeting a Repulse from one he Courted
for his Fourth and Favorite Consort. I.
A very odd and comical Turkish Song.
Three Wives I boast, as black as Jet,
And Comely as the Pine,
Amongst all the Three, I never met
A Baulk to one Design.
O Mahomet, O Prophet you who can,
Hear, and Revenge an Injured Mussulman.
II.
A Short, and Fair, late won my Heart,
And her I would have blessed,
She should have had of Love a Part
Superior to the Rest.
O Mahomet, O Prophet you who can,
Hear, and Revenge an Injured Mussulman.
III.
But she denied the proffered Bliss,
And durst refuse to Wed,
But if she suffers not for this,
May I be Lost when Dead.
O Mahomet, O Prophet you who can,
Hear, and Revenge an Injured Mussulman.
IV.
Before her Window long I stood,
Sung loudly to her Praise,
Deep gash'd my Arm till drowned in Blood,
Yet unconcerned she would gaze.
O Mahomet, O Prophet you who can,
Hear, and Revenge an Injured Mussulman.
V.
But though she proudly dares Rebel,
The time will come when I shall see,
The poor inferior Wretch in Hell,
Not Worthy once to look on me.
Then slight conceited Slave, if there you can,
The proffered Courtship of a Mussulman.


The Turks forbid the Use of Wine.
THE Use of Wine is in the Alcoran forbid the Turks on pain of the severest
Anger of their God and Prophet; yet they Publicly express their great Dislike
of that Injunction, by the frequent drinking it in largest Quantities; in Men
of Years and grave Appearance it is esteemed a Crime beyond Excuse, to be
inclined to common Drunkenness, and Men of High and Envied Posts, are careful
how they show the smallest Inclination to the like Intemperance, lest they
should give a joyful Opportunity to their observing Enemies, to blame the
Follies of their several Governments, as an impure Effect of loved Ebriety: But
Men of Gay and Sprightly Tempers, Young, and unimploy'd in State Affairs,
affect the Practice of continual Drinking; Yet drink it to Extravagance.
nor is the Use of Wine by them conceived as Sovereign by its Virtues, or
enlivening Qualities, but by the downright Operation of a powerful Quantity,
which skrews their Spirits to a strange Extravagance, and robs 'em wholly of
their deluged Reason, by the moist Effects of its intoxicating Nature.

THERE is a Custom I observed amongst the Turks, that they will often visit
Christian Merchants, at their Country Houses, where, retired from fear of
Public Observation, they have convenient Time and Opportunity to Carouse at
Pleasure, till becoming downright Drunk and Mad, they run immediately to mount
their Horses, and though scarce able to continue on their Feet, when fixed
securely in their Saddles, begin to Spurr with restless Fury, riding up and
down from Hill to Valley, in a constant Gallop, till they grow again sedately
Sober, and return to take a formal Leave of him whose Wine they quass'd so
freely of.

THERE goes a pleasant Story of the Cause why Mahomet prohibited the Use of
Wine to all his Followers, which is related by the Turks themselves with these
Particulars.

A Story how Mahomet came to forbid his Followers the Use of Wine.
THERE was a certain Shepherd in the Neighborhood of Meccha, whose Possessions
were so far Superior to the rest of his Fraternity, that he was Chosen as a
Ruler of their whole Society, and exercised a sort of mild Authority, by the
joint Permission of the Shepherds of that Country.

IT happened that this Man opposed with violence the Doctrine of the Impostor,
then but newly vented in those very Parts wherein he lived, and all the
Brotherhood depending upon him as on their Lord and Oracle, The crafty Mahomet
perceived it difficult without his Friendship to accomplish his Designs, and so
resolved to court his Favor by the most respectful Marks of Honor and
Civility.

ACCORDINGLY he came one Day to make a Visit to this powerful Shepherd,
attended pompously by a magnificent and numerous Retinue; it happened that a
Daughter of this honest Man's was that Day Married, and a splendid Entertainment
made, to feast those many Guests who graced her Nuptials; when the Prophet
entered, he saluted kindly all the Company with his most hearty Blessing, and
sat him freely down among the rest, pretending great and wondrous Satisfaction
in their agreeable and pleasant Conversation.

The first and best Effect of Wine.
THE merry Company a little Elevated with the Fumes of Wine, forgot their Hatred
to the Doctrine which he taught; and pleased to see him so familiar and
respectful, grew extremely fond of the Impostor's Person, shaking him by the
Hand, embracing him with fervor, and saluting him with Kisses on his Cheeks
and Forhead.

BUT Business leading him a little farther, he began to take his leave, and was
detained against his Will by the uncommon Kindness of the Shepherd and his
Family, who would by no means suffer him to go, till he engaged himself by
solemn Promise to return again as soon as he had ended what small Business he
was then to go about. He went, and finished in an Hour or Two the utmost of his
Task, and made all have imaginable to be there again, imputing the Excess of
their Civilities to the Virtue of the Wine they drank so plentifully, which he
therefore blessed, with often repeated Orders to his numerous Disciples, that
they should thenceforth drink a double Quantity of that Celestial Liquor, whose
Effects produced such peaceable Engagements, and had Power to change the
sharpest Hatred into Love, and make a Friend of a professed and open Enemy.

The last and worst Effect thereof.
BUT when he came again among them, he perceived a mighty Change in all their
Humors; they were now become entirely Drunk, and turned the late Expressions
of their Kindness, into rude, ungoverned and tumultuous Violence; him whom so
lately they addressed with Kisses, now they Curse and strive to Murder; Noise
and Discord, Fighting and Distraction, were the only Scenes he had before him;
and in short, with much ado escaped alive, from their oppressive Injuries.

THE New Effect of this mistaken Liquor, urged the Prophet to a New Decree, as
much against it, as the First had been in favor of it; for perceiving now it
could excite Disorder, and give birth to Broils as well as Mirth, he changed
the Sentence he so lately gave, and made it an Haraum for ever after, or
Abomination not to be encouraged by the Children of his People.

The Turks and Persians much divided in Religious Matters.
THESE are the prevailing Tenets of the Turkish Faith, but differ widely from
the Persian Doctrine; which last Nation, though the Followers of Mahomet and his
Religion, do notwithstanding that, prefer before him Hali his Successor, and
Usurper of his Empire, by the Claim of Marriage with the Prophet's Daughter,
who in the end was overthrown and slain by Ebubeker, Omar and Osmyn, whose
Opinions are at present followed, as believed Inspired like Mahomet himself, by
all the Turks depending on the Government of the Grand Signior: But as for
Persia, She adheres entirely to the Thoughts of Hali, and esteems him not
Inferior even to their famed Impostor.

THESE dissenting Notions and increasing Differences in Opinion, have at last
so far extended their pernicious Influences, that from small and gradual
Breaches, they are now burst out to open Hatred of each others Persons;
complaining mutually that either Side has added to or taken from the Substance
of their Alcoran, as has been most agreeable to their respective Interests, and
the promotion of their own Opinions.

NAY to such unbounded Madness does their Hate arise, that not contented to
heap Loads of dreadful Curses on each others Heads, they set themselves in
every Point directly opposite to one another Notions, the Turks remaining
censured as Schismatical, by the adverse Exposition of the Persian Creed, and
Persia Stigmatis'd for wilful Heresy in more than Seventy Places of the
Turkish Alcoran.

A rude and barbarous Proof of disrespect.
THUS will the Turks revile that Hali whom the Persians own as their Infallible
Director; and the Persians in return, to mock the Objects of the Turkish
Worship, raise in Sugar at their Marriage Feasts, the Figures of the Three
respected Friends of Mahomet, viz. Ebubeker, Omar, and the forenam'd Osmyn,
when growing merry in their drunken Cups, the Bridegroom and his Fellows draw
their Scymetars, and with a spightful Scoff, and noisy Mockery, first cut them
down from top to bottom, and then proceed to melt the numerous Pieces as a
means to sweeten their Sherbets and other Liquors.

IT IS from a natural Aversion, that the favorite Color Green, which by the
Turks is only worn about the Head and Noblest Parts, is by the Persians chosen
to make their Breeches, Shoes, or Drawers, and employed continually in all the
most indecent, disrespectful Uses which a Man can possibly invent to put it to.

Several differences between the Turkish and the Persian Tenets.
THE Turks esteem it necessary to resort in frequent Numbers to the Public
Mosques, to pray conjointly for the Grace of God, and Blessing of their
Prophet; but the Persians hold it only needful to convene at Churches in a full
Assembly, there to make an open Declaration of their fixed Belief, without the
Duty of a general Prayer to Heaven for Mercy.

THE Persians never Shave the Hair upon their Upper Lip, but cut and trim the
Beard upon their Chin, according to the various Forms their several Fancies
lead 'em to make Choice of; whereas the Turks preserve with care a very long
and spreading Beard, esteeming the Deficiency of that respected Ornament, a
shameful Mark of servile Slavery.

SWINES-FLESH, and the Use of Wine, denied the Turks with strictest
Prohibition, are by the Persians practiced with a fond Indulgence; nor do the
last distinguish Meats by Clean and Unclean, but enjoy promiscuously the common
Gifts of Nature's Liberality.

THE Persians when they wash their Feet before they Pray, do seldom more than
stroke the outward Part with their Right Hand just dipped in Water, and hold it
a superfluous Ceremony to rub hard as if they washed away the Dirt; which last
the Turks believe a Duty of assured and indispensible Necessity.

A Number more of suchlike opposite and contradictory Opinions, divide the
Faith and Interests of these Powerful Neighbors, who invent a yearly Store of
black Invectives to attack alternately each others Doctrine; amongst which
Curses none are more surprising, odd and comical, than these which follow;

The Curses common between the Turks and Persians.
MAY your fatigued and hated Soul find no more Rest when damned to Purgatory,
than a Christian 's Hat enjoys on Earth. By this I guess they meant to ridicule
our European Custom of Saluting one-another with our Heads uncovered. May your
transmuted Soul become in Hell an hackney Ass, for even the Jews themselves to
ride about on: These and many others, needless to insert, are fashionable
Curses, and in frequent use among the Hot-brained Zealots of each Adverse Party.

THUS have I at large set down the most material Articles of Turkish Faith,
which if the Reader looks upon as gross, absurd, and void of Reason, let him
direct his Praise to that Great Being whose enlight'ning Rays of Mercy and
Compassion, have inspired his Soul to Steer aright, and miss the stormy Seas of
Pride and Ignorance.

YET this the Turks agree upon with us, that though they differ in their Notions
of the Godhead, yet they own One Great, Supreme, and Sacred Being, to whose
unlimited and mighty Power, the Earth, Mankind, and all Things else owe their
Existence: And it is observable that though most Nations vary in their Opinions,
yet they own conjointly One Superior Essence, as is observed ingeniously by
Lactantius in the following Expressions: All People under different Notions own
One God.
OMNIVM Sententia quamvis sit incerta, ebdem tamen spectat, ut Providentiam unam
esse consentiant: Sive enim Natura, sive Ether, sive Ratio, sive Men's, sive
Fatalis Necessitas, sive Divina Lex, idem est quod a nobis dicitur DEVS.

THE Opinions of all Men though never so uncertain, tend directly to one common
Center; and agree unanimously upon one conspicuous Providence: Which is, that
be it Nature, Light, Reason, Understanding, destined Fate, or the Divine
Decree, it is still the same with that which we distinguish by the Name of GOD.

CHAP. VII. Of the Ceremonies of the Turkish Religion.
The many Inconveniences of Turkish Superstition.
A STRICT Adherence to the dangerous Tenets which Compose the foregoing Chapter,
have exposed the Turks to constant Troubles; that strange inhumane Tyranny and
barbarous Violence with which their haughty Arms have crushed the Christians,
have obliged whole Nations to become their Enemies: The rash and inconsiderate
Doctrine of Predestined Fortune has exposed their Lives, by an imprudent and
unnecessary Scorn of Danger from the fatal Influences of contagious Pestilence;
their false Belief of a Sublime Reward for Death in Battle, has excited
Thousands of their bravest Soldiers to forget the Charms of Life and Liberty,
and run directly on the Mouths of Cannons.

YET though they see these many Inconveniences, and have doubtless some amongst
them, who have now discovered the fallacious Principles of their impure
Religion, they persist with obstinacy, in the strictest Practice of its weakest
Precepts; like those whom Marius Victor censures sharply in the following
Verses. Nil Hosts, nil dira Fames, nil denique Morbi
Egerunt, fuimus, qui nunc sumus; ijsque periclis
Tentati: Nihilo meliores reddimur unquam;
Sub vitijs nullo culparum fine manentes.
In vain dire Hunger, Foes, and Sickness strove,
The fixed Intention of our Souls to move;
What once we were we strongly still remain,
And the same Snares once felt, now fell again;
No length of Time can our stiff Natures bend,
We live 'midst Showers of Vice, and Sin that knows no End.


The danger of entering a Turkish Mosque.
THE Superstitious Ceremonies of the Turkish Nation are as Numberless as they
appear Extravagant, nor is it easy to obtain Admittance where we may become
Eyewitnesses of their devout Retirements, for so severely do they Guard their
Public Mosques from Christian Observation, that should an heedless and unwary
Stranger set his Foot within their Gates, at certain Seasons of extraordinary
Devotion, he would be seized immediately by watchful Officers, and hurried
headlong to a partial Magistrate, whose harsh Decree admits no Bail, nor any
other Means of Liberty than becoming instantly a Member of their Faith, by
publicly renouncing the Divinity of Christ, and owning Mahomet a Greater
Prophet; which they must Attest by the commanded Seal of instant Circumcision,
a severe and barbarous Custom, but must surely be Submitted to, unless the
Person so surpised, will die a Martyr to the Christian Faith, and bravely
spurn with just Contempt the proffered Doctrine of their vile Impostor.

AND now, since I have spoken of the Circumcision used amongst the Turks, it
will not be improper to begin with that, in the description of their
Ceremonies, and acquaint my Reader with the Form whereby they put that Act in
Execution.

THEY are not, by the Precepts of their Alcoran, obliged to Circumcise their
Children as a Point of Duty, but continue to observe that ancient Practice from
the Custom of Arabia, long before the Time of Mahomet, and use it now, as an
undoubted Mark, whereby they stamp the Faith of Mussulman on tender Infancy.

The manner of Circumcising Infants in Turkey.
THE Act of Circumcision is performed by Surgeons, when the Child has reached
the Age of Seven Years, and is supposed sufficiently Capacitated to profess his
Inclination to become a Mussulman; at which time all his Friends, Relations,
School-fellows, etc. are Invited to a Feast, and Entertained as splendidly as
their various Qualities may be thought to Merit; then the Boy is brought
amongst 'em, and demanded whether he approves of the intended Ceremony; his
Assent is given by the lifting up his Finger, and himself extended on a Table,
where the Surgeon strait performs his Office, and having thrown the Skin upon a
Chasingdish of Coals, he baths the Wound in Salt and Water; after this, his
Head is shaved to one small Lock, whereas before he wore his Hair disheveled,
and untouched by Razor; this done, they put him on a large white Turbant, and
from that time forward he becomes a Member of the Turkish Faith.

Their Circumcision of a full grown Convert.
WHEN any Christian ripe in Years, becomes a Turk, and will Apostatize to base
and sinful Superstition, he is led in Triumph on a stately Horse, through all the
Great and Noted Streets, to some considerable Mosque or Temple, holding in his
Hand an elevated Javelin, the Point whereof he frequently affixes to his
perjured Breast; a silent Declaration of his Will to die for that Religion he
has then embraced: The zealous Turks who pass along, bestow their various
Presents on the shameful Wretch, with very large and bounteous Liberality; and
being Circumcised in public State, he is attended back with great Solemnity,
receiving constantly some Means of Livelihood, by Pension from the Court, or
such Preferment in their Sea or Land Affairs, as his Profession whilst a
Christian speaks him sit for.

Sacrifices what, and how made in Turkey.
THEY have at Public Times, like those of Circumcision, certain Sacrifices, yet
not such as formerly were used as Duties of Religion, but are commonly the
Flesh of Sheep or Lambs, the Heart cut out and burnt in Fire, while the Beast
divided, is distributed with care among the Poor and Indigent about the
Neighborhood.

A strange, uncommon, fatal Accident, fell out about the Year 1702, when I
resided with his Excellency the Right Honorable the Lord Paget, then
Ambassador Extraordinary at Constantinople, Mediator and Plenipotentiary at the
Treaty of Carlowitz, whose truly Great and Noble Services have left behind him
an Immortal Character, to the Interest and Honor of the British Nation, and
the Admiration of the Turkish Empire.

A most unhappy Story of the total ruin of a Turkish Family.
THERE was a Turk who lived in the abovenam'd City, not extremly Rich, but
moderately stored with easy Plenty; he had a Wife so tenderly beloved and
gratefully returning a reciprocal Affection, that he would not use the freedom
of his Country, in regard to tolerated and indulged Polygamy, but confined the
Treasure of his honest Love, to the endearing Center of his first Wife's Bosom:
He had two Children by his Favorite Consort, one was then Four Years of Age,
the other lay a Speechless Infant in its easy Cradle, when his Fruitful Wife
became delivered of a Burden, which declared him Father of a Third and hopeful
Son.

THE common Custom of a grateful Sacrifice on such Occasions, led him to
prepare a splendid Feast, and summon all his near Relations to be Witnesses of
his exceeding Joy for this new Blessing; they met together in an open Court,
and after several usual Forms proceeded to the Place where many Sheep were
killed to give the Poor. The Person who performed the Ceremony, cutting the
Throat with a large Knife peculiar to that Office, and departing with the
Company, to have the Sheep divided in another Place more fit for such an Action.

A strange Curiosity of a Turkish Infant.
THERE was a Window opened from the Room where the Childbed Woman with her
Newborn Infant, lay upon a Saffrai elsewhere spoken of, at the Lettice of this
Window stood the Eldest Son, and saw with pleasure the Performance of the
Ceremony: He was much diverted to behold the Blood of the expiring Sheep run
trickling from their Throats, and taking notice that the Knife wherewith 'twas
done, was left behind by Chance or Negligence, and that the People who attended
him, were some gone down to see the Sacrifice, and those above intently busied
by his Mothers Mattress; he endeavored slyly to escape Discovery, and stole
away without so much as being any ways observed by those about him.

HE was no sooner out of Sight, but he descended by a Case of Marble Steps,
directly to the Place where lay the Knife, yet red and reaking with the Blood
of those poor Beasts, whose bleating Innocence it had so lately Sacrificed.

HE took it up, and hiding it with all imaginable Cunning, underneath his Vest,
returned as slyly as he could, and entered the Appartment he so lately left, as
unperceived as he had just before departed from it.

A Murder innocently committed.
IN a low, capacious Cradle, near the Place where then the Mother lay, his
Second Brother, not above a Twelvemonth Old, was Sleeping calmly, and secure
from any fear, by yet-unbroken Rest, and native Innocence: To him the poor
unhappy Boy immediately repaired, and little thinking what he was about, began
to practice on his tender Throat, the Method he observed the Man to use in
Butchering the Sheep designed for Sacrifice; The waking Child began to cry, as
quickly sensible it felt some Pain, while still the Boy continued his
Endeavors, drawing up and down like some small Saw, the fatal Knife, and
laughing heartily, to see the Blood distain the Clothes wherein his Brother
lay; who struggling to the utmost of his little Strength, the other, to maintain
the Sport which so delighted him, endeavored hard to keep him down, and
leaning forward with too great a Weight, o'erturn'd the Cradle and the Infant
in it.

A melancholy Consequence thereof.
THE Mother, whom the Cries of the assaulted Babe had just then led to look that
way, beheld her Son come tumbling out, all stained with Blood, and wounded
horribly; the strange surprise of such a shocking Prospect, drew her to forget
her weak Condition, so that rising hastily, she staggered inconsiderately on
the Newborn Child, and treading on its Neck became its Murderer.

The Third Effect of an unlucky Accident.
THE guilty Son, perceiving by the Shrieks and Postures of his Mother, that he
had someway or other done amiss, threw down the Knife, and running from her
Presence to avoid the danger of a dreaded Punishment, fell down the high and
slippery Marble Steps, and broke his Neck, by that unhappy Accident.

THE Mother followed to the fatal Place, and Swooning at the Sight, was carried
back to the unlucky Chamber; but the overstrain'd Attempt she had so lately
made, beyond the Strength of her reduced Condition, so disordered all her Body,
that, unable long to bear the Burdens of her Grief and Weakness, she died
herself some few Days after.

The miserable End of an unhappy Master of a Turkish Family.
THE wretched Master of this miserable Family survived not long the melancholy
Loss of so endeared a Consort, and such hopeful Children, but became
thenceforth abandoned over to a mournful Solitude; nor could the oft-repeated
Efforts of his dearest Friends procure him Comfort, so that wholly losing all
the Taste of Mortal Pleasures, he began to languish more and more, and ever one
Year was fully past, quite broke his Heart with weighty Sorrow, and completed
dismally the last sad Scene of such a fatal and surprising Tragedy.

I have informed my Reader in the foregoing Chapter, that the five notorious
and essential Points, required by Mahomet from all his Followers, are frequent
Washings, Prayers, and Fasting one whole Month, the giving Alms proportionable
to their Substance, and performing ever they die, one Pilgrimage to Mecca.

I shall distinctly treat of all these Duties in their several proper and
respective Places; and as their Washing is a previous Ceremony to the other
Four, it will be requisite I should begin with an Account of that.

Two sorts of Washings, now in use among the Turks.
IT is divided into Two distinct Formalities, the Public Washing in their Baths
or Bagnio's, and the Private Washing, in whatever Place their Inclinations or
their Business find 'em.

The Turks descended from the Race of Esau.
NOW though their Prophet has expressly ordered in the Lessons of his Alcoran,
that every Turk shall often Wash, declaring Cleanliness a valuable Part of his
enjoined Religion, yet the Custom is of more Antiquity than He, by many Ages;
for the Turks derive it from the Days of Esau, whose Posterity they boast
themselves to be descended from, and therefore claim the Name of Ishmaelites.
But though the ancient Institution of these Washings owed its being to the
wholesome Practice of a cleanly People, and was never meant a Sacred Ceremony,
yet the fixed Decree of their adored Impostor, has inclined the Turks to such a
strange Opinion of its efficacious Virtues, that they now believe the Water
they make use of, not alone sufficient for the cleansing all the outward Parts
of their polluted Bodies, but of Sovereign Power to wash away their Sins, and
free from Guilt the most internal Passages of their impurest Souls.

Private Bagnio's in Great Men's Houses.
WE may divide their Bagnio's into two Sorts; the First are such as Rich and
Noted Persons build, in some convenient Part of their own Houses, where their
Wives, themselves, and all their Servants Bathe conveniently in different
Divisions, as often as their Duty, Inclination, or their leisure from
Employment, urge 'em to it.

The Public Baths, and reason why so cheaply accommodated in them.
THE Second sort of Bagnio's, are those Public Places where for payment of a
Penny or Three-half-pence, they are washed Politely, and supplied with Linen,
or whatever else the Bath requires, by the diligent Attendance of appropriated
Servants. The reason why they are so cheaply served, is owing to the great
Revenues left to Bagnio's by deceased Mahometans, who amongst the other
Dictates of their Morality, hold it as a very meritorious Deed, to build a
Public Bagnio, Hospital, or other Place of Entertainment for benighted
Travelers, and endow the same with an extensive Liberality.

Men denied Entrance, while the Women bathe.
THESE Public Baths are very common in their largest Cities, and receive at
several Hours, prodigious Numbers of either Sex, and every Quality, for whose
distinct and separate Accommodation, they afford divided and particular
Conveniences. When Women Bathe, a large and Ivory-headed Indian Cane is placed
against the Door that opens from the Street, and no Man dares on pain of Death,
at such a time as that, claim Entrance.

THE Law of Mahomet obliges every Turk to bathe his Body when he has Caressed a
Woman, and the Ladies are obliged to do the same, so that every Morning when
they rise, the first Employment of the Day is washing in the Bagnio, where they
are not only cleans'd with Water, but perfumed, and dried with scented Linen.
Hair, how taken off without the Razor.
The Heads of Men are daily Shaved, and Men and Women are alike enjoined to
leave no Hair on any other Part. In order to obey which firm Decree, the meaner
Sort make use of a compounded Substance, made of Earth from certain Islands of
the Archipelago, and neatly mixed with Lime and Drugs of proper Virtues; this
they beat to Powder, and applying it to any Hair they would remove, it takes it
off as clean as possible.

BUT as the frequent use of the abovenam'd Powder is of dangerous Consequence,
if suffered to continue but a moment longer than the falling of the Hair; Some
use Pincers.
the more Polite and Fashionable Ladies, rather choose to use the help of
Pincers, and irradicate it swiftly by a twitching violence; Others shaved by
Waiting Maids.
yet this is only done by such as would distinguish all their Actions from the
customary Practices of other People, for the Generality of Turkish Ladies,
caring little for the Pain of using Pincers, and unwilling to descend to vulgar
Methods, constantly appoint some favorite Waiting-maid to play the Barber, and
perform that Office with a sharp-edg'd Razor.

1 st. Sort of private Washing, when practiced.
THE other sort of Washing is divided likewise into two distinct Performances,
the First is practiced after having made the necessary Evacuations required by
Nature, and to this they use the three last Fingers of the Left Hand; on this
account, the Turks of Note have Cocks of Water running into Marble Basins in
their several Privies; and the meaner sort of Men among them never go to
suchlike Places, without an Earthen Pot of Water formed commodiously with a
narrow Spout, which serves their Use on all occasions.

Second sort, when practiced.
THE second Sort of this last Washing, is in order to their Prayers, for which
sole End, a numerous Quantity of Brazen Cocks supply large Cisterns placed in
order, at the Entrance of their Churches, here they wash by way of Preparation,
first their Arms, Hands, Head, Neck, Teeth and Forehead, thence proceed in
Summer Weather to their Naked Feet; but if the time be cold and rigid, it is
enough to make an Outward Motion, and the Will is taken for the Duty of the
Action.

The several Hours wherein the Turks are Obliged to Pray.
NEXT come their Prayers, and those, at least, Five times a Day; the
Over-Zealous Bigots to their falls belief pray always Seven; but the common
times Enjoined by Mahomet are, Just before Sunrising, Just at Noon, Betwixt
Noonday and Setting of the Sun, Exactly at Sun-Sett, And last of all, Two
Hours after.

Their Forms of Prayer, by whom Invented.
THEIR Forms of Prayer consist of Sentences Collected here and there, from
several Chapters of the Alcoran; some few whereof were left by Mahomet, but
many more Compiled by his Successors, Ebubeker, Omar, Osmyn, and Hali; and most
Men now of good Capacities, Compose their Prayers according to the Pressures of
their several Occasions. They Praise therein the Mercy, Bounty, and Divine
Omnipotence, of the Almighty Author of our Earthly beings, Petition Heaven for
the constant Welfare of their Sultan and his Empire, and Conclude Inhumanely,
with Numerous Curses on the Christian World.

THE Reader will be better able to perceive their manner, by the following Copy
of a Janissaries form of Prayer, who was appointed by the General of that Order,
to be one amongst a constant Guard which kept the Gate belonging to the British
Ambassador at Constantinople. The Prayer of a Turkish Janisary.
IN God's great Name, in God's great Name, and in the Holy Name of Mahomet, his
Mighty, Good, and only Prophet, God is Great, my God is one, I shall be Happy
and Successful while I trust in him, may my Sword be Broken, and my Head become
the Drinking Cup of Infidels, when I forget his Glory, let my Prince live long
and Flourish like the Cypress, let my Order be Unnumbered as the sands of the
Sea shore, that we may well defend him, and let his Lands become as large and
Unresisted as the Boundless Ocean: Let the Cursed Infidels be Damned for Ever,
since they dare, O Mahomet, Oppose thy Precepts; let the Meanest Slave within
the Territories of my Dread Sovereign put his Foot before it is Washed, upon the
Neck of that Proud King amongst their People who once Blasphemes the Holy
Prophet, let the Infidel I Guard be Safe, whilst under my Protection, but let
all others Perish Quickly, or Enlarge the Bounds of thy Religion, God is Great,
God is One, and Mahomet his only Prophet.

Their postures when they Pray.
WHEN they resolve to Pray in any Mosque, they leave their Slippers at the
Entrance of the Place, when they Pray, they turn their Faces to the East,
because their Prophet lies Entombed that way, then standing for some time
Upright, and Silent, with their Arms a Cross, in serious Contemplation on the
Duty they are Summoned to, they Elevate their Eyes and Mutter to themselves
some Pious Sentence, after which they sit down Cross Legged with their Hands
before 'em, and repeating Slowly several short Ejaculations, at the End of
Each, bend forward to the Earth, and Touch it with their Foreheads; some will
Kiss the Ground in pure Acknowledgement of their Submissive Natures; this they
do for several Minutes, looking now and then behind 'em, over Either Shoulder,
for they think their Prophet, when he comes will suddenly appear behind some
Mussulman devoutly Praying.

Their fixed Attention in the Act of Prayer.
THEY Pray with Fervor and a fixed, Attention, never turning like too many
Inconsiderate Christians in our Noisy Churches, to behold what People pass
behind them; all is still, and softly Sacred; no Man mutters Prayers of Course,
and Gapes the while to see about him, how his Neighbors Clothes are Fashioned;
no loud Indecent Whispers Interrupt Devotion, to inform some busy Irreligious
Asker, who Addresses such a Lady, and how much such a Woman brought her
Husband; no Opening Pews and Shutting them again, disturb the Congregation with
their needless Clamor; no Holy-Talking, and Conceited Hypocrite outruns the
Parson with her zealous Lips, while her lewd Eyes, behind a Fan, are laughing
heartily at some poor Jest her Ears have listened to; no turn'd-up Eyelids
seem to speak her Thoughts on Heaven, while a Wry-mouth or Scornful turn of her
affected Nostrils, declare her Observation running over the Faults, or ill
Contrivance of her Neighbors Pettycoat. A Turkish Mosque is free from Noise,
and all within it so sedately bent on what they do, that it is a matter of
sufficient Wonder, to behold so many met together in so deep a Stillness. A
pious Nicety.
And indeed, so very Sacred do the Turks esteem the Act of Prayer, that if the
casual Sting of some small Gnat, the scratching of their Heads, or any other
common Accident but chance to interrupt them, they begin again though almost
ended, thinking such prevented Prayers of no Effect, or Virtue whatsoever, but
neglected as unworthy the Great Ear of Heaven.

Preaching, how practiced in Turkey.
A small and unadorned erected Pillar, bears a Case, not much unlike a Pulpit,
whence the Priests sometimes direct a monitory Sermon to the listening
Congregation, consisting generally of explanatory Sentences on the Mysterious
Chapters of their honored Alcoran, with proper Applications to the numerous
Audience: The Book is held in reverence to its Author, almost even with the
Reader's Eyes, and certain grave, religious Songs are intermixed with their
Devotion; which being ended, every Man begins to stroke his Beard, and uttering
short and private Praises to his God and Prophet, takes his leave, and goes
away with an extraordinary Satisfaction.

Beads, how used among the Turks.
THEY use a sort of Beads, not much unlike the Rosarys of Roman Catholics, but
to an End extremely different, for whereas the latter make those Trifles guides
of Devotion, Men in Turkey only bear 'em in their Hands, and tell 'em over
while they want some other Exercise; the Beads consisting generally of a
scented Past, agreeably perfuming all who touch them. I mention these, because
some heedless Travelers observing them in common Use among the Turks, mistook
the Cause, and never searching into their Design, have confidently spread a
noted Falsehood, on the fixed Authority of their afform'd Experience.

No business must excuse the Turks from Prayer.
SUCH Turks as at the common Hours of Prayer, are on the Road, or so employed as
not to find Convenience to attend the Mosques, are still obliged to execute
that Duty; nor are ever known to fail, whatever business they are then about,
but pray immediately when the Hour alarms them in that very place they chance
to stand on; insomuch, that when a Janisary, whom you hire to guard you up and
down the City, hears the Notice which is given 'em from their Steeples, he will
turn about, stand still, and beckon with his Hand, to tell his Charge he must
have Patience for a while, when taking out his Handkerchief he spreads it on
the Ground, sits crossleg'd thereupon, and says his Prayers, though in the open
Market; which having ended, he leaps briskly up, Salutes the Person whom he
undertook to Convoy, and renews his Journey with the mild Expression of Ghell
Johnnum Ghell; or, Come Dear follow me.

The Creation of a Turkish Yemaum, or Parish Priest.
THE Turks are summoned at the Hours of Prayer by the repeated Acclamations of
their Yemaums, or Parish Priests, a People Chosen to their Offices by the
recommendatory Letters of their best Parishioners to the Vizier Azem, if near
the Metropolitan, or if in Places far Remote, to the Bashaw of the respective
Provinces where such Vacancies may chance to happen; by him they are Examined,
(for the Turks admit of no such thing as Spiritual Authority) and if found
qualified to read the Alcoran, and to have practiced an austere and rigid Life,
they are confirmed by Virtue of a Sigil, in the sought Possession of a vacant
Priesthood.

How the Turks are called to Prayers.
THESE call, as I have said above, the Turks to Prayers, by mounting to the
Steeple Tops of their high Mosques, where straining to a vast Degree, the
shrillness of their Voice, they often repeat, that God is one, and Mahomet his
Prophet; by constant Practice of this ancient Custom, some attain a great
Perfection, and stopping with their Fingers both their Ears, will raise their
Voices to so high a Pitch, that it amazes Strangers when they hear them crying.

Bells not allowed in Turkish Churches.
BY this Contrivance they supply the want of Bells, not tolerated in the Turkish
Churches; The reason of their Prohibition.
the Cause whereof some Travelers ascribe to an unwillingness they have to
follow any Custom of the Christian Countries, which (though they vow a disrespect
to our Religion and our Manners) is not altogether, the prevailing Cause of
their forbidding Bells throughout their Government. But as the Turks are more
inclined to groundless Superstition than the Christian World, there is an
ancient Prophecy, which having long foretold the Greatness of their Empire, in
the Downfall of the Greeks, advises them to take a constant Care, least by the
tinkling of a Bell the Walls of Constantinople should be betrayed again, and
the undreamtof Fall of that Important Place denote the Ruin of their whole
Dominions. The Words of this feared Prophecy, translated into English, run as
follows. A Turkish Prophecy.
The time shall come, when Earthquakes shall confound,
With unresisted Shocks a fertile Ground;
When the wide Ocean shall be stained with Blood,
And Bulwarks float on the portentous Flood;
When Smoke and Fire shall join to form new Rods,
And Mortals ravish Thunder from the Gods.
Then, shall the Courage by mean Swains possessed,
Lead the bold East to overrun the West;
The Pride of Conquest shall adorn the Field,
And the Tall Cross to the bright Crescent yield.
But ever the Growing Moon her Full attains,
Her waning Face shall see her Sons in Chains;
In a black Hour a fatal Bell shall Ring,
Sure Mark of swift Success to a new mounting King.


The meaning of the Prophecy.
THIS Prophecy they look upon as verified in the Destruction of the Grecian
Empire about the time that Gunpowder and the Use of Cannons was invented; the
Swains, who were to lead the East to overthrow the West were successful
Shepherds, who laid the first Foundation of their present Empire; the Cross
they look upon to signify the Empire of the Greeks, alluding to the Banner of
Constantine the Great; the waning of the Moon before her Full, they say,
denotes the Ruin of the Ottoman Family, before they have obtained their Wish of
Universal Monarchy; and their Interpretation of the Bell I have just now given
you.

The Dress of the Yemaums how differing from the rest.
NOW though these Parish Priests are reckoned, while they hold the Places they
obtain, amongst the Number of the Turkish Clergy, yet are they no ways
differently dressed, so much as to distinguish them from Laymen, but in the
folding up their Turbant, which they wear a little larger than the rest; they
seldom Preach, or venture to expound in Great Assemblies the mysterious Points
of their Religion, but content themselves with leading People into Mosques, and
the Inferior Businesses before related; and if their Posts are taken from them,
they remain no more as Members of the Priesthood, but betake themselves at
pleasure, to such different Employments amongst the Laity, as their several
Educations may have qualified 'em for the Practice of.

The Sohoigs or Preachers of the Turks.
THE Common Preachers in the Turkish Churches are the Sohoigs, a sort of Men
Politely Bred, of Eminent Perfection both in Mind and Body, versed Gentelely,
in a more than common knowledge of the liberal Arts and Sciences, and sedate
Professors of the rules of Moderation; these are most respected by the Turks
and Christians, and are really so Accomplished in external Carriage, and the
Vnfeign'd Practice of an Inward Piety, that it is not common to behold their
Fellows even in the most Refined and Polished parts of Well-bred Christendom.

The Muftee.
THE Head of their Religion is the Muftee, an Officer of the highest Dignity, as
to the respect, which all Men show him, but not extremely Powerful, in that he
is rather looked upon as an undoubted Oracle, in Cases of Dispute in Justice or
Divinity, than as Possessor of a large and Personal Authority. How Created, his
Salary and Perquisites.
He is Created by the Sultan's Choice, who puts him on a Rich and Splendid Vest
of Sables, and confers upon him as his Places's due, the Yearly Salary of about
two Thousand Pounds, which by the Sale of certain Benefices in his Gift,
belonging to the Royal Mosques of Constantinople, and the frequent Presents he
Receives from Foreign Ministers and those of Turkey, is Improved to 3 times as
much again.

The Emirs or Kindred of Mahomet, how respected.
I may set down amongst the Orders of the Turks Religious, the Emirs or Branches
of their Prophets Family. These are so highly Valued by all sorts of People,
that it is present Death, to lift an Hand against their Persons. They are
Independent on the common Government, and Subject to some Grave and Ancient
Member of their own Fraternity: They Wear a sort of Turbant High and Stately,
in Bulk not much Inferior to a British Bushel: Its Color is and must be
Green, for that alone Distinguishes their Lineage; and is Worn, because it was
the Color of their Prophet's Standard, which a Member of their Brotherhood
must always Carry to the War, when the Grand Signior does appear himself in
Field.

The Turkish Funds for Maintenance of their Clergy.
IN order to maintain their Stately Mosques, and Endless Numbers of the Priests
about 'em, above one Third of all the Lands within their Empire, are appointed
for the Raising Sums of Money to defray the Charges of Religious
Establishments, and such Prodigious Gifts are daily added to the Settled Income
of the Lands Appropriated for the use of all their Royal and Inferior
Churches, The Yearly Revenue of Santa Sophia.
that the fixed Revenue of that Famous Mosque distinguished by the Ancient Name
of Santa Sophia, does Amount to near one Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum.

Their Priests Subservient to the civil Magistrates.
THE Priests of Turkey are not, as in Christendom, subservient to the higher
Power of Superior Clergy, but every Man dependant wholly on the Civil
Magistrates of his respective Parish, so that having no dispute upon the
several Privileges of Spiritual and Temporal Authority, they mingle mildly in
a joint Obedience, the Clergy showing due respect to the Unbridled Laity, and
the latter giving daily Proofs of a Profound and Decent Veneration to the
Office of the former, which they show sufficiently in that respectfull Style
wherewith they commonly Address them. How the Turks Address their Clergy.
TO you the Rich and Valued Mines of Eloquence and Wisdom, bright Directors to
the Paths of God, beloved of Heaven, and Children of the Prophet, the Glories
of Religion, and Illustrious Pillars of Unbiased Justice, may your Judgment be
Increased, and joys be Doubled, etc.

The Turkish Ramazaan or Yearly Fast of thirty days.
I now proceed to an Account of the beforenam'd third Injunction of their
Prophet to the Followers of his Doctrine, and that is, to observe a Fast one
Month in twelve: This Fast they call the Ramazann, and keep it by the different
Courses of the Moon, always falling sooner out each Year than other change the
Season with the Month they Fast in, and oblige 'em once in Thirty Years to Fast
each Day of every season.

Their manner of observing it.
THEY keep this Fast by strict, unbroken Abstinence from the first appearance of
the Morning Sun, till after Sun-sett, in which Religious time, it is Death to
Eat, or Drink, or Smoke Tobacco; but when the Lights appear upon the Steeples
of their Mosques, they lay aside Sobriety, and bringing out the Dainties
purposely reserved, begin to revel in a loud Extravagance, turn Fast to
Feasting, Night to Day, and Dallying with their Women, Loose and Wanton spend
their their Hours in Mirth and Jollity, till some shrill Cock invites their
Sleep, by loudly telling them the First appearance of unwelcome Morning.

Travelers, and the Sick, a little favored.
HOWEVER, Travelers, or Persons Indisposed, may break the Fast of Ramazann,
provided, when recovered from their Sickness, or arrived in Safety at their
Journies end, they Fast as many Days together as they then omitted doing it.

The strictness of the Duty.
SO strictly do they keep this Celebrated Fast, that in their Noted Cities,
Officers are sent about from Place to Place, to make their Observations on the
Peoples Actions; and it has been known, that some of their most active Sultans
have rode Incognito about the Streets, attended at a distance by observant
Executioners, who, at the smallest Beckon of their Masters Finger, were in
constant readiness to Strangle or Behead whatever Persons he had found in
Actual Disobedience to the rules of their Religion.

The Feast of Bairamm, and manner of its Celebration.
IMMEDIATELY subsequent to the Ramazann, is that short Three Days Feast, they
call Bairamm, not much unlike our Easter. They have two of these each Year; the
First is Introduced by the appearance of the first new Moon that closes up the
Fast, and is Proclaimed by the discharge of all the Cannon round the Sultan's
Palace, and the Airy notes of Sprightly Music sounding loud from every Corner;
the Second is about Threescore and Ten Days further in the Year. This Feast is
kept with universal Mirth, and all the Sports which Turkish Gravity permits the
Practice of; and at this time they visit one another with a nice formality,
observing, from the Courtier to the meanest Peasant, certain Punctual and
Established forms of Salutation, not inferior to the polished complaisance of
Christian Palaces.

Zacatt or giving Alms, how ordered by their Doctrine.
AND now I come to treat of their Zacatt, or Fourth Injunction of their Prophet,
which is nothing else but giving Alms, according to the Plenty God has blessed
'em with. They are prescribed the several rules of this commanded Charity, in
Books the ancient Doctors of their Law have left behind 'em. The Standard rule
is to bestow one Penny in an Hundred, of their utmost substance on the Public
Funds, for Building Hospitals, maintaining Poor and Aged People, erecting Hans,
or Inns upon the Road, where Pilgrims find free-cost, a Three-days
Entertainment, or for any other public good which shall be thought convenient;
The different Principles of the Turks discovered in their Charity.
this is the lowest they should give, but some are found, whose sordid, base,
and avaritious Principles, incline them meanly to deny their Wealth, that they
may save a Poor and Inconsiderable Portion, from the uses they should give it
to; and others have been known, who generously prizing transient Riches at
their proper Worth, refuse to hide one numbered Penny, but, on the Contrary,
bestow the Fourth or Third of all their substance on the needy objects of a
pitied Poverty.

The Pilgrimage to Meccha.
FIFTHLY The Annual Pilgrimage to Meccha, is enjoined the Turks, who must from
every Part of their wide Empire, once at least before they die, perform that
Journey, as a Typical Expression of their Passage from this World to that
hereafter. Many Thousands Yearly undertake this celebrated Pilgrimage; Referred
to the 48th Chapter.
but as there is a large Account of all the Ceremonies of that respected Duty in
another Part of this Book, I shall say no more in this Place, but will referr
my Reader for his further Satisfaction, to the Eight and Fortieth Chapter,
treating fully of some strange Particulars.

Friday the Turkish Sabbath.
FRIDAY, as I said before, is set apart by the Mahometans for their Day of
Rest, or Sabbath, which they keep religiously till the Duties of the Mosques
are fully ended; Their Punishment for breaking it.
and if in time of their Divine Service, a Turk presumes to open Shop, they nail
his Ears directly to his Counter, and expose him to the Scoffs of Public
Scorn, as one who merits not the Name of Mussulman.

The Derveeshes, who they are.
THEY have a sort of Priests amongst 'em called Derveeshes, who on these Days,
harrangue the People in the open Mosques, and turn themselves about in frantic
Postures to the noisy sound of certain Instruments of Music, till giddy by the
frequent Rounds they make, they fall upon the Ground, and lying for a while
without the smallest Motion, rise at last, with elevated Eyes, and Arms
extended, telling with a grave and artificial Look, their gaping Audience, that
while entranced as they beheld, they have been taken into Heaven, and conversed
with Angels in the Fields of Glory, The Cheats they put upon the People in
their Mosques.
and so proceed, while sheltered by the Cloak of deep Hypocrisy, to tell the
People what their own Desires would have performed, under the prevailing
Notion, that they are all the while, pronouncing Sacredly the Will of Heaven.

The Temperance and Longaevity of the Derveeshes.
THESE Priests are most abstemious in their Diet, and austere in Humor, rarely
speaking but in Mosques, and never drinking Wine, or any other Liquor than the
Fountain Water, whereby secure from those Distempers, which the ill Effects of
Gluttony and Drunkenness make common to luxurious and intemperate Appetites,
they generally live to a prodigious Age, and serve to prove by undeniable
Experience, the inconsiderate Follies of such Rich Men, as hurry headlong to
their Graves by lewd Extravagancies, and the constant Practice of a loose
Debauchery; on which the following Verses in Lucan's Pharsalia, are a very
eloquent and nice Reflection. O prodiga rerum
Luxuries! nunquam parvo contenta paratu;
Et quaesitorum terra pelagoque ciborum
Ambitiosa fames, and lautae gloria mensae,
Discite quam parvo liceat producere vitam:
Et quantum Natura petat. Non erigit aegros
Nobilis ignoto Diffusus Consule Bacchus,
Non Auro, myrrhaque bibunt: Sed gurgite puro
Vita redit: Satis est Populis fluviusque, Ceresque.
Learn, wastful Luxury, whose dainty Care,
Can never be content with low-priz'd Fare;
And, thou vain Hunger, whose ambitious Taste,
Plows Land and Sea to furnish fine repast:
Vainglorious Folly of a Splendid Board,
With far-fetched Cates, and Chosen Dishes stored;
Learn with how little Life may be preserved,
And how much Nature asks. Ill is he served
Who strives, by strong, old-Wine his Health to raise,
Pressed in some ancient King's forgotten Days,
The hearty Poor, the wholesome Country Swain,
Drinks not in Gold, nor does for Myrrh complain:
Bread, and the murmuring Current of some Mead,
Supply his largest Wants, nor does he Dainties need.


AND indeed it is a very common thing, to see in many of those Countries
subject to the Turks, both Men and Women of amazing Ages. A very odd Discovery
of a Man in Bulgaria, who had lived to be 162 Years old.
Once I traveled through Bulgaria and Valachia, into Germany from Adrianople,
with the Right Honorable the Lord Paget, then returning from his Ten Years
Embassy in the Turkish Court; we pitched our Tents about a Furlong from a small
and inconsiderable Village, through whose midst a smooth and pleasant River
gently glided; natural Curiosity and the coolness of the Day, invited me to
take a melancholy Walk along the green and solitary Banks of the delightful
Current; where I was surpised to find a very old and graceful Man lie
stretched upon the Grass, and humming to himself the merry remnant of a Turkish
Song.

I viewed attentively the wrinkled Visage of this ancient Man, who seemed to
have been buried and returned to Earth, with all the Furrows of destructive
Time engraved upon his Forehead: But while I wondered at the briskness of his
Voice, he doubled my Amazement, by his leaping up with such agility of Body, as
became the Strength of one in all the Vigor of accomplished Manhood; A
cringing Method of Salutation used in Turkey.
he came toward me bowing with a servile Air, peculiar to the slavish Nature of
that conquered Nation, and endeavored to Salute me with a strange Humility by
the kissing of my Vest, a cringing Custom used in Turkey, and only proper for
the sordid Practice of a base, submissive, and inglorious People.

I prevented his Design, and pleased to see the odd Appearance which he made,
desired him to follow me to yonder Camp, and I would treat him with a glass of
Wine; A strange Instance of Mirth in old Age.
he seemed transported when he saw the Tents, and running on before me a
considerable way, with awkward steps as if he aimed at something like a Dance,
he threw his Arms and Feet about him, at a merry rate, and with a very brisk
and laughing Countenance, repeated in a sort of tuneless Ballad, several Verses
to the following purpose. Wine makes old Men young again,
Ay marry and Women too;
Wine cures Sorrow, takes off Pain,
And former Joys can soon renew.


The odd Account he gave of himself
I brought him to the Camp, where having eat roast Beef and drank above a Quart
of strong red Wine, we asked him Where he lived, How old he was, and many other
such like Questions. He returned for Answer, that he knew no more, than that he
was about thirty Years of Age when the Village where he lived was burned to
Ashes; that his Children's Children, he thanked God, were dead, and he had
nothing left upon his Care but his old, brisk and honest Person, and so began
to sing and dance again as he had done before.

BY this time several of the Country People, who came out to look upon the
Tents, where gathered round him, and informed us, that his Family had lived
above two hundred Years as Farmers in that Neighborhood, that he had long
outlived the period of his Race, extinct near fourteen Years before, by the
death of two of his Great Grandsons, Men full-grown, that he was now maintained
by charitable Contributions of the Houses in the Village, and that he was by
punctual Calculation from the burning of the Place, computed, then arrived at
the surprising Age of one hundred sixty and two Years.

Teeth three times changed.
HE could eat the toughest Meat without the smallest trouble, leap about without
a Staff, and having changed his Teeth three several times, the Set he had, were
wholly sound, and white as Ivory. Nor was he then, in seeming danger of
approaching Death, but may perhaps be now alive, as healthful and untouched by
those Infirmities peculiar to Old Age, as when he was an Infant.

CHAP. VIII. Of the several Sects into which they are Divided.
Frequent Changes in Religion a certain Proof of humane Imperfection.
AMONGST the numerous Imperfections which attend Mortality, there is none can
better serve to prove the Frailties of our human Nature, than that diffusive
Levity which does so often change the Notions of Mankind in matters of
Religion. To Day, we strongly fix our Resolutions to defend the Creed we now
profess, with Lives and Fortunes; nay, so warmly struggle to promote its
Doctrine, that we scarce avoid the Guilt of Persecution to enlarge its Limits;
yet, to Morrow shakes the Pillars of our Faith, and leads us headlong to a
blind Extravagance, in joining vigorously with some new Sect, to undermine
clandestinely the mocked Foundations of our forsaken Church, and on Her Ruins,
raise the Columns of some New Opinion and prevailing Heresy.

Interest the common Cause of new Opinions.
AND if we guide our Judgment by a contemplative View of those great Turns to
which the Ancient or the Modern Changes in Religion owed their Introduction;
the pricks of Conscience will be rarely found the real Causes of those numerous
Innovations; persuasive Interest is still the Motive that excites our Actions
to our own Advantage; Man, is naturally prone to love himself, and will embrace
such Tenets as do best agree with his desired Convenience, or sooth most
favorably the gross accomplishment of his licentious Inclinations, and when the
tempting Call of such a Doctrine summons his Adherence, Nature urges him to
quit a Faith more rigid and severe, and make himself a Member of such new
Profession, as enlarges him to practice free from Censure, the unbounded
Pleasures of a welcome Liberty.

Men are naturally led to quit the weakest Party.
THUS every Age produces new and various Heresies, nor can the meanest Doctrine
want its Proselytes, if vented at a time when Foreign Wars or Civil Discords
shake the Pillars of that Faith it must oppose; for Men of small and
undiscerning Judgments, will be proud of owning in its shining Grandeur, a
Religion they will quit with scorn and indignation, when too weak to grant its
persecuted Sons a claimed Protection. And as a palliating Excuse for their
abhorred Apostasy, can only say, with Ovid, Tempora mutantur, and Nos mutamur
in illis.
The Times are changed, and we are changed with Time.


The means whereby Mahometanism gaind Success.
'TWAS by these means, Mahometanism, invading Asia at a time when Wars and
Tumults, Schisms and Heresy, and all the Plagues of fatal Discord rent the
Kingdoms of the Christian World, with dire Divisions, met a Swift and strange
Success, perhaps beyond the very hopes or wishes of the Black Impostor.

The cause of the Variety of Sects among the Turks.
BUT as all Men, let them change as much as possible their Natures and Religion,
must notwithstanding, still retain some Scattered Notions of their former
Customs, and perhaps a sort of native Fondness for their ancient Practices, so
the Prodigious Body of the Turkish Church, promiscuously receiving different
Nations to compose its Grandeur, is thereby Divided into full as many Sects and
different opinions, as a mixed confusion of Mahometanism in its own Divisions,
with the broken Remnants of so many Hundred several sorts of Worship, could
produce amongst them.

Above an Hundred different Opinions, now professed in Turkey.
THERE are at present near an Hundred noted Sects among the Turks, who disagree
in very wide Contrarieties of opinion, and many more, whose unsupported
Follies, sinking Daily, by their want of Learning to defend their Tenets, are
not worth a Stranger's observation, nor esteemed enough considerable by the
Turks themselves, to claim a Place in their Religious Lists.

TO treat Distinctly of the various Sects that now divide them, would require
more Room than can be spared from matters more Material and Diverting, and
afford the Reader small delight and less Improvement, I will therefore mention
but the Heads of some prevailing Tenets, and proceed to what will entertain the
Curious with a more uncommon, and agreeable Amusement.

A sort of Turks who own our Savior for the Son of God.
AND first, in due respect to the eternal Glories and Immense compassion of our
blessed Savior, I must, with zealous wishes for the great Improvement of a
happy Prospect, mention an opinion long since formed, in several Parts of the
Grand Signior's Country, and of late increased to such a strength that
Thousands of his Subjects openly avow it, in despite of danger.

The Tenets of the Sect abovementioned.
THE Professors of the Doctrine Taught by this opinion, are distinguished by the
Name of Choop-Massiahee or Dreamers of Messiah: These declare that Christ was
God, is now in Heaven, and shall come to Judgment, far superior to their
Prophet, or his followers. To prove the truth of this opposed Assertion, they
produce the words of Mahomet himself by a Quotation from their Alcoran, where
it is said, thine Eyes O Mahomet, shall see thy Lord return in Glory: They are
generally Men of clear Capacities, and exquisite Dexterity in management of
Business: and by the sacred notions they retain of the Divinity of JESUS,
appear not widely separated from the Pale of his Religion. Some have gone so
far in their enlightened preference of CHRIST, to MAHOMET, that they have
fallen Martyrs to an unripe Faith, and even in Death, maintained their
Principles.

The Barbarous and Inhumane Doctrine of the Morgee.
ANOTHER Sect Entitled Morgee, hold with obstinacy that all the followers of
true Mahometanism, must necessarily attain the most sublime and heightened joys
of their transporting Paradise, though while on Earth, they lived in endless
Wickedness, but on the contrary affirm, that any who deny their Prophet, though
they have led a Sober, Virtuous, truly Exemplary, and Unspotted Life, will
find it yet Impossible to be admitted into Heaven, or indeed, to save their
Souls from tedious Scenes of Future Punishment.

The Chawargee.
THE Chawargee maintain it an absurd and false Conclusion to assert that ever
God bestowed on Man the Gift of Prophecy, or thought it necessary to inspire
with boasted Knowledge or Infalibillity, the blessed Capacity of any chosen or
distinguished Mortal; They deny the Prophetical Inspiration of Mahomet.
these allow no more to Mahomet, than that he was a Man, whom Nature had endowed
with great Accomplishments, and God afforded an enlarged, peculiar, and
uncommon Portion of his holy Spirit, in regard to his unequaled Zeal and
unaffected Piety.

The Sephatee.
THE Sephatee, affirm that God Possesses endless Attributes of Power, Life,
Wisdom, Truth and Justice, but extend their Notions to such wild extravagance,
as to conceive his Senses built upon the same corporeal Organs which compose
the Fabric of our humane Bodies; they think he hears, smells, sees, feels,
tastes, and understands as we do here; differing from Mortals only thus, that
whereas our Bodies are both weak and finite, God has framed himself a Being
strong and infinite: This Notion they defend, or strive to do it, from those
several Passages of holy Scripture, where the figurative Sense of the
Expression, speaks of God's creating Eve from Adam's Rib, as by the virtue of a
manual Operation, his sitting on a Throne, repenting often what he had decreed,
as of the Actions of a humane Body: The grossness of their Apprehension.
They will not be dissuaded from conceiving those Expressions in a literal
Sense, and being for the most part, Men of gross and vulgar Apprehensions,
ascend not to the height of sacred Contemplation, on the mysterious Attributes
of the All-Great Incomprehensible.

A Sect, among themselves, divided into one and Thirty different Opinions.
WONDERFULLY various, and strangely contradictory to their own Assertions, are
the Notions formed of the Divine Omnipotence, by the Muhaw-Tazlee, a Sect,
divided into one and thirty several Interpretations of that controverted Tenet
which divides them from the rest. And that is, GOD is Holy and Eternal, by the
Virtue of his Essence; yet refuse to own him eternal by his Eternity; knowing,
by his Knowledge, or merciful by his Mercy. Their surprising Caution and
fantastic Notion of Almighty God, proceeds from their aversion to the Doctrine
of a Trinity; so that to avoid a multiplication of the Divine Power, they run
themselves to strange, abstruse and incoherent Dreams, of something which they
would conceive but cannot.

A Sect who wait the coming of another Prophet.
ANOTHER Sect, called, Zeidee, believe that long before the World shall end, a
Persian Prophet shall be sent by God to dis-annul the Laws of Mahomet, and
teach a new and surer way to Joys hereafter.

A Blasphemous Opinion.
JABHAIAH are a sort of People who affirm, that God created Man, the World, and
all his Labors, by mere chance and accident; denying his Omniscience, and
believing that he improves like Men, by Practice and Experience.

Two Sects directly opposite.
MAALVMGEE and Meizha-Chullha, are Sects directly opposite to one another, the
first affirming, GOD is to be known on Earth, by the knowledge of our selves;
and the last, maintaining it impossible either in the present World, or that to
come, to know him otherwise than by a faint perception of his Rays of Glory.

A stoical and melancholy sort of People.
KAADE-ZADEELI, are a stoical and melancholy Sect, who practice strange and
superstitious Ceremonies in praying for the Dead. These Men profess a natural
aversion to the sound of Music, and neglect with rigid and austere disdain,
the cheerful use of Mirth and Pleasure; they sit whole Days and Nights alone,
still bending forwards and repeating with a doleful and desponding Accent, the
respected Name of the supreme Almighty.

Idolaters among the Turks.
THERE is a certain Sect called Sab-bin, tending strongly to adore Idolatrously,
the Sun and Moon; from the conspicuous Influences they are found to have on
Things below.

A Sect among the Turks, who allow the Trinity.
ANOTHER sort of Men called Escrakee, allow the Trinity, as a Number springing
from the Unity of God. This Sect are blessed with a Platonic Contemplation on the
great Idea of divine Omnipotence, and discerning plainly all the gross and
sordid Falsehoods of the Turkish Alcoran, reject the Notions built upon its
Fabric, and support their Arguments upon the surer Principles of humane Reason.

A sort of Men Professors of an exemplary Modesty.
THE Hair-hetwee diffide so much in natures Strength, and humane Understanding,
that they think it Sin to contradict the weakest Argument preferred against
them; affirming, that our frail Capacities can never represent a true Idea, of
a Being so superior to us. These Men behave themselves with an accomplished
Modesty, give no offense to Man or Beast, but when a Question is proposed for
their desired Solution, return this Answer, Allah Belerr, ammah Ben Yoketer,
God knows all, but I am Ignorant.

A Sect who hold the Transmigration of Souls.
BUT more diverting and extraordinary will appear the Munasahee or Pythagorical
Opinion, which maintains with violence, the old Metempsychosis or the
Transmigration of our humane Souls: To this Assertion are inclined the ablest
Physicians of the Turkish Empire, and it is a matter worth the Readers
Patience, to reflect a little on the oddness of their Notions, as to this
particular.

THEY hold that when a Man departs this Life, his Soul shall enter in that very
Moment, the appointed Body of some certain Beast, whose Nature did in Life, the
most resemble the prevailing Genius of the late deceased; thus for example, the
undaunted Soul of some brave Warrior, shall be sent to animate the Lion; the
Coward's Soul, shall dwell at rest within the Hare; the Generous shall possess
the Horses Body, and the Goat contain the Soul of the Lascivious. The Camel
much respected among the Turks.
But as a Blessing most desired, and the sublimest Happiness they can attain in
Death, the pious, grave, religious and contented Man, shall see his Soul inform
the Camel, a Beast of every other most respected by the fond Mahometans.

A very strange Opinion.
THUS cased and fettered shall the Souls of Mortals wander in the course of a
refining Pilgrimage, for the full space of three thousand and five hundred
Years, still growing more and more polite and glorious, till the longest Date
of their enjoined Peregrination once expired, they return again to some bright
Part of undiscovered Earth, where, free from those unnumber'd and insulting
Imperfections, which attend Mortality in its impure and unrefin'd Existence,
they shall enjoy the choicest of such unimagin'd Blessings, as will fit them
joyfully, for that more bright Reception they expect to meet in the
transporting Mansions of a future Glory.

THERE is a Story which a very grave and seemingly religious Turk would often
tell me, with repeated Vows, and serious Protestations of the truth of his
Assertion. He was a strict Adherer to the Doctrine of Transmigration, and gave
the following account of a surprising Accident, which had obliged him to
embrace the Articles of that till then despised Opinion.

A strange Relation, of a Turk's Conversion to the Doctrine abovementioned.
I was, said he, about my one and twentieth Year of Age, a violent opposer of
the Tenets of Munasahee, or such as hold the Pilgrimage of Souls, ( for so it is
called among the Turks) and often used to laugh at the Opinion of an elder
Brother, who delighted much in running Races, and was wonderfully swift of
Foot; on which account he often used to fancy that after Death, his Soul would
animate some Horse or Antelope: He died, and left me very sorrowful, for he
deserved my love by frequent kindnesses, and triumphed in a more than common
share of my sincere Affection. I often hunted in the neighboring Woods, and
took a great delight in all the Practices of Rural Pastime; when on a certain
Day, with several of my Acquaintance, riding out to seek some Sport, we roused
a Stagg of stately Size, and spreading Antlers.

Strange Action of a Beast, directly contrary to his Nature.
THE Beast-no sooner saw the Dogs about him, and beheld the Company prepared for
his Destruction, but instead of flying from impending Danger, he came running
swiftly toward my Horse, as if he aimed to overthrow me with his fury.

A very odd Passage.
SURPISED at the advance I saw him making, I prepared as well as possible, for
Self-defence, and poizing in my hand a pointed Javelin I carried with me, was
about directing it to wound his Breast, when (O amazing Prodigy!) I saw the
Dogs begin to tremble, and instead of tearing his unhappy Limbs, lie down and
fawn, with lolling Tongues upon the panting Animal; who with a timorous have,
as sadly apprehensive of the threatening Weapon, reared himself upright upon his
hinder Feet, and with his two fore Legs, and the expressive motions of his Head
and Eyes, made melancholy signs of some important Secret, which his want of
Speech denied an utterance.

A Turk discovers his Brother's Soul in the Body of a Stagg.
METHOUGHTS, the very moment when this moving posture of the Stagg was pleading
for compassion, I perceived a sudden cold strike through my Body, and imagined I
distinctly heard a murmuring Whisper speak these Words, as softly and serene,
as if some gentle breath of Wind had fanned my Temples. Pity, O unthinking Man,
thy Brother's Soul, to whose appointed wand'rings, the intended Death of this
poor Stagg, shall add twelve Years of tedious Pilgrimage.

ASTONISHED at the strange, and unexpected Accident, I dropped my Javelin from
my trembling hand, and scarce preserved my self from sinking off my Horse, by
the industrious Favors of my Friends Assistance: But while they were busy in
endeavoring to recover me again, the Stagg was gone, nor did one Dog attempt
to follow him.

AND now, continued he, you will not wonder that I hold the Doctrine you so
much oppose for certain Truth, and undeniable Reality, my Brother's Soul by
this strange Accident converted me; and may the Will of God direct some Chance
to lead your Judgment, first, to see the light of Mahomet, and then, the
certainty of this sure Faith, the Tenet of his Follower.

EXCUSE me, Reader, that I have so long detained you on so whimsical a Subject,
nor believe you see this Story here inserted from a fond effect of my
Credulity; I tell it to divert you with the Turk's Opinion, who had framed
hereon, a fixed belief of Transmigration, and imagined by the whisper which he
dreamed he heard, that such departed Souls as dwelt within a Beast that happened
to be killed, or die by accident before its time, shall lose entirely all those
Years they had remained enclosed before such accident, and be obliged to wander
so much longer, through the various Stages of their tedious Journey.

Monasteries among the Turks, by whom Ordained.
MONASTERIES, or a sort of Cloisters for religious Turks of several Orders, were
anciently ordained by Mahomet's Decree, in imitation of the Convents famous
then, for exemplary Piety, and great Economy, by the religious Practices of
Solitude and Sanctity among the Christians.

Muveh lehvee an Order of Turkish Monks.
OF these, are held in most esteem Muveh-lehvee, an Order, silent, humble,
modest, and professing Charity; they wear the coursest Dress that can be
possibly invented, and renounce the World with all its Glories, fasting every
Thursday round the Year, besides the Ramazann, or public Ceremony; and
neglecting piously all earthly Pleasures, for the preferable Blessings of a
future Paradise.

These Monks, the most accomplished Spies of Turkey.
ICONIVM is the favored Residence of these religious Men, there dwells the
Chief, or Prior of their Order, and from thence they go like Roman
Missionaries, up and down through China, Persia, and the wide Dominions of the
Great Mogul, striving to convert to Turkish Superstition, every Man they can
commodiously fall in with; and by traveling without the least suspicion into
foreign Countries, become the only able Spies of all the Sultan's vast
Dominions.

Not much unlike the Capuchines of Rome.
THERE is no Order in the Romish Church, which does so nearly suit the Manners,
Habit, Humor, and Deportment of these Turkish Friars, as the Capuchines; and
they agree so fully and exactly in their several Customs, that, were it not for
staining with the near Comparison, a Christian Character, these Eastern
Priests, and Monk-Mahometans, might not improperly, be called the Capuchines of
Turkey.

Nim-tulahee.
ANOTHER Order of the Turkish Priests, they call Nim-tulahee; these have their
Convents in the City of Constantinople, weigh their Bread by Drachms and
Scruples, fast and pray whole Days together, and avoid the Company of all
Mankind. They place no value on the Blessings of Mortality, making frequent use
of this grave Maxim in their common Conversation; Their pious Maxim.
Riches are the vainest Trifles we can possibly collect, since they so far
possess our Thoughts, that we forget one fatal Hour may take us from them; and
herein, they seem to steer the prudent Course of a sincere Morality, believing
the natural Frailty of our humane Bodies undeserving half the pains we take to
pamper 'em, and disregarding with a wise Disdain, those transitory Ornaments,
and fading Satisfactions, which must perish with the Persons of unthinking
Mortals. And here they act agreeable to the Notions of the admirable Horace, in
the seventh Ode of his fourth Book. Hor. L. 4. Ode 7.
Pulvis, and umbra sumus.
Quis scit, an adjiciant hodiernae crastina summae
Tempora Dii superi?
Cuncta manus avidas fugient haeredis, amico
Quae dederis animo,
Cum semel occideris, and de te splendida Minos
Fecerit arbitria,
Non, Torquate, genus, non te facundia, non te
Restituet pietas.
What are the Bodies Men so vainly boast,
But Dust, and Ashes, and a fleeting Ghost?
Who knows, if Heaven, whose Power to day we praise,
Will add one short to Morrow to our Days?
Vainly, fond Mortal, does thy Soul employ
Her greedy Faculties in search of Joy;
For all those Blessings thou do now prepare
Will fly the eager hopes of thy expecting Heir,
When the impartial Stroke of certain Death
Shall ravish all thy Glories with thy Breath;
When the Great Judge of Heavens unbounded State,
Has sentenced thee to some eternal Fate,
Alas! my Friend, where is then thy noble Blood?
What will avail thee there thy earthly Good?
Vainly, thy Eloquence will there implore,
Nor can thy pious Life, thy finished Course restore.


Edheemi, a grave and solitary Order.
ANOTHER Order of the Turks Religious, called Edheemi, live in Woods, Cells,
hollow Trees, and other lonely Places, converse familiarly with Lions, Tigers,
and the wildest Beasts which haunt the Forest, if we may believe the Members of
their own Fraternity: They have some Convents in the Eastern Parts of the Grand
Turks Dominions, but will rather choose to live abroad, and taste the free,
uninterrupted Pleasures of a constant Solitude.

Santoons, a loose, and frantic sort of People.
SANTOON's, or Holy-Men, a sort of frantic, idle and conceited Beggars, going
almost Naked, with their Bodies wounded deep in many Places, are esteemed among
the Turks as Sacred, and inspired by the divine Illumination: These commit the
worst extravagancies, under the deceitful Cloak of heavenly Raptures, and are
allowed the use of Wine, and all strong Liquors, to enable them the better to
converse with GOD and view his Glories.

Fools and Madmen, valued much among the Turks.
MADMEN and Fools are by the Turks esteemed the Favorites of Heaven: They think
'em taken from their Tenements of Clay, to talk with Angels, in the upper
Regions, and will therefore beg the blessing of an Idiot, when they meet him in
the Streets, and bending forward, kiss his Garment, with the most profound and
humble Veneration.

Schism, more prevalent in Turkey, than in Christendom.
MANY other Sects and Orders are at present found among the Turks, some of
which, assert Opinions in diametrical opposition to the Tenets of the others;
and divide the Doctrine they profess from Mahomet, into such intestine Jarrs,
and public Disagreements, that the power of Schism in Christian Churches,
falls far short of that, now found in every Province of the Turkish Empire.

The Opinions of some, diametrically opposite to those of others.
SOME profess perpetual Chastity, and fearing Nature will incline 'em to forget
the tenor of their Vow, will make themselves unable to commit such Sin, by the
preventive virtue of a self-Castration; others Marry freely in their very
Convents, and enjoy, amidst the rigid Ceremonies of religious Solitude, the
loosest pleasures, and unbounded freedom of allowed Polygamy; some again must
never Marry, but are made a full amends for that restriction, by the liberty
they have to hold a free and undisputed Conversation, with as many Concubines
as they find means to compass.

One common Article, in which they all agree.
THUS they vary widely from each others Practice, and only join unanimously in
this One common Article; That it is their duty to oppose with Violence, the
Doctrine of Christianity, hate, kill, and persecute without compassion, all the
Members of that envied Faith, till they have rooted from the Earth the Name of
Jesus, and reduced the Nations of the conquered World, to worship singly One
Great God, and Mahomet his Prophet.

BUT the never-failing Mercy of our great Protector, who prevented hitherto
their cursed Designs, has graciously been pleased to take away all Cause of fear
from his defended Church, whose firm Foundation he has placed upon a Rock, nor
shall the Gates of Hell prevail against it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Turkish Studies, and how far Learning is encouraged among
them.
Learning, discountenanced in Turkey, and the Reasons of it.
LEARNING, as inconsistent with the nature of a Government, wholly founded on
the Power of the Sword, receives but small encouragement in any Part of the
Grand Signior's Empire; and as I have said before, it is a Maxim of his Policy,
to bend the Minds of all his Subjects to a constant Practice of the Art of War,
imagining that, when a Man relaxes from the love of Military Toils, to the more
soft, bewitching Charms of Books and Solitude, he grows unfit for Martial
Labors, and becomes so deeply sunk in pleasing Contemplations on the Works of
Nature, that he loses by degrees, that active Vigor, which should bravely
recommend a daring Soldier to the face of Danger.

Learning, agreeable to mild and gentle Governments.
ROME, the ancient, and the glorious Mistress of the kneeling World, has taught
the Turks by sure Experience, that Learning, and the moral dictates of attained
Philosophy, agreeing sympathetically with the noble, honest, and religious
Forms of milder Governments, preserve a peaceful and unshock'd Tranquillity; for
Men thereby, will see the Blessings they enjoy in Liberty, and know to prize
their happy Freedom: Dangerous, and fatal, to an arbitrary Monarchy.
But in Governments Tyrannical and Arbitrary, Learning, like a Spurr to Horses
of a fiery Nature, only serves to make 'em feel, and hate their Servitude,
exciting warm, and dangerous sparks of Courage in their Breasts, whose sure
Effects produce an eager, and undaunted Inclination to expose their valued
Lives and Fortunes, for redeeming gloriously the ravished Charms of Liberty and
Property.

Rome, successful in her pristine Ignorance.
THUS, while the weak and dubious Fate of infant Rome, obliged her Sons to
slight all Studies but the Art of War, she triumphed nobly in a vast Success,
and grew in time, to such a pitch of Pride, that she subdued the Monarchs of
the distant East, and raised Her Emperors to all the Power, that arbitrary
Rule and unresisted Tyranny could possibly afford them; for the constant
Practice of a Military Toil made Dangers natural to all her People, who,
allured by hopes of fresh Success, attempted freely any hazard, like the Men of
whom, thus Lucan in his first Book, -- Quos ille timorum
Maximus, haud urget Lethi metus; inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris.
Who, fearless, even of Death, (fears blackest fright,)
Led on by Courage, swiftly rush to fight,
Over Groves of pointed Steel.


O'erturn'd, and ruined, by polite Improvements.
BUT when the Roman Conquests had possessed the World, and gained the height of
universal Monarchy, the call of War no more alarming their forgotten Valor,
they betook themselves to study Arts and Sciences, and flourished for a while
in all the Blessings of meridian Glory; but the dictates of their Learning
fatally encouraged, soon inspired their glowing Bosoms with a scorn of Slavery,
and produced such bloody and intestine Discords, as o'erturn'd the Grandeur of
their spreading Empire, and involved the Government in all the miseries of
divided Ruin.

HOWEVER, as it is natural for the working Brains of Man to fix attentively on
some peculiar and selected Object, how wide soever from the fashionable
Practice of the Times they live in; so some are found among the Turks, whose
native Curiosity inclines them to the search of what small share of Knowledge
they can possibly attain from the perusal of those few and trifling Books they
have among them.

The first advance of Turkish Learning.
AND though for reasons mentioned in the Chapter of the Turkish Policy, the Art of
Printing is prohibited among those People, it is not likely they should reach so
great Perfection in the Study of Philosophy, and other dubious Parts of
Learning, as the more inlightn'd Scholars of the Christian World, yet are not
all so meanly ignorant, as the generality. The Person, whose Ambition leads him
to bestow upon some favorite Son a costly Education, generous and particular,
must first begin like those in Christendom, and see them taught their A, B, C,
or Alphabetic Knowledge of the Turkish Language.

The Knowledge of the Alphabet, as much as is required, in any Turkish Minister
of State.
NOR is the Knowledge of their Orthographic Learning looked upon as here with
us, like Childrens Study, and the first accomplishment of every mean Capacity:
But, on the contrary, nothing further is required from such as are elected to
the greatest Places of the Empire, than to be qualified to read a Chapter in
the Alcoran, and sign with their respective Names, the written Instruments
dispatched about from Place to Place by their Authority.

Scribes, or public Notaries, used much in Turkey.
SCARCE One in many Hundreds of the Sultan's Subjects, though they read perhaps
indifferently well, can write his Name, or form one single Letter of the
Alphabet, so that when any Business offers, which they would acquaint a Friend
with, who resides at any distance from the Towns they live in, they must
address themselves to certain Scribes, or Public Notaries, whose peculiar
Trade it is to write the Letters, Wills, or other Paper Instruments of any such
as will employ them.

Their Number in Constantinople.
NO less than Thirty Thousand of these Public Scribes at present dwell, in full
Employment, in the City of Constantinople, and proportionable Numbers are
distributed by order of the Court, to other Cities of the Empire: They are
admitted upon full Examination, by the Great Vizier, or some inferior Officer
deputed by him. They take an Oath to keep all Secrets, no ways tending to the
Sultan's prejudice, but discover every little Hint that looks like Treason;
hereby it is difficult beyond Imagination, to maintain a treacherous or illegal
Correspondence.

Their several Businesses.
NOT only Letters and the little Instruments of private Business are dispatched
promiscuously by the Scribes abovenam'd, but all the Copies of such ancient
Manuscripts, or modern Treatises, as are in use among them, must be frequently
transcribed by some of these, the Art of Printing not allowed, as I before
informed you.

The art of Writing fair, in great Perfection with the Turks.
HOWEVER, Omne malum habet in se bonum, Every Ill contains some Good within its
self. The Scribes of Turkey by perpetual Practice, are become such Masters in
the Art of Penmanship, that they have Pieces common in their meanest Houses,
which for justness of Design, equality of Character, and accomplished Beauty,
Grace, and Smoothness, cannot be exceeded, or indeed matched by the politest
Writing-Masters known in Europe.

The difficulty of sending Letters to any Part of the Turkish Empire.
SINCE I have had occasion here to speak of Letters, 'twill not be digressive
from the Subject of the Chapter to acquaint the Reader, that in order to
prevent the ill Effects of treasonable Correspondences, they permit no settled
Posts in any Part of Turkey; so that he who would dispatch a Letter to a
Friend, though hardly fifty Miles asunder, is obliged to hire on purpose some
Courier, or proper Messenger, or must be forced to stay the motion of a
Caravan, or the departure of a certain sort of Message-bearers, Natives of
Arabia, who ramble up and down on foot to every Corner of the Turkish Empire,
and will carry Letters for a large Reward to the remotest Borders of the Turks
Dominions.

The danger of traveling alone very great in Turkey.
THE Reader will conclude that wanting Posts upon the Roads, must render
Traveling a vast expense, fatigue, and hazard; and really where a Man presumes
to trust himself alone, or undefended by the Power of some respected Order, he
exposes rashly, both his Fortune, and his Life, to the repeated Insults he is
sure to meet with, from the barbarous Wretches he must pass by in his Journey.

How a Man must do to travel safely.
BUT the Man who knows the Custom of the Country, will be sure to hire a Turkish
Janizary to accompany him; by whose Protection, he will not only be secure from
Danger, but may Eat and Drink, Sleep, Ride, or what he pleases, free from
Charge, upon the oft-invaded Property of the poor, enslaved, and miserable
Inhabitants.

The second Step of Turkish Learning.
BUT to return to what I was about, no sooner has the Student gained a full and
finished Knowledge of these earliest Rudiments, but he proceeds to change his
Theory to Practice, and apply himself to study with the utmost care, and
venerable industry, the un-numbred Intricacies of their Alcoran; for to be
learned in that, is what they all desire with eager Emulation, as the Means
whereby they gain the reputation of accomplished Scholars, and are thoroughly
qualified for any Post of Honor, or Religion.

The great respect, the Turks show to such as are well versed in the Exposition
of their Alcoran.
THE Men who reach Perfection, or as great an Height as can be well attained, in
this respected Study, are on all hands sought to, by the common People, as the
Oracles of their Religion, and undoubted Solvers of the most abstruse and noted
Difficulties; but more than any other, are esteemed a sort of Men, who by a
daily running over the several Chapters which compose their Alcoran, in time
commit it to their Memories, and can repeat in order every Sentence of its
valued Doctrine, so that bearing as it were the Body of their whole Religion,
within themselves, they are esteemed as Sacred as the Book it self, and every
where distinguished by such shining Privileges, as declare how much the Turks (
O shame of Christendom,) encourage more than we the Study of Religion.

The Turkish Language, rough and beholding to 3 other Dialects.
THE Turkish Language rough and inharmonious, is obliged to the Arabian,
Persian, and Chaldean Tongues, for all the softness it at present boasts; which
notwithstanding, is so very little, and so seldom understood by common People,
that the Turks of late, difuse the Practice of that borrowed sweetness, once
the aim of all their Nation.

Italian, the only Western Language studied by the Turks.
OF all the noble Languages at present spoken by the Western World, Italian is
the only Favorite among the Turks, and that being seldom understood, beyond
the superficial Knowledge of a common Conversation; the Latin, German, Spanish,
French, or British Dialects, are altogether strangers to their Learning or
Affections; nor is the Grecian Tongue, that poor unhappy Sufferer with her
ruined Sons, so much as sought, or any ways esteemed by the illiterate
Subverters of that lamented Nation.

BUT though the native harshness of their own unpolished Tongue, denis that
smooth, enchanting Eloquence, those various Tropes, and graceful Figures, which
should form the fine, and lofty Style required in Rhetoric; the Turks of Note,
or lovers of Improvement, are not void of other Means, whereby to reach a
wished amusement, which the barren Study of their barbarous Language cannot
give them.

The Persian, and Arabian Romances much in vogue among the Turks.
THE Method then they take to raise their Souls to emulative heights of Honor
and Ambition, is to study an accomplishment in all the artful Turns of Persian
and Arabian Oratory; whereby they are inspired with lofty thoughts and brave
desires of equalling those great and noble Actions, which they read with wonder
in the generous Characters of ancient Hero's, celebrated gloriously in the
famed Romances, and ingenious Novels, numerously scattered up and down, in both
those Languages.

The common Subjects of the Persian Stories.
THESE Novels and Romances are composed by certain famous Writers, who possess a
Genius fertilely productive of inimitable turns of Wit and Fancy; they consist,
for the most part, of broken Remnants of the several Histories of worthy Men,
set off to great advantage, by the fictitious Beauties of their strange
Additions; nor do they want the taking Graces, and enchanting Ornaments, which
shine so softly through the various Subjects of our British, French, and Spanish
Novels.

How they are adorned.
THEY boast their Knights relieving Ladies in Distress, and Slavery, their
Tilting, Tournaments, and amorous Courtships, their enchanted Castles, Giants,
Monsters, Dwarfs and 'Squires; their delightful Meadows, murmuring Currents,
shady Bowers, and Groves of Myrtle; all which are there as frequent and
fantastical, as in any Clelia, or Cassandra of them all.

One Kederlee, the same with them, as St. George among the Christians.
AMONGST the many mighty Men of Valor and Renown, whose Acts of Chivalry, they
record as Miracles, they relate prodigious and diverting Stories of a certain
Knight called Kederlee, who by the Actions of his Life, appears no other than
the famed St. George, that celebrated Dragon-killer of the British Nation. The
4 Beasts which the Turks have placed in Paradise.
And so highly do the Turks respect the Memory of this illustrious Champion,
that, in regard of his unequalled and surprising Merits, they have given his
Horse a Seat in Paradise, and placed him there, in state and glory, with the
Ass whereon our Savior rode, the Dog belonging to the Seven Sleepers, and the
favorite Camel of their Prophet Mahomet.

The Turks unskilled in History.
AS for the delightful, and improving Knowledge of History, the Turks are wholly
destitute of any means whereby to reach the smallest Skill in that engaging
Study; for though they take a constant care to keep exact and punctual Records of
the Rise and Progress of their own prodigious Empire, they are so ignorantly
defective in the Study of Chronology, that by the strangely rude and barbarous
dictates of received Tradition, they confound all Ages, Reigns, and Persons, in
the mixed disorder of a wild irregularity.

A strange Opinion of the Turks, concorning Solomon and Homer.
THUS they look on Solomon and Homer to have been two Brothers, who contended
with each other for the Bays bestowed upon the most deserving Poet, and believe
that Homer having gained the universal Plaudit of the Judges of those times,
was envied by his Brother Solomon, and being banished from the Court, was
forced to roam about the World, and beg a livelihood from charitable
Contributions.

I know not how it comes to pass, but Solomon is now the only Prince who lives
in their Traditions, and so great a Notion have they formed of his extensive
Power, and the splendor of his Government, that they have listed all the
famous Monarchs of the ancient World, as Servants to his Grandeur.

Another of Julius Caesar, Job, and Alexander the Great.
THUS is the celebrated Julius Caesar thought by all the Turks, to have been
Admiral of a prodigious Fleet of Ships, belonging to the abovenam'd Solomon,
consisting of a Thousand and odd Hundred Sail. They say, that Alexander the
Great, was the illustrious General of his victorious Armies; and that Job, so
famous for his exemplary Patience, was the Judge of all Civil Causes of his
large Dominions.

More versed in Poetry, and why inclined to study it.
SOMEWHAT more refined are their Capacities in the Art of Poetry, if that
indifferent Skill they boast may claim the honor of so high a Character; for
the ambitious Sultans of the Turkish Empire, hearing that the Works of ancient
Poets are esteemed in Christendom; Ambition of the Turkish Sultans.
and having been informed by Runagado's, what immortal Characters have been
conferred on former Princes, by the Pens of such as writ harmoniously, became
inspired with eager Wishes, that their own great Actions might be copied to
advantage, by some Eastern Muse, and so transmitted with a shining Glory, to
the praises of Posterity.

The Turkish Language too rough for Poetry.
THIS flattering Notion of the Turkish Monarchs, caused an eager application of
their Subjects Fancies to the favored study of Poetic Excellence, but the
unpolished Cadence of their guttural Language, not allowing them sufficient
Harmony, they make but dull, insipid Verses, unless they tune their Muses to
the warbling Lyre of smooth Arabia.

The Arguments they use in its defense.
HOWEVER, notwithstanding all the dis-advantages they meet in their attempt,
they still continue to improve their Genius in the practice of this Study,
using Arguments to prove the use, and great necessity of Poetic Learning, not
much unlike the thoughts of Horace in the following Verses. Vixere fortes ante
Agamemnona
Multi, sed omnes illacrymabiles
Vrgentur, ignotique longa
Nocte; carent quia vate sacro.
Men brave, and valiant lived before those Days,
Wherein famed Agamemnon gained his Praise,
Yet does a dark oblivion shroud their Fames,
And Nights black Mists efface their glorious Names;
Unknown, and unlamented, dead they lie,
While Deeds of later Hero's never die;
Hence springs the Cause, the first no Poets praise,
The last outlive their Death, in Bards immortal Lays.


The Study of Poetry, why opposed by certain rigid Sects.
STRONGLY notwithstanding, are these great Encouragers of Poetry opposed, by
certain Sects of grave, morose, and rigid Principles, who raise Objections to
the Study, from the many false and contradictory Assertions of the greatest
Poets, The Reasons which they give for their dislike of Poetry.
which besides the scandal they affirm it must infallibly create to their
unstained and holy Doctrine, has another ill Effect, which is, so painting over
all the Vices of a Man or Nation, and so Satyrically detracting from their
envied Virtues, that Posterity will be obliged to read a mixed Account of Truth
and Falsehood, without the smallest possibility of distinguishing with
certainty, between the one and the other. And herein they seem to blame such
noted Fictions, as those for which Ausonius censures Virgil, in the following
Verses, on the Statue of Queen Dido; as I remember in the 117th Epigram. Auson.
Epig. 117.
Illa ego sum Dido vultu, quam conspicis hospes,
Assimulata modis pulchraque mirificis.
Talis eram, sed non Maro, quam mihi finxit erat Men's,
Vita nec incestis laeta cupidinibus:
Namque nec Aeneas vidit me Troius unquam,
Nec Libyam advenit classibus Iliacis.
Sed furias fugiens, atque arma procacis Iarbae,
Servavi, fateor, morte pudicitiam;
Pectore transfixo castos quod pertulit enses;
Non furor, aut laeso crudus amore dolor,
Sic cecidisse juvat: Vixi sine vulnere famae,
Vlta virum, positis moenibus oppetii.
Invida cur in me stimulasti musa MARONEM,
Fingeret ut nostrae damna pudicitiae?
Vos magis Historicis lectores credit de me
Quam qui furta Deum concubitusque canunt,
Falsidici vates: Temerant qui carmine verum,
Humanisque Deos assimulant vitiis.
The Epigram in English.
I am that Dido's Image, kind and fair,
Whose Form thou see here carved with artful Air;
Such was my Body, but my Soul never knew
The Crimes, which Virgil made my Story do;
Nor was my Life debauched by loose Desires,
Nor burnt my honor in incestuous Fires;
Never did famed Aeneas see my Face,
Nor land his Trojan Squadrons in this Place,
Flying the Rage of proud Iarba's Will,
To save my valued Fame I chose my self to kill;
Nor was it Madness made my Bosom bleed,
But chaste and weighty Grief, that urged me to the Deed:
Thus did I fall, unwounded in my Fame,
My Consort's Wrongs revenged, and all my Shame,
And built a stately Town, to celebrate my Name.
But why malicious Muse, did thou inspire,
Erroneous Virgil with a strange Desire,
To heap a feigned Dishonor on my Name,
And sell my Modesty to raise his Fame?
Learn all from me, credit Historians more
Than those who never will give their Fables over;
But daringly expose to public View,
The secret Acts of Love, which Jove is pleased to do;
Poets are Liars, and for love of Rhymes,
Will make the Gods themselves partake of human Crimes.


The manner of making Turkish Verse.
THE Turkish Poetry consists of certain short and broken Measures, chained most
commonly to double Rhymes, that so that jingle of the Numbers may atone as much
as possible, for the unpleasant roughness of the Cadence; they confine their
Muses for the most part, to low and doggrel Balads, or the whining Composition
of some amorous Pastoral; yet some few are sound among them, of a very brisk
and sprightly Wit, who will on Weddings, Victories, or other such occasions,
exert their Faculties in forming something like a Panegyric, Epithalamium,
Ode, or witty Anagram, and having done their utmost, with design to please the
Patrons they address, receive a Present equal to the merit of the Work, or
rather given according to the generous, or avaritious Temper of the Person they
have complimented.

Examples are the surest means of teaching any thing.
BUT Examples will be most diverting, and inform the Reader more exactly of
their peculiar Taste of several sorts of Poetry; I therefore now proceed to come
as near as I can trace their Language, to some remarkable and celebrated Turns
of Turkish Wit, whereby the Authors gained a great and lasting Reputation.

A pleasant Story of a Turk who hired Poets to make Verses on his Wedding.
THERE was a noted Turk, who lived in Constantinople, and had lately gained the
Parents Approbation of a certain Lady, young, and beautiful; they were married,
and their Nuptials celebrated with a Splendor equal to their Fortunes, which
were great and plentiful: The Sports, performed on such occasions, drew the
Observation of all sorts of People, who were treated and caressed with
wonderful Civility; among the rest, unwilling to omit the smallest point of
lofty Liberality, the joyful Bridegroom sent an Invitation to the most
esteemed, and brightest Poets of the City; assuring them they should receive an
hearty welcome; and to tempt the trial of their utmost Skill, informed 'em, he
designed a good Reward for him, who made the finest Verses, in congratulation
of his Marriage.

The Poets feasted by the Bridegroom.
THE summoned Bards appeared immediately, and having feasted plentifully on the
Bridegroom's Entertainment, thought it proper to remember what they came for,
and retiring severally to the private Arbours of their Patron's Garden, soon
composed the mercenary Praises he expected from them, and returning to the
Place where waited the impatient Company, repeated every Man his own
Performance, each submitted, each in hopes of preference, to the decisive
Judgment of a fair Majority.

THE Consequences of this famous Battle of the Turkish Muses, having made some
noise about the City, many Copies of their awkward Panegyricks were distributed
about; and since I was obliged by an Acquaintance with an Italian Translation
of them all, I would not think the Pains too great, for the diversion of my
Reader, to present him with their Verses in a British Dress; the first are
these which follow. The first Poets Verses.
I Mustapha Bashaw to you great Ali,
Favorite of Mahomet, and pride of Hali,
Address my Lines -- you are a Man so clever,
That I could wish you were to live for ever;
For then the beauteous Wife you now enjoy,
Would bring you every Year a smiling Boy;
So would the World forever happy be,
Beauty, and Youth, Wit, Wealth and Honor see,
Your Wife and Sons would prove the former two,
And the three last, must ever shine in you.


I assure the Reader I have done the Poet Justice in his Fancy and Expression,
which though a little brighter in the end than the beginning, may be excused, in
that it is more than tolerable in a Country where the Sun of Learning shines so
seldom. But here comes another somewhat merry and diverting. The second Poets
Verses.
O mighty Ali let me swear
That a most happy Man you are,
Your self is wondrous wise and witty,
And God has sent a Wife to sit ye;
But that I may discover best,
How much I really think you blessed,
Oh Heavens! were I one Hour of Life,
To be in bed with your sweet Wife,
S'bud how should I for Joys then strive,
And be the happiest Man alive!


THE Author of this comical Conceit was one Morat, a brisk and airy Spark, who
would not lose his Jest, wherever he found it; but his Muse however mist the
Prize, and though the Bridegroom seemed well pleased, and laughed for company, he
was not master of a Turkish Nature, if he did not curse the Poet for his odd,
uncommon way of praising him. A third succeeded him more gravely, with the
Lines which follow. I.
The third Poets Panegyric on the Bridegroom.
God made two Sparks of heavenly Fire,
More bright than others were,
Framed 'em to kindle soft desire,
Both Spotless, Chaste and Fair.
II.
Go down says He, to Earth, and there,
Long wander up and down,
Till having found the loveliest Pair,
Their Bliss by Marriage crown.
III.
They came and journey'd long in vain,
Until they found the Two,
Then centered here, and now contain,
The destined Joys of you.


A comical Reward for Poetry.
SOME other Poets tried their Skill, but all fell short of these, and one
Zulduc, the Author of the last, was judged deserving of the promised Prize,
which was accordingly bestowed upon him, by the Bridegroom's Order; the Present
was a well-shap'd Ass, with Saddle and Caparison embroidred richly, and the
Bridle, Breast-piece, and the other Harness, all embossed with polished Silver,
of which Metal were the large and weighty Stirrops, made according to the
Turkish Fashion.

THIS strange ill-chosen Present, soon alarmed the Town with mirth and wonder,
at the novelty of our triumphant Poet's odd Reward; and amongst the many others
who reflected pleasantly upon the Turks unfashionable Gift, a certain humerous
Spanish Runnagado, skilled completely in the Eastern Languages, and still
retaining sprightly Relics of his Countries Genius, was a little sharp upon
the Subject in the following Satyr. A Spanish Runnagado's Satyr, on the
Bridegroom and his Present.
Complain not poor Zulduc, that thy Reward,
Seems not to speak a generous regard,
Thou do alas! mistake thy Patron's Mind,
The Gift he made thee proves him more than kind;
For as a Lover, whom strong Passions move,
Yields up himself a Sacrifice to Love,
So Ali's Hand has given to thee dull Man,
Though not himself, as near it as he can;
For Nature, Bridle, Saddle, all combine,
To show how near the Ass and late-noos'd Ali join.


The Condition of Music, among the Turks.
PROCEED we now to Musick's Charms, as like to those of Poetry as possible, yet
not so much encouraged by the Turkish Nation, who are altogether Strangers to
the melting Strains of Vocal Harmony, nor understand the charming use of those
delightful Instruments, whose elevating sounds have unresisted Power to move
the Souls of dying Men, and make the poor desponding Wretch forget his Sorrows,
and erect with Joy his drooping Head, to hear the soft, and tunefull Call, that
lulls his Cares, and hushes for a while his loud Misfortunes.

Their Notions thereof a sort of Paradox.
THE Notion of the Turks concerning Music, will appear a Paradox, for they
abhor the brisk and airy Tunes of Christian Composition, and alike despise the
dulcid Notes and melancholy, soft, complaining Strokes of grave Sonata's; The
shape of a Turkish Ghittarr.
yet are they never easy when alone, unless they have a kind of course Ghitarr,
or such a sort of Instrument, consisting commonly of several Wires, upon a long
and slender wooden Body, with a round, capacious hollow head, the form whereof
is represented in the Cut relating to the Grecian Wedding, in the one and
twentieth Chapter, above the Letter I on the right hand of the Figures.

Their manner of using it.
WITH this dull Instrument the solitary Turks divert themselves, in every Place,
and every Company; they place it in the left hand, and turning its unweildy
Belly to their Sides, with the unheeding Fingers of their other Hand, strike up
and down at random all the Wires, and whine out horrid, and unpleasant Noises,
to the hum-drum Echo's of their barbarous Instrument.

The strange esteem the Turks profess for the abovenam'd Instrument.
YET so bewitched are all the Turks to this ridiculous Amusement, that a
Stranger must be plagued in every corner of their Streets and Houses, with
repeated sounds of doleful Airs, and noisy Voices void of harmony, nay to such
extravagant Affection are they now arrived, for this prevailing Fashion, that
the Soldiers go not to the War without their Fiddles; nor can any travel half a
Day in Turkish Territories, but he shall see a grave long-bearded Mussulman,
sit singly cross-legg'd, under some large Oak, or shady Cypress, pleasing his
conceit with melancholy Ditties, to the Strum-strum Music of his thrum'd
Ghittarr, while his poor Horse is turned to graze about the Field, and seeks
the pleasure of a more substantial Entertainment.

The shape and use of the Turkish Base-Viol.
ANOTHER Instrument in use among the Turks is a large wooden Trunk, not much
unlike the fashion of the former, whereto one large, and rozin'd twisted
Cats-gut is affixed so straightly, that by scraping thereupon with a
proportionable Bow, a certain hoarse, and hollow murmur strikes the Ear, like
the unpleasant tuning of a bad Base Viol.

The form of Timbrels, and how used in Turkey.
ANOTHER very celebrated Piece of Music, is the noise they make with jingling
Timbrels, which are formed exactly like a Sieve, the bottom made of Buff,
extremely strong and durable; small, long, and narrow holes about the sides,
contain a certain number of round, thin, and polished Plates of Brass, bored
through the center, and securely fastened with a liberty to play, upon a little
Pin; this Timbrel they make yield a very jarring and discordant sound, by
striking with their Fists, upon the middle of the Leather, which thereby
affords a sort of drowsy Base, to the more shrill and sprightly trebble of the
clattering Plates of Brass about it. Both these abovenam'd Instruments are
likewise represented, in the Cut aforesaid.

Wind Music not in use among them.
WIND Music is not much in vogue in any part of Turkey; a sort of Pipe, or
awkward Flute they make of Reeds, is what they chiefly now delight in: But the
Hautboys, Trumpet, and the favored Instruments of Christian Countries, even
from the amorous Flute, down to the rustic Bagpipe, are entirely strangers to
the Turkish Practice.

Drums and Kettle-drums in high esteem.
DRUMS they use in martial Expeditions, and delight extremely in their warlike
Thunder; Kettledrums they beat with skill and pleasure, but they understand no
Tunes, nor boast the noble Theory of Music, but play by rote on any
Instrument, the incoherent dictates of a wild, extravagant, and artless fancy.

The Turks unskilled in Logic.
THE Turkish Studies boast no Logic, nor does any Man among the most polite of
all their People know its meaning; no tough Syllogisms puzzle their Discourses;
no Nego Minorem, Majorem, or Consequentiam, confound their Students with
asserted Contradictions; The Reasons why they disapprove it.
all is vulgar, plain, and ignorant, nor do they wish to gain a clearer notion,
of a dangerous Science, which they say opposes always, and too often overturns,
the truth of Argument, and light of Reason.

Their Ignorance in Metaphysics.
THEY know no more of Metaphysics, than a trifling Contest on the Attributes of
GOD, and that maintained with such absurdity and weakness, that the artless
Tenor of their jangling Disputations, cannot boast a regular proceeding, but
is founded grossly on the obstinate profession of illiterate Contrarieties.

Physic not well understood in Turkey.
PHYSIC is esteemed a sacred Study, but their Ignorance therein exceeds belief;
for though the ancient Doctors of Arabia, were the best Physicians of the times
they lived in, and could say with Solomon, they knew the vegetable nurseries of
Nature; nay, could tell their Virtues from the Cedar to the Hyssop, yet the
modern Arabs, and the spacious Body of the Turkish Empire, are eclipsed by
Clouds of such supine Obscurity, that they can boast no good Physician in their
Nation, but respect a Quack, if bred in Christendom, as an undoubted Master of
an useful Science, which their want of Learning, or neglect of Opportunities
deny themselves the smallest knowledge of.

Navigation, how far known to Turkish Mariners.
NAVIGATION, as I said before, is little understood by Turkish Mariners. The
Compass is by them, divided into Eight great Points, and the dependant
Usefullness of that illustrious Art so much unknown, that they can only sail
before the Wind, and while the nimble Ships of other Nations ply with ease
their handy Tacks to star-board or to lar-board Quarter, veer about, lie by,
and coming up within few Points of every Wind, sail on secure, in spite of
adverse and tempestuous Weather, the baffled Efforts of the Turkish Sailors
sailing their Desires, the unweildy Vessels of those ignorant People must be
forced to creep for hospitable shelter, to the close protection of some
neigh'bring Harbor, and expect with patience the desired return of proper
Winds to prosecute their Voyages.

The State of their Geographic Learning.
GEOGRAPHY is so unknown among them, that they hardly find a possibility of
reaching Skill enough to learn the situation of their own Dominions, and so
very dark are their Capacities that way, that some the most refined among them,
have desired me to inform them, whether Britain did not border on the Mouth of
the Mediterranean, and the King of France's Territories spread their Frontiers
to the Western Indies.

Geometry, Astronomy, and Astrology how far known in Turkey.
GEOMETRY they cannot boast the smallest Notion of, and are extremely ignorant
of Astronomical Observations; yet some are found in Turkey, who pretend to
Schemes and Figures in Astrology, and calculate Nativities for superstitious
People, when even those very Men who pass for Conjurers, and are esteemed as
such by the unthinking Populace, behold with wonder the surprising Form, and
advantageous Uses of our Christian Globes, Celestial, or Terrestrial.

BUT let us now descend from lofty Studies, to the Rural Practices of Country
Labors, and we shall perceive the common Ignorance as formidable there, as in
their Schools of Education, and unpolished Seminaries of Religion and
Philosophy.

The Turks unskilled in Husbandry.
SO little are they skilled in Agriculture, and the Art of Gardening, that where
the Ground requires manuring, they are wholly ignorant of all Improvements,
which the rustic Arts of European Husbandmen have taught the Practice of, and
let it lie neglected and untilled; not useful to themselves, nor advantageous
to Posterity.

Their Lands extremely fertile.
BUT Providence has strangely so ordained, that they possess such fertile, and
productive Territories, as will yield the Blessings of a double Harvest, from
the easy Labors of an unfatigu'd and pleasing Industry.

Greeks commonly employed to till the Ground.
YET are the native Turks so given to Luxury, that few among them care to take
the smallest Pains in rural Practices, but on the contrary, they still employ
the subject Greeks to do their Drudgery, and live supinely like the lazy
Drones, upon the plundered Honey of the Bees about 'em.

The Reason why the Turks neglect improving Lands.
AND perhaps, this universal negligence in Country matters, may proceed from
that inglorious and submissive Slavery wherein they live, and which depresses
weightily their unsupported Spirits, by the sad reflections of their miserable
Servitude to an unbounded Monarch, who possesses at their Deaths, the Product
of their Labors, and becomes sole Heir to all their Lands, excluding even the
Children of a frugal Father from the wished enjoyment of a ravished Patrimony.

How a Country Life may be unpleasant.
FOR though the Charms and various Pleasures of a Country Life, may tempt the
Inclinations of a thinking Man, to leave the hurries of a Town-destraction, and
relax the Springs of wearied Life in gentle Solitude; yet is not any of these
flattering Blessings to be met, or hoped for, from a Rural Life encumbred with
the plagues of noisy Discord, and severe effects of an insulted Slavery, where
every Moment may produce some strange and unexpected Accident, and reduce the
Owner of a rolling Plenty to the shame of Poverty or Military Ravages, upon the
spiteful Nod of some capricious Governor.

When, and how, a Country Life is truly happy.
THEN, O sweet and gentle Solitude, are thy Retirements truly happy, when we can
enjoy, secure from danger, the inviting Pleasures of thy dulcid Mansions; when
the softer Wishes of our peaceful Souls, may free, and unconfined become
successful, and our undisturbed, and blissful Hours roll smoothly on, within
the limits of Paternal Residence. How truly just are the exalted Notions of the
Roman Horace on the present Subject, when he says, Hor. Ode 2d. Epod.
Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis,
Vt prisca Gens Mortalium;
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis,
Solutus omni faenore.
Neque excitatur classico Miles truci,
Neque horret iratum Mare,
Forumque vitat, and superba civium
Potentiorum limina.
The Ode in English.
Happy the Man, who free from Care,
As Men in former Ages were,
From Usury retires;
And Plows with pure industrious Hand,
With his own Steers his Father's Land,
The Crown of his Desires.
No storms of War his Peace can shake,
Vnmov'd he sees the Billows break
And mocks the Oceans frown,
He shuns all Courts where Lawyers are,
Disdains the haughty Grandeur there,
Contented with his own.


BY what has been already said, the Reader may conceive with ease, the utmost
altitude of Turkish Learning; I shall now proceed in the ensuing Chapter, to
inform him of the Morals of those mighty People.

CHAP. X. Of the Turkish Morals.
All Men by Nature, more or less are taught Morality.
THE Reader can expect no elevated Notions of refined Morality, from such as
live on others Misery, and owe the Grandeur of their lofty Fortune to the
bloody Ruin of invaded Nations, yet as Natures Dictates; and the common Lessons
of a mild Humanity, excite Mankind to do the Justice they again expect, so have
the Turks, in the last Age, been more refined than formerly they were, by
frequent Converse with the Christian Nations, which their extended Conquests
made their Neighbors.

Some British Travelers have flattered the Turks.
STRANGELY do the Characters which all our Travelers have given the Turks,
mistake their Nature, some Ingenious Gentlemen the Natives of Great Britain,
have thought fit to speak those People noble Masters of a spotless Virtue, and
describe them sailing in a Sea of Glory, laden richly with the golden Notions
of Morality and Wisdom, which distinguished anciently the Great Inhabitants of
the Countries they have conquered.

Others have detracted from their real Merits.
OTHERS, less obliging, but alike mistaken, biased by the Follies of a fond
Partiality, allow them owners of not one commendable or virtuous Practice, but
describe their Natures wholly sunk in dull Stupidity, and universally inclined
to Mischief and Iniquity.

A Medium most eligible, and the nearest Truth.
THESE Extremes are both to be rejected, and a modest Medium chosen to direct
us, we shall then discover that the same variety of Humor and Morality, now
reigns in Turkey, that is found in Christendom, and that the numerous
Mahometans are like our selves divided into Good and Bad, according to the
Lessons of their different Educations, or the contrary Impulses of a vicious
Soul, or one inspired with a sublime and generous love of Virtue.

Their divided Notions of Morality.
NOT more divided is the Turkish Faith, than their infirm Morality; some holding
lawful, meritorious, and as duty, that, which other some condemn as odious,
sinful, and illegal; nay, to such degrees of violence do they proceed herein,
that some believe it Sin to pity Christians, others hold it Charity to relieve
them; some hate Mirth, and others Sorrow; some love one thing, some another;
each opposing to others Principle, with all the malice of discordant Obstinacy,
as is described by Horace in the eighteenth Epistle of his first Book. Oderunt
hilarem tristes, tristemque jocosi,
Sedatum celeres; agilem, gnavumque remissi.
The Sad the Airy hate, the Brisk the Sad,
The Swift the Slow despise, the Joyless hate the Glad.


BUT to let the Curious clearly understand in what Condition are maintained the
common Morals of the Turks in general, I will transcribe a sort of Catechism
taught their Children, who imbibing early what the Parents make 'em learn,
continue when grown up, to justify their Tenets. The Interrogatories are as
follow. A Turkish Catechism.
Q. Tell me thy Name?

A. My Name is Mustapha.

Q. How were thou made?

A. By One Great God, alone, and indivisible, Almighty, Merciful, Omniscient,
Sempiternal, full of Truth, and rich in Glory.

Q. By what means do thou hope to gain Salvation?

A. By walking strictly in the Paths of Holiness, as measured out by God's
Decree, and set before all true Believers, by the goodness and compassion of
our Pastor Mahomet, (whose Name be Sacred) sent by God to teach Mankind, and
now in Heaven, his mighty, true, and only Prophet.

Q. How do thou expect to gain his Favor, or reward his Goodness?

A. By promoting his Religion, and a Charitable Pity of my Fellow Creatures.

Q. How must his Religion be promoted?

A. By destroying with the Sword and Fire, all such as dare oppose his holy
Doctrine, till the Infidels are rooted from the Earth, and all the Universe
submits to own his Glory.

Q. How will you extend the Charity enjoined you?

A. By erecting Hans, or public Inns for entertaining poor benighted Pilgrims,
building Bagnio's, and endowing Mosques with large Revenues, if the Lord of
Paradise is pleased to bless me with a plentiful Ability: If not, by giving
freely to the Poor as much as I can spare, redeeming Slaves, and looking upon
the Beasts which serve our Uses with a mild Compassion.

Q. How are you to pity Beasts, or Birds which serve you?

A. When an Ox, Ass, Horse, Dog, Mule, or Camel, has for many Years been truly
serviceable; I must let him graze in peace about my Grounds, and live the rest
of his disabled Life, entirely free from Toil, or Drudgery, as a Reward for all
his former Labors.

Q. What else are you required to do to such poor Animals?

A. I am obliged to load my Camels and all other Beasts of Burden, favorably,
and with pity; buy the Birds that pine in Cages for their absent Mates, and let
them fly away to seek lost Liberty.

Q. Who, under Mahomet, will you obey?

A. My Prince, and Parents.

Q. How must you serve your Prince?

A. With Life and Fortune, for he is the Lord of all my Plenty, and may honor
my Head by making it his Footstool, I am to live and die when he commands it,
and depend on nothing but his sacred Pleasure.

Q. How will you respect your Parents?

A. With the unfeigned Duty of a meek Humility; as becomes the Honor of those
Persons, from whom, next God, I had my Being.

Q. How will you deal with your Neighbors?

A. Love those, who love me; hate those, who hate me; kill those, who strive to
kill me; but never give back Ill for Good, nor Good for Evil.

Q. What is your highest Wish?

A. On Earth Success, and Paradise hereafter.

Q. Is your Wish sincere? If not, may Heaven refuse it.

A. So be it to me.



THIS Catechism may convince the Reader, that howsoever differing their Notions
are, in other Points, they all concur in one unanimous respect, wherewith they
humbly own the Power of God, and worship his Divinity, of which the eldest Ages
of Antiquity, acknowledge the assured Existence, and Hesiod seemingly inspired
with more than Heathenish light of Reason, thus expresses. A Quotation from
Hesiod, concerning the Power of God.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
High-thund'ring Jove, who in Heavens loftiest Throne,
Sits uncontrolled, and rules the World alone,
At pleasure, lifts to Empire lowly Swains,
And hurls from boasted Grandeur, him who reigns.
With ease extirpates Lines of noblest Race,
And gives undreamt of Honors to the Base;
In short his Arm can make the Crooked Straight,
And draw out all the Pride, which swells the haughty Great.


The bad Effect of a bad Opinion.
THEIR Notions of the Duty, which obliges them to propagate the Doctrine of
their Prophet, leads their Reason, Justice and Humanity so much astray, that
neither Promise, Vow, nor solemn Oath, can bind their Conscience, to omit an
opportunity of adding any thing to former Acquisitions.

The Turkish Trade is managed by the Jews.
BY this means, Christians find it dangerous to deal in Turkey, and gaining no
security from sacred Oaths, nor oft-repeated Promises, refuse to credit such as
they suspect, who therefore, not regarding public Business, leave the
management of all their Trade to crafty Jews, a People wily, and industrious in
the art of Cheating handsomely, and who are numerously spread over every Corner
of the Turkish Empire; Constantinople, and its Neighborhood, containing many
Thousands of those scattered People.

The crime of Lying seldom known among the Turks.
LYING is a Crime not often known in Turkey, nor does any Man affirm for certain
Truth, what is not proved so, by his own Experience; and speaking generally,
when a Turk has stroak'd his Beard, and laid his Hand with gravity upon his
Breast, sedately to assert some questioned Point, you may securely take his
Word, nor is he ever known to falsify his Promise.

Swearing practiced and encouraged.
OF all the Turks immoral Practices, the Vice of Swearing to a strange
extravagance, is most in fashion; and so oddly new, and different from ours,
are their invented Oaths and Curses, that it will not be a needless trouble, to
inform the Reader, what uncommon Thoughts those People exercise on such
occasions.

Strange and unexampl'd Curses used in Turkey.
THUS for example, When they would express their anger to a Man or Beast, they
do it commonly in the rash and inconsiderate manner following; May the Graves
black Angel fry your Soul; May you vomit up your Bowels, and your Heart Strings
burst in sunder; May the Birds of Heaven defile your Head, and your unwash'd
Body damn your Soul to future Vengeance. But more ridiculous, and impiously
void of reason, is a Method they encourage by a constant Practice, cursing,
with a strange and senseless fury, things inanimate and void of Understanding;
if a Man affronts 'em, Camel, Horse, or any other Beast of burden checks their
Will, or any accidental stumble over a Stone provokes their Passion, they
proceed, without reflecting on the Object of their Rage, to vent these Curses,
Annah sana Secteim Gaour, Annah sana Yonnina Sicheim. That is, I ravished your
Mother, you Infidel, and I will ravish her again as she lies in her Grave.

The common Oaths in use among the Turks.
THEIR common Oaths are such as these, By Mahomet 's Great Office; By the Throne
of God; By the Roof of Heaven; By the Sea and Land; By the Sultan's Soul, and
the hairy Scalp of my Mother.

Gaming, how far encouraged.
GAMING is so little prejudicial to the Turkish Government, that though the
Natives much delight therein, as shall be shown hereafter, it was never known
among this People, that Estates were ruined, and whole Families impoverished by
the cursed Effects of such a vicious Practice.

Drunkeness a prevailing Vice among them.
EBRIETY, I have before informed my Reader, is unlawful by their Prophet's
Prohibition of the use of Wine, or other strong intoxicating Liquors, yet how
far this weak and disregarded Barrier stops their progress in so loved a Vice,
will be easily conceived, when I assure him, that no Nation under Heaven is
addicted more to frequent Drunkenness, than are the Turks in private Meetings.

Whoredom and Adultery but rarely practiced.
WHOREDOM, and Adultery, too much encouraged by the Christian's Practice, and
alleviated commonly by the palliating Cloak of a pretended Gallantry, are
seldom found among the Turks; the Punishments so great, and obviously known,
and Difficulties of obtaining Female Correspondence so insuperably hazardous,
deterr them from attempting such illegal Love, and the little value which they
hold their Women at, the Slavery that poor unhappy Sex are there subjected to,
and the unbounded Liberty their Laws afford 'em in promiscuous Use of Wives and
Concubines, excite no search of such unvalued Pleasure.

The Turks are much inclined to Sodomy.
BUT now, O black and horrid Shame! I must with all the detestation of a
Christian Zeal, descend to speak a shocking Truth, relating to the strange and
cursed Pollution of inverted Nature, that ancient hellish Crime, which ruined
Sodom, and at present reigns among the Turks, with such libidinous
extravagance, that they will publicly avow their countenanced delight in such
a beastly and inhuman Practice.

THEY have their favorite Pooshts, or Catamites, as common as their
Concubines, and ride attended to the Wars or distant Governments, by rich and
splendid Numbers of these young Male Prostitutes.

The means whereby the Turks grew fond of Sodomy.
IT IS more than probable, that the raging Fire of this impetuous Lust, began to
flame from the original Confinement of the Turkish Janissaries, denied, like
Roman Priests the liberty of Marriage; who, therefore not supporting the
unwelcome Prohibition with expected resignation to the Will of their
Commanders, broke out in loose and wanton searches after unknown Pleasures; and
like Water, checked in its encumbered Chanel, soon doubled former force, and
rapidly o'erflow'd the deluged Banks, whose lofty Mounds had formerly confined
them.

The Vice encouraged by Impunity.
IMPUNITY for such unnatural and encroaching Guilt, emboldens their Presumption
to so vast an height, that I remember with the greatest horror and amazement,
an unexampled Impudence I was my self a witness of at Adrianople.

A Story of a Turk, at Adrianople.
SIR Robert Sutton, now Ambassador from Her Present Majesty to the Court of
Constantinople, being just arrived in the abovenam'd City, where his
Predecessor had some time expected him; it was my Duty to Congratulate his
Entrance on that Dignity, which I did in company with many British Gentlemen at
that time there: The House in which Sr. Robert lodged, was seated pleasantly
upon a noble River, which runs along the City, and an open Kiosk or airy Summer
House looked out upon the Water.

WE were standing here extremely pleased with the delightful Prospect, when
from the Plain upon the other side, we saw a Turk of middle Age and decent
Habit, lead a Boy about Fourteen directly to the Bank which slop'd upon the
River, where he thought himself securely sheltered from the People of a Village
not far distant.

An incredible Proof of Turkish Insolence.
DESCENDED to a Place convenient as he thought for the execution of his Purpose,
he began, to our surprise, and inexpressible confusion, to prepare himself and
his consenting Catamite, for acting a Design so hateful to our sight, and such
a stranger to our Customs, that we scarce believed our Eyes, when they beheld
this Object: We hallowed loudly to the lustful Wretch, who turned his Head with
seeming wonder to perceive us there, but still persisted in his first Attempt,
till snatching up a Fowling-piece, which lay by chance upon a Table in the
Summer House, I cocked it, and presented it against his Body, as if I would
have shot him dead immediately; at this he started, and adjusting the disorder
of his loosned Dress, retired precipitately, with a thousand Curses on the
House and Company, for having balked so impious an Intention.

A noted Proof of God's abhorrence of the Crime.
THERE is in Barbary upon the Coasts of Fez, and in the Neighborhood of that
Imperial City, a most strange and dreadful Proof of God's Resentment of this
growing Guilt, in his surprising Judgment on a certain Moor, inflicted in the
very moment of the beastly Action: Why unbeliev'd.
It Is unbeliev'd, at least suspected, though attested in the Works of several
Authors; but that common fate of Travelers Assertions shall not make me
backward in maintaining Truths I know; The folly of believing Travelers more
apt to lie than other People.
nor will judicious Readers question the Authority of any Man's Relation, for
his having traveled into other Countries; a poor, a weak, malicious Proof of
Envy, and the mean effect of Judgments Want, or scarcity of Honor: For Men, by
Nature favorers of Truth will still continue so, what ever Place or Climate
they may chance to visit: For as Horace says, Coelum, non animum mutant, qui
trans mare currunt.
Men, who over Seas to distant Countries roll,
Often change their Climate, but retain their Soul.


The particulars of the Story.
UPON a spacious wild unshadow'd Common in the way from Fez to Arbacan, a
Village not far distant, you perceive at near six Furlongs from the common
Road, the Figure of a Turk committing Sodomy upon the Body of an Ass, and
coming nearer, led by wonder, or prevailing Curiosity, discover it to be an
Image formed in very hard and solid Stone, the Hoofs, Hide, Hair, Teeth, and
Color of the Ass, as various and distinct as when alive; The Turbant of the
poor unhappy Man seems half untied and hanging negligently over his Shoulders;
A very wonderful Act of Providence.
even the Eyebrows, Nose, Mouth, Lips, and every Feature of his Face exactly
formed to speak him living, nay, the very Rings upon his Fingers, and the Nails
of either Hand remain distinguishably obvious to the common View, alike
converted into Stony Substance, varying in its Colors answerable to the
different Parts of that amazing Metamorphosis it represents.

IT stands so strong and deeply rooted in surrounding Earth, that neither Man
nor Ass can possibly be separated, nor the whole conjunctive Monument of Sin
removed from its Foundation; which, they say, has very often been in vain
attempted.

A traditional Account they give of the above-named Accident.
TRADITION teaches them, and they teach Travelers, that in some old forgotten
Age, of which their ancient Records make no mention, the miserable Wretch thus
strangely represented, frequently committed Sodomy upon the open Common, with
Asses, Mares, and other Beasts, which grazed promiscuously upon the public
Pasture; but that at last the weighty Justice of Almighty God o'ertook his
Insolence, and changed him into Stone, whilst busied in his Wickedness, that so
he might remain to future Ages, an immortal Monument of Heavenly Vengeance.

No sort of Robbery much known in Turkey.
HOUSE-BREAKING, Pocket-picking, and the meaner Practices of Petty-Larceny are
altogether strangers to the Natives of this Country; who so much abhor the
Person of a Thief, that where a Man accused of any Robbery, escapes the hand of
Public Justice, he will notwithstanding, fall a Victim to the unresisted fury
of the raging Populace; for all the Turks are so entirely free from fear of
losing Goods or Chattels, by the breaking up their Dwellings, that the richest
Warehouses, which their City boasts of, often lie whole Nights unbarr'd, and
open in their lowest Windows, nor are these frequent Opportunities of Robbing
any ways improved to eithers disadvantage.

A very comical Bargain customarily made among them.
BUT if they overreach each other in their private Dealings, they do not only
think it lawful, but a commendable discretion; and therefore it is a common
Custom with the Merchants of this Country, when they hire a Broker,
Book-keeper, or other Servant, to agree, that he shall claim no Wages; but, to
make amends for that unprofitable disadvantage, they give them free and
uncontrolled Authority, to Cheat them every way they can in managing their
Business; but with this Proviso, that they never must exceed the privileged
Advantage of ten per Cent; all under that, which they can fairly gain by
blinding their respective Masters in the settling their Accounts is properly
their own, and by their Masters Will, confirmed to their Possession.

THE British Merchants will be apt to censure these Proceedings as ridiculous,
and tending to encourage Knavery; but he will soften his Opinion, when he
thinks upon the Reasons, which they give for the permission of this Custom.

The Reasons why the Turks allow this Custom.
THE Servant knowing he has nothing to depend on, but the Profits he must gain
by an industrious Application to the art of Cheating, puts himself upon a wily
Method of o'er-reaching others in the Goods he buys by order of his Master;
whom he strives again to overreach, by reckoning them to his Accounts at full
and current Prizes: The Master on the other hand well knowing, that unless he
watches carefully his Servant's Managements, he will deceive him ten per Cent.
And probably go far beyond those tolerated Limits, becomes observant of his own
Affairs, and keeps his Profits in his own Possession.

Murder common in the Turks Dominions.
MURDER is so dangerously common in this Country, that there passes scarce a
Day, wherein some Man or other is not killed: The Turks however, rarely butcher
one another, but the hated Christians fall in every Corner wretched Victims, to
the blinded Zeal of such Mad Pilgrims as return from Meccha, or the lawless
Insolence of unrestrained Levant's, or those who Man their Ships of War; On
what account committed by 2 sorts of People.
the first of these, transported by the Dictates of delusive Doctrine, aim at
Heaven, by the Death of every Christian they may chance to meet, till they are
killed themselves by way of Vengeance; and the last delight in Murder, by the
bloody Consequence of a licentious Education; so that you can hardly pass the
Streets of Turkey, but you must be witness of an hundred Proofs of their
inhumane Practices.

A Story of a Pilgrim who endeavored to kill the Author.
ONE Day I went on board a British Vessel in the Port of Constantinople, and
returning to the Shore with several Europaean Gentlemen, all dressed according
to the Christian Fashion; we received a thousand barbarous Affronts as we were
landing from the Boat, but being long inured to Turkish Insolence, we took no
notice of their scurrilous Expressions, but endeavored to have passed 'em by,
with an uncommon exercise of Patience and Humility, till we perceived a certain
tattered Wretch, in Habit of a Pilgrim, leaping up and down, with elevated
Eyes, contracted Forehead, and a Visage full of Passion and Deformity, he held
a Dagger in his hand, and skip'd about with such conceited violence, as made me
take his zealous Transports, for an Air of Madness, so that thinking him some
simple Antic, I laughed aloud at his extravagant Diversion.

The barbarous Action of a zealous Madman.
HE saw me laugh and made directly toward me, with his brandished Weapon, which
a Greek Interpreter, endeavoring to turn aside, received unhappily to the Hilt
within his Bosom; I began at this, to change my humor, and endeavor to
prevent the proffered Salutation of the Pilgrim's Dagger, stepping back, I drew
my Sword, and kept him at a distance still retiring from his aggravated Fury,
which being now increased to double height by now and then a thrust upon his
Wrist, he grew quite desperate, and finding that he could not come within my
Sword, stepped back a Foot or two to gather force, and threw the Dagger swiftly
at my Breast, with all the Strength that Zeal and Anger could supply his Arm
with.

An odd way of reaching Heaven.
PROVIDENCE perverted its designed Effect, and led me to avoid the danger of its
Point, by sinking suddenly with Knees upon the Ground, but dreading the Event
of his continued Villainy, I made a strong and lucky Thrust, which pierced his
Bosom through and through, and brought him stagg'ring to the Ground, to reach
the Paradise he hoped to gain, by such a bloody Method, and inhumane Species of
mistaken Merit.

NOT one pretended to detain us from Escaping; but on the contrary,
discontinued all their Insolences, to gather numerously round the Body, and
repeat a Prayer for his departing Soul, desiring Mahomet to see the Piety of
his Intention, and reward his Death with the assured Possession of expected
Glory.

A strange and horrid Principle! alike destructive to the Turks themselves, and
Strangers in their Country, who seldom let the Death of an assaulted Friend go
unrevenged; by which means all the Trading Towns of Turkey, constantly afford
successive Scenes of Murder and Destraction.

THE wonderful Discovery of a barbarous Murder hap'ning in the time of my
continuance in this Country, claims a Place in my Remarks for two great
Reasons; first, the oddness of the thing it self, distinguishes the Accident in
a surprising Manner; and secondly, the never-sleeping Justice of Almighty God,
appears conspicuously in the strange Conviction of so black a Villainy.

A Story of the wonderful discovery of a Murder.
THE Sackah, or the Man who carried Water for the Use of our Ambassador at
Constantinople, used to fill his Leathern Vessels at a very deep and ancient
Well not far beyond the Buildings of the City, where one Morning, he with great
surprise beheld the lifeless Body of a Man without his Head, lie weltring in a
stream of Blood; disrobed, and mangled in a thousand Places, to disguise him
from the Knowledge of such Travelers as might occasionally pass that way; A
cursed Policy.
the virile marks of Nature were entirely cut away, that so the Proofs of
Circumcision, or omission of that Ceremony, might not speak him Turk, or
Christian.

CONCERNED to view so sad a Spectacle, the melancholy Sackah soon returned, and
telling every Man he saw the Accident he met with, endless Crowds of curious
People flocked to see the headless Trunk of this unknown, and miserable Object;
for a Week or Two it made a mighty noise about the Town, and great Enquiries
were for some time made, in order to discover the inhuman Author of this
strange Barbarity.

An undeniable Instance of God's Care and Justice.
BUT full three Months were now expired, and no news came of any Man so much as
guessed to be concerned therein, so by degrees it was forgot and silenced, till
the hand of Heaven thought fit to point out the undreading Villain, and deliver
him to Justice, which he thought himself too wise to be detected by. Hor. Ode
2. Lib. 3.
Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
Rarely does Vengeance quit the Villains Chase,
Though She pursues his Crimes, with a slow, halting Pace.


THERE was a public Shooting-Match with Bows and Arrows, appointed to be held
upon that very spot of Ground, wherein the Well was dug, near which the Body
had before been found; unnumber'd Multitudes were gathered to behold the Skill
of the Competitors, and being heated by variety of Exercise, drew Water from
the Well, and cooled themselves by drinking it.

The Murderers Name, and Quality.
A Crowd of Men were gathered round the Brink, and gave a sudden Shout as if
surpised at some undream't of Novelty; from every corner of the Field the
People ran to know the matter, and among the rest, one Cara Musul Alimet, a
Scrivener of the City, pressed among the foremost, to demand Particulars.

HE was no sooner come, but looking over the Shoulders of a Man or two, who
stood before him, he perceived to his confusion and astonishment, that one who
had designed to draw up Water in the Bucket, had attracted to the Brim of the
surrounded Well, a dead Man's Head, all pale and ghastly, hanging by the Hair
upon the Iron of the Bucket.

A most prodigious and amazing Accident.
HE had reason to appear amazed, and had begun to tremble when the Head fell
suddenly from off the Pail, and tumbled swiftly over a sloping Ground, till it
arrived directly underneath his Feet, and there lay still; its horrid Face, and
dreadful Visage turned quite upwards, seeming to accuse the silent Guilt of
his confounded Murderer.

The Name and Quality of the Person murdered.
THE trembling Wretch, half dead with fear, confessed he had been Author of the
famous Murder that had been of late, so much discoursed of, telling those about
him, that the Name of him he killed, was Gurat Oglani, a Merchant of Aleppo,
newly come from thence to sell some Jewels he had bought a Pennyworth of the
Eastern Caravan; that he had been directed to his House, by Letters from a
Friend, to lodge and board, while he continued in the City, and that cursed
Avarice had tempted his desires to kill him on a certain Evening, near that
Well, into which he threw the Head, and had so cut and mangled all the Body,
that he knew 'twou'd be impossible it should be known, or guessed at.

A very curious and particular Observation.
CONFESSION was enough to gain a Sentence for the Villain's Death, who being
broken on a Wheel directly in the Place, the Murder was committed in,
acknowledged it to be as near as he could guess, that very Spot whereto the
Head had rolled, and stopped beneath his Feet, when first he owned the monstrous
Action.

The Turks more prone to Vice than Virtue.
THUS much shall serve to have spoken of the Turkish Morals, who are generally
more inclined to Vice than Virtue; and though there are some Men sincerely Pious
sound among them, yet are the greatest Part of those, who pass for Men of
zealous, and religious Principles, but seemingly affected with the love of
Piety, and rather honest by the fear of Punishment for acting wickedly, than by
the pungent Dictates of a tender Conscience; directly contrary to the Virtuous
Man, whom Horace thus describes in the 16th Epistle of his first Book. Hor.
Epist. 16. Lib. 1.
Tu nihil admittes in te, formidine poenae;
Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.
Never let fear of Punishment incline,
Thy backward Will to act a good Design;
He who is truly worthy hates to Sin,
'Cause Guilt must wait without, where Virtue dwells within.


I lead my Reader now to view their Trade, which with their various and
peculiar Arts of Management therein, will be the only Subject of the following
Chapter.

CHAP. XI. Of their Trade, Foreign and Domestic.
The Turks not ignorant of the Advantages of Trade.
THE numerous Advantages of Foreign Trade, and vast Improvements which those
Nations make, to whom, the Benefits of an extended Commerce open great and
glorious Blessings, are so entirely known and envied by the Turkish Court, that
they reflect, with grief, upon those Maxims of their Policy, whose rigid
Dictates have confined their Traffic to the meaner Profits of Domestic
Correspondence.

THEY would willingly abate the rigor of their Laws, to taste the Sweets of so
desired a Liberty, but fear the breaking one Decree should shock another; Why
not encouraged by their Government.
for 'twould be full as dangerous to a Turkish Sultan to permit a Traffic
Foreign and Domestic, and thereby, let his People grow more Rich and Wise, as
should some heedless Sailor in tempestuous Weather strike a Window through the
Sides of a deep laden Vessel to admit the Light, and thereby let in dangerous
Waves to sink the Ship in a tumultuous Ocean; however, their esteem for Trade,
and inclinations to encourage it, as far as may consist with the Security of
the Sultan and his Power, may be discovered by the Efforts used to draw as many
Merchants to the Harbors of their Empire, as may settle a continued Commerce
with the Turks, from the respective Nations which they all belong to.

The glorious Titles of the Turks Metropolis.
CONSTANTINOPLE is to this end named, The Harbor of the Universe; Throne of
Splendor, and The Seat of Riches: But the common Title, which both Turks and
Christians give that City, is, The Ottoman Port, and by that Name alone we
generally express it.

SINCE then their want of Skill in Maritime Affairs, and the discountenance of
the Supreme and Arbitrary Power, forbid their sending Ships abroad, let us
proceed to see what Foreign Nations condescend to sell the Manufactures of
their Country in a Turkish Market.

The British Factory at Constantinople.
AND first, the Trade we manage with these People is so great and advantageous,
that the Right Worshipful the Turkey Company employ a worthy and a numerous
Factory at Constantinople, consisting commonly of five or six and twenty
Merchants, with their Servants and Dependants, for whose Protection and
Encouragement, the Kings and Queens of England, The Antiquity of the Turkey
Company.
since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, have still maintained some wise Ambassador
at the Turkish Court, whose prudent Managements, have all along preserved a
sure Establishment of profitable Commerce, and defended both their Persons,
Character, and Factory, from those affrontive Insolences, and audacious
Impositions, which the haughty Carriage of the Sultan's Ministers, have often
offered with success to other Nations.

The Factory at Aleppo.
ANOTHER British Factory is settled at Aleppo, under the direction of a Consul
of our Nation, but that City standing far from any Port but Scanderoon, or
Alexandrietta, a little Town which borders on Cilicia, and lies in 39 Degrees
of Northern Latitude, that is the Harbor whence the Goods are carried to and
from Aleppo, by the Merchant Ships of our and other Nations.

The other at Smyrna.
SMYRNA has its Factory and Consul, and in some measure Rivals both the other
in the richness of its Traffic; many other Places subject to the Turk have
their peculiar Consuls, but are inconsiderable in respect of the aforenam'd
Cities, and dependant on the Plenipotentiary Authority of the Ambassador
residing at the Port.

The Goods of British Manufacture, commonly exported into Turkey.
THE Goods exported to these Wealthy Factors, on the Ships belonging to the
Turkey Company, are chiefly Cloth, Lead, Tin, Pewter, Linen, Coral, and the
finest Iron, all which Merchandices are esteemed at profitable Rates, and turn
to good Account if rightly managed.

Sugar how carried thither.
BRITISH Vessels often sail to Lisbon, where they take in Cargo's of Brazil,
strong Chested Sugars, which they carry on to Smyrna, Scanderoon, or
Constantinople, and dispose of to a Profit sometimes reaching Cent per Cent,
and always near it.

Gunpowder a profitable Commodity.
GUNPOWDER yields considerable Gain, and ever finds a speedy vent, the Turks
not skilled in making it so well, and eagerly engrossing any Quantity the
Christians will afford them.

Firearms how valued.
FIREARMS of all sorts, will be sure to meet a ready Purchase, and the Muskets
of a strong, true British Bore, are so esteemed in every Part of Turkey, that
they stick at nothing reasonable in the Price, provided they are suffered to
approve their Value by a Shot or two's Experience.

Pitch, Tar, and Rozin.
PITCH, Tarr, and Rozin, are exported thither in considerable Quantities; for
though the Conquests of the Turks, and Nations Tributary to their Government,
afford far more than they can possibly consume, they notwithstanding, value
that which comes from Britain, and will barter for it with a double Weight of
what they have among them, which is often brought again to several Parts of
England, and there disposed of at full the Price the first had cost 'em.

Clocks and Watches much esteemed of.
ALL sorts of Clocks and Watches made in Britain, are in Turkey vendible
Commodities, with many other valuable Merchandices frequently exported into the
Grand Signior's Country, and affording very large and easy Profit.

Goods imported by the Turkey Merchants.
THE British Merchants in return for these, import vast quantities of Grograms,
Camlets, Tissues, Velvets, and raw Silk in great abundance; fine Rhubarb,
Opium, Aloes, Balm of Gilead, Cassia, Coffee, and a thousand other Drugs of
noted Efficacy in Medicinal Operations.

FINE Cochineal, Gum-Mastick, Terra Sigillata, Indico and Cotton; rich
Sherbets, Cavear, and Carpets of a noble Size, and wrought beyond Comparison;
Embroidered Muslins, Silks, and Handkerchiefs, or curious Workmanship in Gold
on Leather, with a number more of such like Manufactures, profitably pleasant
to industrious Traders, are imported with an unknown Gain, from several
Harbors of the Sultan's Empire.

Shagreen, how made, and whence imported.
ANOTHER sort of Merchandice imported thence, is Leather of all sorts, prepared
and unprepared, besides which the Country yields great quantities of
Seals-Skins, Goats-Skins, and the Wild Ass's-Hide, whereof they make the best
Shagreen in use amongst us.

PISTACHES, Almonds, Dates, dried Quinces, Marmalade, and Fruits of all sorts,
are by Foreign Merchants, bought at very low and reasonable Prices, whence,
transported to the several Ports of Christian Countries, they are sold to great
advantage.

The Hollanders Conveniences, in trading with the Turks.
NEXT to the British Factory, the Hollanders maintain the greatest Trade with
Turkey, dealing for the same Commodities; but sending Ships much larger and at
half the Charges, they ( for the most part) make the best Returns, and
speediest Voyages.

The ungenerous Policy of France in respect to Turkey.
THE French as well as those last named, maintain Ambassadors at
Constantinople; but with this difference, that the first design thereby no
other Interest than their Factories Prosperity, whereas the last have other
ends directly contrary; and by preserving a perpetual Amity between their
Monarch and the Sultan, endeavor still at every favorable Opportunity, to
stir that People up to War against such Nations as are Enemies to France; by
such unchristian Practices imagining to gain some sure Advantage, by the great
Diversion which the Turk must make, invading Christendom.

The Jews the only Brokers for the Turkish Merchants.
I have before informed my Reader, that the Jews are Brokers to the Turkish
Merchants, and indeed on them lies all the management of public Traffic;
People framed by Nature with a Conscience and Capacity, alike endued to cheat
the Universe; they grow by these means soon extremely Great and Wealthy, but
the Turkish Ministers have learned a Lesson, how to squeeze a Grape when ripe
and juicy, to the best advantage.

Domestic Trade, how carried on.
THE utmost of their Foreign Trade is now expressed, I next proceed to speak of
their Domestic Traffic, which is partly carried on by Coasting Vessels sailing
cautiously at little distance from the Shore, and partly by the Caravans or
Land Conveniences, which are constantly in motion, and export the Manufactures
of one Part of their Dominions to another.

THEIR Navigation, as I have before declared, is mean and far inferior to the
Christian's Skill, and therefore they are backward in the hazarding Commodities
by Sea, unless in Trade with Islands, or a Country they may reach with ease and
safety; How far the Turks employ their Ships in Trade.
thus they send their Ships to load with Goods, from Cyprus, Candy, Rhodes, and
all the Islands of the Archipelago, and sometimes venture with considerable
Fleets to Alexandria, Scanderoon, and certain other Ports of Barbary and Egypt.

The Trade of Turkey with the Euxine or Black-Sea.
THE Euxine, or Black-Sea, has a peculiar Fleet of Ships appropriated to the
Trade the Turks maintain, with all its Harbors, whence they deal for little
else but Timber, and supplies of Slaves to serve their Uses, which are sold
them annually by the salvage Tartars, who in their destructive Ravages, and
deep Incursions into Poland, Russia, Muscovy, and other bordering Christian
Territories, spare nor Sex, nor Age, nor Quality, but carry all in equal
Fetters, to the shame and torment of perpetual Slavery.

THE Caravans of Turkey, are mistaken generally by the vulgar notions
entertained among our common People, who, misled by their affinity of Name with
certain Carriages in use amongst us, think 'em large unweildy Wagons, which
contain a multitude of Passengers; What a Turkish Caravan is.
whereas the true and genuine meaning of the Turkish Etymology is Haraa-vahan,
that is to say, a mixed Convenience, and such are all the Caravans of Turkey,
consisting of unequal Numbers of assembled Merchants, Travelers, and Pilgrims,
from Fifty to an Hundred, Thousand, and so on to sometimes Fifty, Sixty,
Seventy, or an Hundred Thousand Souls.

The Order they observe in all their Caravans.
OVER these promiscuous Multitudes presides a certain Officer, distinguished by
the Name of Caravan-Bashaw, or Captain of the Caravan; he constitutes inferior
Officers, punishes Disorders, regulates Abuses, and preserving fixed
tranquillity and peace throughout their Journey, guards 'em with a number of
selected Soldiers, from the scattered Parties of Arabian Horsemen, who are all
professed Free-booters, and will often attack a Number ten times larger than
their own, and carry off the Merchandice and Camels in the Rear in spite of all
the opposition can be made against them.

The method Travelers must take in Turkey.
TRAVELERS agree with this commanding Officer, for such a sum of ready Money,
to be served with Carriage and Provision (if they please) for any Journey; and
by means of these continual motions of the Caravans from every corner, they are
constantly supplied with all the richest Products of their distant
Manufactures, and the finest Jewels, Porcelane, and the rest of the
Commodities, abounding in the most remote Divisions of East India, Persia,
China, or the Aromatic Confines of Arabia Felix.

The Turks exact great Custom for imported Goods.
'TWAS long before the Turks had learned the benefit of making Foreign Goods pay
Custom of Admission, but when once they tasted the Advantage it might bring
them, they proceeded to exact such vast, unreasonable Sums, that Christian
Traders find themselves obliged to raise the former Prices of their Goods, the
better to enable them to bear the Imposition.

Mechanic Skill, divided into 2 extremes.
AS for the Skill this People boast in their Mechanic Professions, it is
differently great or small, according to the Inclinations of the Natives in
general, or particular Genius of the Tradesmen of that Country. Some
Handicrafts fall vastly short of ours in Britain; others far excel the famed
Artificers of even the most refined and celebrated Parts of Christendom.

The Turks excellent at Embroidery.
THUS in the Art of Sowing, or Embroid'ring on Leather, with a party colored
Silk, or golden Wire, they have reached so great a pitch of Excellence, that
not the nicest Needles of our most industrious Housewives can by any means
compare with their Perfection.

Extremely ignorant in Clock-Work and Ingraving.
AGAIN, in Clock-Work, or the curious Arts of Cutting or Engraving Metals, they
are skilled so poorly, that they understand not good from worthless Work, but
will alike encourage every ignorant and idle Vagabond, and the accomplished
Master of the nicest Operation.

The Turkish art of damasking their Scymetars.
THE Turks have reached peculiar Excellence in Damasking their Scymetars,
whereby they do not only strengthen, but adorn the Metal with a fine and
streaky Substance, yielding a delicious Scent, and odoriferous Perfume,
surprizingly agreeable to such as draw their Weapons unawares and suddenly.

THERE is a Notion commonly received, but false and groundless, as is well
observed by Monsieur Tavernier, in the two hundred and thirtieth Page of his
Persian Travels; viz. That all such Scymetars are brought from Damas, or
Damascus, and can no where else be made, when it is certain and notorious
truth, that they are done as well in many other Parts of the Grand Signior's
Empire.

An Error in the Assertion of Monsieur Tavernier.
BUT as it is difficult almost beyond surmounting, to avoid asserting some
erroneous Probability, while we zealously endeavor to reform the false
Opinions of the Men we speak to, so the Author lately mentioned, to correct one
Error has produced another, for to undeceive such People as imagined Steel was
only damask'd at Damascus, he informs his Reader that Golconda does alone
afford a Metal capable of that Impression; when it is not only practiced in the
Cities of Aleppo, Smyrna, Cairo, Constantinople, and an hundred other Parts of
Turkey; but in many Provinces of Christian Countries; I my self once bought a
Sword at Hambourgh of a Cutler, who for ten Pence more than his demanded Price,
both damask'd and perfumed it to so high a pitch that it retained the Scent for
some Years after.

The manner of damasking.
THIS is done by heating to a moderate degree, the Metal you would damask; and
instead of cooling it as usual, by the dipping it in Water, twisting round it a
rough Canvas Towel, purposely permitted for an hour or two, to lie and soak in
Milk and Fountain Water, wherein has been dissolved a certain quantity of
Vitriol, Sal-Armoniac, and some other such like Compositions.

The Turks exquisite at making Bows and Arrows.
BOWS and Arrows they have learned the Art to make with wonderful dexterity, and
can in Steel or Wood, not only shape them to an exquisite Perfection, but
contrive them even for Use, far better and more lasting than the celebrated
Archers of the Indian Countries can pretend to equal.

CARPENTERS, Joyners, Masons, Smiths, and other Artisans of Turkey, though they
are extremely skilled in their respective Trades, according to the Customs of
the Nations they inhabit, cannot boast that admirable Genius which at present
shines in the conspicuous Improvements of our Europaean Arts, but labor hardly
under the oppressive weights of Ignorance and Tyranny.

Painting ill understood in Turkey.
PAINTING, is in Turkey little understood, because they look on representing any
human Image, or a Being blessed with Life, as gross Idolatry, and a black
abomination in the sight of God; on which account they have maliciously defaced
un-number'd Pieces of Antiquity, by beating off the Heads, or picking out the
Eyes of every painted Figure, or accomplished Sculpture, which they had the
undeserved good Fortune to become the Masters of, in their successive Conquests.

Their manner of Painting.
HOWEVER, some there are, who Paint in Miniature, and represent in fine and
lasting Water Colors, great variety of Fruits and Flowers, and sometimes
Landskips, but it is rarely known, that any can attain a tolerable Skill in the
expressive Doctrine of a true Proportion.

AND yet they seem ambitious in the search of new Improvements, and would
gladly reach the White they aim at, while pushed forward to a vigorous desire
of an increase of Knowledge, by the placing as sublime a Value on the
Excellence of Art, as is expressed by the Greek Hipparchus, in the following
Verses. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Life boasts no Blessing more refined than Art,
Nor can kind Heaven to Man a loftier Bliss impart;
For when the unexpected Turns of Fate,
Has shook to Ruin our securest State;
When dubious War shall all things else destroy,
That stands unshock'd and safe, a sure and lasting Joy.


The Cause of Turkish Ignorance in Arts.
BUT what shall Man presume to say, when the Almighty Justice of an overruling
Providence, permits a poor and miserable People, to continue groaning under the
resistless Torments of a servile Bondage, to the arbitrary Sway of an unbounded
Monarchy, whose barbarous Policy permits no light of Learning, to disperse the
Gloom of an encouraged Ignorance.

BEFORE I end the Chapter I am now upon, I will propose a useful and an easy
way of Gain, to any, who had rather hazard and fatigue their Persons by
embracing such a Prospect as will give them more than hopes of great
Advantages, than sit contentedly in idle Shame and Poverty at Home, indulging
the deficiencies of blinded Reason, by a long neglect of active Industry.

A useful Project for a skillfull Brewer.
LONDON contains an unknown number of ingenious Brewers, who for want of Stock
to carry on a creditable Trade, are forced to live in mean Conditions, Servants
to the wealthier and more thriving Brothers of the same Profession: Let such as
these consider well their present Circumstances, and learn by what I now
proceed to treat of, how they may improve them.

BRANDY, Wine, and all strong Liquors known in Turkey, are unlawful to their
Use, by the aforesaid Prohibition of their Prophet Mahomet, yet are these
People so inclined to drinking, that for want of other pleasing Beverages they
will often venture public Scandal, and severest Punishments, to satisfy the
Call of their insatiate Appetites, by drinking Wine in such prodigious
quantities, that I forbear to mention what my Eyes have often witnessed, lest
it should with difficulty gain belief.

NOW this excessive love of Wine, proceeds from nothing else but their
complain'd-of Ignorance, in Brewing other Liquors, The Turks extremely fond of
English Beer
for I frequently observed that when an English Ship had brought some Bottles of
our Country Beer or Ale to Turkey, and presented 'em to such as afterward
would compliment the noted Turks of their Acquaintance with a share in drinking
them, they constantly expressed a wonderful Esteem, and eager Inclination to
obtain a Quantity, assuring us repeatedly, that could they make such Drink
themselves, they never should be tempted to commit a Sin, by breaking through
their Prophet's Order to forbear the Use of Wine and Brandy.

NOTHING can be possibly more easily accomplished than the universal Wish of
Turks and Graecians upon this occasion, would some English Brewer skilled in
his Profession, make a Voyage into Turkey, purposely to use his best endeavors
for the introducing common use of Beer or Ale, instead of Water.

FOR first, I have sufficiently explained my Reasons, to believe the Natives of
that Country would with pleasure drink it, and the Price by no means could
retard the Practice, Malt, incredibly Cheap in Turkey.
for so cheap is Malt throughout their Empire, that they feed their poorest
Horses with the best of Barley, and with so much ease might he expect to thrive
herein, that though he sold the Liquor he should brew, at not so great a Price as
a Quart a Penny, he must soon grow rich, by more than Cent. per Cent. clear
Profit, in his Dealings.

BUT so far beyond this lowest computation, may he reckon his Advantage, that I
can experimentally assure him, he might sell it (and be never thought too dear)
at full the Price it bears in London; nor would the Turks think more too much,
or if they should, the very Factory it self, excluding all the other Christians
there residing, would enrich him speedily, provided he took care to manage well
the brewing all his Liquors.

Some Objections answered.
IF any timorous Man objects the Inconvenience of so long a Voyage, his being
altogether unacquainted with the Country and its Language, and his want of
Friends to help on his Design, those difficulties soon will vanish when I tell
him, he may bargain for his Passage on an English Ship, and be supplied with
all Provisions even to Constantinople, for considerably less than twenty
Pounds, that he will land within a few Stones throws of the Ambassadors House,
to whom the Captain must of course present him, if designed to settle there,
that he is bound to grant him his Protection and Encouragement, that he may
have a Druggerman, or an Interpreter to wait upon him for a little Charge, and
still conversing with his Countrymen, maintain a Trade almost as free and
uncontrolled as if in England.

The probability of the Projects meeting with success.
I beg the Reader's pardon now, and should before have begged his Patience, for
this long digression, but have said thus much to tempt the Inclinations of some
more sprightly Men than ordinary, to attempt a Project that can no ways hurt
them, but can boast of more than single probability to advance their Fortunes.
If it does the Good for which it is intended, I am fully satisfied, if none
believe it worth their while to put in Practice, I shall still remain alike
contented.

Why the Turks are more deficient in the point of Trade than we.
I have said as much of both their Foreign and Domestic Trade, as either
Subject will afford, and if you think it not proportionable to that mighty
Bulk, and far-extended Power of their arbitrary Government, consider them as
People altogether strangers to the peaceful Practices of correspondent Justice,
a Nation built on Ruin and the Sword, and in its rude Original entirely void of
Honesty and Commerce. If then this great unweildy Body has of late descended to
the thoughts of Traffic, you must look upon it only as a Branch of their
prodigious Oak, and consequently flourishing in far less bright and emulative
Splendor, than our Christian Arts of Trade and Navigation, which are the
strong and stately Trunks of our more thriving Trees of Profit, by whose
celebrated Sap, and vegetative Juice, those spreading Limbs are still supplied,
and richly nourished with a never-failing and consummate Plenty.

CHAP. XII. Of the Turkish Habits.
GOVERNMENTS so absolute and tyrannical as that of Turkey, give us little
reason, by the Notions we conceive of their unpolished Constitution, to expect
Examples of a common Decency, much less exact Economy, from the untaught and
rustical Deportment of their rough Inhabitants.

An exemplary Prudence of the Turks in point of dress.
YET to my great surprise, I found the Turks in many things, I speak it with
concern, more prudent, or at least more orderly, than any part of Christendom,
particularly so in that accomplished Regularity observed among them in respect
to Dress; you may with ease distinguish there, the Mistress from her Waiting
Maid, and know the Quality of any Man you meet by the peculiar Ornaments of his
restrained Appearance; there, no Footmen huff along ridiculously vain, as if
they wore their Master's Honor in the lining of his Livery: Those look great
among the Turks, who really are so, and a modest Carriage, and sincere Humility
adorn the Persons of the common People.

Men obliged to dress according to their Quality.
DRESSES are as Marks, whereby to know the Men you meet, though Strangers to your
View, and pay the nice Punctilio's of Respect, which are required from every
Quality to those above and those below them; but the Head, as commonly esteemed
the noblest Part, is always chose to bear the Mark of an enjoined Distinction,
nor is it possible to speak in any reasonable Compass, of the strange Varieties
among their Fashions, every Rank of Men, or different Order, being more or less
distinguished from the other, by some answerable Turn of Habit and Appearance;
I proceed to treat distinctly of as many as may prove diverting to the Reader,
or deserving of his Notice.

The Turks observe the Custom of the Ancients in respect of Habit.
THE ancient Custom of the Eastern Nations, who delighted much in long and open
Habits, is to this Day prevalent among the Turks; nor do they ever change the
Fashion of their Dress, esteeming little such as are misled to frequent
Alterations of the Clothes they wear, and hating with a fixed and rancour'd
Enmity, the modish Shape of Christian Habits, asserting that by openly exposing
Legs and Thighs, and wearing Coats so short and close, we do not only act
immodestly, but by the Follies of a fond, fantastic, and affected Levity, (for
which they wilfully mistake our Conge's and genteel Deportment) entirely rob
our selves of that grave Majesty, which should distinguish Man from other
Creatures.

The Mohammedan Lock.
THEY shave their Heads as soon as Circumcised, and still continue to renew that
Practice through their riper Years, permitting only one small Lock to grow upon
their Crowns to an uncommon length, which being daily combed and scented by the
Barber's Art, is twisted with a neat and wonderful dexterity, then fast'ned in
a Knot and suffered to remain unloos'd beneath their Turbants.

The common Notion of it false and groundless.
RIDICULOUS and groundless is the common Notion, that the Turks expect to be
received by Mahomet from Earth to Paradise, their Prophet holding them by the
above-named Lock of Hair (thence called Mohammedan.)

An exemplary Piety of certain poor and miserable Christians.
THEY rather wear it as a voluntary Mark of their Profession of his Faith, as
many Christians, now inhabiting the miserable Countries of Bulgaria, Georgia,
Servia, and Sclavonia, invent an Art, to stain by application of a certain
Juice, the tender Foreheads of their Newborn Children with the Forms of
Crosses, that when afterward, grown up, and subject to the arrogance of Turkish
Neighbors, they must keep their Faith in spite of Persecution, or expose their
Persons to the scorn of Christians, and be shunned forever in their base
Apostasy.

The shape and substance of the Turkish Shirts.
THEIR Shirts are formed alike, for Men and Women, open in the Sleeves, which
some Men wear near half Yard broad; they make 'em of a sort of Callico, Crape,
or Muslin, without either Neck or Wrist-band; never suffering any Linen to
appear when they are dressed; a pair of Drawers tie upon the Shirt, of the same
Stuff, and reaching loosely to their very Ancles; Shacksheers or Drawers.
over these they draw their Britches, called Shacksheers in the Turkish
Language, made of Scarlet, or a Violet colored Cloth; and reaching like the
former to the Instep, where, being gathered at the bottom commonly three
quarters round, they strongly sow 'em to a sort of Leathern House-shooes, soft
and yellow, and contrived exactly to the shape of every Foot; these they call
M^sts, which serve within Doors while they sit or walk on their embroidred
Carpet; Papooches, or their walking Slippers.
for they leave at entrance into any House their walking Slippers or Papooches,
made with smooth and yellow upper Leathers, and the Sole extremely thin, but so
well beaten that it will resist the Dirt or Water in their Streets to
admiration, they are made without the smallest Heel, instead of which they use
a piece of Iron framed exactly like a Horse-shooe; they are shaped like Women's
Slippers with a sharp and picked Toe, and come not half way up the Instep, so
that by the smoothness of the outside of the inner, and the inside of the outer
Shoes, I often kicked 'em off as I was walking in the Streets, nor can a
Stranger keep 'em on his Feet till use has made 'em easy to his motion.

The Inconveniences of wearing 'em.
ANOTHER Inconvenience which attends the wearing these above-named Slippers, is
the custom they have got of leaving 'em without, like Women's Clogs, at every
Door they chance to enter, so that often, when I have been present at their
stately Visits, Feasts, or Public Ceremonies, coming out amidst a Crowd of
People, I have sometimes found my Slippers changed, and others, soiled, and not
worth wearing, left me in their room, nay very often have been forced to walk
through all the Dirt, with nothing on my Feet but Mests, which letting in the
wet, were worse than if I had gone home barefooted; Coaches are not found in
Turkish Cities, as esteemed an idle Proof of an Effeminate Indulgence.

The shape of Turkish Boots.
THEY ride on Horseback with a great delight, and wear a sort of Boots unable
long to keep out Water, they are shaped at bottom like the Shooe's above
described, and made, but weakly, of the same smooth Leather, reaching to their
Knees, and large enough to hold with ease, the numerous Gathers of their
spacious Britches.

Their Wast-coats.
A Doublet made of thin stripped Silk, or Stuff, convenient for a Summer wear, is
formed without the shortest Sleeves; and reaching to the Hipp, is folded, one
side over another, and fastened on the left with Loop and Button.

Another sort of Wast-coat.
OVER this they wear a Dolamann, or long loose Robe of Callico or Muslin in the
heat of Summer, in the Winter made of Silks or Stuffs, embroidered richly, or
not at all, according to the Quality of those, who wear 'em. These reach, like
Ladies Night-gowns to the Ground, of spacious breadth at bottom; the Sleeves
are close and button at the Wrist, where they turn back with Facings of the
same; they button also at the Neck, whence one side sloping over the other,
they are fastened in the same place and manner with the under Wastcoat just now
treated of.

The richness of their Girdles.
THEY bind these Dolamanns with Silk or Muslin Girdles, of a length sufficient
to allow three rounds about the Body; after which, they tie an artificial
double Knot before, and twist each overplus within the Girdle to the right and
left; the ends of these long Scarfs embroidered purposely, or richly flowered
with Gold and Silver, finely intermixed with Persian Silks of various Colors.

A sort of Winter Gown to wear in Houses.
AT home in Summer they have nothing on besides, still turning up the Corners of
their Dolamann within their Girdles; but in Winter, most Men in their Houses,
wear a sort of loose, and open Gown, which reaches to their Knees; some lined
with Silk, and some with Furrs, some having open Sleeves, and some not any; all
according to the different Inclinations of the Men who wear 'em.

A costly sort of Lining.
WHEN they go abroad, they let down constantly the Corners of their Dolomann,
and put on Blue, or Scarlet, sometimes Green, long Robes which train upon the
Ground, lined through with Ermin, Squirrels-Furr, good Fox-Skins, Rats, or
Sables, some of which are very costly, and can scarce be bought for fifteen
hundred Dollars.

A noble sort of Robe, not much unlike the Roman Mantle.
SOME delight in wearing light and unlin'd Silken Robes, not much unlike the
Dress wherein we often see the ancient Hero's painted loosely over their
Armor, they are fastened with a Silver, Gold, or Diamond Clasp above the
Breast, thence falling back with admirable Grace, and spreading with an hundred
airy Folds, wide, broad, and stately, from their Manly Shoulders.

The fineness of their Daggers.
GLOVES they wear not, nor appear with Scymetars but when they Travel; all the
Arms they bear about 'em, is the short Hanjarr or Dagger, which I mentioned in
the Chapter of their Military Government, which being thrust within their Sash,
on the left side thereof, does often shine with precious Stones, and other rich
and splendid Marks of the Authority and Grandeur of the Man who wears it.

The Quality of Turks, distinguished by their Turbants.
THEIR Heads, as I have said before, distinguishing their Quality, are
differently dressed by different degrees of People; yet they all affect the
wearing Turbants, some of Muslin, some of Silk, and some of Callico; the
various Colors, Forms, and Magnitudes whereof, contain the Marks of Splendor
or Subjection. The Muftee wears one bigger than a Bushel, yet not heavy, nor
any ways incommodious. The Sultan wears his somewhat less, and differently
twisted; the Grand-Vizier, Lord-Treasurer, and other Officers, whether Civil,
or Military, are each obliged to wear a Turbant answerable to their Quality.

Their several Colors.
THE fashionable Color of these Turbants is a spotless White; though they are
sometimes worn of Black, Red, Yellow, or of any other unmixed Color, (for a
stripped, or speckled Turbant is a Mark whereby they know a Christian, who must
never wear one of a pure and single Color.) Green is the peculiar Property of
those Emir's, or Kindred of their Prophet, which I long since spoke of, a Turk
is Punished if he dares presume to Wear it on his Head unless Intit'led to it:
But a Christian so offending, is without the smallest hopes of Pardon,
instantly Condemned to a Renunciation of his Faith, or must assert it by the
Trial of a Painful Martyrdom.

The Dress of common People.
THE Meaner sort of People go Bare-Leg'd, with Girdles twisted round their
Middles, and a Dirty Towel wrapped about their Heads, or sometimes a small
Scarlet Skull-cap, covering their Crown, and reaching to the tops of both their
Ears, which is the only cover that the Servants Wear throughout all Turkey, who
though somewhat better dressed than are the other common People, yet in this
Restriction are not much above them, that is, they must not Wear those loose
Furr Gowns denoting Power, but be contented with a tight close-body'd Dress,
which speaks their Servitude.

The Dress of Turkish Ladies at home.
THEIR Women's Dress at Home is just the same, in Britches, Slippers, Shirts and
Wastcoats, with the Men's before described, upon their Heads they Wear a sort of
Past-board like a apiece Trencher, covered over with Embroid'red Muslin;
to certain Silver points on whose extremest Edges, their Perfumed and Scented
Hair is fastn'd, so that, twisted into several Locks, and Hanging with a sort
of easy Freedom round their Heads, adorned with Ribbands, Diamonds and an
hundred different sorts of Glittering Stones, it gives a graceful Look, and
amiable Air to the appearance of the Turkish Ladies.

IT IS but very rarely that they go abroad, and then to no Place but the public
Bagnio's, or the Funeral, or Marriage, of some near Relation; but when they do
they cover their above-named Head-Dress with a Linen Muffler, which Meeting
with another Piece of Black and Shining Silk that hides the upper Part of their
Faces, nothing but their Eyes and Nose can possibly be seen.

THEY hide their Faces in Obedience to the Precepts of their Prophets Law,
which tells 'em it is unlawful to discover any of those Beauties God has given
them, but to their Husband, or their Father; Their Dress abroad.
they Wear abroad, a Gown of Blue or Scarlet-Cloath, which Buttons fast before,
and Hangs with narrow Sleeves below their Fingers; as they Walk, they hold the
Bottoms of their Gown in their Left Hand as low as they can possibly Reach, and
Swing their Right each step they take with a Surprising Haughtiness or rather
Gravity. They Die their Nails with certain Drugs which yield a Color like a
Reddish Yellow, and delight Extremely in the Richness of their Habits, though
they very seldom gain an Opportunity of showing them.

THE Female Slaves and Servants of the Turks are Veiled or Muffl'd while about
their Business, but meanly Dressed according to the Servitude of their
Condition.

BUT what I have already spoken of the Turkish Habits shall the rather serve,
in that the Reader may Discover with his Eye the several Dresses Represented in
the Cut hereto Annexed, more fully and particularly, than can be comprehended
in a Verbal and more dark Description.

The Turks in all their Customs opposite to us.
IN every Action of their Lives, the Turks oppose the Europaean Customs; they
Wear long Clothes, we Wear short ones; we in Salutation of a Friend, esteem it
Rudeness not to Bow with Head uncovered, they Receive that point of Breeding as
the greatest and most base Affront that can be put upon them; we esteem a
bending of the Body graceful and obliging, they interpret it a mean
acknowledgement of our Inferiority to him we speak to; they love Sadness and a
grave Deportment, we love Gayety and briskness of Behavior. Every thing in
short is carried on directly opposite to both our Humors and our Customs;
whether one or t'other's Airs of Breeding are the most consistent with that
Native Majesty which Man was formed with, must be judged by several Persons,
several Ways, and whether they or we are right or wrong, we both believe our
own the worthiest Fashion. For as the famed Athenian Solon has it in his
Elegies. (...)
(...)
The Cowards self is brave in his own Eyes,
And the most homely Wretch will his own Features prize.


CHAP. XIII. Of their Wives, Concubines, Ways of Courtship, and Forms of
Marriage.
THE inimitable Virgil was undoubtedly inspired with Love and Truth, when he
asserted this so often experienced Maxim, Omnia vincit Amor, and nos cedamus
Amori.
Love conquers all things, to his Power we yield,
And proudly lose the Day, when Beauty takes the Field.


The Power of Love.
THE roughest Hero's of the ancient World, amidst the dusty Scenes of War and
Ruin, red with Blood of undistinguished Slaughter, and encompassed round with
Care and Danger, often slackened Nature's Springs, and sinking calmly from the
love of Glory, let their Laurels wither on their Heads, and lost the Sense of
Honor and Renown, entirely stupefied in all their Faculties, and slumbring
meanly in the downy Scenes of this Lethargic Passion.

How much that Passion now prevails among the Turks.
EVEN the adamantine Breasts of Icy Scythia, have admitted Love in all its
fervor, and forgot entirely native roughness, by the softening Charms of
Female Conversation; nay, to such excess does that bewitching Passion now
prevail among the Turks, that as if they were not the Posterity of such
uneffeminate, and hardy Ancestors, they frequently neglect the great Affairs of
State and Interest, to dally wantonly with favorite Women, and enjoy the loved
and rapid Transports which attend on their Caresses.

HEREIN however they have got the start of Europaean Lovers, that whereas we
languish long, and unsuccessfully, for some loved Ladies Favors, they enjoy
the utmost of their Wishes, in a speedy Consummation of their forwardest
Desires.

The Power of Turkish Husbands.
AGAIN, (though I Will not give my Country Women cause of Anger by affirming that as
preferable an Advantage as the former) they boast a sort of unconfined
Authority, which makes their Wives submissively Obedient; but since it never
allows that mutual Confidence, that generous, free, and open familiarity, so
requisite to make a Marriage truly happy, I cannot praise their Policy in
robbing Wives of that well tolerated Liberty, which serves to soften
Matrimonial Bondage, and proves a sure and winning Mark of Conjugal Goodnature.

An ancient Saying.
IT was the Saying of a very ancient Grecian Author, (...). Nature did not
frame the Woman to command: And Philemon a Poet, who flourished in the Reign of
Alexander the Great, has left his Notions of the Matter in the following Lines,
(...)
(...)
(...)
A Wife, my Friend, who takes the wisest way,
Should not command her Husband, but obey;
For where a Woman over her Consort Reigns,
The weight, that gaul'd before, now wounds with killing Pains.


AND so entirely do the Turks adhere to this Poetic Doctrine, that for fear
their Wives should by degrees encroach on their Prerogative, they rob them
barbarously of those indifferent Liberties, without whose taste it is morally
impossible for Man or Woman to be truly happy.

Submission and affection of the Turkish Wives.
THE good Effects of Turkish Discipline surpised me much, when I perciev'd that
notwithstanding their severe Behavior toward their Wives, the patient Turtles
were so far from lessening their Affection on Confinement, that they rather
doubled their respect, and Spaniel-like fawned humbly on their Injurers, with
the assurance Horace had from Lydia, Tecum vivere amem, tecum obeam libens.
With thee dear Soul, I could for ever live,
My Life, to die with thee, I Would freely give.


The mistaken Notions of some of our British Ladies.
IT is a strange amazing Labyrinth of Female Wonders, to behold the
contradictory Inclinations of that unintelligible Sex; while those in Turkey
grow good-natured by a brutish Usage, ours in Britain sometimes think it out of
Fashion to oblige an easy Husband, and instead of mending on the Kindness they
receive, insult the more, and make their Spouses gentle Condescension, their
undoubted Privilege of Nature; these speak in rougher Notes than those above,
and plead like Juvenal's unreasonable Woman, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro
ratione voluntas.
It shall be so, I will, it is my Command,
And Resolution shall for Reason stand.


INCREASE and Multiply, is held a very good and necessary Maxim by the Turkish
Nation, and indeed they lose no time nor opportunity of putting it in execution
to the best advantage; Wives, Slaves, and Concubines, promiscuously granted
them without control, and every Tenet of their Faith, and Practice of their
Lives, combining jointly to indulge their Wishes, in the gross Enjoyment of a
sensual Appetite.

POLYGAMY was by Mahomet allowed them, freely and unbounded, but the Dictates
of their Policy obliged 'em to restrain that tolerated Liberty, and fix a
certain Limit to that dangerous Privilege for the Reasons following.

The Reasons why the Turks restrain Polygamy.
WERE Men permitted to indulge their Senses in the various Pleasures of
promiscuous Embraces, they would Marry inconsiderately such a number of Wives,
that on their Death, the major part of their Estates devolving to the Sultan,
little would be left to share amongst them, and the helpless Ladies
consequently forced to Want and Beggary.

ANOTHER Reason (and indeed the wisest of the two) is this, The numerous
Doubts, Fears, Envies, Jealousies, and Quarrels, which alternately possess a
Woman's Mind, where Rivals are respected, would by tolerating many Wives, become
so frequent, formidable, and ungoverned, that those Fairy Pleasures, which
invite to Matrimony, vanishing away, would leave behind 'em little else but
Noise and Discord, Troubles and Distraction.

How many Wives the Turks may Marry.
HOWEVER, they are yet permitted by the common Custom, to espouse four lawful
Wives; and lest their wandering Inclinations should induce 'em to believe they
were denied a Pleasure Heaven designed 'em, they are freely suffered to enjoy
the Persons of as many Concubines, or purchased Slaves, as they may think
agreeable, nor are the Children so begot esteemed in Turkey as in Christian
Countries, spurious and illegitimate, but equally intit'led to their Father's
Love, and Honor of his Quality, with others born in Wedlock.

WITH this Proviso, notwithstanding, are they Freemen and Legitimate, they must
be manumitted in a public Form by Will and Testament, before some Judge of
Civil Administration, Sealed, Signed, and Given in, by their own Father's Hand,
with solemn Ceremony. A very strange and barbarous Custom.
This neglected, leaves 'em Servants, to their Brother's Will, who may at
pleasure use them as their Bondsmen.

O happy Turks! cries some disconsolate, and wretched British Husband, when he
hears me tell him, Turkish Matrimony is not quite so true a Gordian Knot, but
that it is frequently untied without much difficulty; yet perhaps, were some
Mohammedan his Spouses Consort, he would find a Blessing which her present Owner
either does not know, or care to value.

The Turkish Marriages not performed by Priests.
BUT e're we speak of their Divorces, 'twill be proper to describe their
Matrimonial Ceremonies, and in order thereunto, I must acquaint my Reader, that
the Act of Marriage is performed by the appearance of the Husband, with the
Father, Uncle, Brother, or some near Relation of the Brides, before a Judge;
where in a public manner, he avows his Inclinations and Affections to the
Person of the Lady; though perhaps he never saw one Feature of her Face, but
that is no matter, Love you know is painted blind, and thence blind Bargains are
become a Fashion.

PROCEEDED this large Step on his intended Journey, he is next demanded by the
Judge what offers he can make deserving her Acceptance: Settlements are made
according to his Circumstances, or the fettered Privileges of Turkish Subjects;
and the Bridegroom signing there an Instrument, whereby he owns her for his
lawful Wife, the Match is ent'red in a public Register, and ever after they
are conjugally coupled.

How the Man employs the Night before.
NOW then let us venture to observe the Consequences of this previous Ceremony,
after which the Man (transported to be sure, and full of Raptures) takes his
own and half-gain'd Spouses Male Relations to his own Appartment, where he
entertains them till within an Hour of Midnight, with the fashionable Music
Vocal and Instrumental, Coffee and Sherbet; and if of brisk, and airy
Constitutions, sometimes treats 'em with a glass of Wine, but very sparingly,
for fear of Reprehension.

How it is employed by the Women.
BUT as for the poor Female Victim, who is trembling all this while, with
dreadful apprehensions of some near Surprise, she sits unveiled on an
embroid'red Cushion in the midst of a large Room, round which are placed her
She-Acquaintance, Friends, and Kinsfolks, all invited by her Mother, if she has
one, to inform her what she is about to do, and read alternately, repeated
Lectures of the Duty of a Wife, and Power of her Husband, while the poor
half-frighted Creature, stares about her with a blushing Ignorance, amazed and
quite confounded with their Monitory Lessons.

THUS they pass away the time till almost Midnight, when they take the Bride
with one consent, and lead her to the Bagnio, if there is one in the House, if
not a common Bathing Tub will serve the turn. Here every Gossip plucks a
Feather, till having quite undressed the helpless Virgin, they begin to wash
and rub her soundly, smoothing over her Body, with a certain scented and
balsamic Ointment, the better to prepare her for approaching Pleasures; after
this they put her on a Shift, and wrapping Nightgown, thence conducting her to
take her Rest till early the next Morning.

The Morning Ceremony.
AT the dawning of the Day they come again, to wake the Bride, who rising from
the last Possession of her Virgin Pillow, is by them attended with officious
Ceremony, dressed in all her richest Robes, and soon made ready for the amorous
Call of her expected Husband.

HE is not tedious we'll suppose, in dressing, but with all the Friends he
entertained the Night before, sets forward from his House well mounted, and
attended by a gallant Troop of Gentlemen on Horseback, Serenaded as they go, by
several sorts of Music, sounding with them through the Streets. They come at
last where lives the Bride, whose Father summoned by the noisy Instruments,
commands his Door to be set wide open, and demands within it, what they want,
and why they visit him?

The manner of the Bridegroom's coming to demand his Wife.
THE Bridegroom answers, sitting on his Horse, he comes to claim the lovely
Jewel God has given him, and names her with a loud and haughty Voice; and being
further asked, how well he can defend her, he lays his Hand directly on his
Scymetar, and draws it half way from the Scabbard, every Horseman in the
Company proceeding to the same Expression of his Friendship to the Married
Couple; hereupon the Father stepping from his Door, advances slowly some few
Paces to salute the Bridegroom, who with all his Followers, dismounting nimbly,
lays his Hand devoutly on his Breast, and utters this Expression, True
Happiness this Moment blesses me; to which the Father answers heartily, O may
that Happiness be great, and lasting.

How the Bridegroom is received at his Father-in-laws House.
THE Bridegroom enters full of Joy, and with his Father, flies up Stairs as
nimbly as he can; his Friends mean while, conducted in and entertained below,
according to the Turkish Fashion; at the entrance of the Women's Chamber he is
met by the expecting Bride, her Mother, and Relations, she unvailed, and aiming
all her Beauties to surprise his Fancy; entering, he extends his Arms with
wonder, and astonishment, and ( doubtless overwhelmed with Rays of brightness,)
finds himself unable to sustain the Shock, and therefore turns him round with
great Humility, in order to escape the danger of his Spouses Lightning.

How the Bride receives him.
BUT the tender natured Nymph, unwilling to confound at first Appearance, calls
him back with gentle Phrases, and the mild Expression of Gehl Giacquir bennum,
that is to say, Return, my good Angel; this encouragement removes all fear, and
tempts him forward till his new-made Consort takes him by the Hand, and leads
him to a Table, little higher than the Ground; she seats him cross-leg'd there
upon a fine embroid'red Cushion, and sits down herself in the same Posture,
opposite to him; all the Company then place themselves on Cushions, six Foot
distant from the ogling Spouses, till they form a fine and spacious Circle
round the Table.

His Entertainment.
SMILES and Glances, and the common Airs of meeting Lovers, pass the Time till
there is brought upon the Board betwixt them, two small Dishes; one containing
a fat roasted Dove, the other filled with certain Cakes not much unlike our
Barley Sugar.

Emblematical Proceedings of the married People.
THE Dove is cut in four distinct Pieces, whereof the Head and Neck make one,
the Rump the second, and the Body slit in two, composes both the other. The
Bridegroom first presents his Lady with the Rump, and this Expression, Though
lowest, yet acceptable. The Bride returns her Consorts Compliment, by giving
him the Head with this submissive Motto, Be thou my Head, and I thy Footstool.

THEN put they both their Hands together on the Table, taking each one half of
the divided Pidgeon; which denotes, that they should live like harmless
Turtles, and that though the Head and Tail make some distinction, yet they ought
to love and prize each other, as two different Parts of one sole Body.

THIS done, the Bride extends her Hand, and reaching from the other Plate a
piece of the abovenam'd Barley-Sugar, directs her Fingers to her Husband's
Mouth, and makes him swallow it; he does the same to her again, by this
expression of their silent Will, declaring mutually that it shall be always
eithers chief endeavor to oblige the other, by a constant practice of the
sweetest Carriage, and most tender Actions which can prove Affection.

A drinking Emblem.
THEY next proceed to call for Drink, which presently is brought 'em in a
China-Cup, containing fine perfumed Sherbet of costly Preparation. First, the
Husband sips, and then the Wife; which having done, they jointly lay their
Hands upon the Cup, and spill the Liquor on the Table, which is thereupon
removed immediately. This Emblem signifies that they must always join with
sympathetical Concern, or Joy, and gain or lose the Pleasures of this Life with
equal satisfaction.

AFTER all these Ceremonies are performed, the Bridegroom takes his leave, and
goes away to his own House, in order to prepare for the Nocturnal Entertainment
of his charming Wife, who in the close of Evening, is attended to his Place of
Habitation in the following manner.

In what manner the Bride is carried to her Husbands House.
THE Bridegrooms Brother, or the nearest of his Kindred, claims the Lady in her
Husbands Name, who is delivered into his Possession Veiled all over, mounted
like an Amazonian Heroine, astride on Horseback, and Attended by a Stately
number of her Female Friends, who Ride about her and Support a sort of Indian
Canopy, which falling like a Tent below her Horses Breast, becomes a perfect
Cover, and prevents her being seen by any of the People who will always Crowd
the Streets on those occasions; round this shining Troop of Ladies Ride a
greater number of the Male Acquaintance of both Parties, who serve alike to
grace the Cavalcade, and Guard the Women from the Insolent Abuses of the common
People.

How she is received there.
ARRIVED at last, the Waiting Bridegroom standing in his Door, Receives his
Consort open Armed, and leads her Instantly to some prepared Appartment, where
their Numerous Men Relations, who Assisted in the Ceremony, enter One by One,
according to their Quality, and having each bestowed some Present answerable to
his Circumstances, they withdraw genteely, with repeated wishes for a happy
Bedding of the Amorous Pair, returning every Man to his particular Place of
Habitation.

The Pastimes of the Women.
THE Women, to divert the Husband and his Bride, begin to Dance, at which
Profession they are Skilled but Aukwardly, performing always Singly; and
Inventing Strange, and frequently Lascivious Postures, to adorn their Motion,
and Excite an ardent Flame of Expectation, or, to call it by its right Name,
Lust, in the already-kindled Fires which Warm the Breast of the Impatient
Lovers.

The previous Ceremonies to the Bedding.
BUT now the time, which ever Rolls along with heavy Wheels on such occasions,
Summons them to hasten the usual Preparations for the Bridal Bed, in order
whereunto they lead the Bride with Songs and Music, to the Chamber which
contains the stately Scene of her expected Pleasures; here they Place her on a
small Square Block all covered oer with Silk or Velvet, and retiring to the
distant Corners of the Room, Invite the Husband to the Comical performance of a
Merry Duty, Fashionably Incumbent on new Married People.

NO Pulling off the Bridal Garters, Throwing the Stocking, or other common
Practices in use at British Weddings are observed among the Turks, but sure the
Reader will allow the Turkish Bridegroom has a Task far more Diverting, Strange
and Comical.

A Comical Injunction on the Turkish Bridegrooms.
FOR he is First obliged to be his Spouses Valet, and Undress her for his Bed;
nor is this odd Injunction all is he obliged to, for the Young and Airy Turkish
Ladies who delight in Dressing a new Married Friend, contrive such Strange and
Artful Knots about the Silken strings which Tie her Drawers, that it is next to
a downright Impossibility to find out gentle means to loosen them; yet the
Eager Bridegroom is Enjoined to kneel and Fumble with his Teeth, till he can
some way or other get them open, which, the Young and Vigorous Lovers, all
Impatient of delay, with violent endeavors bite Asunder: none, in such a Case,
must use the least Assistance either of their own or Spouses Fingers, so that
were there Men as well as Women present at this Ceremony, they would doubtless
find themselves far more Diverted than the Merryest Company that ever graced a
Christian Wedding.

IT would, it is presumed, be altogether needless to Instruct the Male or
Female Reader in the well known consequences of these Preparatory Pastimes,
since the common knowledge of both Turks and Christians will direct their
Fancy's to a full Discovery of these secret Practices, which eithers Modesty
will constantly incline their Will to draw a Curtain over, ^ to leave them
undisturbed and private.

AND now, since I am treating of the Lover's fond Elyzium, 'twil^ not be
improper to observe, that those bewitching Joys are sometime^ frustrated, and
lessened very commonly, by the Jealousy or Malice of some other Wife,
transported with the fear of Scorn, at the appearance of a Riva^ in her Lord's
Affections.

Witchcraft very common among the Turkish Women.
IN Turkey nothing is more frequent than a deep and cursed Knowledge in the
Practices of Witchcraft, Sorcery, and a sort of juggling Villainy, whereby they
render impotent and ineffectual the strongest Efforts of a vigorous Lover on
his Wedding Night; and it is perhaps to this, the Turkish Matrimony, though
indulged in Polygamy, owes the common and amazing paucity of Children.

NAY, so skilled are many in this damnable Profession, that they insolently
dare pretend to force Affection from Antipathy it self, to punish Infidelity in
Affairs of Love, and give a Lady supernatural Charms to change her humble
Servant's vowed Inconstancy.

The Practice very ancient among the Greeks.
NOR do we find such Practices of Modern Date, the ancient Greece was famous for
this Study, which they had Originally with their worthier Knowledge from that
Source of Learning Egypt. How skilled the Grecian Ladies were in Magic
Incantations, may be gathered plainly from Simaetha's Words to her Maid
Thestylis, in the second Eidyll of Theocritus, where she endeavors to bring
back Delphis, who had abandoned her Affections. Part of the 2d Eidyll of
Theocritus.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Where are my Laurels, Thestylis? And where
The powerful Philtres we must now prepare?
This sacred Cup with purple Fleeces bind,
That though my fickle Lover proves unkind,
I may some Magic Incantations use,
And force him to a Breast he would not choose;
Since he ungrateful went, twelve Days are fled,
Nor knows he whether we are alive or dead.


AND a little further in the following Words begins her Incantation. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
With all the Sacred Charms of Magic Art,
I Will now inchant the loved Inconstant's Heart;
But thou, O Moon, shed favorable Rays,
For, grateful, I to thee address my Lays;
To thee O Goddess, and to Hecate,
The powerful subterraneous Deity;
At whose Appearance Curs forget to bark,
And silent let thee Stalk through dreadful Dark;
Whilst over the Graves at Noon of Night you tread,
And press the clotted Blood of the corrupted Dead.
Hail, awful Hecate, hail Goddess, hail,
Grant me thy Aid -- So shall my Charms prevail.
Go Iynx, go, kind Spirit, have away;
And drag him to my House without the least delay.


Another sort of Sorcery.
THERE is another sort of Sorcery much used in Turkey, if it may be called so,
since perhaps the Notion took its rise from nothing but the superstitious
Fancies, and ridiculous Opinions of Hypocondriacal Persons; they call it Magic
of the Eye, or the bewitching by an evil Look; now whether there are any real
grounds for this Belief, I shall not venture to determine. A Story of a
Gentleman bewitched by an evil Eye.
But this I can assure my Reader, that I knew a Gentleman at Constantinople, who
was naturally blessed with an uncommon Share of Wit and Judgment, yet became a
downright Idiot in the space of twenty four Hours, upon going by the Invitation
of a Greek of his Acquaintance, to make one among the Guests at an Armenian
Wedding, and it was believed in Town by every Man, who heard the Story, that
the Evil Eye of one there present had deprived him of his Senses.

Another sort of Marriage used in Turkey.
THERE is among the Turks, another sort of Marriage, generally used by
Strangers, who reside but little time in any City; this is called Hakabin, and
is a Bargain made before a Judge, whereby the Man is bound to take the Woman,
and maintain her as his Wife, for one, two, six, or more Months, and when his
Business calls him to another Place, he is obliged to give her such a Sum of
Money as is mentioned in their first Agreement.

Concubinage, how tolerated.
CONCUBINAGE, as I have said before, is granted to the Turks, who always keep as
many Slaves as they can purchase and maintain, to serve by Day the Uses of the
House, and all Night long the Pleasures of their Master.

THERE is in Constantinople, a Slave-Market twice or thrice a Week, thither the
People go, and see the miserable Christian Captive-Virgins, dressed in all the
tempting Ornaments, that can allure the Looks of amorous Passengers; they speak
to those they are inclined to like, and having asked them any Questions they
think fit to start, they feel their Breasts, Hands, Cheeks, and Foreheads; A
curious Search.
nay proceed, if curious in the nicety of Search, to have the young, and
wretched Creatures taken privately to some convenient Place, where,
undisturbed, and free to use the utmost of their Will, they find out certain
subtle Means of boasted Efficacy, to discover instantly by Proofs, and
Demonstration, whether the pretended Virgin has as yet been robbed of that so
celebrated Jewel, she affirms her self Possessor of.

THE Slaves they buy, they carry home, and use as is above-declar'd, till
growing weary of their Persons and Embraces, they have liberty again to sell
them to some Friend or Neighbor, taking others to their changeable Affections;
nor are their Wives at all disturbed to see them use this tolerated Freedom;
The Turkish Wives may claim one Night in seven.
Custom's tyranny has made them humble, none complaining of her Husband's
slight, provided he bestows one Night in seven in her conjugal Caresses; that
the Law has given them as their unquestioned Property, and will oblige the Man
to own it as his Duty.

The Turks notion of Cuckoldom, more Reasonable than ours.
AN Honest and an Admirable Notion sways the Judgments of the Turkish People in
the Point of Cuckoldom, for that, which here with us is strangely looked upon
as the Husbands shame, is in their Country placed more Wisely, and with
Justice, on the Lewd Adultress, and her Hornified Relations; for where the
Husband finds his Bed Dishonored and Polluted, he Applies himself directly to
some Judge or Governor, and sitting forth at large the Cause of his Complaint,
obtains relief by an Immediate Order of Divorce, and free's himself at once
from Wife and Scandal.

Why the Turkish Sultan's must not Marry.
THE Turkish Sultan's must not Marry, or it is become a Politic Omission to
forbear so doing; First, in that 'twou'd cause Alliances, and distant Kindred
to their Royal Family, a thing they always Feared and Hated; and Secondly
because the Greatest and most Unexpected turns of Fate, shall never wound the
Princes Honor, in obliging him to see a Wife become the Victim of Licentious
Insolence, and he himself an helpless Witness of her shameful Usage.

The Original of the Custom.
BAJAZET an Ancient but Unhappy Emperor, by dear Experience taught 'em this;
for when the brave Victorious Tam-her-lane the Great, had won the Battle which
reduced him to his Misery; his Wife Dehespeena whom he dearly Loved, and in
whose Blessings his were Centr'ed, being taken Prisoner, was before the Face of
her distracted Husband, Ravished by the Conqueror. The Unsupported sorrow,
which the Haughty Turk conceived hereat, shook all his Patience into Madness,
and produced that Rough and Melancholy Death which put an End to all his
Sufferings.

THE Princes, who succeeded Bajazet, resolving for the Future, to avoid so black
and piercing a Misfortune, made a Law that none should Marry ever after on the
Throne of Turkey, which has been observed with such Religious constancy, that
two late Emperors have been deposed and little urged against their
Governments, but that they took the Liberty of Marriage, and thereby Infringed
the solemn Prohibition of their Wiser Predecessors.

Four sorts of Divorces, used among them.
I spoke just now of their Divorces, and will here Describe Four several Methods
now in use, whereby the Turks with ease Untye the strongest Cord which joins
their Matrimony.

The First.
THE First is Registered before a Judge, as are Indeed the other Three, by this
the Man and Wife are only separated, either free, and altogether Independent on
the others Power; here the Husband is obliged to settle a sufficient
Maintenance, and keep her separate as well as when they Lived together.

The Second.
THE Second kind of separation, is a Wider breach of conjugal Conjunction; for
they then are left entirely to their Liberty, and as by joint consent they may
return again to one another Arms, so may they also Marry at their Pleasure,
any other Person, who shall best agree with either of their Circumstances.

The Third Divorce in Case of Impotence.
THE Third Divorce now Practiced by the Turks, is when a Woman is unfortunately
Married to a Man unqualified for satisfaction of her Warm desires, by the
Natural Misfortune of an Impotent Frigidity; in such a Case the Man refusing to
discharge his Wife, is Summoned by her Friends before a Judge, and forced to
bring her with him to the same Appearance; when the Charge is Read against him
she is asked if she will then affirm the Truth of all that Accusation, hereupon
she Stoops, and taking off her Slipper, Spits upon the Sole, and Strikes it on
her Husband's Forehead; Modesty requires no further Confirmation from a Female
Plantiff, and the Sentence is immediately pronounced, in favor of the Lady,
who is thenceforth, free to Marry as she pleases, and entitled notwithstanding,
to a large Allowance from her former Consort's yearly Income.

NOR is it hard that Women should be favored in a case so reasonable, when it
is the only Plea they have for gaining a Divorce, while on the contrary, the
Men possess a thousand great and boundless Privileges, and are at any time
enabled to obtain Releases from their Matrimonial Chain, on every mean and
slight Occasion.

A very merry kind of Practice for the Punishment of Levity.
BUT the most diverting sort of a Divorce, that ever was heard of, is the Oochey
Tahalac, which having once disjoined a Pair, permits no second thoughts, or
change of Inclination so as to be reconciled again; till, as a Punishment for
his ridiculous and fickle Humor, the repenting Husband will contentedly stand
by, and see his Wife in open Day, enjoyed before his face, by some brisk
Stranger, who is led by accident to pass the House, where they expect
impatiently the first fair Comer.

A pleasant Passage hap'ning, some Years since, at Constantinople, will afford
an entertaining and complete Idea of this humorous Custom; it fell out as
follows.

A pleasant Story of the Master of an English Vessel.
THE Master of an English Merchant Ship, who understood but little Turkish,
scarce enough to buy an Orange as he walked the Streets, would needs be
vent'ring frequently on Shore, sometimes with Company and sometimes without,
well dressed, with Turbant, Dolamann, and every other part of Habit in the
Turkish Fashion; he was often cautioned of the Dangers he might fall into, but
never list'ned to his Friends Advice, returning always safely to his Ship,
without the least Affront, or meeting any who accosted him in the Country
Language.

BUT rambling on a certain Day, about the City, he was beck'ned to by several
Turks who stood together at the entrance of a House; surpised at first, he
would have passed 'em slowly by, as if he took no notice of their Summons; but
before he got five Yards beyond the Door, he felt himself pulled back by one,
who smiling, spoke a long and speedy Sentence, and returning toward the Door
he came from, dragged him as it were by force to follow him.

THE Master understood not one small Syllable of what he said, but went as he
was led, without so much as speaking all the way, till coming to the Door, the
other Company began to laugh, and talk with eagerness as if they were informing
him of something very pleasant, and diverting; he seemed to listen with a
wonderful attention, and to cloak the matter, laughed for Company, but durst
not speak for fear of a Discovery; he then began to curse his forwardness and
Turkish Habit, and to wish himself secure on board his Ship, resolving to
attempt no more such single Wanderings.

A comical Surprise.
MEAN while the Turks had led him forward, and conducted him to a large Chamber,
on the elevated Floor whereof there lay a Bed, with Quilt and Mattress, after
the Fashion of the Country; upon the Bed sat cross-leg'd a genteel, young Lady,
gay, and beautiful, with Face unveiled, and sprightly Countenance, who blushed
at his appearance; on a Cushion not far distant sat a grave Kaddee or Judge,
the Master of the House; and in a corner of the Room, stood leaning, and
disconsolate, a well-made Turk, who by the sequel, proved to be the Husband of
the Lady on the Bed, and standing there, to be Spectator of a Duty he would
rather have excused.

A very doubtful State.
THE Company withdrew at the approach of the Master, leaving none behind but the
young Lady and her Husband, smiling as they passed him by, and pulling to the
Door to keep them private. It Is not difficult to guess the wonder, which amused
his thoughts at such an odd and unexpected Accident; he star'd about him like a
Man distracted, ignorant what he was to do, and fearing every Moment some
Design, which he conceived was formed against him.

AT last, the Husband looking roughly toward him, spoke a few low Words, which
by the accent seemed uneasy, and with a nod or two, and motion of his Hand,
made Signs, that he should do the Duty he was called to without delay; the Lady
likewise, beck'ned with her Finger, and repeated often these Words, Gehl Adham
Gehl, that is, Come Man come; he understood so much, but no ways apprehending
what they meant by those expressive Motions, instead of answering their
repeated Invitations, stood still, and gazed about with mute Astonishment.

THE Husband half amazed to see his Silence, and fixed Posture, as also eager,
since he knew it must be done, to have it over, came grimly up, and pushing him
with anger forward, cried out aloud. Geddi Brai, Boc Kahdin, that is, Go Fool,
see the Lady: But the frighted Britain, all surpised at this new step, was so
confounded with the turns of the amazing Accident, that scarce rememb'ring who
or where he was, he forced himself with fury from the Turk, and in the English
Tongue cried out, Why in the Devil's Name do you push me thus? I know not what
you would be at, nor understand one Word you say to me.

An odd discovery.
THE shocked Mohammedan with all imaginable wonder started back, to hear him
speak an unknown Language, and snatching off his Turbant, presently discovered
him a Christian by the manner of his being shaved; and pointing to his Head
cried loudly to his Wife, Vollah Boo Adham Gaour. By the Lord this Man's an
Infidel. With that he drew his Dagger from his Girdle, and his Wife began in
passion to rise up and fall upon the Master, when the Turk bethought him of a
cunning Stratagem to save his Honor, and having given the English Man his
Turbant back again, endeavored partly by fair Words and partly by his Signs,
to make him understand, he should go out as silently as he came in, and seem to
smile, as if he had been pleased with his Adventure.

THE trembling Master, glad of any opportunity to get away from such a
dangerous Scene of Wonders, made abundance of expressive motions with his Head
and Hands, to thank him for his kindness, and was marching off, with
counterfeited Smiles upon his Face, when all the Company still waiting in the
outward Room, began to gather round him, and to ask him if he had been
satisfied in his good-fortune; he answered as the Husband had made shift to
teach him, Hevett Sultanum; that is, Yes noble Sir. A merry Action of a Turkish
Lady.
But the expecting Wife, who had it seems been balked of her Desire, and was
unwilling though she lost the Christian's Kindness, to deprive her self of some
more qualified Person's, followed to the Door, and cried out Yoketer that is,
(...), he lies, as loud as she was able.

THIS alarmed the Judge, and all the rest, and made the Husband hang his Head
like one condemned to Stocks, or Whipping Post; in short they seized upon the
poor discovered Master, and began to drag him back to do the Duty they expected
from him, He, unwilling to comply with their desires, endeavored by continued
Struggling, to break loose and get away, till in the Scuffling, he again let
Fall his Turbant, and with much ado, escaping from their hold, ran swiftly
through the Street, while all the Boys he passed by, seeing him disordered, and
Bareheaded, and besides, A Fortunate escape.
Alarmed by the repeated exclamations of the Turks he broke away from, who Cried
out an Infidel, an Infidel, as loud as they were able, gathered round him, and
with Dirt, and Stones, pursued him through the City, till he came upon the Water
side, and found among the rest some Janissaries, whom he knew, and, whose
Authority protected him from further Injury.

I cannot say what Second Spark the Lady found to serve her turn, or how the
Business was performed among them, but the Masters ill success in this last
Ramble, proved more Efficacious to dissuade him from such bold attempts in
future Voyages, than all the Good Advice, and Solid Doctrine, which had been
before, in vain, bestowed upon his rash and Inconsiderate Obstinacy.

I promised in the Title of this Chapter, to say a little of the Turkish ways
of Courtship, and will now proceed to let the Reader know as much of their
Amors and Gallantry as fell occasionally within the Compass of my Observation.

No coming into Women's Company, in Turkey.
THERE is no such thing in Turkey as a Public Meeting, and promiscuous
Conversation of Sexes, at the Park, Ring, Balls or Theater, or any other
tolerated Scene of Honorable Liberty; all are Grave, Reserved, and Solitary;
Women seldom stir abroad, before or after Marriage; and as there is never
found the Smallest Opportunity of seeing or Conversing with the Ladies, Love is
consequently quite a Stranger to their Warmest Inclinations, till they have
obtained an object whereupon to Build it; yet there Flames amongst the Youth of
this Licentious Nation, such a Raging Passion of Desire, that they employ the
Wishes of their earliest Manhood, how to get a Wife or two to pass their time
with, and apply themselves accordingly, to those allowed and fashionable means,
whereby, though Blindfold, they may gain a Mistress.

Matches made by Friends.
THEIR common Custom then, in such like Cases, is to listen to their Friends
Proposals; such a Man has such a Daughter, Neice, or Sister, so and so
possessed of Beauty, and good Humor. Fortune they expect none with a Wife in
Turkey; for the Husband there must buy her Person with a settled Sum according
to her Value, which they seldom hold at Mighty Rates; or the agreement made
between the Parents of the willing Couple.

A Pig in a Poke.
THE Fathers word is sometimes taken for the Daughters Merit, and the Bridegroom
signs the Articles of Marriage before he is admitted to a sight of his Beloved:
But the Brisk and Wiser sort of Gentlemen, will seldom make so blind a Bargain,
and refuse to listen to the smallest motion of a Matrimonial Treaty, till they
are convinced by Ocular Experience, that the Mistress offered them is really as
deserving in her Person, as they speak her in her Character.

The Turkish Custom in case of Rivals.
IT sometimes happens that two Rivals Jarr about one Lady, and in such a Case
the Parents of the Virgin will not Interpose their Counsel nor Authority, but
by the following Method bring the Lovers to her sight, and let her choice
decide the matter; they are both appointed at a certain time to meet beneath
the Window of a Chamber of the House she lives in, Lettic'd over so that
nothing can be seen within the Room, but those who stand within can easily
perceive whatever passes in the Court before it: Here is placed the Mistress of
their hopes, who having, by the Throwing down a piece of Silk, informed 'em she
is there, the Amorous Madmen strait begin to strip one Arm above the Elbow,
drawing with the other hand their Sharp-edg'd Dagger, and exerting each his
Brightest Faculties, in Singing, Riding, Leaping, Hurling the Geritt or
Javelin, and an Hundred other Exercises, in which the Vanity of either has
persuaded him to think he can excel the other.

A dreadful way of making Love.
BUT the most ridiculous and senceless Method of expressing their Affection, is
their singing certain amorous, and whining Songs, composed on purpose for such
mad occasions, between every line whereof they cut and slash their naked Arms
with the abovenam'd Daggers, each endeavoring in this emulative Madness, to
exceed the other, by the depth and number of the Wounds he gives himself. Some
Turks I have observed, when old, and past the Follies which possessed their
Youth, to show their Arms all gash'd and scared from Wrist to Elbow, and
express a great Concern, but greater Wonder at their past simplicity.

How the Lady makes her Choice.
THE Marble Hearted Lady, proof a while against these barbarous Demonstrations
of their Love, at last makes choice of him whose Air and Face she best
approves, and speaks her Mind by throwing down a Ball of twisted Silk, while he
on whom her Mind is bent, is whining out her Praises; this produces frequently
so great a fury in the disappointed Soul of him who loses her, that running
furiously upon his happier Rival, they proceed at Daggers length, a second time
to try their Titles to her partial Favors, and before they can be parted,
oftentimes prevent the Bliss of either, by an interchangeable bestowing on each
others Bosoms, such amazing Wounds, as bleed away their Love and Life together.

THE oddness of the Style invited me to render some of the above-named Songs,
into English, which are the most esteemed, and run as follows. An amorous
Turkish Song.
Could I, dear Ray of heavenly Light,
Who now behind a Cloud do shine,
Obtain the Blessing of thy Sight,
And taste thy Influence all Divine;
Thus would I shed my warm Hearts-blood,
As now I gash my veiny Arm,
Would thou but like the Sun think good,
To draw it upwards by some Charm.
Another follows as diverting as the former. Another Turkish Song, on the same
Subject.
Oh lovely Charmer pity me,
See how my Bloood does from me fly,
Yet, were I sure to conquer thee,
Witness it Heaven, I Would gladly die;
But oh! I fear when I am dead,
In the other World we shall not meet,
If not, how like a Fool I Am sped,
For dying blindly at your Feet.


I have at large informed my Reader of their Matrimonial Ceremonies, and have
nothing further left to tell him on that Subject, but that however loose the
Inclinations of the Turkish Ladies may be rendered by Confinement, it is seldom
known that any Wife defiles her Husband's Bed; perhaps it is owing to their want
of opportunity, for I must own my self a great and utter Enemy to that
restriction which the Eastern Nations lay upon their Women, and believe that,
where a mutual Freedom, Liberty, and Familiarity, is by Custom, or Unkindness
any ways denied a Married Couple, it is impossible to reach that elevated
Happiness described by Horace, in his thirteenth Ode. Hor. Ode 13. Lib. 1.
Felices ter, and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis
Divulsus querimoniis,
Suprema citius solvet amor die.
Happy, thrice happy, more than blessed,
Are the unshaken Pair,
Whose Tie stands fixed in eithers Breast,
Unbroke by Grief or Care;
Whose grounded Love by trifling Jars,
Feels no abrupt Decay,
But keeps within true Duties Bars,
Firm to the latest Day.


CHAP. XIV. Of the Turkish Women, in General.
IF by the Title of the Chapter, the Reader may be induced to expect a
particular Account of the exterior Qualifications of the Turkish Ladies; he
must imagine a difference in their Persons and Complexions, answerable to the
Climate of a hotter or colder Country; whose various Influences must
unquestionably produce as various Effects in the Persons of its Natives: The
Turkish Wives submissive and respectfull to their Husbands.
But as the unlimited Authority, which the Turks usurp as a right of Nature,
over their submissive Wives, extends its force to the remotest Borders of their
unmeasured Empire. The continued Practice of a Conjugal Obedience, has bent the
nature of their haughtiest Women, to acknowledge readily an inferiority of Sex,
and obey their Husbands with the strictest Duties of an unfeigned Humility.
This useful Maxim which is for ever taught 'em, with the earliest Rudiments of
their infant Knowledge, has, among many other, this one Effect, that by
representing the Women, even in their own Imaginations, subservient to the Will
of Man, it inspires them all with an ardent Zeal, in the daily Practice of
those alluring Parts of Education, which may render their Persons most charming
and agreeable to the happy Object of their exalted Wishes.

The great Advantages thereof.
MANY, besides this, are the great Advantages the Turks receive from their Wives
Subjection; for it entirely frees 'em from the imperious Behavior of insulting
Yoke-Mates; keeps 'em secure from the uneasy Discords of a jealous Consort, and
gives their leisure Hours an entire Possession of the fullest Pleasures, to be
found in Matrimony; while the common Plagues, and bitter Minutes of some
Europaean Marriages are altogether strangers to the sweet Enjoyment of their
Consummate Happiness.

How Wives are kept in Turkey.
IT IS a sense of awful Fear and Duty, that obliges them contentedly to live at
Home, without the smallest Power in Domestic matters, shut up together in a
long Appartment, divided like our Hospitals for several Beds, where free from
Envy, Pride or Jealousy, they Eat, Drink, and Work together, Guarded by the
Watchful Observation of Industrious Eunuchs, and excluded from the Society of
Men, above Ten Years Old, never Stirring from their Houses, nor making Visits
to their Neighbors, but all entirely bent to please by turns the Wandering will
of their Respected Husband.

THESE then are the Chief Accomplishments of their Women's Minds, which are
Molded by the same Customs, to the same Nature, in every Part of their
Country: And though some Provinces have been esteemed more Famous than others for
the Beauty of their Women; the Following Account will serve as a Description of
the Turkish Ladies.

The Excellence of their Complexions.
THEIR Complexions are for the most Part, of a Lovely Fair, and without the help
of Art so exquisitely Smooth and Ruddy, that it is beyond the Power of
Imagination to Guess at their Beauty, which Extraordinary Perfection they owe
to their so frequent use of Bathing, and Perpetual Confinement to their Houses,
by which means they are never Ruffled by the Changes of the Weather, nor
subject to the Sultry Influences of a Scorching Sun, but it is observable that
they lose their Beauty much sooner than the Inhabitants of the Northern World,
for the daily use of Bagnio's, though it smooths their Skin, and softens their
Complexions, does notwithstanding, prejudice their Constitutions by the Warm
effects of its Sulphurous Quality. A Description of the Persons of the Turkish
Ladies.
Their Features are Generally most agreeably Regular, of an exact and sweet
Proportion, their Eyes of a Piercing Black, almost Transparently Bright and
Striking, and the larger they are, the more Esteemed, for so vast a Value do
the Turks Profess for Great Eyed Ladies, that the Enjoyment of such is by
Mahomet promised them as one of the Sublimest Joys of their Chimerical
Paradise, Arched Eyebrows Judged a Beauty by the Turks.
the Arched Excellency of their Eyebrows, is no small Addition to the Beauty of
their Features, and so Nicely sensible they are of this Perfection, that where
Nature has denied 'em so agreeable a Charm, they are never contented till by
the repeated Applications of Artificial Endeavors, they raise their Brows to a
lofty Semicircle, meeting over their Nose in a Sharp and Graceful Angle.

Their Shapes and Aires.
I can hardly speak of their Shapes, with so large Encomiums as I have done of
their Beauty, since the Looseness of their Dress, denies them that forced
Slenderness of Wast, so much admired by our Europaean Ladies; but though they
boast not that one Excellency, Nature has adorned 'em with a Thousand others,
which sufficiently supply its want, for their Bodies have somewhat of an
agreeable turn, and their Motions carry a Peculiar Grace in an Easy and
unaffected Freedom of behavior, the Native Chams of an Amorous Softness appear
unfeignedly in every look, while every Step bears somewhat of an Air not
altogether free from a Majestic Gravity, and yet entirely Governed by an
Uncommon Easiness.

The Turkish Ladies are Lasciviously inclined.
I am sorry (after so true, yet great a Character of their Persons) to Descend
to the Weakness of their unguarded Virtue, which lies so open and Vnfortifyed
by Principle, as to be Incapable of resisting the smallest Temptation of a
Favorable Opportunity. This Vice of Incontinency is undoubtedly no Hereditary
Misfortune derived from their Ancestors, since most of the Modern Turks,
especially those of Europe, are Descended from the Greeks, the old Inhabitants
of that Subverted Country; a Nation so entirely free from Lewdness and
Immorality, that they Instructed all the World in the Sublimest Virtues. The
reasons of their Lewdness.
The warm Desires which at present sway the looser Inclinations of the Turkish
Ladies, are rather the effects of their unnatural Confinement, and the strict
Prohibition they are under from the Society of Mankind, which raising their
Imaginations to an opinion of a more elevated Bliss, than is really found in
the Conversation of our Sex, enflames their Wishes, as it heightens their
Curiosity, and renders the coldest Constitution of 'em all an easy Conquest to
the first Addresses of an adventurous Lover; and it is no wonder they have no
more regard to their Virtue or their Honor, while the Duties of Religion are
never taught 'em; but on the contrary, their Mind's possessed, that as God has
given them a Soul inferior to that of Man, he exacts less Service from the
Female Sex, whom he only created for the Use and Satisfaction of the nobler
Males.

BY these Notions, and the want of Liberty beforementioned, they are all led
to so vast an esteem of Men, that they scarce know a difference in their
Merits, receiving promiscuously all such as Chance or Assurance throws in their
way, and proceeding without the Ceremonies of a formal Courtship to a plenary
Satisfaction of their lewd Desires; The Lewdness of the Turkish Ladies, when
they can convey some Stranger into their Appartments.
and so lascivious are their Inclinations, that if by the ingenuity of their
Contrivances they can procure the Company of some Stranger in their Chamber,
they claim unanimously an equal share of his Caresses, and proceed by Lots to
the Enjoyment of his Person; nor can he be permitted to leave them, till having
exerted his utmost Vigor in the Embraces of the whole Company, he becomes
incapable of further Service, and is dispatched with the Thanks and Presents of
the obliged Family.

I will desire my Reader's Patience while I entertain him with a fair Example
of the Levity for which I thus accuse the Turkish Ladies; it is not now above
eight Years since first it happened to a fond Mohammedan, who all possessed with
Europaean Dreams of Love and Beauty, would neither marry Wife, nor take a
Concubine, that was not Mistress of a tender Nature, and as he thought
accomplished sweetly in those bright Perfections, which in spite of Fate, must
make him happy; The folly of our inconsiderate love of Beauty.
but oh! how vainly does deluded Man depend on Beauty as a means of Bliss, when
every frail Misfortune of deficient Nature robs him of his Hope; it is a
Blessing ever subject to a thousand accidental shocks of Ruin, and even in its
longest, and uninterrupted course of Sunshine, but the transient Shadow of a
momentary Satisfaction, excellently defined by Seneca in his Tragedy of
Hippolytus. Anceps, forma, bonum mortalibus,
Exigui donum breve temporis,
Vt velox celeri pede laberis!
Oh Beauty, doubtful Good, to human kind!
Thou short-lived Blessing, transient as the Wind;
How do thou slide with slippery speed away,
And how the baffled hopes of Mortal Life betray!


THE Turk of whom I am about to speak, was long an Enemy to every Thought, that
led him to a Scene of Matrimony; but he was caught at last, and I have ever
found, that those, who most inveighed against it have been soonest tempted to
its Yoke, and often most gaul'd by it. It was a very witty Observation made by
an old Greek Poet, in the following Epigram. The witty Observation of an
ancient Greek.
(...)
(...)
The Man is cursed, who takes a She,
As Partner of his Bed;
This all Men know as well as me,
Yet, who forbears to Wed?


A pleasant Story of the bold Adventure of an English Sailor.
THIS Turkish Nobleman, for smiling Fortune had enlarged his Circumstances to a
great and lofty pitch of Splendor, kept a very large Haramm, or Chamber of his
Women, he possessed I think, of Wives and Concubines no less a Number than a
quarter of an Hundred, and so fondly doated on their amorous Conversation, that
he knew no Pleasure greater than the Enjoyment of their Company, would pass
whole Days in their Apartment, and choose some one among them every Night, to
carry to his Bed, and favor with the Duty of his kind Embraces.

HOWEVER, whether Nature had not qualified him for the Women's Favorite, or
whether every Lady thought her turn too long in coming, is not known, but this
is certain, that the whole Society of Beauties, were extremely Melancholy, and
would pensively retire to a large Window, which looked out upon a Garden on the
backside of their Apartment, and by throwing up the Lettice, let in Air, which
fan'd not cooled the warmth of their Desires; their Lord it seems, was very
covetous, and finding Eunuch's somewhat chargeable, maintained but one, and
that an old and lazy Fellow, who would always go to Bed before his Ladies, and
by that means give them favorable Opportunities to open the above-named Window
and look out upon the Garden, or divert themselves with any Entertainment they
thought fit to pass the Night in.

'TWAS late one Evening and the Family secure in their repose, when a brisk
English Sailor, who had lost his Company, in coming, not an Hour before, from
drinking at a little Hovel, where a Greek sold Wine, had rambled up and down
from Street to Street, till he arrived in a small narrow Lane, one Wall whereof
belonged to the above-named Garden; A lucky Curiosity.
he was walking hastily along, not knowing whereabouts he was, when he was
startled at the sudden noise of Women's Voices, and desirous to behold what sort
of Creatures Females were in Turkey, he was led by Wine and Curiosity together,
to ascend a sort of Wooden Scaffold, which he found there raised against the
Wall, and had been built in order to repair some Breaches made by Time.

THE Art of his Profession had instructed him to climb, by which means he with
ease got up so high, that hanging by his Hands and Feet, he overlooked the
ridge of the Wall, and could perceive distinctly, by the favor of the
Moonshine, several Ladies almost in their Shifts, and sporting wantonly
together in a Window, on the other side the Garden; he was wonderfully pleased
to see a sight, he had been long a Stranger to, and not being able to express
himself in Turkish, was resolved to show his Breeding in the English Language,
and called out aloud, A comical Salutation.
Ha! my dear Rogues, have I caught ye faith? Egad I wish I was among ye.

NOTHING could have been a greater surprise to the discovered Ladies, than to
hear a Voice, at once appearing to be a Man's, and Stranger to their Language
or Acquaintance, but 'twas increased if possible, when they beheld a Head, Chin
high, looking over the Wall with short thick Hair, and Hat of English Fashion;
A Surprise soon over.
the fright at first obliged 'em to a Shriek, and drove 'em from the Window for
about five Minutes, but perceiving none had overheard them in the House, they
gathered Courage and returned again, believing Providence had sent a Man to
gratify their Wishes.

THE Sailor had by this time got astride upon the Wall, and was beginning an
old Ballad in that merry Posture, not remembering he had changed his Wapping
Residence, for a short continuance in a Turkish City: But the Ladies gathered
in a knot about the Window, and by the cautionary Motions of their Fingers,
hushed him into silence, and began to beckon him with smiling Looks and all the
tempting Invitations of an amorous Deportment.

A very kind, familiar Invitation.
ENCOURAGED by their unexpected, kind Behavior, the adventurous Tarr forsook
his Station, and leaping from the Wall into the Garden, expressed his
Satisfaction in their beautiful Appearances, by all the awkward Bows, and
apish Cringes his Marine Accomplishments had made him Master of. He came at
last, and stood directly under them, explaining by the Motions of his Head and
Eyes, and other Signs, that he was sorry such an inaccessible Height prevented
him from reaching them.

An obliging Condescension.
THEY talked a while by Signs and Motions, but perceiving they could reap but
little Pleasure from so remote a Conversation, the obliging Ladies, loath to
lose so rare an Opportunity, began to make successful use of those inventive
Faculties, which Nature constantly bestows on Woman, in her amorous Exigencies;
and while certain of the Company continued at the Window, smiling in a sort of
wanton Dalliance, with the raptured Sailor, others ran and tied as many of
their Sheets together as would reach the Ground, which having done, they came
again, and making fast the hither end to certain Hooks within the Chamber,
threw the other down to him, and kindly beck'ned him to make a proper use of
their inviting Favors.

A bold Adventure.
HE was not backward in performing their desires, but never thinking of the
Consequences which might happen, made a shift to reach the Window by the help
of their Contrivance; they received him joyfully, and had begun to stare upon
the strangeness of his Habit, when he interrupted them by roughly kissing all
the Company, imagining, that since he always used his English Mistresses in
that familiar manner, it was the Fashion so to do in every Foreign Place he
came to.

THE Turkish Husbands never kiss their Women but in Bed, and consequently this
Behavior of our merry Britain wonderfully diverted them, they laughed
exceedingly and gathered round him; every one asked some particular Question,
but he could not understand one Word they said, and finding more than he
expected in the Chamber, looked about him with a great amazement, but began at
last, to catch them in his Arms, embracing them by turns, with so much zeal and
rapture, that 'twas hard to tell which Party knew most pleasure; he in meeting
such engaging, beautiful, and willing Creatures, or the Ladies in their
accidental Satisfaction of admitting to their Arms, a Lover of so brisk and
airy a Deportment, and a Man so full of Mirth and Vigor.

A very fair Proceeding of the Turkish Ladies.
THE Room wherein they lay, was long and broad, with Beds all laid in order
along either side, and each desirous first to offer him a part of hers, they
raised a sort of War among them, till it was resolved that all should draw a
Lot a piece, and stand to the decision.

THIS then at last they all agreed to, and with Scissars cut a Crimson Ribband
into five and twenty Pieces, each a little longer than the former; these they
made the Sailor hold, and drew their Lots in order; she, who had the longest
was that very Night to have him for her Bedfellow, and so proportionably she,
who had unfortunately drawn the shortest Lot, was doomed to be the farthest
distant from his wished Embraces.

The Order they contrived to keep.
THUS had they formed almost an whole Months Task, for the poor Sailor, who
never used to think on time to come, and therefore went contentedly to Bed,
with his fair first-night Mistress. We will not doubt the satisfaction, which
he met with, but proceed to tell the Reader that an hour before the break of
Day, that Lady, who was next to be his Partner, came and waked him from a
pleasing Slumber, lest he should unluckily by over-sleeping his Security, be
found as soon as Morning broke by the Eunuch, who was always used to walk his
Rounds about that time; and this was the concluded order they were all to take,
for their assured Security.

I scarce believe our amorous Tarpawlin, when the cool reflection of his waking
Senses, represented his condition, found himself so pleasant as the Night
before; but he had gone too far to think of going back, till he had done the
Duty they expected from him, and therefore wisely thought it best to seem
transported with his present, past, and future Happiness. The Contrivance,
which they made to hide him.
In short they led him to a very high and spacious Pr^ss, or rather Wardrobe,
for it was the Place, wherein they used to hang their Clothes; in this
Repository, he was forced to stand or lie all Day, and had the Door by chance
been opened, he had yet perhaps, continued undiscovered, hid all over, by the
Clothes about him.

THE Master of the House would often come, and pass some Hours every Day
amongst his Women, so that all Day long the Sailor was confined to keep his
Station, yet wanted little else but Liberty, for he had Meat and Drink, far
more than he required, Their good natured manner of getting him Provisions.
which the good humored Ladies, ordered to be set aside, pretending they would
eat it at another time, and taking some convenient Opportunity, when all was
safe, they carried it directly to their pounded Amoroso.

All overturned by an unlucky Accident.
THEY passed about ten Days and Nights without the smallest fear, or danger of
Discovery, when an unlucky Accident fell out, and ruined all; it happened that
the Lady to whose turn 'twas come that Night to claim the Sailor for her
Bedfellow, was taken by the Turk, her Lord and Master, to the unexpected Favor
of his own Enjoyment, so that she, whose Lot came next was sooner than she
thought of, Mistress of her long hoped Happiness, but when the next turn came,
the Lady, who the Night before had lawfully possessed her Husband's Bed,
renewed her Title to the balked Enjoyment of the Sailor's Person, which she,
who next expected it denied with fervor, urging that she, having lost her
turn, should stay till last of all, before she could in justice lay a second
Claim to what she aimed at.

The Sailor's dangerous Discovery.
WORDS were multiplied to noisy Disputations, and from thence they fell to
downright Blows about the matter, till the House alarmed by their Disturbance,
waked the Eunuch, who came running to the Chamber to demand the Cause of their
so sudden Disagreement, and the first thing he took particular notice of, was
the poor Sailor, who was got among the thickest of the Fray, to interpose the
best of his Endeavors, for appeasing their tumultuous Violence.

His bold Attempt to get away.
THE Eunuch all amazed to see a Man so strangely dressed among the Ladies, came
and caught him roughly by the Shoulder, who surpised as much to find himself
discovered, struck the old and feeble Eunuch such a Blow upon the Head, as beat
him to the Ground, and running to the Window, never staid to look for Sheots,
which if he had he would have missed, but venturing his Neck to save his
Liberty, leaped nimbly down, and lighting on the soft and yielding Mould,
received no hurt, but made a shift, to clamber up a Gate which opened to the
Lane; and after half an hours rambling up and down, half dead with fear, came
out upon the Port where lay an English Vessel, half Unladen, close upon the
Key; He got On-board, and overjoyed at his escape, went next Morning to the
Vessel he belonged to, which departed two days after, bound for Alexandria.

The Liberality of the Turkish Ladies.
HE brought off Ten or Twelve considerable Diamonds, of a greater Value than the
Profits of a Hundred of his Voyages could possibly amount to, every Lady
gratefully bestowing One, the Night she Bedded him. Had he but staid to have
gone through the Family he had grown Rich by their Successive Bounties, but he
had cause to be contented with his Fortune eitherway: And what will serve to
make this Accident the more diverting, is, that when the Eunuch rose and looked
about him, the Ingenious Ladies joined to tell him an Amazing Story, how the
Man he saw, came in and Frighted them, which Passing for a truth, they saved
their Reputations, and perhaps their Lives, while it was commonly reported
round the City, that the Devil or an Infidel had entered the Haramm of such a
Nobleman, nor was it known which way he had got in, or how he could find means
to get away again.

A Story of the Unfortunate Intrigue of a French Ambassadors Secretary.
LESS Fortunate, though equally Adventurous was the Comical Amor of a Young
Gentleman, Secretary to the French Ambassador at Constantinople, about the
Year 1700, who Attempting to have Bribed an Eunuch, of a Turkish Noblemans
Haramm, received Encouragement to hope Admission on a certain Night; when
coming by Direction of the abovenam'd Eunuch to a certain Woodpile in the Yard,
belonging to the House wherein they were, he Mounted on the Loggs and waited
for a Summons.

HE had not long continued there, before a certain Lady, purposely as 'twas
reported afterward, admitted to a Chamber very near him, came and looked about
her at the Window, the Amorous Monsieur had no sooner fixed his Eyes upon her,
A silent way of making Love.
but believing that to be the Future Object of his Love, he put in practice all
the Lears, Bows, Cringes and Grimaces, he was capable of using.

BUT while thus employed upon the Turkish Woodpile, the Master of the House,
who had been told the Secret by his faithful Eunuch, came Attended by a Number
of his Servants, and Apprehended him amidst the Numerous Airs of his too
distant Courtship. The bad success of his Amor.
No excuse could plead his Pardon, but he was immediately led out, and in the
very Gate, set open purposely to gather Lookers on, received two Hundred
Bastinadoes on the Soles of his Feet, and was turned out, to hop along the
Streets and reach his Home, as well as his sore Bruises would permit him.

The Turks sharp answer to the French Ambassadors complaint.
COMPLAINTS were made by the Ambassador his Master, but the Turkish Court
returned for answer, that as all their dealings with the several Ministers of
Foreign Princes, had been hitherto directed by the Customs of their Country, so
they knew not well to grant a Satisfaction for an Accident which had not yet
afforded them a Precedent: Thereby Insinuating that the Secretary had so
greatly and so openly Affronted the Turk, who Bastinado'd him, that 'twas an
Action, whose peculiar Insolence was past Example.

Loves blind effects excuseable in all Men.
LET Love excuse the Amorous Frenchmans rash attempt, or rather his Miscarriage;
it is a Flame will Burn in every Country, and the Smoke it raises may excuse the
Blindness of the objects, which it Seizes on; No Man can always run too fast
for following Indiscretion, and you know, who tells us Nemo omnibus horis
Sapit, No Man is always free from Folly. Well spoke that Ancient Greek, who
asks this Question, in the very Case we now are Treating on. (...)
(...)
Ah! brainless Youth, in vain you fly from Love,
He Is winged, and you on foot; who then must swiftest move?


The Turkish Lady's want of Honor rather to be pitied than condemned.
CONSIDER Readers, when you see this strange Account of the Fair Sex in Turkey,
it is not Nature, but the Rules of Education, which inspire the most
accomplished Chastity with purer Notions; and if the rude and barbarous
Ignorance, wherein the Turkish Women are obliged to live, has sacrificed their
Honor to the warmth of their Desires, rather pity, than condemn their want of
Virtue, and remember in compassion of their Frailties, that Humanum est errare.
It Is natural for all Mankind to go astray.


CHAP. XV. Of the Turkish Customs, and Ceremonies in Conversation.
IN describing the general Customs of the Turkish Conversation, 'twill be the
plainest Method to begin with their Morning Exercises, and trace them through
the various Entertainments of a busy Day; for when you know what manner of
Living is practiced by the richest and most active of their People, you may
easily guess at the less stately or stirring Life of the remainder.

The first Employment, whereto Great Men in Turkey put the Day.
EACH then obeys for the most part, the Summons of the earliest Cock, and rising
from his Mattress, for Feather-Beds are never used in Turkey, his Slaves attend
in an obsequious Reverence to wait his Motions to the Bagnio, which Great Men
constantly build in their Houses, others must be contented with the Public
ones: Here, when thoroughly cleans'd, they rub him with Napkins till he is dry,
and then attend him silently to that part of his House he pleases to be dressed
in; every Servant knows his Office, one puts on his Shirt, another his
Wastcoat, the third his Vest, and another his Turbant, till he is at last
completely ready.

Their Diversions when at Home.
IF he intends a Visit, he commands his Attendants to put themselves in order,
and in the mean time sits cross legged on a Cushion in the corner of some
Saffrai, looking into his Gardens, smoking Tobacco, drinking Coffee, or
perhaps playing at Chess with some Favorite Eunuch, which are the only
Domestic Diversions in use amongst them.

Their manner of making Visits.
WHEN his Horse is ready, for they seldom visit on foot, he comes gravely down
to the Gate of his House, through a double Row of his Attendants, who laying
their Hands on their Bosoms bow slowly to the Ground, and kiss the corners of
his Vest, which is the common Salutation of the Turks to their Superiors; his
Horse is covered with a stately Caparison of Cloth of Gold or Silver,
sometimes adorned with Jewels, which reaches from under the Saddle to his
Heels; his Stirrops are of Silver, and so large as to contain his whole Foot;
they are held, while he mounts, by two of his Servants, and when he moves, he
is followed by a great number of them on Foot, walking two by two at equal
distance; How they receive each other at their Houses.
in this order he proceeds to the House of him he would visit (having before
given him notice) where alighting at the bottom of the Stairs, he is conducted
through double rows of Servants to the Presence of their Master, who meets him
nearer to, or farther from his Room of State, according to the difference of
their Quality, though to Christians they never stir out of their Places, but
receive them sitting; after the mutual Compliments of somewhat declining their
Bodies with their Hand on their Bosom, they proceed through several Rooms to
that, they are to sit in; the Stranger, as they walk, always taking the left
Hand, preferred as the noblest Place in Conversation, because, whoever has it,
is supposed to be Master of the others Seymetar, as I think I have in the
foregoing part informed my Reader. When they are entered, they advance to that
elevated part of the Floor, called the Saffrai, and place themselves
cross-leg'd opposite to each other on Cushions richly covered, with their Hands
upon their Laps like our Women.

How they are Entertained in Visits.
NOW begins Discourse, which is hardly entered on, when several Pages richly
dressed bring in a Silk or Muslin Handkerchief finely embroidered, and spread
it on the Strangers Lap; then comes another with a Salver, containing several
sorts of Sweetmeats in little Spoons, like those we use for Tea, some of these
he eats, and is immediately attended by a third with a Dish of Coffee; that
drank, the Handkerchief is taken away, and they withdraw; but the Visiter has
hardly renewed his Discourse, when they return again with another Handkerchief,
which being spread as before, one sprinkles Sweet-Water in his Face from a
Silver Bottle, and another smoking his Beard and the inside of his Vest with
burnt Perfume from a golden Incense-Pan, they withdraw again; these two
Ceremonies are usually performed at the Page's Discretion as to the time
between them; but there remains a third, which they must wait their Master's
call for, and that is the bringing in a large Dish of Sherbet of an excellent
Flavor, which as soon as the Stranger has drank, he takes leave and goes away;
A very odd Custom.
for it is their Custom never to call for that Liquor, till they grow weary of
their Visiter's Company.

THEY seldom eat above one Meal a Day, and that a Dinner; they are rarely known
to be luxurious in their Appetite, and are yet extremely covetous of heaping
vast and numerous Sums of Money from the Offices they hold; unskilled in that
incomparable Doctrine of Horace in the twelfth Epistle of his first Book. Hor.
Epist. 12. Lib. 1.
-- Toll Querelas.
Pauper enim non est, cui rerum suppetit Vsus;
Si ventri been, si lateri est, pedibusque tuis, nil
Divitiae poterunt regales addere majus.
-- Cease your Complaints:
It Is not the want of Riches makes Men poor,
Nor can your Wealth a lasting Bliss procure;
If you have Meat, and Drink, and Habit too,
Oh! learn Content, what more can Riches do?


The Turkish Diet.
THEIR Diet is but course, and rarely varied, consisting generally of boiled
Hens, or Mutton, and a sort of buttered Rice, of late much used in Britain,
where it is called according to the Turkish Name Pilowe; their Butter is not
made like ours, but on the contrary, is nothing else but Sheeps Tail Fat once
melted down, and so preserved in certain Skins for common Uses.

Sheep with Tails so large, that they are forced to draw them after 'em on
Carriages.
AND since I mention Turkish Sheep, it will not be digressive from the Subject
I Am upon, to tell you that there are in many Provinces of Persia, and the Grand
Signior's Country, Sheep, whose Tails are so prodigiously encumbred with an
incredible load of Fat, that twenty, thirty, often forty English Pounds of
Grease, are taken from the Tail of one sole Sheep; nay to such a bulk and
weight they sometimes grow, that it is a very common Scene in many Parts of
Turkey, to behold 'em dragging after them their ponderous Rumps, on two-wheel'd
Carriages, contrived on purpose.

Turkish Pies.
ANOTHER sort of Diet used among the Turks are certain Pies, indifferently
baked, and filled with Meats of various kinds, but so excessively, and past all
relish mixed with Garlic, that the strongest Appetite of France it self, could
scarce digest them.

Their manner of dressing Roast-Meat.
THEY seldom roast, and when they do, observe a very different manner from the
Europaean Practice; all their Fires are made in holes cut one or two Foot deep
in Earth, about the several Parts of all their Kitchins; an Iron Engine, shaped
not much unlike a Gibbet, holds a String, which, fast'ned to some part of any
thing they roast, turns gradually round, and so prepares it for their easy
Palates.

A very savory sort of Dish, in use among the Turks.
ONE Dish they have in frequent use, of relish not unsavory, which may be named
a sort of forced Meat; it consists of many kinds of Flesh, all minced and
chopped together, with the rind of Limons, Nutmegs, Pepper, Cloves, and
Cinnamon, all this they roll when seasoned, into Balls of reasonable sizes,
wrapping them about with doubled Bay Leaves, newly gathered, and proceeding so
to roast 'em with a gentle Fire: This I think they call Kabobb, and is if my
skilled Country Cooks will take my Word, a sort of palatable Preparation worth
the imitating.

Their way of making Bread.
AS for Bread they use no other than a sort of flat and dough-back'd Cake they
call Ecmeck; they make it of a course, and ill-ground Flour, rend'red moist by
Milk and Water; after it is kneaded they proceed to press it out with heavy
rolling Pins, and cutting Cakes in Trencher form, lay many on an heated Hearth
by one another, throwing over them the hot and burning Ashes, till they judge
'em baked sufficiently, by which means they are very harsh and grating in the
Teeth, as if some Sand had fallen upon them.

Their manner of Eating.
WHEN they eat, they use no Plates, Knives, Forks, or any thing but Wooden
Spoons, not much unlike the fashion of our Ladles, these Cakes of Bread supply
the place of Plates or Trenchers; upon them they lay their Meat, so thoroughly
boiled or roasted, that they tear with ease, what part they choose, by the
assistance of their Fingers, eating last of all the Plates themselves, as did
Aeneas and his newly landed Trojans, thus described by Virgil in his seventh
Aeneid. Virg. Aen. 7.
Consumptis heic forte aliis, ut vertere morsus
Exiguam in Cererem penuria adegit edendi,
Et violare manu malisque audacibus orbem
Fatalis crusti, patulis nec parcere quadris;
Heus etiam mensas consumimus, inquit Julus!
AN EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE, Which Represents the Manner of DINING, Among the
TURKS of QUALITY.
THE Place they Sit in, is a Kiosk or Summer House. The Posture of the
Servants, the Towel that goes Round, on all their Laps, the Man, who Reaches
Water from the Fountain, the Carpet on the Floor, and every Figure in the
Piece, is done as Naturally as is Possible.
depiction of Turks of quality at dinner Turks of Quality at dinner
To her Grace Mary Duchess of Ormond etc. This Plate is most humbly Dedicated

S Bois^



While having swiftly swallowed all their Meat,
Nor finding further Dainties left to eat,
Insatiate Hunger, not yet fully fed,
Forced their keen Teeth to gnaw their small-shar'd Bread,
With eager Jaws and Hands to bite and tear,
The poor Remains of their portentous Fare,
Nor even the very Plates themselves to spare.
See, cried Ascanius, we no Morsel lose,
But make those Trenchers Meat, which we for Meat should use.


Their Postures when they eat.
THEY sit at Meals cross-legd, about a Table scarce so much as half Foot high,
made hollow, and the inside plated over with Tin or Silver; in their Laps there
lies a long course Towel, very narrow, reaching round the whole Table, whose
uncovered Surface contains their several Dishes, still removed as soon as
tasted, to make room for others, only differing in the Color of the Soop
wherein their Meat is brought before 'em.

The Drink they use at Meals.
AS for Drink, they rarely use at Dinner any other than the Fountain Water,
commonly at hand in all their Dining Rooms, and taken up in Silver, Gold, or
Earthen Cups that moment it is called for, by the Servants who attend them. It
is seldom known that all the Family sit down together to their Meat, one
Smoaks, another Sings, a third perhaps is playing on his Fiddle, one is Eating,
and a fifth employed at Chess, with some Companion of no greater Stomach than
him self; but that their ways of Eating, and their Postures when about it, may
be understood more fully, I have here annexed a Cut, wherein the Reader may
behold 'em plainly represented.

THEY commonly delight in sprightly Exercises after Dinner, as believing 'em
conducive to their Healths and Reputation; many Sports they use, all which I
shall describe in proper order, and will first proceed to treat about their
Hurling the Geritt, the favorite Exercise of all these People.

Hurling the Dart, a common Exercise in Turkey.
THIS Manly Sport is not unlike, perhaps the same, with that ancient Roman
Custom of darting Javelins from their Hands, the Vigor wherewith they threw
them, and the Execution they performed when thrown, may be conceived by the
Description of the Death of Turnus in Virgil's last Aeneid. Virg. Aen. ult
Cunctanti telum Aeneas fatale coruscat
Sortitus fortunam oculis, and corpore toto
Eminus intorquet. Murali concita nun quam
Tormento sic saxa fremunt, nec fulmine tanti
Dissultant crepitus. Volat atri turbinis instar
Exitium dirum hasta ferens, orasque recludit
Loricae, and Clypei extremos Septemplicis orbeis:
Per medium stridens transit femur: incidit ictus
Ingens ad terram duplicato poplite Turnus.
Aeneas, swift to use the lucky Hour,
Grasped his strong Spear with a collected Power,
And lifting all his Body to the throw,
Aimed at his Rival's Breast a dreadful Blow;
Not from Stone Walls by batt'ring Engines broke,
With half such horrid Roar resounds the Stroke;
Not meeting Thunderclaps, which rend the Sky,
With such loud Shocks roll on, and striking, backwards fly;
The Javelin flew, like a black Whirlwind, strong,
Bearing grim Death with hissing force along,
Till through the edge of his broad sev'n-fold Shield,
It pierced his Coat of Mail unused to yield,
Transfixed his Thigh with a surprising Wound,
And nailed, with folded Knee, great Turnus to the Ground.


The Turks how skilled therein.
NOR is the Turkish Skill inferior to the Roman in this celebrated Exercise,
which is so common, and thereby so exquisitely known, that some are found among
them, who with one strong throw at fifty five Yards distance, will with blunt,
unheaded Wooden Javelins, break a Door of near Inch thickness into twenty
Pieces.

NAY to such Perfection are the Turks arrived in this encouraged Practice, that
they never miss the smallest Mark they aim at; using the Diversion both on
Horseback and on Foot, and catching with their Hands the Weapons of their
Enemies, in certain Skirmishes by way of Single Combat, or a Party of an
Hundred, Twenty, Ten, or more or less, against an equal Number. The Beauty of
their graceful Forms of Exercising it.
It Is a curious sight and worthy observation to behold their admirable
Horsemanship, and dext'rous Management of these Gerits, at certain public and
appointed Trials, by the way of Challenge, where an emulative fire inspiring
either side with hopes of Conquest, leads 'em on, to act as cautiously as if in
earnest. It Is amazingly agreeable to see these Men, amidst an hissing multitude
of Darts, which fly continually from side to side, behave themselves with free
and unaffected Carelessness, with ease defending every Part, and turning,
prancing, rearing, and curvetting on their Warlike Horses, as if they were not
two distinct and separated Bodies.

Their dexterity in several admirable Points.
THEY bear within the left side of their Horses Girt, a certain Cane of crooked
top, not much unlike a Crook, or Nut-hook, with which they suddenly snatch up
whatever Javelin lies upon the Ground, which some can do without such help, by
bending from their Saddles in the swiftest Gallop; others there are found in
Turkey, who will throw a Dart with all their Strength, a little rising as it
flys, and watching eagerly the Course it takes, spurr violently on and catch it
as it is inclined to fall, some Yards before it comes upon the Ground, and this
they often will repeat for twenty, sometimes thirty Casts together.

AND now, since I occasionally spoke of Turkish Horsemanship, I will describe
the manner of their riding, which, together with the graceful Shape,
courageous Nature, and the swiftness of their Horses, renders them the surest
and politest Horsemen of the Universe.

The Turkish Saddles, and Caparisons.
THEIR Saddles are of deep and solid Make, of gentle rise behind, and bearing at
the Bow, a sort of high, and round Steel, Brass, or Silver headed Pummel, very
dangerous to Men unused to Riding: They tie their upper Girt quite round the
Saddle, under which is fast'ned to three Buckles, a Caparison, which falling
largely back, hangs almost to the Ground, and being made of Silk, or Cloth of
various Colors, is embroidered richly, with a Gold, or Silver Wire, and
oftentimes set thick with precious Stones, of a surprising Luster, and
inestimable Value; their Bitts are excellently made of polished Steel, so sharp
and yet so easy, that when gently held, they cannot hurt a soft-mouth'd Horse,
and yet upon occasion, will control a Lion: All the Bridles used by Gentlemen,
are made about the breadth of one of our Inches, of a sort of fine and twisted
Silk, of Green, Blue, Scarlet, White, or any other Color.

Their way of riding.
BOTH their Bridles and their Breast-plates are adorned with massy Plates of
Brass, or Silver, gilt genteely, and their Stirrops of a very large, unweildy
size, with four sharp Corners, which supply the want of Spurrs upon their
Boots, for those they never wear in Turkey. They are fast'ned strongly to the
Saddle Frame, but hang so short, that they are forced to ride with Knees quite
bent as when they sit; Its advantage over ours.
but though this Posture may not seem so graceful to the Eye, as ours in
Christendom, it is yet far more secure, and useful; for by this means, Turkish
Horsemen rising in their Stirrops, and elonging all their Bodies to each
Stroke they give, both reach as far again as we can do, and strike with twice
the strength of Europaean Cavalry; and it is in imitation of this Eastern Custom
that the Hussars of our Army ride so short, and are esteemed so useful in
Pursuits or Parties.

Their use of Bows and Arrows.
ANOTHER Exercise much used among the Turks, is shooting for a Prize with Bows
and Arrows, at which they are expert and dext'rous as I have said before; but
practice this Diversion in a very dull and slothful manner, always near the
Mark, and shooting at a sort of plastered Target, while they fit in rows upon
the shady Grass, and send their Servants for the Arrows as they use 'em. Their
Bows how made.
All their Bows are toughly made, of hardened Horns of Buffelo's, mixed with
Steel of admirable Workmanship, and finely Gilt and Painted with an airy
Mixture of bright Sylvan Colors.

The Turkish way of Wrestling.
WRESTLERS are esteemed, and very common, but unskillfull in the dext'rous Art
of tripping fairly; all their Method is to strip their Bodies naked to the
Middle, oil their Joints, and stooping forward very low, run aukwardly about
each other; making sudden, strange, and uncouth noises to surprise or startle
their Antagonist, and snatching with their Hands his Leg or Thigh so throw him
upon his Back, without so much as ever making use of their own Legs about it.

Rope-dancers and Juglers.
ROPE-DANCERS, and a sort of Juglers are encouraged to perform their several
Tricks, to please with mean Amusements in the open Street such Persons as will
stand, and gather round their Exercises, who contribute something each, to pay
their Labors, when a Fellow brings about a certain wooden Dish, to every one
of the Spectators, and desires their Penny, Twopence, or whatever more or less
they please to give him.

The Carriages in Turkey.
THE Carriages in use in Turkey, are a sort of long and heavy Wagons, drawn by
Buffelo's, a kind of Beast not much unlike an Ox, but stronger far, and larger
by one half; their Horns are long, and spread to such considerable Breadth,
that I have seen the Tips, or utmost Points, almost two Yards asunder.

Their unfamiliar way of Living.
I have told before, their manner of Saluting one another; as for Visiting, they
seldom use it, and when Business leads 'em to each other's Houses, they are
always entertained in outward Rooms; nor are their Wives permitted to appear,
nor grow acquainted with their Neighbor's Consorts.

Their manner of Sleeping in their Clothes.
THEY sleep on Quilts extremely hard, and very often in their Clothes, by which
continued Custom they are some of them so lousy, that you cannot pass a Street
without observing three or four employed, while sitting at their Door, or in
their Shops, in searching for, and killing those encroaching Vermin: Nor do
they blush to be discovered in so strange an Action, common Practice having
made a Fashion of this lazy Pastime.

They make Water like Women.
WHEN they have occasion to make Water, they withdraw from public Observation,
and like Women, couch themselves almost upon the Ground, least by an accidental
drop or two upon their Clothes, they should become defiled: They spit with
scorn to see a Christian stand against a Wall, and sometimes strike him as they
pass along, to signify their hatred of his Action and Immodesty.

A Story how a Gentleman was circumcised for pissing against a Turkish Mosque.
I very well remember that I landed once at Candy, with about four more, all
Englishmen, and Strangers to the Customs of the Country; we were busy in
observing as we walked along, the Buildings of the City, and afforded as
surprising Objects as we looked upon, by being dressed in English Habits; till
at last, an inconsiderate and unluckly Member of our Company, who found himself
inclined to Vrinate, turned round with far more Confidence than Wit to do it,
just against the Corner of a Turkish Mosque.

THE People with a sudden hollow flew about us, and began to use us somewhat
roughly, but a mild Deportment, and submissive Carriage, saved all harmless but
the frighted Criminal; he poor Man was doomed to suffer; certain insolent and
unrestrained Levants, the Sailors of the Country, came about him with their
Knives all drawn, and having a long time beaten him about the Head, obliged him
to lie down upon his Back, and never waiting for the usual Ceremonies,
Circumcised the struggling and complaining Gentleman with Butcher-like Incision.

THEY said abundance, but to little purpose, for we understood not then one
Syllable of Turkish, yet supposed they were upbraiding the Offender, and
advising him to err no more, lest he should meet a second sort of Circumcision,
far more fatal than the former; and indeed the suffering Person was beyond
expression overjoyed to find his Loss not half so great as he at first expected
it. Complaints are vain, where Remedies are never found; so we were glad to
march contentedly away, resolving for the future to avoid the danger, which our
Friend had met with.

A comical Humor of the Gentleman, in relation to his Mistress.
SHAME and regret so much confounded him, that he endeavored once or twice to
drown himself, upon receiving a kind, amorous Letter from a Mistress he had
left in England, and would often swear he never would return because of his
Misfortune; but it seems, some merry Gentleman of his Acquaintance writ a
Letter to the Lady, and informed her of his Resolution and the Accident, which
caused it; and upon her writing to her Lover that she knew the Business and was
glad it was no worse; the poor dispirited Gallant took Courage once again, and
ventured to go back. He Married her immediately on his return, and since he
found her satisfied, has little reason to continue melancholy. I could tell the
Reader a more pleasant Story of another Gentleman, but he is unmarried, and
might chance to lose his Mistress by the Bargain.

What the Turks hunt with Dogs.
HUNTING is an Exercise in which the Turks take great delight, sometimes with
Dogs and sometimes without: With Dogs but far inferior to our English Breed
they course the Stagg, Fox, Hare, and other swift defenseless Animals; but when
they hunt the Lion, Leopard, Tiger, Boar, or other Forest Beasts, they use the
Dogs for nothing but to rouse the Game, and leave it to their Management.

How they hunt Wild Beasts in Turkey.
THEY have both Weekly, Monthly, and Yearly Hunting Matches, when the Gentlemen
about the Country gather in a great and formidable Body, at some noted Place of
Rendezvous, each mounted bravely on some Horse that has been trained to Warlike
Discipline, and armed with a large oval Target, full of Spikes almost yard
long, which hangs on their left Sides; upon their Shoulders certain Quivers
full of the beforenam'd Geritts or Steel pointed Javelins, and in their Girdles
stick a pair or two of small skrew-barrel'd Pistols; besides all these, a
crooked Backsword arms their Thigh: When thus accout'red, they obey the Summons
of the Captain's Trumpets, one distinguished by that Title being always over
them.

The Form they ride in.
THE common form wherein they ride is that of an extended Crescent, or
Half Moon, whereby encompassing the corner of a Wood, they send in Dogs to
rouse the Beasts about it, which the cautious Currs no sooner have performed,
but they come barking back, and save themselves from danger by retiring
underneath the Horses Heels: If it is a Lion or a Tiger they disturb, those
often have the Courage to run roaring forward and attack the Party.

WHEN the Beast is seen approaching, every Man prepares his Target for his own
Defense, unknowing where he aims his Vengeance; while the furious Salvage makes
directly at some singled Horseman, who opposing his sharp-pointed Shield, the
leaping Beast is wounded deeply, and, while redoubling disappointed Efforts,
closed upon by the surrounding Party, who discharge a shower of Javelins at his
Body, till he falls and dies amidst a thousand Wounds.

When they shoot Wild Beasts with Pistols.
BUT, if, as sometimes has been known, the Man at whom the Lion leaps, is
ignorant at his Defense, and lets him seize his Back or Shoulder with a
dreadful Paw, the Company no more prefer their Sport to their Companions
Safety, but ride in upon the Beast, and shoot him dead with Pistol Bullets.

How they hunt the Boar.
THE Boar they often hunt on foot, with Spears of Steel, and having roused his
bristled anger, wait his coming, with a cautious Eye, and leaping from his
Tusks as he runs swiftly by them, take him on the turn, with strange agility,
and strike him through the Heart with their abovenam'd Boar Spears.

How Wild-Cats are hunted.
WILD-CATS, or Cats-of- Mountains there, afford an excellent Diversion; they
frequent the Woods, and leap about from Tree to Tree, insomuch that all, who
hunt them, are obliged to wear a sort of Headpiece; for it is very common to
behold 'em jump upon the Shoulders of their Hunters, and endeavor so to Wound
them, till they are prevented by the Dart or Pistol-Shot of some behind them.

The manner of a Turkish Coffee-House.
COFFEE-HOUSES are frequented by all sorts of People, for it is there they meet
to talk of News, divert themselves with Smoking, telling Stories, or hearing
Novels read; yet are these Coffee-Houses different from ours, in that they only
are a sort of Stalls, like Tailors Shopboards, open to the Street, and capable
of holding twelve or fourteen Men, who meeting there sit cross-leg'd for an
hour or two, to pass away the time, which lies upon their Hands, with several
different kinds of innocent Diversions.

Opium, how and by whom taken among the Turks.
OPIUM has in former times, been taken as a Cordial by the generality of Men
among the Turks, and certainly that Custom owed its Introduction to the
Prohibition of the Use of Wine; yet, now, it is much disused, and mostly
practiced by the Lawyers, Scribes and such, whose Heads are ever busied in
Affairs of great and high Importance; these by constant use, become enabled to
digest a Quantity, of force sufficient to destroy three other Men. Its chief
Effect is for a while to elevate the Senses to a wondrous Pitch of Mirth and
Gayety; but in few hours, they must renew the means, or their agreeable and
brisk Deportment, will be soon Transformed to a surprising Dullness, and
unguess'd Stupidity.

An excellent Custom to encourage Industry.
THERE is an admirable Custom, First no doubt designed as an Encouragement to
Industry, by so persuasive an Example, that the Sultan's must profess some
certain Trade, or Calling, so to be the better able, should their Fate require
it, to get their livings by their own Hand-Labour. Thus, some are Taught the
Art of Turning Cups and Balls in Lignum Vitae; others learn to dress up
Turbants; some make Bows, and some Embroider; every one in short, who has the
smallest prospect of Succession to the Throne of Turkey, being Taught some
useful and Ingenious Art, to Honor and Promote Industrous Applications.

I have as fully Treated of their ways of living in this Chapter, as is needful
or diverting to the Reader, who may see thereby, that though they boast no
Sunshine of illustrious Learning, nor the more Polite and Ceremonious Customs
of the Christian World, they are not altogether void of form and order, in
their Public or their Private Wheels of Government: Proceed we now to trace
them to their Graves, and see their Offices of Mourning and respect for such as
having run the course of Nature, drop a sleep and make their Exits.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Turkish Funerals.
Moral reflections on the consequences of superstition.
TO what a strange degree will Superstition lead astray the Minds of Mortals!
and how wonderfully Blinded in a Cloud of Ignorance, and Obstinacy, must our
Senses lie, when even the Brightest Ray of Truth it self wants force to
dissipate our Errors?

YET such a Darkness Sways the Judgment of the Turkish Nation, nor can even the
plainest demonstrations of their most Ridiculous, Self-Contradictory, and
Erroneous Principles, convince them of their folly; they are hardened in their
Resolutions to persist Vnthinkingly in what they have so long Maintained; and
the increasing Weight of dangerous Pride has shut the Door against their Reason.

The Turks unhappy in a grounded obstinacy.
THE follies of our Lives forsake us seldom, where we see them not, and the
unhappy Turks, believing all their Superstitious notions Sacred truth, Die as
they Live, and have as strange and unaccountable Opinions of a future State
between their Death, and gaining Paradise, as of the Pleasures, which they
Dream, will there present themselves: It Is pity that a People so prodigiously
Successful and so full of Power, should be Hood-winked from the knowledge of a
more refined and Heavenly Doctrine; how true is that Expression of the Greek
Theognis? (...)
True Wisdom knows a more exalted Bliss,
Than Boundless Power or Mighty Empire is.


FOR want of that the Turks mistake the Road to Truth, and Wander both in Life
and Death, alike estranged from reason or the smallest share of solid Judgment.

The Ceremonies used by the Turks in Sickmens Chambers.
WHEN any of this People, Weak and Aged by the course of Nature, or perhaps
invaded by the raging pains of a distempered Body, are supposed by their
Acquaintance or Relations any ways in danger of approaching Death, they flock
in Numbers to the Sick Man's Chamber, and endeavor to persuade him that he
ought contentedly to meet his Fate, and Cheerfully resign his Soul to him, who
gave it; making him repeated Protestations of their great affection, and
assurances that they had rather Die to keep him Company, than Live to lose his
valued Conversation; they Sing incessantly in doleful strains, a kind of
Melancholy Songs, whereby they think they Charm the Evil Angel, who attends to
Kill him; the subject of these Songs is the profession of their Love, not much
unlike, but far less Tuneful than the 17 th. Ode of the second Book of Horace,
where he thus Addresses his Expression to the indisposed Maecenas. Hor. Ode 17
lib. 2 d.
Cur me querelis exanimas tuis?
Nec diis amicum est, nec mihi, te prius
Obire, Maecenas, mearum
Grande decus columenque rerum.
Ah, te meae si partem animae rapit
Maturior vis, quid moror altera?
Oh! why, Maecenas, should you thus unkind,
With your complaining Murmurs rack my Mind?
Believe me, it is not kind to Heaven nor me,
That you should First to Death a Victim be;
You, the great Ornament of all my Fate,
And generous Prop of my depending State;
Ah! if too Swift a Call this Mournful Day,
Must Snatch my Souls dear better half away,
Why should the other part, Imperfect, longer stay?


Their Ceremonies immediately on a Friends Death.
BUT when the Fleeting Breath of the departed Mortal has forsook his Body, and
they find no further room for hope, they tear their Clothes, and for a while
abandon over their reason to the force of Passion, Weeping with a long
Immoderate Sorrow, till at last, those Kinsmen farthest from his Blood, begin
to Dry their Eyes, and strive to comfort him, whose nearness of Alliance to the
Person of the Deceased, requires him to appear Chief Mourner at his Obsequies;
they First Condole his loss and then proceed to such advice as the so late
named Horace gives his Brother Poet on the Death of Quinctilius. Hor. Ode 2 d
lib. 1.
Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit:
Nulli flebilior, quam tibi, Virgili,
Tu frustra Pius, heu, non ita creditum,
Poscis Quinctilium Deos.
He Is Dead, and when he lost his precious Breath,
A Thousand pious People Mourned his Death,
Yet none, O Virgil, does like you complain,
And even your self, alas! lament in vain;
For not the utmost Pity you can show,
Will bring his summoned Ghost, from the dark Shades below.


THE melancholy Mourner must a while resist their strongest Arguments, but by
degrees is brought to own with them, the Notions of the same abovenam'd Author.
Durum, sed levius fit patientia,
Quicquid corrigere est nefas.
It Is hard, but Patience makes that Burden light,
Against which it is vain to strive and sin to fight.


SO that when their Tears are dried away, and they have time for Ceremony, they
proceed to do their other Duties in the following manner.

Their way of laying out dead Bodies.
THE Men by Men and Women by the help of their own Sex, are, in the midst of
some large Room, laid out as here in England, on a Carpet, Mat, or something
meaner, answerable to their Quality. A Crowd of Friends swarm round the Body,
which is naked on the Ground, and having turned it nine times round and round,
with Prayers, and Invocations for the Mercy of Almighty God, they lather it
with Soap and Water, shaving it from head to foot with sharp edged Razors.

AFTER this they wash it clean with Milk and Water somewhat warm; A very
strange expression of respect.
then tie their Beads or other little Toys about his Limbs, which is a
fashionable method of expressing their Affection: But the strangest Custom I
have ever found among the Practices of any Nation, is a method they have got to
wound their Bosoms, with a Pin, or Bodkin, and receive as much of their own
Blood upon their Fingers end, as will enable them to write distinctly in a
crimson Character, their Names and Ages, on the Breast of the Deceased.

How they fold the Body.
THEN fold they up the Body in a Linen Sheet, which twists about a dozen times
the compass of the Corpse, but is left open at the top and bottom for a pleasant
sort of reason, which I shall hereafter mention, and which Superstition has
persuaded them to think sufficient.

WHEN they bear 'em to the Grave, it is commonly about the close of Day, and
with a numerous Train of the Acquaintance and Relations of the late Deceased;
the manner, you will see described at large in the Cut that is annexed hereto;
but for the Reader's further satisfaction, I will set down all the order, which
the Turks observe at the most celebrated Funerals of Men of high and noted
Quality.

Their forms of marching to a Funeral.
FIRST march a Train of grave Derveeshes, or the Priests of whom I spoke in a
foregoing Chapter, these bear a certain number of large flaming Torches, and
with melancholy Looks, and careful, slow, and heavy Steps, foretell the People
what is coming after them.

NEXT follow other Priests, who by their wringing Hands, and shaking Heads, and
other such expressive signs of Sorrow, seem as much concerned as if the Parts
they only act were true and real.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE, Which Represents the Prospect of a TURKISH
FUNERAL.
A. A. THE Grave, and People, gathered round it. B. B. B. The Churchyard. C.
The Torch Bearers. D. D. D. The Priests, and hired Mourners. E. E. E. E. Four
Fine Led Horses. F. F. The Trailers of the Ensigns. G. The Turbant, which lies
at the Head of the Bier, and Marks the Quality of the Deceased. H. The Dead
Body, upon the Bier. I. Two Priests, who follow the Corpse. K. K. K. K. K. The
Company, Invited to the Funeral. L. L. Two Christian Travelers, looking on. M.
The Guide, who attends them.
depiction of a Turkish funeral To Sr Alexander Cairnes of Monaghan ^n the
Kingdom of Ireland Baronet ^his Representation of a Turkish Funeral is
Respectfully Dedicated.





The Turks all mourn in White.
THEN come several Men, who bear along large Ensigns trailing far upon the
Ground behind 'em; after them four, six, or Ten led Horses, at an equal
distance, led by Grooms on foot, come slowly forward, covered to the Heels with
fine white Cloth, (for that is the Turkish Mourning) treading with a grave and
heavy step, as if they knew the Cause of their Appearance.

How the Body lies upon the Bier.
NOW comes the Body, carried on a Bier by four tall Men, half covered over with
the Mourning Cloth, which falls about 'em from the Bier and hangs upon the
Ground, the Corpse is born head foremost through the City, wrapped in Linen, with
his Face uncovered, and a Turbant at his Crown, whose shape or magnitude
denotes his Quality; they never bury them in Coffins, so they lie all open to
the public View, bestrew'd with every Flower, which may happen then to
flourish.

BEHIND the Corpse immediately appear two venerable Priests, with Turbants of a
large and stately size, who, all the way they go, with elevated Eyes, and Arms
extended, sometimes striking furiously against their Breasts, call vehemently
on the Name of God, pronouncing it a thousand times, with awful Sound and
melancholy Accent.

The Close of the Procession.
IN the rear of the Procession walk his Friends, in graceful Order two by two,
with Handkerchiefs, to wipe away the Tears they shed for grief or fashion.
Women go not to the Funerals of Men, nor Men to those of Women, unless it be a
number for their Safety, and performance of the Ceremonies requisite in Burials.

Their Church yards, how, and where placed.
CHURCHYARDS among the Turks are always placed without the Town, or in some
wild and vacant Place within it; as for Ground they never mind to choose it
level, Hills and Dales are all alike, and for the space of sometimes full three
Miles about, you see a sort of Grove or Wood (if the Expression be allowed) of
lofty Stones, for at the head and foot of every Grave, is placed a Marble, of
the shape and bigness of a common Man: The only way they have to signalize the
Memory of Noblemen, I mean great Officers among them, is to carve the tops of
both the Stones they fasten at his Grave, to represent a Turbant of a size or
form, which speaks his Quality; they strew the Ground with odoriferous Flowers,
and often plant such little Trees and Herbs as are for ever green and
flourishing. A charitable Custom of the Turkish Women.
Three times a Week the Women meet in all their Coemitery's, to condole the loss
of dead Relations, with continued howlings for about two Hours, leaving, when
they go away, on every Grave, Meat, Drink, and Money, as a charitable Offering
to the numerous Poor, who afterward come in, and taking what they find there
left, do gratefully repeat a certain number of Petitions for the Soul of the
Deceased, proportionable to the Alms bestowed upon them.

Their Ceremonies at the Grave,
HITHER then they bring the Corpse, and coming to the Grave, first lay it on the
Earth and gather round it, every one repeating Prayers for his Delivery from
the Punishment of Purgatory, for they hold (as I have said before) a middle
State; this done, they bury him without a further Ceremony, and filling up the
Grave with Earth, return again in order as they came.

A very strange Notion of an Examination in the Grave.
NOW says the Turkish Doctrine, they no sooner leave the Body in the Ground, but
up start two black, horrid Angels, with their Hands of Steel, and Heads of
Fire; these immediately rejoin the Soul and Body, and by force oblige the
frighted Wretch to sit upright, while they with great sharp Knives of fiery
Substance, cut the Body widely open, and examine nicely all his Heart, to see
what sort of Life he led while here on Earth; if they perceive his good Deeds
more in number than his evil Actions, they with humble Congees sneak away, and
in their room, come two bright Spirits from the Realms of Bliss, who lay him
gently down to rest again, and sitting, one to guard his Head, the other to
protect his Feet, attend him so till the Great Day of Universal Judgment.

The Punishments they fancy Ill-Men undergo.
BUT if they find (as ten to one they do) that his ill Actions have surpassed
his Good ones, one black Angel with an Hammer of a thousand Weight, with fury
strikes him on the Head and beats him eighteen Fathoms under Ground; by which
time being turned in passage like a Shuttlecock, the other Fiend receives him
at the bottom with another Blow as fatal as the former, and thereby sends him
swiftly up again, so continuing to knock him up and down, 'till Mahomet their
Prince of Mercy, shall in gracious pity of his human Frailties, condescend to
grant a short Reprieve, which being passed, the bloody Executioners strait fall
to work again, as roughly as before; and this Opinion so prevails in their
Imaginations, that they always, in their prayers for Friends deceased, implore
the Mercy of Almighty God, to ease them from the Torture of the two black
Angels. And it is for these two Fiend's convenience, that, as I said before,
the Winding Sheet is left untied at top and bottom.

NINE Days successively the dead Man's Friends assemble at his Grave, and pray
together for the Welfare of his Soul; that time of mourning over, they erect a
Monument of little cost, ( but not unless he was of a distinguished Quality)
upon the flats whereof appear, engraved in Turkish Characters, the several
Graces and accomplished Excellencies, which adorned his Person with peculiar
Merit while he lived and flourished.

A pleasant kind of Burial.
SOME are buried in their Gardens, and have Tombs built over them, adorned with
Jessamines, and all the odoriferous Plants, which blooming Spring perfumes the
World with, whose delightful Shades embracing with a sort of melancholy
closeness, the half covered Pillars of Thebaick Marble, afford a pleasing and
surprising Prospect, through a grated Opening in the outward Wall; formed
purposely to let all Passengers behold the Monument.

The Mausolaeums of the Turkish Emperors.
THE Sultans, who have built large Mosques in Constantinople, and, who shall be
spoken of in the Chapter relating to that City, have their rich and stately
Mausolaeums near the Temples, where assemble daily numbers of poor Pilgrims,
who receive a certain Alms to pray for the departed Soul, of him, whose
Liberality they then are blessed with; many Lamps are constantly kept burning,
and a set of Priests maintained on purpose to inspect the Duties of the Place,
which are both numerous and superstitious even beyond imagination.

Epitaphs of Modern use among the Turks.
IT IS seldom known that any other Epitaph is placed upon a Tomb, than just a
plain account of the Condition, Name, Age, Sex and time of Burial of the Person
there interred, yet it is of late become a Custom with the Richest and most
Noble of their People here and there, to order certain short and witty Verses,
to be made upon the Virtues of the Dead, and either carved or writ in Golden
Letters on the Marble Monument; I will transcribe and print in English one or
two of different kinds; that you may better guess their manner of composing
them. Here follows one, upon the Death of Ishmael Bashaw, the Governor of
Constantinople, who was killed in Battle, at the great Defeat the Turks
received in passing over the River Raab in Hungary, to fight the German and
Hungarian Forces, under the Command of General Montecuculi on the 27th of July,
Anno Domini, 1664. An Epitaph upon a Turkish General, killed in Battle by the
Germans.
Here, by his two good Angels guarded, lies,
Ishmael Bashaw, in War the German's Prize,
They killed him basely ever the Stream he passed,
He won, but lost again, because he won too fast:
O Infidels beware, he, who perplexed
Your Souls while in this World, will damn 'em in the Next.


ANOTHER follows of a merry Strain, upon a certain Orange Merchant, who died in
his first Wives Arms, upon his Wedding Night; in which they seem to show a love
of Puns, by jesting on his Profession. An Epitaph upon a Man, who died in his
Wives Arms, on his Wedding Night.
Alas, alas! here free from Cares and Strife,
Lies one embraced to death by his first Wife;
Had thou been sow'r, as Persian Limons are,
Thou had not met a Fate so sharp, so rare;
But as thou wa'st an Orange thou art dead,
For Women love such Sweetness, even in Bed:
And she, who by thee chanced that Night to lie,
Tasted thee, found thee sweet, and quickly sucked thee dry.


I could insert some others, which I now have by me, but the two above-written
will suffice to show their Genius, and the Turkish taste of Wit in Epitaphs.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Public and Private Buildings of Turkey.
The Reason why the Turks neglect great Buildings.
AMONGST the various and innumerable Follies, which possess the Turks, they
boast one Prudence and maintain it with an Argument, that is, It Is indiscreet
and next to madness, to employ their Thoughts and constant Labors in the
raising lofty and stupendous Palaces, whose solid Forms may probably outlive
the very Memory of their forgotten Founders. Why should we, cry the Turks,
bestow our Cares and Riches on the vain Contrivance of magnificent and stately
Structures, when we neither know if we shall live to Morrow, nor are sure to
leave our sumptuous Habitations to an Heir's Possession of our Race, or our
Religion; Horace wisely in his second Book and eighteenth Ode reproves this
Folly. Hor. Ode 18. Lib. 2.
Tu secanda marmora
Locas sub ipsum funus: and sepulchri
Immemor, struis domos.
In hewing Marble all thy Hours
Unthinking Wretch, roll on,
When the swift Call of Death's keen Powers,
Shall snatch thee hence anon.
In building Palaces of State,
You waste your measured Breath,
Vainly affecting to look Great,
Unmindful of your Death.


The ancient Buildings of Greece, quite ruined, and forgotten.
NOR are there now remaining many of those vast and unexampled Buildings of
Antiquity, whose stately Spires and venerable Piles in former times, were wont
to crown the face of Greece with an amazing Majesty; almost all those ancient
Marks of Pride and Grandeur are entirely ruined, and effaced from even the
nicest ken of curious Observation, and if any yet remain, they are so mouldred
and deformed by penetrating time and Ages Injuries, that they will hardly serve
to any other end, than the presenting a Memento to the Frailties of Mortality,
and telling lookers on with a prevailing Silence, and the horrid Marks of an
experienced desolation, what Ausonius says, when he declares that Mors etiam
saxis, nominibusque venit.
How wide alas! does Death's Dominion fly,
When even our Names themselves, and Stones must die!


The Public Buildings more magnificent.
THE Turks, however negligent in the magnificent and lasting Structure of their
Houses, spare no Pains, no Art, nor Money in their Public Buildings; such as
Mosques, or Churches, Bagnio's, Hans, and Hospitals, which with their common
dwelling Houses, form the Subject of this Chapter, and shall at large be
treated of in their respective Places.

The situation of their Mosques.
AND first their Mosques, as dedicated to the Service of the Great Almighty,
though in an erroneous and mistaken way of Worship, claim our Observation. They
are ever situated on some elevated Hill, or rising spot of Ground, thereby
appearing more majestically Great, and Towering; the common ones are seldom
found so stately as our Country Churches, and may be more particularly
conceived, if the Reader will be pleased to look upon the Form; exactly
represented in the Figure marked by the Letter (O) in the Cut of a Grecian
Wedding in the one and twentieth Chapter.

BUT the Royal Mosques, or such as have from Age to Age been founded by the
mighty Turkish Emperors, deserve a more particular and full Description, which
take as follows; The Turks unskilled in the ancient Orders of Architecture.
first observing that the Turks, unskilled in ancient Orders of Ionick, Dorick,
or Corinthian Buildings, practice methods independent on the Customs of our
Europaean Architecture, and proceed by measures altogether new, and owing to
the Product of their own Invention.

The description of a Royal Turkish Mosque.
THEY are built entirely of a spotless White and shining Marble, round in form,
and rising to a large and stately Cupola, supported nobly by a double,
sometimes treble row of Pillars of a different Order each from other, yet
without a Name whereby I can express them in the British Language; their
Capitals and Bases are not seldom formed of Brass, and frequently the Columns
ring'd about with a continued Piece of twining Carv'd-Work of that very Marble,
which composes the Pillar; sometimes other Workmanship adorns them, not unlike
that raised Work, which Italian Architects distinguish by the Name of Basso
relievo; very often they are left quite plain, but admirably polished by an Art
which gives them lasting Luster.

A sort of Turret, not unlike the Monument in London.
THE Capitals of these high Pillars support not only the above-named Dome or
Cupola, but a broad Marble Gallery, which running round the whole
Circumference, at several Doors admits an ent'rance from four, six, or eight
tall Turrets, which surround the outside of the Mosque, and are erected of an
equal magnitude from top to bottom, rising from the Ground, and reaching half
as high again as to the Center of the Cupola; at equal distance from each other
every Turret is adorned with two, three, sometimes four large Tarrasses,
exactly like the Gallery upon the Monument on Fish-street-Hill, in London;
whence Priests appointed for that Duty, call the People to assemble in the
Mosques at their divided Hours of Prayer.

A glorious Appearance.
THE Cupola's, which often are surrounded with an hundred others, small and
close together like a bunch of Grapes, are, with these small ones, richly
gilded, as are frequently the Spires of the above-named Turrets, so that the
Sunbeams reflected gloriously from their all dazzling Luster, strike the Eyes
of gazing Strangers with a sort of new, surprising Pleasure.

Religious Washing Places.
ROUND the bottom of the outward Building are erected many Cisterns, curiously
contrived with brazen Cocks, affording Water for the Ceremonious Washings of
the zealous Turks, who hold it an unpardonable Crime, to enter any Mosque
before their Bodies are prepared by Washings, as directed by the Precepts of
their Prophet Mahomet.

The fineness of the Marble sides and floors.
A stately Portico admits them to these Mosques, of wonderful contrivance, and
extensive magnitude; here all, who enter, leave their Slippers, and advance
barefooted, upon Mats or Carpets, which are spread at large, and cover neatly
all the Floor, which with the sides, is flagg'd with admirable Squares of
polished Marble, joined so closely, that in many Places it is a difficult
attempt to undertake a quick discovery of any Joint.

Images esteemed Idolatrous.
ALL Images, as I have said before, are so abhorred by the Mahometans, that they
esteem it an Idolatrous Offense to have 'em in their Houses, so that
consequently they are never found in Mosques, or Places consecrated to the
Practice of Religion; The use of Niches, in the Turkish Mosques.
yet though Images are disallowed, the compass of the inner Wall of all their
Mosques is full of Niches, such as in the Europaean Piles, contain fine
Statues, but are here appointed to another use; for being large and deep beyond
the Christian Form, they fill the surface of those spacious Hollows, with the
oft-repeated Names of God and Mahomet, in broad and shining Golden Characters.

FROM the great Gallery, which I just now informed you was supported by the
Capitals of those vast rows of Pillars which secure the Building, certain broad
and stately Arches sloping downwards through the Body of the Church, between
the Columns and the bottom of the Cupola, surprise a Stranger with a distant
Prospect of the sides of the Mosque and all within it, terminating nobly in the
late-nam'd Niches, rendered stately by the golden Names of God and Mahomet.

WITHIN the Temples ever burn prodigious Numbers of Glass Lamps, which hang
about ten Foot above the Ground, illuminating Day and Night the Body of the
Church with a surprising Brightness, and requiring such an annual Charge for
the supply of Oil and Cotton, that Revenues are appropriated to that single
use; and such amazing Numbers still continue burning in their Royal Mosques,
that I dare hardly hope belief when I inform my Reader that in the Mosque
called Sancta Sophia, at Constantinople, An incredible Number of ever-burning
Lamps.
no fewer Lamps are always lighted than Thirty Thousand, and some outward Odd
Ones.

A Description of the Turkish Bagnio's.
TO every Mosque belongs a Bagnio, which as, much frequented by the Turish
People, is esteemed a Building of no small Importance; these are often, though
not always, built of Marble, Square and Spacious, all divided into many and
convenient Chambers, Sweating Rooms and Cooling Baths, which each makes use as
he finds himself inclined; in every one of these Divisions different Cocks of
Brass admit what quantity of Water Hot or Cold they think convenient; and
since, as I have said before, the Men and Women knowing constantly the Hours of
eithers Bathing, never offer at immodest Entrance, there is no Precaution taken
to prevent an Insolence the Laws of Turkey Punish so severely. All the Doors
are therefore carelessly left open, and the Modestest of all their Women, Wives
or Virgins, Bath securely in unguarded Nakedness, as never apprehending they
are liable to any kind of Danger.

A Merry Story of an English Cook, who caught some Turkish Ladies Naked in a
Bagnio.
YET what withholds the Bold presumption of a curious Ignorance? it is not many
Years ago since an Assembled Company of Naked Ladies, were unexpectedly
surpised by an Adventurous Tarpawlin, Cook on Board an English Merchant Ship,
then lying in the Harbor: He was Rambling up and down about the City, when
coming by a Turkish Bagnio, built of Marble, Round and not extremely Large, he
took it for a Cockpitt, and perceiving Nobody denied him Entrance, was resolved
to see a little Sport; so in he went, but had not passed two outward Rooms
before he made a full discovery of his mistake, and something else which the
poor Frighted Ladies Shreik'd their Anger at; but the Attendants of the Bagnio
being Naked in performance of their Office, and the Starting Britain nimble
Heel'd, and Quick to Apprehend his danger, He escaped and ran directly to his
Fellows whom he left upon the Waterside, and got on board without suspicion, so
that he can truly boast he was Eyewitness of a Curiosity unknown perhaps till
then, to the most esteemed and favorite Breast of any Christian.

A Description of the Turkish Hans.
NEXT come their Han's a sort of Square Stone Buildings, for the Entertainment
and Reception of promiscuous Travelers, some of these have Lodgings and
Conveniences of Diet, to deliver Gratis to whosoever asks it, which has been
the gift of some Deceased Rich Officer, as are indeed most Buildings of this
kind throughout all Turkey.

OTHERS only give them Room for Carriages and Cattle, which are Ranged in Rows
along the Middle of the Han, whose Sides are all divided into large Partitions,
each whereof contains a Chimney, where the Company who take it up, may dress
their Meat, and Sleep on Mats if Weariness inclines them, for nothing else can
possibly occasion even the least repose, in such a Wretched Place, with such
Companions as are generally met withal, and in the midst of such confused and
strange variety of endless Noises.

The Inconveniency of Turkish Hospitals.
INFIRMARIES or Hospitals are commonly Stone Buildings of a large Quadrangular
design, not much unlike our own, but that the Beds lie open to each other, no
Apartments being formed to keep the Sick of one Distemper from Diseases of
another kind, but inconsiderately exposing all to Public View, and dangerous
Conversation.

Description of their common Dwelling Houses.
NOW let us look upon their common Houses, and we shall perceive them poor and
mean, ill-contriv'd, and never higher than one single Story, they are generally
built (I mean the Frames) of green, unseason'd Timber, cased with Mud, or
unbak'd Bricks half hardened in the Sun, which is the cause that, yielding to
the Weather, they can seldom stand above ten Years, without expensive trouble
in a general Repair; and another Inconvenience, which attends their way of
Building, is, that by the sudden Moistures, and as sudden Heats these Bricks
are subject to, a sort of black and deadly Scorpions breed so frequently in all
their Walls, that I have had them often fall upon my Clothes as I have walked
about their finest Houses.

THE meanest of their Buildings rise a little in the Roof, and form a low and
arch-like Ridge, defended from the Rain by Slates or Tiles, of odd contrivance,
and have a sort of Gallery or Balcony built quite round them: Description of
their finest Houses.
The better sort, are sometimes raised to moderate height by an unpolished kind
of Stone of greyish Color; they open from the Street with low and ill-made
wooden Doors, to spacious Courts or Yards, which lead 'em to an ill-contriv'd
and timber Staircase, that admits 'em to an Hall, where wait Attendants at a
Door; which opens into the more rich and private Chambers.

ROUND the above-named Courtyard are the several Offices, as Stables, Kitchen,
Cellar, Buttery, and the other necessary Places in a Great Man's Family.

Pleasant Rooms.
THE best Apartments, though not stately, are beyond imagination pleasant and
agreeable, for some are floor'd with Oak, all covered over with fine Mats, or
Carpets, painted on the Sides and Cieling with an hundred various Colors,
richly intermixed with Gold and Silver, and adorned with little Wands of Deal,
cut long and in a semicircular form, the Flats whereof are glew'd on cross ways
to the colored Roof, and form a sort of square confusion, or agreeable
irregularity; one half of all these Rooms is raised about a Foot above the
other, called the Saffrai, which I have before occasionally mentioned; and is
generally that side of any Room, which looking out upon the Gardens, adds a
double beauty to the Place it self, which is alone sufficiently agreeable, by
being covered with the richest Carpets, and surrounded on the sides with fine
embroidred Velvet Cushions, upon which they sit or lean by Day, to eat drink,
talk, or entertain their Family; How the Turkish Beds are made.
and where at Night their Beds are made, not soft with Down, but stuffed with
Camel's Hair, Sheeps Wool, or Cotton.

OTHER Rooms are paved with fine and various colored Marble, having Fountains
of a round, triangular, square, oval, or what other form their Fancy leads 'em
to make choice of, in the midst of the Apartment; A melancholy but delightful
Amusement.
and several others trickling gently from the hollow Wall, and falling with a
sort of melancholy murmuring, upon thin Shells of Brass, contrived on purpose
to resound the Notes of the complaining Waters, and complete thereby the dulcid
Entertainment, of a charming, natural, and yet uncommon Harmony.

THE Turks delight extremely in a Country Life, retiring often to some rural
Seat, to please themselves in Solitude, to which end also, they have very large
and costly Gardens to their City Houses, where though it is allowed, they neither
know nor covet Christian Arts of Planting Flowers, and marking out their Ground
in orderly Divisions; The Turkish Gardens form a sort of natural Paradise.
they yet contrive so charmingly to imitate soft Natures Sweetness, in their
Wildernesses, Groves, and shady Bowers, that walking underneath the Covert of
the meeting Boughs, and undistinguished Avenues, they seem possessed of that
Elyzian Happiness, described as follows by Tibullus. Sed me, quod facilis
tenero sum semper amori,
Ipsa Venus campos ducet Elysios.
Hic Choreae, cantusque vigent: passimque vagantes
Dulce sonant tenui gutture carmen aves.
Fert casiam non culta seges, totosque per agros
Floret odoratis terra benigna rosis.
Ad juvenum series teneris immista puellis
Ludit: and assidue praelia miscet amor.
Since gentle Love with ease my Heart invades,
Venus shall guide me to Elyzian Shades;
There, Songs and Dances swell full tides of Joy,
And Birds from Tree to Tree their Wings employ,
Stretching for dulcid Strains their tunefull Throats,
And chanting Harmony in warbling Notes.
Vncultivated Shrubs yield Cassia there,
And all the kindly Soil does fragrant Roses bear.
There lovely Nymphs with amorous Shepherds toy,
Mixed by kind Love in Skirmishes of Joy.


IT may not be improper under the Head of Turkish Building, to introduce a Word
or two concerning their Skill in the Art of Fortification, which, far inferior
to the Christian Practice, you may take as follows.

The Turkish Art of Fortification.
THEY have no Opinion of the lofty Bastions, Horn-works, Ravelins,
Counterscarps, Tenaille's, or Outworks of the Christians; but level all their
Modern Works within a little of the Ditches, which surround 'em; which, though
less chargeable, they hold as efficacious to oppose Approaches as the other
Method: But their chief security, and whole dependence, is in undermining all
their Works, which they do so dexterously, that by sinking one below another,
they can blow up Bull-warks after they are taken, three several times, so often
ruining the Efforts of their Enemies.

The Turks the best Defenders of a Town, and why.
THE Turks of any Nation are the best in the defense of Towns Besieged, for
Priests, or Politics, have craftily infused a Notion in their Minds, that he,
who being garrisoned in any Fort belonging to the Sultan, lives to see the
Infidels possess it, shall not only lose his Prophet's Favor, but forever be
excluded from the future Blessings of expected Paradise.

The Turkish Prisons, few, and weak, and why.
I should add a little of the Turkish Prisons, which the Reader may perhaps,
expect of Strength and Number, in proportion to their Cruelty, and Arbitrary
Power, which the Sultan exercises; but that very Cruelty is, on the contrary,
the only reason why there are in Turkey very few, and those weak Prisons; for
the Justice or Injustice of the Sentence, which condemns a Criminal of any
kind, is so speedily inflicted, that there frequently are known but fourteen
Hours between the Crime and Execution; so that any Place will hold the Guilty,
since, for reasons mentioned in the Part foregoing, an Escape from Justice is
esteemed impracticable.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the City of Constantinople.
The Antiquity of Constantinople.
THIS Great and Famous Town, the Subject of this Chapter, and an ancient Seat of
Grandeur and Authority, was built about the time wherein the Persian Empire
flourished over the Eastern World, her Founder's Name was Byza, whence she took
her first denomination of Byzantium, and continued an obscure and
inconsiderable City till the Reign of Pausanias King of Sparta.

When, Conquered by the Romans.
TO him it fell the Prize of War, he won it by Assault, and gloriously rebuilt,
enlarged, and strengthened it; insomuch, that long enjoying peaceful Plenty,
she continued Mistress of a fixed Security, and after three Years vigorous
Defense, became a dear and bloody Victim, to the conquering Army of Severus an
ambitious Roman Emperor.

How rendered Great and Glorious.
SHE changed her Masters, but continued notwithstanding, in the same Condition
as to Power or Character, till the Choice of that illustrious Christian
Emperor, Constantine the Great, distinguished her by bright and shining Honors
from all other Cities, stripping Rome of all her Glories, to adorn this happy
Favorite of his Fancy; and in short removing from the Western World the mighty
Seat of universal Empire, to dignifie this new Elected Eastern City with that
envied Title, and conferring on his rich and stately Residence, the celebrated
Name of Constantinople, thereby expressing that he placed her Welfare, in an
equal balance with his own Prosperity, and had elected that one Place of all
the World, to be the proud and splendid Scene of his amazing Grandeur.

TO draw Inhabitants from Rome to this new City, he decreed that Citizens and
Freemen of the one, should all of course, be free of the other, robbing Italy of
many Monuments of Conquest and Antiquity, and transplanting endless Numbers to
Constantinople, How long it flourished.
which continued from the Year of Christ, 331, to 1453, in all the Glories of
unrivaled Plenty, and extended Power; under a successive Race of formidable
Monarchs, who possessed a large and uncontrolled Dominion over distant
Territories, and enrolled the Glories of their Great Metropolis, in the
Politest, nay the foremost Leaf of Fame's bright Register. But how uncertain
and delusive are the Honors of Mortality! And all the shining Trains of
Pageantry, which join to flatter us with promised Fortune! What Condition of
our frail Humanity is permanent or solid? Or as Juvenal has it in his tenth
Satyr. Juv. Sat. 10.
-- Quae praeclara and prospera tanti,
Vt rebus laetis par sit mensura malorum?
Where can be found that uncomplaining State,
Or where the Master of so blessed a Fate,
That they can freely and sincerely say,
Ours is a griefless Joy, and Bliss without Allay?


When Constantinople was taken by the Turks.
AMBITION and the wild distractions of intestine Discords, shook at last to
worse than nothing that divided Empire, and involved her Children in a bloody
Ruin, by the conquering Arms of Turkish Enemies, who in the Year above-named,
won by storm that miserable City, which with different Fortunes has born
different Names; and reigned by turns the famed Metropolis and favored
Residence of the ancient Roman, Grecian, and the present Turkish Emperors, who
now have changed her Name from Constantinople, to Stambole, Her present Turkish
Name.
the Etymology of which Arabian Word is by the Turks interpreted, Fair Peace and
Plenty.

Moral Reflections on the instability of Fortune.
LEARN O Mortals by the Fate of Empires, not to swell imprudent Thoughts with
Sails of Pride for any frail and transitory Gifts of fickle Fortune, when you
plainly see how roughly she insults, and swiftly tyrannizes over boundless
Monarchies, whose unimagin'd Paleness of to days declining State, so strongly
gives the lie to the deceitful gloss of glittering Yesterday. Well judged the
Greek who thus defined her fickle Nature. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Fortune makes wretched humane things her sport,
And triumphs from the Hovel to the Court;
Those, who but just before, she downward hurled,
She lifts again to shine above the World;
Whilst he, she late exalted to the Skies,
Is thrown to Beds of Clay, and on vile Dunghills lies.


The Beauties and Conveniences of Constantinople.
LET us then proceed to view this City in her modern Dress, perhaps, not less
illustrious though more enslaved, than when she shon the Empress of the gazing
Universe; her Situation as I have before observed, has opened all the Gates of
Plenty and Command to her unbounded Sway and Traffic, and the unexampled
Beauties of the Prospects she affords, are such as render her the Seat of
Pleasure, and the Paradise of Nature.

Her form and situation.
THE Town is built of form triangular, and lies upon a Cape of Land, which
gently rises with a smooth acclivity, to a considerable imminence of Ground.
The Eastern side is watered by the Bosphorus, or Channel, which divides the
Euxine from the Hellespontic Sea, about seven Leagues in length, in breadth
three quarters of an English Mile. A spacious Haven of unequaled depth,
security, and beauty lies upon its Northern Line, and to the West, it is bounded
by the Continent.

The circuit of the Town, and how fortified.
THE Compass of the Town is sixteen Miles, surrounded strongly by a triple Wall,
with Towers and Ditches, the remaining labor of the ancient Greeks, whose Arms
and Names are yet perceivable, carved here and there, upon the Stones: Five
Gates of four and twenty open to the Land, and nineteen look upon the Sea or
Haven, into which no Ship can come, which does not first pass almost closely by
the Point of the Great Turk's Seraglio, which completely forms one Angle of the
City; and the Buildings rising gradually on seven easy Hills, each crowned with
a magnificent and stately Mosque, whose Spires and Domes are richly gilded, and
most strangely intermixed with Groves of Cypress in the Gardens of their
Houses, form a Scene so lovely and surprising, that the ravished Traveller
believes himself approaching to a Place no less agreeable, than was the famed
Elyzium of the ancient Poets.

A wonderful Disappointment.
BUT nothing can be possibly a greater Disappointment than I found at entrance;
all those bright and golden Glories, which had tempted at a distance lost their
Beauties in a nearer View; The Ill-condition of the Town of Constantinople.
and I, instead of an expected Heaven, was amazed to find a Hell of darkness;
narrow Streets, with dirty Causeways on each broken side, and Windows hanging
over, almost meeting in a dark conjunction; low mudd Cottages, and wide
divisions, all o'er-grown with Grass or Bushes, and unpleasant Prospects of
dead Walls and crooked Lanes, no Glass in any of their Windows, but instead
thereof, old rotten Lettices, half stuffed with dirty Rags of various Colors,
and half covered over with a sort of thick, white, pasted Paper; every thing in
short, but their great Buildings, such as Mosques, or Bagnio's, Han's, or
Palaces of powerful Officers, meanly representing to a Stranger's View, the
roughest side of shameful Poverty, seeming to upbraid the base Inhabitants
with their dejected Slavery, in all the shocking Marks of miserable Servitude.

HOWEVER, many stately Public Edifices well deserve a full description, and in
order thereunto, omitting purposely the Great Seraglio, the South-West-Wall
whereof divides it from the City, because I shall discourse apart of that proud
Palace of the Turkish Tyrants, in in the nineteenth Chapter. I proceed to speak
of all things else in proper Order.

The Sultan visits Sancta Sophia every Friday.
AND first, among the many Royal Mosques, which crown the highest Places in
Constantinople, none comes near the famed Sophia, standing not far distant from
the Sultan's Palace, who resorts thereto each Friday in a public State. By the
description of this one the others Stateliness may easily be comprehended.

'TWOU'D be a needless labor to repeat the form, since what I mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, may sufficiently inform the Reader as to that particular; it
shall suffice to say, that as no humane Imagination can conceive its wonderful
Magnificence, no mortal Pen can possibly describe it. A description of that
glorious Temple.
It Is in short, a faultless and unequaled Edifice, yet not the Work of Turkish
Architects, for 'twas erected in the Reign of the Emperor Justinian, and
remains unrivaled Queen of Temples, notwithstanding more than half her
beauteous Ornaments have been maliciously defaced by Turkish Superstition.

How much it has been defaced by Turkish Superstition.
FOR all that excellent Mosaic Work, which so amazingly adorned the Floor and
Sides with shining Figures of a thousand various Forms and Colors, is at
present either hid by Mats and Carpets, effaced by Iron Instruments, or quite
daubed over with an Inch-thick Plaster. The Stone and Brazen Statues of the
Grecian Emperors have lost their Heads, and are become disguised by the
repeated Efforts of licentious Insolence. The deep and admirable Cisterns,
which were formed amidst the Vaults belonging to that Temple, and supplied with
Water from stupendous Aquaeducts, now almost ruined by the mouldring rust of
Time, and base Effects of Sloth and Ignorance.

Her further Encomiums.
YET is the venerable Pile in spite of Accident adorned with such a Sacred,
Lofty, and Majestic Aspect, that her towering Roof, bright gilded Dome, and
artfull Cupola's, her marble Pillars and unnumbred Ornaments, combine to strike
an awful Reverence through the Breasts of Strangers, obliging them to own they
see in Her, a sort of shining Glory, which our modern Buildings in their
richest Splendor fail to equalize.

A Sweating Pillar.
AMONGST the numerous Rarities this Church affords, there is a large black
Marble Pillar, plated from the Basis to the Capital with Sheets of Copper,
which at certain Hours of every Day throughout the Year, emits a sort of
vap'rous Moisture, and is therefore called the Sweating Column; whence this odd
Effect should probably arise I cannot guess, but it is the common Notion of both
Turks and Graecians, that it was the Pillar whereunto the Officers of Pilate
bound our Savior when they scourged him, and upon this only ground, (persuaded
to believe the Drops afford some secret Blessing, or prevailing Virtue;) you
may see great numbers of promiscuous People wiping off the Moisture with their
Clothes or Foreheads, some expecting by its sovereign Power, to be protected
from the least Misfortune.

A Door of Noah's Ark.
FOUR Doors it boasts, of stately height and curious Workmanship, the Wood
whereof the largest is composed is said to be a part of Noah's-Ark, and
therefore, (being purposely left open in some parts, the rest all plated over.)
Multitudes of poor and superstitious People, come, and kneeling in the hallowed
Portico, imprint their Kisses on the holy Timber, with a sort of mad and
zealous transport.

Description of the Hippodrom.
WITHIN the View of the above-named Temple, stands the Hippodrom, a large round
Spot of Ground like Lincolns-Inn-Fields, surrounded with the best and noblest
Buildings of the City; about the middle of this spacious Circle, stands a very
large and stately Obelisk, of rich Thebaick Marble; on one Pedestal whereof may
be discovered these remains of some antique Inscription. A Theban Obelisk.
DIFFIC -- S -- QVO -- -- DOMINIS PAR -- JVSS -- -- EXTINCTIS PALM -- -- -- O --
-- -- -- CEDVNT -- -- -- -- NNI T -- -- SIC VICTVS CECOD -- -- -- EBVS. JVDIC
-- -- -- ATVS AD AVR -- -- --

IT is impossible hereby to guess at what the meaning was, so 'twou'd be vain
presumption to attempt Interpreting those broken Sentences. Directly opposite
upon another side of the same Pedestal remain these Characters. KIONA TET -- --
P -- -- LE -- -- -- -- OYNO -- -- TH -- -- DOSI -- -- -- ASIS -- -- -- -- EP --
K -- -- -- -- DE -- KION EDIOCEN -- -- -- -- -- -- -- DYO --

The Pillar of Snakes.
NOT far from this Thebaick Obelisk, there is a Pillar formed of Brass, wreathed
upwards in the shape of three large Serpents, looking from the top to three
distinct corners of the City, in the figure of a just, proportional Triangle;
what the meaning of this ancient Hieroglyphick was, is now unknown; but this is
certain, that the Turks have had some grounds to look upon it as an ominous
remain of Magic Skill; since just two Months before the Deposition of their
Sultan Ibrahim, one Head fell off as if it had been sawed, which being fastened
on again by some Ingenious Artist, kept its Place as firm as ever; An ominous
Observation
but about a Month before that great Rebellion some Years since, which ended in
the Sultan's Death, and total ruin of his favorite Officers, another Head fell
off, and was attended by as fatal Consequences as the former.

Another Obelisk, of several Stones.
ANOTHER Obelisk not far from thence, consisting of a wondrous number of large
Stones, cemented artfully together, now entirely ruined, so as scarce to
represent the form it bore, upon its Basis wears an ancient Greek Inscription
so defaced by Time, that it is a needless trouble to insert the broken
Characters.

Constantine's Pillar.
THE Pillar, commonly distinguished by the Name of Constantine's, stands
tolerably whole, but little more than twelve Foot high, excluding Capital and
Basis; this Distich may be read with difficulty, round the top, TO THEION EPGON
ENTHALE PHTHAPEN PONO.
NEOI ANOYL EYSES AYTOKPATOP.


A deep and most prodigious Cistern.
BENEATH this celebrated Hippodrom there is a very deep and vaulted Cistern, of
incredible Extent, and formerly supplied with Water by a subterraneous Passage,
in such plenty, that when Constantinople was invested fatally by Mahomet the
Great, it yielded daily a sufficient quantity for all the numerous Inhabitants;
but whether Avarice, or their dependence on their Strength, has made the Turks
neglect repairing it I cannot tell, it is now quite ruined, all the Walls being
fallen in, and rend'ring the Cistern consequently unfit for any future use or
service.

Whence it took the Name of Hippodrom.
THIS Place was called the Hippodrom, from the Greek Word (...), which signifies
a Horse-Course, and to that sole use it was of old appointed: The Turks at
present, call it Hatmahdan, which is as much as Riding Place in English. It Is
here each Friday, that the most accomplished Horsemen of the Turkish Court and
Army, meet in Parties to encounter one another in the hurling the Geritts,
which I so lately spoke of: They do it always with such wonderful dexterity,
that though their Darts are blunt, they imitate exactly even the roughest Shocks
of real War; nor in their strange agility of Body, come below those youthful
Hero's, whom the tunefull Virgil celebrates as follows, in his fifth Aeneid.
Virg. Aen. 5.
Postquam omnem laeti consessum oculosque suorum
Lustravere in Equis; signum clamore paratis
Epytides long dedit, insonuitque flagello.
Olli discurrere pares, atque Agmina terni
Diductis solvere choris, rursusque vocati
Convertere vias, infestaque tela tulere.
Inde alios ineunt cursus aliosque recursus
Adversis spatiis, alternosque orbibus orbs
Impediunt, pugnaeque cient simulacra sub armis.
Et nunc terga fugae nudant; Nunc spicula vertunt
Infensi, facta pariter nunc pace feruntur.
Soon as with pleasure, they had viewed the Train,
And saw the graceful Horsemen crown the Plain;
Epytides, who distant from the rest,
A lofty Station purposely possessed,
Observed them ready swiftly to disjoin,
Then smartly cracked his Whip, and gave the expected Sign.
At once, the Troops by gallant Captains led,
Around the Plain in spacious Circles spread,
Then summoned back, in different Lines appear,
Each Warlike Hand adorned with a sharp-pointed Spear;
Now march in adverse Files the stately Train,
Now changing Forms, renew their Ranks again,
And circling Rings in Rings, curvett along the Plain.
Thus they extend their artfull Wheelings far,
And wage with friendly Arms, a counterfeited War;
Now they by flight their naked Backs expose,
Then turn with lifted Spears, upon pursuing Foes;
Till Peace proclaimed, they lay their Arms aside,
And mingling Ranks and Files, in graceful Order ride.


The Historical Pillar.
IN the Women's Market, which the Turks distinguish by the Name of
Auharat-Baasar, stands a Column of prodigious height, and such a curious
Workmanship, that being full even from the Basis to the Capital with
Hieroglyphic Figures representing, in a twining manner, by Towns, Castles,
Ships and Horsemen, Battles, and a thousand other strange Devices, all the
Rise and Progress of the Grecian Empire from its original Successes; the
Figures are contrived of such proportionable Magnitude, that both the highest
and the lowest seem alike: The Author enters it, and what he found there.
This Pillar, like the Monument at London, is not solid, but within to be
ascended by a strong and winding Staircase, where the curious Enterer finds
not any thing that is worth his Observation, but the Names of Travelers of
every Country, cut upon the Stones to tell succeeding Comers, who were there
before them; I perceived among them all but three, that I could think were
English, which were writ as follows upon different Places. H. Blunt -- an
Englishman, and lover of his Country. William Dennis, in the Year 1560 was
here. George Sandys, December the 28th, 1610.

THIS last is doubtless that Ingenious Gentleman, who has so much obliged the
World, with his polite and learned Observations on the Eastern Countries.

BUT now, methinks I feel in writing it, that weighty Grief, which seized my
Spirits, when I saw the poor remains of ruined Majesty; the great and glorious
Palace of the mighty Constantine, where Honor breathed as in her native
Element, and all the Virtues, which adorn the Mind of Man conspired to render
good, a Court, whose Greatness, and Magnificence, could possibly admit of no
Addition; even this rich Court with all its ancient State and Grandeur, is so
strangely changed amidst the unexampled Miseries of poor subverted Greece, that
those tall Roofs, once shining brightly in a dress of Gold, are tumbled with
the Columns, which supported them, and lie confused in heaps of Rubbish, scarce
deserving even the Name of Ruins: The Palace of Constantine the Great, now made
a Stable for wild Beasts.
Those bright Apartments, which in former times, were wont to shine with
ornamental Balls, and glorious Crowds of celebrated Beauties, are at present
made a Den, or Stable, for the several sorts of Wild and Forest Beasts, which
serve the Pleasures of the haughty Sultan.

HERE may the Proud Man read his Fate, and see in the Example of this fallen
Empire (which by the haughty Reigns of her insulting Monarchs, grew divided,
and was consequently weakened more and more, till all her Discords ended in her
Downfall.) How admirable are the Notions of the great Tragaedian upon this
Particular. Sen. Trag. of Troas.
Violenta nemo imperia continuit diu:
Moderata durant. Quoque fortuna altius
Evexit ac levavit humanas opes,
Hoc se magis supprimere felicem decet,
Variosque casus tremere, metuentem Deos
Nimium faventes.
No Tyrant's Government can long endure,
A moderate Sway is ever most secure;
The higher Fortune builds a Man's Estate,
And still the more she elevates his Fate,
So much the more does it become his Mind,
Humbly to own the Gods, beyond his Merits, kind,
To fear the various Ills poor Mortals know,
And worship bounteous Heaven, whence all his Blessings flow.


ANTIQUITY I think, can boast no more remains, than what I have already named,
of all those glorious Monuments of Art and Splendor, which in former times
adorned this City: Modern Buildings, as described in the foregoing Chapter, are
not wanting, but as none deserves particular remark, The number of Mosques in
Constantinople.
I only will inform you, that the Turks compute the number of their Mosques at
Constantinople to exceed Seven Thousand.

BUT the Reader must not here mistake my meaning, as confined to the walled
Town alone; for they include the Cities following, joining all in one
denomination, as we do that of Westminster with London.

The City Scutary.
THE old Chrysopolis, at present Scutary, a Bythinian City, standing opposite
upon the other Shore of the abovenam'd Bosphorus, contains within her Bounds, a
great Seraglio of the Turkish Sultans, and is large and wealthy, not much less
than three Miles round.

The City Pera.
PERA, Galata, or Cornu Byzantium anciently, reaches with considerable breadth,
from the opposite Shore of the Haven, much above an English Mile, with steep a
scent, even to the very summit of the Hills, which overlook the City; The use
of a Seraglio there.
here is likewise a Seraglio of the Sultans, serving as a Prison to receive at
each triennial View of the Grand Signiors Women, whole Shoals of barren, sick,
or antiquated Ladies.

ALL the Ministers of Foreign Christian Princes have their Dwelling Houses in
some part of Pera, seldom suffered to reside within the Walls of
Constantinople; the Buildings of this Town are somewhat larger, and more
stately than the other, all the Christian Factories residing there, The
Christian Privileges there.
and favored with a sort of privileged Immunity among themselves, possessing a
large Place, thence termed the Frank-Street, or the Street of French Men, for
the Turks in common Talk, call every Christian by that Name, who there, with
pleasure, live promiscuously, enjoying almost uncontrolled, an envied liberty,
which very rarely, any Turk presumes to make Encroachments on, though some have
often insolence enough to threaten it.

SOME other Suburbs, such as those without the Gate of Adrianople, where the
Turkish Sultans at a certain Tomb of some old Prophet, are invested with their
Power, spread themselves about and much enlarge the compass of the City, which
if taken altogether, A comparison of London with Constantinople.
does indeed possess a a greater space of Ground than London, but, by reason of
the Gardens joined to every House, and many vacant Places of the Town, can
notwithstanding boast scarce half her number of Inhabitants.

The Sultan common Landlord of most Houses.
THE Houses, or the greatest Part, of Constantinople, are the Sultan's Property,
who lets 'em out at different Rents, according to their Value, and appoints
Collectors to receive the Profits thence arising.

Besisteens, their use and description.
BESISTEENS or large and high-roof'd Places, built of Timber, or sometimes of
Stone, are public Markets, not unlike our Old Exchange, where Goods of every
kind, are bought and sold, each Mystery or Trade possessing a peculiar Row or
Walk: Hither resort both Turks and Christians, who would purchase any thing of
worth, for only here they can procure it; all the Streets, directly contrary to
ours, made dark and close in Front, no Shops appearing in them, worth the
notice of a Stranger or Inhabitant.

The form of Turkish Wherries.
THE Persons, who inhabit the opposite sides of the Haven, correspond at ease,
by means of many thousand Boats, perpetually rowing up and down, called Kaicks,
of long and narrow form, a little rising at each end and widening in the
middle, not unlike an opened Bean-shell: And now I mention their conveniences
of Rowing, I will venture to digress a little way, in order to divert you with
a Story common in the Mouth of every Waterman, who rows you by a Castle founded
on a Rock, that stands surrounded by the Water, at about two Furlongs distance
from the Town of Scutary.

The Maiden Tower.
THIS Fort, for such it is now, is called by the Inhabitants the Maiden Tower, it
is strong and well defended by five and twenty Cannons of considerable Bore;
the Sea between the Town and it, runs thirteen Fathom deep, yet is it
plentifully stored with cool fresh Water, by a spacious subterraneous Passage,
which admitting it from a large Brook not far from Scutary, it finds a Channel,
and emits vast quantities from a prodigious Well within the Tower, running
thence through hollows in the Rock, and mixing with the Waters, which surround
the Castle.

THE Story, which they tell, is somewhat odd, but may divert the Reader, or at
least, will serve him as a Moral Caution, to beware how much he listens to the
tempting Calls of Loves extravagance; whereof the knowing Seneca has left this
Maxim. Sen. Tra. of Hippol.
-- Quisquis in primo obstitit
Repulitque amorem, tutus ac victor fuit.
Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit malum,
Sero recusat far, quod subiit, jugum.
He, who can bravely inborn Courage prove,
And dares repulse the first attacks of Love;
With sure applause shall break his fancy's Chain,
And, crowned with glorious Conquest, safe remain;
But he, who flatters his mistaken Will,
Inflaming Fire, and nourishing the Ill;
Too late shall weep, to see himself undone,
Gaul'd by the weighty Yoke, he could, but would not shun.


A Story of unfortunate and melancholy Love.
THERE lived ( say Turkish Chronicles) at Scutary, then Chrysopolis, a very rich
and noble Earl, extremely favored by the Grecian Emperor, with whom he often
used to ride abroad on Hunting, and continue absent sometimes twelve or
fourteen Days together.

THE Countess, an exceeding good and pious natured Lady, being dead, and
leaving one sole Daughter of the greatest Beauty, Wit, and other Excellencies,
which adorn a female Mind and Person, she was used to mourn her Father's
absence in a solitary Sorrow, still forsaking Company and Pleasure, to retire
alone to sigh or read, amidst the shady Groves and pleasant Meadows, which
afforded sweet Retirements, not far distant from her Father's Palace.

A Father's fatal foudness.
HER celebrated Beauties had alarmed the Youth of Court and Country: Every
Father wished his Son this Maids Possessor, and the Sons of every Parent mad
with Passion, lost their sense of other Pleasures, and enchanted by her Graces,
flocked in numbers to solicit her Affection; but the aged Earl, entirely
doting on his Daughters Conversation, never list'ned to their largest Offers,
bent, if possible, to keep her single, that he might, as long as he should
live, enjoy her Company.

An unexpected Meeting.
FORTUNE, on a certain time, the Father being absent, led a young and amorous
Gentleman, to take a pensive walk along the Bank of a delightful Current, near
the bottom of a Wood belonging to this Earl, and not six hundred Paces from the
House, whence just before his lovely Daughter had walked out, and was by him
surpised while leaning pensively beneath the shelter of a spacious Oak, and
reading softly with a fixed attention.

NEVER was Joy more unexpected and transporting than that, which seized the
starting Youth at this surprising Accident; for he had long been one of those,
who languish'd for her Favor, but till now, had never gained the smallest
Opportunity to let her know how much he loved her, having been, among the rest,
denied admission by her Father's obstinacy.

A sudden Conquest of a Lady's Heart.
LOVE I think, is seldom wanting upon such occasions, to inspire his Subjects
with rhetorical Assurance, so that prompted by the Dictates of prevailing
Passion, he addressed the Lady with a Modesty so graceful, yet becoming
Resolution, that she had no sooner cast her Eyes upon his Person, but a sudden
Inclination, and as sudden Fright together, seized the tender Regions of her
Virgin Bosom.

VARIOUS Arguments with mutual Satisfaction passed away the time in sympathetic
Pleasures, and such powerful Charms did each discover in the others Person,
that from that time forward, they agreed to meet in the adjoining Grove, at the
same Hour every Evening, not having opportunity elsewhere to do it, lest the
Ladies Father should discover their Intrigue, and hinder them from prosecuting
their resolved affection.

I need not tell the English Ladies, that the Rules of Virtue, and her Female
Modesty obliged the Daughter of the absent Earl, to seem more backward than her
eager Lover in the amorous Settlement of their intended Meetings; but where
Occasions are so seldom found, it is a needless nicety to stand too long on
lingering Ceremonies; A kind and gentle condescension.
so in short, upon assurance of her Lovers honorable meaning, and indeed her
Quality had placed her far above distrusting his Pretensions; she permitted him
to hope he might at last be happy in her wished Possession, and for many Weeks
met undiscovered in the secret Grove, and tasted all those innocent Delights,
which Lovers may enjoy, without the smallest tincture of a guilty Conversation.

BUT oh (...). How soon decay the brightest Scenes of splendid Fortune! 'Twas
not long this amorous Couple held their Bliss unbroken and serene; for the Earl
long since returned, had often observed his Daughter absent in the Evenings, and
would frequently reflect with not a little wonder, that she always chose one
certain Hour to leave the House, and still refused whatever Company proposed
attending her; A fatal Jealousy.
his natural Jealousy required no fuel to increase its Fire, but supplied with
this, burnt out in double fury, so that he resolved to watch which way his
Daughter took, and make it his endeavor to discover what he doubted.

ACCORDINGLY one Evening, purposely disguised in habit like a Shepherd he
continued in a Meadow near his House, and saw the poor, unthinking Lady hasten
from a private Door, and cross the Fields directly to the entrance of the Grove
just mentioned.

An unfortunate Mistake.
LITTLE did she dream her Father was so near, and not mistrusting him, who at
distance she mistook to be the Person he appeared, went boldly forward to the
Place appointed, where she met the Object of her Love, and sitting down upon a
Bank as usual, tenderly reclined her Head upon his Bosom, and began to say a
thousand soft, endearing things, believing they were then as private as before,
till, in a manner stupefied with eager Passion, both neglected every Object but
each others Person, not perceiving the suspecting Father, who had gone a little
round, below the brow of an impending Hill, and now stalked forward
undiscovered, till he came so near, behind the Lovers, busied in their
Courtship, that he overheard with ease, each little Word, which passed between
them.

A dangerous Discovery.
KISSES, and a thousand other amorous Actions prompted the unfortunately
raptured Couple to repeat with loud and solemn Protestations, old assurances of
Love and Marriage, insomuch that the surpised and angry Earl transported by
his rage to hear his Daughter give away her self to one, to whom he had before
denied her, and for certain family Disputes, extremely hated, drew a Sword,
which he had privately conveyed within his Dress, and running violently at the
starting Nobleman, who drew in his defense, was killed upon the spot before the
Lady almost dead with fear, recovered from the fright, his Sword had put her in.

A cause for sudden and tempestuous Sorrow.
BUT none can surely guess the storms of Grief and Wonder, which overwhelmed her
Breast with a tempestuous Hurricane, to hear the Shepherd's dying Voice so
plainly speak her Fathers Accent; in short, upon approach she knew him
notwithstanding his disguise, and while the Lover, half distracted at the fatal
Accident, prepared to speak his wonder and her comfort, ran with violence about
the Fields, forgetting Love and all its Consequences but this last unhappy one,
which she proclaimed aloud to every Servant of her Father's House, whereto she
slew with shrieks and horror.

THE Servants ran, and seized the Nobleman, who stood confounded, like a
speechless Statue, looking eagerly upon the Body of the murdered Earl, nor
aiming to defend himself from being taken: A cruel Sentence to divide two
Lovers.
News was carried to the Emperor of every circumstance of the unlucky Action,
who considering wisely all particulars, gave the Gentleman a present Pardon,
but resolving to prevent them from conversing with each other ever after,
ordered the young Lady, with two Aunts and all the Family, to be confined in
the before-nam'd Tower, then called Stony Island, giving strict command to all,
who guarded it, that they should never suffer her to get away, nor give
admission unto any Person, such excepted as were authorized to claim it by his
Royal Passport.

A while the Lady mourned so deeply for her Father's Death; and the desponding
Lover for the Action he had done, that neither thought upon the hardship of
their cruel separation; but when fleeting Time presented to their Minds the
sharpness of their Fate in that severe Decree, they both forsook all hopes of
Comfort; she, in Prison, grew quite weary of and hated Life, and he, at large,
became abandoned to encroaching Sorrows, melancholy, silent, and a Prisoner to
his Grief, amidst the Tracts of disregarded Liberty.

A melancholy way of Life.
TWELVE tedious Months were now rolled over, and the discontented Lover still
continued every Day to visit the remembered Scene of former Bliss, and present
Misery; he would often walk disconsolately up and down along the Bank of that
delightful River, which was used to murmur out a melancholy harmony to sooth
their Minds, oppressed by fear of ill Success in their commenced Affection; and
reflecting on the various Words and Actions, which had passed between them,
would now and then, let fall a mournful Tear, to think on their Misfortunes.

AT last, despairing ever more to see his dear, contracted Mistress, he began
to wish a period to his Life, which only served to lengthen out his Misery, and
as he walked one Day, perceived a Rock, wherein he had heard talk of some dark
Cave, so dismally forbidding, that no Man had ever yet been found, who durst
attempt to enter it: Disdain of danger from a weariness of living, urged him on
to seek the Place with resolution to go in, regardless of the Consequence.

A bold and hazardous attempt.
HE found at last, the gloomy Entrance of the horrid Place, which opened
downwards with a very steep, and dangerous slope, and never waiting for a
second thought, went boldly in, and crept along the rugged sides; a narrow
Channel from the neighboring River, running through a Passage 'twixt the Rocks,
directly in the middle, for about an hundred Yards; he made a shift to crawl
along with wondrous difficulty, down a very deep and slippery Descent, but
there perceived the Water, which till then, had ran confined to proper bounds,
increased in breadth to such a vast degree, that there was left no more dry
Ground to stand upon; A strange example of the Power of Despair.
however, as desiring Death, he was resolved to tempt it, and continued his
advances through the Water, sometimes scarce above his Knees, then almost to his
Neck, here running ten or twenty Yards indifferently smooth, then falling many
Foot, and roaring round his head like some Egyptian Cataract; sometimes he
fell, half drowned with the impetuous fury of the Torrent, sometimes walked
through the rushing Streams, which almost tripp'd him from his Feet, with their
amazing swiftness.

A strange Curiosity.
STILL he crept as near as possible to some one side, and held upon the edges of
the Rocks he met with, till reflecting on the strangeness of the Place he
walked in, and how much it was impossible to reascend those watery Passages he
had already passed, he was resolved to live as long as he was able, and observe
by Touch and Ear, what further wonders the Descent might lead him to, for 'twas
so void of the least glimpse of comfortable Light, that he had then no use of
Eyes, for none could pierce one Inch of the surrounding Darkness.

HE came at last so far, that he perceived a sensible decrease in breadth, for
he could stretch his Arms with ease, and touch both sides; but on the contrary,
the depth increased exceedingly, and by the Waters doubled roaring, and beating
back as from some Wall, he found the Cavity no further capable of giving room
to a continued Progress; A wonderful subterraneous Passage.
yet considering there must be some passage of emission, and little caring
whither it might lead, he dipped his Head and Body under Water, and with much
ado, shot swiftly with the Eddy, through a very short and narrow Neck, and found
himself immediately enlarged, but covered over with a flood of Waters, which he
took to be the Sea, when finding Breath grow short upon him, he made use of
strong and artfull Strokes, which he had learned by swiming while a Boy, by
these means, thinking he should soon be freed, and gain the Surface, or expire
amidst the Waves, both which Events he formed a swift Idea of, expecting either
with a like indifference.

A strange Escape.
BUT he was much surpised, when long before he guessed it, he perceived his
head above the Water, and as soon as he could see, beheld himself within a sort
of Well or Cistern almost level with the brim: He swam a while about from side
to side, at last observed a Channel, into which the Cistern disengaged her
rising Waters; there he soon got out, extremely weak'ned by his subterraneous
Journey, and the first fair Object he discovered when he looked about him, was
his former Mistress walking in a Garden, with a very sorrowful and pensive
Countenance.

The happy meeting of two real Lovers.
THE unexpected shock was much alike to both the Lovers, but the Lady frighted
at the odd appearance of a dropping Man, who looked like some Inhabitant of an
inferior World, began at first to shriek and fly, but when he faintly called
her by her Name, she knew the Voice, mistook him for a Ghost, and fainted to
the Earth, unable to support the weight of so surprising a discovery.

BUT to conclude, the Guards came in upon the Ladies shrieking, and immediately
laid hold on their adventurous Visitor; but when the Emperor was told the
Story, he commanded both the Lover and his Mistress to be brought before him,
and considering the particulars of this amazing Accident, immediately reversed
his former Sentence, had them Married in his Royal Presence, graced them ever
after with peculiar Favors, The Etymology of the Maiden Tower.
and in memory thereof, commanded that the Castle should be called the MAIDEN
TOWER, which commemorative Name it bears at present.

EXCUSE me, Reader, for the length of my digression, it is a Story confidently
told amongst the Turks, but Faith is every Man's undoubted Property; believe
it, or believe it not, I only quote, and not assert it, as I heard it told me
for the strange Original of their old Castle's Etymology.

The seven Towers, a strong Castle
THE Seven Towers, an ancient Castle, by the Roman Emperors called Janicula, is
now a Magazine, or sometimes, Prison for the noblest Criminals; it is a very
spacious Building, and was strong beyond a common Fort, before the murdering
use of Cannons was invented; the Sultan constantly maintains therein a numerous
Garrison: Its situation is upon the South-east side of Constantinople.

The Aquaeduct of Valentinian, 34 Miles long.
BUT while I treat of this illustrious City, 'twou'd be an Error no ways
pardonable, should I fall to mention the prodigious Aquaduct of Valentinian,
which, for sour and thirty English Miles, brings Water upon Channels built on
Arches, over spacious Valleys, from the top of one tall Mountain to another,
till, nigh the City, it pours down from a stupendous height, and fills a
Cistern, like a Lake, of fine white Marble, which contains above two hundred
stately Pillars of the same, and having been repaired by several Turkish
Emperors, does by Pipes and Conduits, now supply Constantinople, with the
finest Water in the Universe.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE, Which Represents, A Prospect of the Great
SERAGLIO of the TURKISH SULTAN at CONSTANTINOPLE.
A THE Highlands of Asia. B. The Point of the Seraglio. C. The Women's
Apartment, in the Seraglio. D. The Grand Signior's own Quarter. E. A
Summer House, where the Grand Signior often sits, to look out upon the Haven,
and Divert himself with his Ladies. F. The Royal Mosque of the Seraglio. G. The
Ancient Grecian Temple, Sancta Sophia. H. H. H. The Haven of Constantinople.
depiction of the Turkish sultan's seraglio at Constantinople Prospect of the
GRAND SIGNIORS SERAGLIO
To the Right Honble William, Lord Paget, Baron of Beaudesert, etc. late
Ambassador Extraordinary, Mediator and Plenipotentiary from ye Court of Great
Britain, to the Ottoman Port, this Plate as an Acknowledgement of the Authors
weighty obligations, is most humbly dedicated.

H. Hulsbergh facit





CHAP. XIX. Of the Grand Signior's Seraglio, and particularly the Apartment of
his Women.
The Introduction.
I Told the Reader in the Preface of my Book, by what uncommon means I was so
happy as to gain admission to a Palace, which for many Ages has been kept a
secret to the searching Knowledge of our Europaean Travelers, and shall now
proceed to entertain him with a wonderful, but pleasant and sincere account of
new Discoveries, which like the Golden Indian World, lay long unenter'd (as
appearing barred against our View with unsurmountable Impediments,) but gained
at last, will spread throughout our Western Regions, such surprising Plenty of
her valuable Product, as may more than recompense the patient stay of your
expecting Curiosities.

I love not flattery from any hand, much less would sooth my own Performances,
with elevated hopes of a success beyond their Merits; Complaint against the
malice of the fashionable Critics.
but of this the World will give me leave to be assured, that as I write the
Beauties of an earthly Paradise, and unimagin'd Scenes of amorous Royalty, till
now unknown, not only to my Countrymen, but every part of distant Christendom,
I have at least deserved the thanks of an impartial Reader, and may be allowed
to blame the undistinguishing Ill Nature of such steely Critics, as instead of
owning an agreeable surprise, in meeting Subjects new and entertaining, strive
ungenerously to condemn a Labor merely out of ignorance or incredulity,
because they find it something odd, and full of Novelty.

HOWEVER, all that base Ingratitude, which meanly may endeavor to obscure the
Worth of what I write, shall never boast that private fear of barking Malice
could prevent my Pen from boldly aiming at a public Satisfaction: What the
Reader may expect in this Chapter.
I will not therefore only entertain the World with an agreeable Amusement, but
proceed by regular degrees to give the Reader an entire Idea of the famed
Seraglio of the Turkish Sultan, not omitting any odd and pleasant Observation,
but neglecting purposely the trifling repetitions of those things, preceding
Authors were enabled to inform you of; and chiefly bending my designed
description, to those glittering Piles of stately Buildings, Groves of Pine,
and Bowers of Cypress, Paths of Love, and Labyrinths of Pleasure, which combine
their Graces to adorn the Seat of one Great Lord, and render perfect the
delightful Mansions, where the amorous Sultan toys away his Minutes in the
wanton Raptures of his Ladies Conversation.

The lovely situation of the Grand Signiors's Seraglio.
FIRST then, if ever Heaven decreed a part of this divided World should shine
conspicuously above the rest, and seem to beckon Universal Monarchy to fix its
Throne on her delicious Surface, it is the very Ground, whereon now flourishes
the glorious Palace of the proud Mohammedan; for from that eminence of Ground,
on which the Temple Sancta Sophia has its Situation, runs a narrow neck of
Land, descending gradually, and on either side politely sloping downward, till
it forms at last a charming Angle on the North-East Point of Constantinople.

The Form thereof.
THE Form of the Seraglio, which is built hereon, appears a sort of long
triangle, one whole side whereof is bounded by the neighboring Buildings of the
City, both the other shelving downwards to the Sea, which washes 'em, and with
their utmost Angle pointing out amidst the Waves, directly opposite to the
surprising height, and rough appearances of certain wild and distant Asian
Promontories; Thrace, with all the Beauties of her Europaean Landskips forms a
prospect full of Pleasures on the other side; not one small Ship can anchor in
the Haven, but must pass the Point of the Seraglio first, whose noble Situation
leads the Eye to gaze astonished, at such strange variety, that all the
ravished Sweets of Art and Nature here seem joined, as if they had agreed to
mix their richest Excellencies, and complete a modern rival Paradise to that of
Eden.

Its strength and Circuit.
IT is above three English Miles in measured Circuit, quite surrounded by a
lofty Wall, defended strongly by a sort of Quey, of five yards breadth which
runs all round it, where are planted numerous Pieces of prodigious Cannon, of
an unexampled size and monstrous bore; One very deep and spacious Ditch
encompasses the Wall, which is moreover strengthened by capacious Ramparts, and
a square Watchtower, at every hundred or two hundred Paces end; in these stand
Day and Night, selected numbers of the finest Soldiers in the Sultan's Guard,
who see that none presume to venture near the Walls of his forbidden Palace;
The beauty of its Prospect at a distance.
all the inside is adorned with Spires and stately Balls, gilt round with Gold,
and shining from afar with a majestic Luster, which sublime appearance, gently
softened by the mixed discovery of extended Groves of lofty Cypress Trees,
there planted in a sweet and natural Irregularity, and somewhat shadowing in
many Places, the refulgent brightness of the Spires and Cupola's, afford a
Prospect to the distant view so full of Beauty, and unknown variety, that Words
want Power to celebrate the Object; therefore see the Cut annexed for further
Satisfaction.

BUT having given this short description of the Form, Extent, and Outward
Beauties of the Sultan's Palace, I will now proceed to lead my Reader with a
gradual Curiosity, through every inmost Part of its discovered Glories; yet as
the unnumber'd differences, which alternately occur to claim our observation,
may confound the Prospect, if I represent them jointly, 'twill be much the
safest way to separate the Building into five Degrees, and treat distinctly of
them all, that so we may preserve an useful regularity.

The first great Court.
FIRST then, I will describe the Outward Court, and all the Offices and Orders
of the Buildings, which surround and form it, into which all Travelers, who
please, have free access, and uncontrolled admission.

The second Court.
SECONDLY I will proceed to do the like, by a more spacious Square within the
former, and composed of far more rich and lofty Architecture, into which, as to
the first, all Strangers are admitted.

The third, where all Ambassadors receive their Audience.
THIRDLY I intend to open to your View another Court within them both, and far
superior in its Order and Magnificence; for in the rich Apartments, which
surround this Square, the haughty Sultans give their Audiences to every
Minister of Foreign Nations, at their first arrival in the Turkish Court.

The Royal Lodgings.
NEXT I lose sight of former Writers, and visit with a Wonder equal to the
Object, the prodigious Statelyness, and towering Splendour of the ROYAL
LODGINGS, so surprizingly transporting me with endless Scenes of artfull
Pleasure, Pride and Grandeur, that for want of Models to express their form by,
which is quite unknown, nay even undreamt of in the Christian World, I have
been forced to draw in the course of this Chapter another Plan, of the amazing
inside of that stupendous Fabric, which will give the Eye a true Idea of its
wonderful Contrivances.

The Discovery of the Women's Lodgings, thought by most to be impossible.
BUT now appears a SECRET worth the hearing, the Discovery whereof I often
(since 'twas made) stood by and heard the greatest Travelers of several
Nations, join in one old fashionable Story, and affirm to be no less than a
downright Impossibility: Yet I will not only trace the Sultan to his amorous
Pastimes with the Virgins of his Pleasure, but admit the Reader to the close
Apartments of the fair SERAGLIO LADIES, nay and into the retired Magnificence
of their Bedchambers, but show him all the various Scenes of Love and
Courtship, which are practiced daily by their Lord and them, even to the
Consummation of their utmost Wishes; and if the British Ladies are desirous of
a further Information, still advance a step or two beyond it.

AS I told you in my Preface, that the absence of the Sultan and his train of
Ladies, then attending him at Adrianople, gave a liberty beyond the Wishes of
our keenest Curiosity, as a Compliment bestowed for Reasons there explained, A
double Curiosity.
so I was willing to improve the opportunity as for as possible, and while I
pleased my Eyes with the delightful Prospect of engaging Novelties, I
satisfied my Ear with listening eagerly to the accounts our Guides thought fit
to give us, of the proper use of every Place, and entertaining Stories of the
Sultan's Customs.

Description of the great Gate of the Seraglio.
FIRST then, The Great Seraglio opens to the Sea on either side, with several
low and private Gates, but such as never are made use of but when the Emperor
himself is pleased to order it; the only common Entrance faces the before-nam'd
Temple, Sancta Sophia, and admits you through a vast and spacious Portal of
white Marble, arched and strengthened in the ancient way of Building; round the
edges of the Arch on either side appear, cut deeply in the Stone, (the hollow
of the Letters, richly filled with lovely mixtures of Gold, Green, Red, Blue,
and every other Color,) some few Arabian Sentences, almost defaced by
mouldering time, but such as Turkish Scholars told us signified as follows.
Inscriptions on the Portal.
GLORY TO THE GOD Of MAHOMET, AND MAHOMET HIS PROPHET. HONOR, POWER, TRVTH AND
JUSTICE, TRAMPLING ON THE NECK OF SIN AND GRANDEVR, HERE ERECT THE SEAT OF
NEVER DYING EMPIRE.

A Chapel built by Constantine the Great.
YOU are no sooner entered through this lofty Gate, than you perceive a Court, the
Square whereof contains almost three hundred Yards, and is surrounded by a sort
of Cloister, which I will describe immediately. A distant Prospect through the
Gate at 'tother end, presents you with a long and lovely Scene of Cypress Trees
and Fountains, charmingly adorning all the second Court. About twelve Yards
upon the left of your first entrance, stands the round and broken Wall of an
old Chapel, built by Constantine, and by him dedicated to the Virgin Mary. It
has been curious for its Building and Contrivance, but has yielded now to the
voracious Rust of Time and Ruin, whose prevailing force is well described as
follows, by an old Greek Poet. (...)
(...)
What does not Time, and length of Days o'erthrow?
From Times black current, endless Mischiefs flow;
By Time the Forms and Names of Things are changed,
And Nature's mighty Self, from her own Face estranged.


The Trophies of the Greeks hung up within it.
THE unintelligible Relics of an old Inscription, speak the Chapel Christian
Workmanship; and all about its broken Walls, are hung as Trophies of their
cursed Success, the Spears, Swords, Breast-plates, Shields, and other Armor,
of those generous Greeks, who bravely scorning to outlive the downfall of their
sinking Country, chose to die the Martyrs of its Liberty, and though they fell
above three hundred Years ago, live nobly in the Praises of succeeding Ages,
who behold their Spoils here hung together, strangely representing in a ghastly
manner, Men in Armor, with their Arms and Legs bound cross each other, which
the Turks have done by way of Triumph to commemorate their Fortune. This may
seem a barbarous Action, and the base Effect of their vainglorious Principles;
but ancient Practices of the inhumane Custom, will excuse the Turks, when Homer
in his Iliads often gives us plain Examples of the like Proceedings; and Aeneas
is by Virgil represented glorying in the Overthrow of dead Mezentius, and
dressing up an Oak with his insulted Trophies. Virg. Aen. Lib. 11.
Ingentem quercum dicisis undique ramis
Constituit tumulo, fulgentiaque induit arma,
Mezenti ducis exuvias; tibi magne tropaeum
Bellipotens, aptat roranteis sanguine cristas,
Telaque trunca viri, and bis sex thoraca petitum,
Perfossumque locis: Clypeumque ex aere sinistrae
Subligat, atque ensem collo suspendit eburnum.
Upon a rising spot of neighboring Ground,
He placed a sturdy Oak, lop'd closely round;
And with refulgent Armor decked it over,
The Spoils, which King Mezentius lately wore,
To thee Great God of War a Trophy due,
Worthy the Conquest, and the Triumph too;
High over the rest his waving Plume he tied,
Yet reaking with the Blood wherein 'twas died;
To these were bound the Spears, which in the Field,
Had pierced or broken on the Trojan's Shield;
His shining Breast Plate graced the Trophies too,
Hacked deep, and pierced in twice six places through;
On his left side his brazen Target hung,
And from the Neck his Sword, all sheathed in Ivory, swung.


The Quarters and Employments of the Ajam-Olans.
THE row of Buildings, which upon the left side bounds this outward Court, is
low and mean, containing Lodgings for some thousands of those Men called
Ajam-Olans, or a kind of People bought as Slaves, from every Country where the
Turks maintain a Correspondence, and educated from their Youth, or sometimes,
Infancy, in all the rough and servile Practices of a laborious Discipline, till
being qualified with strength of Mind and Body, they are ordered severally by
the Overseers appointment, to the various Offices of the Seraglio.

The Woodyard of the Great Seraglio.
WITHIN the Court, and still descending nearer to the Sea upon the Europaean
side, there is a plain and spacious Square, wherein are pil'd in most
prodigious and unnumbred heaps, the Logs of Wood, and various kinds of Faggots
used in the Seraglio, which amount each Year to such vast quantities that fifty
thousand Waggon-loads are constantly brought in, each Wagon drawn, and that
not easily, by two strong Buffelo's.

Pleasant Places.
FROM this large Wood-Yard to the Wall, which bounds the Palace on the
Haven-side, are finely planted stately Cypress Trees, cool Groves, and solitary
Wildernesses, which indeed run round the whole Seraglio in the space between
the Buildings and the Wall about it, but, as I design to speak particularly of
the Garden Part, I shall defer describing this Division, till its proper place
requires my doing it.

The Hospital of the Seraglio.
DIRECTLY parallel to the Apartment of the late-nam'd Ajam-Olans, runs another
higher and more graceful Row of Buildings, bounded on the other side the Court
aforesaid; this is the Hospital for the Seraglio Sick, divided into Chambers
and convenient Lodging Rooms for People indisposed, according to the Quality of
such as want them. Two prime Physicians and as many Surgeons, are appointed by
the Sultan to inspect the Management of the distempered Persons, who are
carefully attended by great Numbers of White Eunuchs, two of which stand
constantly to guard the Entrance.

The Lodgings of the Helvagees, and their Employment.
NOT far distant, but behind the Hospital, are built the Lodging-Rooms,
appointed for the Habitation of the Helvagees, a sort of Boys, who wear a Dress
peculiar to their Office, and are kept to carry Messages from Place to Place,
within the Palace; or, upon occasion, may be sent about the Town, to bring in
any thing the Servants want; for no Man, who possesses no Employment in the
Great Seraglio, ever dares, on pain of Death, attempt an entrance. The number
of these Errand Boys, is generally reckoned to amount to near seven Thousand.

A fine rall'd List, or Green for Exercise.
ABOUT two hundred Yards below the Lodgings of the Helvagees, there lies a
Green, of spacious breadth, and railed about to keep out such, as have not by
their Posts, the liberty to enter: Here the Sultan often comes to see the
Exercises of the Managed Horse, and hurling the Geritt, before described, and
often orders equal numbers of his Negro Pages, to maintain the Lists against
the Challenge of selected White-Ones, giving frequently Rewards of valuable
Price, to those, who conquer.

Other pleasant Places.
SHELVING downwards toward the Sea on this side also, lie vast tracts of
Ground, containing various Scenes of Rural fragrancy, tall Groves of Cypress,
sweetly intermixed with rising Banks, declining Greens, delightful Labyrinths,
and murmuring Fountains.

The Gate, and number of the Men, who guard the entrance of the second Court.
THE second Court is entered through the former, by a lofty Gate, adorned with
Trophies like the ancient Chapel, just now mentioned, guarded constantly by
fifty Janissaries, armed with Muskets, who oblige all Horsemen, Officers or
others to alight and walk, if they design to gain a farther entrance, for it is
held the Duty of the Sultan's Subjects, high and low, to put off all the Marks
of Pride and Grandeur, and proceed as humbly to approach his Presence, as they
ought to do when they address the Object of their daily Worship.

Description of the second Court of the Seraglio.
THIS Court is far more large and stately than the former, near four hundred
Yards the square, and curiously adorned with ever-spouting Fountains, round
whose brims fine Cypress Trees are neatly planted, forming various and
delightful Figures of a different Magnitude; all surrounded with a lofty
Cloister, Gallery or Piazza, artfully supported by amazing numbers of white
Marble Pillars, with their Capitals and Bases of the finest sort of polished
Marble, and of that consists the spacious Pavements, which in several places,
cross the Court, and lead you plea antly to different Apartments, which appear
at some considerable distance, through the Columns of this noble Gallery.

ABOVE the Pillars of the great Piazza, and supported by them, are the Lodging
Rooms of several Officers of no mean Authority in the Seraglio; The Stables of
the Grand Signior's Seraglio.
and on the left hand, at about a hundred Paces distance from it, are the
private Stables, which contain about five, six, or seven and twenty Horses, for
the favorite Exercises of the Sultan's Pleasure; above these Stables are the
Rooms wherein are kept the Bridles, Saddles, rich Caparisons, and other
Furniture for his Led-Horses, most of which are so adorned with precious
Stones, and rich Embroidery, that they amount in price to a prodigious and
incredible Sum of Money. As for the Great Stables, they are placed behind the
private ones, and keep vast numbers of the swiftest and best-manag'd Horses, of
their own and other Countries.

The Divan, or Justice-Hall.
DIRECTLY in a line with the above-named private Stables, but a little nearer to
the third Court's entrance, stands a round and open Place they call Divan, a
sort of Hall or Council Chamber, where the Grand-Vizier and
Lord's-Chief-Justices, with other Ministers exhibit Justice on appointed Days,
to all the People in a public manner.

THE Place is low, and open to the view of all the People; the Roof supported
by large Wooden Pillars, and all leaded over in a curious manner. Wainscot gilt
is all the Ornament the inside boasts of: On the Floor is spread a Carpet,
where, on Benches placed on purpose, sit the Judges of occurring Causes: An
excellent Policy in the Administration of the Turkish Justice.
From the Roof of this Divan, there runs along on the left side, a little
Gallery, which leads by certain private ways, to the Grand Signior's Lodgings,
who by that means, often comes, and, hid behind a Velvet Curtain, overhears the
Trials, which are passing in the Court, and if he sees unjust Proceedings,
frequently reverses, or makes void the Sentence, as he finds occasion,
punishing the partial or unjust Decider; so that, awed by doubt, and never
knowing when he is or is not there, they are obliged to act with constant
Caution, and against the grain, impartially determine every Lawsuit.

ON every Council-Day, the Turkish Janissaries are drawn up, and headed, every
Company by their respective Officers, upon the Pavement underneath the Marble
Gallery, which I before informed you runs quite round the Buildings of this
second Court; A piece of Turkish Ostentation.
and there it is that they receive their Pay, upon such Days as the Ambassadors
of Christian Princes are admitted to the Audience of the Sultan or his
Ministers, that so they may vain-gloriously appear possessors of a rolling
Plenty, by disbursing in the Payment of that one Militia for a few days
Service, such prodigious heaps of Money.

Another Hall.
BEYOND this Great Divan or Hall of Justice, stands another Building, not unlike
it, but of far less magnitude, here they seat such Christian Ministers of
State, or Merchants, as may have occasion to apply themselves for Justice, to
the Turkish Government.

The Quarters of the Baltagees.
THE space dividing these two Halls, admits you to a Gate, that opens to the
left, and leads you into a fine spacious Square, the Quarters of the Baltagees,
or Hatchet Men, whose business it is to cleave and carry Wood for every Part of
the Grand Signior's Seraglio. The Building boasts no Ornament, but is divided
humbly into many Chambers, fit for the Reception of the Slaves for whom they
are provided.

THE Garden Wall prevents you from a further Inquisition on the left of this
large second Court; The Kitchens of the Seraglio.
so let us visit the right side, and we shall find the vacant space behind the
Gallery, politely terminated by a stately row of fine stone Kitchens, seven in
number, each whereof is managed by peculiar Cooks and other Servants, who are
severally busied in providing Meat for different Tables, from the Sultan's own
to those of his superior Officers, and from them to others of less Rank, and
meaner Quality.

The Confectionaries.
ABOVE these Kitchens are an equal number of Preserving Rooms, to which belong
four hundred choice Confectioners, perpetually employed in making Sweetmeats,
such as Conserves, Preserves, Jellies, Fruits of all sorts, dried, or candied,
sometimes liquid Syrups in abundance, and great quantities of Marmalade.

BESIDES these Sweetmeats, it is the business of the Confectioners to make
Sherbets and Limonades, of rich and costly Composition, for the use of the
Grand Signior's self, and such of his Great Officers, as will think fit to pay
such Prices, as from time to time are put upon these Rarities by those, who
make the Profits, The Perquisites of the Confectioners.
flowing from their Perquisites this way the most considerable Income of their
whole Employment.

BELOW the Kitchens, and the seven Confectionaries, which are placed above
them, at about some twelve or fourteen Paces distance, nearer to the Gardens
ending the declension, An admirable Aquaeduct.
stands the great and admirable Aquaeduct, extending both above and underneath
the Ground, in very strong and stately Arches, Vaults and Cisterns, well
supplied with Pipes of Lead, and brazen Cocks of an uncommon magnitude, and
constantly attended by an Officer, whose Title speaks him Master of the
Waterworks, under whose command two hundred Workmen are continually in
waiting.

THE Kitchens, Butteries, Lodging-Rooms, and all the various Quarters of the
Great Seraglio, are not only served with Water from this noble Aquaeduct for
common uses; Strange and pleasant Fancies.
but the numerous Fountains, murmuring Currents, artificial Lakes, and small
meandring Streams, which dance along with tunefull Cadence, over a thousand
artfull Falls and pebbled Precipices, covered over with surrounding Boughs, or
Grass of lovely green and length incredible, are all supplied with
never-failing Sluices, from the wonderful Contrivances of that stupendous
Structure.

Description of the third Court of the Seraglio.
WE enter now the third Division, or that Part of the Seraglio, where the Sultan
constantly receives the several Ambassadors of Christian Princes; and you may
observe that all the proud and haughty Carriage, which in ancient times,
distinguished Eastern Monarchs, reigns conspicuously, improved far, rather than
diminished, in the Turkish Emperors; who do not only with a sort of slight
indifference, refuse admission to a second Audience, even so much as to take
leave at their Departure, but behave themselves that single time, when they
permit an Interview, with such disdainful Arrogance and silent Grandeur, that
it will amaze the Reader to reflect upon their proud Deportment: Alas! how
vainly do they swell their thoughts above Mortality; the common fate of Death
at last o'ertakes them, but with this black difference, that while the humble
Prince still falls lamented, they are generally made the bloody Victims to
their Subject's hatred, and deserved resentment; so that falling short in their
too elevated race of Power, we may apply the Words of Juvenal to their unpitied
Destiny. Juven. Sat. 10.
Ad generum Cereris sine caede and vulnere pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Few Monarchs die without some bloody Blow,
Or visit free from wound, the Shades below.
And Tyrants, who on Earth dare Heaven defy,
Are very rarely found in Beds of Peace to die.


How foreign Ambassadors enter the Seraglio.
A public notice being given to Ambassadors, when it is the Sultan's pleasure to
admit them to his Audience, they contrive to make as splendid an Appearance as
their Quality allows, or Honor of their Country may require them to furnish;
gallantly attended by their Retinue on Horseback, they proceed in order to the
Great Seraglio, where alighting, as is usual, at the entrance of the second
Court, they are conducted to the third by certain Officers of mean Degree, who
there deliver the Ambassador to the Capigee Bashaw, or Lord Comptroler, one,
who serves upon occasion, for a Master of the Ceremonies.

IT IS here they stay by the appointment of their Guides, till certain Pages of
the Wardrobe come among them, bearing each upon his Arm a sort of Vest, or
upper Garment, roughly wove with Silver, Gold, and yellow Silk not neatly
intermixed, of length sufficient to hang down and trail upon the Ground.

Their way of doing Honor to Ambassadors and their Retinue.
THEY first address themselves to the Ambassador, and having covered all his
other Habit with this ill-contriv'd addition, next proceed as ordered to bestow
a certain number on his Followers, observing his direction as to their
disposal; thus adorned, the Minister himself, and such of his Attendants as
before received the Honor of a Vest, are beckoned to advance, while those of
meaner Rank are entertained by Men appointed for that Service, under the Piazza
or long Gallery, by which, as I before informed you, all the second Court is
gracefully surrounded.

The ancient Custom of giving Changes of Raiment, observed among the Turks.
THIS giving Vests has been a very ancient Eastern Ceremony, and was practiced
formerly, as now it is among the Turks, to give a Proof of the Respect they
bore the Person they so honored. All Ambassadors, residing in the Turkish
Court, may judge of the Esteem the Sultan bears the Prince they represent, by
the receiving more or fewer than is usual of these formal Garments; and it is
by long continued Custom, now become a sort of due, for the respective
Ministers of different Nations to expect at least as many, as some former
Precedent may possibly induce them to lay claim to; A nicety about it.
and if they find the Officers of the Seraglio obstinately bent to give them
fewer, than were bestowed upon a Predecessor, they will oftentimes persist so
strongly in the claim they lay to better Usage, as to turn again, and leave the
Palace, still refusing to obey their Summons to an Audience of the Sultan, till
the Turks consent to let them have it on the terms they sue for. Giving Vests
among the Ancients may be proved in many Places, by the indisputable Authority
of Holy Writ, particularly in the five and thirtieth Chapter of the Book of
Genesis, and the two and twentieth Verse, where Joseph sending back his
Brethren out of Egypt, it is said, To all of them he gave each Man Changes of
Raiment: But to Benjamin he gave three hundred Pieces of Silver, and five
Changes of Raiment.

UPON a warning given, that the Sultan is arrived and waits his coming, the
Ambassador proceeds, conducted by the Lord Comptroller, and attended by such
Persons of his own Retinue, as are clothed in the abovenam'd Garments: Upon
the entrance of the Court, which, much unlike the former two, The third Court
not so regular as the former.
is built irregular, with many different Apartments independent each on other,
you perceive, directly opposite, a lofty round and open Hall, the Roof whereof
is neatly arched, and well supported by a double row of Marble Pillars.

The Gate guarded by Eunuchs.
THE Gate of this third Court is kept by Eunuchs, as too near the Sultan's
Lodgings to be approached by common Soldiers. All the Ground between the Portal
and the Hall of Audience, is enriched with Carpets of the costliest
Workmanship, on which the Strangers walk, till they arrive at a fine Marble
Staircase, which ascends to the above-named Hall; on either side whereof there
issues from the Wall, through various artificial Passages unnumbred Streams of
Water, falling with a different sound, according to the bigness of their
Channels, upon sloping Shells of polished Brass, and thence descending to a
spacious Cistern, flagg'd and floor'd with exquisite Mosaic Work of various
Colors, which (easily perceived through the transparency of the included Water)
wonderfully pleases the observing Eye with a surprising and uncommon Scene of
Beauties.

Description of the Hall of Audience.
THE Stairs are covered with the richest Silks, on which the introduced
Ambassadors must tread in their ascent to the extensive Floor, which, though
politely paved with curious squares of various-colour'd Marble, is all over
covered with a Golden Carpet, if it may be called so, every thread whereof is
little less than the genteelest sort of Straws, which form our Mats in Britain.

ABOUT the middle of this spacious Hall, there plays a Fountain in a very odd
and curious manner, from the Cieling to the Cistern, not unlike a Shower of
Rain, The Throne of the Grand Signior.
and opposite to the Ascent there stands the Throne, of no great height, but
splendidly adorned with an extensive Canopy, broad Back-piece, and thick
pleated Bases, all of black and costly Velvet, high embroidered over with a
glorious mixture of both Gold and Silver Wyre, in the squares whereof are sewed
Turquoises, Diamonds, Pearls and Rubys, so contrived, that they not only look
Magnificent, but form a sort of easy Figure so politely pleasing, that against
the Will it captivates attention.

UPON this Throne sits cross-legg'd the disdainful Sultan, looking round him
with a sort of haughty Frown, to view the base and servile Postures of the
Slaves about him.

How he is attended on it.
AND first, the Grand Vizier stands humbly on his right Hand, very near him; and
at more submissive distance, almost opposite, appear the greatest Officers of
his Seraglio, ranged according to their several Dignities, holding each his
Hands across upon his humble Bosom, not presuming once to elevate those servile
Eyes, which are not worthy so sublime an Honor, as to gaze upon the Person of
their mighty Emperor, thus formidably Shining in his Royal Luster.

The first approach of the Ambassador.
NO sooner the Ambassador appears within the Hall, than there advance two
Officers, who taking hold of both his Arms, attend him as he walks, and still
as he approaches nearer to the Person of the Sultan, as it were by force,
incline his Body so much nearer to the Ground, in three low Bows. The Sultan
condescends perhaps to look him in the Face, and now and then bestows a gentle
Nod, while the Ambassador is seated just before him, on an easy Stool all
covered over with a rich Brocado.

The manner of his Audience.
WHILE the Credentials are produced and Reading by the Druggaman, in English the
Interpreter, the Presents brought, and constantly expected from all Foreign
Ministers upon their Audience of the Sultan, are exposed to view; and those of
the Ambassadors selected Train, who have been first distinguished as before,
advancing with their Foreheads to the Ground, have leave to kiss the Hem of the
Grand Signior's Vest, which having done, they silently retire, and stand at
some considerable space behind the Stool of the Ambassador.

NO sooner has the Sultan heard the Druggaman read loudly the Credentials, but
he presents them to the Grand Vizier, who purposely stands near him, and the
Audience being over, the Ambassador takes leave, but is not suffered once to
turn his Back upon the Sultans Person, How he must retire.
and in order to prevent it, he is led out Backwards by the Officers, who before
Conducted him; from this time forward he must make his Application to the Grand
Vizier, and other Ministers about the Court, for the Grand Signior, though the
Head of all their Business, is himself above its Practice; leaving all the
Cares and Hurries of a Throne to his deputed Instruments of State and Power.

The Chambers of the Pages or Icholans.
ALONG the left side of the Court, there run Three Rows of Building, Parallel to
one another, called the Oda's of the Icholans, or Apartments of the Pages, who
ascending gradually from the Meanest Offices among the Ajamolan's, are at last
admitted to the lowest Chamber of the Pages, where for full Six Years they are
Inured to all the Practices of menial Drudgery, such as Baking, Washing Linen,
Brushing Clothes, and such like Labors.

IN the Second Chamber they continue commonly about Three Years, employed in
Exercises more Conducive to the Minds Improvement; thence proceeding to the
Third, and after Two or Three Years service there, are called according to
their several standings, to the Hazoda, or Apartment for the Pages of the
Presence, to supply the Vacancies there made from time to time, by the
Preferment of the Oldest to the Greatest Places of the Empire.

THERE is an Officer appointed over every Chamber, to inspect the Management of
these Icholan's, commonly Amounting to almost a Thousand Men; to him they are
Subservient in so high a manner, that no Imagination can conceive the
Strictness, under which they live; Their restraint in the Seraglio.
their Beds are Spread in order on each side of the Extended Building, and
themselves so rigidly denied a common Liberty, that they are never suffered to
converse with any other Quarter of the Great Seraglio.

The Baths of the Seraglio.
DIRECTLY opposite to these Apartments are Five Rows of Baths, of different
Forms and Structure, as designed for the convenience of the High and Low, and
every Person in the Sultans Palace; one Row among them is the Sultan's own,
divided finely into Numerous Chambers, Paved with Marble of an Hundred Colors,
and Adorned with Roofs and Walls of Crystal, and a Thousand other strange
contrivances to render them beyond example Pleasant and Convenient.

A Barbarous Custom of the Turkish Emperors.
AMONG the Buildings of this Court, there stands a low Roofed Hall of no mean
length, appointed for the Lodging of the Dwarfs, Dumb, Deaf, Crook-Back'd and
other Blots of Nature, many of each sort continually maintained for the
Diversion of the Sultan, who delights in Sporting with those Wretches Miseries.

The Quarters of the White Eunuchs.
THE large Apartments of the Powerful White Eunuchs, much in Vogue in Eastern
Countries, and employed in the most profitable Posts of the Seraglio, to
inspect the Management of all the Servants, terminate AN EXPLANATION OF THE
PLATE, Which Represents The INWARD PLAN of the GRAND SIGNIORS SERAGLIO.
1 THE Sea, and Haven of Constantinople. 2 The Gate of the Seraglio. 3 Watch
Towers, where Soldiers stand to Guard it. 4 The Way, between the outward and
inward Wall of the Seraglio, through which the Soldiers pass, to relieve the
Guard of the Watch Towers. 5 The Great Gardens of the Seraglio. 6 The First
Court Yard. 7 The Ruins of an Old Chapel, that was Built by Constantine the
Great. 8 The Quarters of the Ajam Olans. 9 The Great Wood-yard. 10 The
Hospital. 11 The Quarters of the Helvagees. 12 The Green, where twice or thrice
a Week, they Exercise themselves at Hurling the Javelin. 13 The Entrance of
the Second Court. 14 The Square Piazza, with fine Lodging Rooms above it. 15
Quarters of the Baltagees. 16 Private Stables. 17 The Divan, or Justice-Hall.
18 The Kitchens of the Seraglio. 19 The Aquaeduct, and Court about it. 20 The
Entrance of the Third Court. 21 The Pages Chambers. 22 The Baths of the
Seraglio. 23 The Hall of Audience. 24 The Mutes Apartment. 25 The Dwarfs
Apartment. 26 The Royal Mosque. 27 The Quarters of the White Eunuchs. 28 A
Stately Piazza. 29 The Semicircular Piazza's of the Treasury. 30 The Four
Treasury Chambers. 31 The Grotto's of the Seraglio. 32 Two Ancient Grecian
Obelisks. 33 The Quarters of the Pages of the Presence. 34 The Quarters of the
Great Officers of the Seraglio. 35 The Royal Lodgings. 36 A Triumphal Arch. 37
A River, which divides the Women's Quarter from the other Part of the Seraglio.
38 Another Triumphal Arch. 39 The Winding Gallery. 40 The Ladies Apartment. 41
The Apartment of the Black Eunuchs. 42 The Ladies Garden. 43 A Fine Quick-Set
Hedge, which Terminates the Ladies Garden. 44 Two Stair-Cases, leading from the
two Apartments, through several Avenues, and Shady Passages, into the Wilderness,
which being adorned with Greens and Arbours, Rivulets and Fountains, reaches as
you see, to the very Point of the Seraglio.
plan of the Turkish sultan's seraglio at Constantinople To the Right Honble
Charlot Countess of Warwick this Plate is Most Humbly Dedicated



the Court on either side, and reach within twelve paces of the Garden Walls;
their form is in the shape of large Half-Moons, embracing, as it were, the
other Buildings with their horns or corners.

The Mosque of the Seraglio.
ABOVE the Hall of Audience, and between the North-East ends of the two great
Half-Moons, which form the Eunuch's Lodgings, stands a Mosque, whose Spires and
Cupola's are richly gilded, and the Pile surrounded by a lovely Grove of lofty
Cypress Trees; It Is here the Sultan and his Ladies daily come to their
Devotion, yet unseen by any of those numerous Crowds of People, who assemble in
the Body of the Church, in that they are divided from the rest by a Partition
lettess'd over with an admirable Ingenuity; but their Devotion is no sooner
ended, than they all return the way they came, and pass through private
Galleries, unseen by any, to their own Apartments.

Pillars brought from Troy.
DIRECTLY from the Mosque abovenam'd runs an open Gallery, near thirty paces
long, and thirteen broad, its Roof supported by great numbers of fine Marble
Pillars, six whereof the Turks report to have been brought from Troy to
Constantinople, when 'twas yet Byzantium; they are all of different color each
from other, one is blue, another green, and therefore held as sacred by the
Turks, and every one so naturally bright, that they are falsely said by common
Fame, to be transparent.

Curious Relics of Antiquity.
THE high raised Fret-work of the Floor, is wonderfully fine and stately, all
composed Mosaicly of great and little Marble Squares, of all imaginable
Colors, richly representing some Historical and Kingly Figures, which the
superstitious Turks have now defaced by picking out their Eyes, and quite
deforming all their Heads; however the remaining beauty of this noble Gallery
sufficiently demonstrates, that it was the Workmanship of Christian Architects,
to grace some part of that illustrious Palace, while it flourished gloriously
in the peaceful Residence of Grecian Emperors.

Description of the Grand Signior's Treasury.
A very large and noble Portico, or large Piazza, terminates this Gallery, on
either side extending to an equal distance, and completely forming a large
Semicircle, at each end whereof there open two large Doors, each Door admits
you to some one of four vast Chambers, which contain the Treasure of the
Turkish Sultans.

EVERY Chamber is alike for form and bigness, making four Half-Moons, or
Semicircles, two on either side, at equal distance each from other, with their
horns or points directly contrary to those of the Piazza just now mentioned,
and betwixt one Building and another, all the spaces being planted with the
finest Trees, and odoriferous Flowers in various artfull Figures, form a sort
of charming Prospect, not to be imagined by the most capacious Apprehension.

SIX Seals on either Door, and three large Chains secure the Entrance, never
opened but upon express Command from the Grand Signior to the Hasnadar Bashaw,
or Lord High Treasurer; each Room is full of Cupboards, Coffers, Iron-Chests,
and Shelves extremely large, all filled with Riches of a different kind, and
shining brightly with collected heaps of most inestimable Wealth, and curious
Rarities, which have from time to time been freely given, bought, or taken from
the distant Corners of the spacious Universe.

The Royal Lodgings.
DIRECTLY opposite to the Piazza, which contains the Doors, that open to this
Treasure, stand the Royal Lodgings, which you enter by another great Piazza,
not unlike the former, but with its Points so well disposed, and so exactly
opposite, that both Piazza's make a Space of Circular design, and large extent,
the midst whereof contains a Fountain, spouting from its sides large Streams of
Water, which Descending in a Body on the Center of the Cistern, form a Figure
Pleasantly uncommon.

Two Ancient Obelisks.
AMIDST the space, between the Horns of the Piazza's, stand two Obelisks of
lofty Height, and wonderful contrivance, but neglected by the Turks, no
Lovers of the Venerable Relics of Antiquity, are now o'ergrown with Bushes,
and Surrounding Multitudes of Brambles.

A Pavement leading to the midst of the Piazza brings you to the Entrance of
the Royal Lodgings, which complete another Semicircle, looking out upon the
inmost Gardens of the Great Seraglio, and together with the Gallery adjoining
to it, looking like two C's affixed together in the following manner,

The Wings adjoining to the Royal Lodgings.
TWO Wings are added to the Center, either entered by a Door, which opens at
each point of the Piazza, and extending their Apartments in two large
Half-Moons directly opposite to those, which form the Treasury, but standing
with their Horns the other way, and pointing to the Gardens, like the Sultans
Lodgings.

ALL the space between these Wings, and the abovenam'd Treasury, is filled with
Fountains, Cypress Trees, and curious Flower Gardens, Melancholy Grotto's.
and the Vacancy on either side, politely terminated by a Semicircular Grotto,
Built of Shells, set here and there upon a rough hard substance, exactly
representing Natural Rock, betwixt whose Hollows, artificial Groves of fine
Impending Coral seem to sprout, and through their dropping Branches Murmuringly
discharge, small Streams of Water, gently Trickling down the Rock in many
Places.

The Hazoda or Apartment of the Pages of the Presence.
THE Right of these two Wings, the Turks distinguish by the Name of the Hazoda,
where the Forty Pages of the Presence have their Lodging, under the Inspection
of an Officer of high degree; here they first begin to taste the sweets of
Liberty, and are permitted to converse with whom they please, a Privilege for
many Years before denied them.

Apartments of the Great Seraglio Officers.
THE Left Wing is divided into many fine and large Apartments, where are Lodged
the Selictar-Aga, or Royal Sword Bearer, Hichokadar-Bashaw, or Bearer of the
Cloak, and many other of the Greatest Officers of the Seraglio, such as always
have Admission to the Presence of the Sultan.

THE Sultans Quarter Boasts no more than Three Great Rooms, but those so
Splendid, and beyond Imagination Stately and convenient, that one, who never
saw them, cannot comprehend the Twentieth Part of their Amazing Excellences.

Description of the Sultans Glorious Chambers.
THE Roofs are Arched, and all set thick with Glittering Spires and Balls of
Crystal, rim'd about with Gold and Azure, whence in many Places hang great
Golden Globes, adorned with Diamonds of surprising Luster, all the sides are
Richly Flagg'd in separate Pannels with White, Black, Gray, Blue, Green, and
other colored Marble, 'twixt every one of which runs one of Gold or Silver,
reaching like the rest from top to bottom; all the Floor is Veiny Marble,
covered over with the finest and most costly Cloth of Gold, that can be
purchased, neatly interwove with Twenty other different colors; close against
the Wall, all round each Chamber lie large Cushions, of a black, green, blue,
or crimson Velvet, embroidred in the richest manner, with the finest Pearls,
some long, some round, and some of every form and magnitude; in short, no part
of all those Chambers but possesses Ornaments, the most accomplished Grandeur
of the stateliest Palaces of Europe cannot equalize.

A wonderful River, flowing two ways.
BEHIND the Royal Lodgings at about two hundred Paces distance runs a River,
brought by Art from the adjoining Sea, through subterraneous Passages, to rise
exactly in the middle of the highest Ground of the Seraglio, where it forms a
sort of Lake, and through an artificial Channel, runs along with mighty swiftness
down the Hill on either side, quite cross the Palace, passing through the Garden
Walls on either side, by a large Iron Grate, and so descending to the Sea two
different ways, from which it is constantly supplied, as fast as it emits the
rising Waters.

The impossibility of approaching the Women's Quarter.
IT is this River, that divides the Great Seraglio from the Quarters of the
Ladies, hindering all Communication 'twixt the two Divisions, by the means of
its impetuous Current, nor dares any Man, how bold soever, once presume to
straggle from his Station, toward the Verge of this forbidden Ground, since
could he pass the numerous Guards of Eunuchs, which impede his Progress, though
that bar alone is unsurmountable, he must undoubtedly be seen, by the Grand
Signior or his Officers, and present Ruin follow his Discovery.

Lovely Gardens.
FROM the Buildings, which contain the Lodgings of the Sultan, and the
semicircular Wings thereto adjoining, runs a spacious and delightful
Flower-garden, curiously adorned with every kind of odoriferous Plant, and
shady Tree, which can afford a Smell or Prospect any ways agreeable; numerous
Fountains, each of different form, illustrate the Appearance, and the Gardens
reaching from one Wall to the other, terminate their breadth upon the Bank of
the abovenam'd River, all along whose edge there runs a row of Breast-high Iron
Rails, as on the other side appears a line of gilded Banisters.

THERE runs a little Marble Pavement from the Sultan's Postern, through a very
stately Wooden Arch, adorned with Trees and twining Jessamins, which twist
about it in the middle of the Garden, not unlike the famed Triumphal Arches of
the ancient Romans.

THIS Pavement is divided at about an hundred paces from the River, into two
distinct and semicircular Galleries with Banisters on either side, about three
Foot in height, adorned with Spires and Balls of Gold, Two Draw-bridges, which
lead you to the Ladies Apartment.
which lead to two great Draw-bridges, each guarded by a Party of White Eunuchs
on the hither side, and crossing the swift Current on each side of the
beforenam'd Source of Waters, at the other Foot of either Bridge there waits a
constant Guard of Black, or Negro Eunuchs, and two other Galleries, exactly
correspondent to the former, lead two ways to such another Pavement, running
also through an Arch adorned and built exactly like the other.

Of the Apartments of the Women.

AND now we are arrived upon a Ground, where any Man, except the Sultan, is
like Juvenal's Rara avis in terris, even as great a rarity as his black Swan,
or any other Wonder; nothing here is seen but Beauty, strangely intermixed with
rough Deformity, each small Avenue leading to the Women, who inhabit this
Division, Black or Negro Eunuchs.
being watched continually by Crowds of Blackamores, not only robbed of all the
strong and virile Marks of lusty Manhood by a smooth Castration or Decision
rather, but elected from the most deformed and evil countenanced of that
untempting Race, as if the cursed insatiate Jealousy of the lascivious Sultans,
could not think the incapacitating them from amorous Practices with their
distrusted Women, were sufficient to secure them, but they must inhumanely
contrive a way to keep the Ladies Inclinations Chaste, by the prevailing Virtue
of a strong Antipathy.

Moral Reflections.
HOW wide alas! does this luxurious Prince mistake the real road to Greatness,
who instead of awing his audacious Subjects by a warlike Disposition, and the
even Balance of impartial Justice, leaves his Empire to subservient
Managements, and meanly gives himself entirely over to the constant Practice of
voluptuous Living; neither knowing nor desiring other Grandeur than the plenary
indulgment of his carnal Appetite, not considering that, as Seneca says in his
Tragedy of Thyestes, Sen. Tra. of Thyestes.
Regem non faciunt opes,
Non vestis Tyriae color,
Non frontis nota Regiae,
Non auro nitidae trabes.
Rex est, qui posuit metus,
Et diri mala pectoris;
Quem non ambitio impotens,
Et nunquam stabilis favor
Vulgi praecipitis movet.
THE transient Honors, which frail Riches bring,
Are not those Royal Proofs, that mark a King,
Not Tyrian Purple over his Garments spread,
Nor regal Diadems around his Head,
Not graceful Robes, which shine in every fold
With a polite embroidery of Gold;
He only is a King, who, not oppressed
By those black Fears and Ills, which storm his Breast,
Bravely stands firm, his Justice to maintain,
And hears Ambition tempt his Power in vain;
Who stands the established Pillar of his State,
Always alike, still Good, and ever Great.


Moral Reflections.
CONTENT will make the meanest Object of uncovered Poverty a happier Man, than
commonly the Sultan is in all these elevated Scenes of Pomp and Glory. The
towering height, whereon he stands, does seldom fail to make him giddy; then
he falls below the bliss of those, who can in Rags reflect on Grandeur in the
following Notions of that admirable Author. Rex est, qui metuit nihil,
Rex est, quique cupit nihil,
Hoc Regnum sibi quisque dat.
That Man's a Monarch, who can fear no fate;
So's he, who never covets to be Great,
And that, which makes such sort of Kingdoms best,
Is, that all Men at will may be thereof possessed.


Moral Reflections.
NO Man, who seriously reflects upon the bloody ends, which commonly attend the
Turkish Emperors, and overtake their Pride amidst the Sunshine they are fondly
basking in, would wish to change degrees with their uncertain Majesty; and
surely Death must fall with double weight on such, as Power and Haughtiness of
Soul have lifted up beyond the apprehension of its ever reaching them; for, to
make use again of Seneca's Expressions. Illi mors gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Death on that Man must heavy fall,
Who, by his Grandeur, shown,
Known and respected too by all,
Dies to himself unknown.


A winding Gallery.
BUT to return again to what I was about, the Pavement on the other side the
second Arch admits you to the entrance of a stately Gallery, perhaps the
finest, that was ever heard of, for it reaches from one Garden Wall to the
other, winding in and out exactly as we paint a folding Serpent, all the
turnings at an equal distance from each other, and so often made, that those,
who walk upon it lose the sight of one another every ten or fourteen Paces.

Fine Marble Pillars.
IT IS supported nobly by two rows of Pillars, of a red and white large veiny
Marble; all the Bases and the Capitals are black; and the inverting Floor, on
which they stand, consists of spacious Marble Squares, politely intermixed one
half of red, the other of a lovely greenish Color.

YOU ascend the top of the abovenam'd Gallery by a broad Marble Staircase,
with three stately Landing-places, railed on either side with Iron gilt, and
headed with large Balls and Spires of Gold: A golden Floor.
You enter with a strange surprise, to see the bottom floor'd to all appearance
with thick Plates of burnished Gold, which is indeed no more than Copper gilt,
but every Year or two renewed or polished, so that it reflects a dazzling Luster
and amazing Majesty: On either side is built a kind of Wall breast high, whose
inside like the Floor is plated over with the Copper gilt, and all along upon
its top on either side, at five Foot distance from each other, stand vast
numbers of fine golden Pyramids, each Pyramid adorned upon its utmost Point
with one large Globe of Gold, by four whereof the bottom is supported.

THE Reader I presume, will be inclined to think this Place, as I have now
described it so magnificent and beautiful, that it can scarce admit of an
additional extravagance; he will be consequently much surpised, A lovely
walking Place.
when I inform him, that on either side within the Wall are very deep and
artificial hollows, filled with Soil of a productive nature, where are planted
Wood-bines, commonly called Hony-suckles, Jessamins, low Flowers, and
Tuberoses, which supported by a stronger and more spreading kind of lasting
Greens, so sweetly intermix with one another, meeting at the top, and growing
thick upon a frame of rich gilt Box Wood, that you walk as in a dream, through
all the odoriferous ecstasies of Natures Blessings.

The Lodgings of the Negro Eunuchs.
THE Gallery is terminated on the left by a large Door, which opens sideways
into the Apartment of the Negro Eunuchs, or Black-Guard of the secluded Ladies;
which extends it self strait forward, toward the Point of the Seraglio about
two hundred Yards in length, and breadth proportionable; it consists of only
one large Hall supported by large Vaults, wherein are all the Cellars,
Landries, and Conveniences, required for the service of the Ladies.

THE Room is equally divided into spaces for the Eunuch's Lodging-Places, and
its high Arched Roof supported by an Hundred Marble Pillars, Fifty on a side;
about the Middle opens a low Wooden Door, and lets you out upon a Gallery,
which fronts the Gardens; here they Eat, Drink and Divert themselves, when out
of Waiting, casting still an Eye of Observation on the Women's Actions.

The Lodgings of the Sultan's Mistresses.
DIRECTLY opposite, and entered in the same manner, lie the Lodgings of the
Sultans Mistresses, consisting also of one Room and Gallery with Offices below
it, the Length, Breadth, Height, and whole Proportion just the same with the
Apartment of the Eunuchs.

The Furniture of their Apartment.
BUT as for all the Ornamental part, the Roof, Sides, Floor, and Pillars of the
Ladies Chamber are exactly like the Sultans own Division; or if any difference
appears, it is because the Women's Quarter Shines more Brightly, if it is
possible, with Gold and Crystal; and whereas the Rooms of the Grand Signior,
as you read before, are Pannel'd from the Cieling to the Floor, with Gold and
Silver every Yard or two between the Marble, here, instead thereof, they sert
the finest Looking-Glass, which so surprizingly adorns the place, that viewing
as you walk along, a strange confused irregularity of prospect, in promiscuous
mixtures of the various colored Marble Flags, the Cushions, Carpets, and the
Numerous Pillars, which support the Building, you are agreeable amazed at so
uncommon an appearance.

Their Beds and way of Sleeping.
THEIR Beds are only Quilts or Carpets five times doubled, over which is laid a
Satin Coverlet, which being turned aside, they enter in their Shifts and
Mustin Drawers, and contentedly repose themselves till Break of Day, beyond
which hour they seldom are permitted to indulge themselves in slumber.

How their Beds are Placed.
FOUR Rows of Beds there are, from one end of the Chamber to the other, and the
Number of the Ladies, sometimes more, and sometimes less, may commonly be
reckoned at about Five Hundred. Two Rows of Beds are Placed against the Wall on
either side, and two between the Columns, which support the Chamber.

The Governante's of the Seraglio how chosen.
BETWEEN each Fourth and Fifth of all the Beds their lies a kind of Matron, if
it may be proper so to call an Aged Virgin, for they are always chosen out of
those more Antiquated Ladies, whose hard luck has burdened them with the
Vnsummon'd Load of Stale Virginity, and consequently made them fit for a
Succession to the Vacancies of such a Post, as by requiring a Malicious care to
hinder Wantonesses they are Past the Taste of, speaks 'em enviously and
extremely Qualified for its Possession.

How the Ladies live in the Seraglio.
IT is the proper Business of these Ill-natured Governante's, to inspect the
Actions and Behavior of the Young Recluses, by day to keep 'em Strictly to
their Work, which, for the most Part, is Embroidery in various colors,
intermixed with Gold and Silver, upon Silk or Muslin; at other times to see
they miss not those Genteeler parts of Education, such as Singing, Dancing and
the like, according to the Turkish Mode, all which is Taught 'em Daily by Black
Eunuchs purposely obliged to Practice such Accomplishments, as 'twill be
Requisite to Teach the Ladies.

A strictness to prevent Immodest Actions.
THERE Burn all Night, not far from each Beds Foot, a sort of fine Wax Tapers,
and the only reason for it, is, that by their Light, the Governante may be able
to Discover all immodest or indecent Pastimes, which the Wanton Inclinations of
the Youthful Ladies, kept from the Society or Sight of Man, might prompt 'em
to the Practice of, did Opportunity and Darkness favor their Endeavors: I
could give my Reader some Amazing Instances in that particular, but since it
may offend the Modesty of my more Chaste and Virtuous Country-Women, 'twill be
more Obliging if I spare their Blushes by Omitting the Relation.

The Ladies Gallery.
THE Gallery adjoining to the Ladies Lodgings, tho exactly correspondent, and
alike in Form and Bigness to its Opposite, belonging to the Negro Eunuchs,
shines beyond it in a High Degree, by reason of the Rich Embroidered Cushions,
Cloth of Gold, and Silken Furniture, wherewith the Floor, and Saffrai are both
covered; looking out upon a Garden, filling all the space between the
Buildings, and extending its Avenues, Flower-Plots, Fountains, and Cool
Grotto's, from the Winding Gallery to the bottom of the Lodgings, A Stately
Quick-sett-Hedge.
where it is terminated by a Quick-sett-Hedge, of a Surprising Height and
Thickness, forming a Half Moon, the Horns whereof Embrace the Inner Angles of
the two Apartments, open in the Middle by a smooth and Artificial Gap, which
represents a large Arched Gate-way, leading to the Entrance of a Shady Grove,
the Spreading Branches of whose Various Trees meet over Head and form a Hundred
Lovely Bowers, and cool retirements, which I shall hereafter largely Treat of.

Lovely Gardens.
FROM the Galleries, which Front the two Apartments, you descend from either end
by a large Marble Staircase, turning from the Quick-sett Hedge, and Winding
till they look toward the side Walls of the Seraglio: These admit you to the
Entrances of many Shady Paths and graceful Avenues of Myrtle, Cypress, Orange
Trees and Jessamins, which Wind delightfully from Place to Place, sometimes
admitting you to Subterraneous Grotto's, all supported and adorned by Marble
Pillars, from whose sides there Issues Water, that by falling down from
different Heights on Shells of Brass, of different Thickness, makes a sort of
gentle Music, sweetly full of Melancholy Harmony.

Fine Greens for the Diversion of the Sultans Mistersses.
SOMETIMES these Walks or rather Labyrinths, lead you out upon fine Greens,
Round, Square, Oblong, and of all forms imaginable, Moated round by
well-stock'd Fish Ponds, in the Middle of these Greens, there generally stands
a Tent, each Rope whereof is Guarded by an Eunuch: Here such Ladies, as are
graver than the Rest, sit Cross Legged and observe the Pastimes of their fellow
Beauties, some of which run Wildly up and down the Field, and form a kind of
Sport not much unlike our English Country Game of Threading the Scottish
Needle, others Dance upon another part of the same Green, here some are Walking
and conversing Merrily, there three or four are Lolling in the Shade,
Stretching and Rolling up and down in Wanton Postures, and every now and then
you may perceive some serious solitary Virgin, Angling in the Fishpond, and
unmindfull of all Pastimes but her own sedate and innocent Diversion,

Lascivious Customs of the Ladies in the Seraglio.
IT is not seldom that the Sultan does in Person grace their Exercises, and then
they all contrive with eager Emulation, who shall most engage his fancy by the
Artifice of her Behavior; now Modesty takes leave of these Licentious Ladies,
and the Warmer Arguments of loose desire incline them to the Practice of the
most Lascivious Dances, Postures, and Performances, which serve to raise a
Lustful Fire, and may excite the Passion of the Amorous Sultan to a Cooling
satisfaction of his Heated Wishes, in a full Possession of her happy charms,
who more than any other moves his Inclinations.

SUCH Gardens, Groves, and fine Plantations of Delicious Fruit Trees, as I have
above described, fill all the large remaining space within the Inner Wall of
the Seraglio, which confines the Women's Quarter, The great Gardens of the
Seraglio.
and divides the whole from those vast tracts of Garden Ground, which quite
surround the Palace, and consist of Fruits of every kind, Herbs, Cucumbers, and
every individual thing, which is required even from the Kitchen to the Dining
Room. These larger Gardens are manured by Men, of common Knowledge in Affairs
of Husbandry; but those belonging to the Ladies Quarter, are not entered but by
certain of the Negro Eunuchs, purposely instructed in the art of Gardening,
that they may be qualified to serve in that Employment.

Another Wall.
ANOTHER Wall divides the largest Gardens from the outward Wall of the Seraglio,
leaving only space sufficient for the passing and repassing of those Troops of
Soldiers, who from time to time relieve the Guards, perpetually employed to
keep the Towers, which, as I said before, defend the Palace.

I know the natural Curiosity of my expecting Female Readers will induce them
to condemn my want of Complaisance, if, after having led them gradually through
every corner of the Sultan's Palace, I should hurry 'em away without permitting
them, to look a little into his Amors, the hopes perhaps, of which amusement
was the only cause, that brought 'em thither.

TO this I answer, That I will immediately comply with their Desires; but must
by way of Prologue, urge 'em all to lay aside those vulgar Errors and Romantic
Notions, former Authors, or perhaps, their traveling Lovers have possessed
their Minds with.

Common Fame a common Liar.
COMMON Fame is both a Liar, and a Magnifier of the falsities of all Mankind;
where Truth is doubtful, or the Fact obscure, she strait contrives to fill
deficiencies with a productive train of illegitimate Assertions; A mistaken
Notion of the Grand Signior's Courtship.
nor ever could a Subject more entirely prove the certainty of this Opinion,
than the Great Seraglio of the Turkish Sultan, and the ceremonious Practices of
his uncommon ways of Courtship, such as walking through them with a Knott of
Handkerchiefs fastened to his Girdle, one of which he drops at every Ladies
Foot, he has a mind to make his Bedfellow; yet this erroneous Story had the
fortune to obtain so good a Credit, that the Learned and Judicious Sir Paul
Ricaut, has not blushed to tell us in his Maxims of the Turkish Polity, that
such as is above described, was universally allowed to be the Pattern of the
Sultan's Courtship.

Love Affairs should be kept secret.
AFFAIRS of Love, the Ladies tell me, should be kept as secret as Affairs of
State, and certainly if so, it is doubly criminal, when we betray the close
Amors of Royal Monarchs; yet for once I Will venture to transgress those rules
of Privacy, and give as punctual an Account, as I am able, of the Scenes of
Love, occasionally practiced 'twixt the Sultan and his Mistresses. If any of my
Countrywomen should be so delighted with the Pleasures I describe, as to
abandon England for the Turks Seraglio, the Nation will forgive me for the loss
they suffer, by considering the Accident as such a wonderful surprise, that not
the sharpest Mortal guess could ever have expected it.

The notice given by the Sultan, when he intends a Visit to his Ladies.
FIRST then the Sultan almost daily visits the Apartment of his Ladies, and
gives notice half an hour or more before he comes, by looking out from his back
Windows to the Drawbridge, guarded by the Negro Eunuchs, and informing them of
his intention by the Words Helvett, Gelerrum, that is, Make ready, I am coming.

How he is received, and what he does among them.
THIS notice is enough, and all the inner Palace rings immediately with the
repeated sounds of this Alarm, all the Ladies dress themselves with have,
Wash, Shift, Perfume and Polish their Appearances for the Reception of their
Master, who upon his Entrance, is saluted by the whole Assembly on their Knees,
he sits, drinks Coffee, Tea, and toys away an hour or two in kissing and
embracing them with equal familiarity, and then conducts them to the Greens, or
Bowers within the Gardens, where he takes delight to see their Emulation in the
several Arts of pleasing, which I just now told you they employ their time in.

How the Sultan chooses a Mistress.
THIS is, however, but the method of his public Conversation with the numbers
of his Ladies, amongst whom the Charms of one will often shine superior to the
others; Her, on some such Day of public Sport, appointed purposely, he beckons
from the rest, and leads her to some Bower, to talk a while in private, and
prepare her Expectation for the Honor he allots her to.

How he Courts her.
THE Eunuchs, who attend, acquainted with the Reasons of their Emperor's
withdrawing, summon the repining Remnant of the disappointed Virgins back to
their Apartment; while the new-elected Mistress of the Sultan's Love, receives
perhaps, the sweet advances of a Kiss or two, in token of the value she has
heard her Lord declare he bears her; after which she is delivered by the Hand
of the Grand Signior to the charge of those Black Eunuchs then in Waiting.

The Respect the other Ladies are obliged to show her.
BY them she is saluted with a low Respect, becoming the Address of such as
compliment the Partner of the Sultan's Bed; and quite surrounded by her black
Retinue, walks in State along the Chamber she so lately was confined to; all
the other Ladies as she passes by, rise up, and falling on their Knees to kiss
her Vest, congratulate the Blessing she must soon become Possessor of.

Their Pride upon advancement.
TRANSPORTED by Success, beyond her self, and giddy by the height of her
Advancement to such Fortune, Reason, which before perhaps, had little place
within her Mind, now quite forsakes the elevated Creature, who forgetting that
her happiness depends upon the humor of a fickle Monarch, and must stand or
fall as he is pleased or displeased with her first Embraces, looks about her
with a scornful Air of Pride and Grandeur, and believes herself as much above
them in her Merit, as she then appears by the respect they pay her; hence
spring a thousand Jealousies, malicious Wishes, Envies and Uneasinesses, which
are the neverfailing Consequences of Domestic Preference among the Ladies, and
undoubtedly gave cause to that old Grecian Poet, (who by the way it is ten to
one was Married) to cry out (...) The Envy of the Women make Men's Houses
downright Bedlams.

Preparatory Ceremonies.
THE Public Wardrobe of the Ladies Lodgings is obliged to furnish rich variety
of Cloths and Jewels upon such occasions, and with these, she is conducted by
the grave Matrona's I before discoursed of, to the Bagnio's of the Sultan,
where she is not only stripped, and washed from Head to Foot, but scented with
Perfumes to add new Charms to those of Nature, that she may appear at Night,
deserving that Affection, which her Royal Lover has vouchsafed to crown her
with.

A pleasant Custom.
BESIDES the Preparation of the Bagnio, previous to her Bedding the Grand
Signior, she is offered Wine to drink without control, that so, she may
possess at Night an artificial Vigor, more engaging than the modest
Bashfullness of her untried and native Innocence.

THUS may the Reader see, how wantonly the Monarchs of the Turkish Empire study
means to swell their Pleasures to the utmost pitch of Taste and Luxury, whereby
they madly hasten on their Ends, forgetful of that true, but much unheeded
Grecian Maxim. An admirable Grecian Maxim.
(...)
(...)
Three things there are, that shorten Mortal's Breath,
And hurry us compendiously to Death,
Bathing, and drinking Wine to great Excess,
And love of Female Joys to lustful Wantonness.


How the Lady is conducted to the Sultan's Chamber.
WHEN Night is come, and the Grand Signior, full of Expectation, laid in Bed,
the Eunuchs of his Chamber notify his Pleasure to the Waiting Lady, who is
thereupon immediately attended by the other Virgins, Matrons, and Black
Eunuchs, to the Sultan's Chamber, all the Instruments of Turkish Music
sounding round her, and a hundred large Wax Tapers lighting her along; they
leave her at the Door, and wishing her a Satisfaction equal to her Honor,
separate, and all return to their respective Places.

How received there.
MEAN while the trembling Virgin knocks, and is admitted by the Kisler Aga, or
Great Master of the Negro Eunuchs, who attends her coming, to instruct her in
some necessary Duties, she must offer at Performing; after which he modestly
withdraws and leaves her in the Chamber.

Her first Address to the Grand Signior.
THE Sultan all this while expects her in the Bed, to which she is directed, by
two large white Tapers, burning in the Room; I should have told you, that she
enters, only covered with a Wrapping Nightgown, and advancing to the Feet of
the Grand Signior's Bed, falls down upon her Knees, and in an humble manner
asks this Question. A Slave to your Commands, Great Monarch, waits your beckon,
may, or may she not be now admitted?

YOU may be sure the Sultan answers Yes, and if impatient to possess her
Beauties, takes her in as soon and kindly as your self young Reader would your
Mistress: Their pleasant method of creeping in at the Beds-feet.
But alas poor Women! common Custom generally forces them to a more humble
Entrance, for, in token of Submission, dropping off their Nightgown, they must
gently raise the Bed Clothes at the Feet, and so creep gradually up to those
Embraces, which an Englishman would be so civil to believe deserving of a
kinder Welcome; and an Englishwoman, if I know them rightly, think too worthy
to bestow in such a mortifying and submissive manner.

Their Salutation in the Morning.
IT IS possible however, that an after-game of Love and Kindness may make full
amends for the indifference of her first Reception, that we will not doubt of,
but proceed to tell you, that when Morning breaks, they are awakened by the
sound of Music, and the shriller Voices of some tunefull Eunuchs, singing
certain Songs composed on purpose, not unlike the Epithalamiums of the Ancient;
all these Songs are handed up and down the City, when the Story of some new
Intrigue inclines the People to converse upon that Subject; I had several
presented me, and one among the rest I have Translated, to divert the Reader. A
Turkish Epithalamium
Blessings Crown the Royal Pair,
Mighty Sultan, happy Fair,
Endless Pleasures bless your Bed,
Angels Wings around you spread,
Godlike Offspring grace your Joys,
Heavenly Daughters, lovely Boys,
All that eithers Wish can crave,
That let both together have,
Long continue all your Pleasure,
Let your Bliss be out of measure.
Blessings crown the Royal Pair,
Mighty Sultan, happy Fair.


The Present, he makes her in the Morning.
ALARMED by the repeated Harmony of these congratulary Songs, the New-made Woman
rises from the Bosom of her amorous Partner, who bestows at parting, (with a
grateful Kiss) some precious Jewel of inestimable Value; as soon as she is
covered by the Wrapper, she threw off the Night before, the Sultan pulls a
Silken String, and presently come in the Ladies and their Matrons to attend her
in another Chamber, while she dresses richly in the Clothes I lately told you
were demanded from the Wardrobe, having first been bathed, and well perfumed
all over in the private Bagnio.

The Honor of a Favorite.
IF she has been so happy as to please the Sultan in a more than common manner,
she continues Queen of his Apartment and Affection, served all Day upon the
Knee, by his Superior Officers, and sharing every Night the Bed of her Great
Master, and it has been sometimes known, that One has kept Possession of his
Heart for many Years together, insomuch that all the other Ladies have been
slighted, or forgotten, while their Monarch's Thoughts were wholly bent to find
new Pleasures for the Object of his Passion.

How the Sultan and she pass their time.
WHEN any Lady is so fortunate as this, the daily Custom of the Sultan is to
lead her up and down, from Walk to Walk, and Bower to Bower about the Garden,
Courting her as amorously and as full of softness, as a Christian Lover would a
Mistress he addressed for Marriage; all the while they walk, the Gardens must
be private, not so much as a Black Eunuch is permitted to remain, to overhear
or see the fond Amors of the delighted Sultan.

Other Diversions.
SOMETIMES they walk or sit in Grottoes, sometimes in the coolest part of some
sweet Grove, where fine Cascades and other Water Works seem to join Harmony
with warbling Birds about their Heads, as if they strove to drown from any
others Ear, the whispering softness of their Voices; sometimes they mount a
sort of winding Stairs, that lead up to a little Pleasure House, contrived
within the Branches of an Oak or Walnut Tree, and covered over with Embroid'red
Velvet Cushions, where they sit, stand, lie and dally wantonly, (unseen by any
thing but Heaven) in a mutual Transport.

A strange Contrivance for a Seat of Pleasure.
AMONGST the numerous Contrivances those Gardens boast, one seems to have been
copied from an Indian Model; for in certain thickest parts of the close Groves,
is left a Square about four Yards in bigness; at every corner of this Square is
planted a large Tree, whose Branches, growing very high, and spreading far
beyond the rest, meet overhead, and form a Canopy, that shades all underneath
from the most piercing Sunshine: To the smallest of these Trees low Branches,
consequently such as any weight will move most easily, are fastened strongly the
four Corners of a doubled Canvass, covered over with the richest Velvet, which
is pulled so tight that it appears as even as a Table, yet when any thing of
reasonable Burden comes upon it, all the Branches giving way like Springs, it
feels a very odd and pleasant kind of Motion.

A charming Summer House.
A little Wooden Staircase, Winding round each corner Tree, admits the Sultan
and his valued Mistress to this Velvet-Cover'd Canvas, where they sometimes
roll about, and rocking up and down, so toy away their Hours in Amorous
Pastime, sometimes sitting Cross-legg'd Play at Chess, or Talk away their
Minutes, in a Pleasing Conversation, while their Ravished Senses are Enchanted
in a manner, by the Twining Honey-Suckles, Jessamins, and other Odoriferous,
Plants, and Flowers, which growing out of certain Pots of Earth, Ingeniously
made fast to the Top-Branches of the Trees, Hang sweetly down between the
Boughs, and form a Lovely Scent and Prospect, not to be Imagined but by Persons
present; this Place so rich in Pleasure, tempts the Passions of the Toying
Couple to such Ardent Wishes, that the Shady Canopy, which covers them so well,
is often Conscious of their Wanton Pastime.

How the other Ladies are disposed off, after Beding the Grand Signior.
BESIDES these Inward Scenes of the Grand Signiors Dalliances, there stands a
Lettic'd Kiosk or Summer House, adorned with Cloth of Gold and Velvet Cushions,
whence, while they are Drinking Coffee, Tea, or Chocolate, they have an open
prospect of the Asian Mountains, all the Haven, and the Town upon the other
side, with the Kaickgees or Boat Men Rowing up and down, and the said
Summer House being Built upon the outward Wall of the Seraglio, all the
Galleys, Ships of War, and Trading Vessels, Foreign, or their own, must
necessarily pass almost within Pistol Shot of their Commodious Situation.

THESE are the favors constantly bestowed upon those happy Ladies, who obtain
a Monarch's Heart in lieu of their Virginities: But the less successful Women,
after they have one Night tasted the Embraces of a Man, are carried from the
Chamber, where they live when Maids, and locked in a Seraglio called Kadin
Serai, or Ladies Palace, here they live a Solitary Life, confined within the
Walls of an old Building, Waited on by Eunuchs, and can never hope for liberty,
unless they chance to prove with Child, if so, they are brought back to an
Apartment near the Sultans, and delivered in his presence, ever after living
there, with liberty to wear a Crown of different shape and value, according to
her Quality, which is defined by being First or Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth,
or Twentieth Hasakee or Concubine.

A Barbarous Policy.
AS for the Sons they are delivered of, the Barbarous Policy of their Jealous
Government, immediately Imprisons them as soon as Born, in a Dark Underground
Apartment, where they are Instructed in their Language and Religion, all their
necessaries handed down through Holes bored through the Cieling, being never
suffered even to see the Sun, till on the Death of him who Reigned, the Eldest
Brother is Elected from his Dungeon to the Throne of that Great Empire; who of
old, as soon as he was Father of a Son or two himself, was used to order all
his Brothers to be Strangled in the Prison, but of late they have disused this
Black Inhumane Custom.

THE New-Elected Emperor enjoys at pleasure any of those Women, who were
brought to the Seraglio for the Pleasure of his Predecessor, only the Sultana's
or such Ladies as he had enjoyed, are Instantly removed to the Kadin Serai I
lately spoke of; all the rest remaining pure, undoubted Virgins, he possesses
as he pleases: The care they use in getting Virgin.
Here the Reader may take Notice, that no Women are admitted into the Seraglio
after Eight Years Old, That so the Sultan may not be deceived as to her being
Innocent from even a thought of Man; nor then, unless their Beauties promise by
the Fineness of their Bloom, to ripen by degrees to full Perfection.

IT now and then so happens that a full grown Woman, who is made the Prize of
War, is sent to the Seraglio by some Great Bashaw, but then such a Lady must be
Mistress of those Charms, which seem to mark her, as a Treasure only fit for
the Grand Signior's keeping.

How the Sultan's Daughters are disposed of.
THE Sultan's Daughters at five, six, or seven Years of Age, are married to
Bashaws of high Command, who in acknowledgment of the great Honor he conferrs
upon them, are obliged each New-Years-Day, to send a Present to their Royal
Father-in-law, of such considerable Value, that it drains their Coffers faster
than they find fair means to fill 'em, so that by this little Artifice, the
Sultan finds continual means to turn the Danger of a Subjects Riches to his own
Advantage.

How the Women of the Seraglio plague the Sultan.
NOW will the Reader be inclined to think that he, who swims in such a Sea of
Pleasure, cannot be invaded by the Stings of Discontent, yet, as a Proof that
every Mortal must be subject to the Imperfections, which attend Mortality, a
thousand little Anxietys torment and vex him, and the Quarrels of his Women so
distract his Temper, that he often will be absent a considerable time, in
Hunting or some other Pastime, on purpose to avoid the trouble of becoming
Arbitrator of their frequent Disputations.

No State of Mortal Life entirely happy.
THUS can no Condition of our Life be fully happy, Celibacy has its
Inconveniences, and so has Matrimony; we often change sides like Men in Fevers,
yet can never reach the ease we aim at; there are some admirable Notions
hereupon in a Greek Poem, which is already rendered English by so great a Hand,
that I will give 'em you Translated as I found 'em. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Domestic Cares afflict the Husband's Bed,
Or Pains, his Head.
Those, who live Single, take it for a Curse,
Or do things worse.
Some would have Children, those, who have them, moan,
Or wish them gone.
What is it then, to have, or have no Wife,
But single Thraldom, or a double Strife?


TO wind up my Discourse of the Seraglio, I will only add, that in respect to
the Grand Signior, Mutes are there in great esteem, and such an aweful Silence
always kept, that they have learned a Language on their Fingers, which is not
only practiced by the Mutes, but all the Officers in the Seraglio, who can
readily by Signs, express themselves as fully as they can by Speaking: Why
Mutes are made the Executioners of Turkey.
Another thing the Reader may take notice of, is that the Mutes are kept as
Executioners, and sent to Strangle such great Men, as the Grand Signior Signs a
Warrant for the Death of: I know not why they, more than others, are appointed
to that Duty, unless it is because, by being Deaf and Dumb, they are not
qualified to hear and pity those they Execute.

CHAP. XX. Of the Revenues of the Turkish Sultan.
THE Reader must not here expect particular Accounts of those prodigious Sums
of Money, wherewith the Emperors of Turkey still find means to fill their
Coffers; Private Treasures, how amassed in Turkey.
I can only tell him, that besides the Public Treasury I lately spoke of, there
is kept in the Seraglio private Banks of Money in strong leather Baggs, the
Sum, which each contains, inscribed upon a Label fast'ned to it; These have
been amassed by former Sultans, and are all distinguished from each other by
the several Names of the collecting Monarchs deeply cut upon the Covers of
large Iron Chests, which hold the leather Baggs abovenam'd.

To what Use reserved.
THESE Private Treasures, though containing mighty Sums of Money, which instead of
lying dead might be increased each Year by different Improvements, are esteemed
so Sacred by the superstitious Turks, that they believe it nothing less than
heinous Guilt or Sacrilege it self, to make the smallest use thereof, till it
may do their Country and Religion signal Service at a time, if such a time ever
happen, when the Christian Nations join against them and invade their
Territories; a thing I fear, too much unlikely, but in which the Turks are
apprehensive of a Universal Danger.

The yearly Revenue of the Grand Signior.
AS for the Revenues of the Turkish Sultan, such I mean as are his fixed
Propriety, and the undoubted Right of his Imperial Dignity, they are at present
reckoned at about eight Millions and three hundred thousand Pounds Sterling,
yearly Income; a Sum becoming the Possession of a Prince so absolute as the
Grand Signior.

The manner of Collecting it.
THE manner of Collecting this prodigious Sum, is by Assessing every Subject of
his Empire, at an inconsiderable Yearly Tax, which he must pay as an
Acknowledgment of his Dependence on, and Duty to the Sultan; and it is an
admirable Method, they have got, of raising all this Money without any charge
or trouble to the Emperor.

THE Petty Governors of every little District, are obliged to gather the
respective Quota's of the Villagers about them, and set out with Guards
sufficient to defend the Money toward the next great Town to their dependant
Residences; here they must deliver it to the Possession of the Aga, or the
Governor of the Place, demanding his Discharge for their Acquittance of a Duty
so incumbent on their Offices.

How carried to the Capital.
THE Aga's adding to this Sum their own Collections, guard 'em in like manner to
the Sangiacks, or the Lords Provincial; they, with the addition of their own
deliver it to the Superior Beylerbeys, or Great Archdukes of Turkey, and these
last continue all in their Possession, till demanded by the Guards, who
undertake to carry it in Wagons safely to Constantinople.

THE Quarterly Collections never are behind hand, for on pain of Ruin no Man
dares refuse immediate Payment on the Day appointed, so that ten Days after
every Quarter, the remotest Provinces begin to send away their Money toward
the City I so lately named. In every Province, the Timariots, Zaims, and other
standing Soldiery, are summoned to appear and form a general Muster; How
guarded on the Road.
whence, with their Commanders at their Head, they all advance, and guard the
Wagons to the Residence of the Sangiack of the adjoining Province.

HE with all his Soldiers, joining his additional Collections to the former,
there receives the Custody of all together, and advances in like manner till he
reaches his next Neighbor, who relieves him with another Party; and in this
settled Order they proceed, still swelling their Collections, till the last
delivers all the Revenues of one Quarter, to the Lord High Treasurer at
Constantinople.

IT is observable, that as the Provinces, which lie the nearest to their great
Metropolis, must undertake the Convoy of far greater Sums than the remoter
Places, so the number of their Soldiers is proportionably greater, as they are
by far more populous, for reasons mentioned in the Chapter, treating of the
Maxims of their Policy.

An admirable Policy.
NOW, though the Sultan's Treasure is thus brought him by the universal Labor of
his Subjects; he is as I have said entirely free from any kind of Charge; this
Duty being fixed upon his Governors of Provinces, as one of those incumbent on
their Places, and consequently to be managed only by those Officers.

Another way the Sultan has of raising Money.
BUT many are the means, whereby the Sultan daily adds prodigious Sums to his
Revenues, such as, for Example, The obliging all the Great Bashaws and
Governors of his Dominions every New-Years-Day to send him Presents, commonly
in ready Money, which amounts to an incredible Amassment.

Another, which he often uses.
ANOTHER way he has, when his Occasions press him to Collect extraordinary Sums,
by sending Orders to the Lords Provincial of his Empire, immediately to raise
as much as he requires, which they must do without reply, by Means as absolute
as the Command of their Great Master; oftentimes the Sultan takes occasion to
demand such Sums from certain Provinces, as it is impossible they can supply him
with; but sending in compliance with his Will as much as they can spare, excuse
themselves, as incapacited for a further Contribution.

A barbarous Avarice.
HERE the Grand Signior gains his end, and finds a thousand fair Pretenses for
the Execution of the Governors of all such Provinces; he either sends 'em Word
that they have quite Impoverished their Governments, by tyrannous Oppression of
their People to enrich themselves, or that their Lives must pay the forfeit of
their Disobedience, having failed to execute his Royal Orders, which obliges
him to think them either Traitors to his Power, or unable to discharge the
Trust he had conferred upon them.

EITHER of these Reasons or indeed a Weaker, often none at all, suffice to ruin
those, whose Riches speak 'em fit for Execution, which is done as I have said
before, by Strangling, Why the Turks use Strangling.
for it is esteemed a Crime of an unpardonable nature, to spill the Blood of any
Mussulman: The Treasure of such Governors is instantly declared Confiscated to
the Grand Signior, and accordingly delivered into his capacious Coffers.

The Turks very Covetous.
THUS does Possession of a splendid Wealth endanger those, who own it, yet it is
observable that Turks of every Nation are the most inclined to aim at growing
Rich, more zealously pursuing Gain, by how much faster it rolls in upon them;
and this in every Age has been a Vice as epidemic as unreasonable. The Poor are
commonly the most contented with their Fortune, and Juvenal has left it as a
Maxim, that, Juv. Sat. 14.
Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit,
Et minus hanc optat, qui non habet.
The love of Money does with Money grow,
Those wish it least, who least its Comforts know.


THE Customs upon Goods Imported and Exported, are another means of bringing in
considerable Sums of Money to the Coffers of the Sultan, and occasional Taxes
of an hundred kinds imposed on Christians and the Turks themselves, of which it
was impossible to get a just Account, amount each Year to such amazing Heaps of
Wealth, that the Grand Signior cannot tell the bottom of his Income.

BUT as the violent Extortion of Superiors tempts the rest to imitate their
Methods in a private Dealing, every Man applies himself to study means of
growing Rich, as finding a necessity of being so, if they would make a Figure
worth regarding. Juv. Sat. 14.
Vnde habeas quaerit nemo, sed oportet habere.
No Man will ask, which way you Wealthy grow,
Yet, would you gain Respect, you must be so.


THOUGH all the Nations of the World have ever disregarded ragged Merit, none
despise it like the Turkish People; For their Nobility becoming so but by the
Riches they are Masters of, the Poor are looked upon with strange Contempt, and
their successless Labors slandered with the Stain of want of Industry; and the
Curse of Poverty were in any Country an insupportable Misfortune, though it had
but that one Mark of Inconvenience, named by Juvenal. Juv. Sat. 3.
Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
Unhappy Poverty, that heavy Curse,
In its oppressive Weight has nothing worse,
Than that such Men, as griping Want endure,
Appear ridiculous by being Poor.


PROCEED we now to view the present State of the poor Modern Greeks, and see
how much we find among them of the ancient Spirit of their Glorious Ancestors.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Greeks in their Modern State.
The Learning and Power of the Ancient Greeks.
THE spacious Earth affords no Scene, which plainlier Represents to a
Contemplative Genius the frail Foundation of all Human Gandeur, than the
present Condition of Subverted Greece, that Ancient Theater of Power and
Learning, and Nursery of the most Illustrious Propagators of Wisdom and
Morality. He, who looks back on former Ages, and Traces that unhappy Nation to
its Meridian Splendor, will be strangely struck with an uncommon Wonder at the
Degenerate Principles of their Unmanned Posterity. The Vicissitudes of Fortune
will amaze his Thoughts, when he Reflects Sedately on the Glorious State of
Power and Knowledge, in which they Flourished under the Instructive Discipline
of their Jonick, Socratick, Cyrenaick, Platonic, Academick, Peripatetick,
Stoic, and Pythagorean Philosophers, whose Wise and Virtuous Dictates inspired
their Minds with an elevated Sense of Piety and Honor; in the Practice of
which, (as they exceeded and instructed most other Nations) they endeavored to
outvie each other: All contending with an Emulative Zeal, for a wished
Superiority of Speculative Learning, till, by the long continued Blessing of
such Aspiring Inclinations, they raised the Fame of their Illustrious
Governments above the rest of the Submissive World, and Built themselves a
Glory, whose increasing Brightness could receive no Shadow from the affected
Ignorance of contending Nations.

The Degeneracy of the Moderns.
BUT strangely different is the present Genius of that Metamorphos'd People, who
have so Widely Deviated from the Footsteps of their Ancestors, that, to
describe them rightly, in their Modern State of Slavery, we must place 'em in a
Diametrical Opposition to Honor, Worth and Industry. Their very Nature seems
to have been changed with their Condition, as if their Principles had sunk with
their Nobility, Mahomet's Massacre.
whom Mahomet the Great (on his Taking Constantinople) endeavored to Extirpate
by a general Massacre, imagining Politickly, that a Revolt of the Nation would
be Dangerously, and Unsuccessfully attempted, when they should want a Head to
guide the rough Resentments of an Undisciplined Multitude. An Emperor Trodden
to Death.
Their last Emperor was Trodden to Death in one of the City Gates, and the
greatest part of his Family most Barbarously Butchered by the Inhumane
Conquerors. Those few, who with their Wives and Children escaped the Tyrants
Rage, retired to Woods, and Places far remote from the Imperial City; where in
Disguises proper to conceal their Quality, they wandered up and down in all the
Wants and Hardships of a Miserable Poverty, till, by the Course of Time, their
mean Condition reduced the Nature of their untaught Posterity to so low an Ebb,
that their so lofty Extract, (which some remaining Members of that Family now
vainly boast of) serves but as an Arrow to Stab their Thoughts with the
shameful Idea of their present Miseries. Nothing can more deeply Dictate the
strange Degrees and Turns of Fate a Man is subject to, than the Rigid Fortune
of this Illustrious Family, whose remaining Branches, scattered here and there,
and only known by the Name of P^eologus are so strangely fallen, as to Live,
for the most part, by a Laborious Practice of the most Mechanical Employments.
I was never more sensibly Afflicted at the Misfortunes of another, than when I
saw at Constantinople, in the House of Mr. Williams, an English Merchant, now
at Aleppo, one Constantine Paleologus, at that time a Groom of his Stables. His
Posterity reduced to extreme Poverty.
This Man demonstrated by undeniable Proofs, that he was Lineally Descended from
the Emperors of Greece; but was most sordidly Illiterate, and Inexpressibly
Ignorant in any thing beyond the Dressing of his Horses; yet he had a peculiar
Majesty in his Person, and somewhat uncommon distinguished his Extract from the
Vulgar Dictates of his meaner Education; an Awful Gravity adorned his
Countenance, and his silent Postures had somewhat Naturally Noble. But it
grieved me to see him, after having readily repeated the Numerous Misfortunes
of his Wandering Family, and Proudly boasted of Hereditary Nobility, Run
unconcernedly by his Horses Side, Trotting without Thought, through the Dirty
Streets, with his hardened Hand upon his Master's Stirrup.

THE same Fate, which attended the Blood Royal, involved the Numerous Branches
of the Grecian Nobility, so that scarce a Gentleman now remains, who can Trace
his Extract to the Third Generation. All are become alike Unhappy, and alike
contented; and though the greatest part of the Inhabitants of Bulgaria, Romania,
and several other parts of Turkey, are still Greeks: The Effects of Slavery.
They Possess no Land, enjoy no Liberty, nor study any manner of Learning; but,
with an unaccountable Indifference, submit themselves to the Pleasure of the
Turks, paying them the greatest Part of that Miserable Maintenance, their
Labor gets 'em; nor dare they think of shaking off the Turkish Yoke, by a
general Insurrection, though the fairest Opportunity should Court 'em to
endeavor it; choosing rather to Live Oppressed by Tyranny, than by an Active
Valor undergo the Fatigues of a Vigorous War, to regain the Possession of
forgotten Liberty; and the better to excuse the palpable grossness of their
Ignoble Genius, they have coined a Maxim, now current amongst 'em, A Greek
Maxim.
That they are Wisest, who choose to Know least, where Knowledge of Things past
would only increase the Weight of present Misery.

BESIDES the European Greeks, Asia Major, and part of Africa, is Inhabited by
great Numbers of these People: Their Gluttony.
But though Resident in different Countries, they are all led by the same Genius
to the Practice of little else but Gluttony and Ebriety, (which last Vice they
were ever famous for) spending their time in Dancing, Singing, and when they
Merchandise, in Cheating to such a Degree, that the Faith of a Greek is now
become a Jear, Proverbially thrown at a Man of Dishonest Principles. Some are
Masters of small Vessels, which carry Passengers and Goods from Port to Port,
in Coasting Voyages: Those in Europe are employed by the Turks to Till the
Ground, themselves but little Skilled in Husbandry. They are allowed to Plant
Vineyards for their own use, and that Labor they seldom spare, retaining so
much their Ancient Vice of immoderate Drinking, that the Man is reputed a
Churl, who suffers his Friend to depart Sober from an Entertainment; they Drink
in Earthen Cups, replenishing them as fast as emptied, each Man for his
Neighbor, and sending 'em round without intermission, till, their Brains
Intoxicated with the Fumes of the Wine, they begin, without Order, to Dance,
Kiss, and Sing, Embracing one another with such Antic Gestures, and a Noise so
disagreeable, that it is very surprising to a Stranger, who is present at their
Meetings.

Men's Habit.
THEY differ in their Habit according to their Professions, ever imitating the
Turks, as nearly as they dare, which they are allowed to do in all things but
Yellow Shoes, Green Vests, or a Turbant of one Color; instead whereof most
Greeks use Furred Caps, of what Form or Color they please: Their Ancient
Habits are now quite out of Date, and they differ so much from them, that
whereas they formerly delighted much in long and spreading Hair, in regard of
which Homer often calls 'em (...), The long Hair'd Greeks; they now Shave all
their Heads, and account it ridiculous in the Franks not to follow their
Example. Women's Habit.
The Women, as the Turks, wear long Vests, Muslin Shifts, and Drawers of
Cambrick reaching to their Feet; their Girdles are of twisted Silk neatly Wove,
and Embos'd with Gold, Silver, or Silver Gilt, set thick with Saphirs,
Em'ralds, Rubies, or Diamonds; and those, whose Circumstances will not afford
'em to follow this Fashion, procure Sophisticate Stones, and Counterfeited
Metal to imitate it as nearly as possible.

Description of the Grecian Women.
THEIR Women are, for the most part, exquisitely shaped, generally of a brown
Complexion, excellently featured, and their Disposition of all People the most
amorous; which Inclination of theirs is so well known to their Husbands, that
they take all imaginable care to preserve them for their own Embraces, who
esteem it no great Crime to receive another, as often as Opportunity favors
their industrious Endeavors: Nature does so early teach 'em the advantages of
Beauty, that they use all possible means not only to preserve their Stock but
to increase it, by the counterfeit addition of a sophisticate Complexion; And
so much do they esteem the Art of Painting, that they stain the very Nails of
their Toes and Fingers, with a certain lively kind of red.

Soon decayed
IT is to this perhaps, they owe the numerous furrows of a wrinkled Forhead,
before they have attained the Age of Forty Five, at which time, (contemned by
their Relations,) they are employed in all the Business of the House, and the
most menial Offices of a common Servant.

A kissing Custom.
KISSING any but their Husbands, is esteemed a Crime unpardonable; unless,
between the Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior, at which time both Men
and Women kiss promiscuously all they meet; The Man first kissing the Woman on
her left Cheek, tells her in a Voice as grave as the occasion, God is Risen,
when she upon his right Cheek yielding back the Compliment, makes answer
zealously, His Blessing be upon us.

THEIR Houses are for the most part indifferently furnished, not using
Feather-beds, but like the Turks content to sleep on Mattresses: Their Language
different from the ancient Greek.
Their Language is a much corrupted Dialect, and differs so extremely from the
ancient Greek, now only known to Scholars, that they hardly make a shift to
understand one Word in ten, when Strangers speak it.

Their four Patriarchs.
NOW though the Greeks in all things but Religion are subservient to the Laws of
Turkey, they have yet four Patriarchs of their own, who exercise a kind of
mixed Authority over them in Temporal, as well as Spiritual Affairs; They are
those of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch, or rather
Damascus; These four have their several Districts of Government. He of
Constantinople has by much, the largest Share; extending his Jurisdiction over
all the Greeks in the Europaean Turkey, most part of Asia Minor, Colchis, and
the Northern Coast of the Black Sea; those in Egypt and Arabia, are under the
Patriarch of Alexandria; he of Jerusalem has Authority over those in Palestine,
and all the Parts adjacent; and the Greeks of Asia Major and Armenia Minor are
subservient to the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Damascus.

How Elected.
THE Patriarchs are all Elected by a Synod of Bishops, under whom in most of the
abovenam'd Places, the Greeks are tolerated in a free, and unmolested Exercise
of their Religion, in Churches and in Monasteries, which notwithstanding, they
are not suffered to Rebuild, when Ruined, without vast Presents to the
Ministers of State; By which means all the Places of their public Worship
decreasing daily, they become if possible, each Year more ignorant than the
foregoing: This, together with the tempting Opportunities of turning Turks,
made more desirable by the oppressive Tyranny, with which their crafty Masters
crush their Spirits, draws Multitudes away to a Profession of the Turkish
Faith, choosing rather the transitory Enjoyment of a few small Privileges here
on Earth, than the lasting Crown of Glory in a promised Heaven hereafter.

What Age their Women Marry at.
THE Women Marry very Young, and yet are apt to fancy, if they tarry for a
Husband till twelve or fourteen Years of Age, Good-luck has quite forsaken
them. The Bargain being made between the Parents, or Relations, for till then,
Love, and Good-liking must be kept at distance: A Door is opened, and the Lover
admitted to his Mistresses Conversation, who is generally of too kind a Temper
to put him to the trouble of a tedious Siege, and to avoid that Incivility,
yields frequently upon the first Attack, perhaps because inclinable by Nature,
to profess the same Opinion with an ancient Countryman of hers, who gives us
this advice. (...)
(...)
Whatever you do, do soon, for if done late,
You rob the Favor of near half its weight.


Description of their Weddings.
THE Wedding Day appointed, certain Men are invited, after the manner of our
Bride-Men, who are generally Rivals, or such at least, as the suspicious
Bridegroom thinks he has more cause than ordinary to be jealous of. These must
each Man present a Ring, which by the Priest is interchangeably removed from
the Bride's to the Bridegroom's Finger; after which it is esteemed a Crime,
almost of an Incestuous Nature, for these Bridemen to commit Adultery with the
Wife, to whom they gave such a Ring, by way of Renunciation from thence forward
of all Right or Pretension whatsoever to her Love or Person.

An ancient Custom.
THESE lead the Bridegroom through the Streets, as finely Dressed as his
Circumstances will permit; upon his Head he wears a flowery Garland, which
putting me in mind of ancient Ways of crowning Oxen, when they lead 'em to the
Altar, obliged me to reflect upon the horny Fate, which few Greek Wives fail of
giving them, and made me pity the dull Victim, moving on with-the smallest
apprehension of his Danger, for a Sacrifice to Matrimony.

HE is surrounded by a Company of his Relations and Acquaintance, attended by a
noisy number of Boys, and Fellows with Ghittars, Pipes, Drums, Timbrels, and
other Music, dancing antickly about the Company, with grinning Faces and
strange apish Gestures: As they pass along, there follow Men with Bottles and
Glasses, running up and down, from one place to another, and offering Wine to
every Man to drink as they are walking through the Streets. Thus they resolve to
lose no time, where Wine or Mirth invites their Application, still retaining,
spite of all their Losses, that vivacity of Temper in their Cups, which
formerly gave birth to an Old Proverb, which describing gayety of Humor, does
it by these Words, The Original of an old Proverb.
As merry as a Greek.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE CUT, Annexed, which Represents a GRECIAN WEDDING.
A. A. THE Two Janissaries, who attend, as a Guard, to defend them from the
Insults of the Turks, one in the Front, and another in the Rear of the
Procession. B. The Priest. C. The Bride. D. The Bridegroom. E. The Mother, or
nearest Female Relation of the Bride. F. F. The Two Bridemen. G. G. G. The
Company, Invited to the Wedding. H. A Boy carrying a Torch before the Company.
I. I. I. The Musicians, attending the Company. K. K. K. Persons, hired to Sing,
and Dance Antickly before the Company. L. A Person employed to fill Wine to the
Company. M. A Man, who carries a Basket of Fruit for their Entertainment, as
they Walk. N. N. Turks Observing the Procession. O. A Turkish Mosque, or
Church. P. A Turkish House, as commonly Built.
depiction of a Grecian wedding A GRECIAN WEDDING
^o the Highly Honrd Sr William Wentworth ^f Bretton Hall in Yorkshire Baronet.

Kirkall sculp




AFTER the Men, the Women come, in a Knott by themselves, and in the midst, the
Bride, all covered with a Veil of Lawn; which reaches to her Heels, made like a
Sack, without the smallest peeping Place for her imprisoned Eyes, tied pretty
close about the Neck, and falling widely from the Head, over the sides of a
square piece of Pastboard like a Trencher, over which is hung a Garland of the
sweetest Flowers.

IN this Order they advance, guarded before and behind by Janissaries, for fear
of Insults from the Turkish Rabble. At the Church, the Priest is sure to meet
them, and entering there, A method to prevent Enchantments.
the Bridegroom leaves his Dagger sticking in the Door, for fear of Incantations
or Enchantments, often practiced in this Country, by which means, they pretend
to render the most vigorous Bridegroom altogether Impotent upon his Wedding
Night.

HOWEVER, armed against so unlucky a Disappointment, they go into Church, and
by the Priest are joined, with several Prayers for the successful Issue of
their Marriage; after which, they change their Garlands, and retire to their
Houses, where the remainder of the Day being spent in loud Carousing and making
merry, the New-married Couple are put to Bed, A way to prove Virginity.
and the next Morning early, the Mother, or nearest Female Relation of the
Bride, coming into their Chamber, takes possession of the Wedding Sheets, to be
preserved as a perpetual Proof of her Dear Daughter's sure Virginity.

I WILL tell you a pleasant Story, and leave your-self to guess, how admirably
Nature has endued the nimble-minded Grecian Ladies, with the finest
qualifications in the World, for Cuckolding their Husbands.

A pleasant Story of a Grecian Lady.
THERE is a little Village, called Belgrade, about fifteen Miles from
Constantinople, wonderfully pleasant for its airy Situation; here a Greek, who
was grown rich by Merchandising, kept a very pretty Country House, and in it a
young Wife, extremely handsome, but, as somewhat brisker than he wished her,
she alarmed his Jealousy to watch her strictly, nor would he often let her walk
alone in the adjoining Groves and Meadows.

HOWEVER, I was one Day going by a Wood-side, at the bottom of a Hill to Angle
in a River, that ran by it, and perceived upon the Bank a charming youthful
Lady busy at her Needle, with a Pot of Water standing by her, I immediately
imagined right, and guessed her the fine Wife of the rich Greek abovenam'd; I
must own I was surpised to find her, so, beyond my expectation, gay and
beautiful; I saw she was alone, and ventured to address her in Italian, she
returned my Salutation in that Language, and permitted me to sit down by her,
and converse with all the Liberties of decent Familiarity.

Her familiar Temper.
SHE presently began to make Complaint of the Restriction she was under, by her
Husbands Jealousy, and the Restraint, which Women in that Country were obliged
to undergo, and really thence proceeded to make such kind advances, and so
prettily encourage me to hope her favor, ever I asked it, that I only wanted
vanity, to think I might have met success in any kind of offer, Youth, or
Inclination might have tempted me to make her.

A wonderful Presence of Mind.
BUT on a sudden, in the Height of her Discourse and Gayety, we heard a Voice
among the Trees upon the other side of the River, Immediately she knew it was
her Husband, and expecting every moment, when he would appear in sight, was
sure he must Discover me to have been talking with her, so the very minute,
that he called her, she fell sideways on the Ground, extended both her Arms
with natural negligence, let drop the Silk she was at Work upon, and seemed as
much Asleep, as if she really had been so.

IT WAS no hard Task to guess the meaning of this Counterfeited Slumber, so that,
willing to prevent all cause of Jealousy, instead of striving to get out of
Sight, I started up, and bending forward, looked upon her Face, as if surpised
to find a Woman in that Place and Posture.

I had hardly time to regulate my Air of Wonder, when the Greek appeared upon
the Bank directly opposite; he Started, when he saw the Posture of his Wife,
and me so near her. I pretended an Amazement equal to his own, at his
appearance, and was just about to ask him, if he knew that Lady, when he
Interrupted my design by Hallowing, as loud as he could possibly, to wake his
Consort.

SHE, Poor Creature, was so fast asleep, that all his Noises were in vain, she
Slumbred on, till I, as willing to give all the Countenance Imaginable to her
Politic Contrivance, took her by the Arm and shook her pretty roughly; An
admirable Counterfeit.
at this she Roused, and having rubbed her Eyes with admirable Cunning, looked
about her, and was, doubtless, much surpised to see me there, it having been
so long, since we Discoursed together.

HOWEVER, I was pleased to see, how excellently she contrived to humor wonder,
mixed with an alloy of Modesty, both which I fear, and ten to one, you will think
so by the Sequel, were alike Strangers to her Nature; she started up upon her
Feet, and fixed her Eyes upon me with an Artful Wildness, running Backwards, as
I offered to approach her, with a Shriek or two enough to Frighten all the
Tigers in the Wilderness.

THE more to take all cause of Apprehension from the Staring Husband, I
advanced, as she retired, still bowing, and assuring her I meant no harm,
desiring her to Apprehend no danger from my presence, who was drawn by Accident
to Walk that way, and by her Charms detained to gaze upon her Person; all this
while the Subtle Female Devil kept a Side-long-glance upon her Husbands
Countenance, who seemed diverted at the Fright, my Compliments had put her in;
she saw him smile, and was resolved to keep up the Conceit, wherefore, while I
still continued Bowing and Addressed her with a Thousand Congees, she Inhumanely
stooped down, and snatching up the Earthen Pot, which stood upon the Ground,
threw full three Pints of Water in my Face and Bosom.

An unexpected return of Civility.
A Reasonable Woman, one would think, had been contented with this first Attack,
but she, it seems, was of another mind, for while I stooped to shake the Water
from my Eyes and Linen, she fell upon me like a Lioness, Tore of my Perriwig,
and laid about her at so Merciless a Rate, that I began to think the Safest way
would be to Fly, where Fighting was esteemed Dishonorable.

ACCORDINGLY I turned about in order to escape, but my she Adversary caught me
by the Collar on the Back-part of my Neck, and pushed me on as fast as I well
cared to run, still Thumping me upon the Back, and calling Names as loud as
possible, till being got at some considerable distance from her Husband, who
was all this while half Dead with Laughing, A Pleasant way of Assignation.
she depressed her Voice, and in the Softest Accents she could utter, cried,
Fail not to meet me here to Morrow, and as soon as she had spoke these Words,
she pushed me forward, and ran back again as fast as she was Able.

THE turn of this last part of the Intrigue surprised me ten times more than
all the rest; However, I ran back to fetch my Periwig, while she was crossing a
small Bridge a little higher to get over to her Husband, who as soon as his
long fit of Mirth allowed an Interval, cried out to me, Excuse her Sir, the
Grecian Wives are never used to Strangers Company, and only love their
Husbands Conversation. A mistaken Husband.
As soon as he had made this Speech, he fell a laughing more than ever, and it
was with much ado, I could forbear to follow his Example, when I saw the Fool
begin to kiss his loving Wife, and hug her in his Arms, till they got out of
sight in their way homeward.

I must confess I sped so Ill at first, that I had little cause to think my
watery Entertainment was an Omen of Success in the Conclusion; Water will at any
time extinguish Fires, that have but just begun to blaze, and she had cooled my
Flames a little too soon to tempt 'em to a second kindling, so that I forbore
for many reasons going next Day to the aforesaid Place of Assignation.

A second Meeting.
BUT 'twas about a Fortnight after, when, as I was walking up a Lane, which ran
along the backside of her Husband's House, she saw, and beckoned me to a small
Summer House, in which she sat at Work, as formerly; Good-Manners led me to
embraee the Invitation, where the first Demand was, Why I did not come the Day
appointed? I excused it as I could, and she proceeded with a number of
Assurances to tell me, how concerned she was that she had been obliged, against
her Will, to use me so uncivilly, and in short, proceeded to such kind
Expressions, that I every moment looked to have another Invitation to the
Rivers side.

A surprise as bad as the former.
BUT in the midst of her Discourse, instead of answering my Expectation, by
renewing her kind Summons, she on a sudden raised her Voice to double height,
began to spit upon me, and abuse me to a wonderful degree; however, I had
hardly time to be surpised, before I guessed the reason of her Change, by
seeing her turn round, and call as loud as she could speak, Dear, Dear, come
hither Dear, and shoot this Stranger through the Head, I cannot live in quiet for
him: The moment after came the Husband, peeping over his Wives Shoulder,
looking after me, who never staid to justify my self against the Accusation,
but made the utmost have to get away, least he should take an Opportunity to
do, as his Good-natured Lady had commanded him.

I staid at Belgrade some Weeks longer, but took care to go no more that way,
and by the strange Discovery I made hereby of Women's Temper, I resolved to bear
in my Memory two Maxims of this Country, which are, if I mistake not, left as
follows.

Two Grecian Maxims.
The first is, (...)
A Woman knows nothing, but what she has a mind to.


And the other, (...)
You that are about Marrying, look upon your Neighbors.


The Grecian Funerals.
THEY differ little in their Modern from their Ancient Funerals, the Parent,
Wife, or nearest of the Kindred catches the departing Breath, by joining Mouths
with those, who die; when dead, they wash their Bodies with the richest Oils,
and then, instead of putting on a Winding Sheet, adorn 'em in the finest
Clothes, they wore while living.

Mercenary Mourners.
THEN they lay them on an open Bier upon a Quilt, or Mattress, twisted round
with Garlands of a hundred various kinds of Flowers, and conduct 'em to the
Place appointed for their Burial, followed by the weeping Friends of the
Deceased, who are preceeded by a certain Number of bir'd Mourners, commonly of
Jewish Women, who by constant Practice of their Hypocritical Concern, become
such Mistresses of Tears and Groanings, that by howling, as they go along, with
tearing off their Hair, beating their Breasts, and lamentably weeping in a
counterfeited Sorrow, they extract a real Flood of Tears, from many
tenderhearted People, altogether unconcerned in the occasion of their
Lamentations; so that they appear exact observers of the following Advice of
that admirable Tragedian Seneca. Sen. Tra. Agam.
Lacrymas, Lacrymis miscere juvat.
The mixing Tears with Tears affords a melancholy sort of Comfort.


THEY lay the Body in the Grave without a Coffin, cutting first his Clothes to
pieces with their Penknives, lest the Corpse should be dug up by needy People
for the sake thereof; they throw great Boughs of Cypress on the Grave, and hang
it, as we do Atcheivements, over the Door of the Deceased Person's House.

An ancient Custom.
THE Women generally cut a Lock of Hair and tie it to the Body of their dead
Relation; why they use so odd a Custom none could tell me, but it is certain
they received it from the Practice of their Ancestors, for, that 'twas used
among the ancient Greeks, appears in many Writers, but particularly in the
three and twentieth Iliad of Homer, where he speaks as follows of Achilles,
celebrating the Funeral of Patroclus. Hom. Iliad. 23.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Standing apart the Pile, where lay the Dead,
He cuts the yellow Tresses from his Head.
Tresses, he long ever that to Sperchius vowed,
And, turning to his Friend, thus spoke aloud,
Since I must never, after all my Toil,
Return to visit my dear Native Soil;
On loved Patroclus I these Locks bestow,
That he may bear 'em to my Friends below.
This said, His comely Hair he neatly spread,
And laid it in the Hand of his Companion, Dead.


Another ancient Grecian Custom.
BESIDES their Hair, they often bury in the Graves of their Relations things of
rich and costly Value, such as Bracelets, Rings, Girdles and the like; this
also is an ancient Custom, for the Greeks of Note were burnt of old, and had
their Funeral Piles enriched with precious Jewels, Gums, Sheep, Horses,
Clothes, and every thing of worth, to serve their Uses in the other World: The
Ceremony may be well conceived by a description you may find in Statius of the
solemn Funeral of Archemorus. Stat. Lib. 6.
-- Non unquam opulentior illo
Ante cinis; crepitant gemmae atque immaue liquescit
Argentum, and pictis exudat vestibus aurum.
Nec non Assyriis pinguescunt robora succis,
Pallentique croco strident ardentia mella,
Spumantesque mero paterae verguntur, and atri
Sanguinis and rapti gratissima cymbia lactis.
Tunc septem numero turmas (centenus ubique
Surgit eques) versis ducunt insignibus ipsi
Grajugenae Reges, lustrantque ex more sinistro
Orb rogum, and stantes inclinant pulvere flammas,
Ter curvos egere sinus, illisaque telis
Tela sonant, quater horrendum pepulere fragorem
Arma, quater mollem famularum brachia planctum;
Semianimes alter pecudes, spirantia and ignis
Accipit armenta.
Never till then, such Wealth did Ashes know,
Torrents of melted Gold and Silver flow;
The crackling Diamonds snap amidst the Fire,
And Robes consume in Flames, that shine with golden Wyre;
Oaks rich in Syrian Gums, thrown on, blaze high,
Honey and Saffron hiss against the Sky;
O'er-flowing Bowls of Wine are next thrown in,
Black Blood and mingled Milk to boil begin;
Next Sev'n brave Bands of Warriors crown the Plain,
(An hundred gallant Soldiers formed each Train,)
The Grecian Monarchs all these Squadrons led,
And shone conspicuous at their Warlike Head,
These, Marching to the left, the Pile surround,
With Clouds of choking Dust the Fire confound,
And trail their mournful Ensigns on the Ground.
Thrice round the Pile they clash their dreadful Swords,
Four times their battered Arms a horrid sound affords,
Four times the Slaves their naked Bosoms beat,
As often to Heaven, their doleful Cries repeat,
While numerous Flocks, and Beasts half Slain expire,
Amidst the rising Flames of a less noble Fire.


BY what has now been said, the Reader will perceive the Greeks extremely
fallen from their ancient Glory; and indeed they have not only lost their
Wisdom, but their very Industry, deserving nothing less than the Encomium,
Juvenal thought fit to give them upon that account. Juv. Sat. 3.
Ingenium velox, audacia perdita, sermo
Promptus, and Isaeo torrentior: ede quid illum
Esse putes, quemvis hominem secum attulit ad nos;
Grammaticus, Rhetor, Geometres, Pictor, Aliptes,
Augur, Schoenobates, Medicus, Magus; omnia novit
Graeculus efuriens; in coelum jusseris, ibit.
Quick in his Apprehension, Bold in Speech,
Such Eloquence Isaeus could not reach;
Say what you would have him be, and he is the Man,
All Trades he brings us, and all Things he can.
Do You want Grammarians? That Is his boasted Skill,
A Rhetorician? There you have him still.
Would you a Painter be? He Will teach you when you will.
Would you be taught the Geometric Art?
It Is still the same to him, he will play that Part.
Would you in short, Southsay'r, or Conj'rer be:
There Is none so Skilled in both those Arts, as he.
Would you turn Doctor? He Will not fail your hopes;
Or else he will teach you Dancing on the Ropes.
In fine, the needy Greek does all things know,
Bid him ride Post to Heaven, and strait to Heaven he will go.


CHAP. XXII. Of the Grecian Religion.
The Merit of the ancient Grecian Church.
THE Grecian Church in former Ages has been famous for Converting many Nations
to the Doctrine of Christianity, but is as much decayed at present as their
Temporal Affairs, a barbarous Ignorance possessing Universally their Notions of
Religion.

WIDELY do they differ, as to point of Faith, from Roman Principles, and though
they often have professed a perfect Reconciliation to the Tenets of that
Church, and frequently agreed on certain Articles of Union, it was only at
such times as being pinched by Poverty or other Inconveniences, they hoped
Redress from flattering the Papal Clergy into a Belief, that they were willing
to embrace the Romish Doctrine.

The Ignorance of the Modern.
I have before informed you they are subject to the Power of four Patriarchs,
those in former times were Men of Learning, and undoubted Piety, chosen to
their Offices for their Integrity of Life, and exemplary Gravity in
Conversation; now the highest Briber carries it, and the declining Dignity is
strangely sunk from ancient Worth to Ignorance and Poverty.

Two sorts of Grecian Priests.
HOWEVER, under these superior Members of the Modern Grecian Church, are found
two kind of Priests, the first a sort of Monks, despisers of the World, and all
its Vanities, who taking leave of Temporal Affairs, immure themselves for Life
within the Walls of certain strong and ancient Monasteries, which are spread in
Numbers over all their Country: And the second are those common Parish Priests,
ordained by the abovenam'd Patriarchs to teach the People the Great Duties of
Religion, a Task for which they are but ill provided, while depressed by such a
weight of Slavery and Ignorance.

The Monks called Coloiero's.
THE First, the Greeks distinguish by the Name of Coloiero's, or Monastic's, and
among the many Places, which contain the Brothers of their Order, Mount Athos
is the Chief; for on that Hill alone, stand four and twenty spacious Convents,
constantly maintaining near seven thousand Monks, who live retired, by Oath
obliged to a perpetual Celibacy, and a Life entirely separated from the Layety
of their Religion.

The Coloiero's way of living
THEY wear a kind of long black Gowns and Hoods, of a course hairy Substance,
letting grow their Locks to inconvenient length, in contradiction to the
Shaving Custom of the Roman Clergy; They live by their own Labors on what poor
Provision they can get by Tillage, Spinning, and Improving every way the
Product of the Country round 'em; They are grave, austere, and modest of
Behavior, and by the Poor unknowing Greeks, set out to Strangers with a
thousand high Encomiums on their Learning and Capacities, but fall so, short of
expectation when conversed with by a Traveller, and are so much involved in the
Stupidity of their subverted Countrymen, that all I learned by making them a
Visit, was the truth of an Expression, of the admirable Juvenal, who tells us,
Fronti nulla fides, There is no knowing a Man's Soul by his Countenance: And
another honest Spanish Proverb, that declares, A Spanish Proverb.
No es tan bravo el Leon come le pintan, that is, The Lion is not half so
fierce as they paint him.

The Parish Priests, described.
THE other Priests of Greece, if possible, are still more ignorant than they,
and scatt'red numerously up and down the Country, not being very much respected
by the common People, nor in Dress or Manners very different from them; it is a
wonder, if a Man considers the oppressive Burden of that Slavery, which
crushes 'em, how they have preserved the very Faith of Christians, which they
do not only rigidly profess, but to support its Doctrine, still retain the
following Principles.

Their opposition to the Romish Church.
IN opposition to the Romish Church, which they esteem Schismatical, and laugh
at the Assertion of the Papal Title to the Blessing of Infallibility, they
hold, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from God the Father only.

Their Notion of the Eucharist.
THEY Administer the Eucharist in both kinds, but as if the very Practice of
Religion should submit to the Intemperance of a licentious People, they esteem
the Wine, not any way available, unless they drink it in considerable
quantities, a sign say they, that what we do, we do with satisfaction, and a
heartiness, that proves we bear respect to the injunction; while the moderate
sipping of your Western Churches seems to speak a kind of force upon your
Inclinations.

Leavened Bread.
THEY leaven all the Bread they use in Administration of the Sacrament,
esteeming such, as is not so prepared, unworthy the Great Use they are to put
it to.

Grecian Paintings.
THEY admit of Paintings on the outward Walls, and inward Ornaments of all their
Churches, drawing frequently the Virgin, which you may observe, the Eastern
Nations always represent a Blackamoore, the Figure of Almighty God, like an old
Man with a white Beard, the Holy Ghost, and many of the twelve Apostles, with
the later Fathers of the Church, as near as they can place 'em to the Altar.

The Picture of St. George.
AMONGST the Paintings of the Greeks, Armenians, and some other Eastern
Christians, nothing is so common as the Representation of St. George on
Horseback, fighting with a Dragon, as in the Pictures on our Sign-Posts in
Great Britain; why they have this Figure in such Vogue among them, I could
never meet a Priest of sense enough to tell me, but am apt to think that ^
Basilius, and some other ancient Writers are of Opinion, that much celebrated
Piece is nothing but an emblematical Design. An Emblematical Representation.
St. George, as painted like a well armed Warrior, representing a good
Christian, strongly opposed by a Great Dragon, that is the Devil, who is
vanquished by him, and thereby the Kings Daughter, that is the Church of
Christ, preserved from being devoured by her dreadful Adversary; and this
Opinion is the more authentic, because in every other Place but England, we
shall seldom see the Picture of St. George, but in some ancient Church, or
Monastery, and in either of those places seldom miss it.

The Ignorance of Modern Greeks in Painting.
NOW, though they seem to value Painting, they have nothing of the Genius of their
famed Apelles left among them; what they do is very flat, and scarce deserves a
better Name than that of daubing; and it is observable, that, notwithstanding
their respect for Pictures, they abhor all sorts of Sculpture, with a strange
antipathy, refusing to admit them in their Churches, or even Dwelling Houses,
out of a ridiculous Opinion, that the very looking on such Pieces savours of
Idolatry.

Ever burning Lamps.
VAST quantities of Oil they daily wast, by burning it in Lamps, in all their
Churches, never suffering them to extinguish, as believing it a sort of Duty
well received by God, and showing their respect to the Receptacle of his
Divinity.

Their Notions of the State of the Soul after Death.
THEY all agree in the necessity of using Extreme Unction, which they practice,
as inducted by St. James; they rigorously dissent from the Opinion of the Roman
Catholics, in relation to the Existence of a Purgatory; maintaining, most of
them at least, that the departed Souls of Mortal Men are sensible of neither
Joy nor Torment till the Day of Judgment.

The Grecian Holy Days.
THE Year they reckon in the Roman way, but mark above an hundred Holy Days, to
be observed on pain of Excommunication; this I take to be an undeniable Example
of their hatred to Activity, and Inclinations to the Practice of an idle and
luxurious Life, forgetting Misery, while drowned in Sloth, and wallowing
supinely in the Down of Idleness, amidst those torturing Proofs of Slavery,
which ought to sting a generous Mind with Sense of his Misfortunes.

Their Fasts and Feasts.
THEY Fast on Wednesdays, Fridays, and all Holy Eves, but Feast on Saturday,
because say they, it was the ancient Sabbath, but I rather am inclined to
think, because they are unwilling to omit the least pretense, whereby they may
indulge a craving Appetite.

How far they tolerate Matrimony.
THE Clergy are allowed to Marry once, but Bigamy is looked upon too wanton a
desire to be permitted them, and Trigamy is so abhorred by all the Greeks, that
it is never known among them, but forbidden with the strictest Prohibition even
to the Laity themselves.

Their Lents.
THEY keep four Lents within the Year, so strictly, that in either it is esteemed
a damnable Transgression, and a Sin beyond excuse, to eat the smallest Piece of
Flesh, or Fish, wherein there is a drop of Blood contained; yet one Exception
may be made to this strict Rule, because the Lent preceding Easter, is not
held so rigid as the other, wherefore all the Laity are then allowed to eat
what kind of Fish their Fancy leads 'em to, or Circumstances can afford 'em.

Their Liturgies, and universal Ignorance, and Stupidity
THEY read the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom, unless upon their Festivals, and then
their Priests attired Pontifically, read St. Basil's, but with little Signs of
Decency or Devotion; and indeed so miserably are they led away by love of
Idleness, and long Captivity, that they possess in any kind, but few of those
Perfections, which, in former times, distinguished their Politer Countrymen,
retaining nothing but their Name, their very Language being, as I said before,
entirely lost among them; and that ruined Nation sunk so low, that from the
dread and admiration of the distant World, they are become at present the
contempt and pity of the vilest Wretches of the whole Creation; such is the
uncertainty of humane Blessings, and the certain Frailty of our weak Mortality.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Armenians and their Religion.
What the Armenians are.
THAT Christian Church, which calls its self Armenian, is in Magnitude far more
Considerable than the Grecian, and consists of the displaced Inhabitants of
those large Tracts of Land, which bore the Name, that now distinguishes her
People, who have Widely spread themselves in many Countries, and are numerously
Scattered up and down the Countries subject to the Great Mogul, Grand Signior
and the King of Persia.

Their patriarchal Seat.
AT Tyberis, a large City in the Territories of the last, they live in very
great respect among the Natives, and are very Wealthy by the means of Traffic.
Here their Patriarch has his Seat, and here the Richest and most Noble of their
People fix their Dwellings.

Great Numbers subject to the Turkish Sultan.
BUT the occasion of my speaking of 'em here is, that there are Vast Numbers,
like the Greeks, remaining subject to the Government of the Grand Signior, who
possesses the Dominion of their Ancient Monarchs, by the unresisted force of an
Illegal Usurpation, from the Right of Conquest, Handed down from Prince to
Prince, for Ages long since past, so that they now retain no notion of their
former liberty, but live dependant on the Power of a Despotick Tyrant.

Their Privileges.
IN this however, they have better Fortune than their Fellow-Slaves, the Greeks,
that they are free from that unnatural Duty of delivering their Children, to be
sent upon Triennial Seizures to Constantinople, and enjoy a Hundred Privileges
more, Why given them.
because a certain Countryman of theirs, a Flatterer of Mahomets, and one, who
used to Prophecy his Future Greatness, gained a Promise from him, that he
would injoin his Followers, if ever they should see occasion to Invade Armenia,
and the will of God should give it to their Power, that they would distinguish
the Inhabitants from other Conquered People, by such large Immunities, as
should alleviate the Burden of their Losses.

Their Character.
THEY are very Ignorant, but very Honest, Industrious in their Natures, Slow to
Anger, and extremely willing to forgive an Injury; Abstemious in their Diet,
little Drinkers, and inclined to Melancholy and Sedate Retirements; Devout, and
Superstitious in a High degree; Patient in Affliction, nor too soon Buoyed up
beyond themselves, by the Successful turns of Chance, or their Endeavors.

The Enmity between the Greeks and them.
IN former Ages they were subject to the Grecian Patriarch of Constantinople,
but about the time of the Eutychian Heresy, Revolted from his Jurisdiction, and
had met with such unbecoming Usage, from the Proud Deportment of the Greeks in
those Old Times, that ever since, they have Abhorred their Memory, and now
profess so rancour'd an Aversion to the People of that Name, that if by Chance
(for it but rarely happens) any Greek becomes a Convert to the Faith of the
Armenians, they refuse admiting him a Member of their Church, till they have
Rebaptiz'd him after their own Method.

The number, and piety of their Bishops.
THERE are above three hundred Bishops of that Nation, scattered strangely up
and down, with poor Allowances for the support of their Degree; which
notwithstanding is sufficiently atton'd for, by the Veneration paid 'em from
the common People, and the humble dictates of their own Morality, which teaches
them contentedly to spend their Lives in peaceful Poverty, and raise their
Wishes to a Future Prospect, far surpassing the chimerical Advantages, accruing
from the gross and earthly Blessings, which attend the aim of Prosperous
Ambition.

THE Tenets of their Faith are gathered from the several Opinions of the
Eastern Churches, strangely shuffled into an obscure Collection; hardly one in
fifty can inform a Stranger in the Principles and Grounds of the Religion he
professes: But the Foundation of their Faith is altogether built upon the
following Articles.

Their Notion of one Nature in Christ.
THEY will allow in Christ one Nature only; but yet maintain this Notion with a
difference from Eutyches, and the other Introducers of that Heresy; for whereas
they taught the Nature of our Savior to be one, by a commixture of Divine and
Human, the Armenians hold the Union of those Natures to be made by an entire
Conjunction, as the Soul of Man is joined to his corporeal Substance.

Some other Tenets.
THEY Administer the Sacrament in both kinds, but ardently deny all notion of
the real Presence in it: They hold a Purgatory, but reject all praying for the
Dead; they disallow of the Supremacy of the Roman Church, and join with that of
Greece in their Assertion, that the Holy Ghost proceeds but from the Father
only, and that the Souls of the Departed, Good or Bad, must never feel the
smallest share of Joy or Torment, till the dreadful Day of Universal Judgment.

The abstemiousness of their Priests.
THEIR Clergy, like the Greeks, are once, and only once, allowed to Marry; and
so very rigid and austerely Exemplary are their Lives, that they abstain from
Flesh of any kind, nor can by any means be brought to eat it oftener than five
times a Year; nor would they then, but in compliance with the humor of the
common People, who, as Superstitious in a high degree, might be persuaded to
imagine it a Sin to feed on Flesh, should they observe their Priests refuse to
do it.

Their frequent Fasting.
THEY place the greatest Merit in the World, in duly keeping Lent, which they
observe with wonderful Devotion and Austerity; and indeed, the vulgar Sort, as
knowing little else of their Religion, take such care to be beforehand in this
Point, that I have frequently observed them fast Day after Day without
complaining; and it may be said, within the bounds of Truth, that they fast
three Days out of every seven.

They Fast on Christmas Day.
AMONG the many other Days, whereon the Stamp of Custom has enjoined their
Fasting, it is observable they always do it upon Christmass-Day with double
Strictness; what their reason is they could not tell me; use has made it now a
Law, and they esteem it as their Duty to obey and keep it.

Their methods of Assembling to Devotion.
AS for Churches, they have very few, and those they have, are so decayed by
Time, or Accident, that they are hardly fit to hold an Audience; wherefore they
assemble to their public Prayers, and other Ceremonies, in low, private
Chambers, where they may be free from Noise, and undisturbed in the calm
Exercise of their Religion. They are seldom fond of Painting, but are so
entirely of the Greeks Opinion, as to Sculptures, that they cannot bear to see
'em in their Houses.

The Turkish Policy to destroy their Churches.
IT is observable, that though the Turks in many things give greater Toleration to
the Armenians than their other Subjects, yet they use the same inhuman art to
ruin their Religion, never giving them Permission to re-build a Church, when
once decayed; unless they are bribed to it at so high a Rate, that it is a very
rare attempt to ask a License for that purpose from the Turkish Officers, who
always learn one Art, that is, to make the most, if not the best of their
Preferments.

Their Postures of Prayer.
THEIR postures, when at Prayers, is like the Turks, cross-legg'd; those past,
they elevate their Bodies to a straiter Pitch, and with the greatest Silence
listen to their Priest, who reads from the Chaldean Tongue such Chapters, as he
thinks convenient, still expounding, as he goes along, the Mystery of what he
reads.

Their Forms of Public Devotion.
THIS Service over, they again repeat their Prayers, in the same Posture as
before, the Priest excepted, who then always turns his Face directly to the
Altar, and with lifted Hands and Eyes invokes a Blessing on his zealous
Auditory: Prayers once over, every Man, as he goes round the Room in order to
depart, kneels down before the Priest, or Bishop, if there is one present, and
while he kisses his left Hand, is strok'd upon the Head, and Blessed devoutly
by the other.

IT is at these Assemblies, that the Priest or Bishop nominates the Feasts or
Fasts, which are to be observed the Week ensuing, after which no plea of
Business, or extraordinary Occasions can prevail to get a Dispensation, or
acquit them from the Duty; and in order to prevent all expectation of
succeeding in Petitions of that nature, they have formed a Sentence, which by
common use is grown a Proverb, and is generally painted in the Letters of their
Language, on the Walls or Cielings of their Places of Devotion, and the Houses,
where they dwell: The Words are these, An Armenian Proverb.
As the Almighty God is infinitely greater than the World and all therein, by
so much ought our earthly Business to give way to his great Worship.

I told my Reader in the beginning of the Chapter, that the People of this
Nation are extremely Poor, and yet entirely Honest; an extraordinary Character,
yet what they very well deserve, as what I am about to tell you is a fair
Example.

A Story of a young Armenian, land his Honesty.
THERE was at the abovenam'd City of Tyberis, a young Man not thirty Years of
Age, the only Son of an Armenian Merchant, who was yet so poor, as hardly to be
capable of living in a tolerable Credit: This young Man was much in Love with
the fair Daughter of a Countryman of his, who gratefully returned his Passion
with an equal value; But both these Families were Poor and Honest, therefore
could not see the smallest possibility of doing well, should they by Marriage
suffer the fond Couple to increase a Charge, they found it very difficult to
bear without addition.

A bad Condition.
THE hardship of their Fortune, and sincerity of their Affection half distracted
them, when they reflected, that the Barrier, which prevented their so much
desired Bliss, was never likely to be taken off, and found that every Day, as
Love increased, their Poverty grew greater.

THE Poor young Man, industriously inclined, had tried all ways of bettering
his Circumstances, but had much ado by all his Labor to support a Livelihood,
and was become so melancholy by the misery of his Condition, oppressed at once
by Love and Indigence, that he could find no Comfort, but in the Conversation
of his Mistress, and that a sort of anxious Joy, An anxious Pleasure.
because, as often as it represented to his Thoughts the Blessings, he should
gain by her Possession, it recoiled upon his Memory, that 'twas almost
impossible to obtain so great a happiness.

HE often walked disconsolately out of Town, and wandered up and down, unmindful
of his Steps, indulging Solitude as a loved means of Contemplation; one Evening
very late the Moon shone bright, and led him on in a smooth Walk, that ran
along the great high Road, till he was met by a grave Man in habit of a
Pilgrim, who saluted him and begged he would support him to the Town, or he
should faint before he reached it; the young Armenian looking earnestly upon
his Face, perceived his Color gone, and all the Marks of sudden Illness plain
to be discovered.

HE asked the Pilgrim, whither he was bound, who told him, to Constantinople,
and again demanding, if he had any Friends within the City of Tyberis, was
informed, that he was quite a Stranger, and designed to take his Lodging in
some public Han, or open place of Entertainment, such as is elsewhere
described, for Inns and Houses of Accommodation, are not met with in the
Eastern Countries.

A compassionate Action.
THE good Armenian presently considered, that the Usage he would meet with in a
public Han, could no ways be agreeable to his weak Condition, and invited him
to lie a Night or two at his Father's House, by giving him a frank assurance of
a hearty Welcome; this kind offer was immediately embraced with many thanks by
the Sick Pilgrim, so he returned again, and led his Guest back with him, using
him with great Civility, and Entertaining him in every kind, as well as the
Condition of the one required, or the others Purse could possibly afford him.

An Artifice, to prevent Discovery.
FIVE Days the Pilgrim kept his Bed, and in that time would often talk with the
Armenian and his Father, still concealing who he was, and taking, every now and
then, an occasion to complain of his Misfortunes and his Poverty, till on the
fifth Day in the Evening he desired the Company of the Young Man alone, who
came accordingly, and as he used to do, began to comfort the Sick Man with
hopes of quick Recovery.

AT last the Pilgrim, interrupting his Discourse, began to weep, and taking him
by the Hand, informed him that he found himself so weak, that he had now no
longer hopes of Life, but begged him, as he wished for Happiness hereafter, to
comply with the Request he was about to make him.

The Speech of a dying Pilgrim.
I am, says he, a Merchant, who have traded many Years in Jewels, which by
traveling on foot, and in the Habit of a Pilgrim, I have always carried safe,
when others have been robbed of all they had; Almighty God has pleased to bless
me with considerable Substance, most of which is now about me, in rich
Diamonds, neatly fastened in some corners of my Clothes; I have no Wife or
Child, but one poor Mother at Constantinople, long maintained by my good
Fortune; her I make my Heiress, she knows best what poor Relations at her Death
to leave it to: Now I design to write a Letter, and for fear she loses all, if
sent her by the Caravan, for God Almighty's Sake, do you in Person take the
Charge of what I give you; see her, and inform her how I died, and where you
bury me: The Charges you have been so generously at, and what my private
Funeral may cost you, this small Purse contains a Sum of Gold sufficient to
repay you; but to bear the Charges of your Journey to my Mother, and in some
degree reward your Goodness, I will give you two good Diamonds for your self,
and then deliver all the rest to your safe Custody.

A great Surprise.
HE ended there, and from a Pocket in the bosom of his Vest, that then lay by
him, took a Purse in which were Eighteen Gold Chequins of Turkey, value each
ten Shillings, and delivered it to the Armenian, who was more surpised to see
him rip the corners of his Clothes, and take out two and twenty noble Diamonds,
which had been the Business of the Journey he fell short in, Two according to
his promise he presented him withal, each worth about an hundred English
Pounds, the other Twenty, most of equal value, he committed to his Charge; took
Pen and Ink, and writ a Line or two, directed to his Mother, and the next Day
died, as he before imagined.

A wonderful Example of Honesty.
HERE was a Temptation, few, I fear, in the Armenian's Circumstances, would so
nobly have resisted; he concealed the Jewels, least his Father or his Mistress
should have tempted him to keep them; owned the Money, buried the dead Pilgrim,
who, I should have told you, was himself an Armenian; writ a Letter, and
enclosed one Diamond in it, to assist his Father, and withal informed him of
the whole Concern, he left this Letter on his Chamber Table, sold the second
Jewel for his own Expenses, and departed early one Morning, with the Pilgrims
Weeds, belonging to the late deceased, first having sowed all up, as they had
been, before the Owner had unrip'd 'em for his Satisfaction.

IN short, he brought the Jewels safe to Constantinople, gave 'em with the
Letter to the Woman they were sent to, would not take the least Reward,
confessing he was paid beforehand, and prepared for his Return to Persia, after
a short Stay of thirteen Days with the Mother of his deceased Countryman.

A generous Action, of a Persian Envoy.
BUT Virtue seldom fails Reward, the Story was immediately spread round the
City, and among the rest, a Persian Envoy, then about returning to his Country,
hearing the report, resolved to see such Worth encouraged; sent for the young
Man, informed himself of his Condition, took him back to Persia in his Train,
and there presented him before the King, as an Example of surprising Honesty,
and an Object highly worthy of his Royal Favor.

A Reward of Virtue.
THE King commanded a great Sum of Money to be given him, and learning that he
was brought up a Merchant, ordered him to be the Man, with whom the Court
should for the future deal, for all their Necessaries in his way of Traffic;
and accordingly, he soon grew rich by that Advantage and the many, which
attended the great Character it gave him; so that he not only Married his old
Mistress, but in a few Years raised his Family, to be the most considerable of
all his Country; a happiness he very well deserved, for such a rare Example of
an inborn Honesty, and generosity of Nature, commonly inherent to the People of
that Nation.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Copties.
The Original of the Copties.
IT WAS in the Infancy of Christian Doctrine, that the old Inhabitants of many
parts of Egypt, chiefly such, as bordered upon Aethiopia, were Converted to the
Faith of Christ, by the successful Preaching of the Noble Eunuch, who had been
inspired by Philip with the purest Notions of Religion and Morality: Those
early Converts, who embraced the Gospel there, transmitted it industriously to
the Practice of Posterity, and Multitudes of the Egyptians constantly professed
the Doctrine of Christianity, through all the Ages of inhuman Persecution; and
the Modern Offspring of those Ancient People are the Sect named Copties, whom
this Chapter treats of.

The Causes of their Ignorance.
BUT, as humane Nature is alone too weak a Prop for Faith, and the mysterious
Knowledge of Religion, so, the want of Spiritual Directors through the Labyrinth
of Darkness, which attended the disorders of successive Persecutions, has
involved them in a Gulf of zealous Ignorance, and taught 'em an unnatural and
incoherent mixture of the Superstitious Practices of Pagan Ceremonies, with the
heavenly Rites of their professed Christianity.

Circumcision used among them, and why.
IT IS this Misfortune has confounded their religious Observation of the
Sacrament of Baptism, with the Heathenish Custom of an early Circumcision,
which they still observe, but rather out of Veneration to the Practice of their
Ancestors, than any Notion of its Efficacy in religious Matters: That it was an
ancient Custom, we are undeniably convinced from the Assertion of so old a Pen
as that of Herodotus, who declares it to have been observed among that People,
long before the Age he lived in, they Circumcise their Children at eight Days
old, but Baptize them not till on the fortieth.

Tainted with the Jacobin Herely.
THEY were originally tainted with the Jacobin Heresy, and rigidly maintained
the Doctrine of one sole Nature in our Savior, long before Jacobus preached up
that Opinion in the Eastern Parts of Syria; they are so very cautious, least by
chance they should expose his Person to the Proof of a Division, that, though
they own him God and Man, and perfect in both Essences, they will not venture
to distinguish one from the other.

How agreeing with, or dissenting from the Church of Rome.
THEY administer the Sacrament in both kinds, especially to Infants just
Baptized: They stigmatize the Church of Rome with Heresy, yet by the too
prevailing vigilance of Missionaries sent from many Parts of Italy, great
numbers of them frequently embrace the Romish Doctrine; they value not the
Resolutions of those General Councils, held since that of Ephesus, and with an
universal detestation of the Notions of a Purgatory, Praying for the Souls of
the Deceased, and Extreme Unction, dissent from those three favorite Points of
Roman Doctrine.

THEY have a Patriarch over them, who takes his Title from the Town of
Alexandria, but commonly resides at Grand Cairo, or sometimes at a large City
called Saieta, An ancient City.
six days Journey higher, on the River Nilus; all Inhabited by unmixed numbers
of the Copties; here it is said, our Savior and the Virgin Mary lived, when
flying from the Rage of Herod, they sojourned in the Land of Egypt, till the
Death of that oppressive Tyrant. Here likewise may be seen the Ruins of a noble
Structure, stately in the very Dust it lies in, which the Copties tell us, was,
in former times, a Chapel built by the religious Helena, Mother to Constantine
the Great, and Consecrated to the Virgin, in commemoration of her Residence in
that ancient City.

The Copties keep Lent strictly.
THEY are almost as strict observers of Lent, as the Armenians, never eating
Flesh therein, but in the Night, unless on Saturdays, and Sundays; but upon
those Days they hold it as a Sin to Fast.

A painful form of Worship.
PECULIARLY Devout, and painfully Religious is their rigid form of Worship, for
on Saturday at Midnight they are summoned to their Churches, where they neither
sit, stand, kneel, or use the common Postures of a Man, but till the Sunday
Noon, support themselves, by leaning on a kind of Crutches.

Boys admitted into Orders.
THE Priest officiating is covered with a Veil of fine white Linen, and assisted
by three little Boys, attired not much unlike himself, on whom, as on great
numbers of young Children, they conferr the minor Orders of their Priesthood;
assuming their Authority for such a Practice, from a weak Interpretation of
that part of the Gospel, where our Savior uses the Expression, Suffer little
Children to come unto me, and prevent them not, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Their public Prayers.
THEY frequently exalt their Voices, and accompany the Priest in strange and
unintelligible Noises, using some the ancient genuine Egyptian Language, now
almost forgotten, some the Moorish Dialect, and some the Turkish; oftentimes
the Priest, not much unlike the Romish elevation of the Host, lifts up, above
his Head, a Cloth of Crimson Color, under which is placed the Consecrated
Sacrament.

Other Customs in useamong them.
THEY Sing the Psalms of David through at every Meeting, sometimes a Chapter of
the Old, but oftener of the New, and more respected Testament, as Penned by
Nicomedes; they pay no Reverence to the Pictures of our Savior, and the Virgin
Mary, nor permit them to be placed about the Altar, though they commonly are met
with in the other Corners of their Churches.

Relics of Martyrs.
AT the Entrance of their Churches, which can seldom boast Magnificence, or
Ornament, you see on either side, square Chests, pil'd one above another, and
in these they keep the Ashes, Bones, or other Relics of those, who having
been deluded by the strong Insinuations of the Turks to turn Mahometans, have
afterward repented their Apostasy, and openly professing a Return to the
Religion they before abandoned, have been put to Death upon it, and defended
their unshock'd, and persecuted Recantation by the painful Trial of a glorious
Martyrdom.

Men and Women kept apart.
THE Women, like the Turks, are separated, in their Churches, from the
Conversation of the Men, and placed in Galleries all lettic'd over, to prevent
Inspection: They kiss their Hands at coming in, and lay the Right upon the
Left, proceeding with a Gravity becoming their Devotion.

Their Habits and Subjection.
THEIR Habits differ from the common Greeks in nothing but a kind of Skull-Cap,
of a close and humble Shape, which all the Copties wear upon their Head: They
live in great Subjection to the Turks, pay double Taxes, and are hourly liable
to the oppressive Violences of unbounded Tyranny, and swift Injustice.

Sciences decayed among them.
THEIR Ignorance is great, and universal, and their Morals consequently weak,
and poorly guarded: Sciences are almost lost, at least decayed extremely in the
Practice of their Students.

HOWEVER, whether it proceeds from real Inclination, or a Notion that the
Character of Conjurer, would better suit them, than another People, by the
Stories, which the Scriptures, and Tradition tell the World, of the prodigious
Operation of those famed Magicians, among their Ancestors, who strove so
wonderfully to excel the Power of God in Moses; I say, I know not, which of
these excites their Study, Great Lovers of Magic.
but it is very certain that they all incline to practice Magic, or at least
such juggling Arts, as with the Vulgar may entitle them to that denomination.

Admirable Jugglers.
THEY confidently boast a Power, by the assistance of Familiar Spirits, to
inform Inquirers any thing they ask, particularly in Affairs of Love, and it is
indeed a very pleasant Entertainment, to behold how some of the Politest of
these Jugglers will impose on simple Crowds of Listners by the outward
Artifices of a learned Appearance, while by subtle means they learn the
Business of the Querist from himself, or Company, and then amaze him with a
Declaration of no more, than what he just before has told him.

IT IS pleasant to behold 'em, burning Leaves, describing Circles, melting Wax,
and using all the outward Gestures, which we read of in the Works of ancient
Poets, to have been observed by Sorcerers, or others in their Magic
Incantations, such as that of Simaetha in the second Eidyl of Theocritus.
Theoc. Eidyl. 2d.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) etc.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) etc.
Go Iynx, on the wings of Passion move,
And to my Presence drag my tardy Love.
Delphis torments me, but I Will take my turn,
And for my Delphi's sake this Laurel burn;
And as the Laurel crackles in the Fire,
Destroyed by Flames, which burn it, and expire,
Till not the very Ashes shall appear,
So let strong Flames consume my Perjured Dear.
Go Iynx, on the Wings of Passion move,
And to my Presence drag my tardy Love.
As I now melt this Wax, helped from above,
Just so let Myndian Delphis melt with Love,
And as I whirl my brazen Wand around,
Let him before my Gate in Circles trace the Ground.
Go, Iynx, on the Wings of Passion move,
And to my Presence drag my tardy Love.


No wonder that their Morals are not excellent.
BUT certainly it cannot well be looked upon a Wonder, that Morality should
boast no fixed Impression on the Minds of Men, inured to Artifice and
Treacherous Practices by the perpetual Dangers they have been exposed to, by
the Wars and Persecutions, Changes and Subversions, which have constantly
attended their unhappy Country, through a Course of Revolutions for so many Ages,
when we find that even our selves, divided as we are from all the World,
protected from the Miseries of War and Rapine, and indulged by Heaven in all
the Blessings of Productive Nature, have no great Cause to think our Morals,
generally speaking, better than our Neighbors.

A strange and laboring Sect, among the Copties.
AMONG the many Orders of Religion, now professed by these Copties, there is one
very odd, and new Opinion prevalent among them; a certain Sect, who,
Contemplating seriously, and with incessant Application, on the numerous
Frailties of Humanity, engage themselves by Oath in the most solemn manner,
every Year they live to take upon them some new Mystery, or way of Living: till
they find (if possible) some State of Life, entirely happy: These by turns, are
Soldiers, Merchants, Husbandmen, and every thing their Substance can create
them; and the Good they do by this uncommon Practice of professed Variety,
appears conspicuously in the repeated Declarations, which they daily make in
Public Places, telling those, who gather round them, that Experience has
convinced them True Felicity attends not such and such a Life, for such and
such occurring Reasons, weighing all the Good with all the Bad of every Man's
Condition, and discovering how much the weighty Evils overpoize the Balance.

Their never ending Labors.
THUS are the Lives of these unwearied Wretches spent in searches of Content, a
Fairy Blessing, talked of like the Phoenix, but unknown like that, and never to
be gained on this side Heaven; yet they toil incessantly, and drudge away their
Moments, in a kind of Interrogatory Contemplation, like the learned Ausonius,
who thus expresses the convincing Proofs of Mortal Imperfection. Auson. Eidyl.
15th.
Quod vitae sectabor iter? Si plena tumultu
Sunt fora, si curis domus anxia, si peregrinos
Cura domus sequitur, Mercantem si nova semper
Damna manent, cessare vetat si turpis Egestas;
Si vexat labor Agricolam, mare naufragus horror
Infamat, poenaeque graves in coelibe vita,
Et gravior cautis Custodia vana maritis;
Sanguineum si martis opus, si turpia lucra
Foenoris, and velox inopes usura trucidat?
Afflictat Fortuna viros, per Bella, per Aequor,
Iras, insidiasque, catenatosque labores,
Mutandos semper Gravioribus.
What Course of Life shall my Wild Wishes share?
If Public Posts are full of Noise and Care;
If anxious Tortures break our Rest at home,
And equal Troubles follow those, who roam;
If still new Losses damn the Merchant's Pain,
Or Poverty excites his toil for Gain;
If constant Labor macerates the Swain,
And dreadful Shipwrecks fright us from the Main;
If weighty Sorrows press a Single Life,
And the vain Cautions of an hourly Strife,
Teach not the Husband to secure his Wife;
If War is bloody, if Extortion base,
And griping Usury destroys the Poor Man's Race?
Fortune, by many means, afflicts Mankind,
By War, by angry Seas and Winds combined;
By Storms of Passion, and destructive Snares,
Un-numb'red Labors, and entangled Cares;
And, though we think our Present State a Curse,
We seldom change it, but we make it worse.


The humor of the Copties.
THE Generality of these Copties are curiously inclined to hear the Customs of
remote Dominions, and are overjoyed to get a Gentleman of Learning, who is
traveling through their Country, into their Acquaintance; They receive and
entertain him with a deep respect, and waiting patiently, till he has asked as
many Questions as he pleases of their way of Living, put great numbers of
inquisitive Demands on him, and listen with a close and wonderful Delight, to
hear the Stories, which a Stranger tells them, either of his own or other
Countries.

NOR is it any ways improbable, that this should be the reason, which induces
such vast numbers to profess the Business of a Guide, attending Travelers from
Place to Place, as often as the Arabs will permit them; An Arbitrary Practice
of the Arabs.
but these last are Lords of them and their Pretentions, and are well acquainted
with the Profits thence arising, wherefore they will rarely give the Copties
liberty to serve as Guides to Christian Travelers, but undertake the Task
themselves, and thence extort considerable Sums of Money, in proportion to
their Carriage, Avarice, or Honesty.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Zinganees, or the Race of the Gypsies.
NOW, Reader, have I brought you to a sort of People, who for every kind of
Villainy, and unexampled Practices of Guilt in its most elevated Insolence, may
justly boast themselves without a Rival; Impunity encourages them all to Sin,
and independent Arrogance protects them in it; They are shunned by all degrees
of Men, and all Men equally by them detested; They are Nature's Outcast, and
the black Infesters of Humanity and common Goodness, and of all the World may
best lay claim to the Profession of a Maxim, which the Roman Satyrist expresses
thus, Juv. Sat. 1.
Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, and Carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquis; probitas laudatur and alget.
Would you be Great, and dreaded by Mankind,
Dare to do Mischief never yet designed,
Contrive some Ill, that may the Rope deserve,
Then shall you thrive; if Good, be praised and Starve.


YOU shall rarely apprehend a Zinganee, or execute him for a Crime, but he will
readily confess vast numbers more than ever he was detected in, their only aim
is Wickedness, and that they grow inimitable Proficients in; They seldom differ
one from the other, or if some have accidentally been more successful than the
rest in bringing Mischiefs to perfection, it is because their Opportunities have
been more favorable, and proceeds not from a weaker Inclination to the
Practice of Iniquity: Their Guilt is thus the same, and therefore, I may well
excuse the universal Wishes of the honester Inhabitants of the Eastern
Countries, who profess an open and deserved Abhorrence of the Wretches and
their Customs, desiring nothing more than their very Race might wholly be
extirpated. Juv. Sat. 13.
Nam scelus intra se tacitum, qui cogitat ullum,
Facti crimen habet, cedo, si conat a peregit.
For he, who has his Will to Evil brought,
And secretly dares form a Wicked Thought,
Commits the Crime, that his Consent has won,
Or Sins as much, as if 'twere really done.


BUT, ever I paint the Morals, and inhuman Nature of these People, 'twill be
proper to inform my Reader, who they are, and having traced 'em to their black
Original, I will proceed to the Relation of their Present State, and lay 'em
open in the scatt'red Baseness of their Modern Circumstances.

The History, and Original of the Zinganees.
'TWAS in the Reign of Sultan Selym, the successful Turkish Emperor, who
overthrew the Government of the Circassian Mamalukes, and added Egypt to his
own Dominions, that the few remaining Soldiers of that Name, who had escaped
the Slaughter, and retired in little Numbers to the Borders of the Desert, were
encouraged by a certain daring Slave, named Zinganeus, to assemble in one Body,
and make use of those offensive Arms their hasty Flight had left them, to their
best advantage; they consented to the motion, and upon examination found
themselves a formidable Body, able to defend their Ground by reason of the
difficulty of access, against the Power of all Invaders.

A Salvage kind of Life.
THUS they lived some time, made Nightly Inrodes to the fertile Pastures on the
Banks of Nilus, plundered Towns, destroyed Inhabitants, drove off their Cattle,
and committed all Outrages, void of fear, and free from Punishment, not only
keeping so secure a Guard, that they defended their Possessions, but admitting
daily Numbers of their old Companions, who deserted to their Party in
considerable Bodies, as often as they found convenient Opportunities.

THE Turks, who dreaded what might be the Consequences of this threatening
growth of Power, sent Great Commanders with some regular Forces to reduce them
to Obedience; who fell short in their Designs, and were sent back half ruined,
to assure their Officers, they were to cope with greater Strength than they
imagined.

IN short, the Turks perceived so great a Difficulty in the Method they must
take to bring 'em to Subjection, that they rather chose to offer Terms of
Friendship, and Accommodation, which the Mamalukes as readily accepted of, as
growing weary of the Dangerous Alarums they were Hourly Subject to, so that a
Peace was soon concluded, Articles of Accommodation.
and the Articles thereof Obliging the Circassians to lay down their Arms,
permitted them to exercise what other way of Living, their desires would lead
'em to make choice of.

BUT Civil Discipline agreeing rarely with the Military Genius of licentious
Multitudes, they grew unruly, and became so prejudicial to the common Interest,
that the offended Turks at last grew weary of forgiving, and Enacted a degree,
that every ZINGANEE, for they were so distinguished, from the Name of their
Ringleader, should in Fourteen Days depart the Kingdom: They are Banished Egypt.
This was so severely put in Execution, that in less than two Months space, not
one remained, who Publicly durst own himself of that Denomination, for it was
made Lawful for what Man soever met them, when their Date expired, to Take,
Kill, Enstave, or Use them as he thought convenient.

NO Man from that time forward ever knew certainly, what became of Zinganeus
their Commander, tho it is commonly believed he staid in Egypt, where at present
his Posterity and that of his Companions, openly dare own themselves. A certain
Prophecy is spread about, relating to some future hopes, Predominant on the
Opinion of the Zinganees, tho few among the Turks, regard or Value it. The
Prophecy as it is Expressed in the Egyptian Language, varies nothing from the
following purpose. A Gypsy Prophecy.
Years over Years shall Roll;
Ages over Ages Slide,
Before the Worlds Control,
Shall check the Crescents Pride.
Banished from Place to Place,
Wide as the Oceans Roar,
The Mighty Gypsy Race,
Shall Visit every Shore.
But when the Hundredth Year,
Shall three times Doubled be,
Then shall an End Appear,
To all their Slavery.
Then shall the Warlike Powers,
From distant Climes return,
Egypt again be Ours,
And Turkish Turrets Burn.


A Vain and Groundless hope.
THIS Prophecy has won so far upon the Miserable Romnant of the Zinganees in
Egypt, that they all expect as certainly to see the Restoration of their Empire
in the Downfall of the Turks, as the most Rigid Jews believe and wait for the
return of their Messiah: But how wide from Probability their notion lies, let
any Man decide, who will reflect on the Prodigious difference between the Turks
and Them, in Number and Authority.

The Wandering Lives of the Banished Gypsies.
THOSE Zinganees, who had not Courage to continue in their Country in contempt
of the decree, exhibited against them, spread themselves in Banishment through
every corner of the World, and finding it a necessary prudence to consider on
some means of Livelihood they took upon them the Denomination of Foretellers of
the Accidents attending every Persons Life, Pretending to a natural Gift of
Prophecy, and finding it an easy matter to Impose upon the World by such
Pretentions, the (rather, because many Families among them, had by Art or
Nature, really reached a Wonderful Ability in such like Practices) they
Flourished for a while, and grew considerably Rich in many Countries.

Their First Arrival in England.
AMONG the rest, great Numbers Flocked to England, Traveled up and down from
Place to Place, with Children at their Backs, begged leave to he in Barns, told
Fortunes for their Livelihood, and when they could not fairly get Provisions,
Stole 'em with an admirable Cunning; till the many Mischiefs which attended the
Permission of these Stroling Hypocrites, occasioned several Acts to pass, in
order to extirpate their Fraternity.

THE Laws which were from time to time Enacted to that end, had such effect,
that they were soon Transported hence in such surprising Numbers, that the few
mean Wretches, now pretending to the Character of Gypsies, are not really so,
but such, whose Miserable Circumstances have reduced 'em to a sordid Imitation
of the Vices and Pretenses of those Banished Persons, The Original of the Word
Gypsy.
to whom Originally, our Forefathers gave the Name of Gyptians or Egyptians to
denote the Country they belonged to, but the word has been corrupted by the
course of Time to the Present Vulgar Pronunciation, GYPSIES.

BUT though the Prudence of our cautious Ancestors, found means to rid this
Nation of such Troublesome Inhabitants, few other Countries took that care to
free themselves from their Encumb'ring Multiplication, Turkey very full of
Gypsies.
every part of Turkey is (especially) so Pestered with 'em, that you seldom
Travel Four and Twenty Hours without Encountering them.

Their Way of Living.
THEY are Divided into Tribes, Acknowledge no dependence on, or Duty to the
Power of any Government whatever; they have no Laws among themselves, but
mingle Lustfully together in the most Incestuous manner, never Marrying, but
using all in common, Women, Goods, and all they Boast of.

THEY Wander up and down, with Asses, Laden with their Tents, and other dirty
Necessaries, always Pitching their Black Camp as near some Town of Note as
possible, Excellent Smiths.
and Working commonly as Smiths, particularly famous for the making Hatchets of
an Edge so excellently tempered, that no Nail can turn it; they are Hired
sometimes for every kind of Drudgery, but frequently refuse to Work, and never
tarry longer in a Place, than till they have obtained as much, as Stealing or
their Labor can induce 'em to the hopes of.

THUS in time, they Visit every Part of every Country, hated by Mankind and
Preying on the Losses of their Fellow Creatures, void of Principle and
consequently of Humanity: If any of them Die, they make a Hole within his Tent,
and Bury him about a Foot below the Surface, never using Coffin, Shroud or
Decent Ceremony; Scoffing Publicly at every Law and all Religions; Their
Atheistical Principles.
openly declaring, they believe no GOD, but impiously use no other Argument,
than that of Insolent and Ignorant Obstinacy, telling Christians, who rebuke
their Wickedness, that they have Daily reason to distrust the Notions of a
Godhead, since if there were a Power so Mighty and Omniscient as God is
represented, he would never hear himself Blasphemed, and Ridiculed at such a
Rate, as he is Hourly by their common Practice, without some speedy Judgment on
their Guilt. This Simple Notion made me think upon an Ancient Precedent,
delivered to Posterity by Martial in his Book of Epigrams. Mart. Epig.
Nullos esse Deos, inane Coelum
Affirmat Selius, probatque, quod se
Factum, dum negat hoc, videt Beatum.
Selius affirms, there is no God in Heaven,
And the sole Cause, for that Opinion given,
Is, that while thus he dares a God deny,
He Prospers daily, and no Plague draws nigh.


Their Customs, and Humor.
THEY commonly go naked, or at least, the major Part affect not Dressing. Nature
stains them of a tawny Hue, and the unresisted Influence of a continual Sun
increases their Deformity; they never wash their Hands or Faces, but permit
their Hair and Nails to grow to most amazing lengths: They will not suffer
Travelers to pass without accosting them, extracting Money by repeated
Declarations of the Good or Evil Fortune, which is likely to attend them: But
what most amazed me, is, that they assume the Impudence of giving good Advice,
exhorting them to Piety, and all the Graces of Humanity, concluding commonly
their Hypocritic Lectures with these Words, Be Dutiful to God, your Parents and
your Prince, and let the Blessings of them all be showered upon you.

WHEN I perceived that such as these could give Advice, who are the open
Enemies of common Goodness, I reflected with a wonderful surprise upon the
Truth of an old Maxim, I remember to have read in some Greek Author. A Grecian
Maxim.
(...)
(...)
How readily do all our Natures tend
To give Advice with Prudence to a Friend!
But if we Err our selves, we know it not;
At least our Self-affection cloaks the Blot.


A Story of the Impudence of a certain Zinganee.
THE Native Insolence of these licentious Wretches may be guessed at by a Story
I will tell you. At a little Country Town in Turkey, where great Numbers of the
Zinganees had pitched their Tents, a Friend of mine, who kept a Summer House,
retired to pass a Month or two; and having been informed how Skillful they were
famed to be in making Hatchets of an admirable temper, had the Curiosity to
purchase one, at the dear rate of three and twenty Shillings in the Money of
that Country.

HE tried his Hatchet, which was neatly made, and had a fine turned Helve, and
Leather Case to keep the Head from wet, and found it so exceeding Good, that he
commended it extremely to the Man, who made it, and professed he would not lose
it for its double Value.

A Cheating Temper.
NOTHING could have been more welcome News, or fairer Invitation to the Zinganee
than this, he presently resolved to find some opportunity of stealing back the
Hatchet, that he might oblige the Gentleman to buy another, or reward him well
for the pretense of having found the old one.

IN short, he watched a day or two, and having made his observation of the
Place 'twas laid in, soon found means to get it, and was met one Morning by the
Owner, as he hastened from the Chamber with the mark of Theft about him; The
Gentleman, surpised to see a Zinganee in his Apartment, took him by the Arm as
he was passing by, and asked him somewhat roughly, what his Business was, and
whither he was carrying his Hatchet; The Gypsy, an experienced Artist, answered
nothing, but with elevated Eyes, and shaking Head, endeavored silently to get
away; A wonderful Assurance.
but when the Gentleman increased his anger, and began to call his Servants to
secure him, with a bold, undaunted Look, and Tongue as nimble as his Fingers,
he began to talk away his Guilt, in Speeches to the following purpose. The
Speech of a Gypsy.
FOOL that you are; but Christians will be blind, and who can help it? Now I
know you think that I came hither with design to steal your Hatchet; O poor
Frailty of your common Understanding! I have Skill, honest Infidel, and by that
Skill knew certainly, that if this Hatchet was not taken from you, this Morning
at Eleven a Clock, and just three Minutes after, you would have been inclined
to try its Metal on you Log of Wood, and so had surely cut your Right Leg half
asunder. I have Skill, and valued you, and so prevented it by seizing on the
evil Instrument. See here, I will not be dismayed, I prize your Good above your
Friendship, and will, notwithstanding this, prevent your Danger.

HE had no sooner spoke these Words, but off he ran, as fast as he was able,
nor was overtaken, though the Servants followed him, till he had reached a Well
of an unfathomable Depth, and there he stopped, but first threw in the Hatchet,
which he knew could never be recovered from so deep a Bottom.

The Success of a Cheat.
THE Gentleman, who guessed the Zinganee's Design, could scarce refrain from
laughing at the Air with which he carried off his Impudence; 'twas dangerous to
beat him, though he wished he could have ventured it; in short, the Gypsy won his
point, and still maintaining that his value for the Person of the Gentleman had
made him throw away the former Hatchet, got the making of another like it.

I should have told you, that they always choose some even spot of Ground to
pitch their Tents, where the Men and Women Sing and Dance, in awkward Gestures
all Day long, run, hop, and toy away their Hours in various kinds of active
Entertainments.

Another Story of the Gypsies.
I Lay, in Company with several other English Gentlemen, at a large Town in
Thrace, now called Romania, I think the Place was named Burgoss; upon a
spacious Plain, without the City, stood the Tents of several Tribes of
wandering Gypsies, who were used to entertain themselves in Dancing till near
Midnight, and expressed their Satisfaction in each others Conversation by the
number of their Exercises.

WE walked out one Day to take the Air upon the Plain I speak of, and were very
much surpised to see a Company of Naked People of both Sexes, joined
promiscuously in a kind of Antic Dance, and leaping up and down, with uncouth
Noises, and indecent Postures, which declared them Strangers to the smallest
Grain of common Modesty.

WE came as near 'em as we could, and were immediately surrounded by their
Numbers, every Person striving to foretell our Fortunes, by inspection of our
Hands, which we prevented them from doing, by an obstinate refusal to admit
them near us.

An English Modesty.
ONE Young Gentleman among us, of a very modest, or indeed a bashful Nature, was
half frighted to behold himself encompassed by a Band of Naked Women, and
instead of striving to defend himself from their Endeavors, kept one Hand
before his Eyes and all on fire with Blushes, turned his Head aside, and begged
us to depart from that Society of Devils.

A very dexterous and pleasant Cheat.
THE Zinganees immediately perceived the Opportunity he gave them, and with all
imaginable expedition, joining Hands, danced round him in a Ring, and pulling
him about from Place to Place, laughed, sung, and kissed him with a strange
Extravagance, while several others came about us with a thousand artful
Postures and Discourses, to prevent us from observing what they did with our
Companion, who was so amazed to find himself touched, kissed, and pulled about
by such a Naked Multitude of Females, that he knew not what they were about,
till they had thrown him down, and rolling him along among themselves, found
means to pick his Pockets, of his Gold and Silver, two good Rings, and a fine
Watch of English Workmanship.

The Impunity of Zinganees in Turkey.
WE were so much diverted with the Accident, that we could hardly frame our
Tempers for a necessary Quarrel, which was all in vain, for they had done their
Business, and went on with their Diversion, never minding our repeated
Exclamations that they would restore the Gentleman the Prize so lately taken;
we complained to the Chief Magistrate upon re-ent'ring the City, but found no
Redress, all Men declining to concern themselves with People, over whom they
boasted small Authority, and from whose Punishment, they could not hope
Retaliation of an Injury received, but would be sure to suffer by a swift
Revenge, and never failing Malice; so extremely burthensom and dangerous are
the Gypsies in the Eastern World, beyond those here in England, or indeed in
any other Part of Western Christendom.

BUT, notwithstanding the abovenam'd Character of the Zinganees in general may
incline the Reader to believe the Stories he has heard of Gypsies, and their
wonderful Performances are all Chimaeras, and the wild Production of
distempered Fancy, Some Gypsies better than the rest.
there are really some among them, in whose Families the Spirit of Foreknowledge
seems to live, beyond Examples common in our Country.

THERE is nothing a more certain Truth, than that the Masters of some Merchant
Ships have been advised to wait a happy Hour, least on such, and such a Coast,
they should be Shipwrecked, which advice, when slighted, has appeared of more
solidity, than they imagined, by the fatal Loss of both the Vessel and the
Lives of all her Mariners.

Strange Stories, told of some of them.
NOT only these, but many other such like Accidents, and some more strange have
happened frequently in many Parts of Egypt, and the other Countries, where
these Gypsies live; I could relate surprising things, which have been told me
with a good Authority, but I forbear imposing Facts upon my Reader's Faith,
which, notwithstanding the concurring Evidences of undoubted Witnesses, and
sometimes ocular Demonstration, really seem to shock my own.

ONE Story I will here, however, tell you, and so leave you to your Liberty,
believe or not believe, that some of those called Zinganees inherit naturally
the Prophetic Blessing of foreknowing Things to come, which they pretend to; I
can only say, they give such staggering Demonstrations of a Power beyond a
common Guess, that though I was unwilling to give credit to their Attestations, I
perceived them built upon too sure a Ground, to give me any opportunity of
contradicting them.

A Story of an Accident, which befell the Author in his Travels.
I Traveled once, with a considerable Number of my Countrymen, and other
People, through this Country, and was musing Pensively behind my Company on
Horseback in an easy Pace, when from a kind of Bushy Covert on one side the
Road, there Started out a Man, of Venerable Age, Long Beard, and Decent Habit;
In his Shrivel'd Hand he held a Staff, and a Convulsive Palsy shook his Head
with an Incessant Motion.

HE came forward Slowly, Beckning me to stay, as if he had some Business of
Importance to Communicate; I stopped my Horse, whose Main he Strok'd with his
Right Hand, when he came to me, and Seizing on my Boot Top with his Left, let
fall his Staff, and looked so earnestly upon my Face, that I was Struck with a
Surprise at the uncommon method of his Salutation.

I asked him, if he knew me, or had any thing to tell me, that he looked upon
me with such Eagerness; He Skook his Head with double force, and after having
used some Wonderful Expressions, which for certain Reasons I forbear to
mention here, he told me that a dangerous Cloud hung over my Head, and
Threatened me with Sudden Death; An unwelcome Salutation.
Perhaps, Young Man, says he, you have not half an Hour of Life to come, but
Heaven, (which only can) avert the Omen!

YOU must needs Imagine I was somewhat Startled at this declaration, which the
Old Man had no sooner made, than he departed, Looking Back almost at every step
he took, and lifting up his Eyes in seeming Sign of some concern, which looked
like Pity.

A Wonderful Adventure.
AT last, I fansy'd him a kind of Madman, and converted Contemplation to a fit
of Mirth, so Galloped, on as fast as I could Ride, to overtake my Company, and
entertain 'em with the Story of my odd Adventure; But I had not Rode four
Hundred Paces, when from a Cross Road, leading through a kind of Wood, on either
side, appeared some Horsemen Armed with Javelins, who with elevated Weapons
stopped my Passage, and made signs that I should presently alight, or they would
throw them at me.

HERE the Sudden turn of a Reflection on the Probability of that short Space of
Life, alloted me by the Old Man, more deeply terrified me than the presence of
my Enemies; A Surprising turn of Fortune.
I made a Shift, unknowing in a manner what I did, to lay my Hand upon a Pistol,
and had just presented it when all the Horsemen Galloped off together, with a
Motion equally Surprising for its Swiftness and Occasion.

THAT very Moment struck my Ears with the loud Sound of a large Brazen Trumpet,
which a Member of our Company had carried with him, and the Noise of
Horses-Feer, as if they Galloped; A timely succor.
Presently appeared the Major part of my Companions, who had missed me, and came
Back by the Advice of an Old Guide among them, who Informed 'em 'twas a
Dangerous thing to Straggle from ones Company, in such a part of such a Country.

Reflections on the Accident.
NOW, tho this strange Deliverance might possibly have been unknown to the Old
Man, who met me, and the Notice, which he gave me of it, the Effect of Chance,
or a Strange whim Inspired by Providence, it is surely far more Reasonable to
suppose him Master of a more than common share of Knowledge; or at least, if
this Relation does not Tempt the Reader to the same Opinion, yet some Private
Circumstances, which attended it, gave me such convincing Proofs of his just
Title to a Supernatural Wisdom, that I cannot help declaring, I must still
believe him Blessed with a Prophetic Inspiration.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Sestos, and Abydos, the Castles Commanding the Hellespont, now
called Dardanelli; and of the Ruins of Old Troy.
Sestos and Abydos.
AND now we are about to Travel into Egypt by the way of Constantinople, we must
first sail down the Hellespont, whose Entrance from the Archipelago is defended
strongly by four Castles of considerable Force: The outward two whereof are
Sestos and Abydos, celebrated by the Pens of ancient Poets, for the famous
Loves of Hero and Leander.

METHINKS I found a certain secret Pleasure in the very looking on a Place of
such Antiquity; and while I sailed along the River, the complaining Murmurs of
the rolling Waters seemed to mourn Leander's Drowning, and I could not look
upon the venerable Turrets of those aged Buildings, but they brought to my
Reflection the Idea of those dulcid Strains, wherein Musaus warbles out the
Circumstances of the melancholy Story. Musaeus de Her. and Leand.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In ancient Days, upon the famous Shore,
Where Hellaspontic Waves incessant roar,
Close to the Sea, on either side the Flood,
Here Sestos, there the near Abydos stood;
Here, his strong Bow the wanton Cupid bent,
And one swift Arrow to both Cities sent,
The Youth vowed Love, the Virgin owned the same,
Both felt one Passion, and professed one Flame.
Leander was the Lover's Name, and She
Was Hero called, as Fair as Maid could be,
She dwelt in Sestos, in Abydos He,
Both blessed alike, in Beauty, and in Love,
Like two fair Stars, Both in their Circles move;
But you, kind Listner, if by chance you roam,
And for those distant Climates, leave your Home,
If in your Wanderings you by chance come there,
And, led by Choice or Business, curious are,
Inquire of some old Liver, grave and good,
Where once a certain ancient Turret stood,
Whereon the Sestian Hero chose to stand,
And held a Lantern in her tender Hand,
To teach her better-half, which way to move,
And act the Pilot to Leander's Love;
Look next, upon those Seas, which hourly roar,
And wash the Sands of old Abydo's Shore,
Weeping, as over the Guilty Scene they fly,
That Constant Lover's Loss, whom there they forced to Die.


A caution of the Turks.
AND indeed, a Traveller has here a spacious Opportunity to follow the Advice of
this old Poet, for he is detained three Days, by a fixed Custom of the Country,
and must then submit to be examined, whither Bound, what Countryman, and wait
the searching of the Ship by Officers, deputed from the Castles, ever he may
have liberty to Sail beyond the Reach of their Artillery.

Its causes.
THIS Caution is occasioned by the necessary Policy of their sharp Government,
whose ever wary Eye forbids the clearing Foreign Ships, till after such a stay
within the Entrance of the Hellespont, least they should have Committed any
Breach of Articles, before they left the City.

Reflections on the Modern Ignorance of this Country.
BUT Oh! how much in vain Musaeus bids us ask the People of these Ancient Towns,
for Places, which they are not only Strangers to the Knowledge, but to the
Names of; Ignorance and Insolence have Clouded Learning in the very
Inclinations of the Modern Masters of this Country; endless Revolutions in the
very Face of Furrowed Nature have Erac'd the Characters of Former Wisdom, and
destroyed in an Obscure and deep Oblivion those Lamented Monuments of High
Antiquity.

The Dardanells, and why so called.
THE Present Owners call these Castles Dardanelli, and it is a more than Probable
Opinion, that their Etymology derives its Birth from their Vicinity in
Situation to the Trojan Shore; their strength is little, if compared with the
more Artful forms of regular and modern Fortifications, and are Incapacitated
to defend themselves against the Power of Seiges, carried on by Land
Entrenchments; all their use arises from the large and Monstrous Bore of many
Cannons, Planted on a Level with the Surface of the Water, and discharging
Bullets made of Stone, of such prodigious size, that tho it has been known,
that Ships have passed in safety by the favorable Opportunity of a great Gale,
and Swelling Waters, it is a Rash and Dangerous attempt, and ten to one but all,
who hazard it, are Sunk in the Performance.

Reflections on the Present State of Troy.
WE Sail from hence and presently gain sight of TROY, at least the Shore,
whereon TROY stood, that Towering City, whose Imperial Turrets Braved the Fury
of Confederate Nations, and repulsed so many Bloody times the Powerful Armies
of the Grecian Hero's, under whose Renowned and long defended Walls, the
Flowing Blood of Hostile Nations Bathed a Soil, which Nourished Laurels of
Immortal Memory; whose unbounded Sway and unexhausted Plenty drew the Wonder of
an Emulative World, as her Brave fall, and celebrated Ruin moved the Pens of
the Sublimest Poets in the Universe to Eternize her Glory; This Illustrious
Scene of Wonders, This amazing Field of Action now lies Silent, Buried, and
overwhelmed in the too Melancholy fate of TROJA FVIT, TROY WAS.

NOTHING is remaining worthy of the Monument of so renowned a City; the
relentless Teeth of Iron Time have Gnawed away her Beauties, and the Miserable
Remnant of her Ancient Grandeur is confined to such a Poor and little Measure,
The Mistake of many Travelers.
that those hasty Travelers, who think it a sufficient Satisfaction to have
seen a Place at distance, have informed the World, that all is now converted
into Pasture Ground, or that in short, a just Idea of the present State of,
that subverted City may be comprehended fully, by the Tuneful Chorus of a good
old English Ballad, which, as I remember, tells us; Wast lie those Walls, which
were so good,
And Grass now grows, where Troy Town stood.


HOWEVER, as I was too curious in my Inclinations to rest content with the
Reports of other Men, in Places, where I could inform my self by ocular
experience, I resolved to go on Shore, and was the more desirous to become a
Witness of the Miserable Blot, which had defaced so fair a Copy, The Grounds of
that Mistake.
because I very well remembered to have met a Jew in Portugal, who had assured me
there was more to be Discovered on the Shore of Troy, than commonly was
credited, but the dangerous Barbarity of the Inhabitants was such, as rendered
it a hazardous attempt, and consequently frighted many People from Landing in
that Country.

THE Captain of the Ship, wherein I Sailed, obliged me with his Boat, while
adverse Winds detained us on the Coast, and one Francisco Condaliso, an Italian
Priest, who had been long a Missionary in the Eastern Countries, and at
present, if alive, resides at Padua, consented to Accompany me; The Author
Lands at Troy.
we Landed in a very Fair and spacious Harbor, probably the same, which
formerly received the Boats of Greece, returning to and fro with Soldiers and
Provisions.

WE Walked about three Miles up through the Country, on a Ground still rising
from the Sea with small Acclivity, but overgrown with Brakes and Brambles, as,
indeed, is every part, which Borders on the Sea, for many Miles along that
Land, so that the First Remark I made in this my Trojan Expedition, was that my
old Countryman the Ballad-maker, was mistaken in his Calculation.

An account of what he Discovered there.
WE looked about, as eagerly as possible, but looked in vain, and had begun to
doubt or even despair of finding any Marks or Ruins of Antiquity, when
Francisco struck his Foot with Accidental Violence against a Stone, and casting
down his Eyes imagined he Discovered something like a Piece of Building, scarce
an Inch above the Ground, all over grown with Moss, and in a manner covered by
the Gross about it;

A Piece of the Old Walls of Troy.
UPON a closer view, and digging up the Obstacles, which interposed themselves,
we plainly found, it was a part of some Old Wall, and with our Scymetars
removing all the Brambles, and low Bushes near it, we Discovered it to be near
Thirteen Foot in Breadth, but Narrower and Higher in some Places, than it was
in others.

TRACING it with more than common difficulty, through a little Knot of Bushes, we
had soon lost sight of it, and dug in vain, as deep as we could thrust our
Swords, to find if it continued farther on; However, having met so fair
encouragement, we cheerfully proceeded near a Quarter of a Mile, and there
Discovered at considerable distance, something like a Rugged Wall, or broken
Ruin of an Ancient Building.

COMING near it, we perceived it was the same continued Piece of Building, we
had lately lost, and on a close Examination found it of a black and solid
Stone, appearing joined by Mortar, which the length of time had
notwithstanding, hardened into Substance, of an equal firmness with the Stone
it self.

A description of it.
THE Sizes of the Stones were very different, but rather small, than of
extraordinary Magnitude, for few exceeded half a Foot in their Diameter. The
length of this old Piece of Wall was sixteen Yards, the height at most
exceeded not four Foot, but was in many Places broken, and in some, scarce half
a Foot above the Ground.

'TWAS strangely overgrown with little Shrubs, and diverse Plants appeared
between the Joinings of the Stone, which wore a melancholy Sylvan Dress of Most
and Houseleek: Overgrown with Laurel.
But the most engaging Part of the whole Prospect was a seeming Grove of
spreading Laurel-Trees, which flourished on the top, and hanging down on either
side, protecting, as it were, the Building from the Injuries of Weather;
methoughts I never saw those kind of Trees so justly Planted, and I could not
help rememb'ring, that they looked as naturally placed on these Old Ruins, as
upon the Celebrated Tomb of the harmonious Virgil, in the Neighborhood of
Naples.

A new Discovery.
ABOVE an Hour we feasted Curiosity, with a repeated Observation of the pleasing
Object, and had tarried longer in the same Employment, but were called away by
the discovery of certain other Ruins at a little distance from us, which we
found to be no more than a Continuance of the Wall, we had before been looking
on.

Three Monuments, or Tomb-Stones.
BUT, while we eagerly examined every Part, we both took notice of a great
disordered heap of Stones, near which there stood three things like
Tomb-Stones, and upon approach we found 'em to be really such, at least
designed to represent them; they were two Yards long, and four Foot broad, of
common Stone raised near two Foot in height, and covered with three fine flat
Marbles, which by the Inscriptions on 'em, seemed to have been done in
Christendom, to gratify the Humor of some curious Person, willing to amuse
Posterity, when they should find such Tombs in such a Place, and never know
which way they came to be there.

BY the Workmanship and the decayed Condition of the Monuments, we judged 'em
not the Children of the present Age, if possibly the last was old enough to
Father them; with much ado, upon the first we came to, we could read the
following Epitaph, which I presently remembered to have met with in Ausonius, on
the Death of Hector. An Epitaph found upon the Tomb of Hector.
Hectoris hic Tumulus, cum quo sua Troja sepulta est,
Conduntur pariter, qui periere simul.
This is brave Hector's Tomb,
With whom his Troy found Grave,
One Fate did Both consume,
Both one Sepulcher have.


The Tomb of King Priamus.
A little farther stood the second Tomb, which was it seems, designed to
represent the Monument of Priamus, the Epitaph, which like the first and third
is borrowed from Ausonius, seems to speak a Royal Mourner, and Paternal Sorrow.
Qui Tumulum Priami quaerit, legate Hectoris ante,
Ille meus, nato quem prius ipse dedi.
Hectoris and Patris simul est commune Sepulchrum,
Amborum quoniam juncta ruina fuit.
His Epitaph.
He, who inquires for Priam's Grave,
Should first on Hector's look,
That Is mine, the Tomb to him I gave,
For my own Use I took.
One common Sepulcher must hold,
The Father and the Son,
Because at once to Ruin sold,
They jointly were undone.


The Tomb of Hecuba.
THE third, a little shorter than the former two, contains an Epitaph upon
afflicted Majesty, in the known Name of Hecuba, the wretched Wife and Mother of
the late-nam'd Priamus and Hector. Quae Regina fui: quae claro nata Dymante;
Quae Priami Conjux: Hectora quae genui:
Hic Hecuba injectis perii superobruta saxis:
Sed rabie linguae me tamen ulta prius.
Fidite ne Regnis, and Prole, and stirpe Parentum,
Quicunque hoc nostrum (...) legitis.
Her Epitaph.
I, who was Queen, who was the Daughter too
Of Dymas, whose bright Glories all Men knew;
I, who was Priam's Wife, who first gave Birth
To Hector, whose Great Actions shook the Earth;
I, Hecuba, fell here, overwhelmed with Stones,
But Curses, ever I fell, revenged my battered Bones;
Who ever you are, who shall hereafter see
This (...)
Dogs Sepulcher, which now serves for me,
Learn to depend on neither Sons, Race, State,
Or any other slippery Gifts of Fate,
For what am I, now Dead? Though Living, more than Great?


THESE are the most, and I may say, the only Things worth Observation there,
though they deserved the Notice of a Traveller, and I am therefore much surpised
that none have mentioned them, at least no Countryman of mine; I have been
told, how true I know not, that a French Book, published very many Years ago,
and called, L' History d' Asia, A rare French Book.
mentions these particulars; The Book I never met with, but am apt to think,
that, since they only have the Notion, it was one of their own Countrymen, who
found the ruinated Wall and added the three Tombs, I have so lately spoke of.

YET it is a certainty beyond dispute, that Englishmen have landed there; at
least one Countryman of ours, has left behind him a convincing Argument of his
Arrival in those Parts, for underneath the Marble Flat, which covers Hector's
Tomb, we found these Lines, upon the side of a smooth Stone, they seemed to
have been carved with difficulty by a Knife, and spoke their Author a Salt
Water Poet. A piece of Poetry, made at Troy by an English Sailor, in the Year
1631.
I do suppose that here stood Troy,
My Name it is William a jolly Boy,
My other Name it is Hudson, and so,
God Bless the Sailors, where ever they do go.
I was here in the Year of our Lord 1631, and was
Bound to Old England, God Bless her.


WE staid some Hours with a wonderful delight, and gazed about the Country with
a satisfaction equal to our Curiosity, but finding nothing more to entertain
our Observation, we began to think of getting back, and so returned the way we
came; we were not well on board before the Wind came fair, and we set Sail
immediately.

The Island of Tenedos.
WE passed by Tenedos, an Island celebrated for having hid the Grecian Navy
from the Trojan View, while they, believing the Besiegers gone, took in the
Horse, which entered big with their Destruction. The Place is now not worth a
Strangers notice, but upon account of the above-named Story. Few Inhabitants
are found upon it, and those few the worst and meanest of the Countries
thereabouts, so strangely subject is the Fate of Nations to the common Changes,
and Uncertainties of frail Mortality.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Islands in the Aegean Sea.
The Islands of the Archipelago, famous anciently.
THE many Great and Little Islands, which compose the Archipelago, have been (at
least most of them) so extremely famous for peculiar Attributes, appropriated
to 'em in the memorable Works of ancient Poets, that I cannot pass 'em by,
without a transient View of such, as most deserve our mention; some there are
so very small, as never yet to have been honored with a Name, and many of the
largest, being sometimes seen and sometimes not, in Sailing from Constantinople
to the Coast of Egypt, I will only speak of such, as Mariners (obliged
sometimes to shift their Course by adverse Weather) may by Choice or Force go
nigh to touch at.

The Names of the most considerable.
AND those are Lemnos, Chios, Metelyn and Samos, Icaria, Patmos, Zea, Rhodes and
Coos; sometimes a Ship is driven more Westerly, and Sails by Delos, pretty near
the Continent, sees Thebes, and Delphos, Athens, Corinth, and the famous Creto,
now Candy; every one of these above-named Places I will therefore treat of,
that the Reader may conceive a just Idea of the wondrous difference between
their Modern and their Ancient Circumstances.

How it came to be called the Aegean Sea.
BUT ever I come to the particular Description of these several Places, 'twill
not be a miss to speak a Word or two in Explanation of the Sea in general,
called Aegean from Aegeus, Father to the famous Theseus, who leaped headlong
thereinto, believing that the Ship, which brought his Son from Fighting with
the Monster Minotaurus, was returned with the account of his Miscarriage; the
abovenam'd Theseus having failed in his Promise of converting his black Sails
into white, if he came back Victorious.

Its Extent^
IT is a Part or Arm, and that the largest, of the Mediterranean; it reaches to
the Entrance of the very Hellespont, dividing Greece from Asia Minor; it is a
dangerous Place to Sail in, but especially by Night, the Islands lying so
extremely close, that oftentimes a Ship is driven forcibly upon a Rocky Shore
in open Day by Stress of Weather.

Lemnos and its Product, Terra Sigillata.
NOW let us visit Lemnos, a considerable Island, not so much for its extent of
magnitude as the unthought Advantages, accruing to the Turks, it is present
Masters, from the yearly Exportation of a valuable Earth, called Terra
Sigillata, from the small Impression of a Seal, which marks the Balls, wherein
it is sold, with Turkish Characters, and so prevents the danger of an Imposition
on the Merchant.

IT was in ancient Times esteemed of weighty Virtue in Medicinal Performances,
and gathered Yearly by the Priests of Venus with a thousand Ceremonies, and
often mingled with the Blood of Goats, in order to be offered as a Sacrifice to
that imaginary Goddess.

LEMNOS was formerly of no small Note, for being taken notice of by Homer, as
the Place, whereon the Limping Vulcan fell, when Jupiter thought fit to kick
him out of Heaven. Hom. Iliad. 1.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When once I dared oppose my Brother Jove,
And Warred against him in the Realms above,
He snatched me by the Foot, then raised me high,
And hurled me headlong from the Starry Sky;
Downward all Day I tumbled, and begun
To draw near Earth at setting of the Sun,
On Lemnos then I fell.


Chios, and its Etymology.
NEXT, Chios claims our Observation, anciently receiving that Denomination from
the Greek Word (...), signifying Snow, because her Mountains frequently are
covered with it, now her Name is changed to Zio, or, as some pronounce it, Sio.
It Is near an hundred thirty odd Miles in compass, lengthning from the Southward
to the Northern Point, and subject to the Turks, who notwithstanding, suffer
many Greeks to live among them, with far greater Privileges than they give to
any of their Countrymen in other Places.

A description of the City, and Inhabitants.
THE Town of Sio is considerably large, and made convenient by a spacious Haven;
the City is defended by a Castle of no little Strength, upon a Hill exceeding
steep: The Buildings of the Town are very Neat, especially the Public Ones,
and the Inhabitants, I mean the Greeks, so very merry in their easy Slavery,
that all night long a Stranger is diverted with their Songs and Dances, and
their Instruments of Music sounding briskly through the Streets: The Women, as
esteemed of old, are yet the Mistresses of admirable Beauties, framed by Nature
for an amorous Conversation, and possessing sweetly the politest Marks, of
gentle Affability: They frequently appoint a kind of Balls, and Merry-makings,
which are given alternately from House to House, and spend their Days in all
the Gayety of Wealth and Liberty.

The Manufactures of the Island.
THE Product of the Island is the finest Corn and Oil, some Silks, and Cotton,
and the best Sherbets, which can be made, by reason of the Excellence of a rich
kind of Honey, found in Mastick Trees: I call them so, because the Gum of that
Name is in great abundance brought from thence, and is a Distillation from the
Rind, which being cut in August, still continues to emit great Quantities
thereof, till the beginning of October following. An old Tradition.
They have an Old Traditional Account that, when Saint Theodore was led to
Martyrdom, he wept extremely for the Blindness of the World, and every Place,
which then was moistened by a Tear of his, now bears the Tree affording
Mastick; though the Tour, he took, must have been very large, for all the South
Part of the Island bears them in great abundance.

ARVIS or Amista, a large Mountain, in the middle of the Country, still abounds
in that rich Wine, so Celebrated formerly by Virgil in his Eclogues, then
called Arvisian, now, Il vino Amistano, an Italian Appellation. Virg. Ecl. 5.
Et multo in primis hilarans convivia Baccho,
Ante focum, si frigus erit; si messis, in umbra;
Vina Novum fundam calathis Arvisia Nectar.
When elevated with a lofty Joy,
Our Hours in Bacchu's Pleasures we employ;
If Cold, by the kind Warmth of some bright Fire,
Or, if it is Hot, to shady Bowers retire;
Then with gay Mirth will we recruit our Souls,
And with Arvisian Nectar crown the Bowls.


AND indeed the present Owners of the Wine agree with Virgil in the same
Opinion.

Chios challenges the Birth of Homer.
AMONG the many Things for which the Island Chios is remarkable, she claims the
Honor due to Homer's Birth Place, challenging a right to that Pretention from
a thousand several Circumstances, and showing Travelers an ancient Monument,
which they would fain persuade us to believe, was Homer's Tomb; they either are
mistaken in their Claim, or the old Distich on that Subject, should have
mentioned Chios in the room of Ios, and have made the Verses run as follow.
(...)
(...)


The seven contending Cities for him.
IT would be easy to Translate the Lines verbatim, and inform the unlearned
Reader, that the Towns, contending for his Birth, were Smyrna, Ios, Rhodes,
Salamin, Athens, Argos, and Colophon; but I have met with an admirable Thought
in some late English Poets Writings, though I cannot say directly, who he was,
and rather choose to quote his Words, since they not only touch upon the present
Subject, but will represent a very true and lively Image of the little Honor,
Writers get, till past enjoying it. Seven Wealthy Towns contend for Homer, Dead,
Through which, the Living Homer begged his Bread.


Mitylen, or Lesbos, both those Names how given.
LESBOS or Mitylen, another Island, next appears considerable in her Magnitude,
near two hundred Miles in Circuit, not far distant from the Phrygian Continent,
a very healthful Country, of a temperate Air, and Soil Productive of the finest
Corn in Christendom. The Island takes its Name of Lesbos from the Adventurer
Lesbus, Son of old Sapithus, who was sent by the directions of the Oracle.
Mitylen, from Mitylene the Sister to Methymna, Daughter of Macarius, and the
Wife of the above-named Lesbus.

The Town of Mitylen.
THE City Mitylen upon a small Peninsula, the Capital of all the Island,
likewise claims from hence her Etymology. Her Buildings are magnificently fine
and beautiful, her Situation high and stately, and the brisk Inhabitants of
this delightful Country, gay, and honest in their Poverty, like those of Chios,
and like them now subject to the Turkish Government, which here maintains a
constant Fleet of well appointed Galleys, to secure the Islands thereabouts
belonging to the Sultan, from the daring Squadrons of the bold Maltese, or
Florentine Adventurers.

The Virtue of the Lesbian Wines.
THE Wine of Lesbos is at present looked upon exceeding good, and boasting one
convenient Property beyond most other sorts, for let a Man Debauch as much as
possible with an Excess thereof, it never hurts him, nor is troubled with those
heady Qualities, which Grecian Wines are generally subject to.

IF you will allow the Taste of Horace to have been polite, and he methinks should
know its Relish, who so admirably well describes its Virtues, you may see his
Thoughts upon the matter. Hor. L. 1. Ode 17.
Hic innocentis pocula Lesbii
Duces sub umbra; Nec Semeleius
Cum mart confundet Thyoneus
Praelia.
Here, under some thick Shade,
By meeting Branches made,
Shall you, while no Sun Beams upon you shine,
Drink Cups of harmless Lesbian Wine;
Nor shall Thyonian Bacchus tempt your Rage,
To rise to Disoord, or with Mars engage.


Spirits, or frightful Apparitions on the Coasts.
THEY have a Notion, that in some few Harbors of this Island, frightful
Apparitions flutter dreadfully about a Ship all Night, that dismal Shrieks are
often heard, and I have been informed by many, that they could not Sleep
without the trouble of the most tremenduous and amazing Dreams imaginable: This
last Assertion is a certain Truth, but I am rather apt to think the matter an
effect of the unwholesome Vapors rising from the Sea, or Lakes about it near
those Harbors.

The Island Samos.
AND now we come to Samos, not considerable in its self, but on Account of a
Commodity thence brought in very large and frequent Quantities.

A Dangerous Tempest forced our Ship to seek a Shelter in a certain Creek upon
the Southward of this Island, where we Anchored pretty safely, and were drawn
by the delightful Prospect of the Shore to Land upon it, about Six in Company.

A pleasant Accident.
WE left the Boat, which brought us from the Ship, within a little Nook or Bay,
nigh Land, locked by the High and Rocky Ground about it, and were Walking on
the Shore in order to ascend the Country, when we Spied upon the Waterside a
thing, which at a distance looked not much unlike a Washing-Tub.

WE Walked directly to it, and perceived it was a Vessel of a very small and
Incapacious Hollow, full of Oil, in which were Swimming up and down near Twenty
little Engines, which upon Examination, we discovered to be Sponges, each
containing upon either side, a little piece of Cork, which being fastened to the
middle, kept the Sponge it self afloat, and only suffered half to move in, or
imbibe the Oil within the Vessel.

WE were Busied a considerable time in looking on these things, and wondering
what should be their use in so remote a Place, from any Town, as that appeared,
whereon we found 'em, but at last resolved to sit us down upon the Sand, and
wait the coming of an owner to the Vessel, for we thought it Probable there was
one, and believed he could not long be absent.

BUT, while we Talked to one another of the Wondrous Smoothness of the Waters
in the Bay, while those without were Ruffled by the Storm, and cast our Eyes
upon their stillness, A Strange surprise.
we were all surpised to see a thing not much unlike a Basket, pop with force
above the Surface, and continue Moving up and down a little Space; then up
there started something like a Man, who shook his Head, rubbed clear his Eyes,
and Swam directly inwards to the Place we sat on, pushing in the Basket just
before him.

THIS Second Figure really startled us beyond the First, and brought to our
remembrance an Idea of the Sea God Neptune, for we hardly could believe him
Mortal, who had risen from the Water, by whose side we had been sitting nigh
ten Minutes.

THE Man, for such he proved to be, no sooner saw us, but he seemed a little
Shy of Landing, till we beckoned him, and called as kindly as we could, and so
persuaded him to come ashore, and bring the Basket with him. He had left his
Clothes, and other things behind the Rock not ten Yards from us, and
immediately ran thither for them; A Diving Basket.
in the mean time we approached his Basket, found it quite bound round with
Cork, and covered with a Canvass, in the midst whereof appeared a Slit, through
which we put our hands, and drew out Sponges of a surprising Bigness.

THE Man returned as soon as dressed, and finding us more civil than he had
expected, told us in a kind of Lingua Franca, that those Sponges grew on Rocks,
Ten, Fifteen, sometimes Twenty Fathom deep; that there were many Hundred Diverse
in the Island, some of whom had left him just before, who got their Livelyhoods
like him, by gathering Sponges.

A curious Diving project.
THEN he showed us how they were enabled to perform it, in the following manner.
Half the Sponge, as I have said, is soaked in Oil, the other half is dipped
before in certain Stiptic Waters, to prevent the Oil from Penetrating farther
than it ought to go, when so prepared, they take the Sponge, and thrusting it
within their Mouths, the Oiled part outward (but of that, almost an Inch within
the Lips) they press their Teeth a little hard upon it, and by that means force
the Oily Sponge to close the Entrance of their Mouths against the Water.

How the Sponges are gathered.
THUS they Dive, and with a little difficulty in a Streighten'd Suction make a
Shift to tarry under Water a considerable time. They sink the Baskets by the
help of Stones, which they contrive to fasten at the Bottom, and with
Instruments, they carry down on purpose, cut the Sponges from the sides of
Rocks, till having filled the Baskets, they take off the Weights, and then they
rise with ease, by reason of the Cork about them.

How long they tarry under Water.
BY constant Practice many of these Diverse are arrived at such Perfection in the
Art, that they can tarry under Water till the Oil corrupts, which it will
always do in less than two hours time. There is a Law among the Diverse of this
Island, that no Man shall be allowed to Marry, till he can demonstrate by a
Trial, he is qualified to Dive for one continued quarter of an Hour: The
Novelty engaged us all to make experiment, and I, who more than most Men, was
averse to Diving, did without great difficulty keep my Head two Minutes under
Water: But the Secret of the Stiptic Preparation he refused to teach us, though
we would have gladly bribed him to it.

SAMOS boasts no other Trade than this of Sponges, which is yet so profitable,
that they Yearly send away vast Ship Loads of them, and grow Rich thereby,
beyond the Emulation of their less Industrious, or less Skillful Neighbors.

Why Juno is said to have been born at Samos.
THE constant clearness of the Air in Samos, gave occasion to the Poets of
Antiquity to feign that Juno, taken allegorically for that Element, was Born
upon this Island, and the excellent Pythagoras adorned the Country with the
Honor due to the respected Birthplace of so Great a Man: They also still
pretend to show the Rock, whence Aesop was thrown headlong, and a Cave, where
in the Reign of Numa Pompilius, Heriphile a Sibyl prophesied of Christ.

Description of the Island Icaria.
ICARIA now Niceria, is a small and inconsiderable Island. Creeks it has, but
no commodious Haven, bearing Corn in great abundance, but possessing very few
Inhabitants; and famous for the Fornoli, a ridge of sharp and dangerous Rocks,
much feared by Sailors in a Foggy Night: It Is ancient Name, the Poets feigned
to have been given it, together with the Sea it lies in, from the fictious Fall
of Icarus, attempting to have flown with artificial Wings, of which thus Ovid
in his Metamorphoses. Ovid. Met. ^ 8.
Oraque caerulea patrium clamantia nomen
Excipiuntur aqua; quae nomen traxit ab illo.
He fell, and on his Father called in vain,
For as he sunk in the relentless Main,
Sky-colour'd Waters stopped his eager Breath,
And took the Name they bear, from his untimely Death.


AND in another Place. Icarus Icariis nomina fecit Aquis.
The Icarian Sea from Icarus took Name.


THAT the Island took its Name from the same Accident, appears from Daedalus's
burying his Son upon it, thus described by the same Poet, in the Book
abovenam'd. Devovitque suas arts, corpusque Sepulcro
Condidit; and tellus a nomine dicta sepulti.
He cursed those Arts, which drew his Ruin on,
And built a Tomb upon his breathless Son,
From whose unhappy Fate, well known to Fame,
The Ground, wherein he lay received its Name.


Description of the Island Patmos.
PATMOS is an Island, very small and full of Rocks, extremely Barren, not
affording even the common Necessaries for support of human Life, which
therefore the Inhabitants supply themselves withal from other Islands of the
Archipelago. The Land is Mountainous, and has no more than one small City,
which Equips a Fleet of Trading Vessels to Import Conveniences from Foreign
Parts; the ancient Name is changed at present to Palmosa.

THIS Place is famous for the Character it has of being the Seat, St. John made
Choice of, while he Penned his Revelations; A Monastery on a Hill.
and upon a Mountain in the Northern Parts, there stands a Monastery of the
Grecian Coloiero's, who profess that Saint their Patron, and pretend to show
some Relics to inquiring Travelers.

THE Notice, which I had hereof, obliged me to the hopes of seeing Patmos, and
a Tempest was so favorable to my Wishes, that we anchored in a Haven not far
distant from the Monastery; and the Opportunity inviting me a Shore, I landed
with design to Walk and Visit it.

THE Northern side of Patmos is but very thinly Peopled, and as I was destitute
thereby, of any means to get a Guide, so, either want of Curiosity, or
Indisposition by the roughness of the Storm, dissuaded those on board our
Vessel from consenting to go with me.

The Author lands at Patmos.
HOWEVER, since the Road appeared but short, and seemingly conspicuous, I
resolved to undertake the Visit single, so I landed with a pair of Pistols and
a Scymetar, and crossed a little kind of Plain, which brought me to the bottom
of a Hill, on which the Monastery had its Situation.

THE Hill was overgrown with a large Wood, through which appeared no other
Passage than a small Foot Path, and that not beaten, but a very unfrequented
way, which led me through an hundred several turnings to Ascents extremely steep,
and intricate as Labyrinths.

Loses his way in a Wood.
I came at last, where I perceived the Wood grow thinner, and could see a pretty
way before me; there I stopped, and looking up, discovered on the Brow of an
impending Precipice a little Hut, or Cave, which seemed the Habitation of some
melancholy Hermit, or unhappy Lover, like the Swains of ancient Times, who,
being baffled in their Hopes, forsook the World for some forlorn and solitary
Wilderness, to spend the remnant of their silent Days in Grief for their
Misfortunes.

Discovers a Cave.
SURPISED at first, by the Romantic Air of this low Cave, I stood a while, to
think if it were safe to venture forward, since it was a probable belief, that
some wild Beast had chose that Den for the rough Scene of his Retirement; but
that groundless Apprehension vanished instantly, for while I yet continued in
suspense, methoughts I could discover plainly something like a Door, that stood
a jarr, and consequently rendered it a Place improper for a Salvage Mansion.

I advanced with equal Doubt and Curiosity, till, having gained the summit of
the Precipice, I found it was a Cell, the Door of which stood half way open,
and contained upon its smooth outside, a piece of course, and half-lost
Painting, with the following Latin Sentence in a homely Character. With an
Inscription on the Door.
Hic, and in Coelo Quies.
Here, and in Heaven is Rest.


THE softness of this first Discovery invited me to make a Step beyond it, so
that with a gentle Force I pushed the Door quite open, and was all amazed, when
I perceived the inside of the Cell as still as Possible; no Ornament appeared
to set it off, but just against the Entrance burnt a Lamp, on either side a
little Altar, and the weak and broken Light, which they afforded, faintly
striking through the dullness of the Place, Finds a Man in a black Coffin.
discovered in the midst, a large black Coffin, filled with something not to be
distinguished, but as black, and dismal in its first appearance, as the Coffin
it was laid in.

NOTHING (I then thought) could add to my surprise, which yet was doubled, when
there rose, with a deliberate Silence from within the Coffin, something like a
Man, or rather Spirit, who no sooner sat upright, than looking on me with a
frightful Aspect, he pronounced these Words in a low Voice, Who invites him
into the Place.
Che sei, se un Christiano, ben-venuto.
Who are you? If a Christian, you are welcome.


BY the Language of his Salutation I perceived him an Italian, and the
trembling of his Limbs persuaded me to think, that the appearance of my
Scymetar and Pistols had as much surpised him, as he had me. I therefore took
immediate care to undeceive him in the apprehension he had framed, that I was
some armed Robber, and informed him that I was a Briton, Traveling the World,
and thrown by Chance upon that Island, where I landed with design to Visit the
Greek Monastery.

THE old Man seemed transported with the News, made shift to rise, and led me
to a Seat, hewn roughly from the Rock within the Cell; he laid his Hands upon
my Head, pronounced a grave and honest Blessing, and proceeded modestly to take
the liberty of asking some few Questions, which I willingly obliged him with as
ready Answers to.

Which proves to be a Hermits Cell.
HE then abandoned all the Coyness of his first deportment, and informed me, he
had lived a Hermit's Life in that poor Cell nigh two and thirty Years together,
that he frequently was visited by the Friars of the Monastery not far distant,
that they sometimes brought him Meat and Wine, which he consented now and then
to take for the support of Nature, though he rather chose to live on Roots and
clear Spring Water; that he always Slept in that black Coffin, never to be
absent from a strong Memento of his frail Mortality; that he was born (I think)
at Zant, and named Antonio, Giacomo Malaviso.

A Chapel in the Wood.
I purposely omit some Hours Discourse, I had with this old Hermit, because
digressive from the Cause for which I mention him, and only will inform my
Reader, that he would accompany me to a small Chapel in the Wood, at no great
distance from his Cell, built over the Stone Cave. wherein St. John is said to
have resided, while he Writ his famous Book of Revelations.

HE left me there, first recommending me to the Civilities of certain Priests,
who kept the Chapel: They received and treated me with wonderful Respect, and
having talked away an Hour in Questioning each other, as we thought convenient,
they proceeded to unlock a private Door, which opened from a corner of the
Chapel to a very dark and narrow Passage.

The Cave, wherein St. John is said to have Writ his Revelations.
WE Descended some few steps, and having Walked about six paces farther, came
upon a sudden to a very large and lightsome Cave, the Light was introduced by
very Artificial Hollows, from the Surface through the Rock, and in the midst of
one of the Four Squares, which formed the Cell, was cut a Seat, exactly like
the Niches made for Statues in Cathedral Churches.

JUST before this Niche, there stands a solid Rocky Table, of about a yard
Square, and here they would persuade us to believe, the Saint was seated at his
daily Studies. Relics in the Cave.
To confirm me in belief of this Opinion, they made long Harangues of those
Authentic proofs, which justified Tradition, and desired that I would take
particular and serious Notice of a kind of round Impression on the Area, or
Superficies of the Table, which they say was caused by the Perpetual standing
of the Brazen Vessel, which contained his Ink, and on the Floor, they showed me
several little Marks like Spots of Black, which they assured me, were the
Drops, occasioned by the Shaking of the Pen, wherewith the Saint was used to
Write the Dictates of his holy Inspiration.

The Monastery of St. John.
WITH these obliging Priests I visited the Monastery, and was there received as
civilly as I coud possibly have found an Entertainment in the House of an
Acquaintance or Relation, every thing was Neat, and Plentiful without
Extravagance, becoming the Decorum of Religious Livers, yet not void of Relish,
Form, or Delicacy.

A Miracle of St. John's Hand.
AMONG the many Relics they delight to boast of, and communicate to
Travelers, they showed me a large bony Hand, which seemed to be a Man's, Cut
off not far above the Wrist; the Bones were dry, and full of little Holes, as
if Worm-eaten, yet there seemed to sprout at all the Fingers Ends a little sign
of something, which the Friars told us were the Nails of the late-nam'd St.
John.

HOW they came by St. John's Right Hand, they could not tell me, but attested
that on every Second Sunday of the Month, the Nails were Cut, as close as
possible, and that they always grew again. They brought me a large Silver Box,
wherein the Parings of these Nails were safely kept, as sacred Relics, never
to be used, The Virtue of his Nails.
but when some Father of their order was extremely Sick, and then, they said, a
few of those, thrown piously upon a Fire, and the Smoke thereof ascending at
his Nostrils, are a very quick, and never-failing Remedy, provided the Sick
Man's appointed Hour of Death prevents not his Recovery.

Description of the Island Zea.
FROM Patmos let us look on Zea, a small Island of about Twelve Miles in
Compass, Hilly and extremely full of Woods, productive of a large and fat'ning
Acorn, of such noted goodness, and of such abundance in this Island, that the
few Inhabitants upon it, who are generally Greeks, (but subject to the Turks
Authority) enrich themselves considerably by exporting Yearly, great Shiploads
to other Islands, and some Places on the Continent.

Asses excellent at Climbing.
BUT what is most worth Notice here, is the prodigious Usefullness of certain
Asses, which the Natives Saddle, and upon their Backs (so well do those poor
Creatures Climb) can Travel over Rocks and Craggy Precipices, so extremely
Steep and Rugged, that a Man on Foot would find himself put to it, to ascend
without Assistance.

THE Island boasts one little Town, but that entirely void of stately
Buildings, or indeed the Poorest Ornaments of common decency, for not a Door in
all the Place is Four Foot High, but People almost Creep, who are obliged to
enter them; and this they do, because the Turks, who often come to buy or
plunder Asses in this Island, would if possible, make Stables of their very
Houses.

A description of the Island Rhodes.
RHODES is an Island famous now, as it has ever been, for all the Blessings,
liberal Nature can bestow upon a Country; in ancient Times her valiant People
were the Envy, but withal the Wonder of their Neighbors, Skilled in every
Science, Grace, and Virtue; the temperate Air, convenient Harbors, fertile
Pastures, and unnumber'd Benefits, she justly boasted of, were admirable and
peculiar, and the Sun so constantly was known to shine upon this Country, that
Clara Rhodia, Rhodes the Bright, distinguished her among the Ancients, for that
glorious Blessing.

Famous for two Things.
TWO things of old, she was particularly famous for, The first Discovery and
Planting of the Vine, and that stupendous Fabric the Colossus, striding on
the Sea, from Rock to Rock, that Ships might Sail with ease between the Legs,
and when thrown down, the very Brass, whereof 'twas formed, was found enough to
load almost a thousand Camels.

ABOUT the Year of Christ 1308, Emanuel, Emperor of Greece, bestowed this
Island on the Noble Knights of St. John de Acre, just then beaten from their
last Asylum in the Holy Land; When Conquered by the Turks.
in their Possession it remained till the Year 1552, when Sultan Solomon, the
Turkish Emperor, became its Master at a bloody Price, and the surviving Remnant
of its brave Defenders were by Treaty suffered to remove to Malta.

IN the Possession of the Turks it still remains, well Fortified, and strictly
Guarded, and has often, since its Loss, proved fatal to the Christians
intercepted Navigation, justly punishing their base neglect in the implored
dispatch of timely Succors, censured sharply in the following Lines by
Scaliger. A Reproof of Scaliger, to the Christians Negligence.
Clara Rhodos, sed clara olim; nunc horrida nimbis;
Obnubuit nitidum dira procella caput.
Ah dolor! ah mors! ah aliquid morte, atque dolor
Durius, aut etiam tertius esse potest:
Stertitis? and ferus amenti lupus optima carpit?
O jam sit jam aliquis velle perire pudor.
Bright Rhodes, but bright of old, dark-clouded now,
A dreadful Tempest shades thy shining Brow;
Oh Grief! oh Death! oh! something worse than Both!
Or than that worst even worse, oh shameful Sloth!
Sloth! that with Slumber did your Eyes betray,
While the fierce Wolf snatched your best Prize away;
O, this base Shame, if any, sure will stain,
Not only to be tied, but even invite your Chain!


Description of Coos.
COOS or Longo, is a little Island, plain and pleasant in its Situation,
jointly Peopled by the Turks and Graecians, full of admirable Springs and
Rivolets, abounding greatly with a noble Wine, fine Cypress Trees and
Turpentine, with many rich and useful Druggs, exported thence to almost every
part of Christendom. But what this Island is most famous for, is, that it was
the Birthplace of the great Hippocrates, that Sacred Demy-God of Physic, and
Improver of a Science so extremely Useful to Mankind in general.

Description of Delos.
DELOS, now called Diles, is an Island, all encompassed by a Ring of Rocks and
lies conveniently, directly in the Passage between Greece and Asia: 'Twas
famous anciently for the Great Oracle and Temple of Apollo, and received its
Name of From (...), signifying Clear.
Delos from the clear and pertinent Responses, Querists met with to their
Questions of all kinds whatsoever; hence Apollo oftentimes was Worshipped by the
Name of Delius.

The Ruins of Apollo's Temple.
THE Island now is Uninhabited, but well deserves a Strangers View, for there
remain the Ruins of Apollo's Temple, still Majestical, and full of Grandeur,
many stately Marble Pillars lie neglected in the Heaps of Rubbish, and a very
precious kind of Stone is sometimes brought away, to many Parts of Italy.

UPON the Death of Christ, the Oracles grew silent, and from thenceforth Delos
lost her Honor, and has never been frequented since that time. We read in
Plutarch a remarkable Relation of an Accident, which happened to the Knowledge
of one Epitherses, who was formerly his Tutor, in the Reign of Tiberius Emperor
of Rome, the Story is as follows.

A Story from Plutarch.
BETWEEN Corcyra and Leucadia, lay the Paxe, two small Islands' where this
Epitherses, Sailing for the Coast of Italy, was suddenly becalmed; and while
the Passengers, uneasy at the slowness of their Voyage, walked upon the Deck, a
frightful, shrill, and mournful Voice alarmed 'em from the Shore, distinctly
calling Thamus, Thamus, Thamus.

A Voice from an unknown Shore.
THAMVS was a Pylot, then upon the Poop, one born in Egypt, who was silent with
amazement till the Call was thrice aloud repeated; then he answered faintly,
and demanded, why he summoned him? The Voice replied, As soon as thou art come
to the Palodes, let it be Proclaimed aloud, that Pan, Great Pan is Dead.

A sudden Horror seized the Company, to hear this strange and unexpected
Salutation; presently the Wind came fair, and as the Ship drew near the Place
abovenam'd, Thamus, as he was desired, stood high upon the Poop, and with an
elevated Voice, cried, Pan is Dead, when in a Moment, all the Air was torn with
Groanings, and a mixed Confusion of complaining Accents, so extremely dismal,
that it cannot be imagined.

CAESAR, hearing this Report, commanded Thamus to be brought before him, who
attested it with the concurring Evidences of the Sailors then on board. The
Cessation of Oracles.
Great Pan was Christ, the Universal Shepherd, and his Death had bound the
Devil's Power, no longer suffering his delusive Oracles to impose upon Mankind;
they therefore upon hearing this unwelcome News, bewailed their Miseries with
the abovenam'd Lamentations.

SOMETIMES it happens, that you Sail along the Continent, and see the ancient,
venerable Thebes, renowned of old, for admirable Virtues, Skilled politely in
all Arts and Sciences, Mistress of the Rules of War and Policy; a Government,
made famous by the wonderful Successes of a Race of Heroes, but particularly
Glorious in the never dying Memory of Brave Epaminondas, who was yet
ungratefully Rewarded for his Matchless Actions, and neglected rather than
encouraged by the Factions of his Country; a very ancient Vice, and still, I
fear, too fashionable in the Modern World. I wish it were not in my Power to
quote Examples.

Thebes as She now is.
THEBES is now entirely subject to the Turkish Government, and groans beneath a
weighty Burden of Oppressive Tyranny; some stately Ruins of Antiquity may
still be seen, and feast the Eye with wonderful Delight, while with a
melancholy Contemplation of the short continuance of vain Magnificence they
entertain the Understanding.

Delphos, as at present.
DELPHOS, memorably noted for a thousand Causes, humbly rears her miserable
Head, as if, rememb'ring former Splendor, she reflected mournfully upon her
present Fall, and blushed to be discovered in her changed Condition: The
Mountain of Parnassus now no more pretends to boast the Muses Residence, the
lofty Songs of ancient Poets are forgotten on the now-neglected Streams of
Helicon, and the delightful Harmonies once celebrated there, are now converted
into Howlings of strange Salvage Beasts, and Brayings of Wild Asses.

Athens, described.
ATHENS still may call her self a City, but can only do it as the Skeleton of
some Dead Man continues long to represent the Shape of human Body; for her
ancient Temples are defaced and buried, even beyond the Knowledge of the very
Ground they stood upon; her exemplary Forms of Government, and Order, ruined,
and demolished by the arrogance of Infidels, more arbitrary and unjust, than
all the Tyrants she opposed in former Ages: No longer now do the judicious Laws
of the incomparable Solon sway her Natives; Bribery prevails, and Justice
yields her Balance to the Rapine of an uncontrolled and barbarous Authority.

BUT, notwithstanding the Destruction of her valuable Liberty, she still
retains her ancient Plenty, constantly affording all the Delicacies, require to
be obtained by even such, as would encourage Pride and pamper Luxury.

Corinth, and her Product.
CORINTH, situated on that narrow Neck of Land, which joins Moreae to the
undivided Continent, is only famous for her Mines of Brass, in great esteem
among the Romans, and affording still the finest Metal in the World, but that
in small, and inconsiderable Quantities.

Description of Crete, or Candy.
CRETE, or Candy, as at present called, was taken by the Turks from the
Possession of the brave Venetians, who defended it some Years against a
constant Siege, and made the Place a bloody Purchase to the Turkish Army: It is
an Island, very large, its Capital containing stately Houses, and defended by a
regular and modern Work, of admirable Strength and Artifice. Provisions here
are very Plentiful, and the Inhabitants exceeding Numerous; many Harbors of
commodious form, and a capacious magnitude, invite the Traffic of the Foreign
Merchant; and it is observable, that Crete is blessed with a surprising Property,
which some have thought peculiar to the Soil of Ireland, for nothing poisonous
is bred therein, nor can the Reptiles of another Country long survive their
Importation thither.

Very subject to Thunder.
'TWAS in this Island, Jupiter was born, and thinking, when I saw the Place,
upon the fiction of the Poets, I observed with Pleasure, that the Judgment of
the Ancients still moved regularly, for nothing could have been more natural
than representing Jove a Native of this Island, since there hardly passes one
whole Day throughout the Year, wherein it does not Thunder with a mighty
Violence.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Alexandria in Egypt.
The Origin of Alexandria.
NOW have I brought you into Egypt at the common Landing Place, the ancient
Alexandria, so called from the successful Macedonian, who, desirous to
perpetuate his Memory there, resolved to build a City, which he did, upon, or
near the Place where now the Modern Alexandria has its Situation.

Its ancient State.
HE Peopled it with Greeks, and so amazingly adorned the Streets and Houses with
the richest Gifts of Art and Nature, that 'twas long the celebrated Paradise of
all the East: The Houses were supported upon Marble Pillars, and as much of
them were hid below-ground as appeared above. Unnumbred Statues of the nicest
Workmanship adorned the Place, and every stately Ornament was purchased to
complete its Excellence.

How different from the Present.
BUT oh! How different from this does she appear at present? The Houses, which
remain are low, all meanly built, and thinly Peopled, those excepted, which are
situated on the Haven: The form is almost square, encompassed round by double
Walls, with many Turrets in the ancient way: These Walls are commonly believed
the same, which Ptolemy, so many Ages since, commanded to be built for the
Security of the then-valuable City.

Its Situation.
IT IS seated in a very Barren Desert Country, and has no Allurement (Trade
excepted) to invite Inhabitants. The Castle of Alexandria.
Upon the Entrance of the Haven, formerly the Island Pharus, now converted into
Continent (so great a Change does Time produce in all weak sublunary Beings)
stands a Castle, ill supplied with Water, or Conveniences for long Defense:
The Ordnance of the Walls salute all Ships upon their coming to an Anchor; for
the Port of Alexandria is free for Traders, of all Nations whatsoever.

THIS Pharus, which is now a part of the Main Continent, was not only divided
from it, in Times past, but, if we may believe the Affirmation of old Homer,
was an Island situated at considerable distance. Hom. Odys. L. 4.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
'Midst stormy Seas there does an Island stand,
Which Men call Pharus, before Egypt's Land;
So far disjoined, that when the brisk Winds play
On a Ships Poop, the speedy Vessel may,
With swelling Sails, get thither in a Day.


THE Face of Nature has been strangely altered since the Days of Homer, and the
only Reason Men can give for this Effect is, that it has been caused by gradual
discharges of the Sand, brought down by Nilus in his Annual Overflows, and so
thrown up in heaps between the Island and the Continent, till in the course of
time, the Sea was banished, and the whole became firm Land as it remains at
present.

The Ancient Pharus, or Egyptian Light-House.
ONCE, the Pharus had a Bridge built from it, to the Shore of Egypt, and upon a
very steep and rugged Promontory of the Island, stood the Tower, on which the
Mighty Philadelphus Built his Light-house, which obtained the Honor to be
Ranked among the Worlds Seven Wonders; it took its Name of Pharos from the
Place it stood in, and has given that old Denomination to all those Buildings,
which are raised to hang out Lights for the Direction of such Ships, as else
would Labor in a dangerous Darkness.

The Lake of Maroeotis.
THERE is a Place, now called Buc-hat-ra, anciently the Lake of Maroeotis,
Famous for its Depth and even incredible Extent, which took in Water at the
Yearly Overflow, and by the means of Sluyces of amazing Fabric, kept it in the
whole Year round, supplying numerous Canals of Artificial Length, and Breadth
beyond belief, on which the old Egyptians Mad with Luxury, continually
delighted to Sail up and down, in Stately Barges, Gilt and Painted, full of
amorous Men and Women, Brisk in Wantonness, and Sounding Music as their Oars
divided the complaining Waters, Singing, and enjoying all the loose and airy
Pleasures of a Juvenile Extravagance.

BUT those Canals are now, at least the greatest part, Dried up and lost, by
ever-rolling heaps of Sand; A Gloomy Labyrinth.
the Lake however, still remains, but quite deprived of all appearances of that
stupendous Building, which consisted of an intricate and Artfull Labyrinth,
that led by many Thousand Windings, Dark and Dismal, to the Seven and Thirty
Glorious Palaces, appointed for the Meeting of the Seven and Thirty
Jurisdictive Powers of that formidable Country, and at the End whereof we Read,
that there stood once a Stately Square, and wonderfully vast, Fine Marble
Pyramid, supposed to be the Sepulcher of King Ismandes, the Original Contriver
of the Lake and Labyrinth, at least the Founder of the Pyramid.

THERE is not any thing in Alexandria worth the mentioning, but some few
venerable Relics of Antiquity, which still proclaim with silent Eloquence,
the once-aspiring and unrivaled Stateliness, which Crowned this City with a
Dazzling Majesty.

The Tomb of Alexander the Great.
AND, First, they show the Tomb of that brave Monarch Alexander the Great, whose
Body, taken from Perdiccas by Ambitious Ptolemy, was brought by him to Egypt,
where, when he was killed by Soldiers in a Desert, Alexander's Body was by them
conveyed to Alexandria, and lies entombed in a mean Chapel, visited, but
rarely, by some Curious Travelers, and held in great esteem by the Mahometans
themselves, who pay a twofold veneration to his Memory, as a Mighty Warrior,
and a Holy Prophet, for Tradition tells them, he was both, while Living.

Joseph's Granaries.
ANOTHER Rarity, they show most Strangers, is a very Lofty Pile of Buildings,
all composed of solid Stone, but ruined much by natural decay, containing many
large Apartments, strangely wild, and void of Regularity, some would persuade
us to believe, that these were Joseph's Granaries, or Places, which he ordered
to be Built within the Seven Years of Plenty, to preserve the Magazines of
Corn, against the following Years of Famine, in those parts.

Cleopatra's Palace.
UPON the rising of a Hill, which overlooks the Haven, stand the Ruins of a
spacious and aspiring Structure, probably the Palace of the famous Cleopatra,
whereof remain some Pillars yet entire, and some few Arches of polite
Contrivance: They pretend to show the Ruins of a private Gallery, through which
that Queen received Mark Anthony, on his Return from the Defeat at Actium.

Pharaoh's Needle.
UPON the Place, where Alexander's Palace stood of old, remain two Hieroglyphic
Obelisks of Theban Marble, one quite fallen, the other standing, of considerable
height, and vulgarly distinguished by the Name of Pharaoh's Needle.

UPON a little spot of rising Ground, without the City Walls, and on the
South-West side, there stands a Column of a Substance much like Porphyry, in
height near seventy Foot, and five and twenty in circumference; it stands upon
a Cube or Pedestal, far less in compass than the bottom of the Pillar.

THE Conquering Caesar here erected this fine Column as a memorable Trophy of
his Victory over Pompey, and left it to Posterity, as an ambitious Monument of
his successful Conduct: But to let Men see how vain are their Endeavors when
opposed by Heaven, he lost his aim, and has instead of Triumphing over routed
Pompey, given the Vanquished all the Honor, he himself aspired to gain from
future Ages by the Credit of this Victory; Pompey's Pillar.
for now the Christians know the Column by no other Name than Pompey's Pillar,
so that many thousands hear him named, who never read, or dreamt of such a Man
as Caesar.

The Martyrdom of St. Mark, at Alexandria.
TRAJAN was Emperor of Rome, when they condemned St. Mark to suffer Martyrdom
in Alexandria, where accordingly, they burnt, and buried him; his Bones were
afterward removed to Venice by the Natives of this City, who profess that
Saint as Patron of their Country. There stands a Chapel now upon the Place,
where once he lay Entombed, and near that Chapel is a House, in which resides
the Grecian Patriarch of Alexandria.

Ceremonies there to be observed by Strangers.
THUS much of Alexandria, scarce worth mentioning, but as it is the Place, all
Travelers must land at, and pay Custom for the Goods, they bring; proceeding
thence for Cairo or Rosetta, by the Virtue of a Teskaree, or Passport from the
Governor.

THE Christian Nations, such I mean as Trade, do here maintain their Consuls or
Subordinate Officers, to manage the respective Interests of their Countries; The
mixed Inhabitants of Alexandria.
and the few Inhabitants, residing there, are gathered from all Nations under
Heaven, Jews, Indians, Copties, Turks and Graecians, Moors, Armenians, French,
Italians, Zinganees, and now and then an Englishman: There was, I think, an
honest Gentleman or two, my Countrymen, when I was there, employed in managing
the Business of our Traffic, but I staid not there so long as to become
acquainted with their Characters, which I the less desired, because in Company
with some Italian Gentlemen of an agreeable and airy Disposition, who
accompanied me throughout the Country.

ONE thing I must observe, that, as they are a mixture of all Nations, so they
commonly are found the worst of each; and I may very well apply a Word or two
of Juvenal's to the Inhabitants of Alexandria, the rather too because it suits
the Country as adaptly as the People. Juv. Sat. 13
Rari quippe boni, Numero vix sunt totidem, quot,
Thebarum Portae, vel divitis ostia Nili.
-- Virtue is here so Rare,
That Men exceed not, if you miss the Vile,
The Gates of Thebes, or Mouths of Fruitful Nile.


CHAP. XXIX. Of Aethiopia, and the Source of the Nile, with the Cause, Manner,
and Continuance, of its Annual Inundation.
BEFORE I enter on the Subject of the Chapter, promised by the Heads
abovementioned, 'twill possibly, be needful, I should say a Word or two, to
undeceive such Gentlemen, as by the General Title, I have given my Book, may be
induced to think, I meant to Write a full Description of the Present State of
Aethiopia in regard to its Extent, Inhabitants, and Forms of Government, which,
though perhaps my Opportunities enabled me to do more fully than most former
Writers, yet it would require a length too tedious and digressive from my
purpose to enlarge upon that Subject.

How far the Author Treats of Aethiopia.
I only mean to speak so far of Aethiopia, as the Country interferes with my
Discourse upon the Source and Channel of the River Nilus, as I have had
occasion elsewhere in this Book, to mention the Religion of the Persians,
Customs of the Tartars, and some other points relating to such Countries, as
were widely distant from my purpose, and were therefore Treated of no farther
than they had dependence on, or Interest in the Turkish Empire.

A Discourse of Aethiopia.
HOWEVER, that vast Tract of Land, distinguished amongst Christians by the Name
of Aethiopia, is not as is commonly believed, commanded by the Arbitrary Nod of
one Great Monarch, whom we vulgarly call Presler John, but by corruption of the
Genuine Word, which is no more than Prissir-Jan, which in the Language of the
Country, signifies Renowned or Mighty Emperor.

The Government of Aethiopia.
IT IS true, he is Possessor of the Greatest share of Honor and Authority, having
more than Thirty Tributary Princes under his Command, whose Reigns are Limited,
and Power Created by his undisputed will and Sovereign Pleasure; but there are
Monarchs, wholly as Tyrannical and Absolute as He. Nine several Kings possess
vast Territories, free, and independent on each others Government; and all
these Princes so extremely Jealous of their Neighboring Equals, and so
careful to preserve their own Prerogative, that they permit no Traffic 'twixt
their Subjects, cautiously preventing with the strictest Prohibition, all
Communication whatsoever, and condemning to immediate Death all Subjects of a
Foreign Prince, they find amongst them.

How divided in their Interests,
AND as the Interests of these Princes are so widely separated, so are their
Professions of Religion and Morality: Those under the Dominion of the late
named Prissir Jan are Christians, or at least usurp that Title; I say usurp,
because unfortifi'd by Truth or Learning, they have grossly mingled sordid
Remnants of their old Idolatry with the diviner Practices of Christian Duty.

THEY first received the Faith of Christ by the industrious Labors of the
Ethiopian Eunuch, Philip's Convert, and retain a Dusky and Traditional Account
of the uncertain Circumstances of that famous Action, whereby they are misled
to strange Opinions, widely differing from each others Tenets, but alike
mistaken in the universal End they blindly aim at.

And Religion.
SOME prefer our Savior as the greatest Person of the Trinity, some esteem him
lowest of the Three, some believe not in the Trinity at all, and many,
ignorantly Zealous in their Folly, still prefer St. Philip's Merits to the
worth of our Redeemer.

Their Character.
THEY are a People (generally speaking) of a Slothful Disposition, Obstinate and
Rash, extremely swift to Anger, and of daring Courage, when provoked by the
temptation of a strong Resentment; they are Jealous to excess, and very
Avaritious, Temperate in Diet, nor inclinable to Drunkenness; they are Tall of
Stature, Strong in Constitution, and Robust in their Proportion, and as I said
before, most resolute Defenders of their valued Property.

Why difficult to Travel there.
IT is perhaps, to their unreasonable Hatred of all kind of Strangers, that the
Civilized Inhabitants of Europe owe their Ignorance of those remote and
dark'ned Corners of the distant World; for as they are prohibited by Principle
to entertain, or even preserve the Lives of curious Travelers, it has been
hitherto impossible to make Discoveries by the Endeavors of Adventurous Men
alone, or amicable Parties; and the mighty distance, they are at from Christian
Powers, the spacious Countries, interposing their extensive Lands; the
Mountains, Lakes, and Deserts inaccessible to all Approaches, were in every
Age, and still continue formidable Barriers to the aim of Curiosity or efforts
of Ambition.

The Princes, who have been baffled in the Search of the head of Nilus.
IT is this alone, that was enabled, many Ages since, to baffle the Attempts of
Powerful Monarchs, Men, possessed of every help, which Power and Riches could
afford their Resolution: It is this alone, that could have foiled the often
repeated Efforts of Egyptian Philadelphus, or the Roman Nero; it is this alone,
that could have disappointed the resolved Attempts of Great Cambyses, Famed
Sesostris, and the Macedonian Alexander: All these Princes have at several
times, endeavored to no purpose, an entire Discovery of that Mysterious Sourse
of Waters so concealed by Nature, that it seems to speak our very Search
unlawful and prohibited, thus nicely touched by Lucan. Lucan. ^ 10^
Arcanum Naturae caput non prodidit ulli,
Nec licuit populis parvum te, Nile, videre
Amovitque sinus, and gentes maluit ortus
Mirari, quam nosse tuos --.
Nature, O Nile, forbids to look on thee,
Where thy faint Streams declare thy Infancy;
Thy rising Fountains she thought fit to shroud,
And wrapped thy mantled Bosom in a Cloud,
Thence teaching Nations to admire thy Stream,
And choose Applause, not Knowledge for their Theme.


A Discovery of the Sourse of Nile.
HOWEVER, if we may believe the confident Reports of such Egyptians, as Inhabit
Countries bordering on Aethiopia, or indeed such Aethiopians themselves, as
will or dare Converse with Strangers, Nilus rises in a great extent of Marshy
Grounds, surrounded by prodigious Mountains of an almost inaccessible Ascent;
the Weeds and Rushes so incumbering the uncertain Waters, that no Boat can pass
from Hill to Hill, and it is a more than dangerous Attempt to venture any other
way on so deceitful a Foundation; yet it is said, that some have passed secure,
and seen a Rock of a stupendous Magnitude, whence gushed a Stream of roaring
Waters with impetuous violence.

IT IS said these Marshes lie near twelve Degrees beyond the Equator, and that
the Nile, forsaking his entangled Bed, is found to wander in maeandring
Labyrinths quite through prodigious Deserts, spacious Kingdoms, and remote
Dominions, sometimes forming wondrous Lakes, and seeming to forget the Order
of a River, then recovering his spreading Waters, and continuing a Course for
many Leagues together, calm and gentle, swelling as he passes on, to great
increase, by the reception of encount'ring Currents, all imbibed and carried on
in his superior Channel; every now and then surrounding some delightful Piece
of Ground and making Islands, pleasant in their Situation, and agreeably
Productive of the gayest Sweets of aided Nature.

The Course of the River.
SOMETIMES, rolling headlong from a Mountainous and Rugged Country, to the
Valleys under it, it forms those loud and dreadful Cataracts, so famous for the
noise created by the Waters, violently rushing from the lofty Precipices and
resisting Rocks, that many Authors of Antiquity have joined in the Reports,
that such Inhabitants, as lived too near those horrid Water-Falls were by
degrees made Deaf with their continual roaring.

Where divided.
THUS this great and celebrated River prosecutes his Course through many Nations,
till it enters Egypt, there grown deep, it smoothly runs within its Banks in
one broad Stream, till near five Miles below Grand Cairo it becomes divided
into two distinct and Navigable Branches; that toward the East discharging all
its Waters from a Mouth at Damiata, situated on the Mediterranean, and the
Western Branch, the Old Canopus, likewise falling into the above-named Sea, not
far below Rosetta in the Neighborhood of Alexandria.

Five of the Seven Mouths of Nilus now quite lost.
EXCEPTING many Channels cut by Art, for the Convenience of letting Waters in
upon the Country in the Yearly Overflow, there now remain but these two
Branches out of the so often mentioned Seven, sometimes Nine, which Pliny,
Herodotus, Ptolemy, Diodorus Siculus, and other ancient Writers tell the World
of; they are now, if ever such have been, choked up by Sand, or other common
Accidents which are not seldom, known to change the Course of Rivers in our
Europaean Parts as well as Egypt.

The Rise or Increase of Nilus.
BUT now I come to treat of the Surprising Inundation, which this River causes
Yearly in the Land of Egypt, where it very seldom Rains, and when it does it is
rather Mist, and never falls but in the Winter Season; about the midst of June
the Nile Infallibly begins to rise, thence Swelling by degrees, till August
following, and Mounting in that Space, the Height of two or three and Twenty
Cubits.

WHEN thus it has increased to a convenient Height, the Grand Bashaw of Cairo
solemnly attended by the best of all his People, comes upon the Bank, and
having given with his own Hand, the Warning Stroke, they cut it through in many
Places, where the Water Rushes in with an impetuous Current, overflowing all
the Country upon either side the River, so continuing many Days; Its Effects.
then Suddenly Decreasing and Retiring orderly within its Banks, leaves all the
Land (before a Desert) covered Richly with a Propagative Slime, of such an
admirable Virtue, that the Corn, upon Abatement of the Waters, Scattered
Carelessly about the Surface, constantly produces two good Crops, and sometimes
more, with equal plenty; And Decrease.
not quite Five Months the Waters take in Rise, Continuance, and Abatement, for
about the First or Second of November, all the Country, lately Deluged, is
entirely freed from the invading Current, which is then returned to its
ordinary Bounds and so continues till the Year Succeeding.

IT IS a Prospect, highly Pleasant for a Stranger to behold a Country Suddenly
overwhelmed, and that become a Sea, which just before appeared a Desert; Men
and Women briskly rowing up and down, still more rejoicing, the more deep they
find the Waters; Their Presages by the Rising of the River.
for from the great or small increase of their Presaging Nilus, they foretell
with ease the never-failing consequence of Plenty or a Famine.

THE great advantages, accruing to this Country from the Yearly overflow of
Nilus, being so extremely plain and constant, the Rejoicings, which are made on
that occasion, are accordingly extravagant, for when the Banks are Cut, as I
just now informed you, all the Noblemen attend the Great Bashaw of Cairo to an
Ancient Castle, Built upon an Island in the Middle of the River, where, Three
Days together, they are Entertained and Feasted with the greatest
Demonstrations of delight Imaginable.

The Public Rejoicings, made in Egypt at the Overflow of Nilus.
NOR are the Common People (equal Sharers in the Blessings of Increase) less
grateful in acknowledging a Sense thereof, but join unanimously in a Course of
Mirth for many joyful Days together, forming Fireworks, Singing, Dancing,
Feasting with their Women, and Employing all their time in one Incessant search
of Pleasure, and the constant practice of Uninterrupted Gayety.

NOW let us search a little into the Received Opinions of the Learned World,
and see if we can apprehend the Cause of this effect, so wonderfully different
from the Common Course of gradual Nature.

Euripide's Opinion of the Cause thereof.
AND First, we find Euripides and many others, of Opinion, it proceeded from
Prodigious Thaws of Snow, then Melted by the Sun upon the Ethiopian Mountains,
but, as we are certainly assured, the constant Heat of that too Sultry Climate
cannot suffer Snow to rest, since even in Egypt it is never known, not even on
those Mountains, which confine her Borders, so the Modern Judgment of Politer
Naturalists has quite rejected that mistaken Notion.

The Opinion of Thales Milesius.
THALES MILESIVS affirms, that he believes the Inundation to proceed from the
continual Blowing of the Rough Etesian Winds, which then begin to Bluster from
the Northern Quarter, full upon the Mouth of Nilus, hindering it thereby to
enter the Mediterranean, and violently Driving back the Flood upon the low and
Sandy Ground of Egypt.

The Opinion of Diodorus Siculus.
BUT this is controverted by the Famous Diodorus Siculus, in his First Book,
who, to disprove the Argument of Thales, Nominates some other Rivers, equally
exposed to the Etesian Winds, which yet are never liable to such like
Inundations; he therefore in dislike of this Opinion, has preferred his own,
that Rain or Snow, dis^olv'd from distant Aethiopia, is the only Cause of an
Effect so Wonderful.

The Opinion of Herodotus.
DIRECTLY Opposite to these, is the Assertion of the Learned Herodotus, who
imagines, that the Sun, exhaling moisture in a great abundance from the River
Nilus, as he forms his Journey in the Winter Tropic, causes it to run in an
unnatural narrowness, but, when advancing toward the Northern Climates, the
Recovering River swells again with native Grandeur, then possessing all its
Streams, and Flowing uncontrolled, with full Authority, till the returning Sun
again demands the Tribute of its Waters.

The most received, and probable Opinion.
AMONG all these, the most received and probable Opinion is, the First belief of
Diodorus Siculus, that the Increase of the Waters is occasioned by continual
Rains, not Melting Snow, upon the Hills of Aethiopia; and the Reasons, which
are given in defense of this Assertion, are as follow.

Its Reasons.
FIRST, for many Days before the Inundation happens, all the Skies are seen in
Egypt, full of Black and Treatning Clouds, incessantly producing rumbling
Noises, and by Northern Tempests driven fiercely toward the Southern Parts,
where always follows Rain in great abundance, frequently near Threescore Days
together.

ANOTHER reason for this last opinion is, the Muddy thickness of the Waters,
when they overflow the Country, for, Rushing violently through so many Tracts of
Fertile Land, they tear up great and hourly quantities of fatning soil, which,
mixing thickly with the swelling streams, is left upon the scorched and barren
Sands of Egypt, of a very deep and slimy substance.

MANY other reasons are by the Inhabitants produced, to prove the Justice and
Solidity of this accepted Modern Notion; but as tedious Observations, and
unnecessary Repetitions grow Prolix and Heavy on a Reader, I will say no more
upon the Present Subject, than that all the Naturalists, reputed Famous in the
Eastern Countries, agree among themselves in full belief of this Assertion.

The goodness of the Water of the Nilus.
I must inform my Reader now, that as this River boasts peculiar properties in
Fractifying Nations to so rich a Plenty, so its Blessings many other ways are
equally particular; his Waters are observed to be for ever free from Mists or
Vapors, Sweet to such an Admirable and uncommon relish, that it is difficult (if
hoodwinked) to distinguish it from Milk.

How Clarified.
IT IS Famed for many Operative Virtues in Medicinal essays, and has but one known
Fault, which is a certain dusky thickness, clouding its appearance with a kind
of dark unpleasant Color, which they Clarify however in an Hour or two, by
casting into certain Earthen Pots (wherein the Water is contained) small
quantities of bitter Almonds bruised on purpose; Fish by reason of the just
named Muddiness afford no delicate or pleasant taste, and therefore is by
Strangers seldom Eaten, and neglected commonly by even the Natives of that
Country.

THE breadth of Nilus, when within the Bounds of its own natural Course, is
equal to the Thames, a Mile or two below the Bridge at London, and upon the
Banks on either side are built small, poor, and inconsiderable Villages,
inhabited promiscuously by Turks and Arabs, The danger of Sailing on the Nile.
those last named so insolently daring and extremely dangerous to unsuspecting
Travelers, who pass in little Boats upon the River from Grand Cairo, that they
frequently attempt with Javelins in their Mouths, to swim at dead of Night,
from some small Creek of the undreaded Shore, and coming on them unawares,
kill, take or plunder them, as they may think convenient.

A necessary Caution.
HOWEVER, led of late, to think of their own safety by the many fatal Accidents,
which have from time to time attended such, as rashly trusted to implored
Good-Fortune, and were disappointed of her Favors, they have found a way to
free the Passengers of their own Country or a Foreign one, from those
presumptious Insolences of Arabian Robbers; for at present, none attempt a
Voyage on the Nile, without providing useful Firearms, and very frequently a
Guardian Janizary, by whose faithful Care, and honest Courage they may be
Protected safely from those villainous Outrages, whose effects have often proved
unhappy to the headstrong Resolutions of unguarded Obstinacy; so cautious ought
a Traveller to be, who ignorant of Danger from an ignorance of Custom, may,
unknowingly, involve himself and Company in the unfear'd Misfortune of some
treacherous, swift and unexpected Ruin.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Government of Egypt.
The History of Egypt, from the Roman Conquest.
IN Order to inform you of the present State of Government in Egypt, 'twill be
necessary to inquire no further back in ancient History, than the times in
which the Great Octavius, Emperor of Rome, converted that extensive and
subjected Kingdom, to the meaner Title of a Roman Province, which in that
Condition, was enlightened by the glorious Rays of introduced Christianity, from
the unwearied Labors of St. Mark, who suffered Martyrdom, as I have said
before, at Alexandria.

Conquered by the Greeks.
THE Grecian Emperors, upon the fatal weakening of the Western Power by the
Division of the Roman Government, became the Lords of Egypt, and her People,
till oppressing them inhumanly by heavy Taxes and an arbitrary Tyranny, they
forcibly Revolted from their Yoke of Slavery, and in order to expel the Greeks
Authority, invited to their Aid the hardy Saracens.

Saracens,
HOWEVER, these about the Year of Christ six hundred thirty five, were beaten
from the Government, they gained in the expulsion of the Greeks by the
successful Arms of Omir, Kinsman and Successor to the Power of the Impostor
Mahomet, And Mahometans.
who, satisfied with Tribute, left them free to the Profession of their own
Religion; then fell they under the Dominion of the Babylonian Caliphs.

AFTERWARD, they chose a Caliph of their own, who was succeeded in a long
uninterrupted Line of full three hundred Years, when Almeric the Sixth, King of
Jerusalem, invaded and reduced them to a great extremity.

AMIDST this exigency, they entreated Succor from the Syrians, whose designing
Sultan sent immediately a greater Aid than was demanded from him; but as soon
as they had beat the Christians back to their Possessions, Sarco, General of
the Syrian Forces, murdered basely the Egyptian Caliph, and usurped the Kingdom
to his own Dominion.

The Original of the Circassian Mamalukes.
THE Mighty Saladine succeeded Sarco, and for the space of seventy six Years,
the Syrians held Possession of this Kingdom, till ambitious Melec-Salha'a,
jealous of the Courage or Integrity of his Egyptian Vassals, yearly bought
prodigious numbers of Circassian Slaves from their Allies, the Tartars, and
depending wholly on their Valor and Fidelity, armed thousands of them, till he
had completed his designed and numerous Army.

BY the Assistance of these bold and hardy Men he grew successful in the Wars,
he made upon his Foes the Christians, till at last, the Slaves too well
acquainted with the fatal Power, wherewith he trusted them, ungratefully
Revolted from their just Obedience, murdered Melec-Salha'a, and upon the bloody
Ruins of his broken Power, erected a New Form of Government among themselves,
inviting into Egypt all their Countrymen, or purchasing in every Place, as
many of them, as had formerly been taken.

THUS the Government of these revolted Slaves became in time extremely
Powerful, dreadful to their Enemies, and rich in their Possessions, still
maintaining their Dominions strongly and with resolution very near three
hundred Years; whereby they grew a famous People, and were known by the
denomination of Circassian Mamalukes, Their Overthrow and Downfall.
till Sultan Selym, Emperor of the Turks, in the Success of long and bloody
Wars, o'erthrew their Government, and so brought Egypt under his Subjection.

Egypt, how governed by the Turks.
IN the Possession of the Turks it still remains, and is at present governed by
a kind of Viceroy, full Possessor of an arbitrary Power, given him as Deputy,
or Great Vicegerent to the absolute Grand Signior; he takes his Title from the
City of Grand Cairo, is the first Bashaw of all the Turkish Empire, continues
seldom in his Government above three Years, and constantly resides in that
Imperial City.

DEPENDANT on the Power of this great Bashaw are the twelve Beys, or Lords
Provincial, constantly elected from among the Natives of the Country, and
Assistant, in the framing Laws and other matters, to the Grand Bashaw, who
therefore looking on them as Inspectors of his Actions, and set over him as
Spys, or Curbers of his Inclinations, does generally hate and contradict them;
hence proceed intestine Jarrs, and frequent Tumults, not a little prejudicial
to the Interest of the Turkish Sultan.

The Militia of Egypt.
IN order to support this Power, a Standing Army is Established in the Turkish
manner, which consists of twenty thousand Horse, and eighty thousand Foot,
accomplished, hardy and experienced Soldiers, all dependant on respective
Zaims, or their Timariots in the nature treated of at large, in the beginning
of this Book.

Egypt in its Modern Divisions.
THE Modern Egypt is divided into three Distinct and Spacious Provinces, that
part, which lies between Rosetta, and the famous Alexandria, is distinguished
by the Name of Hersiah; that part, which lies between Grand, Cairo, Tunese, and
Damiata, is now called Mar-hemha, and the Land, which lies upon the south of
Cairo, is in Turkish called Saihid.

The Humor of the People.
THESE different Provinces produce Inhabitants, as different in their Natures;
some are rougher than the rest, and more unciviliz'd in common Conversation;
but it is a general observation, that the nearer to the Port of Alexandria, or
the Sea about it, so much more polite is found the humor of these People.

Their Justice.
THE Military Power is in Egypt, as at Constantinople, mixed entirely with the
Civil Administration, and the Laws of both exactly Copied from the Turkish
Government, so that neither in Religion, Customs, Habit, or the forms of
Justice, can be found the smallest difference from what I have explained in the
foregoing Part, relating to the Turkish Policy; It Is Money only, Arbitrary,
Eloquent, persuasive Money can prevail in Egypt, as it ever does in Europaean
Turkey, to decide a Contest.

Their Superstition.
THE many Graces, which in former times enriched the Minds of their Illustrious
Ancestors, are all forgotten; but to show how prone Man's Nature is to Ill,
they still retain their ancient Superstition, and though they do not practice the
abolished Ceremonies of a rank Idolatry, they yet impute such power to every
little Accident, or Work of Nature, that they tread as near as possible in the
detested Footsteps of those old Egyptians, whom the Roman Satyrist has well
derided in the following Verses. Juv. Sat. 15.
Quis nescit Volusi Bithynice, qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? Crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin.
Effigies sacri nitet aurea Cercopitheci,
Dimidio Magicae resonant, ubi Memnone chordae
Atque vetus Thebe centum jacet obruta portis.
Illic coeruleos, hic piscem fluminis, illic
Oppida tota canem venerantur, nemo Dianam:
Porrum and cepe nefas violare ac frangere Morsu.
O sanctas gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis
Numina! lanatis animalibus abstinet omnis
Mensa, nefas illic foetum jugulare capellae.
Carnibus humanis vesci licet.
Who knows not, what fond Worship and vain Praise,
Mad Egypt to prodigious Monsters pays?
This part the Crocodile a Godhead makes,
That honors frightful Ibis, fed with Snakes.
There golden Images of Monkeys shine,
And sacred Worship crowns the apish Shrine,
Where Magic Spells make half-left Memnon sound,
And ancient Thebes now lies a ruined Ground,
Thebes, which twice fifty Gates did once surround.
Here Seafish, there the River Fish they own,
To Dogs whole Cities bow, but to Diana none.
A wondrous wickedness, indeed, to eat
A sacred Leek, or make an Onion Meat!
O blessed People! in whose Gardens grow
These Gods, to whom such wondrous helps you owe!
From woolly Animals each Board abstains,
To kill a Kid pollutes their Soul with Stains,
Yet none by Conscience led from humane Flesh refrains.


The Effects of Misery.
THE Miserable Poverty, whose ill Effects have crushed the Spirits of the
Warlike Graecians, and subverted Valor to contented Slavery, has worked so
deeply on the humble Minds of the depressed Egyptians, that they daily more and
more become Effeminate, neglecting meanly the once loved Practices of
Martial-Discipline, and idly sinking in a stupifi'd forgetfulness of all the
calls of Liberty or Honor.

Their Character.
THEY are very Lazy, Proud, and Insolent in Carriage, Dirty in their Dress, and
stiff in their Behavior, haters and despisers of all other Countries, scarce
affording Love to one another, and so very nasty in their Tents, or Houses,
that the very entrance is offensive to a Christian Stranger.

The Egyptian Moors.
THERE are, besides the Offspring of the old Egyptians, certain tawny Natives
of this Land, a Sunburned Mongrel kind of Race, descended from the Arabs, and
in strength of Body, Humor, Shrilness of their Speech, and great Agility, not
much unlike them; for Distinctionsake, these Men are called the Moors of Egypt,
but are commonly more honestly inclined than are their numerous Copartners in
that wide Denomination.

Their Government, a Copy of the Turkish.
THE Towns of Egypt are not many, and those few, they have but ill defended,
rather trusting to the number of their People, than the strength of Walls, or
tedious helps of Modern Fortification; each Town and Village has its Governor;
and as I said before, the nature of their Government is so entirely Turkish,
that I need no longer dwell upon the Subject of this Chapter, but will hasten
in the next, to look a little into the condition of their Learning and
Morality, and see if we can trace the Footsteps of their great Forefathers, in
the Modern Applications of their lost Posterity.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Learning and Morals of the Egyptians.
Egypt in her present Ignorance, a Proof of Humane Frailty.
THE Curious Searcher into Humane Changes, and the various Miseries attending
Life, can never find a fairer Proof of Sublunary Frailty than he has before
him, in a nice Reflection on the present State of the Egyptian Learning; Egypt,
which of old possessed unbounded Knowledge, and unlimited Dominion; Egypt,
which out-towr'd not only the Felicity, but even the Imitation of admiring
Neighbors; Egypt, from whose Source of Wisdom, Greece originally drew those
Channels, from whose unexhausted Store she afterward supplied the spacious
Universe; Egypt, the neglected Mother of our Arts and Sciences, is now involved
in stupid Ignorance, and boasts no more than that unpolished common Sense, we
owe promiscuously to Liberal Nature.

THE black effects of Time and Discord have amazingly subverted ancient
Splendour; and the glorious State of Learning, which in former Ages flourished
in this Country, left her with the Blessings of that wealthy Peace, she once
could boast of, Knowledge fell a Victim to the Sword, and the Destruction,
which befell them, was so very Universal, not alone to Power, but even the well
established Principles of Literature and Morality, that when I think upon the
Ruin of the Old Egyptians, who survived the loss of all worth living for, and
then fell lastly solitary Victims to their Nations Enemies, it brings to my
remembrance the Expressions, Seneca thought fit to use upon the Fate of
Priamus, in his Tragedy of Troas. Sen. Trag. Troas.
-- Felix Priamus!
Felix, quisquis bello morions
Omnia secum consumpta videt!
-- O happy Priamus!
And happy all, who, when in War they die,
In one destructive Fate see all things with them lie!


The Origin of the Egyptian Ignorance.
THE gloomy Cloud of unaspiring Sloth and dull Stupidity, which now possesses
fallen Egypt, hence received its fatal Origin, and ever since has skreen'd the
Sun of banished Learning from that miserable Country, nor has even the most
retired and private State of Life escaped the general Calamity, which spread
its Influence with an uncontrolled and Universal Ruin.

AND, indeed it is a vain and groundless hope, for an unthinking Man to flatter
his Opinion, with the strange Belief of even a possibility to live contented in
a sinking Government, or stand unshock'd, in the destruction of his Country,
though the share, he boasted in the management thereof, was never so small or
inconsiderable, or even though the trifling Part, he acted in its Welfare, was so
far from helping to support the State, that he appeared the most unknown and
useless Member of his Nation.

THE admirable Solon, an unequalled Former of the wisest Laws, and consequently
an undoubted Judge in Rules of Policy, has left us his Opinion on the matter,
in the eloquent Expressions following, Solon's Opinion, of a Public Ill.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When Publick-Ills do Commonwealths impair,
Each Private Subject feels a Public Share,
No barring Gates can its effects exclude,
Over highest Walls it climbs and will intrude;
Still it o'ertakes you, if to Shades you fly,
And finds you, though in latent Beds you lie.


Sciences invented by the old Egyptians.
THE old Egyptians first invented Music and Geometry, with the useful
Knowledge of Arithmetic; they first inspected Heaven, and bravely traced the
Sun and Stars through their Diurnal Motions; they first divided Years by Months,
and from a Knowledge of the various Aspects of Caelestial Constellations, grew
Diviners of portended Consequences; Philosophy, and the transporting Flights of
a Poetic Harmony were first known there.

Hieroglyphics, what they were.
MECHANIC ARTS, though since improved, were numerously owing to the deep
invention of Egyptian fancy. Hieroglyphics, used instead of Characters,
explained the meaning of the wisest thoughts by silent Images of various kinds,
whereby they strangely represented Humane Nature in its different Passions,
with a very still, but moving Eloquence.

BUT now the very Memory of these Perfections is itsself forgotten, by the
Deviated Souls of the Possessors of this Country, in its Modern State of Folly,
Pride and Insolence, and all, an Author is enabled to inform the World of the
Condition of their Learning is, that they have really none among them; No
Learning in Egypt now.
it is a Wonder if, in many Villages of Egypt well inhabited, Ten Men are found,
who boast capacity to Read or Write; my Reader will not therefore be Surpised,
when I assure him that, for any more refined and elevated kind of knowledge,
they are altogether Strangers to the very notion of its usefullness.

NOR can I give their Morals a much fairer Character, than I have justly fixed
upon their Learning. Morality is commonly the good effect of Honest thoughts,
produced by some Improvement of the Mind in serious Contemplation on the Worth
of Virtue, and the only way to reach the Power of so bright a Contemplation is
by aiming at as great a share of common Knowledge as we can with ease attain in
humble Stations; Why Morality is seldom found in Egypt.
it is not therefore probable or possible, that these Egyptians, void, by the
Tyrannic and oppressive Constitution of their Government, of any means to reach
such Practice, nor indeed desirous, by the bent of Inclination, to endeavor
after it, should e're attain the happy end, it constantly produces.

I have in the Preceding Chapter, spoke in general of their Obvious
Principles, the less will therefore serve me here, since I can only use the
same Expressions, or at least in other words declare the same Assertion, should
I now enlarge upon the Shallow Subject; The Egyptians very covetous.
I will therefore only add, that they are Avaritiously inclined almost beyond a
Parallel, and, as desirous eagerly of growing Rich, will scruple nothing to
obtain the Blessing; hence it will be an easy thing to guess how far from
Virtue, Honesty, or Justice lies the Course, they Darkly steer in, -- Nam Dives
qui fieri vult,
Et cito vult fieri, sed quae reverentia legum,
Quis metus, aut pudor est unquam Properantis avari?
For he, who has on Riches bent his Mind,
Would still to Wealth a Speedy Passage find,
But what respect to Laws, what Fear or Shame,
Restrains the Eager Wretch, who does at Avarice aim.


I hasten from a Subject, Melancholy in its Truth, and thence Oppressive, and a
Clog upon my fancy: But alas! we find no part of Earth, but has sometimes
experienced Rugged Changes, and our own Examples may convince us daily, that
the Scourge of Fortune Triumphs frequently in other Parts, as well as Egypt.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Beasts, Birds and Serpents of Egypt.
AMONG the numerous Observations, Travelers may make in Egypt of a thousand
things, peculiar to that Country, none deserves remark more justly than the
Virtue, it can boast of, in producing Creatures as uncommon and particular, as
are the many Artificial Rarities, they have in every Age been famous for.

The Hippotamus, or Seahorse.
AND first, to mention none of those more common Animals, which may be found
promiscuously in almost every Country, the Hippotamus or Sea Horse, of old more
frequently observed about the River Nilus, than in later times; for Pliny,
Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and many other Authors, have described them in
their Writings, some of which have authorized their full Descriptions by their
own Eyewitness.

Described.
BUT at present, it is a Curiosity not often met with, to obtain an opportunity
of seeing any of these Creatures; they have Heads of a prodigious size, their
Jaws of very large extent, and full of Tusks in color not unlike the whitest
Ivory, but sharp as Needles, and their bite of very dangerous Consequence to
wounded Passengers.

Their strength and fierceness.
IN Shape they differ not extremely from a Boar, but are so much beyond him in
proportion, that we seldom see an Ox of greater Magnitude: Their Color is a
dusky Brown, and all their Backs so armed with Scales of an impenetrable
Substance, that the sharpest Weapons seldom wound them. They are commonly of
such a fierce vindictive Nature, that they rarely fail to turn with violence
upon a Boat, when any in it have attempted to ensnare them, and have oftentimes
been known to rear themselves stupendiously above the Water, and by overturning
Vessels prey upon the Mariners, they thence grew Masters of.

The River Bull.
THERE is another Beast, of an Amphibious Nature, commonly distinguished by the
Name of River Bull, not much beyond a Calf in bigness, nor unlike him in
Appearance, only so superior in the Strength of Body, that the spacious Nets,
the Natives make of twisted Ropes, have often proved too weak to hold him; they
have Finns upon their Feet, which spread at bottom to considerable breadth, and
serve, as Guides, to their unweildy Motions, which, by plunging forward with an
unresisted Violence, break fiercely through the strongest obstacles.

The Crocodile.
THE Treacherous Crocodile, so called from a Traditional Account, that this
deceitful Animal commands his Tears at any Season, and by counterfeiting a
complaining Human Voice, allures the Curiosity of Passers by, and then devours
them, is very common on the Banks of Nile, and ever has been looked upon
peculiar to the Land of Egypt. The Shape, exactly like a Lizard, is so fully
known in Europe, that it is needless here to say much of it.

Their Natures.
THEIR Nature is Oviparous, and when they lay their Eggs, they hide them in the
Sand with such an admirable Cunning, that the overflowing of the River Nilus,
never reaches them, though frequently it comes within a yard or two; and hence
the Country People finding now and then their Artfull Nests, are taught how
high the Inundation will advance the Waters in that increase; a Turkeys Egg is
equal to the Crocodiles, if not Superior in its Pristine Magnitude, but
afterward they grow to such amazing length and size, that many have been found
eleven Yards long, and in their Bulk proportionable.

THE common notion entertained in Egypt is, that every Female Crocodile can lay
one Hundred Eggs, and that their Age has often reached the Hundredth Year.

Their way of Catching Men.
THEIR Tails are very long and sharpning to the End, whereby they constantly
Entwine and Seize their Prey, and it is a very dangerous thing for Travelers,
who pass the Nile in open Boats, to Sleep with Heads inclined upon the side,
for these observant Creatures gather frequently about the Vessel, watching
cautiously some favorable Opportunity, which when they Spy, they Swim up
close upon the Surface of the Water, and enfolding the unwary Person by a
sudden Throwing out their Tails, have often so unhappily succeeded, as to draw
him Headlong from the Vessel and devour him in the River.

How Taken.
THE Natives of the Country bait Sharp Iron Hooks of mighty Magnitude, and
sometimes take them. They esteem their Flesh of Savory relish, and as such will
seldom Scruple Eating it; But as this Creature is extremely hurtful on the
Water, Playing on its Surface in a Moonlight Night, so he is no less
Destructive on the Land by Day, for then he generally Wanders up and down in
search of Mischief, Preying on whatever he can meet with.

How to be avoided.
THEY are Mighty Swift at Running in a line; but having only one continued joint
along their Back, are tedious in a motion Circular or any ways Uneven, and
thereby with ease avoided by a Man acquainted with the Country and their
Nature; Oftentimes they lie a Foot or two below the Surface in the Places,
whence the Peasants, living on the Banks of Nilus, fetch their Water, and have
sometimes seized a Man or Woman by the Arm, and drawn them in: But to prevent
such dangers for the Future, the Egyptians generally take the Pains at present,
to secure their Watering Places by a kind of Hedge, which they support with
Stakes, and so protect themselves from these designing Animals, who have been
long so hated by the prejudiced Inhabitants, that they have used a Thousand
Arts to compass their Destruction, and it is not common now to see a Crocodile,
within the space of some Days Journey from the City of Grand Cairo.

A Wonderful Observation of the Crocodile and little Bird.
IT is observable that there is found in Egypt, though but rarely known, a little
Bird about the Bigness of a common Quail, its Color of a Lightish Gray, the
Bill extremely sharp and small, and both the Wings containing Feathers, at the
End whereof are certain Prickles, not unlike the Bristles of a Hog; this Bird,
as often as she finds the Crocodile lie Basking in the Sun, and Slumbering, as
he often does upon the Banks of Nilus, with his Mouth wide open, flies directly
in, and fixing near his Teeth, erects her Prickly Wings, not much unlike a
Porcupine, or Hedge Hog, so preventing him from closeing his great Mouth upon
her, while she feeds herself by picking somewhat from his Teeth. The Bird was
formerly more taken Notice of, than she has been of late, and commonly
distinguished by the Name of Trochileus.

Ichneumon, or the River Rat.
BUT, while the Crocodile, diverted by a kind of tickling Pleasure, which the
pecking Bill of the Bird Trochileus affords him, gapes considerably wider than
he generally does, the River Rat, a little Beast about the bigness of a Ferret,
clean in Shape, in color Black, and of a Skin extremely smooth, his Teeth
long, sharp and very numerous, his Tail of an uncommon length, his Legs but
short, and Ears of a peculiar roundness, of a Nature very bold and fierce
beyond example; this small Beast I say, who bears a strong antipathy to the
above-named Crocodile, observing narrowly the tempting Opportunity, comes slily
round, jumps through his Mouth, and with a wondrous swiftness passing down his
Throat, gnaws forcibly a Passage through his Belly, thence escaping with the
triumph of a sure Destruction to his mortal Enemy.

Its fierceness, and great hatred to other Creatures.
THIS River Rat is sometimes called Ichneumon, which appears to have been
anciently the Name, by which he was distinguished by the Curious and more
Learned Egyptians, then inhabiting the Country, he is found in; they are of a
mischievous Nature, killing all the Pigeons, Hens, and Poultry, they can
possibly find means to get at; Cats and Dogs they hate extremely, and will kill
as often as they conquer them, nor ever fail Assaulting them, as often as they
find convenient Opportunity: But, as in some things they are hurtful to the
Interests of the People, so in many others they appear not only Useful, but
even Necessary for the good they do, by seeking constantly the Eggs of
Crocodiles, and breaking them, when they discover where they lie; as also for
their Universal Hatred to all kinds of Serpents, Snakes, or Reptiles
whatsoever, whom they often fall upon, and kill with wonderful dexterity.

Moral Reflections.
HOW wisely, and beyond the apprehension of our weak Capacities, has the Supreme
Creator of our Earthly Beings guided the Performances of his Divine
Omnipotence! To what an height of Piety and necessary Contemplation on the
Bounties and Omniscience of Almighty God, must that Man needs arrive, who
seriously reflects upon the numerous Works of his Creation, yet amongst so many
Millions of surprising Differences, and directly opposite Existences in Nature,
cannot find one needless Insect, but perceives them strangely mixed together, in
the joint Advancement of one common Interest.

The Chamaelions.
IN many Orchards near Grand Cairo, may be found great numbers of those
Creatures called Chamaelions, falsely said to live upon the Air, which
notwithstanding, is indeed their principal Subsistence, though they prey
continually on Flies, and extend their Tongue with wonderful celerity, which
is in length not much inferior to his Body, naturally hollow in its top,
whereby he may more easily attain his Ends, and serve himself in the
Destruction of the late named Insects with a little trouble.

Described.
IN Shape and Size, they are not much unlike the Lizard, their Eyes and Head
extremely large, their Necks unjointed, and of consequence not moved, without
the turning their whole Bodies; its native Color is a greenish Yellow, with
small Spots of white about the Belly: They are seen with difficulty though you
pass at little distance from them, for they constantly assume the Color of
most Places, which they stand upon, and generally change their Hue, as often as
they find occasion to remove their Station.

Their Antipathy to Serpents.
THESE also bear an innate Enmity to every kind of Serpent, and it is remarkable
that, when they have discovered any Sleeping underneath a Tree, they never
rest, till having climbed the Branches, they direct a little shining drop of
Moisture from their Mouths exactly on his Head, which by a certain natural
Virtue it possesses, never fails to give immediate Death to the unwary Serpent
so invaded.

The Ostrich.
I must not here omit the Ostrich, though but very rarely found, unless in the
remoter and more Inland parts of Egypt. It is a Bird of Mighty size, long Neck
and Feet, with Head and every other part of Shape extremely near the Pictures,
which we draw to represent them. How Hunted.
They have Wings of spacious size, yet Fly but heavily, so near the Ground, that
it is an Entertainment very Pleasant, and not seldom used, for Gentlemen to Hunt
them with a kind of Spears on Foot; for the Resistance, Awkard motions and
Unweildy Flight, they make, afford their Hunters an agreeable Amusement.

An Eater of Iron.
BUT the most Remarkable, peculiar and surprising Property, the Ostrich boasts
of is, that he not only Eats, but even Digests the hardest Iron, Picking up
with pleasure broken Horse-Shooes, rusty Nails, and many other things,
especially, at certain Seasons of the Year, when they incline (I know not for
what reason) to take more delight than usual in the Swallowing that Metal: And
Hater of Women Pregnant.
It is a thing worth Notice that, from certain hidden Dictates of directing
Nature, Ostriches are led to an abhorrence of a Woman big with Child, and it is a
certain truth, from a repeated Observation, that they are not only sensible,
when such a Person is brought near them, but will make directly toward her,
and with lifted Feet endeavor to oblige her to withdraw, or Patiently submit
to their Unwelcome violence.

The Salamander.
THE Salamander, Famous for resisting Fire, is in Egypt often found, but it is a
false and groundless notion that he lives in Flames, but probably that old
mistake First took its Rise from something, that appeared like reason; How
resisting Fire.
for a certain Cold and Mucous Substance, full of Moisture is the only Flesh,
that Creature boasts of, who, when put upon the Fire, can emit a certain
quantity of Black and Slimy Matter, which extinguishes, for some short time,
the Coals about him, but by that time he has once or twice repeated the
Experiment, he becomes Exhausted, and is forced to yield his Body to the
Irresistible Invasion of the Flames, he lies in.

The Basalisk or Cockatrice.
THE Famous Serpent, called a Basilisk, or in our vulgar English Tongue
distinguished better by the Name of Cockatrice, does still remain in many parts
of inmost Egypt, but was falsely by the Ancients said to be possessed of such a
Penetrative Venom, that his very look gave present Death to every Man, he fixed
his Eyes upon, whose subtle Poison Lucan thus describes among the many Noxious
Serpents, Cato met with in his March with the Brave Roman Army, through the Sands
of Africa. Lucan, lib. 9.
Sibilaque effundens cunctas terrentia pestes,
Ante venena nocens, late sibi submovet omne
Vulgus, and in vacua regnat Basiliscus arena.
The Basilisk, whose Dreadful Hisses fright
All other Serpents into distant flight,
Whose Subtle Venom humane life confounds,
Nor needs a Touch, but Kills before it Wounds.
Drives meaner Snakes from his frequented Plains,
And on the empty Sands in frightfull horror Reigns.


Why said to Kill with a look.
BUT those, which now are called the Basilisks of Egypt, are not so extremely
dangerous, as the abovenam'd Poet chose to represent them; yet it is certain,
that they bear a kind of natural malignity about them, which affects a Man,
though at a considerable distance, with a strange uneasiness, but whether Seated
in their Eyes, or caused by the Effluviums of their Noxious Bodies, does not
come within my purpose, and is therefore left to the Opinion of the Reader.

The Asp described.
THE Asp, another hurtful Serpent, is in many Parts of Egypt dangerously known,
a small black Creature running swiftly, and is generally found within the
hollow Places of a Rock, or rotten Root of some decaying Tree: Their Bite is
Mortal, and the Death, they give, attended frequently by various Symptoms, but
overtaking all, he bites with equal swiftness, some Die Laughing, others
Weeping, many Sleeping; but this last effect should seem to be the most
peculiar to the Asps of old, since Lucan thus describes the Nature of that
Serpent. Lucan. Lib. 4.
Hic, quae prima caput movit de pulvere tabes,
Aspida somniferam tumida cervice levavit.
Plenior huic sanguis, and crassi gutta veneni
Decidit: in nulla plus est Serpente coactum.
Here the Sleep-causing Asp with swelling Head
Rose first, from Poyson-mingled Atoms bred,
Full of the thickest Blood, Gorgon over Libya spread;
Nor amongst the many Snakes, which thence did spring,
Can one be found, who boasts a more envenomed Sting.


A Story of a Gentleman, bit by an Asp.
SOME Years ago an English Gentleman, residing at Aleppo, and in Company with
many Merchants, belonging to the Factory, there Established, went a Hunting,
and amongst an heap of Stones upon the Sand, perceived an Asp run swiftly to
its Hole, which, fatally mistaking for a little Squirrel, he immediately
alighted from his Horse, and thrusting in his Arm, as far as it would go, felt
something sharper than he thought to meet withal, and drawing out his Hand
upon a sudden, brought the Asp still hanging by the Teeth upon his middle
Finger: The immediate Exclamations of the Gentlemen in Company obliged him
presently to shake it off, but all in vain, the Poison had affected him too
deeply, and though with much ado they got him on his Horse, he strait grew Mad,
Laughed, Wept and Fainted by successive turns, till they had brought him Home
to his Unhappy Family, where instantly he Died, by the unfortunate Event of
this lamented Accident.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Cities of Grand-Cairo, Memphis and Babylon.
THE venerable Marks of mighty Age declare the Towns, I am about to speak of,
Children of Antiquity; nor did they only flourish, when the World was Young,
but were from Time to Time the Glorious Scenes, whereon were represented the
Prodigious Sallies of Ambition, starting suddenly to Universal Empire, then as
suddenly declining from its Pinnacle, and yielding Fortune, for a transitory
Spurt, to the Possession of some other rising Monarchy.

The Changes; which have happened in Grand Cairo, Memphis and Babylon.
'TWAS hence, that these renowned and stately Cities have successively beheld
the Haughty Pharaohs, and Luxurious Ptolemies, the Roman Caesar's, and profuse
Extravagance of the Unhappy Cleopatra; have beheld 'em swollen above Mortality,
with elevated Pomp and splendid Royalty, and after all the Triumphs of a
short-lived Grandeur, seen 'em sink the miserable Victims to some sudden,
strange, and unexpected Ruin.

'TWAS here of old, that the Almighty Hand of God himself, performed such
Miracles; 'twas here the hardened Heart of Pharaoh drew down Vengeance on his
tortured Nation; 'twas here the Israelites were chained in long Captivity, and
in returning hence, their Great Redeemer proved his Power by dividing Seas to
let them pass, and guiding them alternately by Clouds, and Fiery Pillars,
through the numerous Dangers of a tedious Pilgrimage.

THIS Train of Wonders, and amazing Scene of Human Changes were in ancient
Times transacted here; The decay these 3 Cities.
and the above-named Cities, which so many Ages have withstood the Shocks of
Time or Accident, and gloriously outlived the frequent Downfalls of un-numbred
Rulers, now begin to sink Themselves, and prove by slow, though sure, Experience,
that the strange Vicissitudes of Earthly Strength, involve alike the Prince and
Peasant, Town and Hovel in a dark oblivion.

Cairo, now the best.
CAIRO is the only City of the Three, which now retains the smallest Mark of an
un-ruin'd Majesty, and has its Situation, near four hundred Miles from
Alexandria, upon the Eastern side of Nilus, not above twelve Furlongs distant
from the River.

Bow-lac, the Port to Cairo.
THE Boats, which commonly bring Passengers to Cairo, land 'em at Bow-lac, a
small Port Town, supported by the Trade, the River brings her, where a sort of
Tax, or Imposition by the way of Poll, is laid on every Christian Traveller,
who comes on Shore, amounting to about a Crown a Head; and here it is, that we
are all obliged to hire a nimble kind of Asses, with their Owners, running by
on Foot, to carry us to Cairo, A barbarous Baseness of the Turks at Cairo.
where the Reader may take notice, that the barbarous Insolence, and blinded
Zeal of the rude Turks, inhabiting the Place, oblige all Christians, who would
ride about the City, to be mounted on those Creatures, in a strange derision of
our Blessed Savior's Choice, who rode upon an Ass, when the transported
Multitude saluted him, as he advanced, with the repeated Acclamation of Hosanna
to the Highest.

The Town and its Extent.
THE Town is built about the Foot of a large Mountain, called Muc-haat,
extremely Rocky, and extends its Buildings in a Semicircular Form above half
round it; it is Walled but ill, and taking in the Suburbs, which are very
large, is so prodigiously extensive, that the measured Compass has been found
full sixty two Italian Miles.

Description of the Houses, and manner of their building Streets.
THE Streets are crooked, long and narrow; all the Houses (those excepted, which
the Turks have built of later Years) of solid Stone, and many Stories high;
their Roofs are Flat, and open in the top with artificial Neatness to let in
the Breezes, which at certain Seasons of the Day, regale the Air with
comfortable Coolness; the Streets are every Night locked up, at either End by
well-defended Gates, at each whereof is kept a Guard of able Watchmen, so that
all the Mischiefs of Nocturnal Robberies are here prevented by the visible
Impossibility, that Thieves would find to get away, if they should chance to be
discovered.

The Gates of Grand Cairo.
THE High Street is of a considerable Breadth, extending from the Gate Naufrei
to that, they call Zueelia, the First admitting you from the great Road, which
leads to the Red Sea, the last directly fronting Nilus, and Bow-lac, the
Ancient Town I lately spoke of. These two Gates confine the Length of this
extensive City.

A Pleasant Lake.
ANOTHER Gate, distinguished by the Name of Futulee, which opens on the Northern
side, directly leads you to a Spacious Lake called Esbikee, that in the
overflow of Nilus is supplied with Water, and frequented, while it is so, by
the Painted Barges of the Gentlemen of Cairo, shaded over with the Greenest
Boughs, and Rowing up and down with Wine and Music in delightful Pastime; But
when Nilus is decreased, and all the Water dried within the Lake, it changes
its appearance to another Scene, and by affording Corn in plentiful
Production, yields a Prospect equally agreeable.

Some other Gates.
BESIDES these Three Chief Gates, are many other, for convenience of free Egress
and Regress, through the City; but, as those are only Portals for a Private use,
not Public Ostentation, they deserve not the unnecessary Trouble of Remarks
upon their Number, Forms, or Situation.

Their way of Darkening the Streets.
THE Sun is here so greatly Incommodious, that to Skreen the City from its
Power, they commonly place Rafters cross their Streets, and cover them with
Mats, which by preventing the above-named Inconveniency, is found to cause
another nigh as bad, for by excluding the Sunbeams from Shining on them, they
are forced to Walk as in the Dark, in many Places, where the Narrowness of
Streets, and Jetting form of all their Buildings, added to the Dullness, they
are Cloak'd in, by the Matts and Rafters, join together in a close alliance to
keep out the Day, and Cloud the Houses even at Noon, with the unpleasant Veil
of counterfeited Midnight.

Wooden Locks and Keys.
ONE thing deserves Remark among the many others, which a Stranger may observe
in Cairo, that is, they have so excellent an Art in Working upon Wood, that all
the Locks and Keys, they use about their Houses, are of a hard kind of Tree, in
Color Blacker than the Box, and in its substance far more hard, and doubly
durable.

THE Streets are all unpav'd and full of Sand, and many Lakes of half a Mile,
or sometimes more, in Compass, scattered every here and there about the City,
which with certain Wells of no small depth or Number, serve the People with the
Water, fit to be employed in common uses, such as Washing Houses, Cooling
Streets, or such like purposes; Water brought on Camels Backs.
but as for what they Drink, it is brought on Camels Backs from Nilus, that
abovenam'd being neither Clear, nor Sweet enough for that nice purpose.

A Noble Market Place.
DIRECTLY in the Center of this Spacious City, stands a Building, not unlike the
Besesteen, or Vaulted Marketplace, I spoke of, in the Chapter of
Constantinople, and designed exactly for the same occasion; Hither Flock vast
Numbers of all kinds of People, who would purchase any thing of value; for it is
here they may be sure to meet with what they search for; and it is observable
in Cairo, that they never mingle Trades together, but appoint the Men of each
Profession, Rows of Shops by one another, every one whereof must Shut his Doors
at Five a Clock in the Evening, the Cooks alone excepted, who by reason of
their common usefullness (few Families in Cairo dressing their own Meat) are
suffered to continue, open till whatever Hour, they think convenient.

Pleasant Gardens.
WITHIN the Walls of Cairo are vast Numbers of delightful Orchards, Gardens and
the like, in which are ever growing most delicious Fruits of almost every kind,
but Apples, which are here but very rarely met withal; their Oranges and
Limons, Almonds, Dates, and many other sorts, do here arrive to such mature
Perfection, that I never tasted them so richly pleasant in another Country.

Their Bagnios and Hospitals.
THEIR Public Buildings are both numerous and stately. Bagnio's in Grand-Cairo
fall not short of those, I mentioned to be built at Constantinople, and the
rich Endowments of not only those, but Hans, or Hospitals, for several Uses,
are so very splendidly increased in this Egyptian City, that they cannot be
exceeded by the Buildings of their kind, in any part of the Grand Signior's
Empire.

Mosques, an incredible Number.
THEIR Mosques are so magnificent in Structure, and prodigious in the Number
commonly reported, that 'twou'd perhaps be thought a Falsehood, should I tell
my Reader, what my Guides told me, that they surpass in costliness of Building
all the Royal Mosques of Constantinople, and are so extremely Numerous, that
they are reckoned almost Twenty Thousand.

BOTH these Opinions I believe untrue, though I perceived, that in the first they
have not stretched Veracity to any great degree; but in the second, I presume
they have made full amends; though all, a Traveller can do, is, only to pursue
the dictates of a reasonable Probability, when he directs his Judgment on that
Point, since they are really so stupendous in their Number, that it is morally
Impossible, for any single Man to know exactly.

The Great Men's Palaces.
THE Great Men's Palaces are very Stately, and have large Court-Yards before 'em,
opening to the Street with Wooden Gates of an uncommon Magnitude. They have a
very Insolent and Idle Custom here, to pull a Christian from his Ass, as he
rides by the House of any Turkish Officer of Note, and make him walk, till he
is passed the Wall, in token of Submission and a mute acknowledgment of
Inferiority.

Cairo, very Populous.
THIS famous City is so very Populous, though of so vast a Magnitude, that as we
rode along the Streets, about the Center, we were so extremely Crowded, that
our Guide, who went before with a long Pole, and cleared the way by crying out,
Bda-ha-rack Adam-lerr, Bda-ha-rack, that is, Make room good People, pray make
room, had much ado to open us a Passage.

The Castle of Grand Cairo.
UPON a very steep and lofty Precipice, upon the Southern side of Cairo, stands
the Castle, where resides the Grand Bashaw, in pompous State becoming his
Degree, attended by a chosen Guard of Turkish Janissaries: Here on the three
first Days of every Week they hold Divan, at which the Grand Bashaw is always
Present, and Administers their Justice, as they Practice their Religion, both
in Imitation of the settled Forms, and ceremonious Customs of the Turkish
Government, Established, as before described, at their Metropolis
Constantinople.

Its Ascent, And Prospect.
THIS Castle is to be ascended but by one Way only, which is hewn with admirable
Art and Labor, from the solid Rock, and twining round, permits a Horseman
easily to mount its Summit: It Is of vast Extent, divided, in the ancient
manner, into Courts and Squares, which seem to have been formerly designed for
Warlike Exercises.

And Prospect.
HENCE the City may with ease be overlooked, from any of the Walls, which are
all built of Massy Stone upon the Rock it self, and entered by a Port, amazingly
secured with Iron Gates, and leading to the Castle by strange, intricate, and
winding Passages.

Fine Relics of Antiquity.
OF Old, the Mighty Sultans of the Brave Egyptian Mamalukes resided here, in all
the Grandeur, Empire could afford 'em, and though Sultan Selym, the Victorious
Turk, defaced its Ornaments in many Places, yet there still remain such
towering Piles, and Marble Columns of so strange a Bulk, and Workmanship so
excellent, that they to this Day, show a thousand Proofs of Regal Majesty, and
that prodigious Stateliness, wherewith it flourished in its old Magnificence.

An Hieroglyphic Obelisk.
DIRECTLY in the midst of a large Court, upon the backside of this Castle,
stands an ancient Hieroglyphic Obelisk, near nineteen Foot in height, whereon
are represented such distinguishable Figures, as do plainly prove it to have
been placed there by the Ptolemies, in Commemoration of the Victories, they had
obtained in War, and the surprising Grandeur, in whose Bliss they flourished.

Several Ruins, near Grand Cairo.
THERE are not many Relics of Antiquity at present, to be seen in Cairo:
Besides this Castle, there remain the Ruins of some famous Palaces, but so
disguised by their Decay, that Travelers can only Guess at what they were,
when many Ages since, they proudly flourished.

The Place, where Moses was found by Pharaoh's Daughter.
THEY show such Strangers, notwithstanding, as are curious in their Searches,
many Things worth Observation, and among the rest, a certain Bank upon the side
of Nilus, where they say, of old, King Pharaoh's Daughter found young Moses on
a Bed of Rushes.

The Etymoligy of the Word Cairo.
THE Etymology of Cairo is from the Arabian, in which Language El Cai-airo
signifies a Forcer; as to the Original Foundation, Founder, and Historical
Account of this extensive City, Scaliger, and Leo Africanus, with a hundred
other Authors, have so fully treated on those Subjects, that I cannot judge it
necessary to enlarge on such notorious Circumstances.

IT only then remains, that I should mention the Condition of the People, now
Inhabiting Grand Cairo, whom we found in rolling Plenty, and the blessed
Possession of the richest Smiles of Providential Nature; Trading greatly, and
increasing Wealth with wonderful Dexterity; The Plenty of that City.
nor can Provisions of all kinds be any where, more reasonably Sold than in the
well-stor'd Markets of this spacious City.

A way of hatching Eggs in Ovens.
AMONG a thousand other Customs, in some kind Peculiar to the People of Grand
Cairo, they have got a way of hatching Eggs, by Artificial Heat, which they
perform by building certain Rows of Ovens, of considerable depth, which they
contrive on either side a Room, one Row above another; within these Ovens they
take care to lay a kind of course, rough Hemp, on which they spread a Mat, and
cover it with Camel's Dung, or that of Pigeons, to considerable thickness, so
that by preserving artful Heats, by constant Fires within the Stoves, built
under the above-named Ovens, they continue from the Month of June to the
declining of December, to produce vast quantities of Chickens, from innumerable
thousands of these Eggs, which, notwithstanding, are observed to fall far short
of Nature's un-assisted Efficacy.

The Inhabitants of Cairo, famous for Instructing Beasts.
I could not help observing here, that the Inhabitants of Cairo seem Possessors
of a quicker Genius than our Western People, in the Arts of teaching wonderful
Performances to Asses, Goats, Dogs, Horses, Mules, or any other Creatures void
of Reason.

A Story of a Goat.
I have been shown a Man, who kept a Goat, so dex'trous in the poizing his
Instructed Body, that he could not only stand upright upon a little Staff, ten
Inches long, but climbed with ease from one, to stand upon another, and
proceeded without falling, from that second to a third, fourth, fifth, or more,
till he, who owned him, was no longer capable of adding to the height, by one
Staff more.

A pleasant Story of a Fiddler and his Ass.
A merry kind of Fellow, of a Moorish Extract, used to walk about the City with
a sort of Fiddle, and divert the Passers by, with the repeated Airs of one dull
Tune; and in return for this, it is true, he did not beg Reward, yet by a subtle
Stratagem came off so well, that he succeeded generally better than a
Downright Beggar could have reasonably hoped for.

THE Ingenious Fellow kept an Ass, that always followed him from Street to
Street, without the trouble of his leading him along, he carried on his back a
little Budget, which contained Provisions, and the necessary Utensils, his
Master wanted in his daily Journeys.

An Ass of good address.
EVERY Man, the Fiddler met, he bowed his Body to, by way of Information, that he
hoped for the Receipt of a small piece of Money, from his grateful Liberality;
and still, as often as the Fiddler bowed, the Ass bowed too, as he had been
instructed, in so strange a manner, and an Air so truly like himself, that all,
who passed the Streets, were moved to Laughter, and not seldom, Gentlemen have
given the Man a Present for the Pleasure, they received from the surprising
Prospect of his Asse's Novelty, who constantly, with such another Cringe,
returned the Compliment.

A cunning Practice.
BUT, if it chanced, that any Man passed by regardless of the Fidler's Music,
or Request, nor thought it worth his while to pay him for his Harmony; The Ass,
who cunningly came on behind, at a considerable distance, and observed all
Passages, but yet pretended not to mind 'em, watched their coming, and took
care to snap a Piece, from off the Britches of the unsuspecting Person; or, if
he went by at too great distance, on the other side the way, he frequently
turned back, and bit out his Revenge, as soon as he had overtaken him: This
pleasant Humor of the Fiddler and his Ass became at last so very noted, that
Both the Master's Profit, and the great Respect, they showed the Beast, grew
daily more and more, for really 'twas a dangerous Accident to meet 'em in the
Street, for such, as happened to be unprovided of a Charm to soften his
Resentment.

ANOTHER Trick, they have of Getting Money, is by training Camels up to dance
about the Streets, upon the Sounding of a Drum, or any other Instrument of
Music. This they do with admiraabe quickness in the manner following.

Their way of teaching Camels to Dance.
THEY make a large square hollow Place on some Stone Pavement, not unlike a
Bath, of such a depth, that nothing, let down thither, can get out again but
with the same Assistance, he was first put in by. Under this paved Floor,
consisting purposely of well experienced Fire-Stone, is built a Furnace, into
which they put a necessary quantity of Wood, and heating it to what degree they
please, the Stones grow hot like some mild Oven.

THEN they put the poor meek Camel into this square hollow, heated as it is,
and standing round the edges of the Place, begin to sound their Drums, or other
Instruments, continuing so to do, while the Vn-hoof'd and Tender-Footed Camel,
all impatient of the Heat, first draws up one Leg, then another, changing
swifter, as the Heat increasing, burns his Feet with greater Anguish, till at
last, he rears himself an end, and capers nimbly on his hinder Feet, as if he
strove to imitate a Dancer.

A lazy kind of Living, on the Labors of a Beast.
THUS they use him, till by frequent Practice, the unwellcome smart has made
impression on the Creature's Memory; at which time, they begin to lead him up
and down the City; where at certain Corners of the Noted Streets, they suddenly
strike up the Tunes, they used to play, which the poor Beast no sooner hears,
but dreading the Hot-Stones, he formerly was wont to feel, when he had heard
such Music, he begins to Dance, and Skip about with strange Agility, which
soon becomes not only easy, but even natural to his Performance, and is daily
practiced by him, to divert the Common People, who assemble in great Crowds to
see the Sport, and pay the Owner a small Sum by voluntary Contribution.

The ancient Memphis.
THE ancient Memphis, which has been by many Authors falsely thought the City,
now Grand Cairo, was of old, the Residence of Egypts Monarchs, flourishing in
all the Grandeur, Wealth and Royalty could Crown her Sons with; here they kept
their Apis, and had once a stately Temple, Sacred to his Worship; here also
stood the Glorious Temple of the Goddess Venus, and a thousand Noble Monuments
of Power, and Antiquity, all buried now, and only showing their defaced and
broken Relics, Great in Ruin, and amazingly Majestic in those Heaps of Dust,
wherein now lie confusedly mingled, Marble Pillars, Stately Towrs, and Battered
Statues of prodigious Workmanship.

Why so called.
THIS ancient City took the Name of Memphis, from the Daughter of King Ogdo,
whom the Poets feign to have been Ravished by Egyptian Nilus, in the Form of a
large Bull. Its Situation.
It stood about five Miles to the South-East of the so celebrated Pyramids of
Egypt, and not above two Miles full West of Nilus, distant from Grand Cairo,
sixteen Miles or somewhat over.

Babylon of Egypt why so named.
NOT distant far from the South Side of Cairo, lie the ruinated Ruins of
Egyptian Babylon, which took that ancient Name from certain Babylonian
Colonies, who, here assembling, joined their Parties in one Body, and
solicited a License from the King of Egypt, to lay out a considerable Sum of
Money in the Purchase of a Spot of Ground, whereon to build a Place of
Habitation.

THEY obtained a Grant from the then Reigning Ptolemy, for the Possession of
the Land, on which they built the Town, I lately called, according to its Old
Denomination, Babylon, which now has changed its Name to that of Misul-Hetic,
and is known to all the People of this Country by the last named Appellation,
which I think may claim Arabian Etymology.

The Ruins of a stately Cistern.
AMONG the numerous Ruins, whose confused Appearances amuse a Traveller, there
is at Babylon, the broken remnant of a spacious Cistern, formerly a mighty and
stupendous Labor, and receiving Water from the River Nilus, to supply the
Castle lately mentioned, through a very strong and artful Aquaeduct, supported on
some hundreds of the loftiest Arches, Stone could build, or Resolution finish;
nor has Time prevailed so much as yet, but that it is repaired to a Condition,
which enables it to serve a little for the ancient Uses, to whose necessary
Practice its well-meaning Founders first designed it.

The Magazines, which Joseph built in Egypt.
NOT far from hence, stand certain vast unweildy Structures, of Prodigious
Height, and antique Figure, all supported by a Number of huge Buttresses, and
seeming to remain in that strange form, they bear, to tell the Modern World,
how their Deceased Forefathers built before 'em; we were told by the Egyptians,
that these venerable Piles, were those Seven Granaries, or Public Magazines,
which Joseph built at the Command of Pharaoh, to preserve the Product of the
Seven Years Plenty, which preceeded as long time of dreadful Famine. Repairs
have fitted one or two for the same use at present, but the rest are so exposed
to the Inclemencies of Weather, that they cannot be employed in such a Service.

The Wonderful Extent, and Prospect of Egyptian Ruins.
THERE is not in the World, a more uncommon, Mortifying Scene, than Egypt
represents to every Stranger, for above the space of Eighteen Miles, on either
side the River Nilus, in this part of that depopulated Country; where you
cannot Sail a Hundred Fathoms. but you must discover, if you look about you,
the afflicting Marks of Misery and Desolation, ancient Turrets have disrobed
their Tops of that aspiring Grandeur, which their Youth once boasted of, and
Hoary Age has Whitened the Remainder of their Craggy Relics with a Melancholy
Aspect, Heaps of Dirt have Buried Palaces, and every here and there appears the
Half-Sunk Capital, or Basis of some Noble Pillar, those Prodigious
Masterpieces of elaborate Art, which once supported the resplendent Roofs of
Glittering Courts, and Palaces of Princes, now lie low in rough Obscurity, nor
are so much as seen by Passengers, while Covered with the Grass, which
Flourishing in the Destruction of such Stately Pieces, seems to spread with a
Malicious Pride, and Triumph in their Downfall.

Moral Reflections on the Worlds uncertainty.
OH! Blind, Wilful, Vain, Mistaken Man! Unthinking, Weak, and Shadow-like
Mortality! Why do we still grasp eagerly at Riches? Why esteem the Transitory
Blessings of a Wealthy Splendour? Why delight in Worldly Grandeur, or the Noisy
Pomp of Momentary Majesty, when not the Stony Scenes of ancient Pride, and
countenanced Vainglory, can preserve the Memory of their forgotten Founders,
but the Stongest and most Stately Cities of the Universe submit their Marble to
the Teeth of Time, and prove in Ruins, the undoubted Truth of Ovid's elegant
Reflections on the Worlds uncertainty. Ovid Met. L. 15.
-- Sic tempore verti
Cernimus, atque illas assumere robora Gentes,
Concidere Has. Sic magna fuit censuque Virisque,
Perque december poluit tanlum dare sanguinis annos,
Nunc humilis veteres tantummodo Troja ruinas,
Et pro Divitiis tumulos ostendit avorum.
Clara fuit Sparte: magnae viguere Mycenae:
Nec non Cecropiae; nec non Amphionis arces.
Vile solum Sparte est; altae cecidere Mycenae;
Oedipodioniae quid sunt nisi fabula Thebae?
Quid Pandioniae restant nisi Nomen Athenae?
Thus, in the Course of Time, strange Turns we see,
Some Nations Raised, whilst others Ruined be,
Even Troy -- a Town of old, so Rich, so Great,
That Spilt such Seas of Blood in Ten long Years Debate,
Now lowly Prostrate, Ruins only knows,
And her Sons Tombs, instead of Riches, shows;
Sparta was Great, so was Mycena too,
Athens and Thebes un-number'd Splendors knew,
Yet is this Sparta now a Dunghill grown,
And proud Mycena's Towers are overthrown;
What but a Fable does of Thebes remain,
Where Royal Oedipus once held his Reign?
Or where Survives the Great Pandion's Fame,
But in lost Athens, now an empty Name?


NOW let us hasten from the Ruins of these fallen Cities, to some more lasting
Structures, which in spite of Time, have proudly stood from Age to Age, and
baffled strangely all the Shocks of Age or Accident.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Pyramids of Egypt, and of several New Discoveries therein,
which were never yet Published.
The Pyramids of Egypt.
UPON the Western Side of the aforesaid Memphis, near the Borders of the Lybian
Desert, stand those vast and towering Pyramids, which have so long amused the
World, with strange Reflections on the strong Ambition, and vain glorious Aim
of their aspiring Founders: But before I enter on a full Description of their
Building, Number, Form and Situation, 'twill not be amiss to tell my Reader,
that I look upon it, as a needless trouble, to repeat the many various Notions
and received Opinions of the ancient World, concerning the Original Design of
such Stupendous Fabrics.

What designed for, by their Founders.
FOR it is now an uncontested and apparent Truth, that they were first designed,
as lasting Sepulchers, wherein such Monarchs, as might claim Interment in those
lofty Mausolaeums, were induced to hope, they might outlive their Dissolutions,
and continue known to after Ages, by the striking Grandeur of their barbarous
Monuments.

TO this Opinion, not to mention Pliny, Strabo, Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus,
and many other ancient Writers, Lucan seems to be a strict Adherer, especially
in his eighth Book, where he exclaims against the base Injustice of King
Ptolemy, upon the account of Pompey's Murder in the following Verses. Lucan. l.
8.
Vltima Lageae stirpis perituraque Proles,
Degener, incestae sceptris cessure sororis,
Cum tibi sacrato Macedon servetur in antro,
Et regum cineres extructo monte quiescant,
Cum Ptolemaeorum manes seriemque pudendam
Pyramides claudant, indinaque Mausolea;
Littora Pompejum feriunt, truncusque vadosis
Huc illuc jactatur aquis.
Degenerate Last of Lagu's Failing Race,
To an Incestuous Sister yielding Place;
Must Pompey's Headless Body, Sea-wash'd over,
Be dashed by swelling Surges on the Shore?
Whilst you the Macedonian's Ashes keep,
And Royal Relics in tall Buildings sleep,
While the base Ptolemy's Ignobler Race,
Vast Pyramids Entomb, and Mausolaeums grace.


AND thus in many other Places the above-named Author, takes occasion to repeat
his Notions of the Use, to which the Ancients put the Pyramids.

One of the Worlds seven Wonders.
IT IS certain, and has been allowed in every Age, to whom these mighty Piles
were known, that they deserved the Character, they ever bore, of one of those
Stupendous Prodigies, which justly merited the Title of the Worlds Seven
Wonders: Their amazing height, an Old Greek Writer nicely touches on, as
follows, An old Greek Writer on the Pyramids.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In faithless Stories an Account is given,
That, when Titanian Arms assaulted Heaven,
Pelion and Ossa from the Earth they drew,
And at the Skys those Rocky Mountains threw.
But those tall Pyramids, near Nilus found,
O'erlooking with proud Heads the distant Ground,
Guide to the Realms above by sure degrees,
And kiss the golden Stars, which form the Pleiades.


The number of the Pyramids.
THE Pyramids extend themselves for many Miles, along the Desert, and are near
Fourscore in Number, most of which are small, and inconsiderable in respect of
Three, which stand within a little space of one another, and are built upon a
certain Hill of Sand, which covers Rocks of a stupendous depth and wondrous
magnitude.

The height and bulk of the Great Pyramid.
THE Altitude in perpendicular, of the most large and stately Pyramid, is near
five hundred English Feet, but if we take the Height, as it inclines ascending
toward the Point, we find it equal to the Latitude of its prodigious Basis,
every way seven hundred Foot, by moderate Computation.

The second and a third.
THE second Pyramid is equal to the first in Height, and not above a Bow Shot
distant from it; but the third appearing scarce half finished, leaves no room
to make Comparisons, and only gives us Cause to think, by the Proportion, it at
present bears, that, had it been completed, as the others are, it had been
higher far, and more polite than either of the former.

The Stones of which the first is built.
THE first Great Pyramid is built of vast and solid Stones, which some pretend
were brought from Quarries in the Mountains of Arabia; but the gross Absurdity
of that Opinion, is extremely evident from many Demonstrations, but by none
more fully dis-anull'd than the remaining Pieces of Sawn Stone, which lying up
and down upon the Sand about the Pyramid, sufficiently convince a thinking Man,
that they were dug no farther off, than from the solid Rocks not many Foot
below the Surface of the Desert.

SOME Stones, and those not seldom met with, near the top of this amazing
Structure, are no less than five and twenty, often thirty Foot in length, and
depth proportionable: It is a wonderful but very pleasant and engaging
Prospect, to observe the Art and strange Economy, whereby this mighty Pyramid,
was built so loftily. To be ascended on the outside.
You may ascend it gradually on the external Sides, or Steps, which lead you
safely to the Summit of the Building.

The Architecture of the Pyramids.
ABOUT the bottom of the Pyramid, there runs a strong degree of Stone, near five
Foot high and four in breadth, upon the inner Edges of which round Degree is
placed another, somewhat smaller, upon that a third, yet smaller than the
second, on that third a fourth, still leaning inwards more and more, as it
advances in its Altitude, and growing less and less, till at the top thereof,
it forms a Square, consisting of three several Stones, close knit together, in
the compass of about fifteen or sixteen Foot of English Measure.

The Form thereof, and number of the Steps.
THUS are the four Sides, for I should have informed you, that the Pyramid is
Quadrilateral, encompassed by above two hundred of these vast Degrees or Steps,
of different Height and Magnitude, which appear like long and narrow Walking
Places, but are now so much decayed by Time and Weather, that it is a dangerous
Trial to attempt ascending, but in certain Places, where the Stones continue
firm, unbroken, and of promising Appearance.

The Founder of the greatest Pyramid.
THIS Pyramid is said to have been built by Cheops, King of Egypt, who by that
Amusement, kept his Subjects from the dangerous Rust of a Rebellious Idleness,
and erected for himself a Mausolaeum so prodigious, that it has already stood
almost four thousand Years, and may, according to the Dictates of undoubted
probability, continue near as long again, before it is ruined.

How long in Building.
SO vast was the Command, and great the Labor, requisite to carry on so strange
an Undertaking, that for the space of twenty Years, there were employed about
the building it, above three hundred, threescore thousand constant Workmen.

The second Pyramid.
THE Stones, whereof the second Pyramid is built, are white, and shining, not to
be ascended on the outside, which is very smooth, and has its sides extremely
equal. By whom built.
This Pyramid, as Herodotus and some other Writers tell us, was Originally built
by Cephron, Brother to King Cheops the Great Founder of the former.

The third Pyramid.
THE third, unfinished Pyramid, is built of a fine, hard, bright, white and
clearer kind of Stone than either of the rest, which some, though groundlessly,
affirm to have been brought, from the remotest Mountains of the sultry
Aethiopia.

IT IS more than probable, this Fable sprang from those Old Writers Observations
of a mighty quantity of Theban Marble, not unlike the Product of an Ethiopian
Quarry, which now lies in heaps, not far from this third Pyramid, and with
which Stone, perhaps, they anciently designed to cover it, but were prevented
by some Cause, which God alone is capable of telling us.

The several Persons, said to be its Founders.
THERE go almost an Hundred different Stories, of the Founding of this Pyramid,
some say, 'twas built by Macerinus Son to Cheops King of Egypt; some say by
Dorica a Courtezan or Harlot; some again make mention of another famous
Strumpet, Aesop's Fellow Slave, called Rhodope, who, when grown Rich by
frequent Prostitution, built this Pile to eternize her Memory.

A Pleasant Story of the Building a Pyramid.
ANOTHER Story gives a strange Romantic Air to the Original hereof, and tells us
how the late-nam'd Rhodope, Inhabiting the City of Naucretis, went one Day to
Wash and Bath herself in a delightful Fountain, in the Middle of her Garden,
and that leaving all her Clothes upon the Verdant Brink, a sharp-Ey'd Eagle
seized upon her Shoe and bearing it aloft, Flew out of Sight, nor staid a
Moment, till he came to Memphis, where he dropped it in the Lap of Amasis, then
King of Egypt, who surpised at the Extraordinary event, and pleased extremely
with the shape and Beauty of the Lady's Shoe, gave Orders instantly, that
strict enquiry should be made about his Kingdom, for the Owner of it, who at
last, was found, and being brought to Memphis, was immediately declared the
Wife of Amasis, with whom she Reigned for many Years, as Queen of Egypt, and
upon her Death, received a Stately Mark of his Affection to her Person, in the
Orders, which he gave for the erecting over her so fine a Monument.

The Remoter Pyramids.
THERE are but very few of the Remoter Pyramids, whose forms or magnitude
deserve the Trouble of a Strangers Observation, yet have all been closely shut
from Age to Age, whereby the wisest Writers of Antiquity itsself, have been
enabled to report no more, than what they guessed at Randam, or received
Traditionally from the vulgar notions.

Shut close in all Ages.
I know not why the Entrances of all the Pyramids, (the great one only still
excepted) were originally closed against the view of an Adventurous Curiosity,
nor by what strange means they have so many Ages 'scap'd Discovery, from the
Ingenious Scrutinies, and nice Inspections of our later Ancestors, or the
Refined and more Polite Inhabitants of Egypt, when converted to the Doctrine of
the Christian Faith.

The Superstition of the People, the cause thereof.
BUT 'twill be nothing difficult to guess the Reason of their being still kept
close, from the Establishment of Turkish Government, in that subverted Country;
for as the ancient Nature of the true Egyptians, was defiled extremely with the
Mud of Superstition, and exceeding prone to look on Omens, and all
Insignificant and Idle Observations, as the sure Proclaimers of Portentous
Prodigies, that senseless Vice or Humor has increased of late, to double
Folly, by the Cursed Commixture of their own erroneous Principles, and the
Delusive Superstitious Tenets of the fond Mahometans.

The Madness of Bigoted Zeal.
THIS Ill-contriv'd Conjunction of Ignoble Follies, kept back Inclination to the
search of Knowledge, and to such amazing Height did their Resentment fly, when
any Man, of whatsoever Quality he was, presumed to offer at an Entrance of the
Pyramids, that the desires, which some Bashaws of Cairo have thought fit to
mention upon that account, have caused such Mutinies in the distracted Nation,
as the Sword of Justice was too weak to Pacify.

NOR will it be unpleasant to the Reader to inform himself of the Validity of
their Traditions, by reflecting seriously upon the following notion, which till
very lately, was esteemed as Orthodox.

A pleasant Notion of the Egyptians, relating to Moses, and the Magicians.
THEY told such Travelers, as asked them, why the Entrances of every Pyramid
but one, were closed so strongly, That the Sorcerer Moses, for it seems, they
so distinguished that Illustrious Prophet, having wasted Egypt by Ten Grievous
Plagues, their Great Magicians vainly strove to check the Mischiefs, he
designed and did them.

The Ten Plagues of Egypt, imprisoned in the Pyramids.
BUT at last, when tedious Practices of vain Experiments convinced them plainly
of their want of Power, to stand unshock'd against the Miracles, the Hebrew
showed them, they resolved to try another way; and finding it impossible to
hurt the Person of the hated Moses, they invented strange and admirable
Talismans, whereon, by fixing certain Hieroglyphic Characters, and shutting
them securely up within the Pyramids, they instantly found means to free
themselves from all those Plagues, superior Power had brought upon them.

AND hence, the Superstitious Natives of this Country, believing, those vast
Piles, locked in their Miseries, prohibited the opening any of the Pyramids,
least on admission of excluded Air, the Charms upon the Talismans should lose
their Power, and all the Plagues rush out again, and overwhelm the Nation with
impetuous Violence.

A resolute Bashaw of Cairo.
HOWEVER, notwithstanding the Antiquity and Strength of this Egyptian
Superstition, some Years since, when I was happily at Cairo, there arrived a
new Bashaw from Constantinople, a Man of an uncommon Share of Courage and
Ambition, eagerly desirous of increasing Knowledge, and with pleasure snatching
every Opportunity, which offered a Temptation to his swelling Curiosity.

THIS Man, who knew full well the Power, he was Master of, and scorned to fear
the Insults of a poor unthinking Mob, which he was sent to Govern, framed a
bold and sudden Resolution to inform himself immediately, by the convincing
Proofs of Ocular Demonstration, of the various Wonders and surprising Strokes
of Art, which he had often heard discoursed of, on occasionally mentioning the
Pyramids of Egypt.

A Journey to the Pyramids.
NO sooner was his Resolution spread abroad, than he perceived a thousand Marks
of Discontent and Anger in the Common People; but despising those effects of
Ignorance and Folly, he prepared convenient Instruments of every kind, and
ordering a necessary number of his Servants to attend his Person, took a
Journey to these famous Pyramids, in order to observe the nature of their
Buildings, and procure himself a great and lasting Satisfaction, in the wished
for Pleasure of some new Discoveries.

NOR fell he short in his expected ends of going thither, and as the
Discoveries, he made, were such, as never yet were told the World, it will not
be unwelcome, since my self and five more Christian Travelers were suffered to
accompany him, if I here particularize the gradual advances, which, with
curious notice of the most minute, or great remark, then led us leisurely through
every part of that stupendous Fabric.

The Entrance of the greatest Pyramid.
ARRIVING at the Place, where stands the great and first named Pyramid, we all
ascended a steep Hill of Sand, near forty Foot in height, upon the Northern
side thereof, which brought us to the Entrance, a Dark Hole, not four Foot
broad, nor in its height exceeding such a Measure, so that it appeared designed
for the reception of a Stone to close that Mouth, and so prevent the Times to
come, from aiming at the Knowledge of those silent Mansions of imperious Death,
whose undisturbed and darksom Hollows kept the Bodies of departed Majesty.

A noisome narrow Passage.
WE entered after certain Guides, who undertook our Conduct through this dismal
Passage, and descended, as upon the steepness of some narrow Hill, almost one
hundred Foot before we reached the bottom, and were all that while obliged to
stoop, or rather crawl along with Torches in our Hands, annoyed extremely by
the suffocating heat and closeness of the Place, but more by certain black and
dreadful Batts, a kind of Bird, whose Shape is frightful, and her Wings like
Leather, flying up and down, and oftentimes with dangerous Violence repulsed,
by striking on the Heads or Faces of such Travelers, as entering there, must
necessarily encounter them.

An open space.
THE bottom of this close and gloomy way admits us to a Place, considerably
broad, and of an height, which frees us from the great uneasiness of stooping
for a Passage; all the Stones about this space are broken and irregular, but
yet appear to have been rendered so by force, because not answerable in
Proportion, or Politeness to the universal Harmony, which crowns the other
Building.

The first Gallery of the Pyramid.
FROM hence we were obliged to clamber up an huge and massy kind of Stone, near
ten Foot high, which brought us to the entrance of the lowest Gallery, whose
Pavement, of a polished white and shining Marble, gently rises with a smooth
acclivity; the breadth thereof was near five Foot, the height a little more,
the Sides and Roof were flagg'd with Stones, of an unpolished, rough, and
softer Substance than the Marble of the Pavement; the height of this first
Gallery, exceeded, rather than fell short of six score Foot of English Measure.

THIS Gallery was terminated by a very thick and solid Wall, through which a
Hole, about the bigness of the first, by which we entered to the Pyramid,
admitted us directly to another Gallery, of very fine and stately Workmanship,
but in its length inferior to the former; A very dreadful horrid Well.
hence we entered on an open space, which led us to the Brink of a most dreadful
Well, a strange Descent of such forbidding horror in its black appearance, that
the very apprehensions of its Depth and Danger, has for many Ages frightened the
desire of Curious Men, from even aiming at a further Satisfaction, than by
passing hastily along its edges, to attain the entrance of another Passage,
leading to Apartments, which I shall describe hereafter: Here we stopped, and by
direction from the Grand Bashaw, who was himself amongst us with a lighted
Torch, surrounded the Descent, whose Mouth was near three Yards in its Diameter.

The Bottom how discovered.
THE Light, occasioned by so many Torches, was by far too weak to penetrate the
thickness of this gloomy Place, so that finding it impossible by their
Assistance, to perceive the bottom of the Well, we stood by, we contrived to
cast in certain Balls of Oakam, dipped in Pitch or other fit bituminous
Ingredients, to prepare them for the blazing Offices, they might be put to.

THESE Balls, once set on fire and thrown down, discovered, at the bottom of
the Pit, a strange disordered heap of Sand and Rubbish; it was near ten Yards
in depth, and had no Stairs, whereby Descent had formerly been made, but
certain Hollows, cut like Pidgeon-Holes, quite round the inside of the Well,
directed those, who would think fit to venture down, to use promiscuously their
Hands and Feet, and so enable them to satisfy their Curiosity, without great
danger to their Persons.

How cleared from Rubbish.
REVOLVING Ages of continued Time had Robbed this Well of a considerable Depth,
by filling up great part with Sand and Stones, by Accident thrown thither, but
this weak Obstacle the Resolute Bashaw found present means to render void, by
making several of his Men descend and Dig away, whatever they met with (Stone
excepted) which by some above, was instantly drawn up in little Baskets, and by
those means a free Passage opened to the solid Bottom of this Rocky Hollow.

A new Discovery at the Bottom of a Well.
THERE the Well grows vastly larger, and in Circular extent is dug on every side
much deeper, in the same degree (to use an ordinary Comparison) as is the Body
of a common Bottle to the Neck thereof; this great Additional extent of space
is Graced, far rather than supported, by a Stately Circle of fine Pillars of
Thebaic Marble, or at least a Stone, not much unlike it: And in the Center of
the Circle, which those Pillars form, there stands an ancient Monument, the
Tomb perhaps of that great Architect, who built the Pyramid.

A Tomb found there.
THE Tomb exceeds not much six Foot in Length; its Breadth is hardly four,
appearing hewn from the Main Rock, but covered with a flat of Polished Marble,
on the top whereof, as on the sides of the whole Tomb, were strangely carved a
Thousand Hieroglyphic Images and odd Devices.

A Wooden Coffin in it.
WE found it no great labor to remove the Stone, which covered the Sepulcher,
and were much amazed, when, contrary to expectation, we beheld therein a Wooden
Coffin, or at least appearing to be Wood by Touch and Figure.

UPON the Coffin Lid were represented, in a kind of Inlaid gilt Work, the
distinct and several Figures following.

Hieroglyphics on the Coffin Lid.
AN Eagle first appeared upon a sort of Throne, supported by four Winged Faces,
not unlike the notions, we conceive of Cherubims; but by their swelling Cheeks
and blustering Breath, sent forth four different ways, I rather guess they were
at first, designed to represent the four great Winds of Heaven.

THE Eagle with severe and sullen aspect looked directly at a Man, who held in
his Right Hand a pair of Compasses, and had his Left extended in a form, which
represented him demanding Mercy, while half sinking in an opening Gulf, which
loosening likewise the Foundations of a Towering Pyramid, which stood before
him; that also seemed just Tumbling after him, kicked downward by the Foot of
an old Man, whose Right Hand held a Scyth, while with his Left he drew along a
Cloud, which he appeared designing to throw over both the Man and Pyramid,
thereby to cover their appearance in a thick obscurity.

The meaning of them.
NOW among the many Hieroglyphic Images, whereby the Old Egyptians represented
GOD, they often chose the Eagle in regard to the sharp Sightedness, that Bird
is famed for, as an Emblem to express his Attribute of sure Omniscience, as the
four Winds there placed, were meant to represent the vast extent of his
unbounded Power, over every Corner of the World, the Winds can blow upon.

THE Eagle's looking so severely on the falling Man, may probably denote God's
anger at the Pride and Vanity, wherewith he had indulged his Merits, on the
Building that huge Fabric, which appeared before him; The Authors Opinion,
whose the Tomb was.
for I take this sinking Man to have been done, for the Great Architect of the
Egyptian Pyramids.

THE tumbling of the Pyramid I guess to signify, that though the Builder perished
first, yet even the strongest Master Pieces of his artful Labor must succeed
him in a sure, though slower Downfall; and to show that nothing, though of never so
stupendous Strength and Grandeur, can resist the Shocks of powerful Time. Old
Time himself there represented, spurning down the Building, spreads a Cloud of
Darkness over it, to prove that he is not alone enabled to destroy the pompous
Pageantries of Human Ostentation, but to bury even the Memory of their
overthrown Existence in a black Obscurity.

SO that, if I may be allowed to have guessed right, in the Interpretation of
these Hieroglyphic Figures, they will be found to signify as much, as if in
Common Characters, we should set down the following Sentences. The Hieroglyphic
Word for Sense Translated.
Almighty God, whose undisputed Power extends it self to East, North, West and
South, and every Corner of the spacious Universe, Sees and despises Human
Insolence, for while Men vainly think to Raise themselves beyond Mortality, by
some proud Undertaking, they are overthrown by time, and buried with their
Labors, in a dusky Cloud of ever dark Oblivion.

FROM these persuasive Circumstances, I profess my self induced to think this
Monument contained the Body, as I said before, of him, who built this wondrous
Pyramid: The Coffin broke open.
But perhaps the Reader will be more inclinable to that Opinion, when I tell him
that the Coffin, by Command of the Bashaw, was with great difficulty forcibly
broke open by the Blows of Pick-Axes, and that we found therein the
undiminish'd Body of a perfect Man, Embalmed, and wrapped about with many
thousand folds of Aromatic Searcloth, like the Mummies, which I shall at large
describe in the seven and thirtieth Chapter.

A Mummy found in it, with Hieroglyphics on his Breast.
THOSE Folds, wherewith his Breast was covered, seemed to have been varnished
over with a lasting kind of glewy Liquor, upon which were represented all the
various sorts of Instruments, used of old by the Professors of encouraged
Architecture.

WHEN we had seen as much as we coul'd possibly discover, in the Tomb, the Body
was again enclosed, as it had been before; and the abovenam'd Marble Cover
placed again upon the Sepulcher; A further search of new Discoveries.
from whence we went about the Circle, in the midst of which we found the
Monument, to try, if we could find no Passage, that might lead us on to new
Discoveries of something, which we then began to form strong hopes of meeting
with.

Moral Reflections.
METHOUGHTS the strange disordered heaps of Dust and broken Stones, over which
we walked, and the uncertainty we had, of knowing, when those massy Piles were
built, and to what Founder they have owed their Origin, then struck me deeply
with a melancholy Thought, and often brought to my remembrance the Reflections
of an Old Greek Poet, on the arbitrary Power, which Time's Prerogative entitles
him to exercise over frail Mortality. (...)
(...)
The length of Time shocks Monuments of Stone,
Even I Am it self must Time's Dominion own;
All Things on Earth his Powerful Rule obey,
And fall before his Arm, in one appointed way.


A Stone Door.
WE walked sometime about the Place, and with our Torches narrowly inspected
every thing, we passed by, till at last we spied a Door of Stone, so closely
shut, and joining with the Wall, that 'twas not easily distinguished from it;
here, believing we should meet with somewhat, worth our Observation, several
Men were ordered to come forward, and employ their Pick-Axes and other
Instruments in forcing open this discovered Place, which seemed to offer us no
other hopes of gaining Entrance.

Broke open.
'TWAS not without much difficulty, that the Arts, they used, at last prevailed;
the Door flew open with a mighty violence, and caused a sort of frightful
Sound, as sudden as a Thunder Clap; but what was most remarkable, was, that the
Hinges, upon which it turned, were all of Stone, the Joints contrived with an
amazing Ingenuity, to knit together close and admirably, held by certain strong
and clumsy Iron Pins, whereby they were for ever hindered from all possibility
of accidental loosning.

Dangerous Vapors.
I know not, how so dry a place, as this, contained such damp and noxious
Vapors, as at the surprising opening of the Door above-named, presently
extinguished several Torches, and struck dead, for some considerable time, two
sturdy Laborers, who were foremost of the Company.

FOREWARNED by the Example of these Men, we cautiously proceeded to inspect the
entrance of a dismal Cavity, and that we might the better see the nature of the
Place, cast in before us many of the Balls, I lately spoke of, which, by
flaming greatly, did not only clear the Prospect of that gloomy Passage, but
diffused an efficacious kind of Warmth, How dissipated.
which, dissipating soon the hurtful Vapors, or unwholesome Closeness of the
Place, encouraged us to enter with our lighted Torches.

The Discovery of many subterraneous Chambers.
WE advanced with equal Pleasure and Amazement through a very lofty, broad, arched
way, on either side whereof were hewn Elaborately from the solid Rock, great
numbers of square Chambers, every one of which had small low Benches, carved
quite round it; and in some, appeared large Niches of an exquisite Contrivance,
but convincing, or at least inducing us to think, they were designed for other
Uses, by their not retaining any Marks of having ever held the Burden of a
Statue.

Hieroglyphic Figures.
UPON the Sides, Floor, Roof, and the above-named Benches, we discovered plainly
certain ancient Hieroglyphics, most of which were unintelligible, or at least
extremely difficult to all our Apprehensions.

SOME however, I took pains to think upon, and flattered my Belief with the
Opinion, that I could Interpret their Significations, and among the rest it may
not be unpleasant, should I mention One, for the Diversion of the Reader.

First Figure.
NEAR half a Foot above the Bench, the Hieroglyphic took beginning in the figure
of an Infant, sleeping in a Cradle on the lowermost Stair of Ten, which
reaching to the Roof upon the uppermost supported an Old Man, extremely feeble
in his Aspect, bending with the Weight of Age and Misery, and seeming ready to
fall down and die immediately.

Second Figure.
A Man, who seemed to be of Middle Age, was represented on the sixth or seventh
Step, his left Hand full of certain Chains, in number equal to the Stairs, he
had ascended; to the respective ends of each long Chain, were fastened many
things like Globes, of different sizes; his right Hand seemed with eagerness
employed, in grasping many other Chains, as he ascended further.

These Figures, what designed to represent.
THE Stairs, which, as I said before, were Ten in number, were intended (as I
guessed) to represent the Ten Great Stages of our human Life, which very rarely
goes beyond one hundred Years: The Child there sleeping in a Cradle on the
lowest Stair, I take to signify the ten first Years of helpless Infancy: The
Weak Old Man was Life's great Period, and the utmost Age of frail Mortality.

THE Man of Middle Age, upon the sixth or seventh Stair, was nothing, but an
Emblem of our Mortal Life, 'twixt Theescore Years and Seventy: The Chains with
Globes of different sizes, fastened to one end, which he endeavored eagerly to
grasp, as he ascended, signified no more than that a Man, who Travels toward
Old Age, should make good use of every Moment, in collecting Knowledge, and
retaining it with resolution; How the old Egyptians in Hieroglyphics,
represented Wisdom.
for the Old Egyptians represented Wisdom by the Hieroglyphic Figure of a Globe
or Circle, to denote that it was boundless, and the different Magnitudes of all
those Balls expressed the great variety of Worth in Arts and Sciences.

THE Application therefore of this Hieroglyphical Contrivance, seems
conspicuous to my probably mistaken Judgment, which, by putting the abovenam'd
Thoughts together, framed immediately the following Interpretation of the
dubious Emblem. The Interpretation of the Hieroglyphic.
He, who will hope to reach a good Old Age, and bear the Weaknesses and great
Infirmities, it is always subject to, must never fail in every Stage of Life, he
passes through, to gather Wisdom and improve his Mind with Learning and Morality.

Moral Reflections.
AND excellently Good is the Advice, this admirable Hieroglyphic gives Mankind;
how heavily and full of sorrow sits Old Age, on that unhappy Wretch, who in the
fruitless Journey of his growing Life, has still omitted all his Opportunities
of laying up the Treasure, of a serious Contemplation, or improved Capacity,
whereby to soften the unpleasant harshness of the Burden, Time misspent has
laid upon his Shoulders.

BUT the Wiser Man, who never knew to live in vain, but daily gathers an
increasing Stock of Learning and Discretion, to enrich the dry and barren Soil,
Old Age must bring him to, will never feel the Stings of Ignorance and
discontented Solitude; but, when he finds himself decayed in Strength of Body,
can reflect with Solon on the Virtues of his Mind, and banish Grief in the
transporting Repetition of the following Sentence. A Saying of Solon.
(...)
It Is true, I grow more Old, but if I do,
As I wax Older, I wax Wiser too.


THE Reader must not blame me for presuming to Interpret the abovenam'd
Hieroglyphics, since the wonderful variety of Fancy, they afford a Subject for,
gives scope enough to every Man's Opinion, and the dubious Meaning, cloak'd in
their Disguise, may very easily mislead our Judgment.

A Passage stopped with Rubbish.
AFTER we had passed with gradual Advances, from one Chamber to another, we
arrived at last, at what repulsed our eager Curiosity, though probably it was not
anciently the uttermost Extent of those strange subterraneous Hollows; there we
found the Passage quite choked up with Stones and Rubbish, nor could force an
entrance any farther, though we zealously endeavored by an universal Labor to
remove the Obstacle.

Several Opinions on the use, the Caverns were designed for.
GOD only knows, how these vast heaps of Dirt and Ruins came Originally there,
and what remains unseen behind them; possibly there may be found in future
Times, some wonderful Conveyances for Water, as the common Notion seems
inclined to credit, or perhaps these Chambers were designed of old for Tombs;
or probably they were the Habitations of a kind of ancient Priests, who lived
the Life of a secluded Votary, or melancholy Hermit, in or near the doleful
Monument of some Great Prince, or Man of Honor, and had all the Necessaries of
their Life provided daily by the Legacies of the Deceased.

The Author's own Opinion.
INDEED I am the most inclinable to a Belief of this last Guess, for many
Reasons; two especially, the first, because the numerous Hieroglyphics, carved
upon the Rocks, have been such, as seem to 'em fansy'd for the Contemplation of
Religious Persons, and because, had all those Places been designed for the
conveying Water from the River Nilus, Hieroglyphic had been certainly a very
odd, and needless Ornament.

Its Reasons.
AND secondly, because without the Pyramids in many Places, still remain the
rows of Caves, hewn deeply in the Rocks, where formerly the superstitious
Priests of Egypt used to dwell, employed in several different Services in the
Romantic Offices of their Religion.

WHATEVER they be, we found the utmost of our Labor vainly spent in hopes of
gaining further Knowledge, so returned again the way, we had descended, till we
came to the beforenam'd rugged Place, which brought us to the brink of the deep
Well, I have been speaking of.

A Passage leading to a Square, within the Pyramid.
ASCENDED from the Well, we went directly forward, and exactly in a Line with
the before-nam'd second Gallery, we entered a small Neck or Passage, scarce five
Yards in length, and very narrow; this admitted us to a large Square, a little
finer than the former, but in Magnitude not far exceeding it; the Stones
whereof it is built, are so extremely large, and yet so wonderfully closely
Jointed, that the nicest Eye can scarce distinguish, where abouts they join
together; and it is the mighty Size of those prodigious Stones, and the
Politeness of their Workmanship, that yields such cause for Travelers
Amazement, when they see the Fabric of those towering Pyramids.

The dimensions of the Square.
WE found this Square no less than near an hundred Foot, and thence proceeded to
a vaulted Chamber, sixteen Foot in height, near twenty long, and eighteen broad
or thereabouts; the Stones, which flagg the angled Roof of this large Chamber,
are of admirable smoothness and surprising magnitude; but all the Walls are
plastered over with a Limy Substance, wonderfully firm, and not inferior even
to Stone it self, for its appearance or duration.

A Niche in the Wall.
JUST equidistant from the Eastern Angles of this Room, and on that side
thereof, we found a kind of hollow Niche, which seemed at first to have been
made to hold some Statue, as an Ornament or Idol, but upon a nice Inspection,
we imagined, it was possible, there might be something of a Passage into other
undiscovered Chambers of the Pyramid, whereupon the Men had Orders to endeavor
by their Instruments, to find it out.

A new Descent discovered.
BY Thrusting in their Iron Betties, where they thought the Joints a little of
the Widest, they found means to force out a large Stone, which stopped a Hole,
near three Foot Square, and opened to the view of all the Company a narrow
shelving Passage, leading downwards with a dismal Gloominess.

And Entered.
WE Entered, and Descended, strangely struck with Grave-like Smells, and dusty
odours, there was cut a Passage down, by certain Stairs, whose Winding Turns,
and Labyrinth of changes led us on with wonderful surprise, and eager
curiosity, till we imagined, we had gone almost the Height of all the Pyramid
below its Bottom. All the way was Hewn laboriously from the Rock it self, and
commonly so very low and narrow, that but one could possibly go down
full-breasted, and that one was forced to stoop with incommodious Forwardness.

A Vaulted Passage, under Ground.
THE Bottom of these Stairs at last, admitted us to a low Vaulted Passage,
strait but narrow, which continued in one form, for a considerable way
together, letting in a Glimmering Light, which looked like Day, through certain
little Holes, of almost undistinguishable size and Workmanship.

A strange Ascent.
IN all the Horror and Amazement possible, from the surprising oddness of the
Place, we Walked in, we proceeded, till we found the straitness of the Passage
terminated by another Winding Staircase, leading upwards, in as strange a
manner as the other downwards.

The Passage Closed.
WE Ascended here, and found no difference in Form or Magnitude, between this
Passage and the former, till we perceived it closed by certain Massy Stones
above our Heads, and several other, on each side the Staircase.

HERE we stopped, and for a while amused our selves with strange Reflections on
the Nature of the Place, and Thoughts, which way we might get out, without
returning the same Road, we came; some Passage out, we were assured, there was,
else could not comprehend the use of all those steps, by which we had ascended.

A Moveable Stone Discovered.
AT last, some Men, belonging to the Great Bashaw, and famous Masters of the Art
of Architecture, as in Fashion in the Eastern Countries, looking earnestly
about the Place, perceived one Stone, much smaller than the rest, and by the
Application of their Irons, after many fruitless efforts, found it stir, and by
repeated Labors, so prevailed at last, that they quite lifted it from out the
Place, it stood in, and by forcible addition of a doubled strength, quite
thrust it from the Hole, it stopped.

A Storm of Sand.
BUT we had little reason to be pleased with this success, for in the very
Moment, that the Stone was lifted out, there Showered down on us such Impetuous
Tides of Rolling Sand, that in the space of half a Minute, we were almost
Buried Quick, and wholly overwhelmed with its amazing violence.

NO sooner was this Sandy Storm, and our surprise thereat abated, but we opened
all our Eyes; and found our selves half Swallowed by it, yet those Men, who
stood the nearest to the Hole, perceived it wider at the Top than Bottom, and
the Stone, which filled it, being likewise so, had served to stop it up
effectually, and till then, prevented all that Sand, which lay upon it from a
possibility of Entrance.

The Author and his Company rise, without the Pyramid.
ON either side the Hole, and Rock below it, there were cut Square Nooks,
wherein by thrusting Hands and Feet, a Man, without great difficulty, might
ascend, and by those means we all got up, in order as we stood, and were beyond
belief surpised, not only to behold an open Sky, which plainly showed us, that
we were without the Pyramid, but to perceive our selves within a Spacious
Hollow on the lofty Head of that great Rock, which Pliny, and the other Writers
of Antiquity, distinguish by the Name of Sphynx.

Plinys Opinion of the Sphynx.
THE Author, just abovenam'd, would persuade us to believe, that 'twas the
Sepulcher of Amasis King of Egypt, and of his Opinion are most Modern Writers,
who have had occasion in their Books to mention it.

The Authors Dissent from it.
FOR my part I must own, my Inclination leads me to dissent from the belief,
that it was ever meant for that Employment, I am rather Tempted to imagine, it
was anciently an Idol, from the hollow of whose Head, the Priests deceived the
Common People, as they thought convenient.

And the Causes thereof.
AND, indeed, to what end else, were those strange Subterraneous Passages
contrived, which lead from the Great Pyramid, and Caves adjoining, formerly the
Habitations of a Superstitious Priesthood? Why, (but for this cause) should
they have Carved the Rock, it is made of, like an Ethiopian Virgin? or why else
have made the Head so hollow, and the Passages thereto so very Secret?

Why called a Sphynx.
'TWAS called a Sphynx, because from the Breasts upwards, it was said to
represent a Virgin, and a Lion from the Bosom downwards; If there ever was the
Lions shape belonging to it, Hills of Sand have covered its Appearance, for
there now remains no more above the Surface, than the Head and Neck, and
something of Foundation, which those Men, who please, may take for Shoulders.

Its Situation, and Dimensions.
IT stands on the East side of the great Pyramid, but very little distant from
it, its Height exceeds not Seventy Foot, and is defaced extremely by the
violence of those Bigoted Turks, who hating Images, believe it meritorious, to
abolish the Remembrance of their very Being.

How decayed by time.
THE Arabs call it Abul-hol-hon, and express a Satisfaction in the hopes, they
have conceived, that it will shortly fall, by reason of the Weakness of the
Neck, decayed extremely by the Shocks of Time, and frequent Tempests from the
Neighboring Deserts, whence the Winds, from time to time, blow storms of Sand,
and thence came that, which so unwellcomely invaded us, when first we forced
the Passage open.

They return to the Pyramid.
WE placed the Stone, as we had found it, by the strength of certain Men, whom
the Bashaw obliged to stay above on purpose, and re-enter (by the common way)
the Pyramid we were returning to; we fastened in the Stone, belonging to the
Niche, and going back to the abovenam'd Well, began to climb another Passage,
not far from it.

A Graceful Gallery.
THIS brought us to a Graceful Gallery, of six and twenty Foot in height, still
rising with a very smooth, but somewhat steep, and difficult Acclivity. This
Gallery is almost Seven Foot broad, and Bench'd with solid Seats of Stone, near
two Foot high, on either side, and Flagg'd with Stone, politely joined, and of
a Magnitude, almost surpassing Credit. It Is in Length one Hundred, Fifty and
odd Feet, and leads, where it Terminates, to two Large round (...) Stately
Chambers, opening into one another, and indented Square and certain Nooks,
which seem to have been formed for sitting Places.

A Chamber with a Tomb in it
HENCE a square and Marble Passage, brought us to the Entrance of the middle
Room, the loftiest, most amazing, and prodigious Building of the Pyramid, the
Chamber, which contains the Tomb of him, who built it, thought, as I have said
before, to be King Cheops, an Egyptian Monarch.

The amazing dimensions of the Chamber.
THE length of this vast Room, is five and thirty English Feet, the breadth a
little more than seventeen, the height within an Inch or two of twenty, and the
Sides, Roof, Floor and every Part thereof, flagg'd richly with fine glittering
Tables, of Thebaick Marble, so prodigiously extensive, that the Place is roof'd
by nine great Squares thereof, and all the Sides are flagg'd by six vast rows
of equal Magnitude, and Beauty inexpressibly surprising.

Description of the Tomb.
A little distant from the Western Side of this great Chamber, stands the
Monument, I just now mentioned, it is about seven Foot in length, three deep,
and thereabouts in breadth; it is empty and uncovered, and consists of one
entire Piece of admirable Porphyry, which being struck by any Swordhilt, Stone,
or other solid Body, yields a sound, not much inferior to the Tone of some
great Bell in Christian Churches.

A further Passage.
FROM hence, a Passage leads you steeply to some other Chumbers, none deserving
a particular Description; and continuing to ascend, as far as possible, we
searched in vain for more Discoveries, and at last descended by the way, we
came.

How the Top is to be ascended.
THE Top must be ascended from without, and is not, what it seems to be (by
reason of the distance) from below, a Point; but an exact and perfect Square,
of fourteen Foot, which space three single Stones contain, joined artfully
together, and all over covered with the Names of Travelers, of every Nation,
there cut deep, and left to tell succeeding Comers, they were there before 'em.

Other Pyramids entered.
MANY of the other Pyramids, besides the two adjoining this, we entered, finding
Tombs in every one, and several things, worth speaking of, but should I name
them all, it would require a greater Space, than I can here allow my self, and
having therefore largely treated of the most remarkable Discoveries, we made,
let it suffice to tell the Reader, that I have some Thoughts of publishing a
Treatise, of these famous Pyramids, unmixed with any other Observations, when
the World's Goodnature speaks it self deserving, or my own spare Time appears
permitting it.

The uncertainty of their Number.
THE Number of the Pyramids was ever, as uncertain, as their Founders and
Antiquity, nor are they all of the same Magnitude, some being far inferior to
the smallest of the Three so celebrated; yet perhaps, were those away, the
meanest of the little ones would well deserve the Name of Wonders.

Extent of their Situation.
THEY extend themselves in great unequal Distances, for near the space of twenty
Miles, and may be seen at large from the square Flat upon the highest Pyramid;
but whether it proceeds from any difficulty, owing to their strange Position,
or is caused by the unwary Negligence of those, who strive to count 'em, I am
yet uncertain, but it has been found, as much impossible to do it justly, as to
tell the Monuments of Stonehenge, upon Salisbury Plain: a Task, most English
Writers have reported difficult.

How many little Pyramids the Author told, from the top of the great one.
I looked as nicely, as I could direct my Eyes, from the abovenam'd Place, and
could distinctly tell no more than five and twenty: Other Authors have reported
them an hundred; many Modern Writers say, there are but eighteen, or at most,
but twenty.

A probable Cause, of the different Accounts on this Subject.
WHENCE these different Accounts should rise, I cannot guess, unless a kind of
Foggy Weather, often known in Egypt, might obscure the Prospect, at such times
as those, who lessen the just Number of the Pyramids, have chanced to take
their Observations.

A Question, how the Stones were raised.
IT is a Question, not a little curious, how the Ancients could contrive to
carry Stones, of such amazing Bulk, to such an Altitude, whereby the Fabric
was erected; and to this I answer, that I have collected all the Notions worth
Remark, To be answered in another Treatise.
which, with the Draughts of several fine Machines, and admirable Engines, I
design to Publish, when I find this Book so well received, that Gratitude, not
Recompense may urge me to the setting forth the Treatise, I so lately spoke of.

Why the Author is not fuller on this Subject.
I hope, the Reader will not think me blameable, in that I have not dwelt much
longer on the Subject, since it was so copious to afford me Matter; those, who
may imagine me too short, must certainly forget, how many Things I am to treat
of, equally deserving Notice, and how much I should out-swell the Volume, I
proposed, should I enlarge to a Prolixity on every Subject, which afforded Room
enough to bear that way of Writing.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Trade of Egypt.
The Introduction.
A Conquered Nation must be Subject, among other Shocks of inauspicious Fate, to
deviate from her Genius, as she dwindles from her Power, and the same
destructive Hand, whose unresisted Violence has crushed the Liberty of a
subverted Country, may undoubtedly be said to triumph over the Minds of her
unhappy Natives, when it has depressed their Courage, and enslaved their
Persons.

Egypt brought to Turkish Customs.
AS therefore Egypt, wholly Subject to the Lawless Tyranny of an insulting
Monarch, knows no wished partiality of Freedom, nor is suffered to possess
peculiar Tolerations, it must consequently follow, that her fixed Dependence on
the Turkish Government, must strongly bend her Biased People in their Modern
Slavery, to an encouraged Practice of those very Customs, Forms, and
Ceremonies, which are Publicly professed by their Imperious Masters.

Why the Egyptians love not Traffic.
HENCE the Reader, having long since been informed of the prevailing Genius,
which has still inclined the Warlike Turks to never resting search of
Conquests, will be apt to guess, that their Egyptian Subjects, aping eagerly
their strange Example, cannot be inclined, or qualified indeed, for the
encouragement of any thing, so different from the perpetual Hurries of
fatiguing War, or Martial Studies, as the softer Practice of a Trading Life,
and the less dangerous Rudiments of Peaceful Traffic.

Extremely fond of War.
AMBITIOUS Aims and swelling Hopes, which take their Beings from a love of War,
have changed this Nation, from her ancient Searches after Arts and Sciences, to
an imperious disregard of every Virtue, not exerted in a Martial manner; Arms
alone are the encouraged White, they universally direct their towering Shafts
at, and a different Cause has now produced among them all the same effect,
which animated gloriously the ancient World to scorn of Danger, and the
Practices of War, which how esteemed, may plainly be discovered, in the
numerous Writings of those early Ages, handed down to late Posterity, with a
deserved Applause and universal Admiration, particularly in the following
Verses of Tyrtaeus, a Greek Poet, flourishing about the thirty fifth Olympiad.
Tyrtaeus a Greek Poet, in the 35th Olympiad.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The Quotation Englished.
I scarce can think, a Man deserves a Name,
Or can Regard from Fellow Creatures claim,
Not, though in Wrestling he is grown Complete,
And Skilled in all the Virtues of the Feet;
Not, though he boasts a Cyclops Strength and Grace,
Or can outrun the Northern Winds of Thrace;
Tho, in his Form he Tithon's self excells,
And midst such endless Heaps of Riches dwells,
As not King Cynara's, or Mida's Fate
Gave, in Possession of their wealthiest State;
Not, though he had more Powerful Kingdoms won,
Than ever blessed Pelops, Tantalus's Son;
Not, though more Music on his Accents hung,
Than ever graced the sweet Adrastu's Tongue;
Not, though he was with every Talent blessed,
And all Heavens Gifts, but that of War possessed;
Nor can He truly boast a Martial Soul,
Who cannot bravely stand, where Seas of Slaughter roll;
Who does not nobly scorn repeated Blows,
And dares not wish to Fight, surrounded by his Foes;
This is true Valor, and this Grace possessed,
Of all Rewards, we aim at, is the best;
He Is well adorned, who has such Actions done,
And that Youth richliest Dressed, who his own Trophies won;
Hence Common Good to every City slows,
And every Subject some advantage knows;
He, who, amidst the Battle, grasps at Fame,
Forgets base Fear and a retreating Shame;
Who hazards Life on a contested Plain,
And bends his Soul to a content in Pain;
Who tempts his Right Hand Man to lose his Breath,
And yield, without one groan, to an approaching Death;
This is the Man, whose Praise shall echo far,
And speak him bravely fit for the great Toils of War.


YET is not Egypt wholly destitute of such Commodities, as, Egypt not quite
destiture of Trade.
notwithstanding all these disadvantages, entice the Merchant, to adventurous
search of profitable Traffic: which their Seaport Town of Alexandria is, in
its Situation, so extremely fit for; The Manufactures of Egypt.
Thither once a Year repair the Galleys of the Turkish Sultan, loading first
with Wood from the Black-Sea (a scarce Commodity in Egypt) and returning back,
with many rich and costly Manufactures of Grand Cairo, and the Country round
it, such as Drugs of excellent and noted Virtues in Medicinal Operations, fine
Perfumes, the Skins of Beasts, peculiar to this Place, vast quantities of
Dates, much larger, and of better taste than any other, Sugar Canes in great
abundance, and a stately kind of Carpets, made at Cairo, in appearance richer,
and by far more durable, than those, they make in any other Part of the Grand
Signior's Empire.

What English Ships import from Egypt.
BESIDES these Merchandises, which our English Ships have constant Trade with
Egypt for, we often are supplied at easy Rates, with many of the rich and
valuable Silks, and other Products of the Indian Countries, brought to Cairo by
the Monthly Caravans, and thence exported, at convenient Opportunities, to
every distant Part of Trading Christendom.

What they export to it.
BY way of Barter for the Merchandises, we receive from thence, we load our
Ships with nothing more than these Commodities (the Product of our own and
Foreign Manufactures) which I have largely mentioned in the Chapter, treating
of the Trade, at present carried on, between our Countrymen, and those of
Turkey.

How the French, Dutch, and Venetians trade with Egypt.
THE French and Dutch both carry on a Trade with Egypt, but inferior much to
that, we manage in the Port of Alexandria; but the Venetians deal for a
peculiar kind of Ashes, made of Lime, calcined with the broad Leaves of certain
low and spreading Herbs, which grow on the else Barren Deserts of this Country;
of which, when they have used some Arts at home, in the refining and new
moulding it, they make the famous Crystal, and so celebrated Glasses, which
are much esteemed, and numerously sent about to every Part of Europe.

BEFORE I close this Chapter, 'twill not be digressive from the Subject, I am
treating on, to tell the Etymology, from whence we give the Name to Paper.

Whence our Writing Paper took its Name.
THERE is a very common Herb, which grows in the Egyptian Marshes, called of old
Papyrus Nilotica, from the Appellation of the River; it is a kind of stringly
Leaf, of Filamental Substance, which the Ancients used to strip in Flakes, of
which it is almost naturally composed, then spreading them upon a Board, they
moistened them with certain Waters of a stiptic Composition, and by pressing
them with weighty Instruments, so well enabled them to bear the Writing on,
that they were used by all Men for that purpose, and composed most part of
those unnumber'd Volumes in the Library of Philadelphus.

Why the Author is so short upon this subject.
IT IS needless to enlarge on the particulars of the abovenam'd Manufactures,
hence exported, since they are not only long since extant in the lists of many
Writers, but are now become Familiar to the Trading part of England, who alone
are those, to whom a full Account thereof might even formerly have been
imagined welcome.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Revenues of Egypt, and to what Uses they are Applied.
AS the unbounded Power of the Turkish Sultan Authorizes his Pretensions, to an
undisputed sway in the Egyptian Government, so does it thence entitle him, to
the Possession of a certain Annual income or Revenue, The Revenue how gathered
in Egypt.
which is Raised, Collected, and in all kinds Managed (as I have before Related,
in the other Parts of his Dominions) till deposited at Cairo in the Hands of
the Bashaw, then Governing, as Viceroy, for the Turkish Empire.

How Employed.
THENCE, Guarded by proportioned Bodies of the Standing Forces, kept in Egypt,
it is severally employed to certain settled uses, and from Hand to Hand
delivered carefully, in order to be used for the respective purposes, to which
it was decreed, since first the Arms of the Victorious Selym made him Master of
this Fertile Country.

A Calculation of the whole Revenue.
THE whole Revenue, as it has been Calculated justly by some late Inquirers,
into the Condition of the Turkish Treasures, is no more than Eighteen Hundred
Thousand Gold Chequins, that is Nine Hundred Thousand English Pounds a Year,
and such a Sum is Annually raised, and distributed with great exactness, in the
just proportions of the Three Divisions following.

The First Third, how disposed of.
THREE Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year are set apart, for the Possession of the
Turkish Sultan, and delivered to the Care of certain chosen Regiments of Horse,
whose Duty it is, to Guard it safely to Constantinople, and receiving a
Discharge from the Lord Tefterdar or Treasurer, return, when they have left it
in his Custody, to be employed according to the Will and Pleasure of his
Master, the Grand Signior; sometimes it happens, that the Turkish Fleet, with
formidable strength, is ready to depart from Egypt, at the time, wherein the
Guards set forward with the Money, and in that Case, it is Embarked on Board the
Admiral, who saves the Soldiers their expected Trouble, and acquits them from
their Charge at Alexandria, though this but rarely happens, and is found a very
dangerous way, because the Treasure undefended by a Mighty Naval Force, would
probably become a Prey, to the Industrious valor of the Christian Squadrons,
ever Cruising on the Coasts of Turkey.

The second third, how disposed of.
THREE Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year are next appropriated, to defray the
Charges of the numerous Offices, dependent on the Great Bashaw, and other
necessary Uses in relation to the Posts, incumbent on such Men, as are deputed
by, and thence subservient to the Great, Supreme, and Arbitrary Monarch of the
Conquered Egypt.

The last third, how applied.
THE Third Three Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year are still employed, in bearing
the Expenses of the many thousand zealous Pilgrims, who resort each Year with a
Bigoted Faith, to the great Rendezvous at Cairo, whence they all set out with
wonderful Devotion, and a superstitious Ignorance, in order to complete the
necessary Pilgrimage to Mecca, their False Prophet's Birth Place.

THESE three above-named Uses are the only ones, to which the Turks apply the
Sums, they gain from the Egyptian Tribute, nor is it lawful by the fixed
Decrees of the Grand Signior's Empire, that the Sums thence rising, should be
any ways perverted to what Use soever, devious from the ends, to which they are
appointed.

Why the Revenue is so small.
IT IS true, nine hundred thousand Pounds a Year are no great Income, from the
Conquest of a Country, so exceeding famous for her known Fertility; that, when
the Romans conquered her of old, she gained the Name of Granary to that
successful Empire. But as Wealth decreases by a long continued Series of
destractive War, it is no great wonder, if we now find Egypt far from the
Capacity, of yielding such amazing heaps of Spoil and Plenty, as in ancient
Ages blessed the Plunder of Victorious Legions.

How the Turks make up the deficiency.
HOWEVER, though the Sum, exacted thence by the Grand Signior, is a smaller Burden
than they well might bear, yet are the Turks so dexterously skilled, in
managing Authority, to the Advantage of their Purses, and their Master's
Safety, that the vanquished Natives are not only crushed, beyond all hopes of
growing rich, but kept below the very possibility of framing, with the smallest
shadow of Success, a dangerous Rebellion.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Egyptian Catacombs, and the Mummys, which are found in
the Ancient Sepulchers of their Dead.
BY the foregoing Descriptions of Cairo, Memphis, Babylon, and the Stupendous
Workmanship of those prodigious Pyramids, whose outward Magnitude, interior
Passages, and subterraneous Cavities, have so deserv'dly styled them the Worlds
Chief Wonder; the Curious Reader may have formed a Notion, no ways disagreable,
of the valuable Antiquities, whose still remaining Splendours speak amazingly,
the former Grandeur of the Egyptian Nation.

The Antiquity of some of the Mummys.
I shall now proceed to give a strange, but true Account of those vast
Catacombs, wherein the Old Egyptians were Embalmed and Buried, and whose black,
horrid Wombs do yet contain a formidable Proof, how long our Humane Bodies may
preserve their Substance, when defended by the help of Art, from the
destructive Power of a Natural Corruption: For in the dark Recesses of those
Gloomy Caverns, to this Day remain unnumber'd Thousands of those very People,
who lived and triumphed over the Subject Israelites, before the Hand of GOD
delivered that ungrateful Nation from their long Captivity.

IT IS a Curiosity, however Dangerous, extremely Satisfactory for an Adventurous
Traveller, to behold those Lifeless Bodies, which from Age to Age have been
Interred in these surprising Monuments, and bidding strong Defiance to the
Course of Nature, remain untouched by piercing Putrefaction, and have for
several Thousand Years, lain undisturbed, entire and sound in every Part, nor
will undoubtedly for many Ages yet to come, be any ways subject to the smallest
Diminution.

The Extent of the Catacombs.
THESE Vaults and dark Sepulchers of their Ancient Dead, extend themselves in
greatest Numbers, from the Neighborhood of Memphis to the distant Borders of
the Libyan Desert, containing Thirty Miles in length, and breadth
proportionable: Many have been broken up from time to time, and often entered
by the daring Curiosity of European. Travelers; but many yet remain unopen'd;
nor is it an Attempt, consistent with the Dictates of a Self-preserving Humor,
to Visit frequently those Dusky Palaces of Death, known only by the sight of
some large Stone, unnatural to the Place, which turned aside, discovers under
it a narrow Descent, not much unlike the Mouth of such a Well, as we may often
see in British Villages: The manner of descending the Vaults.
The Passage down was formed by gradual Steps, cut circularly through the Neck of
this Descent; but Time, or accidental Ruin having now defaced those old
Conveniences, some Rope, or other neat Contrivance is made use of, to let down
those, who are desirous of enlivening their Contemplations, by such a strange
and melancholy Prospect. The bottom of this steep Descent admits them instantly
to one large Vault, which leads to many others, high, and dismal, built
securely with a small square Stone, of Color black and shining, not
unreasonably supposed by some, those famous Bricks so Celebrated in the
Scripture, for the Workmanship of the Poor Captived Israelites, who labored
hardly under the harsh Injunctions of an Egyptian Bondage.

THE greatest part of these dark Arches remain entirely whole, and stately, but
in some few Places are defaced and fallen, so as to render the Passage through
them, almost impracticably difficult: Some are distinguished by small Pillars,
oppositely placed in graceful Order. Others wholly unadorned and naked, leading
like the Streets of Christian Cities one through another, and forming with a
sort of venerable Majesty, a Gloomy Labyrinth of Death and Horror: The Order,
in which the Mummys lie.
For on either side, lie ranged in measured Order, at near Three Foot distance
from each other, promiscuous Bodies of Men, Women and Children; some whereof
(such likely as were Rich and Honorable) have flat Stones, a little elevated
at the Head and Feet, placed neatly under them. Others lie meanlier in the
Common Sand, but all Embalmed; and wrapped about with numerous folds of
Searcloth-Linen, which, forcibly untwin'd from their defenseless Bodies, looks
not much unlike the middle Rind of some decaying Oak, and leaves the Corpse
entirely Solid, Whole and Perfect in its full dimensions; of a blackish Red, or
dusky Brown in Color; its Substance hard, like Pitch or Rosin; their Backs and
Breasts are often stained with Hieroglyphick Ciphers, and on their Bosoms, lie
small figured Idols, made of Artificial Stone, Baked hard and durable, or
sometimes folded Scroles of rough and painted Parchment, some of which Devices
I shall, in the course of this Chapter, describe to the Judicious Reader, with
my own Opinion of the likeliest Significations of their diverting Fancies, and
Hieroglyphical Contrivances.

The Danger of too great a Curiosity.
THE Danger of Descending such of these Repositories, as are most Curious, is
extremely great, by the distance they are at, from the Cities aforementioned,
which exposes frequently the unwary Traveller, to the barbarous Violence of the
Inhumane Arabs, who, watching secretly for a favorable Opportunity, will often
close the Mouth of the Sepulcher, and by that means Starving the unhappy
Strangers, return some few Days after, to divide the Plunder of those
Miscarried Gentlemen.

A strange Accident which befell the Author in a Vault amongst the Mummys.
AN Accident occurring unexpectedly to my own Experience, may perhaps, divert
the Reader, in the Relation of what I can with Pleasure now reflect on, though it
gave me little Satisfaction, when I was liable to its Danger: About 15 Miles
South-East of Memphis, lie several Famous Catacombs, but ( as dangerously seen)
are commonly neglected; however, a strong Desire of seeing something, that for
so many Ages had continued shut from Mortal View, excited my Curiosity to
forget the Hazard, and procure, as Guide, a Native of that Country, to conduct
me with three Fellow Travelers, to the Place abovementioned. The Fellow was a
little backward, alleging, in excuse of his unwillingness, that 'twas an
Inconveniency, to lie a Night abroad upon the Open Desert; but assuring him, we
would rather Travel all Night long, he consented to go with us. We Rode on
Mules, and Traveled with a wonderful Delight through a rough and sandy Country,
till we arrived at a Place, where Stones of vast, uncommon Sizes, pointed out
the Passages to what we looked for. We were pleased to see the Coast so clear,
that not the smallest Tract of Man or Beast appeared to give us cause of
Jealousy. We alighted from our Mules, and tying them together, went toward the
largest Stone, we saw amongst them, and turning it with much ado aside, were
all surpised to see securely fastened, and rolled up on the inside, a Ladder of
Ropes; but imagining it might have been left there, by some, who had descended
formerly, we spared the trouble of making use of a Convenience, our Guide had
with him, and having unfolded what we found there ready, went backwards down,
with each Man a Pistol in one Hand, and a lighted Torch in the other: A strange
uncommon Smell saluted our first Entrance, with an Odor, not to be imagined by
such, as have not known it by Experience, and the blazing Torches, striking a
faint glimmering Light through the thickness of the Gloom, discovered, as we
walked along on either side, the discolored Faces of the Dead, with a strange
and inexpressible Horror: We had scarce passed three Yards within the Vault,
when the foremost of our Company, stumbling accidentally on something, that lay
in his way, fell headlong over it; whereupon, holding down our Torches, we
perceived two Men in Christian Habits, extended cross each other, and appearing
newly Dead, with all the pale and frightful Marks of a Convulsive Horror, in
their contracted Joints and Faces: Between the Feet of one there lay a Pocket
Book and Pencil, which taking up and opening, we read with great Difficulty and
more Concern the following Lines, there Written in Italian, but in a Character,
that was hardly legible; for besides the Confusion of one Letter running into
another, the Lines were here and there writ upon certain others, which seemed
to have been designed, as Memorandums for several private Businesses. Two
Gentlemen found dead in a Vault.
LORENZO and FERDINANDO BONAVOGLIA, Dear Unhappy Brothers, born at Pisa, a City
of Italy, died here by Grief and Hunger, barbarously shut in and lost for ever,
June 18 th, 1701. Good Christian, if thy dear Eyes shall read our Misery, Pray
for our Souls; O Jesus, O Mary, Mother of God, hear and pity us.

IT should seem by the melancholy Contents of this small Pocket Book, that
these unfortunate Gentlemen had been observed to enter, by some Arabian
Murderers; and the sequel of this Relation will I think, incline the Reader to
the same Opinion. By the Date of the above-named Sentences we found, they had
not long been there, for to the best of my Remembrance, 'twas on the Twenty
Second of the same Month, that we came thither.

AMAZED, and half confounded at the miserable Objects, which we saw before us,
we began to think upon the Danger, we were in; the Apprehension whereof
increased immediately to a double Magnitude, by the ghastly Looks and trembling
Agonies, which shook the heartless Guide with fierce Convulsions: As we knew
him more familiar than our selves with the Customs of his Country, so we
guessed our Danger more extraordinary by the Fright, we saw him in; and judging
it a necessary Prudence, to make the best of Time and Opportunity, we retreated
with the utmost have to the Place, we came in at, A dangerous Surprise
but to our great Surprise, perceived the Stone placed over the Mouth of the
Descent the very Moment, we came directly under it; with all the fright
imaginable we began to seek the Rope, by which we had Descended, but 'twas
taken up, and all the hopes of our Deliverance from that dreadful Prison, were
entirely dashed to nothing, by the unexpected turn of such a sad Catastrophe:
'Twas here we felt the fear of Death, in all its roughest Attributes; and the
Guide, who should have given us Comfort in our deep Extremity, increased the
weight of our Concern, by piercing Cries and oft-repeated Curses on our rash
Attempt, which had involved our selves, and him in one promiscuous Ruin; and
would destroy in him, the chief Support and poor Subsistence of his unhappy
Wife and Family. For my part, though exposed in equal measure to the threatened
Misery, I was so strongly moved by the Sighs, Groans, Tears, and wringing Hands
of this complaining Wretch, that I forgot the Nature of the Place, I walked in,
and forming strange unreasonable Hopes, that we might find some other Passage,
urged the Company to ramble farther through those dismal Cavities; but
considering the Horror, which in such a Place, the want of Light would soon
produce, and willing to keep back the evil Hour, as long as possible, we
extinguished Four of our Five Torches, and with the sickly Light of the
remaining One, walked on with heavy Hearts from Vault to Vault, quite through
those dismal Mansions; till at a little distance from the Guide, who bore the
Light before us, we perceived with more than common Terror, the faint Idea's
of six Pale Faces, close against the Wall, that stood before us; we started at
the Sight, and saw them move as if they stalked to come upon us undiscovered;
so that rightly guessing they designed no good, with one consent we fired our
Pistols; it is impossible to make the Reader sensible, of the prodigious loud
Report and rumbling Noise this one Discharge created in the Vault, it rolled
above our Heads like some uncommon Clap of Thunder, and continued, still
increasing, a considerable time: Whether Fear, or some unlucky Accident
produced the Cause, I cannot well determine, but the frighted Guide let fall
his Torch, which presently extinguished, and running backwards with impetuous
Fury, beat down a Gentleman of our Company, and tumbling on the Ground, lay
still in a most profound and breathless Silence: When the Report was over, we
expected every Moment to have heard or felt the Persons, we had seen before us;
but all was strangely still, no Tread or Voice alarmed our Fears nor could we
guess, what Accident had rid us of our Danger; till through the Wall before us,
we perceived a sudden Ray of Light break briskly in; and coming to the Place,
found there a Hole, dug through the Stone, or Brick, AN EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE,
Which Represents The Strange Particulars of an Accident, that happened to the
Author, in The Catacombs of Egypt.
A. THE Entrance, by which we Descended to the Catacomb, with the Mules, tied
together about it. B. The Stone, that Covered the Mouth of the Descent. C. The
Guide. D. The Pocket Book. E. The Two Italian Gentlemen, found Dead, in the
first Vault. F. One of the English Gentlemen, who fell, by Stumbling over them.
G. G. G. G. Mummies, in several Allies of the Catacomb. H. The Six Arabs,
against the Wall. I. The Stone, that Covered the other Entrance of the
Catacomb. K. Two of the Arabs, making their Escape from the Vault. L. L. Others
of them, Riding away hastily. M. M. Their Companions, carrying off our Mules.
N. The Turkish Party of Horse, appearing at a Distance. O. O. O. The Pyramids
of Egypt. P. The Ethiopian Head, called Sphinx by Pliny, and other Writers.
depiction of the author's accident in the catacombs of Egypt To the Right Hon,
ble Charles Earl of Peterborow and Monmouth ye Authors Honored Patron and
Encourager of his Undertaking this Plate is Most humbly dedicated.



which opened largely into another Catacomb, through which we saw the Passage,
that had let in so much Light upon us, and heard an unintelligible Noise of
Hallowing descend, as from the Mouth of that uncovered Cavity; through which, we
could perceive distinctly Six Tall Men, climb swiftly up, and seemed confused,
as if afraid of some approaching Danger: The Author's strange Escape from the
Vault.
The fear of dying in that horrid Place, had banished every other from our
Thoughts, so that getting eagerly though the broken Wall, we ran immediately to
the Entrance of the Vault, and hearing neither Voice, nor any other Sign of
their continuing above, we ventured to ascend, as they had done; and certainly
the Light of Heaven did never more Enliven Man, than it did our joyful Company,
at such a strange Deliverance.

NO sooner were we up, but looking round, we could perceive Four Arabs, riding
hastily toward the left side of the Desert, leading away our Mules, as lawful
Booty, and followed, at some distance, by Six others: On the right of our
unlucky Station, we perceived a Troop of Turkish Horsemen, whom we knew by
their Appearance, to belong to the Bashaw, and to be part of those convenient
Forces, kept on purpose to Patrole from Place to Place, and guard the Country,
from the presumptuous Insults of these Arabian Villainies: Till then, I never
met a Turkish Party with the smallest Satisfaction, but was now transported
with a boundless Joy, at the welcome Prospect of their first Appearance.

WE walked to meet them, and informing their Commanding Officer, of what had
passed, he strait detached a Number of his Men to gallop after them, who were
no sooner seen advancing by the Wary Arabs, but they set our Captived Mules at
Liberty, and soon outran the hopes of their less-swift Pursuers: However, we
were very well contented to have sped so well, and fearing we might lose our
Safety, by the dangerous Absence of our new-come Champions, we agreed to give
the Officer the value of Five and Twenty Shillings a piece, upon Condition, he
would see us safely to the Neighborhood of Cairo; He accepted the Proposal,
and invited us to descend again, while he with several of his Men, would keep
us Company, and leave the rest above to watch for our Security: His offering to
accompany us, convinced us of his Honesty, and missing the poor Guide, who had
been left below, They descend again.
we ventured once again, to visit the late Scene of our Misfortune; being
entered with three Lights, which the Captain ordered to be carried, such as I
have elsewhere largely treated of, and which afford a Flame, much brighter and
more powerful than our small Torches, we proceeded gradually from Place to
Place,, and searched in vain over all the Vaults for the poor frighted Fellow,
we had left behind us, till at last, arriving at the farthest end of that first
Catacomb, which we descended, we observed one Mummy higher than the rest, and
drawing near, to view it more particularly, we could perceive it stir, at which
surpised, and calling for the Lights, to know its meaning, the first thing,
They find the Guide, hid under a Mummy.
we saw, was the poor Guide, who, being crowded in between the Wall and the
Mummy, was creeping under it, as far as he was able, and turned his Eyes upon
the Lights and Company, with such a dismal Languish, that it threw us into a
long and violent fit of Laughter. The Honest Man's Simplicity, had persuaded
him that, if he lay close, he might pass for a Mummy, and having crawled from
Vault to Vault, he chose that Place for his Asylum from those Arabs, for whom
he now mistook the Turkish Soldiers.

A joyful Transport.
HE heard us laugh, and looking earnestly about him, found with a surprising
Joy, that he had been mistaken in his Apprehensions, and the rapid Transports,
thence oppressing his recovered Spirits, made him start from his unnecessary
Shelter, and embracing me, who then unluckily stood nearest him, expressed the
Sense, he had of his scarce credited Delivery, with such Ungovernable signs of
Satisfaction, in the Leaping up and down, that Treading frequently upon my
Feet, I was obliged to shake him off with Roughness, unbecoming the Soft Airs
of due Congratulation.

NOW had we time, without the fear of a succeeding Danger, to inspect, with all
the Zeal of an unlimitted Curiosity, those gloomy Tracts of Death and Terror,
in whose dismal Paths we had before been so amazingly surpised, by dangerous
Interruption.

The Observations, they made in their Second Descent.
THE Observations then, which, favored by so fair an Opportunity, we made, were
these; the Bodies of the Mummies, not exceeding in their Stature those of
common Height now Living, are a certain confutation of that old mistake, which
Teaches many to believe that, as the World Increases in her Age, Mankind
decrease in Strength and Magnitude.

THE many Thousand Folds, which Swathed some Bodies in the Catacomb, were Wound
about the Corpse, with so much smoothness, and such admirable Art and Neatness
of Contrivance, that the Nicest Hand Modern Times would fall so short of
equalling, that they could never Imitate the Beauties of the Practice, should
they now attempt it.

WE all took Notice, that the Heads of many Mummies were divided from their
Bodies, and perceived that Part the Weakest, and most prejudiced by Time, even
in those Corpse, which seemed entire, and no ways Robbed of their Original
Proportion.

THE Faces of such Bodies, as appeared the Richest, by their Ornaments and ways
of Lying, we observed all coverd over with a very thin and Shining Aromatic
Searcloath, of such admirable form and such a Skilful Preparation, that it only
served to keep the Head more lasting and entire (which else was found a Part
most subject to decay) without obscuring the Appearance of the Countenance, or
altering even the Minutest turn of any Feature.

The Painted Rolls.
THE Rolls, which lay on many of their Breasts, contained, as I have said
before, a Thousand different kind of Hieroglyhic Figures, some done in Gold,
some Red, some Blew, some Green, and others Black, in short of every Form and
Color; thence a Man may reasonably claim the Liberty to guess, he could
distinguish many things, relating to the Age, Death, Quality, Life, Virtues,
and Profession of the Person, to whose Breast they are Affixed.

THUS for Example, on the Bosom of one Mummy, whole and Fair in every there,
there lay a Roll, whereon in Lines of Gold and Azure, we distinguished plainly
among many more the following Figures.

An Hieroglyphic Image, in the Catacombs.
UPON a very High and Craggy Rock, there stood a Throne, whereon in all the
State of Ancient Monarchs, sat a Man in Royal Robes, and Wearing on his Head a
Regal Diadem; his Right Hand highly Elevated, held a Sword with Threatening
Fury, and his Left extended with a kind of a disdainful Air, appeared to Mock
the Fruitless Efforts of a Numerous Company of Men in Arms, who seemed with
eagerness to grasp the Rocks, and vainly aimed with angry Looks, at Reaching
the Defended King, who sat secure, and Triumphed in their Disappointments.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE, Which Represents, Exactly an Egyptian
Hieroglyphic, Found upon the Bosom of a MVMMY, in the CATACOMBS.
A. A King, upon his Throne, or an Emblem of a Prince, who Governs Justly. B.
An Emblem of Designing, Underhanded Treachery. C. An Emblematical Description
of the Great Stability of Justice, and Moderation. D. D. D. D. An Emblematical
Representation of Ungovernable, Headstrong Treason, and its Difficulties.
hieroglyphic found on a mummy in the catacombs of Egypt AN EGYPTIAN
HIEROGLYPHIC
To the Right Honble Carry Countess of Peterborough etc This Plate is Most
Humbly Dedicated





An Emblem of crafty Treason.
BUT on the other side the Rock, behind the Monarch's Back, appeared a brisk
and fiery Youth, who, having mounted by the help of a tall Ladder, was just
steping, from its topmost Round upon the Rock it self, with seeming resolution
to attack and kill the King, with a long Spear, presented at him, was witheld
from his Intent by means of a large Chain, descending from a Cloud above his
Head, and twining suddenly about his Arms, while he himself was wounded in the
Bosom by a Sword, directed by a Hand, which issued likewise from the Cloud
abovenam'd.

NOW in my Imagination, it is a Task of no great difficulty, to unfold the
Mystery, contained in this intelligible Hieroglyphic; perhaps I am mistaken,
but as probably am not; however, right, or wrong, I Will give the Reader my
Opinion, let him judge, as he thinks proper.

The meaning of the Hieroglyphic.
THE Monarch, represented in his Regal Ornaments I take, to mean a King, who
Rules with State and Power: The Sword denotes the Justice of his Office: The
disdainful Look implies a scorn of Treason, and its Practisers.

THE Rock, whereon he sits enthroned, was doubtless meant, to signify his
Governments Solidity; its craggy Roughness was designed to show, what dangerous
Precipices, we are led to by Ambition.

Emblem of Open Rebellion.
THE Rash, armed Multitude, who strive in vain, before the Face of the
above-named Monarch, to ascend and wound him, are as Emblems of of those daring
and imprudent Rebels, who will openly presume to carry on their Hate to just
Authority, and prosecute the Dictates of their Impious Wishes in the Face of
Majesty.

THEIR numerous Repulses, and the fruitless Efforts of their eager Application
serve to show, how much it is impossible, by open Practices of Lawless Villainy,
to shock the Throne of an established Government, or succeed in the Endeavors
of a treacherous Inclination.

THE siery Youth, just mounting from a Ladder to the summit of the Rock behind
the King, and holding up a Spear, as if with design to kill him, signifies in
my Opinion, that more crafty kind of Treason, carried on by underhand Intrigues
and subtle Secrecy, and powerfully assisted by prevailing Parties.

Emblem of Heaven's Justice.
THE descending Cloud, from which appears the Chain, that binds him, and the
Hand, which wounds his Bosom with a Spear, was meant by the Egyptians of
Antiquity to represent that Great, but unknown Power, by whose sure, though
secret means of Justice, they perceived the sacred Persons of Just Monarchs,
safely guarded from designing Treachery, and very rarely knew a Villain Die
unpunished.

NOW, if the Ingenious Reader will but put together these Interpretations of
the Hieroglyphic Mystery, he will soon perceive a nice connection of its several
Parts, which we may read, as follows. The Hieroglyphic literally Interpreted.
That Prince's Throne, who governs justly, is so strongly seated on the Rock of
Power, that he can look with scorn upon the vain Attempts of those Mad Rebels,
who, invading his Prerogative with open Violence, encounter such prodigious and
undreamt of Difficulties, that they fall in their Endeavors wretched Victims,
to the disappointment of Ambition.

But that more Crafty, Politic, and Private Traitor, who ungenerously aims at a
Success in his Rebellion, from the undiscovered Practices of close Disloyalty,
though he may prosper for a while in undetected Villainies, is, notwithstanding
his great Cautions, watched in every Step, he makes, by the unknown Omniscience
of some Heavenly Being, who, when his Plot seems ripe for Execution, chains his
Will, o'erthrows his Treason, and amazingly converts his unsuspecting Malice to
his own Destruction.



The particular Application of the Hieroglyphic.
THIS general Interpretation led me to conclude, the Hieroglyphic was designed a
Monitory Lecture, to dissuade Mankind from Practices of Treason, by an artful
Declaration of its fatal Consequences; and the Application in particular
directed me to guess, the Mummy, on whose Body it was represented, had been
formerly some Youth, made wretched by the Knowledge, if not Executed for the
Practice of some Treason or Rebellion.

They reascend from the Catacomb.
WHEN we had made as many Observations, as we could, we reascended by the way we
entered at, and were conducted safely to Grand Cairo, by the faithful Captain
and his Party, on the Terms beforenam'd

INQUIRING, when we were returned, if any News had reached the City, of the
loss of two Italian Gentlemen, and hearing nothing of it, we imagined it our
Duties to acquaint a Person of that Country, who resided there in Public
Business, with the strange Particulars of the above-named Accident: He
presently informed us, that he knew too well the Gentlemen, we spoke of, that
they had been recommended to him in their Travells thither, and had been
forewarned, how dangerous it was to visit those remote, and dismal Catacombs;
that they refused to listen to Persuasion, and had taken a Guide, and several
Servants with them, none of which had since been heard of.

What became of the dead Bodies of the two Italian Gentlemen.
IN short, the Gentleman, with melancholy Marks of Thanks, rewarded our
Civility, in giving him this sorrowful Intelligence; he hired the Captain, who
had been our Convoy, to remove the Bodies of the two unhappy Brothers from the
Catacomb to Cairo, whence he afterward Embarked them on a Vessel, which was
bound for Europe, and which brought them soon ( God knows a shocking and
unwelcome Cargo) to their Country and Relations.

How they were betrayed.
IT seems their Guide (since taken and Impaled alive for his abominable Villainy)
had held a Correspondence with the Arabs, and betrayed his Charge, by entering
with them to the Catacomb, and giving them the Slip at a convenient Opportunity
through the other Hole, set open purposely; the Servants, who remained above,
were siez'd on, and made Prisoners by the Arabs, who returned to Plunder their
dead Masters at a time, when they unhappily found us, an unexpected Booty in
the Gin, they came to.

PROBABLY, the reason of their leaving the Italian Gentlemen unplunder'd, when
they shut them in, was owing to the distant Prospect of some Turkish Party,
frequently Patroling, as I said before, from Place to Place about those Deserts.

AS our Escape was wonderful, so were our Praises and Thanksgiving, Great and
Hearty; yet the Horror, whose unnatural Shock, when we sustained the Danger,
startled Nature, is by time converted to a certain inexpressible Contentment in
the sweet Remembrance, and Reflection on the oddness of the Accident, nor is it
a new thing to change our Passions with the Change of Time, in such a manner,
Seneca has left us his Authority, to prove it common in the following Words,
Sen. Trag. Herc.
-- Quae fuit durum pati,
Meminisse dulce est.
Men's Mem'ries commonly delighted are,
To think on, what they once found hard to bear.


The Catacombs, nearer Cairo, not worth describing.
I could enlarge extremely on the Subject of the Catacombs, but think it
altogether needless, since the finest of them all are those, which I have here
so largely treated of, and which are very seldom visited by any Travelers, nor
to my Knowledge have been ever yet described, in any of their Writings; all the
Wells, or little Places nearer Cairo, which contain the Bodies of Egyptian
Mummies, are not only so inferior to these Catacombs, as scarce to merit
mention, but have been already taken notice of so frequently by other
Travelers, in almost every Book of this kind, extant in our Language, that
it is neither worth my Trouble in repeating the Particulars, or an Ingenious
Readers in perusing the Relation.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of that Part of Egypt, formerly the Land of Goshen, and of the
Passage of Caravans, through the Libyan Deserts.
Delta, why so called.
AMONGST the many fertile Tracts of Land, enriching Egypt with an annual Plenty,
there is one, called Delta by the Ancients, in regard to the Resemblance, it
was thought to bear the Grecian Letter of that Name.

Two Streams of Nilus.
THE River Nilus, not above four Miles below Grand Cairo, is divided into two
distinct and navigable Streams, one running Eastward, and the other toward the
West; the first emits his Waters into the Mediterranean, not far distant from
the Old Pelusium, now called Damiata; and the second loses his swift Channel in
the same Sea, just below Rosetta.

THESE two abovenam'd Channels form, by their triangular Course, a very rich
and spacious Island, even the fattest Soil, and most delightful Part of
Fruitful Egypt, and it is this Portion of the Country, which, as I have said
before, was once distinguished by the Name of Delta.

The Land of Goshen.
THIS, Though many contradict the Notion, I imagine to have been in former Times,
the Land of Goshen, and am much confirmed in my Opinion, by the Holy Scriptures
undeniable Authority. As, for Example, in the tenth Verse of the forty fifth
Chapter of Genesis, where Joseph tells his Father, Genesis chap. 45. v 10
And thou shall dwell in the Land of Goshen, and thou shall be near unto me,
thou, and thy Children, and thy Childrens Children, and thy Flocks, and thy
Herds, and all, that thou have.

BY the Words near unto me, in this Verse, it is evidently certain, that we
cannot guess with greater probability, than in believing Delta to have been the
Place, since it is the nearest fruitful Spot of Ground to Memphis, (then the
Residence of Joseph,) in the whole Egyptian Country.

Goshen proved a fruitful Country.
AND, that the Land of Goshen was not only near the Capital, but preferable in a
thousand other Blessings to the rest of Egypt, we may be assured by the
Authority, I just now quoted, and some other Places.

IN the fourth, fifth, and sixth Verses of the seven and fortieth Chapter of
Genesis, we find the Sons of Jacob pleading for, and Pharaoh granting them the
Land of Goshen in the following Sentences. Genesis chap. 4 v. 4, 5, 6.
They said moreover unto Pharaoh, for to sojourn in the Land are we come; for
thy Servants have no pasture for their Flocks, for the Famine is sore in the
Land of Canaan: Now therefore we pray thee, let thy Sevants dwell in the Land
of Goshen.

And Pharaoh spoke unto Joseph, saying, Thy Father and thy Brethren are come
unto thee.

The Land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the Land make thy Father and
Brethren to dwell, in the Land of Goshen let them dwell.



AGAIN, in the six and fortieth Chapter, Pharaoh speaks to Joseph in the
following manner, And take your Father, and your Household, and come unto me:
And I will give you the good of the Land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of
the Land.

Also regard not your Stuff: For the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours.



Delta, by the Author, thought to be the Land of Goshen.
BY these abovenam'd Passages of Holy Writ, we may without absurdity conclude,
that the triangular Tract of Land, called Delta by the Ancients, or at least
some part thereof is cettainly the same, which formerly was dwelt in by the
Bondag'd Israelites, and bore the Appellation of the Land of Goshen.

The common Notion of it.
BUT many are of an Opinion, opposite to this, and judge the Land of Goshen to
have been that part of Egypt, situate betwixt Grand Cairo and the Libyan
Deserts. Why absurd.
Not to enter into a Dispute on that account, I only shall beg leave to make one
Observation, and that is, A Country, so extremely Barren, nor Productive of the
smallest Mark of competent Increase, much less of flowing Plenty, cannot
reasonably be imagined reconcilable to the Idea's of Fertility, we take from
the Accounts, the Scriptures give us of the Land of Goshen.

PROCEED we now from Egypt to the Holy Land, to which the common Passage from
Grand Cairo lies, through Part of Idumaea, and the dangerous Deserts of Arabia
the Stony.

The way of Traveling in Caravans.
CARAVANS, which I have elsewhere in this Book explained the meaning of, pass to
and fro continually, and afford Conveniences for Christian Travelers, who
either ride upon a Camel or a Dromedary, not unlike it, but a little smaller.
Certain Bails of Merchandise are bound on either side the Shoulders of the
Beast, and in the hollow, thence occasioned, there is placed a kind of Quilt,
or Cushion, whereupon we are obliged to ride Cross-legg'd, defended from the
Sun by a large Canopy of Canvass, purposely erected.

IT IS a very toilsome and fatiguing way of Traveling, by reason of the native
height of Trott, peculiar to those Creatures; who without the smallest sign of
discontent, will Travel four whole Days together, destitute of Water, but upon
occasion, can so far exert this Blessing of their Nature, as to live without
it, near a Fortnight.

The Caravans how ordered.
THE Caravans, which pass from Palestine to Egypt, commonly consist of six,
seven, eight, nine hundred, or a thousand Persons, with their Camels, and
Conveniences, which we must all provide from the Brass-Kettle, to the
Drying Pan, if we would Eat or Drink with Christian Decency. An admirable Order
is observed among them, and continual Watch kept Night and Day, to guard the
Caravan from the Attacks and Robberies of the Wild Arabs, who infest the
Desert, and of whom I shall more fully treat, when I am come to the Description
of their Laws and Ways of Living.

Jews, who go to die at Jerusalem.
IT IS really a diverting Entertainment, for a sprightly Fancy to observe, what
Multitudes of superstitious Jews swarm up and down in every Caravan; the
oldest, ugliest, and most decrepit of all Mankind, who flock from every distant
Corner of the spacious Universe, to die as near Jerusalem as possible, and load
themselves and other Beasts of Burden, with the musty Bones, and tattered
Relics of their Dead Relations.

Three Castles in the Deserts.
YOU traverse desert Sands and miserable Countries, for about a
Ten-Days-Journey, then arrive at Gaza in the Holy Land, first passing by three
several Castles, strongly Garrisoned, who claim a certain Sum, by way of Toll
from every Passenger, both for himself and Camels; nor is this the only
Trouble, Travelers are subject to, for such is the prodigious Power and
inhumane Nature of the upstart Officers. commanding in these Places, that they
never fail exacting, with the utmost Insolence and Avarice, whatever Force
makes easy to their Rapine: The necessity of a Passport from the Bashaw of
Cairo.
So that every Stranger, who would Travel unoffended, from Grand Cairo to
Jerusalem, must purchase a full Passport from the Great Bashaw, residing at the
first of those two Towns, by which he may be sure of a Protection, though he
meets with no Respect; but if, imprudently, he ventures, undefended by the
Virtue of that necessary Safeguard, ten to one, the Persecutions, he must meet
with, damp his Curiosity, and he returns, deep laden with Repentance in the
room of Satisfaction.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Present State of the Holy Land.
Palestine justly called Holy by the Christians.
AT last the Reader is arrived in Palestine, the Land, which anciently was
chosen by the Voice of God himself, for the Possession of a People, whom he
long distinguished by an undeserved Partiality of Favor and Affection: A
Country, justly called the Holy Land by Christian Piety, because our Savior
blessed her Cities with his Residence and Conversation, and in this selected
Climate paid the Debt of an assumed Humanity in ignominious Death and bitter
Agonies.

Not else deserving of the Title.
BUT far from Holy has it ever been, if we consider the Rebellious Principles,
incorrigible, strange, and unexampled Wickedness of the unhappy Jews, her Old
Inhabitants: A Nation disregarding Laws, imposed by God himself, who in their
very Sight vouchsafed to hold a Conversation with their more Religious Leader,
the neglected Moses.

The obstinacy of the Jews.
A Nation, who in midst of the Possession of those show'ring Happinesses,
consequent to the increasing favor of their Great Creator, and delivered by
amazing Proofs of his Affection; nay defended in their greatest Perils by a
thousand Miracles, and often repeated Marks of the Almighty's Mercy; I say a
Nation, who possessing these, and many more peculiar Blessings, could, amidst
their Obligations, slight their Duty, and neglecting Him, from whom they
boasted all their Fortune, deviate from the Rules, he set before them, to the
shameful Practices of black Idolatry.

How greatly Punished.
BUT as the heinous Nature of these Peoples Sins, exceeded far the most enormous
Crimes of other Nations, so does that surprising Punishment, inflicted on them,
full as much exceed the Misery, which even the most despised and wretched
Outcasts of the spacious Universe are forced to suffer.

Strangers in their own Country.
ABHORRED in the Society, and banished from the Habitations of Mankind in
general, they wander miserably up and down, possess no Property, and wish no
Excellence in any Art but that of Cheating, scorned and persecuted, wheresoe'er
they come, and to so shocking a degree the Tennis-Balls of Fortune, and
unpitied Exiles of the World, that they are no where greater Strangers, than in
Palestine it self, of Old the Right of their subverted Ancestors, and making
them, while they possessed her, not alone the Pride, but Terror of the
Universe.

NOT any Country of the Habitable World is known, to have been subject to so
many Changes, or has felt the ill Effects of such stupendous, bloody, and
successive Revolutions, as if the Just, All-Wise, and Mighty Hand of Heaven
inflicted never resting Torments on the Place, for having been the Scene of our
Redeemer's Sufferings, by the insolent Decrees, and obstinate Stupidity of her
Inhumane Natives.

Palestine in the Turks Possession.
AMONG the many Changes, she has felt, she groans at present under the severest
Weight of galling Slavery, that ever she was subject to, entirely in Possession
of the Turks, and Governed by Bashaws, Sangiacks and other Officers in all
degrees presiding, and exerting their Authority, as in the other Countries,
subject to the Government of the Unlimited Grand Signior.

How Inhabited at present.
HER Old Inhabitants, Eradicated wholly by successive Shocks of War and Poverty,
have left the Ancient Seats of their Possession, to be Peopled by a Mixture of
the Scum and Refuse of most other Eastern Nations, such as Greeks, Armenians,
Moors, Egyptians and the like; for Turks, there are but very few among them,
nor would those continue there, but out of a design to Plunder and exact, as
much as possible, from the Unhappy Wretches, subject to their Tyranny.

The Soil itself Changed.
NOR is, the once sublime, and Flourishing Condition of her Ancient Government,
the only thing, which time has changed to this Surprising disadvantage, even
the Land itself, as if a Curse from Heaven attended the detested Climate, has
disrobed her Surface of those amiable Beauties, and attracting Excellencies of
Fertility and Prospect, which in former times, were wont to Crown, not only the
Valleys, but the very Hills and Rocks themselves, with a Productive Gayety.

Reflections.
METHOUGHTS it grieved me, when I trod the Paths, which, in forgotten Ages, have
perhaps been traced by the repeated Footsteps of the Ancient Patriarchs, and
their Posterity. Methoughts I say, it grieved me then to think, that Lands, of
Old, possessed by the Religious Patrons of GODS Holy Doctrine, should now be
owned by the Defiling outcasts of Humanity, by Swarms of Infidels.

IT Shocked me strangely, when I cast my Eye from Hill to Hill, about the
Country, and beheld almost on every Mountain, the remaning Ruins of some Chalky
Fabric, Mourning, as it were, its Founders Downfall: It shocked me, when I saw
such rugged Relics of o'erturn'd Antiquity; and yet by what my Guides
informed me, was obliged in looking on them, to reflect, there once stood
Jericho in all her Grandeur, there Damascus anciently erected her aspiring
Head, there stood the Famed Metropolis of Israel, bright Samaria, and in former
Ages, yonder despicable Heap of Ruins was the Proud Jerusalem.

Moral Reflections.
OH! How can Man be led to Flatter his ambitious Passions, with the Groundless
hopes of Riches Permanence, or an unshock'd Possession of the Smiles of
Fortune, when that very Ground is grown a Dunghill for the Filth of Nature,
which the promises of Heaven, and the GOD of Abraham confirmed to his
Posterity, with the repeated Character of a Land, that Flowed with Milk and
Honey, and the strong assurances that it should dwell with Him, and with his
Seed for ever.

Bread made of Roots.
I know not, whether it proceeds from the Defect of Nature, in some wondrous
Alteration of the Soils Fertility, or Universal Negligence, or want of skill in
those Inhabitants, who now possess it, to improve it, as they ought to do, but
this is certain, that the Land is so extremely Barren, or Deficient in
producing Corn, that for the space of many Miles about Jerusalem, the People
Eat no other Bread, than what is made of Beans, or certain Roots, of an
Unsavory Relish, but they say, of Mighty Virtue, as to the Effects, they have
on those, who Eat them.

IT is, indeed, a Diet, only fit for those mean Slaves, whose abject Souls can
stoop to Servitude with a regardless Easiness, and such alone would condescend
to live among such Arbitrary Tyrants, as oppress all kinds of People by
Extortion and Injustice, in this miserable Country.

Rapine encouraged, in Turkey.
IT IS true, the Practice of unbounded Rapine is allowed, nay even encouraged in
the mildest Scenes of Turkish Government, but here in so particular a manner,
that Honor, Power, and Riches can by no means be obtained, but by the help of
such unjust and wicked Courses, as by universal Custom are become, not only
safe but fashionable:

The evil consequences of Example.
AND indeed, where not alone licentious Education tolerates an Evil, but an
universal Approbation justifies its Practice, it is a Task, extremely difficult
for any Man to shun the common Course of Vice, he sees before him; an Evil
Conversation and the ill Examples, set Mankind, deceive their Senses into an
Opinion, that such Practices are just, as they see common; Hence Injustice is
become so natural to the Turkish Government, and hence, we find, how useful it
would be for all young Men, to study well the Precepts of Theognis in the
following Verses. The Advice of Theognis.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Cyrnus, I Will kindly teach those Rules to Thee,
Which Good Men taught my unsiedg'd Infancy.
Be Wise, nor Power, nor Wealth, nor Honor gain
From Deeds, whose foul Injustice all will stain.
Be careful next Ill Company to shun,
But to a Good Man's Converse always run;
Eat, Drink and Sit with him, and still take care,
To make your Court to such, as Powerful are,
From Good Men's Conversation Good will flow,
Whilst with the Ill you lose, what you already know.


PROCEED we now, to take a view of the remaining Tokens of Antiquity and Zeal,
which yet adorn the Modern State of lost Jerusalem.

CHAP. XL. Of Jerusalem. The Sacred Antiquities therein contained, and the
Entertainment of Strangers in the Christian Monastery on Mount-Calvary.
Old Jerusalem's Condition.
NOW, Reader, we are come to a description of the celebrated Queen of ancient
Cities, whose aspiring Turrets raised her Pride beyond a Rival, whose peculiar
Blessings spoke her long the Mistress of Command, and Glory of the Universe,
whose impious Walls contained the Scene of our Redeemers Agonies, and shook
with Earthquakes at his mighty Crucifixion.

How different from the Modern.
BUT now, alas! She can no longer boast those Gayeties of Nature and combining
Art, which swelled her Excellence in former Ages, all those bright and towering
Marks of Splendor and Authority are sunk to nothing, Rocky Barrenness, now
stares a Stranger wildly in the Face, where once he might have charmed his
Senses, with a glittering Prospect of refined Magnificence, and craggy
Precipices in the very midst of this depopulated Scene of Sorrow, seem to groan
out in complaining Murmurs, Mortal Glory comes up, and is cut down like a
Flower, and passes away like a Shadow, and is no more seen.

Reflections on Jerusalem.
OH! Poor, unhappy City, Great even in the Memory of what thou once were thought
deserving of; how fully have thou seen accomplished the Prophetic Sentence of
thy Crucified Director; Oh! how much better had it been for thy deluded
Natives, to have listened gratefully to the repeated Woes, denounced against
them; Then had thy splendid Temple stood unshock'd, and not exposed to verify
a Sentence, which, had she deserved no Overthrow, had never been inflicted.
Math. 24. chapter v. 2.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, there shall not be left here one Stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down.

HOW evident alas! are all thy Miseries; how vainly do thou groan in an
unpitied Ruin; and how stupidly inactive must be that Man's Fancy, who,
beholding thee surrounded by thy present Curses, does not mournfully reflect,
how much in vain our Tender Savior pitied thy Misfortunes, when he breathed
these piercing Proofs of Heavenly Compassion mildly over thee! Math. 24. chapter v.
37, 38.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them,
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would
not!

Behold, your House is left unto you desolate.



THE Shocking Weight of those Oppressions, thou art subject to, give lively
proofs of the just cause, our Blessed Savior had to say, Weep not for me, but
for your selves O ye Daughters of Jerusalem.

New Jerusalem, how Situated.
MODERN Jerusalem has Changed her Situation, from the very Ground, on which the
old one stood; for when she Flourished in her Ancient Grandeur, Mount Moriah,
and Mount Sion, stood directly in the Center of the City, and the Mount called
Calvary, the Place of Crucifixion, was without the Northern Gate, at a
considerable distance, but the New Jerusalem is built so much more toward the
North, that Sion is without the Wall, upon the South Side of the Modern City,
and Mount Calvary now stands almost directly in the Middle.

The Castle of Jerusalem.
UPON the Right Hand of the Western Gate, there stands an Old Decayed Castle,
inconsiderately Garrisoned, and Mounted with a useless Number of Great Pieces
of Artillery.

The Walls, and Gates, how Fortified.
THE Walls are Weak, and all the Town much stronger by her Natural Situation
than the Art, wherewith she has of late been Fortified; the Gates are Guarded
by a constant Number of Foot Soldiers, and defended by the largest of their
Cannon; the Remaining Houses, (for I cannot say there is a Street now standing)
are of very low and humble Fabric, Built of Mud, and not exceeding one Poor
Story, widely Straggling from each other, and without the smallest sign of
Order, or an aim of Regularity.

SOME broken Remnants of old Buildings, which the Natives tell us, were the
Palace of King David, Theater of Herod, and the like, serve only to remind a
Traveller, that once Jerusalem was, what she now is not: No Jews suffered to
Inhabit Jerusalem.
No Jews are suffered to Inhabit here, the Town being wholly Peopled by Zealous
Christian Bigotts of promiscuous Nations, and such Turks, as Dwelling there, in
hopes to use an Arbitrary Power to the best advantage, are Subservient to the
Government of a Sangiack or Deputy Provincial.

SINCE then there is not any thing uncommon in the form of Government here
practiced, and abundance of our Modern Writers have described the Place with
Geographic Nicety, and as for the Historical Accounts thereof, they are already
fully known, I Will purposely omit the Naming any thing, but what is shown most
Travelers, as Relics of Antiquity, which, I believe is, what an English
Reader will receive most welcomely, at least it is, what I chiefly aimed at, in
this Treatise, and will consequently lead me into no Unnecessary Deviation from
the Tenor of my Subject.

FIRST then, I will inform my Reader, what we see within Jerusalem, and round
about it, not including the Franciscan Monastery on Mount Calvary, or near it.
Secondly at large describe both that, the Sepulcher of Christ, the Temple over
it, and every other thing, worth Notice, thereunto belonging.

The Father Guardian, why so called.
I should First inform you, that the Chief of the Franciscan Monastery, is
Entitled to the Name of Father Guardian, from the Privilege, he has of granting
his Protection to all Christian Travelers, whether Protestants or Roman
Catholics, who are constantly obliged, as long as they continue in the City,
to take up with a Monastic Entertainment in the Convent; for a Stranger (not
of the Mohammedan Persuasion) is not suffered to reside in any of the Turkish
Houses, or indeed in any other Corner of Jerusalem.

THe Convent at Jerusalem, how maintained.
THE Europaean Princes of the Romish Church contribute largely, toward the
Maintenance of these Religious Friars, who expect Rewards, of far more worth,
than is the Entertainment, which they give to Travelers, and least such
Gentlemen, as Curiosity has led to see Jerusalem, should possibly be ignorant,
of what is still expected from their Purses, they are ever careful by repeated
Declaration of their Poverty and Want of Christian Charity, on all occasions to
insinuate, how welcomely they would receive a generous Gratuity.

How the Friars live there.
THUS live they easily in flowing Plenty, using all the pampering Gifts of
Liberal Nature, with an unreserv'd and gratifying Luxury, which is so fully
known to the designing Turkish Governors, that they are seldom found to miss
the smallest Opportunity of squeezing their Possessions to the best Advantage.

A Ceremony, used to Strangers.
THESE Politic Franciscans, versed politely in the well dissembled Practice of a
great Humility, receive all Strangers with a wonderful respect, the Father
Guardian always condescending, by a long continued Custom, to kneel down and
Wash their Feet, while others Wipe them, many of the Order standing round,
devoutly Singing certain Hymns, appointed for that purpose.

How they are treated.
AFTER this, a certain Number of the Friars are directed by their Padre, to
accompany the Strangers up and down, within the City and without, and show them
every Place, worth observation, which they constantly perform with admirable
Artifice, appearing wondrous Civil, and exciting those, they guide, to think
their Curiosity a Meritorious Zeal, in hopes thereby, that others may at their
return to their respective Countries, be induced to undertake a Journey
thither, and by that means swell the Perquisites of their Dependence to
additional Abundance.

A Question always asked at Jerusalem.
IT is a Question, always asked, if you design your Visit to those Holy Places,
from a Motive of Religious Zeal, or Common Curiosity; If from the first, they
pester you with Beads, and other superstitious Tokens of Devotion, which direct
the strict Injunction of repeating two, four, six, eight, ten or twenty Pater
Nosters, at such and such more Sacred, or less Holy Places; but if you assure
them, that the latter Motive tempted you to Travel thither, they are
complaisantly passive in the matter, and accompany you about from Place to
Place, without observing your Deportment in them.

A Register kept in the Monastery.
THE Friars of this Monastery keep a Register, wherein they enter both the Names
and Country of such Travelers, as visit the renowned Jerusalem: It is
impossible to know exactly the just number of our Countrymen, who have been
there, because the different Inclinations of some Men engage them to pretend
themselves Italians, when they are really Spaniards, French Men, when they are
Britons, and renounce their Countries for some ends, which they believe most
prudent.

How many English men have been there, these hundred Years.
HOWEVER, we were suffered to look back upon the Books, which have been kept
these hundred Years last past, and found there entered (to the best of my
Remembrance) One Hundred and Ninety Eight, who, since that time, have in their
Travels from the English Shore, had Will and Opportunity to see Jerusalem.

THE Sacred Relics, Ancient Buildings, or whatever else deserves Remark, are
these, which follow, eagerly asserted by the Priests to be the same, whose
Reputation they have taken on them.

Herod's Palace.
THE glorious Palace of the haughty Herod speaks (in a Decay, not quite so bad,
as Ruin) the unbounded Pride of its Imperious Founder: There still remain some
Rooms entirely whole, particularly, that, wherein he used to sit, Enthroned
beneath a Canopy, and list'ned to the Business of his numerous Addressers; near
which they show another Square, but low Roof'd Chamber, where our Savior
Christ, derided by the Scoffs of Impious Villains, was saluted on the Knee with
the Ironical Address of Hail King of the Jews.

SOME stately Arches prove the Architecture to have been Magnificent and Lofty,
and the Place is now so well repaired, that it is the Residence of the Sangiack
or Turkish Governor.

Solomon's Temple.
THEY show a Building, which they call the Temple of Solomon, but are neither
suffered to go in themselves, or gain Admittance for a Christian Traveller, not
even though Bribery, an almost never failing Orator among the Turks, should plead
for the Permission.

Pontius Pilate's House.
THE House of Pontius Pilate still remains, and there they show the Place, where
stood our Savior, when they crowned him with the Thorns, and bound him to a
Pillar, which supported the Apartment: But, oh! shocking Thought! and strange
Effect of Times vast Changes! that very Place, where Christ was Scourged by the
Command of Pilate, is at present made a Shop, where an Old Man, of Seventy
Years of Age, frys Cakes in Oil, and sells them in the Street to Common People.

The Pool of Bethesda.
INCLINING to the East Side of the City, stands the Celebrated Pool of Bethesda,
now almost dried up and filled with Rubbish, where the Angel formerly
descended, and by troubling the Waters, made them efficacious in the Cure of
Great Diseases.

The melancholy Way.
WITH melancholy Sighs we walked along the melancholy Way, through which our
Savior passed, o'erloaden with the Burden of his Cross, in order to the
Tragedy of his stupendous Crucifixion: Here we pass by an old Ruinated Place,
where lived the Pious Veronica, who beheld, when Christ went by, that he was
fainting with his Load, and brought him out a Napkin, to wipe off the Sweat
from his afflicted Face, which Napkin amongst other Relics, is retained and
shown to Strangers in the Chapel of the Monastery.

The Houses of Simon and Lazarus.
NEXT, stand almost contiguous to each other, two old heaps of Building; in the
first whereof they say lived Lazarus, whom Christ restored to Life, when he had
long been buried; and the other they report, to have been formerly the
Habitation of that Simon, who, perceiving Jesus faint before his Door, took up
the Cross, and bore it for him to the Place of Execution.

The Virgins Chapel.
HARD by there stands a Chapel, Dedicated to the Virgin Mary, where they say,
she stood, to see her Son go by, in order to be Crucified, and Swoon'd, when
she beheld him.

St. Peter's Prison.
THE Prison, where St. Peter was confined, is still remaining, and employed at
present by the Turks for the same Purpose: Here they show a Hole, cut deeply in
the Wall, to which they would ridiculously force you to believe, the Chain was
fastened, which was used in binding the Imprisoned Saint abovenam'd; and not far
distant from this Place, they show a Remnant of the Judgment Gate, through which
our Savior was conducted to the Sentence of his Condemnation.

The House of Annas.
THEY show the House, wherein our Savior, visiting one Annas, then its Owner,
stumbling accidentally, and almost falling down a little Precipice, in order to
support himself, laid hold on the sharp Corner of a Wall, the Stones whereof,
to this Day bear a Mark, which represents the Print of his four Fingers, if we
may depend on the Assurances, our Friars gave us.

A miraculous Stone.
THE House of Simon the Pharisee contains a Stone, whereon appears the Print of
a Man's Foot, the Mark, they told us, which our Savior made, when standing on
it, he forgave the Sins of Mary Magdalene. It seems the Sacred Virtues of this
Stone are so extraordinary, that though the Turks have frequently attempted to
remove it from its Place, it has not only strangely baffled all their Efforts,
but when once, the Governor himself, a mighty Enemy to any, who professed
Christianity, endeavored it with Obstinacy, Flames of Fire broke fiercely from
the Floor, and scorched away his Resolution.

The Room, where the Virgin Mary was born.
BENEATH the Hollow of a certain Rock, on which was built the House of Joahim
and Anna, there is shown a small, low, square Apartment, where was born the
Virgin Mary, as the Fathers told us.

St. Mark, and St. James.
THEY show the Ruins of a little Chapel, situated, where St Mark once lived,
and not far from it a small Church, first founded by the Spaniards, in
Commemoration of St. James, and Dedicated to him, for I think, they say, it
stands upon the Ground, on which he was Beheaded.

THESE, as far as I remember, are the most remarkable of all the Places, we
were shown within the City; I will now proceed to give you an Account of
others, equally deserving Observation, which are found without the Walls, at
several distances.

A Monastery in the Place, where Jesus met the two Disciples in the Road to
Emaus.
IN the Road to Emaus, Westward of Jerusalem near Six Miles, there stands a
Monastery founded by the Pious Empress Helena, directly on the Place, where
Jesus met his two Disciples: Not far from hence they show a Valley, where they
say was fought the famous Battle, before which the Sun and Moon stood still, at
the desire of Joshua.

The Sepulcher of the Prophets.
AT five Miles distance from the North-West-Gate, are several Hollow Caves, cut
deeply in the bottom of large Rocky Mountains, one whereof was formerly the
Sepulcher of the Inspired and Celebrated Jewish Prophets.

The Burying Place of the Kings of Judah.
ALMOST directly opposite to that, remains the Burying Place of the Renowned and
Formidable Kings of Judah, which is entered by a square Descent, of near five
Foot each way.

A narrow Passage.
THIS leads us through a Passage, somewhat narrower, and still descending with no
little difficulty, by reason of great heaps of Rubbish, driven by Time to choke
the Entrance: The Passage, fifteen Foot in length, is terminated by a broad and
lofty Level, Arched above, and Bench'd, though roughly, upon either side.

A wonderful Door.
THE end of this large Place, which I may term a Gallery, admits you to a very
wide and graceful Chamber, which you must descend to from the Gallery by two or
three Stone-Steps, of admirable Workmanship: This Chamber has a Door belonging
to it, which we found quite open, of an exquisite Contrivance, made entirely of
the Rock it self, with Hinges of the same, on which it moves, though of
prodigious Weight and Bulk, with an incredible facility.

ON either side the Chamber, into which you are admitted by the three Stone
Steps abovenam'd, stand the Monuments of such, as formerly were buried there;
the Number is considerable, and the Order, they are ranged in, very regular.

Description of the Tombs.
THE Tombs are formed alike, and of a Magnitude, exactly equal. They are
smaller, otherwise they differ little from the Monument of Porphyry, I
mentioned in the Chapter of the Pyramids of Egypt; some retain their Covers
still upon them, others have been opened by the eager Curiosity of Christian
Travelers.

Characters, within them.
UPON the insides of them all, we found Decypher'd certain unintelligible
Characters, which, could we have interpreted their meaning, might have probably
informed us, who was buried in each Stony and Capacious Hollow. That they were
the Kings of Juda, we have no great cause to disbelieve, but that among them
were Interred King David, and his Son, the Mighty Solomon, (as the too
credulous Inhabitants of Palestine are taught by their Tradition) appears too
widely distant from the reach of Probability, to fix a Reputation on the
groundless Notion.

The Corpse, found in them.
HOWEVER it is certain, that, at breaking open any of these Tombs, we may be
sure to find the Body of a Man, Embalmed, and Uncorrupted, but extremely
different from the Mummies, found in the Egyptian Catacombs, for these are so
incredibly diminished, both in Bulk and Stature, that they scarce retain the
bare Resemblance of the Shape, they once were Masters of.

A melancholy Sight.
THE broken Pieces, and disjointed Bones, left carelessly about the bottom of
some Tombs, afford a very odd and melancholy Prospect; and, in others, the
remaining Firmness of the jointless Bodies, Light and Thin, like some dried
Fish, which I have seen in England, gave our Thoughts a mournful Subject for
the following Contemplations. Contemplations on it.
Is this alas! our boasted Mortal State?
Is it for this, we covet to be Great?
What Happiness from envied Grandeur springs,
When these poor Relics once were mighty Kings?
O Frail Uncertainty of Human Power,
While Graves can Majesty it self devour!
While Death distinguishes nor Sex, nor Birth,
And Regal Graces moulder into Earth!
Alas! how strange, how sad a Change is here,
In what a Dress does Royalty appear!
O where is now the Globe of thy Command?
Or where the Scepter, that adorned this Hand?
Where Is now the Crown, which once these Temples bound?
Or where those trailing Robes, which swept the Ground?
Where are those brawny Guards, which awed thy State?
And where those cringing Crowds, which once were proud to wait?
Are those thin Jaws the same, which used to treat,
Thy Pampered Palate with such Choice of Meat?
Can narrow Limits, such as these, contain
The changed Extent of thy once larger Reign?
Can Thou, at whose least Frown a Nation shook,
And dreaded Lightning from thy stormy Look?
Can Thou alas! be passively Content,
To let Intruders search thy Monument?
Thou, who were once too Great for Vulgar Touch,
Can thy Proud Majesty be changed so much?
That Common Men, unknown to Kings like you,
Thus poize you, turn you round, and wonder at the view.


Bethlehem, how Situated.
WEST from Jerusalem about six Miles, stands the Renowned and Ancient
Bethlehem, our Redeemers Birthplace; and upon the Road, which leads you to it,
you are made to observe the following Relics of Antiquity, by your Guides,
the Friars, who attend you thither.

Solomon's Aquaeduct.
THE Ruins of a Great, and Noble Aquaeduct, which formerly brought Water to the
Celebrated Temple of the Glorious Solomon, appear between two Rocky Mountains,
every here and there, delightfully conspicuous, high above the Superficies of a
Flowery Valley.

Bathsheba's Fountain.
THE Fountain, where Bathsheba Washed her self, when David spied her from a
Neighboring Turret, still continues extant, or at least a Spring, inheriting
its Reputation by the Virtue of Tradition; and a little higher, on the Summit
of the utmost Corner of Mount Sion, stand the Ruins of the Tower, whence she
was discovered by that Powerful Monarch.

Elias 's Rock.
ANOTHER Rarity, they show most Travelers, is a large Rock, whereon they
zealously affirm, the Prophet Elias used to Sleep; and to confirm the Story,
they oblige us to take Notice of some Natural Hollows, which are found upon the
Rock, Created, as they say, by the Miraculous Impression, that the Prophets
Body made, in his repeated Slumbers.

Jacob's House.
THE Ruins of a Church, or Monastery, point out the Ground, whereon in former
Ages, stood the House of the Old Patriarch Jacob; and the Tomb of Rachel stands
within Six Furlongs of this Place, not far from which the Town of Rama, where
the Voice was heard of Rachel, Weeping for her Children, still continues a
considerable Village.

THESE, and many other Rarities of venerable Age and Sacred Virtue, if the
Priests may be believed upon their Verbum Sacerdotis, give a Stranger frequent
Opportunities of Gazing round him, in the Road, which lies between Jerusalem
and Bethlehem, to which last, however, we are now arrived.

A Temple, Built by Helena, at Bethlehem.
DIRECTLY in the Place, where stood the Inn, in one of whose Mean Stables, the
neglected Virgin Mary was obliged to lie, when she so greatly Blessed the
Sinful World, in our Dear Savior Christ's Nativity, the Pious Helena, that
Happy Mother of the Glorious Constantine, Erected, long time since, a Stately
Temple, representing in its form, the Figure of a Cross, near which is Built a
little Monastery, now possessed by certain Friars of Franciscan Order, and in
all kinds of the same Fraternity with those, I mentioned in the Convent at
Jerusalem.

Three dismal Grotto's.
THEY give all Strangers Torches in their Hands, and lead them through a Narrow
Dark, and Winding Passage to three several Grotto's; one a Vault, wherein they
say the Children, Murdered by the barbarous decree of Herod, were thrown
Headlong, to be Buried; and within the second, stand the Tombs of good St.
Jerome, and his Scholar, famed Eusebius, the Confessor; The last Cave,
containing nothing but a Monument, erected over the Grave of the Fair Convert
Paula, a great Roman Lady, of the Noblest Extract, who together with her Son
Eustochius, was Interred at Bethlehem, were she Built Four Monasteries and
endowed them Richly, which are now entirely Ruined.

The Birth Place and Manger of Christ.
WITHIN a little space of the abovenam'd Grotto's, you descend to a large
Chapel, flagg'd with Marble, Gilt and Ornamented in the richest manner: Here
they show the very Spot of Ground, whereon the Virgin was delivered of her Son,
the Holy Jesus, with the Manger, into which she laid him, and the Place, where
it is reported, that the Wise Men of the East, directed thither by a Star, knelt
down and Worshipped, whilst they offered up their Presents.

Jacob's Meadow.
IT is at Bethlehem, that they show the Field, where Jacob sed his Flock, and
where the Angels, visiting the Shepherds, ravished them with the transporting
News of our Great Saviors blessed Nativity: The Field to this Day bears the
Name of Jacob's Meadow.

Joseph's House.
NOT a Mile without the Town, they show the House, where Joseph lived before he
fled to Egypt, and the Cave, wherein he hid the Virgin and her Son, while he
prepared Conveniences for his intended Journey.

Many other Places, worth Remark.
BESIDES the Places, which I have already mentioned, there are many others,
equally deserving Observation; but as it would oblige me to an inexcusable
Prolixity, should I so much as name them all, I will omit enlarging any
farther, than to give you a Description of some certain things, which justly
claim the Reader's Notice, who may rest assured, that not one memorable Place
in Scripture has escaped the Knowledge of the zealous Romans, and Bigoted
Christians of some other Churches, who will boldly undertake to show you almost
every thing, you possibly can ask for.

Acceldama, or the Field of Blood.
SOVTH of Jerusalem, and not far distant from the Walls thereof, is that cursed
Piece of Ground, of Old Acceldama, the Field of Blood, a Purchase, made by the
reward of Villainy, returned again by the repenting Judas: This in former Times,
the Scriptures tell us, was employed as a Receptacle for the Dead Bodies of all
kind of Strangers.

A Burying Place for Christians.
NOR has Time had Power to change the Use, to which it was ordained so long ago:
It Is still the common Burying Place of all those Christians, undistinguished by
the Name of Franks, that is, all such, as are the Subjects, or at least the
Tributary Slaves of the Grand Signior.

How Walled round.
THE Field is all enclosed by a Stone Wall, of mighty thickness, Roof'd with Art
so very closely, that there is no Passage to the Soil within it, but by certain
Holes, considerably broad, which rise, like Cupola's, upon the top, and are
from time to time, set open in a different Place, to let down such Dead Bodies,
as have right to be Interred within that Compass, Corpse, that rot in a days
time.
where the Earth is certainly endued with such a penetrative Virtue, that in two
Days time, the Soundest Body of a Man, or Woman will be eaten to a Skeleton.

TO search the Causes, which may probably produce this odd Effect, is devious
from my Subject; I will therefore only tell you, that the Stench is so
offensive, that it is no agreeable Amusement, to inspect that horrid Mansion of
Corruption, yet we ventured to look down the Hole, which then stood open, and
discovered, as distinctly as the Places Duskiness could possibly permit, the
lately buried Bodies of some six or seven Persons; A horrid Prospect.
four of which were so far Skeletons, that there appeared the ^shless Bones in
many Places, and the rest were coming on to such degree, that they appeared
half rotten, and afforded such a strange and dismal Spectacle, that we were
frighted from the Thoughts of an exact Remark or curious Observation.

Ship-loads of Earth.
THE Roman Catholics have frequently Exported whole Ship-loads of this
prodigious Soil, which has been long known publicly at Rome and Paris; and at
Pisa, I my self have seen a Churchyard, covered four Foot deep therewith, in
which they used to bury Persons only of an high Distinction.

Other Sepulchers.
BESIDES the Sepulchers abovenam'd, all the Rocks, for a considerable distance
round this Place, are full of Caves, against the Mouth of every one of which is
rolled a Stone of ponderous Magnitude, according to the ancient Custom,
mentioned in the Holy Scriptures.

IT would be endless to enumerate the many venerable Places, shown a Traveller,
on every side, without Jerusalem; I Will only therefore say in general, that we
saw them all, but took a more than common Notice of the following Places.

Memorable Places.
THE Valley of Jehosaphat, the Old Oak Roguel, the Pool of Siloa, the Sepulcher
of Zachariah, and the stately Pillar, which was built by Absalom with a design
to eternize his Memory, before the Period of his black Rebellion.

Other memorable Places.
WE likewise saw Mount Olivet, the famous Gethsemane, and the Garden, where our
Blessed Savior was betrayed by Judas, with the Place, whereon he Prayed in his
amazing Agony; the Village Bethany, the Place, where the Repenting Judas was
Interred, and a Remainder of the Tree, whereon he hanged himself; Bethphage.
the Place, where once stood Bethphage, a considerable Village, whence our
Savior, on an Asses Colt, came riding to Jerusalem.

LET these suffice to give the Reader an Idea of the Entertainment, Christian
Travelers receive, who, led by Curiosity, or sometimes Zeal, engage the Friars
to direct their Notice to the most considerable Relics of esteemed Antiquity.
Helena's Temple.
Proceed we now to take a View of the beforenam'd Temple, founded on Mount
Calvary, a very low, but craggy Hill, all cut and polished from its ancient
Form, for the Convenience of Building this Illustrious Temple, which was left
by the Religious Helena, a memorable Monument of the Respect, she bore
professed Christianity.

Its Situation.
THE Temple is Magnificent, and covers not the Hill alone, but a considerable
Part of the surrounding Plain, one side whereof was that, into whose
unfrequented Wildnesses the ancient Jews were used to throw the stripped Dead
Bodies of their Executed Malefactors, from which common Custom it received the
Name, it bore of Old, when it was called the Valley of Carcasses.

Its Description.
THE finest Buildings of the Temple front the South, the Roof thereof is Arched
and stately, Ornamented in two Places by a couple of indifferently large, but
somewhat ruinated Cupola's, the one to be ascended by a kind of Staircase on
the outward side, the other open at the Top, and rising from the Chapel, which
encompasses the Sepulcher of Christ.

Two Tombs.
YOU pay a certain Sum of Money to the Turkish Officers, who grant a License for
your Entrance, which you have no sooner made, than you perceive upon your Right
Hand, an Old Fashioned Tomb, and on your Left another, which enclose the Bodies
of the famous Godfrey of Bulloigne, and King Baldwin his Successor, the two
first Christian Monarchs of Redeemed Jerusalem.

UPON the Tomb of Godfrey, on the Right Hand, as I said before, is found the
following Latin Epitaph. Godfrey of Bull^'s Epitaph.
HIC JACET INCLYTUS GODEFRIDVS DE BVGLION,
QVI TOT AM IS IT AM TERRAM
AC QVISIVIT CVLTVI CHRISTIANO,
CVJVS ANIMA REQVIESCAT IN PACE. AMEN.
HERE LIES THE FAMOUS GODFREY OF BULLOIGNE,
WHO CONQUERED ALL THIS COUNTRY
TO THE CHRISTIAN WORSHIP,
O MAY HIS SOUL REST IN PEACE! AMEN.


THE other Monument upon the Left Hand of the Entrance tells the Traveller, it
is King Baldwin's by the following Inscription. King Baldwin's Epitaph.
REX BALDWINVS, JVDAS ALTER MACHABEVS,
SPES PATRIAE, VIGOR ECCLESIAE, VIRTUES VTRIVSQUE
QVEM FORMIDABANT, CVI DONA TRIBVTA FEREBANT,
CEDAR, EGYPTI DAN, AC HOMICIDA DAMASCVS:
PROH DOLOR! IN MODICO CLAVDITVR HOCTVMVLO.
ANOTHER JUDAS MACHABEUS, FAMED
FOR GLORIOUS ACTS, LIKE HIS, KING BALDWIN NAMED,
HIS COUNTRY'S HOPE, AND CHURCH'S CHAMPION TOO,
IN WHOM UNITED BOTH THEIR HONOR KNEW,
WHOM CEDAR, THE EGYPTIAN DAN, NAY MORE,
DAMASCUS WITH HER HOMICIDIAN STORE,
WHOM ALL THESE FEARED, AND TO WHOSE POWERFUL SWAY,
THEIR WILLING DUTIES CONSTANT TRIBUTE PAY,
ALAS! IN THIS SMALL TOMB IS SHUT FROM DAY.


The Rent in the Rock.
NOT far from those two Monuments you rise upon Mount Calvary, and there are
shown the Cleaving of the Rock, which split asunder at our Savior's
Crucifixion, naturally rough and plainly proving, Art could have no hand in the
prodigious Rent, wherein they tell us was discovered Adam's Head, which had
been buried there, unknown to Mortals, till the Death of Jesus.

Christian Chapels.
FARTHER in the Temple there are many Chapels or Divisions, constantly
Inhabited by several different Sects of Christians, who imagining it is a very
meritorious Act to spend their Lives within the Temple of the Holy Sepulcher,
embrace Confinement, and possess Apartments, independent each on other, never
stirring, but on great Occasions, from the Altars of their Worship.

The Hole, wherein was placed the Cross of Christ.
THE highest of these Chapels, Checkered over with a various colored Marble,
which they will not let you walk upon with Shoes, is built upon the very Spot
of Ground, on which our Savior suffered on the Cross; the Hollow of the Rock,
wherein the Cross was placed, remains unbroken, richly Plated with the finest
Silver gilt, and piercing through the midst of a large Remnant of the Cliff,
which was not cut away at the Foundation of the Chapel, but continues whole,
near half a Yard above the Superficies of the Marble Pavement.

The Ceremonies there performed by Pilgrims.
HERE it is, that Christian Pilgrims in a zealous Extacy, are seen to practice
Airs and Postures, not much differing from down right Madness, rolling up and
down with strange Extravagance, endeavoring to creep, as near the Hole, as
possibly they can, Embracing, Kissing, and half Deluging with Tears the solid
Stones, as if they knew them not to be insensible, and would extract a
Sympathetic Sorrow from their Rocky Hardness.

The two Thieves Crosses.
ON either side of the abovenam'd Hole, there stands a Cross directly in the
Places, where the Thieves, who suffered with our Savior, hung in Crucifixion;
Here, as in the other Chapels of the Temple, they adorn the Sides, and Roof,
with a considerable Stock of ever burning Lamps, the melancholy Air of which
Appearance helps to strike a Sacred Terror through the Breasts of all, who enter.

The Place, where Christ was nailed upon the Cross.
ANOTHER Chapel, entered through the former, brings you to the Place, where
Christ was laid upon the Ground, and nailed, as usual, upon the Cross he Died
on: On the Floor, which is composed of many colored Marbles, you perceive the
Figure of the Cross, directly, as the Priests assured us, in the Place, whereon
lay that, which this is but designed to represent the Form of; Here again, the
Pilgrims of both Sexes exercise their Vigor, in those zealous kind of Motions,
I described so lately.

Another Sacred Place.
WITHIN a little distance from these Places, you are shown a Marble Stone, which
covers, as they say, that very Spot of Ground, whereon the Virgin Mary stood,
when from the Cross our Savior recommended her and his beloved Disciple to a
mutual Love from that time forward.

The Sepulcher of Christ, how enclosed.
YOU pass by many little Chapels through abundance of large Pillars, to the
Sepulcher of Christ, enclosed by a small Temple, upon which is built the open
Cupola, I lately mentioned; the Wood thereof is Cedar, and the Chapel quite
surrounded by a Range of Cornish'd Marble Pillars, standing close against the
Wall, and thence affording something, that deserves the Name of Ornament.

Description of the Sepulcher.
DIRECTLY in the midst appears the Sepulcher of our Blessed Savior, hewn by
manual Labor in the Rock it self, near two Yards long, and one in breadth:
'Twas anciently exposed to Public View, Unpolished and in native roughness;
but is now politely covered with a spacious Marble, to preserve it from the
zealous Robberies of such Religious Pilgrims, as, imputing a Miraculous Effect
to the Possession of such Holy Relics, often used to break away small Pieces
of the Rocky Sepulcher.

Placed in a narrow Space.
THE Tomb, not quite a Yard in Height, enclosed in such a narrow space, as
scarce affords sufficient room for four to Kneel, is now converted to an Altar,
Ornamented brightly with a constant Number of fine Lamps, the dark Effects of
whose perpetual Smoke have daubed the Roof with an unsightly Blackness.

The Stone, which the Angel rolled away.
NEAR the Entrance, in the Middle of the Floor, there lies a Stone, near two
Foot square, whereon some say, the Angels sat, when they declared that Christ
was risen; Others would persuade us to believe, 'twas that, which had been
rolled against the Entrance of the Sepulcher, according to the Jewish Custom,
though they showed us in another Place, a Stone, which has with more success
assumed that Reputation.

The Pillar of Christ's Scourging.
NOT far from hence they show the remnant of a broken Pillar, which is said to
be a Part of that, whereto they bound our Savior, while they scourged him.
It Is four foot long, and vein'd with dusky Clouds, but sprinkled on one side
with certain Spots of reddish Color, which they would persuade us to believe,
were made by the most precious Blood of the Reviled and Tortured Jesus.

The Honor paid the Relic.
THIS Relic is enclosed within an Iron Grate, through which it must be touched
by nothing, but a certain Stick, the Priests provide you with, which being
thence immediately conveyed to Pilgrims Mouths, is steadfastly believed of never
failing Power to infuse a certain balmy Virtue to the Soul of Him, who blesses
his internal Faculties by kissing eagerly the holy Stick, which has been
honored with the Touch of such a Sacred Relic.

Knights of the Sepulcher.
THERE was a Custom Instituted in the Year One Thousand and Ninety Nine, of
Constituting Gentlemen, Knights of the Sepulcher, by kneeling on the Place, and
taking there a certain Oath to be Eternal Champions of the Church of Christ,
and lead a Life sincerely Pious, and continue Members of the Roman Catholic
Religion, which, with certain other Ceremonies, such as girding on a Sword, and
hanging a Gold Cross about his Neck, being performed by the Father Guardian of
the Franciscan Monastery upon Mount Calvary, he rises, Dignified with that
Religious Quality.

By whom Instituted.
THE Sovereigns of this once respected Order were the Kings of France, who
Instituted it Originally, but when the Avarice of the Priests inclined them to
accept of any Man, how mean soever, who desired the Honor of this Sacred
Knighthood, could he but afford to bribe them highly, it became at last so very
Common, that 'twas disregarded by degrees, Now almost disused.
and now is very rarely practiced, or so much as sought for.

Christ's Prison.
THEY show a little low and darksome Grotto, hewn, but roughly, in the Body of
the Rock, wherein they say our Savior was confined, betwixt the Hour of his
Sentence, and Moment of his Crucifixion.

The Place where they cast Lots for his Garments.
HERE likewise is the Place wherein the Soldiers cast their Lotts, according to
the Custom, then in Practice with the Jews, for our condemned Redeemer's
Garments. Not far from thence, the bottom of a tedious narrow pair of Stairs,
cut also from the Rock it self, admits you to a kind of Gallery, supported by
four Marble Pillars of a greyish Color, which, for ever sweating, or emitting
a perpetual Moisture by the native Dampness of the subterraneous Place, wherein
they stand, are shown to Strangers for a Miracle, Weeping Pillars.
and said to Weep with Sorrow for our Savior's Crucifixion.

The Place where they found the Cross.
UPON the Southern side of Calvary, eleven Stone Stairs admit you to a Vault,
which Helena first founded on that Part of the Valley of Carcasses, wherein,
among vast heaps of Rubbish, Bones of Men, and Mossy Stones, they found the
Cross of Christ, and those of the two Thieves, who had been Crucified with him,
after they had lain unthought of, and forgotten, full three hundred Years, or
somewhat upwards.

The Conclusion.
I think that, having said thus much, it would be needlessly Prolix, to tire the
Reader with additional Relations, little else deserving a peculiar Observation,
gives me opportunity to swell the Subject, I have dwelt so long upon, and
which, when I beheld the numerous Scenes of our Redeemers Sufferings, possessed
my Bosom with an ardent Flame of Zeal for that Religion, he so dearly fixed
amongst us by his Death and Passion.

GRANT, Indulgent God of my Desires, that I may long retain a fresh Idea of
those moving Scenes, which stirred the Passions of my melting Nature to a
lively Sense of Duty and Affection, for that Compassionate and Tender Savior,
who descended from his Father, to assume the Frailties of a Weak Humanity, and
Died for the Offenses of an undeserving Race of stubborn Sinners.

Nothing more, worth viewing.
NOTHING, after you have seen all this, can tempt your Stay in sad Jerusalem,
you therefore take your leave of the Franciscan Friars, who pretend an humble
Condescension to all kinds of People; but have often given demonstrative
occasion to the Protestants, who Travel thither, to mistrust the Truth of their
fair-fronted Compliments, by the Miscarriage of some Englishmen, whole
Companies of whom have Died within one Week, I fear by other Motives than the
Complaisant Intention of accompanying one another, to the other side Mortality.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Cities of Palestine, as they now are.
I NOW proceed, to let the Reader know, that such as is Jerusalem, just now
described, such also are the other Cities of this miserable Country; Once they
flourished in a State of Glory, if not equal, yet not much inferior to their
famed Metropolis; But now like Her subverted, and disrobed of ancient Beauties,
they exhibit to the View of every Traveller, a melancholy Cause of
Contemplation on the Changes, Mortal Excellence is ever subject to, and the
undoubted Truth of Seneca's asserted Maxim. Sen. Tra. Troas.
Quicquid Sol Oriens, quicquid and Occidens
Novit; Coeruleis Oceanus fretis
Quicquid vel veniens, vel fugiens lavat,
Aetas Pegaseo corripiet gradu.
What ever the Rising, or the Setting Sun
Knows in the daily Course, his Glories run;
What ever the Ocean with Sky-Colour'd Waves,
Or in her Ebbings, or her Flowings laves;
Time shall with Pegasean Flight devour.


I will not, in describing the Condition of the Cities of the Holy Land,
observe the nicety of Geographic Regularity, but taking first the Seaport
Towns in order, as they lie to the South-East of Egypt, thence come back the
other way, and so include a full description of as much, as now remains worth
Notice, in that Tract of Land, extending, as of Old, from Dan even to Beersheba.

The Seaport Towns of Palestine.
THE most remarkable of such, as were of Old, or still continue Seaport Towns,
or near the Sea, are these, which follow; Gaza, which I elsewhere mentioned,
Ascalon, and Joppa, Acre, Tyrus, and the Celebrated Sidon.

The Inland Cities.
THE Inland Cities, anciently of most Repute, and now remaining most deserving
of a Stranger's Observation, are no more than these, which follow: Old
Damascus, Caesarea, Nazareth, Samaria, Jericho, and Hebron, and to sum up all
the famed Beersheba.

Gaza, described.
GAZA, now called Gazra, was in ancient Times most Famous, for the wonderful
Performances of Sampson's Strength; it is situated on a Hill, and stands amidst
the fruitful Valleys of a pleasant Country, Inhabited promiscuously by Turks
and Christians, it is about a Mile in Circuit, all the Houses low, and meanly
built of muddy Substance, yet many Relics, both of Marble Pillars, and a
polished kind of Porphyry Buildings, give fair Proofs of her Magnificence in
former Ages.

Ruins of the Philistines Temple.
THERE yet remain upon the Hill, the splendid Ruins of a Massy, Arched and Lofty
Piece of Architecture, which is generally said to have been anciently the
Place, where Sampson, standing blind betwixt the Pillars, to make Sport for the
Philistine Noblemen, pulled down the House with sudden force, and with himself,
destroyed such mighty Numbers of that Warlike People.

Sampson's Foxes.
THEY show the Field, wherein the just named Sampson tied the Foxes Tail to
Tail, and burnt the standing Corn of the Philistines; and among the many
Places, Famous in his Memory, oblige you to take notice of a very steep and
craggy Hill, to which, when he had been disturbed in Gaza, he ascended, with
the City Gates upon his Brawny Shoulders.

An Old Castle.
THERE is a Castle now remaining, Founded by King Baldwin, in the Year One
Thousand, One Hundred and Forty Eight, a very mean and despicable Fabric,
where the Great Sangiack of Gazra has his Residence, and Rules the City and the
Country round it, with an uncontrolled and arbitrary Tyranny.

Ascalon described.
ABOUT twelve Miles South-East of Gazra, close upon the Sea, is built the City
Ascalon, now called Schalon, Inhabited by Turks, and guarded by a kind of Fort,
wherein they keep a ragged Garrison. This Place deserves Remark, in that it was
of Old the City, where was built the Celebrated Temple of the Great Philistine
Idol, Dagon, part of whose decayed Foundations they pretend upon Inquiry, to
point out to Travelers. It Is now a kind of inconsiderable Village, worth
regard for nothing, but the Garrison, the Turks maintain to guard their Castle.

Joppa described.
JOPPA, Famous in the Scriptures for a Sea Port Town, is ill accommodated with
a dangerous Haven, open to the fury of the Northern Tempests; all her Buildings
are of Mud, or an unpolished kind of Stone, of an-appearance, not agreeable.
The Place is Peopled by promiscuous Numbers of the Turks and Christians.
Certain Merchants have their Dwellings here, in order to Export such quantities
of Cotton, as they can procure about the Country. Other Merchandises they are
seldom stocked with. Annual Numbers of the Christian Pilgrims, Traveling to
visit the Sepulcher of Christ, and other Sacred Relics at Jerusalem, are
landed here, and by their frequent Passages maintain, but not enrich the
miserable Natives of this Worthless City, which is Famous for the boasted
height of her Antiquity, reported to have been first built by Japhet, Noah's
Son, or as some say, before the Deluge.

Acre described.
ACRE is a Sea Port Town, directly equidistant from Jerusalem and Tripolis of
Syria; it is built upon a Plain, its Form Triangular, two sides whereof the Sea
for ever washes; Once it was a Place of Strength, Impregnable, and Fortified by
all the Helps of Art and Nature, which the mighty Ruins, still remaining, like
stupendous Mountains well demonstrate.

How much Blood has been shed there.
SUCCESSIVE Seas of Blood were shed between the Turks and Christians in the Holy
War, each side alternately possessing, and obliged to quit the fatal City; It
is now entirely governed by a Turkish Sangiack, and Inhabited by Men of pretty
good Condition, on account of the Convenience, the Sea affords them, of a Trade
with Britain, Holland, France, and every other Navigating Part of Christendom.

Tire described.
TYRVS, the Famed Metropolis of Old Phoenicia, Celebrated anciently for Wealth
and Power, and particularly Famous for her Purple Dye, which lives so
frequently in many of the Works of former Writers, is at present Subject to the
Turkish Government, and Peopled by a mixture of Moors, Greeks, and other kinds
of Christians and Mahometans together. It is Situated close upon the Sea, to
which she opens on her Northern side, with a delightful and commodious Harbor.

Her ancient State.
ONCE she was not only gloriously Magnificent in all her Buildings, but
surrounded by such Numbers of delicious Trees, and lovely Gardens, that she
seemed to form the very Paradise of Nature, and misled the Senses of her Proud
Inhabitants, to all the Practices of Villainy and Arrogance, which tempted them
to live a Life of Luxury, and wallow in the taste of Carnal Bliss, unmindful of
a Truth, the ruinated Aspect of her Modern Figure, sadly teaches every
Stranger, who may chance to visit her, Sen Trag. Thy.
Nulla sors longa est, dolor ac voluptas
Invicem cedunt, brevior voluptas.
Ima permutat brevis hora summis.
No Lot is lasting, Grief and Pleasure too
Alternately each other still pursue,
But Pleasure's Reign is shortest of the two.
One short Hours Change makes Meanest Things most Great.


Sidon described.
SIDON is of rather more than less Antiquity than Tire, Built and Named, as
most agree, by Sidon, Canaan's Eldest Son. It Is Situated in a very rich and
healthful Country, not far distant from the Cedar Mountains of the Famous
Lebanon, and upon the other side made Pleasant and Convenient by the Sea, which
washes it.

The modern Sidon.
THE Present Sidon stands on a Foundation, somewhat distant from the ancient
City, and is very meanly Built and despicably Peopled, scarce worth mention,
but upon account of some Antiquities, particularly an Old Tomb, which they
affirm to be the Sepulcher of Zebulon: It stands among the ruinated Buildings,
which appear to mark the Place, where the proud Sidon stood in former Ages.

Its Manufactures.
MANY Merchants here reside, Exporting Yearly Quantities of Cotton, Silk, and
other Manufactures: The Government of Sidon.
The Town and Country round it, are entirely subject to the Turkish Government,
but in a manner somewhat different from other Places, for their Great Emir or
Governor possesses an Hereditary Power, and free Exercise of a Religion,
between Mahometanism and Christianity, by Virtue of a Patent, granted them on
their Submission to the Turkish Yoke, when they had long defended those
Possessions, left them by the Famous Godfrey of Bulloigne King of Jerusalem,
who brought them from their Native Country, France, to serve as Christian
Soldiers in the Holy Land, where their Posterity have in the Course of Time,
degenerated both from their Religion and their Honor, to the evil Principles
and mean Subjection, they profess at present.

Description of Damascus.
EASTWARD of Sidon, two Days Journey stands, Damascus, Situated on a Plain,
well Watered, and Surrounded by a graceful Ring of fruitful Mountains, now the
Seat of a Bashaw, and Peopled with the Wealthiest Inland Merchants of the
Turkish Empire. All her Houses are indifferently built of Stone, or Brick
unbak'd, and of a small duration. Numerous Fountains, Fish Ponds, Orchards,
Gardens, Avenues, and Grotto's gracefully Adorn the Celebrated City, which of
Old was Famous, and in great measure still continues so, for the Invention or
Improvement of Ingenious Arts, and Useful Sciences.

The Town Caesarea.
CAESAREA, once the Famous City Dan, is now extremely changed to Disadvantage,
by the Course of Time, and Overthrow of Governments. It Is notwithstanding,
still a Town of great Importance, Famous for a Castle of so strong a Situation
and Contrivance, that the Turkish Sultans, looking on it as a kind of Berwick
upon Tweed, think fit to honor it with a perpetual mention in the Titles, they
affix to every Public Proclamation, in the following manner; I, even I, the
Mighty Sultan, amongst whose numerous Places of Defense, the Impregnable Castle
of Caesarea is esteemed the least, and in regard to whose vast Power, the
Macedonian Empire was a very Trifle.

Nazareth, in her present Condition.
NAZARETH, the Birth Place of the Blessed Virgin, scarce deserves a mention
upon any other Consideration. It Is Situated in a Valley, all the Hills about it
Craggy, and Unfruitful; not above an hundred Houses form the Village, built at
present on the old Foundation of the Galilean Nazareth.

How Inhabited.
POOR are the People, who Inhabit here, a mixed Conjunction of the Turks and
Christians, yet the last by far the fewest. Nothing here deserves remark, but
certain venerable Ruins on the Hills adjoining, and a kind of Chapel, which
they say is built, upon that very Spot of Ground, whereon stood formerly the
Virgin Mary's House, and Room of her Nativity.

Samaria, as at present.
SAMARIA, lying almost in the Center of the Holy Land, continues still a
Formidable City, Peopled only by Mahometans, and (but in that it is somewhat
strong) deserving no Man's Observation, as to any thing, but some fine Ruins of
Antiquity, which seem to have been formerly no less than Kingly Palaces, by
their remaining Marks of Faded Royalty.

The City Jericho.
AMIDST a spacious Valley, nine Miles broad, upon the Ground, where once stood
Jericho, we found a miserable little Village, near the Wilderness, wherein is
Situated the prodigious Mountain, Quarantania, an Italian Etymology.
now called Quarantania, because 'twas from the top thereof, the Devil tempted
Christ, by showing him the Kingdoms of the Universe, and urging him without
Success, to think on Sin for Forty Days together.

JERICHO was once a Place of Fame, and the surrounding Country tolerably
Fertile; now the very Face of Nature is so strangely altered, that (the piercing
Scarcity of all Life's Necessaries, tempting the poor Arabs, who Inhabit the
rough Mountains round it, to make Prey on all such Passengers, as they can
overcome by downright Force, or subtle Ambuscadoes) it is become so dangerous an
Undertaking to attempt a Journey thither, and the Place it self so Barren and
Unpleasant, that it gave occasion in the Holy War for the Original of an Old
Proverb, The Original of the Proverb, Would you were at Jericho.
when you would revenge your self on any Man, who has affronted you, to say in
England, Would you were at Jericho.

Hebron described.
HEBRON, which was once the Residence of David, till his Conquest of the
Jebusites possessed him of Jerusalem, stands not many Miles from Gaza, nor far
distant from the Celebrated Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah. The Place is held in
much esteem, and often Visited with wondrous Veneration, by Bigoted Jews, who
hold it as a meritorious Deed, to make a Pilgrimage on no account, but to
perform a kind of Ceremonious Mourning over the Tombs of their Old Patriarchs,
who here lie Buried.

A pleasant Place.
NOTHING certainly can yield a more delightful Prospect, than those lovely
Valleys, fruitful Hills, large Plains, and flowery Meadows, which, combining
the Perfections of their natural Beauty, seem to paint the Land, round Hebron
with so odd a Gayety, that even the dullest Eye is sweetly ravished with an
Object, so delightful.

Bersheba, as at present.
BERSHEBA opposite to Gaza, and the Southern Boundary of Old Judea, now
distinguished by the Name of Geheblin, remains an inconsiderable Village,
boasting neither Relics of her own Antiquity, nor tasting the Advantages of
other Cities, in her Traffic, Situation, or the Character, she bears, when put
in Competition with the Places, I have treated of.

AND now I think, I have as briefly as is possible, described, as largely as is
necessary, all those Cities of the hapless Holy Land, which may deserve Remark,
or bear regard enough in Modern Servitude, to claim a Place in the Remembrance
of a Traveller.

I cannot help repeating the Concern, I had upon me, to behold this Country,
once the Seat of Justice and Religion, groan in a Subjection to the Enemies of
Both. It Is true the Jews, her Old Inhabitants, had more deserved a Stranger's
Pity, had they less invited their Foretold Destruction, for we may be allowed
to say with Seneca, Sen. Tra. Hip.
Quem Fata cogunt, ille cum venia est miser;
At siquis ultro se malis offert volens,
Seque ipse torquet, perdere est dignus bona
Queis nescit uti.
That Man, whose Troubles from Fates Curses flow,
Though Miserable, is with Pity so;
But He, who does, unforced, Self Torment choose,
Deserves to lose a Good, he knows not how to use.


CHAP. XLII. Of the River Jordan, and the Dead Sea, or Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah.
I bring my Reader now to a Description of a River, worth Remark, in that it is
the only noted one, the Holy Land can boast of, and a Memorable Monument of the
Almighty Vengeance on a Wicked People in the Stagnate Sea of heavy Waters,
which at present covers those once-lovely Plains, on whose delightful Surface
stood the Cities, which by Obstinate Adherence to the Blackest Vices, drew down
Showers of Fire and Brimstone, on their Vnrepenting and Supine Inhabitants.

The Etymology of Dan.
DAN, of Old the Southern Boundary of Palestine, received its Name from a large
Fountain, near to which the Town was Situated; And from a kind of Lake or Well
of mighty Depth and Magnitude, some Miles above that Ancient City, Flows the
celebrated River Jordan, running thence through Subterraneous Passages to the
aforenam'd Fountain Dan, emitting there (and at another Fountain somewhat
smaller, very near, and Anciently distinguished by the Name of Jor) The
Etymology of Jordan
those rising Streams, which gradually swell to a considerable Breadth, and
Form by their continued Course, the River Jordan.

Description of the River.
NEITHER the Length, the Breadth, or Depth of Jordan are Extraordinary, where
Broadest not exceeding half a Quarter of an English Mile, and no ways Navigable
for a Bark of Burden; Slow in motion, Smooth and Clear, in all her Channels
and from North to South, dividing many Pleasant Tracts of Land, for more than
half the Length of Palestine.

Its Course and Beauty.
THERE is not in the Universe a River of a more Delightful Prospect, or
agreeable Contrivance, as to the Meandring Forms, and Winding Labyrinths,
wherein it glides with an Uncommon Gentleness, along the midst of Plains and
Valleys, sometimes through an open Country, then Enclosed on either side by
rising Ridges of fine Woody Hills, and every where adorned on both its Banks,
with Shady Groves of Poplar, Alder-Trees, the Mournful Willow, and a Thousand
other Lovely Greens, surprizingly Enchanting every Eye with sudden Wonder, at
the Unassisted Gayeties of Virgin Nature.

YET does the River sometimes change its proper Form, and Wander, till it is lost
a while in certain Lakes, amongst whose Number two there are, which Anciently,
were Famous for their Magnitude and Depth, and still continue highly worth a
Strangers Observation.

The Lake Hoolee.
THE First is Situated in the Upper Galilee, and now called Hoolee, Spacious in
the Winter, but in Summer almost Dry, and yiedling a Production of such
Quantities of Reeds, that commonly Wild Beasts find Shelter there, and
Dangerously lie in Ambush for the Vnsuspecting Traveller.

The Sea of Galilee.
THE other, formerly the Lake of Tiberias, or Genezareth, and sometimes called
in Holy-Writ, the Sea of Galilee, is Fifteen Miles in Length, and Ten in
Breadth, affording Numerous Kinds of Fish, of admirable Relish, and so
Strangely Fatning all the Soil, which Borders on it, that it well deserves the
Name of the most Fertile Part of all the Holy Land.

Jordan, how Swallowed up.
THUS Glides the River Jordan with a natural Face of Pleasure, till it is
Swallowed up in the Dead Sea, to which it enters with a full discharge of all
its Waters, but is seen no more from that time forward, nor the Sea itself
observed to swell, by such a Tributary Affluence of Increasing Waters, whence
it is reasonably guessed, that there must be some Subterraneous Channels to
disgorge the Streams, received so Plentifully.

Etymology of the Dead Sea
THIS Lake is called the Dead Sea, from the Heavy Stagnate Nature of the Water,
it contains, which neither Currents, nor the Force of Tempests have the Power
to stir from its amazing stillness, and it is observable, that, though the River
Jordan runs into it, it continues a considerable space entirely Clear, and long
unmixing with those Thicker Waters.

Its Extent and Original.
THIS Sea, or Lake is Sixteen Miles in Breadth, and Seventy Long, now Drowning
all that Paradise of Pleasure, that Delightful Plain, once called Pentapolis,
amongst whose Five Aspiring Cities, Sodom and Gomorrah were the two most
Wealthy, ever since their Fatal Burning by the Fire and Brimstone of Vindictive
Heaven, entirely sunk beneath the Surface of this dismal Lake, which now
overflows the Ancient Habitations of Luxurious Wickedness, and does at certain
seasons of the Year (especially preceding Rainy Weather) constantly emitt a
kind of Mist or Smoaky Cloud, in Five distinct and distant Places, which the
Superstitious People thereabouts, would needs persuade us to believe, point out
the several Situations of those Miserable Cities.

Its Nature and Description.
THE Salt or Brackishness, peculiar to the Waters of this Lake, is so extremely
great, that Heavy Bodies, thrown upon the Surface, sink not down, without much
difficulty, and it is reported, that the Roman Emperor Vespasian Commanded
certain Sentenced Malefactors to be Bound, and thrown in Headlong for a Proof
of the Experiment, which was confirmed by their strange Floating up and down,
incapable of sinking through the Surface of the Waters, whose Sulphurous Quality
prevailed so far upon their Skin, that it Peeled off in every Part, as if they
had been Scalded, and this last effect it now produces to so Piercing a degree,
that it will Flea the Fingers of a Man, who Rashly goes about to Wash his
Hands, in that Untempting Monument of Horror and Iniquity.

Why called Asphaltites.
IT likewise bears the Name Asphaltites, from a Prodigious quantity of Pitchy or
Bituminous substance, called Asphaltum, which is Bred in time upon the Surface
of the Lake, and being cast on shore all round it, gathered by the Country
People, and employed in many uses; often Anciently exported into Egypt, for
Embalming the Dead Bodies of the Vulgar, not capacitated to afford the Purchase
of an Aromatic Composition.

Why the Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah.
AMONG the many Names, it is distinguished by, 'twas justly called the Lake of
Sodom and Gomorrah, in Commemoration of the Dreadful Punishment, inflicted by
the Hand of our Almighty God, upon a Sinful People, once Inhabiting the
Cities, which had there their Situation.

A Vulgar Error concerning the Dead Sea.
IT has been commonly reported, and confirmed by the Assertion of some Modern
Travelers, that all such Birds, as dare attempt the Flying over it, are
suffocated with the Vapors, rising from the Lake, and fall down dead upon its
Surface: This I can assure my Reader, is a most egregious Falsehood, for I have
not only seen vast quantities of Fowl fly up and down about it, but descend
sometimes in search of Meat, upon such floating Reeds, or other swimming Heaps,
as lie upon the top thereof. Perhaps the Story took its Rise from the Repute,
which Poets gave Avernus, and some other Lakes on that Account. Thus touched on
by Lucretius. Luci. Lib. 6.
-- Nomen id ab re
Impositum est, quia sunt avibus contraria cunctis,
E regione, ea quod loca cum advenere volantes,
Remigii oblitae pennarum vela remittunt;
Praecipitesq cadunt molli cervice profusa.
-- That Name is justly given,
Because the Killing Nature of the Place
Is still Destructive to the Feathered Race;
Who, when they leave their Tracts of milder Air,
And hither with adventurous Flight repair,
Forgetting how to Fly, they strangely fail,
Through the Infected Air on Wings to sail,
And with extended Necks fall headlong down.


One good Quality of the Dead Sea.
I shall only add one Observation more, before I end this Chapter, and that is,
this Lake among its many Ill, has one Good Quality; For by the Briny Nature of
its Waters, and the Soil about it, it yields such mighty Quantities of Salt, as
furnish all the Holy Land with unexhausted Plenty of that necessary Product.

Lot's Wife, and the Pillar of Salt.
YET one Addition more, accosting my Remembrance, must implore the Reader's
Pardon, if I stay to mention it; It is, that amongst a Ridge of Mountains, not
far distant from the Lake, I have been treating of, they show a Hill of an
indifferent Magnitude, which is, or seems to be, a kind of Rocky Salt, unfit
for Use, and thence unvalued upon any other reason, than the Reputation of
being, what the Scriptures call the Pillar of Salt, into which Lot's Wife was
Metamorphos'd, when her Female Curiosity inclined her to look back against the
Angel's Order, and behold the Ruins of her Flaming City.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Present State of the Christian Religion in Palestine.
A shocking Contemplation.
IT WOULD be perhaps impossible, in Traveling about the spacious Universe, to
find a Scene, more strangely shocking to a Christian Zeal, than what the Holy
Land affords at present: For it cannot surely be a welcome Contemplation to a
Man, who owns the Faith of Christ, to see that Place have least of his
Religion, which had most of his Good Wishes.

THE vilest Soil, the Earth possesses, yields Increase, when it is Sowed with
Liberality; But this ungrateful Clime, this miserable Country, enriched by the
inestimable Blood of Christ himself, is yet so far from an Improvement of her
not alone Prodigious, but Peculiar Blessings, that the disencourag'd Practice
of Repulsed Christianity is disregarded more in Palestine, than even the most
Remote and Barbarous Corners of the Turkish Territories.

The common Christian Inhabitants of Palestine.
THE scattered Christians, who Inhabit with the Turks, in any of those Towns, I
mentioned in the former Chapter, commonly are such, as are attracted by the
Summons of a Profitable Way of Living, and forgetting every Call of their
Humanity, but that of Interest, give their Minds entirely up to a continued
Practice of such advantageous Courses, as, engaging totally the Bent of their
Desires, prevent their Souls from the neglected Execution of those Holy Duties,
which would better far become their Application.

Many Sects, who live in the Temple of Christ's Sepulcher.
HOWEVER, there are many different Sects of Christians here, who led by Piety,
and the prevailing Love of their Religion and its Practices, abandon all the
gayest Follies of the gilded World, and spend their Days within Jerusalem, nay
commonly within the very Temple of our Savior's Sepulcher, with all the Marks
of a sincere Repentance, and ingenious Resignation to the Smarts of Poverty,
and unalluring Rules of an unseign'd Austerity.

How Converse with Strangers.
SOME Hundreds of these zealous Families, perpetually reside within the Temple,
so as never to Eat, Drink, or Sleep, in any other Place, nor find a possibility
of Conversation with the People of the Town, at any other time, than when they
bring Provisions thither, and by ringing one, of a great number of small Bells,
by different Cords made fast within the several Apartments of the Christians
there, give notice to the Persons, they desire to speak with, who immediately
come out, to be acquainted with the reason of their Summons.

BUT since it may not be an unacceptable Amusement for the Reader, to be made
acquainted with the different Tenets of the different Sects, residing at
Jerusalem, I will enumerate the several Doctrines of such Christian Zealots, as
are comprehended in the following Denominations.

The Names of Christian Sects, residing in Jerusalem.
ARMENIANS, Coptees, Abyssens and Graecians, Jacobins, Nestorians Georgians,
and a kind of People, who have many Monasteries on Mount Lebanon, and are
distinguished amongst Christians, by the Name of Maronites.

The Armenians.
THE Faith of the Armenians, who are, next the Graecians, here most numerous,
has been already told you in the three and twentieth Chapter; largely treating
of those Peoples Customs, and their Tenets of Religion.

The Coptees and Graecians.
I likewise, have informed you, that the Coptees are the Remnant of the Old
Egyptians, and at large described their Doctrine and Condition, in the four and
twentieth Chapter of this Treatise, nor can I enlarge, without a flat
Prolixity, on what I have already said concerning Greece, and the Religion of
her Natives.

The Toleration given them.
LET it then suffice to say, that all the three abovenam'd Sects, administer in
the respective Offices of their Religion, at Jerusalem, with as unbounded a
Permission, and the same degrees of Ceremony, as they are allowed to use, when
in their several distant Countries.

THE rest I will proceed to treat of, as distinctly as I can, and first the
Abyssens, more ancient than their Fellows in Conversion to the Faith and
Worship of our Savior Christ, require the Preference.

The Abyssens.
THEY are no other than the Ethiopian Race, whose Ancestors embraced the
Christian Doctrine, from the Preaching of their Queen Candace's Eunuch,
Philip's Convert, much about the Year of Christ, Four Hundred and Seventy.

The Tenets of their Religion.
THEY Circumcise their Children, Authorized, as they imagine, by our Savior's
own Example, and extend the Duty of that manual Operation to both Sexes equally.

THE Man at forty Days Old, and the Woman at threescore they constantly
Baptize, repeating every Year that Sacramental Ceremony, on the Twelfth Day of
Christmas, in Commemoration only of the Condescension of our Lord, who stooped
that Day to be Baptized in Jordan by St. John the Baptist.

CONFESSION, Keeping Lent, and Praying for the Dead, are Points, wherein they
join exactly with the Roman Catholics, as they oppose them rigidly, in not
admitting Images in Churches, or the Use of Crucifixes, and permitting Priests
to Marry freely.

A Jewish Inclination.
IN one odd Point they seem to favor the Opinion of the Jews, with whom they
side in Abstinence from certain Meats, and keeping Saturday as Holy, as they do
the Christian Sahaoth.

I need not tell the Learned Reader, that the Jacobins are called so from the
Founder of their Heresy, a Syrian of mean Parentage and Fortune, named Jacobus.

The Religion of the Jacobius.
HIS Dictates taught his Followers, and their Posterity, to make the Godhead of
our Savior Passive, and Subservient to his Manhood. They believe the Soul of
Man Immortal, but with this Reserve, that it continues Slumbering with tho
Body, till the Day of Judgment.

CONFESSION, Purgatory, and the Prayers of Roman Catholics for the Deceased,
they disregard, as needless Innovations. Their Priests may Marry, and
Administer the Sacrament in both kinds, and unanimously join to disbelieve the
Truth, and disobey the Orders of the ancient Fathers, and their Synods, for the
most part.

The Nestorians.
NESTORIVS in the Reign of Theodosius, was Bishop of Constantinople, and a
Native of the Upper Germany; he introduced an Heresy, which has prevailed
extremely in the East, and gives the Denomination of Nestorians to its
Professors.

IN the Administration of the Eucharist, this Sect deny the Real Presence, nor
permit the Virgin Mary to be called, The Mother of God. They read the
Scriptures, and pretend to practice a reserved Humility, but make a strange
Division in our Savior Christ, between his Divine and Humane Nature.

The Georgians.
THE Georgians, called so from the Country of that Name, (in ancient Days,
Albania, or Iberia) are in many Ceremonies and Opinions, Imitators of the
Greeks, and most distinguished by the following Principles, to which they long
have been most strict Adherers.

THEY take a Liberty from their Religion, to indulge their Senses almost to the
highest Pitch of Incest, by permitting Marriages within the Rules of Christian
Prohibition. They are great Admirers of loud Instruments of Music, in their
Churches, and have seldom deviated from an honesty of Mind, which speaks 'em
justly Qualified for the Respect and Care of Europaean Governments, who might
with little Charge or Labor, bring them over from their in-offensive
Ignorance, to a more lively and illuminated Knowledge of the Christ, they
Worship.

The Maronites.
THE Maronites took Name, from Maro an Old Abbot, who won 'em over from the
Jacobin Opinion to a new one of his own; or, as some say, from a large Village,
called Marona, situated near their famous Monastery on Mount Lebanus or Lebanon.

THERE have been frequent Conferences set on Foot, between the Roman Catholics
and the abovenam'd Maronites, wherein the former have so well succeeded, that
they are come wholly over to the Church of Rome, some few Reserves excepted,
two of which are these: They hold it as a Superstitious Ceremony, to make use
of Extreme Unction, one of the Seven Romish Sacraments, and look upon all
Prayers for the Deceased, as helpless Offices of a mistaken Zeal, or
ineffectual Bigottry.

The Government, these Sects are subject to.
THESE then are all the noted Christians, now Inhabiting Jerusalem, or any other
Part of Palestine, each several Order subject to the Government of their
respective Bishop, Abbot, or Elected Guardian, but so much more subject to the
Turkish Power, that they must miserably stand, depressed by want of Riches or
Authority, and see the Ground, which once the Good, the Holy Jesus honored
with his Habitation, made the Property, and ruined by the Insolence of those
audacious Infidels, who dare, upon the very Scene of his prodigious Agonies,
Blaspheme his Person, and Deride his Crucifixion.

The Conclusion of the Chapter.
IN this Condition, Reader, lies the Holy Land at present, scarce enough
esteemed by the few Turks, who live therein, to make 'em guess their Profits
worth their Pains, and yet in vain desired with longing Wishes, by many
Christian Princes, who for want of a sufficient Power, by single Efforts, to
expel the Conquerors, are forced to see that Land more wretched now than any
other, which was once declared by God himself, the Happiest of the Universe.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Arabia the Stony.
Arabia, not all subject to the Turk.
NOW, let us look a little into the Dominions of the Three Arabia's, many Parts
whereof are subject to the Turkish Sultan, but far more, are not, yet do those
Lawless and Imperious Monarchs claim the Honor of the Government of all, by
adding to their Titles an Illegal Claim, to the entire Possession of the wide
Arabia.

SINCE therefore, though not really his, he calls them so, I will as briefly as
is possible, to satisfy the Reader, give a just Description of the Three
Divisions of this Mighty Country, and first attempt a thorough View of that
Arabia, called Petraea.

Arabia Petraea why so called.
ARABIA PETRAEA, or Arabia the Stony, either took its Name from Petra, now
called Rat-al-allah, by the Turks, its Masters, the Metropolis of Old of all
the Country; or, as some will have it, from the Rocky Mountains, which confine
it, and the great Stone Quarries, at the bottom of the Sand, in every Part
within it.

The Situation of the Stony Arabia.
IT IS bounded on the Northern side, by Syria, on the West by Egypt, on the East
it borders on the Deserts of Arabia, and the Southern Confines touch the
Northern Shores of the Red Sea, and the delightful Frontiers of Arabia Felix.

Description of the Soil.
THE Land is very desolate, and barren to a vast degree. The Ground lies wast,
overwhelmed a thousand times a Year, by fluctuating Waves of rolling Sand, if I
may call them so, impetuously driven up and down, Hills changed to Valleys, and
the Valleys suddenly transformed to Mountains; nothing here can boast the
certainty of one Half Hours Duration; all the Face of Fickle Nature varies in a
moment, and you see no more the vanished Prospect, you have just been looking
on.

Its Barrenness.
NO Tree here flourishes, but now and then a solitary Palm; the Ground unstable,
can produce no more than two or three low kind of Herbs, the Hyssop, and
another with a spreading Leaf, which wanting little depth for Root, grow here
and there upon the Grass-less Surface of the Naked Sand.

Great Want of Water.
BUT what is more than all the rest intolerable, is the melancholy want of
Water, Travelers are subject to, who often are obliged to ride till almost
Dead with Thirst, before they find a Spring, sufficient to emit a Pint of Water
for the Service of a Multitude.

The Misery of the Inhabitants.
EXCEPTING the Wild Arabs, whom I shall distinctly treat of by and by, those
miserable Wretches, who Inhabit this untempting Country, commonly are such, as
being driven from their Native Places by a barbarous Oppression, choose to
change a forced, for a no less, but voluntary Misery.

Reflections on the ill Effects of Poverty.
O pinching Poverty! That Men should yield their noblest Virtues to be crushed
by thee! How strange are thy Effects! And to what unaccountable Attempts do
thou push on the Minds of such as feel thee! No Men had certainly ran headlong
to these Deserts, to avoid the Shame, thy Power exposed 'em to, unless thou art
indeed as terrible as the Old Poet thus has represented thee. Theognis, upon
Poverty.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Poverty, Cyrnus, ^ames a Good Man more
Than Fevers, Age, and all, he felt before.
To fly the heavy Curse of being Poor,
What Ills, O Cyrnus, should not Men endure?
They rather ought to meet some Briny Wave,
And 'midst th'unfathom'd Ocean find a Grave;
'Twere better far to rush against some Rock,
And dash their Brains out with the bloody Shock;
For every Man by Poverty's deprest,
Nor can he Speak, or Act, or Live at Rest;
But Tongue-tyed, Silence binds his knowing Breast.
Thence, Cyrnus, should we strive by Land or Sea,
From Poor Men's Burdens to live ever free,
For it is far better, we should Death endure,
Than bear the Weight of Life, if Life must still be Poor.


Reflections on the vanity of Pride.
YET is it, on the other Hand, as wretched a Condition, to be swelled, beyond
the Knowledge of our Selves, and the Remembrance of our Frailties, by the
transitory Preference, we gain above our Fellow Mortals by the shortliv'd
Honors, Wealth bestows on our deluded Wishes; sudden Changes, and undreamt-of
Storms, invading our Possessions, may reduce us swiftly, even below a Level,
with the meanest of our Menials, and to punish our Ambition, Ship-wreck our
Good-Fortune.

A Story, of a Proud, Rich Man at Hamburgh
I very well remember, once at Hamburgh to have seen a melancholy Instance of
the strange Vicissitudes to which Mortality is hourly Subject: For as I was
looking on the Monuments, which graced a Church of the abovenam'd City, I took
notice of a certain Tombstone, fixed up sideways to the Wall, on which,
besides a deal of Sculpture, there were deeply cut the strange Particulars of
the Relation following, in the German Language.

(...)
FREDERIC LEOPOLD LAVSSERBVRG, a Person of obscure Birth, and an Illiterate
Education, grew so Rich by Great Men's Favor, and a thousand unexpected
Blessings of an undeserved Good-Fortune, that he was advanced to the most
envied Dignities, the Magistracy of the City could bestow upon him, and
increased in Wealth and Power to so prodigious a degree, that no six Gentlemen
in all that Country, could outbalance his Possessions.

A weakness of Nature.
PRIDE, the Consequence, and Common Tinger of Triumphant Beggary, quite turned
his Senses; In this Height of Exaltation he forgot the means, by which he rose,
and looked upon the Blessings, he Possessed, as Framed for his Enjoyment;
Insolence and Vanity so Clouded his small share of understanding, that he used
all People with such Vnbred Haughtiness, that he became the Universal hate of
Town and Country.

Good advice unhappily Slighted.
PROVIDENCE endeavored to oblige him by a Warning, from the Mouth of a Free
Speaker his Relation, who attempting to dissuade him from the Odious Practice
of so Scornful a Deportment, urging that though now he was above the Malice of
the World, a time might come, when he should cease to be so, had this vain and
senseless answer thrown upon him. -- Alas! Poor Fool, an Ass might sooner learn
to Play upon the Bagpipes, than the Curse of Poverty be Taught a Way to make me
Miserable.

A Midnight alarm.
ADVICE was ineffectual, and the Gentleman forbore repeating it, the Haughty
Lausserburg went soon that Night to Bed, and Waked about the Hour of Midnight
with a wonderful Surprise, to hear the Noise of Rustic Music in the Street
(and as he thought before his Windows) with a Hundred Exclamations, such as
Lord deliver us, Protect us Heaven, and the like, from all the Windows,
opposite to his, whose Casements shutt and opened with a strange Confusion.

A wonderful Apparition.
TEMPTED by the Noises, he got out of Bed, and Running to his Chamber Window,
threw it open, and the first Remark, he cast his Eyes on, was a kind of
Phantom, representing the exact resemblance of an Ass, erected on his hinder
Legs, and Dancing up and down to an uncommon Tune, of his own Playing on a
perfect Bagpipe, while the Frighted Neighbors, all amazed before, were now far
more surpised, to see the Apparition Vanish in the very Moment, he looked out
at Window and beheld it.

THE Startled Lausserburg, in Agonies at this Appearance, presently Reflected
on the Wicked answer, he had made his Friend, and from that Hour became so
Melancholy, that he never relished former Pleasures, but neglected strangely
all his Great Concerns, and sunk almost to a downright Stupidity.

A sudden Downfall.
AMAZING Accidents by Fire and Robbers, Lawsuits and Neglect, in two Years time
consumed his Wealth to so incredible a Change, that being hated by the
Townsmen, they refused to give him the relief, he wanted; so that he, who
lately Judged himself too Great to know an Equal, or Converse with an Inferior,
was by Providence, reduced to Beg his Bread, from Door to Door, and hope a
Charity from even the meanest of those People, whom he had before Uncharitably
dealt with; A Miserable Condition.
nay so far Ill-Fortune Tortured him, that, not admitted under any Roof, That
very Friend, who had forewarned him of the possibility of Falling, coming late
one Moonlight Night, along the Street, in very Cold and Rainy Weather, saw him
sitting huddled on a Heap of Dirt, half Naked, Sheltred from the Rain by
nothing, but a kind of Wicker'd Basket, which being close at Bottom, but as
open as a Cage in every other part, he had drawn over him, to keep his Head
from the Severity of Weather.

The use of the Story.
THIS Story, carved at large upon the Tombstone, quickens Pity and Amazement at
one time, and may be useful, as a Mirror to present the World, with an exact
Idea of the rise and fall of Vanity, and the Misfortunes, drawn by Pride upon
the Bubbles of Mortality.

Shells, and Shining Sand, upon the Desert.
BEFORE I close this Chapter, 'twill be proper to inform the Reader, that the
Sandy Deserts of the Stony, and indeed the other two Arabia's, are covered
thickly with a Thousand kinds of Little Shells, and Nitrous Atoms, which appear
with Glistering Beauty, at a distance from you, which, with several other
Proofs, are reasonable Grounds for a belief, that once these Plains, now Desert
Sands, were a large Part of the Main Ocean.

CHAP. XLV. Of Arabia the Desert.
The Deserts of Arabia.
THE mighty Deserts of the Wast Arabia, South of the Foregoing, are confined
that way, by the Arabia, well called Happy, from the Aromatic Blessings of its
Climate: But on every other side, run wildly on toward Babylon and Media,
Mesopotomia and Armenia, in such endless Tracts of Sand and Desolation, that
the undiscovered Reach of their prodigious Surface, frightens Curiosity from
Thoughts of searching, for the just Extent of such a dangerous Territory.

Different from the rest of the World.
HEAVEN has here laid Wast the Work of Earth's Creation, or contrived these
Blots of Nature, like a Mole in a fine Face, to serve as Foils, and add an
Ornamental Luster to the Brighter Parts of the more Temperate Universe.

THE Elements themselves are here at War; The Sun inflames the Sand, and the
Tempestuous Sand invades the Air with Waves of Fire, whose rolling Heaps like
stormy Billows of impetuous Heat, hiss dreadfully against the Breath of those
prodigious Tempests, which remove them hourly, and make a Chaos of the horrid
Desert.

Wild Beasts, and Serpents in the Deserts.
NOT a Shrub grows here, or any thing at all, which looks like Nature in her
common Decency; the Hiss of every kind of Poisonous Serpent aggravates the
Terror of a trembling Traveller, who, all environed by the dangerous Snakes
and salvage Beasts, which, scaring others, are themselves as often scared, by
the unstable Motion of the trackless Deserts, is obliged to seem at Sea, upon
the scorching Continent, and Travel Day and Night without the smallest Guide,
but the Assistance of a Compass.

The Virtue of Fire in the Deserts.
THE raging Heat of a perpetual Sun so burns the Sands, they Travel on, that
they are scorched, as if they walked through half-extinguish'd heaps of Ashes,
yet are they still obliged to carry Fire, and fix it round the Places, where
they rest, to fright away the Monst'rous Creatures, who would else assault 'em.

The Skill of the Arabians.
THOSE Arabians, who are Knowing in the Nature of the horrid Climate, guess, by
certain Motions of the Clouds, the coming of a Storm of Wind from any Quarter,
and the distance, it is at, and consequently suit their Travels through the
Deserts, to their Best Convenience.

The Misery of Christians, Traveling without a Guide in the Deserts of Arabia.
BUT Christian Strangers, wholly Ignorant of all those Signs, nor daring to
confide so far in the suspected Arabs, as to take 'em for their Guides, are
sometimes miserably overtaken by the danger of a Storm, which agitates the
Ground, they travel on, with all the violence of the severest Earthquake,
lifting Men and Camels from the Desert, or at least so fills the Air with
Clouds of Sand, driven up and down by unresisted Whirlwinds, that the Wretched
Traveller, quite blinded with their Fury, stands, unknowing what to do, while
the Dried Dead Bodies of Men and Women, who have perished Ages since, in
passing over, are with a surprising Horror blown upon them, whisk'd like Paper
through the Air, all Dreadful and Deformed, with those suspended Carcasses, and
Flocks of Serpents hurried violently through the Winds, with the uplifted Tracks
of glowing Sand, they lately crept in.

WHO knows, but many of those dead Men's Bodies, which are blown so frightfully
about the Desert, are the same, who perished, when the Roman Legions, under
Warlike Cato, bravely passed this Sultry Climate in the Search of Glory, and on
whose account the Poet Lucan thus describes the Nature of these Deserts. Luc.
L. 10.
Sic Orbem torquente Noto, Romana juventus
Procubuit, metuensque rapi, constrinxit amictus,
Inseruitque manus terrae; nec pondere solo,
Sed nixu jacuit, vix sic immobilis Austro,
Qui super ingentes cumulos involuit arenae,
Atque operit tellure viros, vix tollere miles
Membra valet, multo congestu pulveris haerens;
Alligat and stantes affusae magnus arenae
Agger, and immoti terra surgente tenentur.
Saxa tulit penitus discussis proruta muris,
Effuditque procul miranda sort malorum:
Qui nullas videre domos, videre ruinas,
Jamque iter omne latet, nec sunt discrimina terrae
Vlla, nisi aetheriae medio velut aequore flammae.
Sideribus novere vias;
While thus (disturbing Earth) the South Wind blew,
The Romans on the Ground their Bodies threw,
And fearing swiftly to be blown away,
Bound fast their Clothes, and graspt the Soil, whereon they lay;
Nor does their Weight alone secure them there,
A Clinging Strength they make the Surface bear;
Scarce can they thus the Southern Storm withstand,
Which over their Prostrate Heads, rolls mighty Hills of Sand;
Buried therein, the Soldiers scarce can lift
Their Limbs, the Monumental Dust to shift.
Those, who dare stand upright, unmoved remain,
Kept strait by heaps of Sand, which over-whelm the Plain,
Prodigious Stones, rent from some broken Wall,
Fly in the Tempest, which supports them all,
And in some distant Clime, with wonder lets them fall.
They Ruins see, who can no Houses spy;
No beaten Path salutes the longing Eye,
No different Roads in this sad Place appear,
Like Mariners, by Stars, their doubtful Course they Steer.


The wretched Condition of Travelers, who are lost in the Deserts.
HORROR and Confusion overtake the Traveller, who, by a thousand little
Accidents, is hourly liable to lose his Company. Imagine, Reader, what a
miserable State you would believe your self reduced to, were you left alone,
amidst the wild, and unfrequented Sands of these unmeasured Deserts; Nothing
near you, nor within the reach of the most Sanguine Hope, but dreadful
Serpents, unknown Monsters, and a thousand barbarous Enemies to Nature and
Humanity; No distant Prospect of a Smoking Chimney to direct your Footsteps,
nor the comfortable sight of Beaten Roads, to guide you in your Journey; Day
assaulting you with scorching Heats, Ghosts, and Apparitions, in the Deserts.
and Night confounding you with the repeated Shreicks and shrill Complaints of
Ghosts, or Apparitions, which, it you believe the People of the Country, wander
Nightly up and down about these Deserts.

Mischievous Hob-goblins.
THE Arabs told me fifty frightful Stories of the Mischiefs, done by these
Hob-goblins, who delight, ( it seems) to exercise Deceit, and make poor
Travelers not only lose their way, but perish in the Desert.

HOWEVER, there was, some Years since, a Certain Better natured Spirit, than a
Man has commonly an Opportunity to get acquainted with, and since it is pity she
should lose the Honor, due to her Civility, I will Record her, for as honest
and obliging an Hob-goblin, as ever can be found in all Arabia.

A Story of an Armenian Merchant, lost in the Deserts of Arabia.
THERE was, as I was told by my Judicious Turkish Author, an Armenian Merchant,
called Demetrio, who lived for many Years in Egypt, and as I remember, in the
City of Grand Cairo, till, by his industrious Application to the Art, he
Practiced, he became considerably Rich, and Flourished mightily.

IT seems the Man was of a Grateful Temper, and remembered that, when he had
lived, while Young, in Babylon, in a Condition very Mean, and much depressed by
Servitude and Poverty, he had received extraordinary Civilities from a Good
natured Turk, by whose Assistance only, he had been enabled to engage himself
in that successful way of Living, which had now so happily improved his Former
Circumstances.

The grateful Design of a dangerous Journey.
HE made a Resolution, that he would go pay a Visit to his Friend in Babylon,
and let him see that he remembered gratefully the many Bounties, he had
formerly received, and would reward, at least acknowledge, his extensive
Obligations; and accordingly, he went in Company with the Great Caravan, which
crossed the Deserts to the very Place, he had designed a Journey to.

The Water falls short.
HE Traveled pleasantly enough, till he was got almost half through the danger of
his Passage, when it happened, that the Caravan fell short of Water, which they
searched in vain for among the Sands, so that their Thirst increasing daily,
almost all their Beasts of Burden fainted under it, and many of their Company,
unable to support the Anguish, it reduced them to, fell Sick, and Died in
Miserable Torment.

They detach Parties to seek a Spring.
PRODIGIOUS Offers there were doubtless made, for the reward of any, who should
then discover the glad Tidings of a Spring, which though they could not
reasonably hope to find, the Zeal of their Desires, and Sharpness of their
Appetite, inclined them to endeavor it, by sending out Detachments every way,
with Orders not to lose the Sight of one another.

They divide, and straggle from each other.
THE Wants of Nature, notwithstanding this Precaution, urged their Courages to a
contempt of any other Danger, than the Death, they dreaded from the Want of
Water, wherefore little minding the Advice, they had received, they frequently
divided their small Parties, and would ramble singly up and down, regarding
nothing, but the Thoughts of keeping still within the hearing of each others
Hollow.

A dangerous Wandering.
AMONG the rest one Moonlight-Night, Demetrio, (it seems) was gone a Water
Hunting, and had straggled to considerable distance from the Party, he went out
with, but imagined, he discovered all about him many Companies, belonging to
the Caravan, employed on the same Errand, he was busy in; at last he heard a
Voice on his left Hand, which called, as from the Nearest Party, with the
welcome Repetition of these Words, Ho! This way, this way, we have found out
Water.

A delusive Prospect.
FULL of Joy he looked about him, and perceived (at least imagined he perceived)
the Parties of the Caravan run all one way, as if they followed the
Transporting Summons, which invited them to Crowd that way, and taste the Water,
he believed so happily discovered.

IN short, he ran as fast as he was able, close upon the Heels of Certain Men,
whose Faces he was very well acquainted with, and knew them to belong to the
Great Caravan, he came with: The malice of a Company of Ghosts.
Till at last, when he had followed them above an Hour, they turned upon him,
shook their Heads, laughed loud, then disappeared, and vanished like a Shadow.

NATURES Dictates may inform the Reader, what Convulsive Agonies alarmed the
Breast of the Deceived Armenian, when he saw those Guides dissolve to Air, on
whom he had depended, as his Safe-guards and Directors: But his Fright
increased to double horror, when he looked all round him, and could see no Sign
of Man or Beast, but found he had been led away from all his Company by the
delusive Beckons of Malicious Ghosts, and Ill-designing Apparitions.

A sad Condition.
IN vain he cursed the hapless Motives, which inclined him to the Journey, and
with bitter Cries bewailed his Misery; lamenting the Misfortune of his lost
Condition with a flood of Tears, which bathed the Sands, over which he
wand'red, void of Comfort, and instead of finding the far distant Company, he
looked for, hourly rambled farther in the Desert, while his A king Eyes saw
nothing in his way but trackless Regions of unstable Sand, and both his Ears
were deeply pierced, by frightful Hissings of the Serpents round him, and the
doleful Shrieks, and horrid Yells of unseen Ghosts, and Hovering Hob-goblins.

A despairing Resolution.
TWO Days and Nights were thus passed over, when despairing evermore of seeing
Man, and weak'ned by Fatigue, and want of Food and Water, he laid himself upon
the Sands, and was resolved to wait his Death, with an Heroic Resignation to
the Will of Providence.

HE had not lain two Hours, before he started at the Repetition of a Voice,
which called three times, in a shrill, melancholy Accent, Demetrio, Demetrio,
Demetrio.

A Wife goodnatur'd even after Death.
HE lifted up his Eyes, with great Amazement at the mention of his Name, in such
a Place as that, and scarce believed himself awake, when he beheld his Wife at
two Yards distance from him, with a Pot of Water in one Hand, and a Dry Biscuit
in the other.

SHE placed 'em by him, and made Signs, that he should Eat and Drink, which an
half-famish'd Appetite obliged him to endeavor, after he had offered to
Embrace his Wife, who glided from him like an Airy Phantom, and forbad him
touching her.

The Speech of a Ghost to a Man in the Deserts.
I am, said she, no more the Partner of your Earthly Blessings, Death has
interposed his Obstacle betwixt our Meeting to Embrace as formerly: Thy Friend
at Babylon is also Dead, and thy poor Children, Motherless at Cairo, want thy
Comfort. Follow me, and I will lead thee to thy Company, and show thee Water
for thy self and them, which when thou have discovered, and received the Great
Reward, that will be given thee, go back with me, I Will lead thee safely to the
Borders of the Desert, whence thou may return to Egypt, though alone, in
safety. A Check to Curiosity.
But thou must not ask me any Questions of my present Circumstances, too
Mysterious for a Mortal's Comprehension.

OVERJOYED, but wondering at the strangeness of the Accident, he followed his
Obliging Wife, quite cross another Part of the Wide Desert, till she brought
him to a Place, where she assured him if he dug, he should find Water; but
enjoined him not to grieve, that she was Dead, repeating many times, that she
was happier now than she had been, while Living.

A lucky Discovery.
HE could from hence behold the Caravan, a third Part of whose Number had
already Perished by the Drought, they were exposed to. He immediately went to
them, brought 'em to the Place, and showed 'em where to dig, till they found
Water, in sufficient quantity to satisfy them all, and fill the Vessels for
their Use, in the remaining part of their sad Journey.

A dead Wife, doubles her Husband's Fortune.
HIS Wife, invisible to all, but him, attended all this while, and whispered in
his Ear, the best Directions, she could give him: A Considerable Sum of Money
was presented him by the Commanders of the Caravan, which almost doubled what
he had before obtained by a successful Industry. A happy Escape from the
Deserts.
He presently exchanged the Present, for such Jewels, Gold, and other Riches, as
would lie in the least Compass, and conducted by his Wifes kind Spirit, left
the Company, and went in safety back to Egypt, holding a delightful
Conversation all the way, and being told a thousand wondrous Things by his
Aerial Guide, who, having brought him to the Borders of the Desert, left him
with a Charge, to give her Love to all her Children, and advise 'em how to
live, secure of Happiness, by means, she had informed him of.

HE did as she directed him, and when he came to Cairo, found his Family in
Mourning for the Death of his Dear Wife, who left the World, according to his
Computation, just a Week, before he met her in the Deserts.

How they mark the Water Places in the Deserts.
THIS Story, Reader, told me by a Turk, who thought himself a Man of great
Sincerity, and of no small Judgment, please to take as I received it; 'twill at
least divert you, and may serve to give you an Idea of those horrid Deserts, on
which Subject I shall add no more, than that such Travelers, as find a Spring
of Water, tolerably fresh, by digging in the Sands, too well acquainted with
the Misery of wanting it, endeavor to preserve the Memory of the Place, by
fixing up a Pike, or sometimes two, bound fast together, to make the Mark more
lasting by its length; These have a kind of Ensign at the top, but seldom stand
a Month, before whole Mountains of the Sand entirely bury them, at least so
cover them, that scarce three Foot of all the Pike appears above the Surface;
Such a dreadful Visage bears the Desert Country of the scorched Arabia.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Arabia, the Happy.
Arabia Felix, justly so named.
THIS Country, Aromatically Happy in the Spices, She produces, and distinguished
from the other two by all the Blessings of Indulgent Nature, sometimes known to
be a Partial Mother, well deserves the Name of Felix, not alone because most
Happy in her Wealth and Products, but as she is doubly so, when placed in
Competition with the two Arabia's, her Deformed and Barren Neighbors.

Providence Bounty to this Country.
PROVIDENCE has here made full amends for the Deficiencies, she caused in both
the other; and the People, who Inhabit this delightful Country, are as far
superior to the rest, in their Humanity and Fair Deportment to the Strangers,
they Converse with, as their Soil exceeds the other in its Beauties and
Fertility.

Arabia Felix, how Governed.
ARABIA FELIX has a Sultan of her own, possessing Arbitrary Power, and Ruling
in the Inland Countries; but the Seaport Towns, at least most of them, have
been long Subservient to the Turkish Government, as valued most by that
encroaching People, on account of the prodigious Profits, rising to their
Owners, from an open Traffic with the Indian Countries, and the great
Advantages, they reap by Exportation of their own rich Manufactures, and the
Product of their Climate.

The Cities of that Country.
THEY have many Cities of considerable Magnitude, the Chief whereof, are Mocha,
Zenan, Siam, Ermin, Surac, Demmar, Almacarhan, Nag-helsaamar, Raba-taaman,
Tais, Mousar, Doffar, and the Port of Aden.

Their way of Building.
MOST of these, and many other Cities, are adorned with very fine and stately
Buildings, of a lasting kind of Stone, well polished, and joined close with
admirable Mortar: Gardens, Orchards, and large Ornamental Suburbs, generally
grace the Towns with Beautiful Appearances, and many of them are indifferently
Fortified with Walls and Outworks.

The Merchandises of Arabia.
THE Merchandises of Arabia Felix, are the Aromatic Gums and Spices, it was ever
famous for, Olibanum and Frankincense, and Myrrh of many kinds, Rich Balsam,
Sugar Canes, Large Coco-Nuts, and Coffee in abundance.

THEY have Grapes, and almost every kind of Fruit, in fullest Excellency;
Mutton, Beef, and other Meats both Good and Plentiful, and live in the
Enjoyment of the Gayest Pleasures, Nature, unassisted by the Helps of Art, can
furnish their Delights with.

Plenty of Wild Beasts bred (...)
THE Inland Countries are extremely Woody, and afford convenient Shelter for the
numerous Herds of Lions, Leopards, Tigers, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey,
abounding greatly, not alone in this, but all the Three Arabia's, I have
treated of.

The Air very Pleasant, and Healthful.
THE Air is constantly salubrious, and notwithstanding the warm Situation of the
Country, reaching from near Thirty to Eleven or Ten Degrees of Northern
Latitude: The Heat is so delightfully alloy'd by frequent Breezes, which like
wanton Zephyrs, fan the Air, and wast the Scent of odoriferous Spices on their
gentle Breathings, that you feast upon the richest Banquet, Nature can prepare
you, as you travel on the Road from Town to City; and the moderated Climate,
softly mixing Vernal Mildness, with the Beams of Summer, makes all Seasons
equally engaging, so that the Greek Poet, who in the following Verses, Wishes
for a Constant Spring, may properly be said to have described the Blessing of
Arabia Felix. Bion's Choice of Seasons.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I love not Summer, for the Sun then Reigns,
And Scorches me on the unsheltred Plains;
I love not Autumn, for Diseases then,
Bred by her Fruits, afflict the Healthiest Men;
Pernicious Winter does sharp Snows create,
And all Cold-Weather Nature bids me hate;
Let Spring, that long-wish'd Season, then appear,
And bless me with her Presence all the Year,
For then we neither Heat nor Cold can fear;
All Things look smiling then, Nature grows Gay,
And Men divide their Hours, in equal Night and Day.


CHAP. XLVII. Of the Red Sea.
THE Red Sea is so fully known already, by the Geographical Descriptions of our
own Country Writers, and the exquisite Performances of the Mathematic Authors
of most Christian Nations, that I mean not here to Touch on those notorious
Observations, which have long ago been made by others, but inform my Reader of
some new Discoveries of little matters, which I made my self.

BUT first, it will be Requisite to say a Word or two, relating to the
Etymology and Ports of the Red Sea, which having done, I will proceed to
mention the Remarks, I made, as they occur to my Remembrance.

Why the Red Sea is so called.
RHYTHRA, in the old Egyptian Language, signifying Red, was formerly the Name
of a great Monarch of that Country, who gave the Sea his own Denomination,
which has been since mistaken, by affinity of Sound, and Mis-interpreted the
Red Sea, by those, who fixed the Name upon it, which it bears at present.

A Second Opinion.
OTHERS think, especially the Jews, Inhabiting the Eastern Countries, that it
was called the Red Sea, from the prodigious ruin, and great overthrow of
Pharaohs Army, in their Passage over it, in the pursuit of Moses, and his
God-defended Israelites, but as the Blood, there Spilt, was very little, though
such Multitudes were Drowned, I look upon this guess, as an Improbable Opinion.

A Third, and the most probable.
ANOTHER Notion, and perhaps the truest of the Three, is, that it is called the
Red Sea, from the Redness of the Sands, o'erspreading all the Bottom, whence
the Waves receive a kind of red Reflection, and the Water thence appears, as if
'twere stained with certain Juices, of a redish Color; This is made more
Reasonable from the Etymology of the Euxine, commonly called the Black-Sea,
from the Blackness of the Sands, which lie at the Bottom.

THE Sea Port Towns are very numerous, and very different from each other, in
Magnificence, or the conventency of Harbor, some are much exposed to dangerous
shelves, and Rocky Shallows, others both commodious, large, and stately, Aden,
the great Seaport Town.
but the only Place, deserving a particular Description, is the Port, called
Aden, in Possession of the Turks, and not alone the Largest. but the Richest,
and most celebrated Sea Port Town of all Arabia.

Its Description.
IT is Situated in about thirteen Degrees of Northern Latitude, directly in the
Center of a kind of Amphitheatre, or Semicircular Ridge of Mountains, jetting
out prodigious Promontories into the Sea, for a considerable Length, on either
Horn; the Harbor is not only safe, but capable of holding at an Anchor near a
Thousand Sail of Ships, by the most modest Computation.

The Town how built.
THE Town it self consists of near four thousand Houses, built of Stone, and
rendered Pleasant by vast Spaces, unemploy'd to other Uses, than the Planting
Orchards, Gardens, and a kind of Favorite Wildernesses, much in Practice with
the Eastern People.

THE General Inhabitants of Aden are considerably Wealthy, and enjoy their
Pleasures with a greater Gust, than elsewhere is permitted them; Now much
decayed.
yet is the City much decayed from what it has been formerly, for once the Town
extended to a double Length to that, it now contains, and all the Buildings
(though they are not despicable now) were anciently adorned with a far greater
Beauty and Magnificence.

The Fleets of the Red Sea.
THE Turks build Vessels in the Ports, belonging to this Sea, and constantly
maintain a Fleet of Galleys, for support of their Authority, besides the
Merchant Ships, which Trade about from Place to Place, and by the Customs, paid
on the Commodities, they carry, bring considerable Profit to the Coffers of the
Sultan.

A new Discovery of a Monument, near the Red Sea.
UPON the Northern Shore of the Red Sea, not far from a small Haven now called
Pozi, stand the Ruins of a Monumental Heap of Stones, appearing very ancient,
by their Forms and way of Building: By the Remnant of the Work, we may suppose
it to have been Erected Pyramidically, and about one hundred Foot in height,
the breadth of each square of its Basis much the same; upon the bottom Stones,
and certain fallen ones, we could discover unintelligible Characters, which
seemed to have been Carved to tell succeeding Ages, what the Monument was there
Erected to perpetuate the Memory of.

IT IS pity, Ignorance has incapacitated the Inhabitants from letting Strangers
into any Light of Knowledge, in relation to Antiquity, else probably they had
been able to inform us, what this Heap of Ruins was Originally; Thought to be
the same, which Moses left in Memory of his Passage.
Now we can no more than guess at random for its doubtful Origin, unless we will
believe the not impossible Traditional Account, the Natives give us, who would
fain persuade us to believe, 'twas built by Moses, when the Israelites
miraculously passed that Sea, and left by him, a Memorandum for Posterity, to
make Mankind depend on God, and not diffide in his secure Protection, though
reduced to never so fatiguing, and oppressive Exigencies.

Opium made of Poppies.
THERE grows upon the Shores of the Red Sea, a certain heavy-headed Poppy, only
differing, in the bigness of its Stalk, from ours in England: At a certain
Season of the Year, I think it is July or June, they gather many of these
Poppies, beat 'em in a Mortar, lay them by for many Days, then take 'em out,
and adding several unknown Herbs, make Opium of the Composition, but of far
less Efficacy than the other sort, more frequently Exported into Foreign
Countries.

Indigo, how made of an Herb.
THERE likewise grows a little Violet colored Herb in mighty Plenty, all about
the Sea Shore, which they take care to gather in the Sun's Meridian Height, and
mixing it with certain Weeds, which float like scattered Samphire; on the
Surface of the Waters, make thereof the Die, called Indigo, in full Perfection.

Pearls found in the Red Sea.
MIGHTY Rocks in many Parts of the Red Sea, erect their Heads above the Water,
and it is not seldom, that they find upon them something like a Shellfish, yet
unlike an Oyster, which is opened with the greatest Difficulty imaginable, and
contains within it, great round Pearls, sometimes but one, and sometimes more,
of equal Value with the richest of their Magnitude, from any other Part,
imported into Christendom.

A wonderful Fish.
AT certain Seasons of the Year, it is a common thing to see a Fish, not much
unlike an Hippotamus, or great River Horse, whose Strength and Swiftness is so
very wonderful, that it is almost impossible to take 'em, but by some Surprise,
or Cunning Stratagem.

A rich Perfume.
THESE Creatures, when they happen to be caught, are carefully Dissected; for,
besides a kind of rich Perfume, beyond the scent of Ambergrease it self, which
lies like Fat about their Spinal Joints, and yields a vast Advantage to the
Man, who finds it, A Carbuncle, found in the Head of a Seahorse.
there often is discovered in the Head of this strange Animal, a glittering
Stone, which may be called a Carbuncle, for it is of Globe-like Form, and quite
Transparent; yielding, if produced in a Dark Place, a Light, so striking, that
a Man may see to Write by its Assistance, in the duskiest Winter's Midnight.

The Danger of attempting more Discoveries.
THESE are all the Observations I could make, deserving my Remembrance; nor can
any Man discover in this Sea, or upon its extensive Shores, more Rarities, or
Creatures, worth Remark, than have already been communicated in the Books of
Travelers, unless his Curiosity, becoming Master of his Reason, tempts him to
a rash Endeavor of opposing Laws and Dangers, to Instruct himself in Matters,
probably unworthy half his Labors.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Turks Pilgrimage to their Prophet's Birthplace, and
their Ceremonies at Mecca and Medina Telnabi.
The force of Superstition.
NEVER sure did a Bigoted Superstition lead away the Minds of Thoughtless
Mortals, to so wondrous a degree, as it has done in Turkey, where the Annual
Practice of a Pilgrimage to Mecca, has prevailed so strangely by the fixed
Injunction of their Prophet's Law, that it is by all believed the surest
Passport from Mortality to Paradise.

A strange Notion.
NAY they carry it still farther, and persist in the Assertion, that unless a
Turk shall once at least, before he Dies, perform that Pilgrimage, or bear the
Charges of some other Man to do it for him, (if the want of Health prevents his
Piety) it is impossible that he should ever reach those gross Enjoyments, they
expect from the Romantic Blessings of another World, till they have Purified
their Persons from the Guilt of such Omission, by a long continuance in the
Tortures of the Grave, inslicted on them, by the two Black Angels, as I have at
large informed you in the Part Foregoing.

Moral Reflections.
OH Miserable Frailty of deceived Mortality, so strangely open to the strong
Assaults of our mistaken Passions, and unguarded commonly against the weakest
Efforts, made by Nature to delude our Senses, but by far more liable to the
Persuasive Ills of Superstitious Zeal, and the Deceitful Gloss of an Illchose
Religion: There our Vices sculk with undetected Art, behind the Masque of a
pretended Virtue. And how easily, alas! are we misled in Execution of our Duty,
when the Dictates of our Reason are themselves too often Biased to a Partial
Sentence, and our Judgment, which should ever Rule a Wise Man's Actions, Bribed
unfortunately by Erroneous Principles.

A vulgar Error, concerning Mahomet's Tomb.
HOWEVER, ever I enter on the Subject of the Chapter, I am now about to treat
of, I will undeceive my Reader, who has probably been led astray, like many
others, by a Vulgar Error, which inclines them to believe, that Mecca, as the
Place, to which the Turks direct their Pilgrimage, is the Town, wherein the
Great Impostor Mahomet lies Buried, when it really is no other, than his
Birthplace, and as such, made Holy by his own Injunctions that, with such and
such appointed Ceremonies, all his Followers should Visit that Great City, in
Commemoration of his being thence produced amongst them.

Of Mecca and Medina.
SOME few Days Journey, North of Mecca, stands the Celebrated Tomb of Mahomet in
a small Town, distinguished by the Name of Medina Telnabi, where he Died, and
now lies Buried in the Form, I shall describe hereafter: No Believer, (as they
call themselves) is by their Prophet's Law obliged to Visit this Place in their
Pilgrimage, but as they were assured by the Impostor, that, if not a
Meritorious, 'twou'd at least be an Acceptable Acknowledgment of Zeal for their
Religion and his Memory, it is never known, that any Annual Pilgrimage is made
to Mecca, but a certain Number of the most Bigoted of the People, turn aside,
and pay their Offerings, (e're they return) to Medina Telnabi.

Another Vulgar Error.
AND here another vulgar Error challenges a Confutation, which Experience, as
the surest Judge, may be allowed to give it; It Is a general Belief, that
Mahomet was never Buried, but is hung, suspended in the Air within an Iron
Coffin, by the strange attractive Force of certain wondrous Load-Stones, so
surprizingly affixed to the high Roof of a great Temple, that they cannot be
perceived by the most exquisite Inspection.

Very Groundless.
THAT this is false the Reader will discover presently; but whence it grew so
common a Report, I can by no means guess, since I have ever found the Turks so
far from justifying the Pretended Miracle, that they exert their utmost Wit and
Raillery, to ridicule the fond Credulity of Christian Nations, led so easily to
a Belief of such a Gross Absurdity.

The Place of Rendezvous.
THE Numbers, which compose the Mighty Caravan of Meccan Pilgrims, generally
swell beyond Imagination; Zealous Turks of every Country, Quality, Profession
or Capacity assemble at Grand Cairo, (the Great Rendezvous, appointed for that
purpose) by the first of August, or within a few Days after; for about the
tenth, or fifteenth of that Month the Caravan most commonly sets forward on the
Journey.

Their Public Proclamations.
WITHIN six Days of their Departure, Notice is, by Public Proclamation given
the People, to get ready by the Time then set, and that they must be subject to
the Government of such a Person, (whom they Name,) both Going and Returning, in
whatever Cases may require his Arbitration.

Their Chief, how chosen.
THIS Officer is called Emir Hadgey, which signifies as much as Ruler of the
Pilgrims: He is always chosen by the Great Bashaw of Cairo, and makes a vast
Advantage of his Post, besides the settled Sum of near two thousand Pounds,
which he receives from the Grand Signior's Treasury, by many Perquisites and
Opportunities of Gain, like these, which follow.

The Order observed in Registring their Names.
AS soon as the Emir-Hadgey is Proclaimed, all People, who accompany the
Caravan, must presently resort to him, or one deputed by him, paying a
considerable Sum of Money for the Regist'ring their Names, the number of their
Camels, and the Names, Religion, Quality and Sects of every Passenger, they
carry on them.

The Emir-Hadgey's Power.
HIS Power is so Unlimited, and so Decisive is his Sentence, while the
Expedition lasts, extending even to Life and Death, and every little Matter,
Criminal or Civil, that to Bribe his Favor, no rich Gifts are thought too
Costly, nor that Money ill bestowed, which recommending those, who give it, to
the favorable Eye of such an Arbitrary Ruler, frequently prevents the Hand of
Rapine, from Invading their most valuable Property.

His Perquisites.
ANOTHER Perquisite, and that no mean one, rises from a Law, Severe and
Barbarous, by which all Christians, whatsoever, are Prohibited from coming
within three Days Journey of their Prophet's Birthplace, or his Place of
Burial, while the Pilgrims are employed at either in the Ceremonious Practices
of Zeal and Superstition: The Turks true to Interest.
For, notwithstanding this Decree, if any Europaean Traveller, has Courage to
confide in the Fidelity of Turks (and really, where their Interest binds them,
they are generally very Punctual in Performance of their Articles) he may, by
making a considerable Present to the Emir-Hadgey, not alone be sure of his
Protection, in the Places abovementioned, but possess an undisputed Liberty to
Travel openly throughout the Journey, and select what Company he pleases, to
Converse with in the Caravan, which he accompanies.

WHEN every thing is ready, all the Caravan have Public Orders presently, to
quit the Town, and Rendezvous Fifteen Miles from it, in an open sandy Plain,
along the Borders of a Pool, called Birquey.

The Gallantry of the Emir-Hadgey.
HITHER, two Days after, the Emir-Hadgey comes, gallantly attended by a Company
of such among them, as pretend to be distinguished by the Name of Gentlemen,
and have resolved that Year to make the Pilgrimage: All these have many
Servants waiting on them, with a tripple Change of Camels, to prevent the
Inconveniences, they might be otherwise exposed to, by the accidental Deaths
of those, they rode on.

The Dress of his Camels.
ALL the Camels are adorned, as finely as is possible, with Ribbons, Spangles,
Rich Caparisons, and every other Gay Contrivance, which may serve to show the
Universal Joy, with which they snatch the wished Occasion of so Troublesome and
Dangerous, but Holy a Peregrination.

The Alcoran, how carried.
AMONG the Camels, which compose the Number, for the proper use of the
Emir-Hadgey, one Venerable Old one is elected, to be richly Ornamented with
Embroidered Trappings, thick beset with Precious Stones, of admirable Luster,
on whose Back is carried a square Golden Box, which holds the Alcoran,
extravagantly Bound, and all enriched with valuable Jewels, yearly sent by the
Grand Signior, as an Offering, due to the Great Mosque of Mecca, in respect to
Mahomet.

Camels, how respected at their Return from Mecca.
THIS Camel, if it happens to outlive the Journey, is for ever after free from
Labor, as indeed most others are, which have returned in Safety, if their
Owners can afford it, and Interred, upon their Death, in Orchards, Gardens, or
some other private Place, that so they may not be exposed, like other Beasts,
to Dogs and Vultures.

The Departure of the Caravan.
AS soon as the Arrival of the Emir-Hadgey has been confirmed throughout the
Camp, (for they Pitch Tents like Armies) all the Caravan make ready in an
Instant, and the Women, Children, and Acquaintance of the Pilgrims, who have
hitherto accompanied them, begin with Prayers, Tears, Kisses, close Embraces,
and a Thousand Marks of Friendship and Affection, to take leave of all they
know, and recommend them to the Smiles and Care of Providence; so that for a
considerable time, there is nothing to be seen, but a confused Extravagance of
Sorrow, and its Consequences.

Their Order in Marching.
NOW the Caravan begins to March, the Emir-Hadgey riding at their Head, or
sometimes in their Center, as he thinks most proper: All the Camels are tied
Tail to Tail, and follow one another in strait Lines of different length, some
Hundreds often going in a Knot, their Riders sitting on them in the Posture,
elsewhere spoke of in this Treatise, and some Thousands of the most
accomplished Warriors, in a manner quite surrounding the whole Caravan, protect
them from the Dangers, they are often subject to, in the Attacks, they meet
with from the Wild Arabians, who insest the Deserts.

Their Amusements on the Road
THEY are generally very Merry, sounding all the way an Hundred awkward
Instruments of Music, and diverting one another with the tedious Repetitions
of such Old Wives Tales, as commonly pass Current, in the Conversation of the
Vulgar People, of the Eastern Countries.

Their Lights on the Journey.
THE Violence of Heat is so excessive in the Climates, they are bound to pass
through, that they seldom Travel much by Day, and therefore carry a prodigious
Quantity of Links or Flambeaus, for the Lighting them along; and really, when
the Moon denies her Influence, in directing their Advances, they supply the
want, occasioned by her Absence, with such glorious Numbers of these Flaming
Torches, as afford a Prospect, so surprizingly agreeable, that it is not to be
guessed by such, as have not seen it.

The Dangers, they are subject to.
THE Sultry Influences of a scorching Sun, and Pestilential Blasts of an
unwholesome Southern Wind, together with the want of Water, (Bitter Springs
excepted) and the Scarcity of all Provisions, with a Thousand unavordable
Fatigues, they meet with, in so long and disagreeable a Journey, frequently
occasion such Mortality among the Caravan, that it is a common thing in its
Return to Cairo, to have left Eight Thousand Persons Dead behind them.

Their common Numbers
AS for the Numbers, which this Annual Caravan does commonly consist of, they
are so uncertain, that I cannot form a General Calculation better, than by
telling you, that they are seldom known below the Full of Fifty Thousand Souls,
but very often to a great degree exceed an Hundred.

Another of the Emir's Perquisites
ALL the Goods, Clothes, Camels, and Conveniences, belonging to such Persons,
as sall Sick and Die upon the Journey, are the Property by Perquisite, of the
Emir-Hadgey, who (unless a Man of admirable Principles) is consequently no
great Well-wisher to the Welfare of his People.

The Distance between Grand Cairo and Mecca.
THE Distance between Mecca and Grand Cairo, is Five and Forty large Days
Journey, in which Passage they are forced to Rest Three Days together; such is
the Fatigue of Traveling upon a Desert Country, where the Sands, unstable to
the Footsteps of their Beasts of Burden, slip away, and make the Roads
extremely tiresome.

A Remark concerning Camels.
AND here we have a spacious Scene for Contemplation, on the All-directing
Wisdom of the Hand of Providence, who in the Countries, naturally Stony, has
provided Horses, of a hard and solid Hoof, to serve the Uses, they are there
designed for: But in Desert Places, such as these, I now am speaking of, has
formed the Camel, qualified by Nature with her spreading Fool, to overtread
more easily the sinking Sands, which Horses Hoofs with difficulty pass through.

The Place, called Marah in the Scriptures.
TWO Days from Cairo bring the Caravan to a Place, called Miz-Haana, anciently
that Marah, spoke of in the Scriptures, whither Moses brought the Israelites,
just then delivered from Egyptian Bondage, and, Miraculously Aided by Almighty
God's assisting Hand, converted bitter Waters into sweet, by throwing in a
Tree, cut down on purpose, thence supplying all the Peoples raging Thirst, who
Murmured loudly, that they could not Drink, for the waters of Marah were Bitter.

The Stages of the Caravan.
THENCE, proceeding onwards of their Journey, they Encamp on many of those very
Places, where, so many Ages since, the discontented Israelites, then wandering
in the Wilderness, by God's Direction Pitched their Tents, and lay a while, in
expectation of the Orders, Moses was to give them, whither next to bend their
Progress.

Abraham's Mountain
WITHIN near Threescore Miles of Mecca, stands a Village, called Babble, scarce
Three Furlongs distant from the Mountain of that Name, on whose high Summit,
Abraham built the Altar, upon which he had designed to Sacrifice his only Son,
his much-loved Isaac, in Obedience to the Will of that Great God, whose least
Command he knew it Sin to think of Disregarding.

Isaac's Altar.
THERE is upon the Top of this famed Mountain, a low kind of Turkish Mosque, or
Chapel, built obscurely, of an Antique Model, in the midst whereof they show a
small square Heap of Stones, joined fast together with a lasting Mortar, not
much less than three Foot high, six long, and four in breadth, which they have
dignified with a strange Reputation, and are sure to show all Pilgrims, who
come thither, by the Name of Isaac's Altar.

The Story, why improbable.
IT IS, I must confess, a little inconsistent with my Notion of the Rules of
Reason, to imagine Abraham, as we read the Story, should have taken Pains to
build so strong and durable a Monument, whereon to Sacrifice his Son upon so
short a Warning; and it therefore must require a Romish Faith to look upon this
Altar, as a Relic of Antiquity.

The Ceremonies of the Pilgrims, on this Hill.
THE Mosque however, which is built upon this Hill, is constantly Inhabited by
some Old Scheich, or Turkish Preacher, who is bound by the Conditions, upon
which he claims a Salary, belonging to the Benefice, to stand upon the Hill,
and make a Declanition, or a kind of Lecture to the Pilgrims, who assemble
round him, (those, who happen to get nearest, telling those at greater
distance, what they learn from the Persuasive Oratory of their Preachers
Doctrine.

The Subject of a Sermon, there Preached.
THE common Subjects, which are chose on this Occasion, for Employment of the
Doctor's Lungs and Faculties, are such, as an Endeavor to Ingraft a Pious
Notion in the Peoples Breast, of that Important Duty, they are now performing,
the Necessity there is of a Repentance after it, and the innumerable Blessings,
they may certainly expect from God's Indulgence, if they never deviate from the
Principles of Zealous Mussul-Men, and True-Believers of the Laws of Mahomet.

The Turkish way of quitting Sin.
THEY rest a Day, upon the Old Man's Sermon, to digest the Entertainment, he has
gravely given them, and then are led by the Emir-Hadgey on Foot, without
observing Rank, all one by one, to the abovenam'd Mosque upon the Mountain
Rabiie, which they enter at one Door, and go out of by another, opposite
thereto; first passing by the Grave Old Scheich aforesaid, who is placed upon a
Step, near two Foot high, directly in the middle of the Mosque, and touching
every Man, as he goes swiftly by, with a short Stick, repeats these Words, May
Sin here leave thee.

A strange Notion.
NOW, you must understand, the Holy Wishes of this Favorite of Mahomet are so
Successful, that they never fail to crown the Person Blessed, with an entire
Deliverance from all the Vices, he was ever subject to; so that, freed happily
from such a weighty Burden, they run nimbly down the Hill upon the other side,
and never stop, till they have crossed a little Stream of Bitter Water, gliding
by the Bottom, and, by dipping in their Hands, and sprinkling all their Faces
with some Drops thereof, from that time forward they become New-Men, as Pure,
and Free from all Iniquity, as Infant Innocence, and consequently Qualified to
see the City, they must next proceed to.

A stranger Punishment.
BUT you must take notice, that the Punishment of looking back, before they
Cross this Purifying Stream, is full as Exemplary to these Cautious Pilgrims,
as it was of Old to Lot's too Curious Wife: For though their Metamorphosis
appears not so amazingly conspicuous, yet they will tell you, that it is fully as
severe; for in the very Moment, any Man among them turns his Head, before it is
permitted him, the heavy Load of his own Sins, which he had just before made
shift to leave behind him, does not only overtake him in an Instant, but
returns, enriched with Interest upon Interest, by the Black Addition of two
other Peoples.

Their Ceremonies, at first sight of Mecca.
CAREFUL therefore, to prevent so Burdensome a Mischief, on they march with
joyful Hearts to the Remainder of their Journey, and about the middle of the
third Days Progress, gain a Prospect of the Mosque at Mecca; when they all
alight, as if half mad, with noisy Ecstasies, and prostrating themselves upon
the Ground, thrice kiss the glowing Surface of the Sand, they Travel on, and
thrice Proclaim with Universal Clamor, Allah-Illah-Ilallab, Muhamed Resul
Allah. God is God, the only God, and Mahomet, of that sole God, the only
Prophet.

How they Encamp at Mecca.
ARRIVED at Mecca, they Encamp upon the Plains, without the City, as by far too
numerous to find Conveniences within the Walls, for a Commodious Entertainment
of Themselves and Camels: But I should have told you, that they often turn
aside, and pass through Giddah, the Port-Town to Mecca, to pay Reverence to the
Grave, where Eve was Buried; The Tomb of Eve.
for the Arabs there pretend to show all Travelers her Sepulcher, and would
persuade us to believe, our Father Adam had a very Formidable Consort, if we
are allowed to guess her Strength by the Proportion, which they give her; for,
from the Stone, now standing at the Head, to that, which stands at the broad
Bottom of the Grave, the Distance is full Five and Twenty Yards of English
Measure: Sure a Man, if any now is Blessed with such a Wife, would scarce
lament her want of Stature.

Description of Mecca.
MECCA is about Three Miles in Compass, Rich and Stately in a great degree, and
her Inhabitants Possessors of a Rolling Plenty, still continue to increase
their Affluence, by Annual Profits, rising from the Concourse of such mighty
Numbers, drawn by Zeal to Travel thither.

BUT, as I only mention it, because the Birthplace of that Vile Impostor,
whose successful Impositions drew such Numbers to profess his Doctrine, I will
here enlarge no further, than is requisite to give a just Description of the
Holy House of God, as they presume to call it, which is looked upon so Sacred
by the Turks, that in whatever Part of the wide Universe they are, Why the
Turks in Praying, turn their Faces to the East.
they never Pray, but with their Faces to the East, in Honor to this House,
wherein they say, that Mahomet was Born, and in respect to which, they yearly
undertake so dangerous a Pilgrimage.

The House of God, as they call it.
THIS House, which they distinguish by the Name of Kiabee Betulla, stands
directly in the middle of the City, not surpassing Thirteen Foot in Breadth, in
Length Eighteen or thereabouts, and near Ten Yards in Height, Flat-Roof'd, and
quite surrounded by a stately Court, Walled in, and Ornamented by Three several
Rows of Marble Pillars, close within the Wall, supporting Arches, of a Graceful
Fabric, upon either Square, divided into Four Apartments, kept by Priests, of
the Four most noted Sects, among the Turks, who Pray continually with an
incessant Fervor, for the Boundless Propagation of their own Religion, and the
Downfall of Christianity.

Two Hoops of Gold.
TO strengthen, as it were, the Ancient Building, which I think, consists of
Square Rough Stones, (though it is almost impossible to see them, being covered
on the Inside and the Out, by such inestimable heaps of Riches) the House is
Circled round, by two prodigious Hoops, of Beaten Gold, at least appearing so
to be; and of that valuable Metal are the Drains and Spouts, which carry off
the Water, falling on the Place in Rainy Weather.

A Silver Door, and strange Old Fashioned Entrance.
THE only Entrance, contrary to any Buildings, now in Fashion, or indeed
Remembrance, is by two large Folding Silver Doors, to which you mount upon a
Ladder, five Foot high, for so much higher than the Ground about it, reaches
the Foundation of this Odd and Antique Piece of Building.

Stately Hangings.
THIS Door is placed almost as far, as the left Corner of the House, and being
entered, presently admits you to the only Chamber, it consists of; richly Hung
with an Embroidered Damask, Red and Green, (the last the Prophet's Favorite
Color) and supported by four Pillars, the Diameter of each above two Foot,
entirely of a Piece, their Form eight Square, and made of a black kind of Wood,
perfuming all the Chamber with the finest Scent imaginable, which the Turks
assured us, were not so by Nature, but became thus Odoriferous, the very
Moment, their Prophet Blessed that Place in his Nativity.

A fine goodnatur'd moving Stone.
WITHOUT the House, they show a dusky Colored Stone, near two Foot Square, to
which they Kneel, and pay their Adoration with a thousand Kisses; and indeed
the Reputation, which this Stone has got, deserves their Complaisance for the
Civility, it once was Master of: That was very Civil to Father Abraham.
For you must know, this House was built by Abraham's own Hands, who knew by
Holy Inspiration, what an Honor it was destined to in After Ages, and,
unwilling therefore to abuse the Walls, when he had raised them pretty high, by
making Holes to fix a Scaffold in, he modestly resolved to stand upon this
Stone, which then lay there by chance, and build as high as he could reach by
its Assistance, which, it seems, was so extremely taken with the Patriarch's
Goodnature, that it gradually rose, and lifted him about from Place to Place,
till he had made an End of all the Building.

The Ceremonies here performed.
HITHER then the Pilgrims come, as many at a time, as the Emir-Hadgey thinks fit
to send together, least they should Affront the Holy Place, by over-crowding
its Approaches. The only Ceremonies, here Performed, are, Falling Prostrate on
the Earth, and Blessing God, who has permitted them to see a Sight so Sacred;
then repeating certain Prayers, they pass in Order through the Pillars of the
four Apartments of the Sects above-named, and are Blessed and Kissed by the
respective Priests of each Opinion, after which they Walk out backwards, till
they pass the utmost Limits of this Venerable Fabric.

Hangings out in Pieces to make Relics.
NOTHING rests, deserving our Remark, but that a black Silk Canopy, which covers
all the Roof of this Fine House is changed, for one renewed each Year, at the
Expense of the Grand Signior, and by him sent thither with the Caravan of
Pilgrims, while the Old One, by the Priests, is cut in many thousand Pieces,
and distributed among the Superstitious People, by the way of Sale, with a
Pretense, that those, who bear that Holy Relic still about them, shall be
ever free from sudden Death, and unexpected Dangers, of what kind soever.

Medina Telnabi.
HENCE, such People, as are led by Zeal, to think, their Duty Summons them, to
see their Prophet's Tomb, accompany the Caravan, which goes from Mecca to
Damascus, and arrive in eight or ten Days time, at Medina Telnabi, much about
the Magnitude of Mecca.

The Tombs of Mahomet, Osmin and Hali.
HERE, in an obscure, and narrow Corner of a Stately Mosque, which stands
directly in the middle of the Town, are seen the Sepulchers of the Impostor
Mahomet, and his two Famous Followers, Osmin and Haly.

Description of the Tombs.
THE Tombs are low and narrow, of a Lozenge Cut, and framed of Marble, of a very
Black, or Dusky Color, void of any kind of Ornament, or Writing whatsoever,
and enclosed within three round, and high built Marble Turrets, through whose
Sides are cut small narrow Windows, into which the Pilgrims look, and see the
Tombs of their respected Prophets, That of Mahomet's the middlemost of all the
Three.

The Towers enclosing them.
THESE Turrets are adorned with little Galleries of Gold and Silver, which
together, with the Inward and External Sides of all the Towers, are richly
Ornamented with innumerable quantities of Precious Stones, of an inestimable
Value, Great Half Moons of Gold and Diamonds, Chains of Pearl, and Crowns of
Jewels, Glorious Ornaments.
every here and there appearing Writ in Golden Letters, the repeated Names of
God and Mahomet, between the different kinds of Treasure, which for many Ages,
have been sent, as Offerings, from the Superstitious Princes, who Profess
Mahometanism.

The Departure of the Pilgrims.
HERE the Pilgrims gain a second Blessing, and return, as soon as they have seen
the Tombs, to reach the Caravan, which waits their coming back at Mecca, and
advance toward Egypt, in the Order, they came thence with. Many, Drunk, or Mad
with Zealous Folly, bore their Eyes, or hold them over burning Irons, till they
lose their Sight, as thinking it a Sin, beyond excuse, to look on Grovelling
Earthly Vileness, after they have once been Blessed with so Divine and
Long-desir'd a Prospect.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Arabians, their Government, and way of Living.
The Descent of the Arabs.
THE Arabs are Descended, as is commonly believed, from Ishmael, dwelling now,
as anciently they did, in Tents, and open Places, nothing differing from what
they were, when the Inspired Historians of the Holy Scriptures writ their
Character, and handed down the Nature of those Barbarous People to the
Knowledge of Posterity.

The Etymology of Saracen.
THEY are distinguished likewise by the Name of Saracens, from the Arabian
Etymology of Saara-Saaken, which in English, signifies as much, as an
Inhabitant of Desert Countries.

Description of the Arabs.
THEY are generally Men of Middle Stature, swift and daring, very Lean, and
wonderfully Bony, Tawny to a strange Degree, by the perpetual Influence of an
unshadow'd Sun, which burns 'em in the Deserts: They are shrill of Voice,
beyond most Women, and inclined by Nature to the Cruel Practices of an
unlimited Barbarity.

Their Pride.
THEIR Pride exceeds most other Nations, for they scorn Dependence, and reject
all Notions of a Lawful Government: They boast Antiquity, and not unjustly,
Glorying in that they have, in the continued Course of such a mighty Number of
successive Ages, kept themselves unmixed with other Nations, and obtained an
undisputed Claim, to not alone the Ancientest, but Purest Titles of Nobility,
now extant in the Universe, by an obstinate Contempt of all Mechanical
Employments, and depending solely on their Arms and Courage, for the Means of
their Subsistence.

Their way of Living.
HENCE they Ravage all, they meet with, live in Plunder, and infest the Deserts,
with a Lawless Multitude of Great and Little Parties, Robbing and Destroying
all they Conquer, if they presume to make Resistance; after which, they
suddenly retire behind such endless Tracts of unknown Sand, that none can
follow them with Force, sufficient to repel their Numbers.

Why it is impossible to Conquer them.
IT IS esteemed impossible to Conquer thoroughly these ungovernable People; for
they ride on Horses of peculiar Skill, in tracing out the Passages of the
unstable Deserts, and can live on very small and poor Provisions, and by
frequenting constantly those Barren Places, know the Ground so very well, that
no great Number can attempt pursuing them, but they must perish by the want of
Food and Water, ever they can with Reason, hope to find the Private Lurking
Corners of their Nimble Enemies, who never fail to watch the Moment of some
favorable Opportunity, to fall upon 'em under Covert of the Night, with bloody
Execution.

Their Arms.
THEY little understand, and less esteem the Use of Firearms; all their Weapons
are, a kind of Spears, not much unlike an Officer's Half-Pike in England,
headed with a Cap of Steel, sharp-pointed, and of admirable Temper, which they
Poize with an extended Arm, and either hurl at distance, or can use in close
Fight with an Enemy, as they may see Occasion.

Their strange Dexterity.
SECONDLY, they are the surest Archers in the World, and generally Arm
themselves with a Capacious Quiver of Steel-headed Arrows, some of which are
always Poisoned; These they Shoot with such a strange Dexterity, on Horseback
or on Foot, That, like the Ancient Parthians, famed in History, they Kill more
Enemies in their Retreat from a lost Battle, than they Slaughtered all the time
before, while Face to Face, they stood the Shock of Open War, and Fought for
Victory.

Their Roving Life.
THEY live, as I have said before, in Tents, and Pitch their Camps from time to
time, where any little Face of Pasture for their Horses, or the Prospect of the
most Advantages from Robbing Caravans, invite their Stay; Removing frequently
from one Place to another, carrying with them all the Cities, they pretend to
dwell in, and the Families, which they are Masters of.

Their Form of Government.
THEY are divided into Tribes, or Companies, and pay a kind of Reverence to
certain Princes, as they call 'em, who by long Descent of Noble Blood beyond
the rest, are Honored by the Tribes, and constantly Preside in all their
Councils, Guiding, as they please, (though not assuming a Commanding Power) the
Business of the People, who respect 'em greatly, though no otherwise
distinguished from the Common People, than by wearing Turbants of a different
Form, but equal Bigness.

Their Habits and Diet, etc.
THEIR Habits differ nothing from the Vulgar Turks, their Diet is not much
unlike the Tartars, and their Exercises few, because they live in a perpetual
Motion. Their Religion is Mahometanism, and they look upon it, as no little
Honor to their Nation, that the Prophet was their Countryman.

Their way of disposing of the Goods, they Plunder.
WHEN they have Plundered a Considerable Booty, they deliver it to certain of
their People, living Peaceably on every Border of the Deserts, who are suffered
to Converse and Trade with all the Governments, about 'em, rather out of Fear
than Friendship.

THESE find present Means, to sell the Plunder of one Nation to the Natives of
another, and delivering the Money to the Party, whence they had the Goods,
receive a certain fixed Reward, proportionable to the Value of the Prize, while
all the rest is equally divided among those, who shared the Danger. With this
Money they will often buy fine Jewels, or whatever else their Inclinations lead
'em to.

Jewels for the Women.
SINCE I have mentioned Jewels, 'twill be necessary to inform the Reader of the
Uses, they design 'em to, which is, to Ornament the Persons of their Women, for
they have as many Wives, as they think fit, and either carry them about, as
they remove themselves, or leave them, in their Expeditions, in the Towns or
Camps, they have, upon the most Delightful, Habitable, and not quite Infertil
Borders of Arabia.

The Arabian Women, dreadful Creatures.
I think, I need not tell the English Ladies, that the Sun is no great Friend to
Beauty, and the Poor Arabian Females find it to their Sorrows; For, but that
their Husbands prove them Women, and not only so, but Fruitful Women too, I
should not only quite mistake their Sex, by missing in their Souls and Persons,
all those soft, engaging Excellencies, which combine to Crown the Graces of my
Country-Women, but really Misinterpret their Humanity, by judging them some
Meaner-Part of the Creation. Methinks the Painters, who, (to cover the
Disgraces, which the Christian Armies frequently received, by being beaten in
the Holy-War, by those Men's Ancestors) took care to represent a Saracen upon
their Sign-Posts, like a Monst'rous Giant, so so to give a terrible Idea of
those People, had done better far, to Paint the Figure of a Saracen's Wife, for
all the World must have believed, that where the Women were such frightful
Creatures, All the Men must have been worse than Devils.

Another kind of Arabs.
SOME People notwithstanding, bear the Name of Arabs, and are yet of Principles,
directly different from these, such, for Example, as Inhabit many Places in
Arabia Felix, and some other Countries, where they live in Peace and Honesty,
subservient to the Laws of Civil Government; But those, I speak of, are the
Arabs, commonly distinguished by the Name of Wild, or Independent, and are
every way, the Men, I have described, abhorred, but dreaded, by Mankind in
General, yet above the Anger of surrounding Enemies.

CHAP. L. Probable Conjectures, concerning the Ten Tribes of Israel, which were
carried away Captive, by Shalmanezer, King of Assyria. 2 Kings. Chap, 17.
I Would not have my Reader led to a Mistake of what I mean, or by the Title of
this Chapter, be induced to think, I flatter my Belief with an Opinion, that I
can inform the World more largely, than all other Writers, of the Present State
of the Ten Captived Tribes of Broken Israel.

The Aim of this Chapter.
MY only Aim, in touching on this Subject, is, to prove, that those, who guess
the Race of Turks to be Descended from the Jews of the Ten Tribes abovenam'd,
may at least defend their Notion, by a very probable, and natural Chain of
Arguments, if not incontrovertible, and certain Demonstration.

Many various Opinions.
MANY notwithstanding, and extremely various, are the odd Opinions, commonly
received, not only in the Europaean World, but even in those Eastern Parts,
which, by their Old Vicinity of Situation to that Bondag'd People, may be
thought to have retained an eager Curiosity to know, if possible, the Present
Fortunes of a Formidable Nation, which in ancient Times, they not alone
Esteemed, but held uninterrupted Correspondence with.

AMONG the several Judgments, or Conjectures, made upon this Famous Head, it
may not, possibly, be thought unwelcome, should I entertain the Reader with a
Few of the most Celebrated Notions, prevalent in the Opinions of the Knowing
Universe.

The first Notion.
ONE commonly received Opinion is, that these Ten Tribes of Captived Jews went
quite through Tartary to Green-Land, so to America, by passing by the Straight of
Darien, where they fixed themselves in the Dominions of Peru, and all those
Parts, distinguished by the Name of Nova Hispania, or the Spanish West Indies.

Its Proofs.
TO prove the Probability of this Assertion, its Defenders openly avouch, that
there are many Ruins, extant to this Day, whose own Remains, and the Tradition
of the Country, join to speak them formerly the Work of Jewish Architects; In
many of these Buildings they report to have discovered Well-Wrought Nails, of
mighty Size, which kept the Timber joined together; this was judged Remarkable,
because those Buildings were Erected, long before the Indian Natives are
supposed to have been made acquainted with the Use of Iron.

AGAIN, they judge it very Probable, because the Spanish Indians are not, of so
Brown and Beardless a Complexion, as the rest, but much inclining to the Airs,
and Features of the Ancient Jews, and thence believed to be decended from them.

ANOTHER Reason, they produce, as a Persuasive to their Notion, is, that, when
the Spaniards Conquered Mexico, Peru, and all those Parts of the West Indies,
they perceived their Customs, as to Women, Altars, Jubilees, Divorces, and the
Knowledge, they professed of the Creation of the World, and Universal Deluge,
with a Thousand other of their Practices, and Ceremonies, so entirely molded
to the Imitation of the Jewish Customs, that they could not help concluding,
that great Numbers of the Indians were themselves Descended from those Jews, of
the Ten Tribes aforesaid, or at least had learnt from them the Numerous
Ceremonies, they so long continued to indulge the Practice of.

The Second Notion of the Ten Tribes of Israel.
ANOTHER Notion, not alone received among the Jews, but almost every Nation in
the East, persuades them to believe, that many of those Tribes may now be found
in certain Inland Parts of China; and, to prove the Probability of this
Opinion, they produce a Thousand Instances of Roman Missionary Priests, and
many other Travelers, who have discovered mighty Numbers of those People, in
the Land above-named, who retain the Practice of the Ancient Jewish Ceremonies,
but are altogether ignorant of either the Arrival, Doctrine, or Portentous
Crucifixion of our Blessed Savior.

The Third Notion.
IT IS no improbable Conjecture, that some Tribes (if not all) inhabit in a
Country, to the South of Persia, commonly distinguished by the Name of Tabor;
for the People there, obey one Great, and Arbitrary Monarch, and profess no
other Faith than that of Judaism.

Its Proofs.
THE Natives of this Country are divided into Tribes, which still retain such
Names, as are entirely Consonant with those, which anciently distinguished the
Lost Tribes of Israel; and the Name of Tabor, which (as I have said before)
their Province bears, appears not widely different from Habor, whither
Salmanezer ordered them to be Transported, as we read in Holy Scripture, in the
Second Book of Kings, and the Seventeenth Chapter. 2 Kings, Chapter 17. V. 5, 6.
Then the King of Assyria came up throughout all the Land, and went up to
Samaria, and Besieged it Three Years.

In the Ninth Year of Hoshea, the King of Assyria took Samaria, and carried
Israel away into Assyria, and placed them in Halah, and in Habor by the River
of Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes.



The Fourth Notion.
THOSE are not Few, who strenuously maintain, that many Parts of Aethiopia are
inhabited, by the Posterity of these Ten Jewish Tribes, particularly near the
Lake, whence Nilus is supposed to take his Rise; All the Men of this Persuasion
would oblige us to believe, the Abyssens, Coptees, and certain other Ethiopian
Christians, owe the Practice of their Circumcising Children, to some Ancient
Imitation of the Custom of the Jews, who found a Refuge in their then more
Hospitable Country.

The Fifth Notion.
IT is more talked of, than believed, that they may possibly inhabit those
unknown, and spacious Territories, on the other side of that Prodigious River,
The Sabbatical River
which Josephus mentions to be not far distant from the Caspian Sea, and called
Sabbatical, by reason of a wondrous Secret in the Nature of its Stream, which
runs six Days with such amazing Breadth, and rapid Violence of an Impetuous
Current, that by driving down the very Stones, and Sand, over which it rolls,
it renders it impossible for Mortal Courage, Strength, or Artifice, to compass
Means of passing it, but on the Sabbath Day, at which time all the Waters fall
Miraculously, for the space of Four and Twenty Hours, leaving dry, and passable
the Sandy Bottom.

The Sixth Opinion.
Mr. William Pen, in the Account, he gives of Pensilvania, tells us, he believes
the Natives of that Place had no Original, but from the Jewish Tribes, and arms
the Arguments, he uses on this Subject, with the following Observations.

Its Reasons.
THAT God could point them out with ease a Passage to America, from the Eastern
Parts of Asia, and that, since they were Ordained to be removed to an Vntill'd,
even Vndiscover'd Country, it is highly probable, that the West Indies was the
Place, since that was then the only unknown Quarter of the Habitable Universe.

AND that they rather Peopled Pensilvania, than the other Parts of the
West Indies, he imagines not unlikely, since the Natives of that Country so
resemble Jews, in Features and Deportment, that they seem distinguishably
Marked by God, as the Posterity of that Unhappy Nation.

Jewish Customs in Pensilvania.
AGAIN, their Feasts, Fasts, Sacrifices, and all other Rights, and Ceremonies,
with the great Affinity, their Language bears to Hebrew, and abundance more
concurring Circumstances in their ways of Life, agree so evidently with the
Jewish Institutions, Government, and Customs, that he judges it a very
reasonable Notion, to conclude they are descended from the long Lost Race of
the Subverted Israelites.

The Seventh Opinion.
BUT having mentioned the foregoing Notions, now most common in the Eastern
World, I will proceed to let you see, how probable it is, that all the Turks
are of the Jewish Race, and that the Ten above-named Tribes, at least the
greatest Remnant of them, now reside in Tartary, and are the People so
Notorious for their Inhumanity, so Formidable in their Government, Unknown in
their Condition, and so justly Dreaded by the often Invaded World, who only know
them by the Name of Tartars.

The Turks Descended from the Jews.
I showed the Reader in my Entrance on the Book, that Anciently the Turks were
an huge Body of Vngovernable Wandering Scythians, or Tartars, who forsook their
Country for some unknown Cause, and overrunning Turcomania, and a Boundless
Tract of Fertile Land, became a People, formidably Numerous, and swelled in
time to that surprising Pitch of Arbitrary Sway, they boast at present.

IT hence appears it is Universally allowed, as an Undoubted Certainty, that
it is from Tartary the Turks first took their Origin; It only then remains to
prove, that those, we now call Tartars, may be rationally thought the True
Posterity of the Ten Tribes of Israel, which the Conquering Salmanecer carried
with him Captive, as aforesaid, which I shall endeavor to perform, as Briefly
as is possible.

The Etymology of the word Tartar.
AND first, the Reader may observe, that Tarut-Har, or Tartar, in the Syrian
Language, signifies the Remnant, or Remainder of a People, which though alone an
Argument, of no small weight, is strongly aided by the following Particulars.

A very probable Argument.
MEDIA, Situated near the Caspian Sea, is now possessed entirely by these
Tartars, and as it appears by the abovenam'd Text of Holy Writ, that the Ten
Tribes of Israel were Transported to the Cities of the Medes, so it is
observable, that those few Cities, which the Tartars have, are called by Names,
agreeing nearly with the Ancient Towns of Israel, when She Flourished.

Ancient Jewish Names still retained.
THUS, the Capital of Tartary is called Samar-yan, which is very little
different from Samaria, once the Great Metropolis of Israel's Monarchs, and it
is observable, that many Pillars, Buildings, and vast Relics of Antiquity are
yet remaining in this Town, adorned in so demonstrative a manner, that they
plainly speak themselves, to have been Jewish Monuments.

A River called Jordan.
THEY have another Town, called Jericho, a Mount, named Sion, and another Mount,
distinguished by the Name of Tabor, with a River Yordan, (from the Hebrew
Jordan) and a thousand other Names of Places, plainly prove a Jewish Etymology.

The Tartars divided into Ten Tribes.
THEY are divided into Ten Great Tribes, or Parties, bearing Names, not much
unlike the Ancient Patriarchs, from whom the Israelites received their
Appellations: All these Tribes, though wholly Subject to one Common Government,
avoid confounding Kindred by a Marriage into one another Families, a Nicety,
which never was observed, but by the Jews, and now these Tartars, thence with
Probability suppo'd their Offspring.

The Language of the Tartars.
THE Language of the Tartars is so very reconcilable to Hebrew, that the
Difference there is between them, may be very well accounted for, when we
consider they were mixed so long with their Rough Conquerors, the Syrians, e're
they found a Possibility to make a General Revolt, and the prodigious
Ignorance, and strange Barbarity a Nation, for so many Ages, void of Arts and
Sciences, or the Improvements of Humanity, by Trade or Conversation with a more
Polite, and Knowing People, must of Course degenerate to.

A Tradition of the Tartars.
ANOTHER Thing, which serves to prove the just Validity of this Opinion is, that
all the Tartars do not only Circumcise, and Use the ancient Jewish Rights, in
almost every Point of Worship, but Traditionally boast themselves, to be
Descended from those Israelites, who Conquering their Conquerors, became
Possessed of all the Territories by the Caspian Sea; and hence it was, that
Tamerlain, or rather Tam-her-lane the Great, who led the Turkish Bajazet about
his City, in an Iron Cage, would often take occasion to be Vaunting of his
Pedigree, affirming, he was Lineally Descended from the Tribe of Dan, in an
uninterrupted Genealogy.

The two Inferences to be drawn from the foregoing Arguments.
FROM the abovenam'd Observations, it appears but rational to draw two
Inferences; First, That the Great Founders of the Present Turkish Empire are
Descended from the Tartar's Race, and Secondly that those, distinguished now by
the said Name of Tartars, are the Ten Transplanted Tribes of Israel, so justly
Punished by Almighty God, for their Offensive Obstinacy, that from the most
Esteemed, and Glorious Nation of the Universe, they are Degenerated into the
most Despicable Outcasts of Unblessed Humanity.

CHAP. LI. Instructions to the Traveller, who would make a Safe, and Profitable
Journey into the Eastern Countries.
The Design of this Chapter.
THE Generous Reader will, I doubt not, put a right Interpretation on my
Meaning, in pretending to instruct the World, when I my self, as much as other
People, want Instruction; All I aim at by the Subject, I am now about to take
upon me, is to lay down Rules, which I have proved by often Repeated, though but
young Experience, to be safe and necessary, to the Practice of that Traveller,
who would to any Purpose,spend his Time in Foreign Countries.

Education of Youth, the Glory of a Nation.
THE Infinite Advantages, the Honor, Glory, Riches, and Prosperity, accruing to
a Nation, by the careful Training up the Youth, she shines with, and the great
Necessity of sowing wisely all those Seeds of Liberal Education, which they
hope to see securely Flourish in a full Maturity, are so Conspicuous to
Mankind, and Universally allowed of, that I need enlarge no more, on so
Incontrovertible an Argument.

The Advantages of Travel.
IF then the Care of Youth be commonly allowed a Duty, weightily Incumbent on a
Common Wealth, 'twill easily appear a certain Truth, both from the Practice of
the Ancient, and the Modern Times, that sending them to Travel into Foreign
Parts, has ever been esteemed, and doubtless is the greatest Blessing, and most
sure Improvement, we can lead their Minds to, since they Learn thereby to study
Men, instead of Books, and by a Free and Generous Conversation with the open
World, not only shake off their Domestic Dregs of Bashfulness, and Ignorance,
but wholesomely digesting the Remembered Dictates of their late Minority, become
Polite in the Deportment of their Persons, and Refined extremely, in the
Notions of their Judgment.

The Folly of neglecting it.
HENCE it follows that, as it is undoubtedly the greatest Policy, as well as
Honor of a Prudent People, to encourage Youth to Early Travel, it is an unhappy
Flaw in any Nations Character, to have it said, they stand Insensible of
Evident Advantages, and rather stifle than promote a Practice, so Commendable.

Englishmen Remiss in its Encouragement.
I must confess I have with no small Wonder, taken notice, that my Countrymen,
of all the Europaean Nations, are the most Remiss in this Affair; We see them
commonly but thinly sown in Foreign Courts, Camps, Schools, or Academies, while
Numbers of the Natives of all other Christian Countries, flock continually to
every Land or City, Famous in the least, beyond their Neighbors.

An Observation on the North-Britons.
I ought not to omit, (since I have here so fair an Opportunity) the doing
Justice to our Late-Vnited Gallant Brothers of NORTH-BRITAIN, who are so
effectually Sensible of the Advantages, abovenam'd, that their Gentlemen are
commonly the Best Bred, and most Learned of Christendom, and do not only Travel
much, but to much Purpose also; for we seldom see a Celebrated Court of Europe,
but the Civil sometimes, sometimes Military Offices thereof, are not alone
Possessed, but Ornamented greatly by the Natives of that Country.

Traveling now more in Fashion.
HOWEVER, I may spare the Pains of Searching for the Causes of so Groundless a
Neglect, since there appears a Brisker Turn than Formerly, to animate the
Genius of the English Nation, who within some few Years past, have seemed to
seek more earnestly than heretofore, the Benefits of Traveling.

I will therefore only wish for the Improvement of a Custom, so Praiseworthy,
and proceed to give the Hints, I promised, in relation to the Methods, they
should Use in Traveling.

At what Age Young Men should Travel.
I am not for the speedy sending Youth abroad, before their Judgment is Mature
enough, to give them a distinguishing Idea of the Use, as well as Prospect of
the Things, they meet with; Eighteen Years of Age is more too Early than too
Late, for a Young Man to think of leaving England: This I know by Personal
Experience, having been beholding to my Latter Travels, for a Full Digestion,
and Improvement of the Unripe Observations, vainly gathered in my Former.

An Error common in the English Practice.
IT is a Fault, too Common in our Modern Practice, to send Young Men Abroad, to
see the Rarities of Italy, and other Countries, before they are at all
acquainted with Domestic Curiosities, and Things as well deserving
Observation, in the Heart of our own Kingdom, as he possibly can meet with, in
the Places, he must Travel through.

Its Follies.
BESIDES, it is a kind of unaccountable Simplicity, to think a Man is Qualified
for Conversation in a Foreign Land, before he Understands, or has the smallest
Notion of the Government, or any Part of the Whole Constitution, or Condition
of his Native Country: For such an Ignorance must necessarily render him unfit
for an Inquisitive, or Learned Society in any Place, he comes to, and
consequently hinder him of all Advantages, he might have Reaped from the
Improvements of his Journey.

Another Error.
ANOTHER Error, and no small one, is that most Young Men are sent Abroad,
entirely Ignorant of German, Dutch, Italian, and too often French, or any
Foreign Languages: This renders them deprived of even a Possibility of Living,
as they ought, in Friendship and Acquaintance with their Equals or Superiors,
where they come; for it is but seldom any Tongue but French, is thought worth
bringing Home, or if some Few have Souls, and Memory enough to Compass more, by
that time, they have learned to speak them tolerably, the short Space, allotted
for their Absence, is expired, and they must return, to put an End to their
Vain Journey, just as they are grown Capacitated to improve themselves by its
Advantages.

A third Error.
THERE are a kind of Gentlemen, called Tutors, generally sent Abroad with a
Commission to Direct, and Govern their Young Travelers: These are sometimes
Frenchmen, sometimes Englishmen, but always of an Age by far Superior, and an
Humor, often Opposite to those, they have the Charge of.

Proper to be Reformed.
THIS I think an Error, that should be Reformed for many Reasons; If the Tutor
be a Foreigner, I need not Nominate the many Disadvantages, the Pupil must be
Subject to; and if an Englishman, of such Superior Age, as commonly they are, I
humbly ask my Reader's leave, to say a Word or two on that Occasion.

The Reasons for Reforming it.
YOUNG MEN are naturally Prepossessed with a Dislike, or Timorous Apprehension
of such Men, as are appointed for their Governors: They are their second
Schoolmasters, and consequently looked upon, as Objects of their Spleen; They
are imagined Spies over all their Actions, and Informers of their Juvenile
Extravagancies: Their Best Advice is Coldly list'ned to, for want of an
Affection, and their Precepts robbed of proper Force, because not backed by Open
Familiarity.

More Reasons.
AGAIN, it is natural for Young Men to reflect, What is this Man, who Curbs our
Inclinations? Why a Tutor, that is, one, whose Business is to call those
Pleasures Faults, which he has now, perhaps, outlived the Taste of; He forgets
the Inclinations of his Youth, and would oblige us to a Life, as Melancholy as
his own, in spite of all the Disproportion, that appears betwixt our Ages. But
were any of the Arguments, he used, made strong by both the Precept, and
Example of some Wise Companion, not much Older than Himself, they would
undoubtedly prevail on his Belief, because he cannot look upon them the Effects
of Peevish Age, or Want of Relish, but occasioned purely, by a Wise Restraint
of Headstrong Passions, and a Swing of Vanity.

AS I have Censured those Three Common Errors in our Practice, just aforenam'd,
so I will, as Briefly as is Possible, set down the Rules, by which we may with
ease avoid their Inconveniences.

How the first Error might be mended.
AND First, I would advise, that Children should be put to School so early, that
they may have gained a Competent Increase of Understanding, in a Residence at
either of the Universities, by that time, they have reached the Age of Eighteen
Years at farthest.

THEN, it might be Proper that, in some Relation's Care, he might Reside at
London, one whole Winter, there to Learn the Fashionable Gayeties, which
recommend a Gentleman for Breeding and Appearance.

A necessary Improvement.
IN the Summer following, 'twou'd be a great Improvement to his Knowledge, if
assisted by the Recommendatory Letters of his Friends, to their Acquaintance in
the Country, he should undertake a Journey, quite through England, Wales, and
Part of, if not all, North Britain.

How to be (...).
BUT he should not only Travel through these Countries, but from Place to Place be
Recommended to the House, and Care, of some Considerable Man, of Parts and
Fortune, who should not alone contrive to Entertain him Hospitably, but be sure
to Introduce him to the Knowledge, and Acquaintance of the Best and Wisest Part
of all his Neighborhood, by whose Assistance, and Society, he might not only
be Diverted with a Sight of every Curiosity, but Taught at large the Charters,
and Antiquity of every Corporation, Privileges, Laws, and Customs of each
County, Honor, and Descent of every Family, and all Things else, that might be
fansy'd requisite to give him an entire Idea, of the Nature, and Condition of
the Government, he is Subject to.

BY these means he is hardened, for the Accidental Dangers, and Fatigues, he
probably may meet with in his longer Journey, and enabled, when he is Abroad,
to give a Foreigner an Answer to a Question, full as easily, as ask one of him.

A Second Error, how Curable.
SECONDLY, in order to prevent the Inconveniences, arising from a want of
Knowledge, in the European Languages, I would advise all Gentlemen, who think
of Traveling, to Qualify themselves for true Improvement, by some few Years
Previous, Interwoven Application to the Study of the French, Italian, Dutch,
and German Languages, which they may learn with ease at several times, by
several Masters, or by one, while at their Latin School, or either University:
Then, having made themselves indifferent Proficients, they may in their Six
Months Continuance at London, afterward improve them to a fuller Height, by
keeping Company, as much as possible, with Foreign Gentlemen, who Travel Yearly
into England, and would be glad of their Society.

The Advantages of Language.
THUS, would they go Abroad, sufficiently enabled to Converse Familiarly in
Foreign Countries, as they did at Home, and thence avoiding that too common
Shyness, used to Strangers, they would soon gain Friends, and pleased with
their Acquaintance, swell their Knowledge to as high a Pitch Abroad, as they
had done at Home, by former Application.

An Observation concerning Tutors.
THIRDLY, not to Rob the Gentlemen, who in the Character of Tutors, take upon
them the no little Charge of Educating Youth, of those accomplished Merits,
some of them are Masters of, I would offer to the serious Consideration of my
Countrymen, whether 'twou'd not be a Method, more Conducive to the good
Improvement of a Young Man's Time, to send Abroad, as his Companion, some Young
Gentleman, of Unquestionable Conduct, not much Older than himself, but one, who
has by Public Business, or his Former Travels, rendered his Experience riper,
than his Years might speak it.

How justified
HERE, Persuasion and Example would undoubtedly, be far more efficacious, than
the Precepts of Authority; The Arguments, which might be used, to win him from
a Folly, would appear no otherwise, than Friendly Wishes for his Welfare; The
Familiar Conversation, they would have together, must afford a Thousand Pretty
Opportunities to Censure the Miscarriages, he may have made, with a Brisk Air
of Unsuspected Gayety.

The only Bar no great one.
IN short, the only Bar to the Advantages, which must accrue from such a
Practice, is the mighty Difficulty, that must certainly attend the Choice of
such a Man, as may in every Point appear well Qualified, for the Discharge of
such a Trust, as must be given him; And this, (how difficult soever it may
seem) will prove an easier Task upon Examination, than most Men imagine it, and
doubtless would be easier yet, if once the Introduction of so good a Custom
gave Encouragement for Men of Worth, to Qualify themselves for that Employment.

Which Parts are best to Travel first to.
WHEN thus prepared for Foreign Travel, the Young Gentleman would do a Prudent
Action, to consider what Part of the Universe, he may with most Improvement
bend his Journey to; and certainly in my Opinion, 'twou'd be best to Visit
first the East, or South-East World, for there he will not only view a Scene of
Nature, wholly contrary to his own Country, in Religion, Humor, Government,
and every Means, and Form of Living, which he cannot well be said to meet in
Europe, but will learn to Contemplate, (by frequent Views of the prodigious
Changes, Time has made in Towns, and Kingdoms) on the Miserable Instability of
Worldly Grandeur, which together with the Vnpolite and Rustic Treatment, he
must doubtless meet with, from the Proud Inhabitants of those Self-Loving
Countries, will depress, or curb at least, the Headstrong Sallies of Impetuous
Youth, and Native Arrogance of Temper; so that afterward returning by the way
of Italy, and France, and other the Politest European Nations, he may stand
secure, against the strong Temptations of those Fashionable Vanities, which-
mix themselves unluckily with the respective Excellencies, every Court is
judged most Famous for.

A Great Neglect Reproved.
AGAIN, I look upon it, as a mighty Error in the British Travelers, so
strangely to neglect the Knowledge of Marine Affairs, unless their Education,
or Pursuit of their Preferment calls them to their Practice; Nothing certainly
can add a Brighter Ornament to any Englishman's Capacity, than to be fully
Versed, at least, made tolerably Knowing, in the Mysteries of Navigation, and
the many useful Sciences, and profitable Observations, which a few short
Voyages will gild his Understanding with Considerable Notions of.

Traveling by Sea Recommended.
I would therefore willingly advise all Gentlemen, who travel, to Embark on
Board some Trading Vessel, (if in time of Peace) bound up the Straits from Port
to Port, on either side; or if the speed one Vessel makes, may call him from a
Place, before he has had time to make his Observations, he will constantly be
sure to meet some Ship, or other, Bound directly to the Port, he has a mind to
be Transported to, no matter, whether she be English, or of any other Christian
Nation, for the more Variety, he meets with in his Travels, so much more
Extensive will become his Experience.

The Course he should Steer.
BY these Means, he may at his own leisure see the Kingdoms of Spain, Portugal,
and Sicily; The Seaport Towns of Fez, Morocco, Tripoly, Algiers, and other
Parts of Barbary, the numerous Islands of the Grecian Archipelago, with the
Rich Emporiums of the Turkish Empire, Smyrna, and Constantinople.

A Further Journey.
HENCE, he may proceed, by Land, and Sea, as he imagines most Convenient, and
Diverting, on to Egypt, and the Holy Land, and thence from Place to Place, with
Yearly Caravans, or Monthly ones, till he has satisfied his utmost Curiosity,
with a distinct, and serious View of all the several Branches of that Mighty
Monarchy.

The Tour continued, and ended two several ways.
THIS done, he may return, from any Seaport Town of Turkey, by the way of
Italy, for Ships are constantly Bound thence to Venice, or Leghorn; But as some
Inconveniences, such as Performing Quarantana, and the like, attend that
Voyage, 'twou'd be more Improving, and Delightful to a Genius, Tempered with
the smallest Curiosity, to Travel over Land through Turkey into Italy, by the
Road of Philippopolis, and so to Venice, or into Germany, by passing through
Romania, Bulgaria, Valachia, Transylvania, and Hungary, to the City of Vienna;
either of which Roads, admitting you to a considerable Part of Christendom,
lies easy and convenient, to point you out a Tour, through all the Noted Courts
of Europe, after which you will return to England, like an Indian Vessel, whose
inestimable Freight makes full amends, for the Fatigues, and Dangers of a
Tedious Absence.

NOW, that all these Schemes of Travel may be undertaken, and performed, with
as much Safety, and Advantage, as is possible, I beg the Reader's Patience,
while I give a word or two of Necessary Caution, which will bring me on to a
Conclusion of the Chapter.

Another Great Neglect.
THERE is not a Neglect, more Common, nor of a more Fatal Consequence, now
suffered, than the sending Gentlemen Abroad, without a further Charge of
Letters, than such only, as are necessary, to procure Supplies of Money, when
their Exigencies may require it.

The Use of Recommendatory Letters.
HE ought to carry Recommendatory Letters for each Noted Place, he thinks of
going to; Nor are those Letters worthy of that Name, which commonly are sent by
Merchants, to their Correspondents in a Foreign Part, wherein the Gentleman,
who bears them, is, in Fashionable Words of Course, so Coldly Recommended, that
a Formal Visit, or a Drunken Entertainment is the most, he meets with, from the
Persons, he is addressed to.

The Care, to be used in that Point.
ALL Gentlemen, who send their Sons, or Friends Abroad, should be extremely nice
in this Particular; For it is according to the Interests, or Inclinations of the
People, to whom Travelers are Recommended, that their Journey turns to Good,
or Ill Account, however Great may be their Quality, or Long their Absence.

The Inconveniences of going Abroad, without them.
IF they are not recommended to some Gentlemen of Interest, in the Countries,
they pass through, they can do no more in any Town, they come to, than Walk up
and down the Streets, see now and then a Monastery, or perhaps Peep through the
Grates of some Close Nunnery, stare aukwardly upon the Outsides of Great
Buildings, and return to England, after two or three Years Absence, just as
Wise in Foreign Matters, as when they departed from it.

A Fault, peculiar to Englishmen, Abroad.
AND here, I cannot help Complaining of a Fault, peculiar to the English
Gentlemen, Abroad, and called by Foreigners, an Vnbred Pride, and Haughtiness
of Temper, though it is rather owing to their want of Recommendatory Letters, well
Directed. It is a kind of Separation, or Distinction, which they make between
Themselves, and the Inhabitants of any Town, they chance to stay at, earnestly
desiring English Company, and seeming, as it were, averse to any other, which
entirely Robs them of the smallest Possibility, of making an Improvement by
their Travels, or Expenses.

The Best Recommendatory Letters.
THE only way is, to make Interest with the Foreign Ministers, Ambassadors, or
Envoys, who reside at London, and have doubtless, not alone a vast
Acquaintance, but considerable Power with the Best, and most Capacitated
Gentlemen of their own Country, and the Tenor of their Letters should require
their Favor, Friendship, and Good Offices in every kind, to the Young
Traveller, who carries them, but more especially Solicit their Assistance, and
Directions in the Observations, most deserving a Remark, and their Advice, what
Towns or Places in the Country may be worth Regard, with the Additional
Civility of Letters of Recommendation, which may urge their Friends in any
Parts to do, as they have done, by the departing Traveller.

Another necessary Caution.
ANOTHER kind of Letters, they should never go without, are those, directed to
our own Ambassadors, or other Public Ministers, residing in the Courts of
Foreign Princes, and a due Respect should constantly be paid them, on your
first Arrival. These Advices, well observed, may (I have reason to believe) at
least, I wish they might, conduce a little to my Country-Mens Advantage, who
design to Travel: But as I have thoughts of Publishing hereafter, by its self,
a Regular Treatise on this Subject, I will now conclude, with an Assurance to
my Reader, that Experience has convinced me of the Truth of what I Write, or I
had scarce presumed to Recommend my Sentiments, on this Occasion.

CHAP. LII. The CONCLUSION.
AND now, I have, as well as I am able, played the Part of a Sincere Relater of
the Observations, made in Foreign Countries, and commit my Book to the
Ill Nature of the Critics, with a Scorn of all their little Malice, and a
hearty Wish, that such, as read with a Desire to be Diverted, or Informed, may
find therein, as full a Satisfaction, as I should receive, in hearing that they
did so.

The Malice of the Times.
THE Fashionable Envy of these Peevish Times, permits no Author to be over-proud
of his Best Labors; And were I less Modest, than I think my self, which would,
I Am sure, be very far from any thing, like Vanity, The Age, I live in would, no
doubt, find Means to mortify all Self-esteem; and were a Book to be exposed to
Public Censure, as deserving Praise, as those of Horace, or the Roman Ovid,
The Ill Nature of Critics.
Soft-mouth'd Critics would be nibling at the Bait, and run the hazard of
breaking out their Teeth; far rather than not strive to make some ill
Impression on it, which if, after all, they fail to do, they will drivel out
their Rage, and spit upon it harmlesly, in mere Vexation.

WERE there a Modern Ovid now alive, accomplished like the Ancient, he would be
looked upon a very Monster of Vainglory, should he Crown his Labors with a
Self-wreath'd Gaerland, and conclude his Works as Magisterially, as once the
former did, in these High-sounding Verses. Ovid Met. Lib. ult.
Jamque opus exegi, quod nec Jovis Ira, nec Ignis,
Nec poterit Ferrum, neque Edax abolere vetustas.
And now an End to that vast Work is given,
Which neither Fire, nor the Ill Will of Heaven,
Nor the Keen Rage, which does the Sword employ,
Nor Time's devouring Rust shall ever destroy.


The Author's Resignation.
SINCE therefore Truth, not Merit can successfully lay claim to just Applause,
in this ungrateful Age, I, who can only boast the former Virtue, will proceed
more humbly, and submit my Labors to the Sentence of the World, with all the
Resignation of a Man, who, having nobler Ends in Writing, than to Flatter
Faction, or expect Reward, has no occasion to be much solicitous, for the
Success of his Endeavors.

A Word or two, concerning the Probable Downfall of the Turks.
I WILL only add a Word or Two, concerning a Conspicuous Probability of the
approaching Downfall of the Turkish Empire, which has grown, by gradual
Acquisitions, to a most amazing Bulk, and Constitution, but at present seems so
weakened, by the Natural Corruption, and Infirmities of Age, that Terrible
Convulsions shake its Frame, as if 'twere hastening onwards, toward a sudden
Period.

Expected from the Muscovites.
I have, elsewhere in this Book, occasionally taken Notice of a Prophecy, in
vogue among the Turks, That They shall be destroyed by a Long-white-hair'd
Northern Nation of the Christian World, and that they look upon the Muscovites
to be the Nation, hinted in the Prophecy, on which Account, they seem extremely
Apprehensive of the Motions of that People, and their Fright is aggravated
greatly, by the means, the Muscovites have lately found, of sending Ships of
War, through the Black Sea to Constantinople, and the Universal Disposition of
the Greeks, to look upon that Nation, as their long-decreed Deliverers.

The Policy of the Czar, in his War with Sweden.
IF Heaven has Ordained it to be so, it is probable, it may be suddenly Effected,
for the Warlike Disposition of the Present Czar, beyond his Ancestors, and the
Degeneracy of the Modern, from the Ancient Turks, are Weighty Circumstances.
The Victorious King of Sweden has been nothing worse, than a Severe
Schoolmaster to the Muscovites, who owe an admirable Discipline to the War,
they are now engaged in, and reserve those Troops, made Soldiers by a Year or
two's Fatigue, in Inland Garrisons, to Exercise their Fellows, and Improve
themselves, while Raw, and New-raised Men are sent each Year, to face their
Enemies, till they become Good Warriors, and give way to more Fresh Comers.

The Reasons guessed.
IN my Opinion, these Proceedings wear the Air of some Well-laid Design, and the
Fatigue, the Present Monarch of the Muscovite Dominions has been at, in tedious
Travels; The uncredited Improvement, he has made throughout his Country,
(chiefly in Marine Affairs) The Great Encouragement, he gives all Foreign
Officers; and Arts, he uses to allure them to his Service; All these seem to
speak a further End, than the Repulsing a Weak Swedish Enemy.

The Possibility of his Conquering the Turks.
IT IS my Belief, he will fall upon the Turks, as soon as the Maturity of his
Designs affords him Opportunity; Nor do I question, but ( by God's Assistance)
with the Great Advantages, he will have over them, he may entirely Overthrow
their Government, and in their Ruin, gloriously Revenge the Bloody Falls of
those Brave Christian Princes, who have sunk, from Age to Age, beneath the
Weight of their Oppressive Usurpation. But the Nature of my Book, and little
space, I have to spare, forbid me to enlarge on this Particular, which, if I
have foreseen with Judgment, Heaven direct to triumph in Prosperity, for the
Great Good of UNIVERSAL CHRISTENDOM.

FINIS.

