THE SERAGLIO; A COMIC OPERA. [Price One Shilling.]

THE SERAGLIO; A COMIC OPERA, IN TWO ACTS: AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL
COVENT GARDEN.

LONDON: Printed for T. EVANS, near York-Buildings, Strand. M,DCC,LXXVI.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
ABDALLAH, Mrs. MATTOCKS, FREDERICK, Mr. LEONI. GOODWILL, Mr. DUNSTALL, REEF,
Mr. REINHOLD. VENTURE, Mr. QUICK. HASSAN, Mr. BAKER. GUNNEL, Mr. BATES.
WILLIAMS, Mr. THOMPSON.
WOMEN.
ELMIRA, Miss WEWITZER. LYDIA, Miss BROWN. CURTIS, Mrs. GREEN. POLLY, Miss
DAYS.
Fishermen, Sailors and Slaves.
THE SERAGLIO.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Prospect by the Seaside, a Cottage on one Side, at which are two
Girls mending the Fishermen's Nets, Curtis inspecting their Work, and Polly,
who appears melancholy. The Fishermen in the Course of the Chorus bring one
Draught of Fish on Shore, and as the Chorus finishes, they pass over the Stage
in their Boat, casting their Net.
CHORUS.
CURTIS and two GIRLS. THE Sun's mounting high, we no longer can stay,
Then cheerfully work away, Lasses.
CURTIS. Take Comfort, what though he be gone far away,
Girl, it is but a Folly
To be melancholy.
POLLY. Alas! did you know in my Bosom what passes!
CURTIS. I know well enough, Child, for I Have had my Day.
FISHERMEN. Yo, yea -- Land the Yawl,
Pull away -- By the Weight,
We have caught a good Freight:
Zounds, Boys, what a Hawl.
Two GIRLS and CURTIS. Born humble and cheerful, good Humor and Health
Are Treasures to us beyond Power and Weatlh.
POLLY. With a Prospect so charming --
CURTIS. Hark, hark, hark, hark!
Only hear the Wood Lark,
How it makes the Air ring!
And the Black Birds, but listen, how sweetly they sing!
CHORUS. Come, the Tide ebbs apace,
Then each Man to his Place:
This favoring Breeze
While we can let us seize;
And while the Birds carol so sweetly around,
And the Rocks and the Shore in loud Echo's resound,
We'ell be grateful to Heaven for the Good it has sent,
And sing with good Humor, and toil with Content.

Curt. Do you hear, you must bring in another Draught as fast as you can;
[Calling to the Fishermen.] and do you leave the Nets a little, and see that
the Fish is sorted as I directed you. [To the Girls.] Dear me, I Have a great
deal of Business to mind; but no Matter for that. And now, my Child, I want to
talk to thee -- Bless the Heart on thee, don't be dismayed; my Goodman has
promised to let thee know, the Moment he hears any Tidings of thy Father; he
likes thee well -- and for that Matter, so do I too; but no Matter for that.


Pol. I am pleased to hear you say so, and Lassure you --


Cur. I know what you was going to say: but there is no Occasion for your
telling me, that you will do every Thing you can to deserve it. I say it again, I
love thee; but it is no Matter for that. -- And it is not every young Girl would
come so far after her Father: no, not if he was twenty Times over sold for a
Slave.


Pol. Ah, me! If I could but find where he is, I should then be easy: but if I
never find him, I shall always --


Curt. I know what you was going to say; that you would always remember our
Civility.


Pol. I was, indeed.


Curt. Look ye there now, I said so; we understand one another very well. And
now tell me, what was that I cunningly drew from you, as we were walking last
Night by the River's Side? -- See how she blushes -- Don't be ashamed, Child --
the more ready you was to part with your Lover, the more Duty you showed for
your Father.


Pol. Why surely, I did not tell you any Thing that --


Curt. I know what you was going to say; that you did not, as one may say, tell
me directly, who he is. Why, Child, I confess that; but I was once fifteen
myself, and I remember very well, I was just such a sweet, little, tender,
delicate Morsel, as you are now -- I warrant, thou have made a prudent Choice.


Pol. My Father thought so; for he consented that we should be married, upon my
Lover's return from Sea.


Curt. Is he a Sailor? I said you had made a prudent Choice, my Husband has
been a Sailor, and Heaven knows, we should now have been comfortably settled in
England, with the little we had got by the Sea, if upon our Voyage, we had not
been taken by those wicked Algerines. We were made Slaves to the Great Bashaw,
Abdallah, and my Husband worked in the Gardens, while I attended the Ladies of
the Seraglio. But we were so kindly used, that at last we plucked up Heart of
Grace, and told the Bashaw all our Misfortunes. What do you think he did? He
gave us our Liberty, set us up in this Business, and ever since we have served
the whole Seraglio with Fish. -- But if I stand idling here, I shall he scolded
by my old Man -- Ah! you smile at that -- And well you may -- He scold me! --
Poor Soul --


Pol. Indeed, you seem very happy.


Curt. Why, as he often says, People are never unhappy, but it is in some
Measure their own Faults -- Let me see -- It Is forty Summers since we first
came together, and in all that Time, we have seen nothing but smiling Days.
It Is true, when we first fettled, the Indians came down upon us, and plundered
us of all we had, and from the Fright, and one Thing or other, I had like to
have died of a Fever; and once when he was at Sea, he was very near being
swallowed up by a Shark; we were afterward ship-wrecked, then sold for Slaves,
after that we were confined in a close Dungeon, and every Body said, we should
certainly be strangled. But no Matter for that; we had no bad Actions to tax
ourselves with, and we were determined not to be frightened at any Thing.

[Exit into the Cottage.
Enter Goodwill to Polly. Good. Ha! My little Charge, I have charming News for
you.


Pol. Oh dear; have you heard any Thing of my Father?


Good. Yes, I have seen him myself.


Pol. I wish I had seen him too -- Pray where is he?


Good. Oh, he is a very fortunate Man; what would many a one give for such a
Situation -- I would rather be as he is, than Overseer to a Cadi.


Pol. Is not he a Slave then.


Good. O yes, he is a Slave.


Pol. Dear, dear.


Good. But to such a Master -- Why, do you know that he has the Honor to work
in the Garden of the Seraglio of Abdallah, the Great Bashaw.


Pol. Dame Curtis has been telling me what a good Man the Bashaw is. But yet I
wish my Father was not a Slave to any body.


Good. Oh! that Bashaw will never give over doing good Things. What do you
think I heard just now?


Pol. Nay, I don't know.


Good. Why Hali Hassan told me, that an English Lady was made a Slave
yesterday, and the first Thing he did, upon her coming to the Seraglio, was to
let her choose her own Apartments; nay, it is actually said, if she behaves
well, she will be suffered to have her own Servants to wait upon her.


Pol. But what of my Father?


Good. I could not stay with him long, for I was ordered into the Bashaw's
Presence: but I did not forget to tell him, that I had great Interest, and bid
him hope for better Days.


Pol. Bless you for it.


Good. Yes: but when I told him so, he smiled, and said, he believed his good
Days were over. However, I am going again by and by with some Fish, and then we
shall see what is to be done.


Pol. If you are going again, will you take a Letter for me? -- Oh dear, I am
so happy!


Good. Why you seem pleased.


Pol. I am, indeed, pleased.


Good. With the Thoughts of writing to your Father, I suppose. Thou art a good
Girl.


Pol. No; it is to the Bashaw I shall write.


Good. To the Bashaw! Why, Child, do you know how to address such a great Man
as him?


Pol. I know but little; yet I think, if I was to write, I should prevail on
him to give my Father Liberty.


Good. Then I Am sure I Will not be your Hindrance. But take Care what you are
about. His Title begins, Most high and most illustrious; and in the Letter you
must tell him, two or three Times, that he is a Serpent in Wisdom, and a Phoenix
in Goodness.


Pol. Alas! I am a Stranger to these Things.

AIR.
I have not the Grace, and I know not the Art,
In fine Words my poor Mind to array;
But express every Thought as it flows from my Heart,
And as Nature shall point out the Way.
Yet, yet will I write, and am sure to prevail,
While to save my poor Father I try;
In the Language of Nature I Will dress a plain Tale,
And Duty the rest shall supply.

Good. Well, well; go and get your Letter ready. I must see after the Men.


Fishermen. [At a Distance.] Yo, yea.


Good. Ahoy, Lads, I Will among you.

[ Exeunt Goodwill and Polly.
SCENE, A Street.
Enter Frederick, Venture, Reef, Gunnell and other Sailors. Afterward Polly.
Fred. [Coming on.] My brave Fellows, you have bound me to you for ever: but
follow my Fortunes no longer. No; my Pursuit is at an End: my Lydia's in
Slavery, and I cannot expect that you should stay to witness the mad Excesses
of a doting Lover, who is determined to rescue her, or fall in the Attempt.


Reef. And so, Master Frederick, you think, that like a Parcel of Pirates, we
are to take Possession of the Ship, and leave you ashore in an Enemy's Country.
As I take it, that is the Bearing of the Thing.


Fred. Come, come, I know your Kindness; but Venture here will be all the
Assistance I shall want.


Vent. And little enough too, I believe. -- But, Sir, if you will give me leave
-- if you should redeem this Lady from Captivity, unless they stay, how will
you get a Vessel to transport us from hence?


Fred. Oh! I know enough of Turkey to manage that; however, stand off to the
other Shore for two Days, and, if in the Course of that Time, I have any
Success, you shall hear from me; if not, I beg you will make what Expedition
you can to our Friends in England. Farewell then, my Lads, and may we meet in
more prosperous Times.

[Reef and the Sailors retire to a Corner of the Stage. AIR.
Here each Morn, and every Eve,
In dewy Ray returning;
Shall share the Sorrows that I breathe,
Shall witness to my Mourning:
Echo, catch the plaintive Lay,
To her Heart discover,
How, for her, forlorn I stray,
How well, how true I love her.
If forbidden to renew
The Vows which once we plighted;
My Lydia's Fate I will pursue,
In Death, at least, united:
The latest Breath that warms this Clay,
At parting, shall discover;
How I sigh my Soul away,
How well, how true I love her.
[ Exeunt Frederick and Venture.
Reef. [After a Pause.] Hark'ee, Jack Gunnel.


Gun. What do say, my Hearty?


Reef. An't my Name Tom Reef?


Gun. Why you may as well ask me, which is the Hatchway?


Reef. Well, and an't I Master and Commander of the Lovely Betty?


Gun. To be sure you are.


Reef. And an't I beholden for every Bit of spun Yarn about her, to this young
Man and his noble Father?


Gun. Ay, ay, you tell us often enough of that; you are too good a Seaman to
forget who gave you your Prefarment.


Reef. And now tell me; Have I ever, in all my Command, kept a wrong Reckoning,
tacked about when I should have bore away, or done any Thing that could make
you take a Notion aboard your Head, that I did not know every Rope in the Ship,
and how to steer her in all Weathers?


Gun. Never, Master.


Reef. Why, Gunnel, you lie; for it is impossible, if I had not some how or
other behaved in an unseaman-like Way, that my Master Frederick could have set
me a-drift in such a Manner as he has.


Gun. Why I thought to myself; thinks I, the young Youth does not know his
Soundings.


Reef. Know his Soundings! Why he will run bump ashore for want of a Pilot: but
I Will watch him closely; for though he will not take me in tow, as I said before, I
am obliged to him and his Father for all the Cargo I have, and, if there is a
Call for it, he shall find, that for all this, I Will stand by him as long as my
Timbers will stick together, Will you let me pilot you?


All. Ay, ay.


Reef. Then all Hands a-board. I Will only just take an Observation of our
Bearings, and be after you in less Time than you can count three Ratlings in
the Mizen Shrouds. -- Away --

[The Sailors go off.
Pol. [Coming on.] I have got my Letter ready; now to have it sent.


Reef. I have been over-hauling the Logbook of my Remembrance, and cannot find
how I have derserved this Usage. -- Eh! -- Is not that Polly?


Pol. How Is this? -- Surely I dream -- Dear Tom.


Reef. Why, my sweet Girl, how happens it that I should come along Side of you?


Polly. Indeed you may well ask. I have a long Story to tell you, of how I came
here; but it is enough at present to say, that I followed my Father, who is a
Slave to the Bashaw of this Place, and I have written a Letter to him, to beg
he will accept of me in his Stead, 'Till my Father is released, I can think of
nothing else.


Reef. Why, then, give me thy Letter, and if I don't get him out of the
Bilboes, say I have bore up to you under false Colors, that is all.


Pol. And will you think of me when we are parted?


Reef. Think of thee! When a Heart like mine is moored to the Affection of such
a sweet Girl as thee art, you may as well pretend to heave up the Peak of
Teneriffe, as break it from its Moorings.


Pol. Heigh ho!


Reef. Don't be down-hearted; if we must part, we must; but it shall go hard if
we don't soon bring to in a better Latitude.

AIR.
I.
Blow high, blow low, let Tempest tear
The Mainmast by the Board,
My Heart with Thoughts of thee, my dear,
And Love well stored,
Shall brave all Danger, scorn all Fear,
The roaring Wind, the raging Sea,
In hopes on Shore, to be once more
Safe moored with thee.
II.
Aloft, while Mountains high we go,
The whistling Winds that scud along,
And the Surge roaring from below,
Shall my Signal be
To think or thee,
And this shall be my Song:
Blow high, etc.
III.
And on that Night, when all the Crew,
The Memory of their former Lives,
Our flowing Cans of Flip renew,
And drink their Sweethearts and their Wives;
I Will heave a Sigh, and think of thee,
And as the Ship rowls through the Sea
The Burden of my Song shall be,
Blow high, etc.
[ Exeunt Reef and Polly.
SCENE, The Garden of the Seraglio.
Abdallah is seated under a Pavillion, Hassan, and other Slaves of both Sexes,
attending. CHORUS.
Hail to Sadi Abdallah Chiquaw,
Of every Village, Port, and Town,
City and Province of Renown
In fifty Leagues, the Grand Bashaw.
Whose Steps a Thousand Slaves attend,
Whose Power with Wonder we behold;
Whose mighty Treasure's without End,
Whose Palace shines with massy Gold.
His Sword is like the Morning Ray,
His Helmet a Beam of the Sky;
Where he comes, he casts round him perpetual Day,
And his prostrate Slaves lift their Voices and cry,
Hail, etc.

Abd. Hassan, have thou given Orders that Lydia, the European Woman, may choose
her own Attendants.


Has. I have, my Lord.


Abd. And now tell me, Hassan, did thou ever see so much Elegance and
beautiful Simplicity.


Has. Alas! Poor Elmira! --


Abd. I ordered thee to inform Elmira, that she might have her Liberty.


Has. You did, my Lord, and that she should return to her Friends, loaded with
Benefactions.


Abd. Were my Orders obeyed?


Has. She goes, my Lord, tomorrow.


Abd. Perhaps I may bid her farewell -- and now enough of this, for here comes
Lydia.

Enter Lydia. Well, my sweet Innocent, are my Slaves anxious to please you? Do
they obey your Commands? -- If the most tender Assiduity, the most unremitting
Affection, the most ardent Love --


Lyd. Oh, but they tell me, you never marry Folks, and that will not do for me,
for I promised long ago to love nobody but my Husband, and I intends to keep my
Word.


Abd. All this is Prejudice of your Country -- Love should be free, unlimited,
unrestrained. Behold the Birds how they live; Pleasure without Constraint.


Lyd. Oh! very well, upon my Word -- but I Will tell you one Thing: when I love,
I never intend to be tired, in the first Place; then as to Slavery of Marriage,
I am a Slave already: and for all them fine Things you say about the Birds, I
have observed it a hundred Times myself, that Doves were a great deal happier
than Sparrows.

AIR.
The little Birds, as well as you,
I Have marked with anxious Care,
How free their Pleasures they pursue
How void of every Care.
But Birds of various Kinds you will meet,
Some constant to their Loves:
Are chattering Sparrows half so sweet
As tender cooing Doves?
Birds have their Pride like human Kind,
Some on their Note presume,
Some on their Form, and some you will find
Proud of a gaudy Plume:
Some love a hundred, some you will meet
Still constant to their Loves;
Are chattering Sparrows half so sweet
As tender cooing Doves?

Abd. Well, my pretty innocent Reasoner, take your own Time to consider of my
Offer; you are Queen of these Possessions, together with abdallah's Heart.

[ Exit Abdallah, etc.
Secne shuts, leaving Lydia. Enter Elmira. Lyd. My dear Elmira, I wish I could
see you more cheerful.


Elm. Well, Lydia, what News of the Bashaw?


Lyd. Oh! he is ten Times more in Love with me than ever.


Elm. And pray do you mean to encourage him?


Lyd. Certainly.


Elm. To what End?


Lyd. In hopes that when I Have made him feel a little the Torment of
disappointed Love --


Elm. He Will reform, I suppose, and do me Justice. -- Ah! my dear Lydia, there is
a Delicacy accompanies a sincere Affection, which an Inconstant can never have
an Idea of.


Lyd. Well, I am not so uncharitable; I have a great Deal of Compassion for
this Man. Besides, how noble was his Resolution to marry you.


Elm. And yet he broke it.


Lyd. Poor Elmira! But my Situation is full as desperate as yours. The Ruffians
who brought me here, took me by Violence from my Lover. He swore to me, that I
should not be long in so defenseless a Condition; 'twas this Promise that made
me think my Life worth preserving, and, in spite of my Sorrows, to assume this
Character of Gaiety and Levity. And I am rewarded, for I have this Day seen him.


Elm. Seen him!


Lyd. Yes, my dear, and if you have no objection, I intend to see him again
presently.


Elm. By what means?


Lyd. By means of a Key that opens a private Door into the Garden.


Elm. You frighten me to Death! the Consequence will be dreadful.


Lyd. I say dreadful, indeed, when the whole Seraglio are my Slaves, Bashaw and
all.

AIR.
If it was not that such a meek Creature as you
They Would imagine to have a Concern in it;
Before I Would be pent, like a Bird in a Mew,
I Would set it on Fire, and burn in it.
Why, Child, what do you talk, over every Thing here,
I absolute hold a Dominion,
And I Will lay you my Life, let tomorrow appear,
That you will own yourself of my Opinion.
I command at my Will, every Slave, every Mute,
His Retinue and all his Regalia,
And I Will come and I Will go,
Say, Yes, or say, No,
Just as Fancy, or Whim, or Caprice it shall suit;
Or I Will take every Key,
Set all the Slaves free,
And turn out of Doors the Seraglio.
[Exeunt.
SCENE, another View of the Garden; on one Side a Range of Apartments, with a
Balcony to each.
Enter Venture. A Plague confound my Curiosity -- Ah! I am quite lost; why
could not I remain where I was? How could I expect to find any Place by myself,
among these damned Serpentine Walks? Where was it my Master and Miss Lydia set
me to watch? -- I dare not holloa; and the further I go, the more I seem out of
my Way -- The Day is quite closed in too, and in three Minutes it will be as
dark as Pitch -- Ah! it is all over with me; I don't suppose I shall keep my
Head upon my Shoulders above a Quarter of an Hour longer -- Poor Venture, what
will become of thee?

AIR.
What shall I do? Oh, la! Oh, la!
I am all over quite one Thaw;
I only saw an aged Yew,
Through which the Wind but whistling blew,
And thinking it a horrid Turk,
Who swore, he to the Wall would pin me;
For fear lest she should fall to Work,
I run as is the Devilish was in me.
I am a very drowning Rat.
I dread each Breath of Air I hear.
I dare not look -- Oh, Lord! What Is that? --
I believe 'twas nothing but my Fear.
What Wretch would now be in my Coat?
This Frolic dearly we shall rue:
I feel the Bow-string at my Throat,
What shall I do? -- What shall I do?
[ Exit Venture.
Enter Reef. Reef. Now these same Infidels are safe under Hatches, I may
venture to cruise a little more. I hope it will please Polly, that I have sent
home her Father, and have in his Stead entered myself among the Bashaw's
Complement of Hands. -- I don't despair neither of an Opportunity of effecting
young Madam Lydia's Escape; one Six-pounder will knock down that ginger-bread
Work there, that leads to the River, and then there will be a free Passage for
us to enter ten abreast, if we like it -- Have at you then, Seigniors -- I
fancy they will soon strike.

[Goes off.
Enter Lydia and Elmira, at the Balcony, afterward Reef reenters; then
Venture, Hassan, and Slaves; then Frederick, and after him several female
Slaves appear at the Balcony. Elm. I hope they got out safe.


Lyd. Never fear -- What a delightful Evening it is! -- The Slaves are pretty
near at rest by this Time -- I shall be impatient till I see Frederick again.
See how sweet the Moon rises!


DUETTO, QUINTETTO AND CHORUS.
Lydia and Elmira. How beautiful, and how serene,
Shines yonder Night's resplendent Queen!
Kindly to comfort those who roam,
And light the Trav'ller to his Home.
Oh, thou, whose Beams so sweetly play,
Bestow one kind, one chearing Ray;
One sympathetic Gleam impart,
To heal the Anguish in my Heart.
Reef. These Swabs turned in, and fast asleep,
Poor Tom, his midnight Watch to keep,
Now roams alone, by Love inclined
To think of her he left behind.
Venture, [Behind.] Murder, murder! Oh, dear, dear!
Lydia. Hark, Elmira, did you not hear
A dreadful Cry of Murder?
Elm. -- Yes.
Reef. What means that Signal of Distress?
A Sail. [Venture crosses the Stage.
Lyd. Elm. -- I fear the worst.
Has. -- Come on, [Here two Turks cross the Stage.
Reef. Two, three.
Has. -- He cannot far be gone.
Follow.
Lyd. Elm. -- Alas!
Has. -- This is the Place.
I traced him by the Light of the Moon.
Reef. A hoy, why here is a Fleet in chase,
Of one poor Picaroon.
Elm. Oh, Heavens!
Lyd. -- My Spirits fail,
I droop.
Reef. -- They Are crowding all their Sail.
They bear up faster than he likes.
They Have boarded him -- Ah, now he strikes!
Lyd. Elm. Oh, Heaven!
Reef. -- And see this Way they steer.
Well, Messmates, what is the Matter here?
Has. Drag him along.
Vent. -- Oh, woeful Plight!
Has. By Heaven, he shall not see the Light.
A sabre, here!
1 st Slave. [Behind.] Hassan, run, run!
Fred. [Behind.] I will not yield.
Lyd. -- Ah! we are undone.
It Is Frederick's Voice.
Has. -- He Is bound at last.
Strangle them both.
Reef. -- Mess-mates, avaunt!
Lyd. In pity spare him.
Fred. -- Lydia, oh!
Good Heaven, what complicated woe!
Has. No Words.
Reef. -- You're all aback, I say,
The Prizes a'n't condemned today.
Clap them in Irons then, and wait
For further Orders.
Has. Right, their Fate
Till then we will suspend.
CHORUS. Come on,
And ere the Veil of Night be drawn,
The great Bashaw's supreme Decree,
Shall give them Death or Liberty.
[Exeunt.
End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, the Garden of the Seraglio.
Enter Lydia and Elmira. Elmira. YOU are unacquainted with his Temper; he is
generous, but provoked, he is implacable. Oh, Lydia, you don't know in what
Misery you have involved us all! He will now complain of Insult upon Insult,
and with Reason. In a few Days had you requested it, he would have given you
your Liberty.


Lyd. So he said, indeed, but you know he has a Knack of changing his Mind; I
was therefore willing to make sure of it, without his Leave.


Elm. And you have failed in the attempt -- He will now have every Thing to
upbraid you with; and you may depend upon it, there is no Resolution in the
Moment of his Resentment, he will not be capable of putting in Execution: and
as for me --


Lyd. Hear me, Elmira -- I have my Pride -- I have my Resentment -- Who is this
Abdallah, that because he is powerful, shall dare to trample on the Laws of
Honor and Humanity? Rely upon it; Truth and Reason will at last wake him, or I
am a bad Physiognomist.


AIR.
ELMIRA. Ah! what avails the brightest Worth
That in Abdallah's Bosom flows;
Though Truth and Reason there have Birth,
Though there each radiant Virtue glows!
Must I, at Distance placed, survey
The Beam that other Hearts inspires,
While, with unkind, averted Ray,
From me its chearing Warmth retires.
[Exit.
Enter Abdallah, followed by Hassan. Has. Health to the Bashaw!


Abd. How now?


Has. May it please you, illustrious Abdallah, we have taken two Men who were
lurking last Night about the Garden, with a View, as we suspect, of speaking to
Elmira or Lydia; but how they got in, or what Mischief they intended to do, we
cannot discover.


Lyd. I let them in.


Abd. You!


Lyd. I.


Abd. Distraction! And for what Purpose, Madam? See that you clear yourself of
any Intention to dishonor me, or the Consequence shall be dreadful to you. Who
are they?


Lyd. My Lover and a Domestic. They came here by my Appointment; and if they
had not been discovered, we should before this have made our Escape from you.
Now, Sir, what heavy Vengeance is to fall upon us for it.


Abd. Confusion!


Lyd. What Right had we to consider you, but in the Light of an Enemy? Were we
not treacherously brought here, from the Arms of our afflicted Friends? There
is some Generosity about you, I acknowledge. You boast of your Justice, let us
see you exercise it now, you have a fit Opportunity; if you dare behave as you
ought, we may know how to thank you: but if it is your Pleasure to give us a
Proof of your Power, you will meet with those who have Fortitude enough to
despise its utmost Malice.

AIR.
I.
I simply wait for your Commands, Sir,
Is it Peace, or is it War?
Shall we quarrel, or shake Hands, Sir?
Which, good Seignior, are you for?
II.
You Have naught to do, but speak your Mind, Sir,
Only give me then my Cue;
If for scolding you're inclined, Sir,
I can scold as well as you.
III.
But did you give a single Hint, Sir,
That Peace and Quiet you preferred,
There'd be no Obligation in it, Sir,
I would not speak another Word.
[ Exit Lydia.
Abd. That Power you so much despise, you may, perhaps, tremble at. -- Bring
those Men before me.

[Hassan goes off.
Re-enter Hassan, with Frederick, Venture and Slaves. Abd. Endeavor to escape
from me! Abuse my Confidence! Have the Hardiness to own it to my Face, while I
stand confounded, and even incapable of making a Reply. -- Tell me, devoted
Wretches, why have you thus incurred the heaviest Vengeance in Abdallah's
Power, presumptuously daring to penetrate within these Walls?


Vent. Why you know, Sir, 'twas the old Fishermen that brought us the Key; we
had better, therefore, confess, and so have him strangled, to save our Lives.


Abd. Which of my Slaves were prevailed upon to give you Admittance here?


Vent. Magnificent and most mighty Abdallah, if I tell you the whole Truth,
will you spare my Life?


Abd. Thou shall find me merciful.


Vent. Then I will speak, I am determined. -- There is an old Fisherman, one
Goodwill; I don't suppose your magnanimous Honor can be acquainted with such a
Fellow as he -- but let that be as it will -- he sometimes comes here with
Fish, and he brought my Master a Key, which he said would open a private Door
into the Garden; so you see 'twas all his Doings, and if I might speak --
though to be sure, it is highly presumptuous in me to advise such a most
illustrious, and prodigious great Man as you are -- you had better hang him,
and send us about our Business.


Has. My Lord, there is a Circuustance that confirms this Account, the Slave
you received by the Persuasion of this Goodwill, in exchange for one Williams,
has this Morning made his Escape.


Abd. It Is plain there is a Plot against me. Seize this Fisherman instantly,
and every one you find in his House.


Fred. How could you be guilty of so much baseness, as to betray the poor old
Man and his Family?


Vent. Lord, Sir, you don't consider what a terrible Thing it is to be
strangled.


Fred. This Wretch raves out any absurdity to save his Life.


Vent. Indeed, most prodigious minded Abdallah, it is all true.


Abd. I will know the whole Truth, or make examples of you all -- Hassan, obey
my Orders, seize those People directly, and for you, whatever Punishment you
deserve, shall, without remission, be inflicted on you.

[ Exit Abdallah.
Has. Come let us bestow you in safety.


Fred. Lead me where you will, and let your rapacious Lord exercise his
Pleasure.

AIR.
The pious Pilgrim, who from far
Has journey'd weak and faint,
The hallowed Fabric to revere,
That holds some favorite Saint;
Not deeper plunges in Despair,
If all his Toil is vain,
Than does the hopeless Suff'rer here,
Nor feels severer Pain.
[Exeunt.
SCENE, the Fisherman's Cottage.
Enter Goodwill, Williams, Curtis and Polly. Good. I tell you, Dame, that it
will be the making of us all. I communicated the Design to Reef last Night, and
I dare say they must have got off by this Time; that the Ship will fall down
here by Twilight, and then we shall all embark for England together.


Curt. Why I should be glad to lay my poor old Bones at Peace in my own
Country, that is to be sure.


Good, And so thou shall; and we'll sit round our Fireside, and tell our
Neighbors, what Adventures we have had among the Turks.


Curt. But yet now you cannot be angry with me for being afraid, for how many
Times have you said yourself, says you, Always beware of a Lawyer with your
Estate in his Hands, and a Turk with his Scymetar at your Throat.


Good. Why to be sure, though they are very generous when you trust them, they
are very Devils if you deceive them.


Will. I hope, therefore, this Plot was well devised.


Good. Why don't I fell you, I managed it myself -- Well devised; ay, ay, but
I Will go and put off a little in the Boat, as if I was fishing, and so take
Notice what they are about aboard the Ship; she was removed from the opposite
Shore, and I dare say, if I can but get far enough up the River without being
observed, I shall be able to watch all their Motions. If I can perceive what
they are doing, I Will return and let you know.


Will. Do; but pray be cautious.


Good. Never fear.

[ Exit Goodwill.
Curt. And I Will go, and get together what few Things we have, that we may not
be hurried when we set out.


Will. And, Polly, my dear Daughter, do you help Dame Curtis, that she may not
be too much fatigued.


Curt. Fatigued! Lord help you, I am able enough to do work.


Will. Indeed you seem healthy enough.

[ Exit Curtis.
Pol. Now then, my dear Father, I am truly happy upon the point of leaving this
disagreeable Place with you, who are redeemed from Slavery, and with Reef, who
now I do not blush to own, I have an Affection for.


Re-enter Goodwill. Good. Well, I was just putting off to them, but Reef
observed what I was about, and waved me to stay where I was. Every Thing is
just as we could wish -- the Ship is under Sail. -- Adieu, Seigniors -- Egad,
it makes my old Heart rejoice, to think, that I shall once again get a Sight of
old England.


Re-enter Curtis. Curt. Odds me! We are all undone! There Is Muli Alouf Hali
Hassan, and twenty more Slaves, coming to take us all before his honor the
Bashaw.


Good. How do you know?


Curt. I spoke to them out of the Window, and they told me, if I did not open
the Door, they would force it open.


Good. I Will try if I cannot prevail with my Friend Hali Hassan, to let us give
them the Slip; in 'the mean while, do you hide yourself in some Closet, while I
go and try.

[ Exeunt all but Polly.
Pol. Poor Reef, what will become of thee!

AIR.
My true Love the cruel Sea,
From me did sever,
Then my poor Heart was rent in twain,
For much I feared, ah! woe to me,
That he would never
To my Arms return again.
What must I feel then at this Hour,
If I love, if I esteem him,
To see him bound, and have no power,
But Sighs and Wishes to redeem him?
[Exit.
Enter Reef, Gunnell, and Sailors. Reef. Now, my Lads, I Will undertake to bring
the Prize into Port, in a few Glasses: mayhap we may meet with a smart
Resistance; what then, must take Things as they are -- Life's a Voyage, where
we must expect all Weathers, sometimes rough, sometimes calm; and as for
Despair, why it signifies nothing, Resolution and Skill are better than a stout
Vessel; for why? Because they require no Carpenters, and get stronger, the more
Labor they undergo.


Gun. I believe you know pretty well, we shall not flinch, we'll trim their
Whiskers for them, if they come to close Quarters with us.


Reef. That Is hearty -- You all know your Stations.


All. Ay, ay.


Reef. Down Bulk-heads, and then up Chests and Hammocks.

AIR.
The Signal to engage shall be
A Whistle and a Hollow;
Be one and all but firm like me.
And Conquest soon will follow.
You, Gunnel, keep the Helm in hand,
Thus, thus, Boys, steady, steady;
Till right a Head we see the Land,
Then soon as we are ready,
The Signal, etc.
Keep, Boys, a good look out, do you hear?
It Is for old England's Honor,
Just as you have brought your lower Tier
Broadside to bear upon her,
All Hands then, Boys, the Ship to clear,
Load all your Guns and Mortars,
Silent as Death the Attack prepare,
And when you're all at Quarters,
The Signal, etc.
[Exeunt.
SCENE, the Garden of the Seraglio.
Enter Abdallah, Lydia, Hassan, Frederick, and Slaves. Abd. Hassan, where are
your Prisoners?


Has. They attend without, my Lord.


Abd. Bring them here -- Hear me, Christians; when you were brought Slaves to
my Seraglio, hearing you repined at your Situation, I remitted its Severity,
undertook myself to provide you those Amusements, which I thought were the most
likely to alleviate your uneasiness; entreated you to think me your Friend --
nay, upon Terms which I thought you could not in Honor refuse, I offered you
Liberty; in return, you have abused my Confidence by a most unwarrantable
Outrage, -- Hali Hassan, conduct these Christians to the Banks of the Tigris,
and there dispose of them as this Paper shall instruct you.

[ As they are going off, a Whistle and a Hollow is heard, when Reef, Gunnel,
and other Sailors come on the Stage.
Reef. Avast, my Boys; Master Frederick, I thought it would come to this Come,
Seigniors, we'll see whether your Scymetars or our Cutlasses can do the most
Execution -- There Is one for you.


Fred. Thank you, Reef, and now let them attack us as soon as they dare.


Abd. Hold! -- Though I could with ease repel this Outrage, it would give me
more Pleasure to find that you can excuse it -- What Is the Cause of it?


Reef. Why what signifies two Ships hailing one another, when they are yard-arm
and yard-arm for an Engagement. I saw this young Gentleman steering right
before the Wind into an Enemy's Harbor, so I and all my Crew are determined to
save his Life, or lose ours. Fall on!


Abd. Hold! [ To Hassan.] Deliver that Paper. Read it. [ To Reef.


Reef. [Reading.] " Hassan, as thou regard'st thy Life, load these Christians
with Riches, and give them safe and honorable Conduct to their own Country."
--


Fred. Do I awake?

[Reef signs to the Sailors to retire.
Abd. Well, you may be astonished -- I had determined to cut you off, but my
Love for Lydia would not suffer me to listen to such an Objection. This Motive
more and more prevailed, till at last, I resolved to send you back to those
Friends who lament your Absence, and with Honor, because I had wronged you.


Lyd. Generous Abdallah! [ Runs to Fred.


Reef. Why it has turned out a stark Calm, just as we expected to go to the
Bottom.


Enter Goodwill, Williams, Polly and Curtis. Abd. [ To Reef.] You, Sir,
embraced Slavery to redeem the Father of her you love -- as a Reward, take her
and your Liberty.


Pol. And are you mine then at last?


Will. May I believe my Senses?


Good. Did not I tell you, that his illustrious Honor was all Generosity? Why
don't you thank him, Reef?


Reef. I will, Master, when I have swabbed the Spray From my Bow a little.


Abd. You have had your Trial, now comes mine -- Lydia, be free; my first
endeavor shall be to make you happy. I ought not to repine, for you were born
to teach me the Duties of Humanity.


Lyd. You are a noble Creature, I will say that for you -- Return to Elmira,
dismiss this useless Train of Favorites, reward her Virtues, and enjoy perfect
Happiness.


Abd. You have instructed me well -- This Building shall be no longer my
Seraglio, but Elmira's Palace.


Has. My Lord --


Abd. I know that thou would tell me that I am violating our Customs -- But
was I the greatest Sultan, and had carried the Glory of the Crescent to the
Ends of the Earth, I should be unworthy my Dignity, if I could give Countenance
to any Laws that would fully my Honor.


FINALE.
Abd. Away with rough tyrannic Rules,
From Reason's Precepts that depart;
Be mine the Power that not controuls,
But mildly wins the pliant Heart!
When generous Dictates lead the Mind,
Then, then alone of Bliss possessed,
In others Joys our own we find,
In blessing others truly blessed.
Fred. Beneath such kind protecting Care,
Rich Commerce spreads his golden Wings,
And Science does her Banner rear,
And rugged Labor toils and sings.
Lyd. The virtuous Maid, and constant Youth,
Their mutual Wishes free obtain;
And Love, and Innocence, and Truth,
In undisturbed Enjoyment reign.
Reef. The ready Sailor quits the Shore,
His Sov'reign's Honor to maintain;
And when the dangerous Toil is over,
Partakes the Blessings of the Plain:
Polly. Where Mirth amid the rural Throngs,
The Triumphs of his Power imparts;
And Carols from a thousand Tongues,
Speak lively Thoughts and grateful Hearts.
CHORUS. When generous Dictates, etc.

FINIS.

