VIOLENTA, OR THE Rewards of Virtue: TURNED FROM BOCCACE into VERSE.

LONDON, Printed for John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1704.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Earl of SCARSDALE.
My Lord,
I have long had an eager Ambition to see Your Lordship's Name amongst those
Noble Patrons, to whom I have presumed to offer my unworthy Attempts in Poetry.
I acknowledge, I want Merit infinitely in all these Undertakings, and am so
Humble, to own more Faults than the severest Critic will give himself the
Trouble to find; yet such has been my Good Fortune, that I have often found
Indulgeance from the Greatest and Best of our Kingdom: This, in Part, mitigates
my Fears, when I Venture to approach Your Lordship with so worthless a Piece.

I have the Honor to know Your Lordship so well, as to depend on Your
Goodness, when I am afraid of Your Judgment, to believe you so kind and
forgiving, as to smile at Follies, that have no other Intention than Your
innocent Diversion. After having confessed the Weakness of my Pen, I may be
justly excused from Aiming at a Character generous as Your Lordships, and
shining with those Heroic Qualities, which ought to be inherent to the Great;
nor let the severest Moralist Reflect upon the Encouragement of Things of this
Nature, since the noblest Lives Fame has transmitted to Posterity, have always
been Patrons, of Poetry.

May Your Lordship long continue in that State of Happiness Your Noble Birth
and Fortunes have fixed You, and Master of those excellent Indowments, Justice
and Humanity, with that unalterable Firmness to Your Word and Principle. These
Virtues, My Lord, render You, the Ornament of the Nation and Nobility; and in
Your unbending Hours, may You still remain a Favourer of the Stage, and
vouchsafe, to listen to the unartful Numbers of this Poem, and be inclind to
pardon the Daring Boldness of Inscribing it to Your Lordship, by,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient and Humble Servant,

ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. ult. dele a; p. 21. l. 14. r. pursue for preserve; and Wretch for
Wrath; p. 22. l. 12. r. writ unspotted Truth; p. 27. l. 14. r. blotted for
bursted; p. 29. l. 14. r. pursue for preserve; p. 45. l. 14. r. Vestals for
Vessels; p. 49. l. 6. r. Fires for Fits; p. 56. l. 5. r. small for Male; p. 65.
l. 9. r. Mothers for another; p. 71. dele The Father said; p. 109. l. 13. r.
dazzling for Darling; ib. l. 16. r. shine for shown; p. 112. l. 10. r. glad for
sad.

VIOLENTA FROM BOCCACE
BEGIN my Muse, the wondrous Tale rehearse,
The various Turns of Virtue in Distress.
How Fate controuls the Council of the Wise,
How often hid in Beauties fair Disguise,
Foul Deceit and treacherous Falsehood Lies.
How Virtue breaks the dark'ning Clouds away,
And from Misfortunes Night arises gay,
Gives double Luster to the glorious Day.
Here may the Old a mighty Pattern find,
And view the Trial of the noblest Mind;
Soft Love to please the cheerful happy Young,
With strange Adventures fills the Historick Song.
'Twas in those warlike Days, when growing France
Would with extending Power her Realms advance:
The Sturdy Germans, late the Roman Pride,
Still struggled hard, still pushed and gored her Side;
Vast Troops they raised, the King and Prince their Head,
Filled with their Youth, and by their Heroes led;
This done, there follows and important Care,
Whom they shall trust, their great Vicegerent here.
The Dauphin to his Father recommends
One of his dearest, most deserving Friends,
The Count of Angiers, then in high Renown,
Fittest to guard and fill the empty Throne.
The Choice with universal Joy's approved,
Never was Man like Noble Angiers loved.
Against his Will the Mourner's drawn to Court,
Who had forsook the World and all Resort;
To the dark Groves and silent Caves was fled
To weep in vain, his dear Maria dead;
For Tyrant Death had snatched a Faithful Wife,
And with her all the Joys of hapless Angiers Life;
The World to him had now no pleasing Charms,
Nor waked he with the once loved Sound of Arms:
Thus lived the Count to eating Grief a Prey,
'Till by his Master's Voice he is forced away,
He heard, and knew he must the King obey.
He comes, and soon the mighty Charge receives,
And for his Trust his Faith and Honor gives;
And now the Dauphin ready to depart,
Presses his faithful Angiers to his Heart:
Oh! thou my Dear and long tried Friend he said!
And on his Bosom kindly leaned his Head,
To thee my Father leaves his Kingdom's Care,
No Subject boasts of Power a larger Share:
The Trust is weighty, and the Trouble great,
To Rule this potent Land and Pop'lar State;
Yet my best Friend there is more Business yet.
I must engage thy most peculiar Care,
To guard and please that bright Illustrious Fair,
My charming Wife, whose far famed Beauty may,
While I to distant Camps am called away,
By some ill Fate, my Peace at Home betray.
Watch that Cleora undisturbed may rest,
In serving her thou gain'st thy Master's Breast:
This said, he clasped him fast, nor staid Replies,
But cried, I read thy Answer in thy Eyes.
Quick to his warlike Troops he took his Way,
Whose youthful Heat could brook no longer stay.
Angiers is left the sole Commander now,
To him the officious Courtiers crowd and bow;
He looked as born to the Honors of his Place,
His Noble Soul enriched with every Grace,
Shone with Majestic Sweetness in his Face.
Just ripened full from Youths delightful Bloom,
Enough to promise happy Years to come;
With most judicious Policy he Reigns,
Supports the Good, the Bad his Power restrains;
Remembering well his Master's last Command,
He Signs all Orders with Cleora's Hand.
Cleora bright as the approaching Day,
When Fair Aurora does her Beams display
And gilds the Mountains with her blooming Ray.
In her ten Thousand Graces Revelling meet,
The blowing Rose not half so lovely sweet:
She looked as if her Eyes commanded Fate,
Formed equal to her Great Imperial State,
Yet on her Soul a yielding Softness sat;
And Noble Angiers was her chiefest Care,
On him she smiled with a familiar Air;
Tried every way that might his Griefs redress,
Oblige the Count (and make that Passion less)
With all Delights that Prudence could afford,
Or Palace yield in the Absence of its Lord.
Sometimes with Rural Sports they would chase the Hind,
Whose nimble Feet seem to outstrip the Wind;
Then Dancing, Balls, and Masquerades and Plays,
With these they wast the Nights and cheerful Days;
With these Delights Cleora kindly strove
To drive from Angiers Breast all former Love;
Abroad they prosper, Couriers daily bring
News of Success both by the Prince and King.
Now in the height of Bliss, just Angiers stood
Supreamly Great, and more supreamly Good:
Yet short the Joys which humane Souls allure,
Nor can we make our Happiness secure;
Vain Man as well on Sand may Structures lay,
As hope to fix his Fate in mouldering Clay;
A Thousand Accidents frail Life attend,
And Mortals only know that Life must end;
Our Paths seem hid in the dark Book of Fate,
The Doom once past, Precaution comes too late;
So luckless Angiers, Thoughtful Bold and Wise,
Esteemed his Court another Paradise;
Yet to his Cost, the Noble Hero found
Ten Thousand Snakes beneath the enameled Ground:
Had he foreseen his Fate, though but in Dreams,
He must have died at Terror of the Scenes,
Which thus began; Cleora Orders sends
To the Count her Councellor, and best of Friends,
To her Appartment he must straight repair,
For Business of Importance waits him there.
With have, and Loyal Zeal, the Victim came,
Dressed like Loves Goddess was the princely Dame,
Her Eyes had equal Brightness, equal Flame;
Her Mantle Azure, filled with Stars of Gold,
And shining Jems adorned each curious Fold;
Careless thrown, scarce covered half her Breast;
But to the wondering Eye exposed the rest:
Choice Garlands crowned her lovely flowing Hair,
Yet seem to lose their Luster planted there,
The Rose not half so fresh, the Lilly half so fair.
Supinely on a glorious Couch she lay
As she would Rival the bright Lamp of Day;
Her Head she leaned upon her snowy Hand,
Whilst Angiers kneels to hear her dread Command;
The bright attending Nymphs that round her wait,
Retire, not pry into Affairs of State:
When thus the charming Princess Silence broke,
And with a Smile to faithful Angiers spoke,
Arise my Noble Lord, and seat you there,
For I have much to say, and you must hear;
You once did feel great Love's Tyranick Reign,
And sure must kindly Sigh when I complain;
The Dauphin writes, the Wars will take much Time,
And me neglected leaves in Beauties Prime,
Hard Fate! a Sacrifice to public Voice,
I never knew the Priveledge of Choice;
When in my Father's Court, the wondering Crowd
Still gazed, and Poets sung my Praises loud;
They haild my Youth, and wished me all Delights,
But I Am condemned to care, and widdow'd Nights:
The sad Reverse of all their Blessings prove,
And must conclude the Dauphin does not love.
The flattering World, and each reflecting Glass,
Owns matchless Glory's in this injured Face;
Forgive me if I break our Sexes Laws,
When wronged, we may assert our Right, our Cause.
Speak Angiers, were I circled in thy Arms,
Would thou for Camps forsake Loves softer Charms?
Up to her Cheeks a conscious Blush straight flies,
And thousand Cupids revell'd in her Eyes.
Angiers arose, with Reverence profound
Began, nor raised his fixed Eyes from the Ground:
Most Divine Princess, you may rest assured,
You are the Treasure of your absent Lord;
By Glory torn from Loves delightful Chains,
Yet in his Heart alone Cleora Reigns:
Oh! had you heard the tender Charge he gave
Of you (his Life's Reward) to me his Slave,
You never could his Constancy suspect,
But call that Violence which now you term Neglect.
Scarce could the Fair her soft Confusion hide,
And half composed, she blushing thus replied,
To Angiers then did he Cleora leave?
For that one Act I all his Faults forgive.
To Angiers freely I my self resign,
Too sure I Am his, Heaven make the Hero mine:
What racking Fires are these that fill my Breast,
My Soul distract, and rob my Eyes of Rest!
Oh! turn not from me, since too much I Have said,
And the soft Secret of my Soul betrayed:
If I Am refused, Death is the Punishment.
But Love and Pleasure wait on kind Consent.
Down at her Feet the trembling Angiers fell,
His Terror and Surprise no Tongue can tell
His Faulters, not knows which way to begin,
The Princess he reveres, abhors the Sin:
It Is a hard Task Superiors to reprove,
And mighty Virtue to resist such Love;
Amazed, he spoke in the mildest Phrase he could,
Instructs the Charming Princess to be good.
Then cried, What Frenzy's this that dares control
The Noble Greatness of Cleora's Soul?
You're born Supreme, your Lots are paired above:
Bounded by Fate from an inferior Love.
The Dauphin, first of Men, already's yours,
By Right Divine his lawful Claim secures:
I own ye beauteous as the blooming May,
Fair as the First, ever Nature knew decay;
Still in your Looks you wear all conquering Charms,
But these are destined for my Masters Arms;
I Would give my Body to consuming Flame,
Leave any other Blot upon my Name,
Ever wrong, in you, that Royal Masters Fame.
She rose with Fury, and would hear no more;
Disdain now worked her boiling Spirits over,
Those Eyes shot Fire, that languish'd Love before.
She starts, then paused, and with a scornful Smile,
Foretold the Mischiefs and intended Guile.
The Count who knew no Ill, suspected none;
Blushed for her Shame, and wished himself alone.
When straight she threw her Mantle on the Ground,
Her Garland tore, her curling Hair unbound;
Then seizing Angiers, with a Scream of Woe,
Cried Murder, Villain, Traitor, let me go.
The Voice of Terror through the Palace flies,
Followed still with loud incessant Cries;
Help all, oh help, or lost Cleora dies.
All have, and swift as Thought the Apartment's filled,
Where on the Flore the Princess they beheld;
The injured Earl confused and pale they View,
This Turn robbed him of Speech and Reason too.
When false Cleora reared her weeping Face,
And Beauty gave to Sorrow double Grace,
Look on the base perfidious Man she said,
By whom the Dauphin and you're all betrayed;
Trusting his Faith, I charged him to declare
The Affairs of State, and Business of the War,
The Conference strict Secrecy required,
My waiting Servants by Command retired;
But ever he half the Dauphins Will declared,
Seized on my Hand, around like Madness star'd,
And cried, the Regent Princess now is mine,
She shall her Honor or her Life resign:
For I am wild with Loves ungoverned Rage,
Possession only can my Flame assuage.
With the Surprise I scarce could raise my Breath
To call your Aid which has secured from Death.
Who could suppose the Raising of the Dead
Might see the Amazement that each Face overspread;
None but the Wicked this sad Tale does please,
Nor dare his Enemies his Person seize.
Alone, disgraced he to his Palace goes,
And there reflects on his malicious Foes,
Thinks on the Weight of his pretended Crimes,
Resolves to fly his coming Fate betimes:
For if he should declare h^ Innocence,
And on the Princess cast the Black Offense,
The Laurels which the Prince abroad did gain,
Would wither all at the unhappy Stain;
Resolved alone the rigorous Fate to bear,
And own the Guilt rather than lay't on her.
His speedy Flight is straight condemned by Fame,
And all ill Tongues are busy with his Name;
He takes two tender Pledges Wedlock gave,
The only Treasure he had Power to save:
With him Ernesto flies, faithful and just,
Who long had served, and never betrayed his Trust:
Thus the Great Man, whom that same rising Morn
Saw dressed in Honors that such Trust adorn,
With crowded Levee, and a waiting Train,
All the gay Pomps that can Observance Gain;
Now stripped, forsaken, bare, disgraced and lost,
Wanders to find some hospitable Coast;
And as he traveled toward the distant Sea,
A dreadful Light directs his doubtful Way;
He views his Castle blazing in one Flame;
The fierce Revenge of that invet'rate Dame;
Unmoved, he saw the Structure tumble down;
And cried, thou can not bury my Renown:
In time perhaps my Truth may come to Light,
My Fame outshine those Towers that Blaze so bright,
And the mistaken World, though late, may see
A conspicuous Virtue in unhappy Me.
Now in a Cell they snatch a short Repose;
Soon as the Sun the wakeful Angiers rose,
His Courage yet unshock'd by adverse Fate,
His Noble Suffering showed him truly Great.
But oh! when he beheld his little Pair,
The Mothers Darlings, and the Fathers Care,
In vain upon their Nurse and Servants call,
The Floods so long restrained, in Torrents fall;
At their sad Wants he could no more forbear,
Indulged his Grief with many a pitying Fear;
The tender Charge, who thus awaked his Care,
A little Son, and lovely Daughter were,
Both Beauteous seemed, as formed by Hands Divine,
The Parents Graces in the Infants shine;
Lewis the Son, a charming sprightly Boy,
The first dear Fruit of Angiers Nuptial Joy;
His other Hope, his Darling Daughter's Name
Was (...), sacred still to Fame:
The helpless Infants, the wronged Angiers viewed,
Their woes, the dear Maria's lost renewed.
Dashed by Despair, and groveling on the Earth,
Cursed the Malignant Star that ruled his Birth,
Like some sad Wretch, long struggling for the Shore,
He sinks and gives his hopeless Labor over,
'Till old Ernesto urged him to remove,
By that fond Care and that pater'nal Love.
If you neglect your Princess Wroth to fly,
Then next prepare to see your Children dye;
Revenge will touch you in the tenderest Part,
Her Rage will wound, through theirs, your Manly Heart:
He found 'twas vain to make a useless Moan,
The Father and the unhappy Babes must on.
At length they Calice reached, and there they found
A Passage Ship for neighboring England bound;
He gets an humble Weed, md poor Disguise,
Besmears his Face, and vai^ his Noble Eyes
To shun the swift Pursuit of eager Enemies.
Embarked, he turns toward his native Land,
Though injured much, he sighs to leave the Strand;
And softly murmurs over his riged Fate,
Undone by Love, far worse than Mortal Hate;
Yet still he bids the listening Winds forbear,
Nor waft the Story to the Dauphin's Ear;
For his sweet Peace he barters all his own,
Neglects the Fame which did his Actions crown;
Wives Errors on the Husbands Head remain,
To keep the Dauphin clear he bears himself the Stain.
Cleora! can thou have a peaceful Thought,
Whose lawless Fires this mighty Ruin brought?
Poor Angiers still pursued by his ill Fate,
As if the Winds joined with Cleora's Hate;
Adverse they toss the Vessel on the Seas,
Like his tempestuous Mind, no Calm, no Ease;
These Toils to old Ernesto were unknown,
A gentle Servitude his Years did crown;
Unable now, in his declining Age,
To act a longer Part on this rough Stage,
Pale Death, the last Retreat, and sure Relief,
Came to his Aid, and ends his Life and Grief:
The gashly Tyrant he seems joy'd to meet,
And sinks beneath his troubled Masters Feet:
There was no need of this; grieved Angiers said,
Will Heaven still preserve the Wrath it made?
Why was this added to my Misery,
That thou my poor Ernesto too must die?
Now of a Sudden all the Seas grow Calm,
As if his Grief had hushed the raging Storm;
At length the fair white chalky Cliffs they spy,
A joyful Sight to every Sailor's Eye;
Only the Earl who knows ^ot where to go,
Alone expects variety of Woe:
The Travelers would fain his Sorrows cheer,
Inquire his Name, what Course he meant to stear?
He answers with a Sigh, I cannot stray:
The Wretched never fear to lose their Way.
In the same Ship, a venerable Man
Well marked the Count, and then with Tears began,
Whoever thou art, says he, within thy Face,
Is written spotted Truth, and matchless Grace,
And thy young Cherubs seem of heavenly Race.
Then haste thee Stranger to our Nations Pride,
To that great Mart where gaudy Courts abide;
There, if my Foresight fail not, thou shall find
Some Noble Britain to these Infants kind;
^ie view d him well, then pressed him more to know,
Good Man he cried, thou have a Sceam of Woe,
Inquire no more, but where I bid thee, go.
His Words Emphatick, struck an awe Divine,
Both Priest and Prophet in his Vizage shine;
Angiers, unknown, to London takes his Way,
Resolved the Holy Father's Voice to obey;
Wheree'er he goes there is no avoiding Fate,
He to his Sufferings finds no early Date:
The public News his shameful Story tells,
Explores his Crimes, the Dauphin Wrath reveals:
His Castle's razed, his Lands Confiscate were,
Too poor Amends, for that offended Fair;
A vast Reward, whoever shall Angiers bring
Alive, or Dead, to the Revengeful King:
His Race to endless Exile they condemn,
And Death to those who should these Laws contemn.
I Would sing, my Muse, his Woes in such a Strain,
That no sad reader might from Tears retrain:
Sure all the generous Worl^ must weep to see
Exalted Virtue in such Misery.
Who can expres^ his Fears and anxious Care!
Enough to raise Distraction and Despair!
When he looks back upon his prosperous Days,
The pleasant Paths, and the delightful Ways
His Youth had trod, it racks his thoughtful Brain,
His Lot of Grief he scarcely can sustain,
But Piety forbids that he should Heaven arraign.
He knows the only Way to vanquish there,
Is Patience, Faith unmoved, and servent Prayer;
So to the Temple flies, that Ancient Pile,
Which long had graced the City and the Isle,
St. Paul's, for stately Pillars so renowned,
With all the Beauties of the Artist croun'd;
There he repairs, and takes his Children too,
In hopes their Innocence may Mercy woo;
Stretched on the Pave^ent, wretched Angiers lay,
And kneeling Infants, early taught to pray.
Devotion done, a lovely British Dame,
With her Attendants from the Temple came,
The Lord High Marshal's Wife, of brightest Fame.
She stopped, and not disdained, to turn her Eye
Toward him who bore such Marks of Misery:
She said, my Friend, from whence, and what art thou?
Why hangs that Cloud of Sorrow on thy Brow?
This little Pair, with Beams of Beauty shine,
I cannot think thee poor, if these are thine;
Yet speak, declare, what is thy Cause of Grief?
Perhaps, by me, kind Heaven designs Relief.
Oh! wondrous Condescension, Angiers cried,
The truly Great are always free from Pride.
Madam, I Native am of neighboring Gaul,
My Parents honest, though my Portion small;
'Twas my hard Fate Superi^s to offend,
Whose Wrath no Modera^n knew, nor end,
And I was placed, too humble to contend:
I from my peaceful Dwelling, straight was hurled,
And bid to wander over an unknown World:
Nor would they stop their cruel Vengeance here,
But sorc'd these Babes, my Punishment to share,
Too weak, alas, such mighty Ills to bear.
She heard, and Pity filled her Mind,
The too long cruel Powers, now made her kind,
With soft Compassion, and a gracious Look,
To listening Angiers thus the Lady spoke,
If thou will give thy Daughter to my Care,
Her Breeding and her Fortune shall be Fair:
In Virtues Rules we will instruct her Youth,
With Love of Modesty and Sacred Truth:
Speak hen, if to my Words thou do agree,
Inform her Name, and leave the Child with me.
First, up to Heaven his watery Eyes he reared,
And thanked the Powers who thus his Prayers, had heard.
Then to her.
Oh! thou bright Pattern of thy charming Sex,
Blessed be thy Days, may no disquiets vex
Thy peaceful Mind, nor lengthened Years perplex;
But all thy Joys uninterrupted be,
Thy Life one Scene of blessed Prosperity.
Florella is the Name of the wretched Child,
O may she Virtuous prove, her Temper mild;
With a kind Eye may you her Actions view,
For you are Parents now, and Mistress too:
With that he turned, and bursted out a Tear,
The Infants parting Look he could not bear.
The courteous Dame to him a Present gave,
And the poor Babe to an attending Slave.
In ancient Times, thus did they merit Praise,
By Noble Acts, their Name and Country raise:
Few wanton Dames, no broken Nuptial Bed,
The Wretched they relieved, the Poor they sed:
In Deeds, like this, dwelt their Renown of Old,
No Pride, no Falsehood, no cursed Love of Gold,
But Glory reigned in every Britains Soul;
No lurking Vice their Greatness durst control.
Angiers returned still sad, his Heart still grieved,
To him the Child is lost, though thus relieved;
And as he measured out his pencive Way,
He met the Bard with whom he crossed the Sea;
He hailed him thus, lift up thy Eyes from Earth,
No sulien Star o'er-rul'd thy Childrens Birth.
Thy Daughter now has reached the happy Shore,
Destructive Fate has lost its poisonous Power,
Her Innocence the Planets hurt no more.
Thy Son, good Fortune shall attend his Bloom,
And a long Train of Blessings press to come;
Only thou many tedious Years must wait,
Ever thou shall conquer thy malignant Fate;
On me be all their hateful Influence shed,
Shower all their Wrath on this poor destined Head,
The Sufferer cried, I Will bear it in their Stead;
And if the rolling Torrent they withstand,
I Will kneel and bless the persecuting Hand:
Instruct me, Sir, how I this Youth may save
From threatening Ills, which often the Brave,
For I shall soon press to the peaceful Grave;
There undisturbed may find that sweet Repose,
So long denied by my too cruel Foes.
Instruct your Son in his uncertain Wa^
For Truth Divine shines forth in all you say.
Then thus the Bard:
Amidst the Western Mountains, where of old,
Such warlike Deeds of Britains Chiefs are told;
Where Merlin did his mighty Art expose,
From whence his Wonders and his Fame arose,
The Lord high President keeps there his Court,
And fondly seeks the Strangers kind Resort;
The Youths are there bred up to Feats of Arms:
Thy lovely Son has all those manly Charms,
That will attract his Eyes, his Fancy move,
And fix him to his Soul, with Bonds of Love.
Farewell, for I shall never behold thee more;
My Tempest beaten Age, comes near the Shore;
Where wearied out, I lay me down to rest,
When Thought and Care, no more shall load my Breast,
Nor vainer Objects my freed Soul molest;
But upward mount, through yon bright Realms, and see
All the great Maze of vast Eternity:
The wondrous Contemplation Silence brought,
And he seemed lost in Energy of Thought:
Then lift his Eyes, and blessed the believing Pair,
But though entreated, would no more declare.
He deemed the Council Sacred, and from thence
Does his long weary Pilgrimage commence:
Often Scraggy Rocks, and lofty Mounts they meet,
Where rising Ground resists their willing Feet;
Then reached those Britains so renowned of old,
Of whom such famous Actions have been told;
There, as the Prophet said, the lovely Boy,
(The Last, the dearest Hope of Angiers joy)
At the first sight the President approved,
Made him his Care, and soon he grew beloved;
Soon Angiers saw his happy Son designed
The Darling of that Court, and humane Kind.
This was an Age when the Renowned and Great,
Made Wealth but serve them to assist the State:
When bountious Nature had the Groundwork laid,
Their forming Hand the worthy Hero made;
Like his own Children, Angiers Son was trained,
And from his Patron's Bounty, Arms and Arts he gained.
In this was Britains Glory, and her Boast,
From Discipline like this, they raised a Host;
Then no industrious Youth neglected lay,
But Merit to Preferment led the Way:
Lewis d^pos'd as might advance his Worth;
Was called Perotto to conceal his Birth.
The Dauphiness became the Queen of France,
Her Pride and Rage do with her Power advance:
New Proclamations all around she sends,
Disgraces those who had been Angiers Friends:
He fears a stricter Search will now be made;
Nor stays he, least his Children be betrayed,
But hasts to find a more secure Retreat
From Woman's Rage, that is lasting as it is great:
Distressed, he quits Fair Albions court'ous Shore,
But leaves behind, his All, his valued Store;
For whom he often does the Heavens implore.
He, with Regret, now leaves the lucky Strand,
Looks back, and Sighs, as on his native Land;
Extremest Griefs, his suffering Soul overflow;
And every Breath declares incessent Woe;
Then he reflects on his malicious Foe.
Inhumane Queen, ah! Whether must I fly?
Is there no way to escape thee, but to die?
Yes, I would die! throw off these servil Chains,
Did not our Priests pronounce eternal ^ains
To those who wearied out with Life's Disease,
Shall dare to cure themselves ever Nature please.
Fond Fatal Princess, could thou see me now,
Nor Love, nor Rage, would discompose thy Brow.
Thus Lean and Pail (secure from being known)
I should move Pity for a Wretch undone:
And now my Royal Friend the Dauphin Reigns,
His Subjects in their Native Right maintains;
And Valor, Justice, Mercy, grace the Throne,
No injured Wretch makes his impatient Moan,
But all the Gallick World, the Face of joy puts on.
It Is only I that am debard of Bliss,
Nor can find Rest without destroying His:
Then let me never accuse the Imperial Dame,
But suffer still the Punishment and Shame.
He who had once a Nation at Command,
Now seeks a Master in Hibernia's Land.
It was his Fate, a haughty Lord to find,
Fierce and severe, nor could he bend his Mind;
And he who in his mild and gentle Sway,
His Servants made, through Love, not Fear, o bey,
No Slaves to pride, in plenty and in ease,
They lived content, for 'twas no Task to please;
Yet their Good Master's diligent in vain,
Faultless is chid, nor dares he to complain;
Not Hebrew Job at length to Ills inured
So much, or half so patiently endured.
But now my wearied Muse, his Woes sorsake,
Begin another Scene, and turn the Prospect back;
Over pass the rolling Years of flying Time,
And show Florella in her Beauties Prime,
Divinely Fair, as the First Eden Maid.
Ever she for Knowledge, Innocence betrayed:
When in her Eyes sat smiling every Grace,
And the immortal Bloom was on her Face,
And bright unfully'd Glories, new Creation grace.
Only one Son preserved the Marshal's Line,
Whose Form was lovely, and his Soul Divine:
His Tour through France, and Italy had been,
And Europes World the Traveling Youth had seen;
Returned, improved, by skilful Masters taught,
With all their Language, and their Learning fraught;
Pleasing his Mean, so Gay, but truly Brave,
Nor yet to Vice, or Passion made a Slave:
The Courts Delight, for whom each Lady strove,
And put on all her Charms, to make him Love.
Lord Mandevil was now the only Theme,
Their daily Pleasure, and their nightly Dream;
Florella at a Rural Mantion staid,
Left to the Conduct of the lovely Maid;
Content with what her Fortune did afford,
The Virgin thought not of her New come Lord:
The joyful Parents showed their Darling round,
And every Pleasure his Return had crowned;
Then leave the Town, their Country Seat to view,
And with Variety their Joys renew:
Soon as arrived, Florella Duty paid;
But Heaven! How gazed the Youth, when he beheld the Maid!
In all the Realms that he had traveled over,
He thought he never had Beauty seen before;
He sighed, and looked, and fastened there his Eyes,
And scarcely could he hide the vast Surprise.
She saw him fixed, the doubtful Virgin feared
She had done some Fault, so, blushing, disappeared.
As if the Sun had straight his Beams withdrawn,
And left no gladsome Ray, no twilight Dawn,
So seemed to him the Place, dark and forlorn,
When Fair Florella from his Sight was gone;
Absent, her lovely Form remained behind,
Fixed was her Image on his tender Mind:
He soon inquired who the Virgin was,
And smiling said, she had a charming Face.
The indulgent Mother, whose delightful Aim
Was to please him, from whom her Pleasures came,
With graceful Air, the whole Adventure tells,
And to his listening Ears, each Circumstance reveals.
He Blushed, and Sighed at what she did relate,
And cried, it is sure some Mystery of Fate!
Her looks, do Awe, and Admiration strike!
Such Charms from Want? not Courts can show the like.
Sure Heaven mistook, and with a hasty Hand,
Formed her a Slave, when it designed Command;
The Talk was changed, but still his thinking Soul,
Was with the glorious bright Idea full:
He strugled hard, nor yielded to the Snare,
But often cried, she is not sure so Fair;
Besides her Birth is mean, not worth my Care.
Urged by Desire, a second Sight he sought,
As if he would correct his former Thought;
Thus treacherous Love draws the Unwary on,
The more they gaze, the more they are undone.
The pointed Rays had filled his Youthful Breast,
The amourous Fire, his daring Soul possessed,
And quickly grew too great to be suppressed.
The Brave, the soonest are to Love inclined,
And Love delights to sooth a generous Mind.
In vain the Youth with fated Passion strove,
For every Breast must yield to powerful Love.
The Sons of Art no Recipee have found;
In all their Store, to heal this pleasing Wound:
Had there in Herbs or Plants a Balm been known,
The God of Physic sure had cured his own;
He pines and sickens now with Loves excess,
His Sighs and Languishings his Pains confess;
His wonted Sports grew tastless to his Soul,
Triumphant Pashon all his Joys control:
He hates the Court, shuns every charming Fair,
They cannot please, unless Florella's there.
To some dark Grot, or Melancholy Grove,
The Youth retires, and breathes his hapless Love;
There vents his killing Griefs, and there complains,
And only tells the silent Trees his Pains.
A little Distance from the Palace stood,
A stately Shade of venerable Wood,
Which full a Hundred Years the Seasons bore,
And Reverend Trunks with Moss, were covered over;
Whose dusky Shade defied the Rays of Light,
And spite of Noon-day-beams, seem Sacred still to Night:
In this Retreat, the Lovesick Hero chose,
To nurse his Flame, and to indulge his Woes;
Florella too, to solitude inclined,
But her Amusement's of another kind:
Various Theams delight her easy Breast,
And no prevailing Thought disturbs her Rest;
Pensive she walks to take the Evening Air,
At her Approach, the Greens fresh Verdure wear;
For her Companion, flowing Horace chose,
And could her self harmonious Airs compose;
Officious Love, her wandering Steps betrayed,
And brought the dispairing Youth, the lovely Maid;
Stretched on the Earth, beneath a Maple Shade,
As rooted there, poor Mandevil was laid;
His absent Soul was waiting on his Fair,
But Sense and Life returned, as she drew near;
Straight with Convulsive Transports he was seized
At the Surprise, alarmed, disturbed, and pleased.
The modest Maid, blushing, her Lord espied,
Obeisance made, and turned her Steps aside:
But when he saw the Virgin haste away,
Confused, he rose, and thus bespake her, Stay
Dear Nymph! you seem the Goddess of this Grove;
Or, what is more, the Immortal Queen of Love!
Let that soft Form, a tender Heart contain,
With Pity, hear a dying Youth complain,
For mine are real Woes, and real Pain:
These Woods are Witness to my constant Flame,
Each Tree thy Cipher bears, though not thy Name;
Least jealous Eyes the mighty Secret find,
And to my Charmer, grow from thence unkind;
But when alone, my Tongue naught else will sound,
I reach the vaulted Skies, and pierce the hallow Ground:
To Eccho's Care, I send Florella's Name,
And kindly she reverberates the same.
Oh! do not look with such relentless Eyes,
If you're unmoved, your faithful Lover dies.
All Night, on Beds of Down, I restlessrave,
On this cold Earth, I measure out my Grave;
It Is you alone can help, it is you alone can save.
The Maid, whose Soul was suited to her Birth,
With noble Scorn, raised her fair Eyes from Earth;
Then with a Voice majestic and severe
Thus spoke, and gave the Lovesick Youth Despair:
Because I to your Mother's bountious Hand,
For Food and Raiment do indebted stand,
You think, perhaps, you may the Slave command.
But though, my Lord, my Niggard Star's denied
Me Wealth and Titles, they have given me Pride:
If from my Wants, your wanton Hopes you frame,
Know I prize Honor, and a virt'ous Name.
My Heart's unconquered, and my Soul unstained,
A Fortitude by Heaven it self maintained;
Nor Force, nor Flattery, can my Mind subdue,
Behold me then, great and resolved like you.
Surpised at this! the wretched Lover cried,
If you're displeased, I wish ere this I Would died:
In my unhappy Speech, what have I said
TO offend my dear beloved bewitching Maid!
Beneath thy Feet let me for ever lie,
Or by your just Commands, condemned to die
If against your Honor I had least Design;
My Thoughts, though they are kind, are chaste as thine;
When of my Love I make an Offering,
With Flames less pure then pious Vessels bring,
When in their Temple they sincerely pray,
And bright Devotion, at their Altars pay,
May all my Days and Nights be dashed with woe,
Nor ever the Blessing of Possession know:
May no Self-joys my longing Wishes Crown,
But Curse me still with a remorsless Frown;
Never think I would destroy the Worshipped shrine,
Or wrong that Honor which I Court for mine:
It Is Hymen's Torch is my auspicious Guide,
Directs my Love to seek you for my Bride:
Blessed with that Hope, I bear the Pains of Life,
(I ask you, not a Mistress, but a Wife)
Else on the Instant would I quit this Breath,
And seek my Peace in the cold Arms of Death:
Oh! it would overwhelm my Soul with Black Despair,
If after all my Service, all my Care,
I did not hope to gain my charming Fair.
Florella, cease to think my Love a Crime,
And let my Faith be tried, by that sure test of Time:
Enjoin me any thing that may convince
Of my Flames Durance, and its Innosence,
(The greatest Tortures I would undergo)
If you will except it, and believe it so.
She listened now more Calm, and more Sedate,
Yet seemed resolved, as the Decrees of Fate:
Then thus replied, Such Virtue sure has Charms,
But I am placed Inferior to your Arms;
Such Honors might the most Ambitious move,
Who would not prize the Treasure of your Love?
But I Am unworthy your exalted State,
And must except a more convenient Fate.
Let not ignoble Fires your Youth mislead,
With equal Fortune grace your Nuptial Bed;
A Father will direct you in your Choice,
There Is no true Joys without the Parent's Voice;
Therefore no longer feed this fond Desire,
But here, in silence, let your Flames expire:
And that from Guilt Florella may remain,
That no ungrateful Act her Duty stain,
Thus in the Face of Heaven firmly swear,
Your ill placed Passion I no more will hear,
Except your Father's free Consent you gain;
And Reason tells you, that Attempt is vain;
For he is cold, in his declining Years,
A dow'rless Wife's, the greatest Ill he fears:
Old Men are always fond of darling Gold,
Still strive to grasp the Earth they cannot hold.
Amongst the Great, some wealthy Fair adore,
Consult with Duty, urge this Suit no more;
Then with redoubled haste she flies away,
He called in vain, she wou^d no Answer stay.
What Pen can paint the Sinner in Despair,
When Heaven, regardless, will not hear his Prayer!
Terrors like those, the hopeless Youth oppressed,
And filled the tortured Mansion of his Breast:
Now he submits to Health-destroying Grief,
Bends down beneath he load, nor seeks Relief;
A deadly Pale his youthful Cheeks over spread,
Continual Sighs have chased from thence the Red,
His langui'd Eyes the cheerful Light refuse,
And in pale Fits their former luster lose.
Scarce will this wanton Age my Tale Believe;
A Constant Youth their Vice would never forgive.
Now Love is grown the Universal Sport,
The Men design to leave, ever they begin to Court;
Fickle their Nature's, roving their Desire,
In Various Heats, there is no real Fire.
Of old, to one the Passion was Confined,
They Would wait an Age to make the Fair one Kind;
Changing's the Mode; a Lover is a Fool,
And to be very Faithful's, to be very Dull.
But to return to our kind ^aithful Youth,
And all the Wonders of ^is Love and Truth;
The Mother does with careful Eyes Survey
His Griefs, and finds a sencible Decay;
She trys with all delights, his Soul to Cheer,
And when he Sighs, cries out, What ails my Dear?
In vain her fondness, the inquiry Frames,
Guesses in vain, a Thousand things she Names;
Fruitless her Aid, he still the wrack indures,
Beneath the Moon but one Elixer cures;
That denied, all other helps are vain,
He only with his Life, can end his Pain;
A languid Sickness makes his Youth a Prey,
And Canker like, eats the fine form a way:
Apollo's Sons are bribed to use their Art,
To save this Darling of the Mother's Heart:
Their Cordial Juilps they apply in vain;
They cannot Cool the Heat, nor swage the Pain.
Who can the Sighs, the piercing Woe express,
The Fears which his sad Parents Souls Distress?
His Noble Father cry's, his hopes are gone;
His Name is lost, his Heir, his only Son;
But his great Courage helps his Grief to Bear:
The Lady seems distracted with her Care.
Sorrow no sleep, no balmy peace allows,
And Heaven she wearies with Incessant Vows;
No Cheerful Guest the wonted Mirth Maintains,
But through the House a solemn Sadness Reigns.
Florella too, who did these Woes Create,
In Secret Mourns the Youths unhappy Fate;
Blames the Cross Star that had to Love inclined,
And made her cause the ills she never designed.
Now at a stand are all the learned Tribe,
They find it vain to Visit or Prescribe;
The active Spirits weary of ^eir Course,
And drooping Life appears ^tain'd by Force:
His Servants all are dr^n'd in black Despair,
He only lost in Thought, seems void of Fear;
Reserved and cold to his officious Friends,
He chides their Care, their Diligence offends.
When in her turn the Fair Florella came,
The lovely source of this consuming Flame,
He reared his dying Eyes, and faintly said,
Come near, thou too too lovely Charming Maid;
Now see how pale and languishing I lie,
And still remember it is for you I dye.
Death, cold as your disdain, comes over my Bloom,
And ah! sweet Nymph, in Ages yet to come,
As none in Beauty ever can rival Thee,
So none in Constancy shall equal me.
Oh cruel Fair! hereafter prove so Just,
When I am lost, forgotten in the Dust,
To all the listening Swains my Story tell,
Proclaim how much I ^ov'd, how early Fell:
No other way, I Would Court a lasting Fame,
But as Loves Victim Eternize my Name.
Yes Goddess, the bright tract I have in View,
Is that the World may say I died for you.
At this the Tears fell from her Conquering Eyes,
And Sighs uncalled from her fair Bosom Rise;
The fainting Youth beheld the blushing Maid,
And to his trembling Lips her hand conveyed.
Enough, my first, my everlasting Dear,
I dye content, since I am worth a Tear.
He said no more, The approaching Friends might spair
Their useless aid, for all the help was there.
Amongst Apollo's Sons that crowded there
One to his Skill added peculiar Care,
Resolves, if Art will do it, to save the important Heir.
Upon his Life he saw their ^opes Depend,
Nor unconcerned, hea^ every Mourning Friend;
Though some unmoved, can see the Parents Cry,
Lamenting Wife, or Friend stand sighing by,
And gravely Answer, Man was Born to dye,
When they, perhaps, have hastened Natures Date,
And lay their own Mistake, on guiltless Fate:
But this, with utmost care, consulted Health,
Like Generous Garth aimed not alone at wealth;
The Mean, the Great, his equal influence find,
As sent by Heaven, to heal and bless Mankind.
In him the Graces with the Arts combined,
Like Poetry and Wealth, but seldom Joined,
Yet here they Triumph all, while he with Ease,
Can Charm, Relieve, and Conquer a Disease;
A Stranger to the New Fantastic way,
Which dresses first, and bids the Dying stay,
He weighed each C rcumstance ever gave his Vote,
Took not the common way, and killed by Rote;
And by his nice Observances, could find
The Body struggling with a tortured Mind.
Healthful, reluctant to the imperial Sway,
Contending still, unwilling to obey:
No ^ctive Fever lodged within his Blood,
The sullen Soul denied the Body Food,
And Sighs and Sorrow robbed his Eyes of Rest,
He sooths the Griefs which his sad mind oppressed.
Seeing him thus resolvd, the ill to Endure,
And that he neither strove, nor wished a Cure,
The only care must be to search the Wound,
There Is no Receipt has power, till that be found:
He waits and watches the slow passing Sand,
Though bid retire, he minds not the Command;
But still observes and grasps his feeble Hand.
The Pulse was low as at the ^bb of Life,
And weakened Nature ^rce maintained the strife.
When fair Florella to the Chamber came,
Sent by his Mother, that dispairing Dame,
Straight the Male Ministers fetch nimble Strokes,
And fresh Vermillion died his Languid Looks;
New strength, new Vigor now his Eyes inspired,
And glowing Cheeks, with conscious Blushes fired,
Relapsed again, soon as the Nymph Retired.
The Wise Physician, this with Judgment weighed,
He found the Youth was dying for the Maid.
H e smiling rose, and hastened to depart,
And murmured to himself, How Vain's our Art?
We have no Medicine, for a Lovesick Heart.
He left the Room, th inquiring Mother flys
To ask what hopes, examines first his Eyes,
Longing the truth to know, yet truth she sears,
Her trembling Voice is choked with rising Tears.
Says he, I long have viewed your deep Concern,
And studi'd much your Sons Disease, to learn
What led his Youth toward an untimely Grave,
And why my Drugs now lose their power to save;
In vain my utmost Art and Care I use,
My Medicines all their healing power Lose,
And the sick Youth does all releif refuse.
At this amazed! at length I truly Guest
Some Pain hid in the Closet of his Breast:
There like destructive Fire, in secret Mines,
Consumed his strength, and baffled our Designs.
The impatient Mother, interrupted now,
Surpised, she cried, Can there be ought below,
My Darling Son eager as Li^ Requires
And wait not I too Crow^ his fond Desires?
It Is Love, he then re^d, has racked him long,
Love, that delightful Torture of the Young,
The Worlds great Lord, subduer of the strong;
The subtle Fire has pierced his aching Heart,
And drinks his Vital Blood with ceasless Smart:
His L^e's a Prey to the All powerful Flame,
Unless he is cured, from whence the Torment came.
And is there then, she haughtily replied,
A Dame too great, to be Lord Mand'vils Bride?
Why pines my Son upon the Wrack of Love,
When to be his, each charming Nymph has strove?
Name but the Fair, who bears such conquering Eyes,
Be sure my Lord High Marshal gains the Prize,
How great soever her, Noble Parents be;
My Son can boast Descent with any she.
The Blood that fills his Veins, from either Source,
Has a glorious Spring, and untaunted Course;
Titles and flowing Wealth, his Name adorn,
What cruel Nymph can pay him back with Scorn!
Then the good Man, whose Speeches only tend
To calm her Wrath, and to preserve his Friend,
Went on;
If thus he'ad place'd his Love, why should he mourn?
Or fear your kind Consent, or her Return?
But if forgot the Honors of his Race,
He doats upon a beauteous Form and Face,
Of Birth unknown, though most divinely Fair,
Whose utmost Glory is to be your Care:
His Reason by his conqu'^g Love betrayed,
And the sad Choice, is ^ath, or that bright Maid;
I need not now pr^ounce her well known Name,
There is but one can kindle such a Flame.
The Mother said, What Ills must I endure,
Ever my Stern Lord will yield to such a Cure?
For this Misfortune he will me upbrai'd,
Because I succor'd first the tender Maid.
Virtue and Grace Florella does possess,
My cruel Lord builds there no Happiness:
However my utmost Tears, and Prayers I Will try;
It Is better far, to see him hers, than dye.
This spoke, she hast's to find her Mourning Lord,
In the softest Phrase her Language could afford;
With moving Tears the unhappy Tale relates,
Often blames her Son, but more the cruel Fates,
That thus ordained to rob their Souls of Rest,
To lose the Youth, by whom their Age was blessed
Or give Consent, she sighed, that Ill's the least.
Her soothing Softness could not stop his Rage,
Nor gentle Showers, his Mad Fury swage:
From his fierce Eyes the fiery Tempest came,
Tumultuous Passion set him in a Flame,
Let him then dye, he cried, ever thus disgrace his Name.
Oh! barbarous Sound! Oh! most unnatural Breath
She said! To doom an only Son to Death!
When first, my Lord, to me your Vows you paid,
How often you wished me born some humble Maid,
That you might greatly prove your generous Fire,
And grieved, your Fortunes could not raise me higher:
Had I been so, you the same Risque had run;
Then, oh! Forgive your too too Amourous Son!
Yet all her pleading Agonies were vain,
Her unperswasive Griefs could only gain
That she might sooth her Son, in his destructive Pain;
That she with Hopes might lull his Cares a Sleep,
Make Promises, which he never meant to keep.
With this dear Cordial, to the Youth she flies,
Sits down, and views him with the kindest Eyes:
He Sighed, and Begged she would his Faults forgive,
And cried, don't ask your wretched Child to live;
Nor torture thus, my Soul, to see you Grieve:
Your Blessing on your hapless Son bestow;
Excuse the Debt I to your Goodness owe^
It Is a vast Sum, which I can never pay,
Yet I will rather dye than disobey.
Weeping, the Lady spoke:
Oh! thankless Child! oh! most ungrateful Boy!
Too well thou know, thou art alone my Joy;
Thy Death will my Remains of Life destroy:
Therefore no more of thy false Duty boast,
When you indulge the Ill by which my Peace is lost:
Since after Days, and Nights, of wracking Pain,
Scarcely to be endured, or thought again,
Since the First happy Hour the gladsome Morn,
When the wished News went round, a Son was Born;
I have indulged thee every anxious Year,
No Mother ever such Tenderness did bear,
Why do thou then distract me with Despair?
Upon my Love and Pain thou never look back
Nor the successive Cares which I did take;
So forward still the eager Streams are born,
And to the Nursing Fountain rarely turn.
He only groaned, here let my Life have end,
Too long I Have lived such Goodness to offend.
She could not bear the Grief she saw him feel,
Feared to increase the Pangs she meant to heal:
Then mildly, with a softer Air began,
And kindly cheered her poor dejected Son:
Thy Fathers Hopes, and mine, are built in thee,
His Pride thou art, and every Wish to me;
Yet cautious Youth, in this you are to blame,
You do not prize aright a Mothers Name;
But hide from me, your very best of Friends,
The secret Woe, on which your Life depends,
Whilst your Physician, the true Cause displays,
And says, it is inward Grief, your Youth decays.
Officious Fool! the pensive Son replied!
His nauseous Draughts he longer should have tried!
Not the dear Secret of my Soul impart!
And thereby show the Weakness of his Art!
Oh! Mandevill, his Mother mildly said,
Confess the Truth, I will no more upbraid,
For now his Care thy wishes have betrayed!
Thy healthful Bloom, let Grief no more devour,
But seek my Aid, and trust another Power.
What silent still! Will naught your Spirits cheer?
Go quickly one, and call Florella here:
Look up, my Son, and now believe me kind,
I Have brought the Balm for thy distempered Mind:
Your Life in Balance, we this Choice prefer,
Your only Task's to live and conquer her.
Too much transported at this Change of Fate,
He cried, Your proffered Kindness is too late.
The mighty Tides of Joy come on too fast,
And weakened Life is gone too far to last;
A dreadful Sound adds Terror to their Fears,
And fills the Room with piercing Shrieks and Tears;
The Mother from the Pillow snatched her Son,
And cried, Help all, or I am lost, undone.
Then on her Breast the Darling Youth she laid,
And bid Florella bring her useful Aid:
He strait revived at Touches of the Maid.
Then Conscious what transporting Joy had done,
He blushed at what Extravagance he would shown,
And she, as if the Fault had been her own.
This was his Crisis, this the lucky Hour,
And Death, and Sickness, quit malignant Power.
Now winged with Joy, the happy Minutes flew;
He still beheld the Fair, and still the Sigh was New;
Soft Tales of Love he whispered in her Ear,
Not so reserved, butshe seemed pleased to hear;
And when he begged she would his Fears remove,
And bless him with that charming Sound, I love;
Her Tongue was silent, but her Eyes proclaim,
She loved the Youth, and caught the infectious Flame:
His Health returned, and every blooming Grace
Revives and sparkles in its wonted Place,
With Transports in his Mein, and Raptures in his Face.
A new Respect was to Florella paid,
All hailed with Joy, the beauteous happy Maid:
Throughout the Land was spread her wondrous Fame,
Each Sonnet raised new Trophies to her Name;
With such a Grace as scarce can be believed,
These flowing Honors the Fair Nymph received:
The Courtly Youth now envied Mand'vill more
For this rich Prize, than what his Titles bore.
Paint now the Pleasures of the happy Pair,
Whose Joys were Innocent, and most Sincere;
From Garden Grots, to purling Streams they rove,
Endless their Talk, and all that Talk was Love.
New Raptures still, from Conversation grow,
Ten Thousand Joys, which only Lovers know:
Such sancy'd Bliss, her charming Presence brings,
The blessed transported Youth, looks down on Kings;
Implores, that Hymen make his Joys secure,
And tie that Knot, which does for Life endure.
Those were the Sun shine Days, when Cupid played,
And every Laughing Hour was joyful made;
They dreamed not of the Black approaching Shade:
(Mankind, when he injoys the Smiles of Fate,
But vainly thinks to fix a prosperous State:
And when ill Fortune does his Life attend,
As vainly fears his Woes will never end:
Alas! it is foolish! All our Life's a Dream,
And every Season has its changing Scene!)
Fearless, Supine, and blessed with sweet Repose,
The Lovers were, when unthought Storms arose.
The Father to his Closet takes his Son,
And with an Air severe, his Speech begun:
I Would know when you will quit this Sluggish Pace,
When banished Honor reassumes its Place,
And you maintain the Glory of your Race.
Is not thy Fancy sated, foolish Boy?
Love is a Sweet, designed to please and cloy,
Nor meant the nobler Faculty's to employ.
License I gave to the ignoble Fire,
That thou might Glut thy insatiate Desire;
And feed like some Ill-manner'd eager Guest,
'Till thou grew Sick, and loathed the Luscious Feast.
Nay, turn not Pale; thou can not change my Mind,
Nor think I ever otherwise designed.
The impatient Son, then eagerly replied,
Under Love's Vail, could you such Baseness hide?
Compelled by Duty, I have heard too long,
The Sacred Business of my Love you wrong.
Florella's Virtue is above your Thought;
Nor would the Jem with all your Wealth be bought:
For the Fair Maid, good Angels be her Guard,
May her just Worth still meet a just Reward:
Kind Providence! preserve her Youth from Harm!
Oh! may she ever live, and live to Charm!
His Father was enraged at this Reply,
The Father said:
And with a Stern tremendous Voice, did cry,
Audacious Boy! And durst thou to my Face,
Bless One born for thy Shame, and my Disgrace!
Go to the Grave, and hide thy Abject Flame:
Could hope I Would give to her a Daughters Name;
Or vainly think I would thy Choice applaud,
Though I did yield to a fond Mothers Fraud;
I Would rather see thee and thy Sorc'ress dye,
Than to the Marriage but in Thought comply:
He calmly answered;
Enough, my Lord, your furious Rage give over;
Take your Sons Word, you will hear of this no more:
With Looks composed, he left the hateful Room;
Nor could his Father guess the Fate to come.
No Image of Delight now fills his Mind;
He never can hope to make his Father kind.
Deep struggling Griefs his doubtful Thoughts oppressed,
All Day no Dawn of Peace, all Night no Rest;
Tortured with Pains, too great to be expressed,
Disturbed he walks, revolving in his Breast,
What Course he should his wretched Footsteps, stear,
That most might show his Love and his Despair.
Florella feared him weary of his Flame;
Nor gay, nor pleased, he to her Toilet came;
No tuneful Airs her gentle Slumbers break;
No Songs Salute her, ever she is well awake,
And sweet Melodious Notes, composed for her dear Sake:
Nor one soft Billet Deaux so kind does prove,
To whisper the Dear Tale of Truth and Love:
If she approach, he hangs his pensive Head,
His Looks strait change, from Pale, to glowing Red.
He Sighs, as if around Destruction fell,
And his full Eyes, a fatal Story tell.
These boding Symptoms fright the Charming Fair,
Who finds, when Love does faithful Breasts ensnare,
They Are wracked with Jealous Fears, and every tender Care.
Retired alone, she softly does complain,
And wishes for her former Peace in vain;
Reflects upon her Hours of downy Rest,
Before enchanting Love, that cruel Guest,
Usurped, with Tyrant Power, her milder Breast.
Oh! happy Days, she said, from Passion free!
When all was Peace, and calm Felicity:
If eager Joy, I neither wished nor knew,
I lived without the Pain and Pleasure too.
Oh happy State of Cold Indifference!
Blessed in that seeming Want of nicer Sense,
Whom nothing pleases, nothing gives Offense.
No fierce Pursuit, their thoughtless Minds employ,
They feel no Sorrow, as they taste no Joy.
In Bounds the Stagnate Waters sullenlye,
No Tempest raises them like Mountains high;
Whilst Curling Waves, formed by the rapid Stream,
Can never rest, nor ever be Serene.
Oh friendless Maid! If he Unkind should prove,
Or so Untrue, but to dissemble Love,
And I, the public Talk, the public Jest,
Become of every Meeting, every Feast:
But hold! There Is something tells me I am Born,
Above their Laughter, and above their Scorn;
Yes, Mand'vill,
If thou disdain'st thy humble Victory,
Know I can Triumph too, and bravely dye:
Thus her dispairing Fears, her Hopes o'ercame,
Thus she accused her Lord, and cursed the fatal Flame.
Whilst Love alone possessed Young Mand'vills Mind,
To give the greatest Proof he now designed,
And quit the waiting Grandeur of his Birth,
And with his Love, forsake the Glories of the Earth;
For since Florella is denied his Wife,
He Will wed himself to a Monastic Life;
And though within his own dear Native Land,
Many Fair Abbyes do inviting stand,
Gardens and Groves, delightful to the Eye,
As if they meant to sooth Austerity;
(The best of all the Realm the Priest's still chose,
They looked as if designed for soft Repose;
But we are to believe they watch and pray,
And Tears and Penance wear their Hoursaway)
These he avoids, least Power his Will restrain,
And force him from their Convent, Home again.
In France he means to find some lovely Cell,
And there in solemn Silence, ever dwell:
Now all things for his Voyage he provides,
But from his dearest Friends, the Secret hides:
The Marshal, daily, Tables did ordain,
The weary traveling Pilgrims to maintain,
Who always found a welcome; there refresht
With Hospitable Food, the Gracious Donor blessed:
Like one of these, his Son designed to dress,
And 'scape unknown, amidst the thronging Press.
Thus his Designs the wandering Scene had laid,
And thus the hapless Youth himself betrayed;
Not to his Love, he would his Thoughts reveal,
Yet could not part without a last Farewell;
Though 'twas a pang that Life could hardly Bear,
For her to Health and Life he did Prefer,
Nothing beneath the Sun he held so Dear.
He to the Beauteous Nymph's Apartment went,
Pains in his Heart, and Looks of Discontent;
He found her Reading to divert her Mind,
'Twas Ariadne's prayers breathed to the Wind,
When faithless Theseus left the Fair Behind;
He took the Book, and when he saw the Place,
A burning Blush flew to his lovely Face.
She forced a Smile, and cried, what find you there,
That in your Cheeks such Signs of guilt appear?
Said he, Had Theseus been Compelled to go,
To purchase Fame, and fight a distant Foe,
And left the Nymph in some blessed happy Place,
Would that, and sighed, not alter much the Case?
If left, the Maid replied,
Though in a Palace where she bore Command,
'Twou'd soon grow hateful as the barren Sand;
Since there is no amends for perjured Love,
No pleasures will the bitter Pain Remove.
Heaven it self, takes cognizance of broken Vows,
And its strict Justice there, no Mercy shows,
Whither, oh whither, do thy Speeches lead?
With dying Eyes, the tortured Mand'vil said,
Do thou unjustly think thou art betrayed.
Me, my Florella! Me, do thou accuse!
Or tax with perjured Love, or broken Vows!
Do not my sufferings dwell upon thy Mind?
Oh thou too killing Fair! And too unkind!
Know that in all the tales of Love thou'st found,
No Heart with greater truth was ever crowned,
My Thoughts have still been fixed, my Eyes never straid,
Since first Loves mighty Laws my Soul obeyed,
And if my adverse Stars, such woe Ordains,
That I am still Condemned to endless Pains.
If I am doomed to lose what I hold dear,
A Punishment which Nature cannot Bear.
Add not my Fair, to the too Cruel weight,
But think it is the hard necessity of Fate.
Ah little, little of my Pangs you know!
Nor kindly guess the wracks I under go;
The rending Grief, that tears my laboring Heart,
When I with you, and all my Joys must Part;
Such woes as these fond nursing Mothers Feel;
To see their Infants on the Soldiers steel,
Such piercing Pain, when we behold from far,
The Vessel sink, where all our Treasures are;
Yet these sad Woes, compared to mine, are small,
A parting Lovers grief, exceeds them all.
Must we then part? she said: Oh most unkind!
And for what wretched place am I designed?
Friendless, forsaken, must I wander now,
Or to some new imperious Mistress Bow.
Ye unauspicious Stars, that ruled my Birth,
Why was I formed? Why did I crow'd the Earth,
When no Provision for my Life was made,
And not one place my own, to rest my Head.
Let not such Thoughts, affright thy tender Mind,
Here thou shall stay; my Mother will be kind.
That Parent for the Other does atone;
She mild as Doves, he hard as petred Stone:
My Charmer, she thy Life will easy make,
And love Florella, for her Mand'vils sake.
She answered,
Why such disjointed Thoughts do you express?
You Will leave me, yet talk of Happiness:
Ruin thee! surely, my Ruin is designed by Fate;
And mustLove more destructive prove than Hate?
Why my Calm Virgin Hours did you molest?
Flatter me with possession of your Breast?
Make me exchange my Peace, for this unrest?
If still, he cried, I do not love thee More,
Than greedy Misers, Gold, or Monarchs Power;
Than sick Men Ease, the happy Life's Increase;
Towns Beseig'd, Relief; or pious Matrons Peace;
If thou art not my Joy, my Life my Health,
Prized like my Soul, my only valued Wealth,
Then send just Heaven, upon my perjured Head
Ten Thousand Plagues, and strike me with 'em Dead.
But, oh! my Fair! my Hope! my only Wish!
A Father stands 'twixt me, and happiness;
Deceived in his dissembled false Consent,
Whose specious words disguised a foul intent:
In Rage, he bid me quench my faithful flame,
In Terms so vile, my Soul abhors to Name.
I often have heard your cruel fatal Vow,
Your Virtue no stolen Marriage will allow;
Therefore we must for ever, everpart;
Why do I live? Why do thou hold my Heart?
Why does not Fate, quick, sure Destruction bring,
Burst tortured Natures ties, and break each trembling String?
Why, when Life's tedious March was almost over,
Was I brought back, to suffer on the Shore?
My cruel Father, worse than Death destroys,
Death is a Good, when Life's bereft of Joys.
Cease my loved Lord, the fair Florella cried,
Would I had never been born, or born, that Moment died.
All things to your kind Family I owe,
And in return, Curses alone bestow:
I Will go where you shall never behold me more,
And with my Absence, former Peace restore.
Peace without thee! the doting Youth replied,
No Griefs will all my Days and Nights devide:
Despair and Sorrows, all my restless Hours betide.
Since from what my Soul desires I Am debarred,
Forgive my earnest Suit, nor think it hard:
I beg you never will yield to a new Lovers Charms,
For I should dye, to see you in another's Arms;
And (as my first, last Dear) with lovely you,
I bid the World, and all your Sex adieu:
So let me hope that Snowy Virgin Breast,
Will never entertain another guest;
If I have first your Heart to Love inclined,
Oh! still preserve me in your Chaster Mind;
Will ye be so kind? Can these Tears persuade
The fairest Nymph that ever Nature made?
Can she, for the poor hapless Mand'vill's sake,
Resolve a lasting Leave of all Mankind to take?
It looks like sullen Pride, I must confess,
That I should others bar of Happiness,
But oh! impute it to my Love's excess.
Grant this my charming Dear, my Hearts desire,
The only Suit that I shall ever require.
Like Sorrows Image then, he silent stood,
And strove in vain to hide the falling Flood:
Pale, at her Feet, the dying Hero fell,
And let those Signs of Grief, his inward Sorrows tell,
Distressed, she raised him with her lovely Hand,
And cried, What would my Lord his Slave command?
Oh! poor Return, for all his wondrous Love,
That to no other Youth I kind should prove;
Without Injunction, I Would have made that Vow,
Immortal Passion, is your Merits due,
No Maid can Love again, after once loving you;
No thou dear Idol of my conquered Soul!
Thy Empire in my Breast, no Power shall ever control;
Each tender Wish I Will dedicate to thee,
For wheresoe'er confined, still Thought is free,
And mine shall ever Faithful, ever Constant be.
Oh! For my sake, each desperate Purpose shun,
If thou art lost, Florella is undone:
With Patience, let us our Misfortunes wait,
And hope, from Innocence, a better Fate.
He with glad Pleasure listened to the Fair,
His Heart rejoiced to hear her Love and Care;
Yet still resolves his Purpose to pursue,
And meant this Visit for a last Adieu.
He could not take his longing Eyes away,
But rooted stands, and adds another Moment's stay;
Another, and another, to the mighty Sum,
Grudges the past, and fears the rest to come:
At length he clasped her in his faithful Arms,
And said, Thou Mistress of Eternal Charms,
Remember Mand'vill, thou soft lovely Maid,
And let no Scandal on my Name be laid;
My Love was pure, from thought of Interest free,
Virtue I sought, found the rich Jem in thee,
More worth than boundless Heaps of hoarded Gold,
Or gaudy Titles, which are bought and sold:
A mighty Stock of Beauty Nature gave,
Beauty that would all humane Kind enslave;
Judge then my Fair, the Wrack, such worth to leave!
He said no more, but forced himself away
With Sighs, that did his Truth and Pangs betray.
The Nymph distracted, knew not what to guess,
But found ill Fate on every side did press;
Whilst secret Means for his Escape he made,
And trusting none, could be by none betrayed:
His Pilgrim Weed, to all, unknown he bought,
And to his Chamber undiscovered brought;
And sends his Page on Errands several ways,
That must detain tke Youth the space of many Days;
Then leaves the Key of his own private Chest,
And says, when he returns, therein his Will's expressed:
So fitted for the Purpose, when alone,
His Robe throws off, and the poor Weed puts on;
With a false Beard, and Hair, he hides his Face,
And amongst the Traveling Pilgrims takes his Place;
With them he passes through the House unknown,
Leaves the gay pompous Roof, designed his own,
To search some dismal melancholy Cell,
Some Caves where Sorrows self would choose to dwell.
Oh! mighty Love! Behold, look down and see
This glorious Victim, sure, is worthy Thee;
And if over Mortals thou would still maintain
Dispotick Sway, and undisputed Reign,
This Story, in thy Annals, still preserve,
From him let constant Lovers learn to serve:
His Birthright left, the Honors of his Name,
A wondrous Tale, fit for the Book of Fame;
Let sighing Virgins, endless Praise rehearse,
Crown him ye Poets with immortal Verse.
Ye Shepherds, and ye Nymphs, new Songs ordain,
He was, indeed, the Glory of the Plain.
When a forsaken Fair laments her Friend,
If her Complaints to Exclamations tend,
Name but this faithful Youth, and all her Wrath shall end.
Mand'vill, thy Constancy, thy Worth alone,
Shall for the Falsehood of thy Sex atone;
When amorous Youths shall meet in Plains or Groves,
And there repeat the Story of their Loves,
Thy lasting Truth, in all their Songs shall shine,
Thy eager Love, and Constancy Divine,
And each shall wish his Fame may equal Thine!
Mean time Florella's busy in her Mind,
Some quick Expedient she resolves to find,
Her Mand'vill of his dangerous Love to cure,
Though She, her hapless Self, the Pain endure;
Concludes to hide her in a living Tomb,
Forsake the World, Religious straight become.
Sympathy gave to each the same Design,
Both meant to raise their Love to that Divine,
And aimed to show what mighty Flames could do,
For each had vowed to bid the World adieu;
Yet still they hid the secret working Thought,
'Till the formed Purpose to effect was brought:
Mand'vill succeeds in what he fears to own,
And with the Holy Pilgrims flies unknown.
Now in her Turn, Nights Gloomy Shades invest
The Ruddy Glories of the shining West,
And weakened Nature seeks Recruit by Rest:
When round the Palace the Inquiries pass,
Who saw their Absent Lord, and where he was?
Near his Appartment they expressed their Care
With dutious Love, expect to find him there:
He wants no Service from officious Hands,
They wait in vain for his desired Commands:
When Darkness came, they could no more forbear,
To the fierce Marshal told their Cause of Fear.
With furious Rage, he to his Lodging Flies,
No Locks nor Bars, the impetuous Way denies,
But all is exposed to his inquiring Eyes:
Sad trembling Fears the Mother's Steps retar'd,
Complains, the cruel Powers have no Regard
To Worth, but hinders Mortals of their wished Reward.
When entered, soon their busy Search does find
Him gone; his scattered Garments left behind;
A thousand Fears they in their Fancy frame,
And many Dangers, which they dare not Name;
In this Distress, each meddling Fool grows wise,
The helpless still are readiest to advise,
With flying Speed, Florella's sent for there;
Pale looked the Virgin, almost dead with Fear:
To their Demands, she could no Answer give,
But that he seemed to take an everlasting Leave.
His Lady cried, this did my Soul presage,
See now the Effects of your too cruel Rage,
We Are Childless left in our declining Age:
Your boundless Wrath destroyed a faithful Pair,
And heaps on me the Terrors of Despair.
Could this fair weeping Maid create Offense?
Has she not Charms enough, in Truth and Innocence,
To match with so much Virtue, no Disgrace?
They to your Joy might have brought forth a Race,
TO uphold the Honors of your Name and Place:
But now your hoarded Wealth, your Seats and Lands,
Will fall to some ungrateful Stranger's hands;
And I shall curse my Prudence, and my Care,
Compelled, with the Effects, to bless some foreign Heir.
Stung with Reproach, and Loss, the Marshal swore,
If he would return, to oppose his Love no more;
That his fixed Flame should be with Joys repaid,
And he would yield his Son to that All-charming Maid.
If with strict Search, that Son can ever be found,
For which the Servants are dispatched around;
He binds his Promise, with a Solemn Vow,
That the wished Marriage freely he will allow:
Nor by Reproach, his Passion disapprove,
But crown his Constancy with lasting Love.
Thus does Affection bend the stubborn'st Mind,
Pierced with the smart, turns Pious, and grows kind;
Each Road they take, and pry with eager Eyes,
But miss their Lord, unknowing his Diguise:
They only find the Page, and force him home,
Examine often where his loved Master's gone?
The affrighted Boy, the Truth of all reveals,
His Lord's Commands, and secret Letter tells:
His Cabinet is in a Moment brought,
And there, with ease, they find what they had sought.
To FLORELLA, this Inscribed.
The LETTER.
'E'er this (my Dear) will reach thy lovely Hand,
'I shall have ever left my Native Land;
'Cast out from thee, no matter where Iroam,
'The Tryal's over, Iv'e suffered All at Home.
'To rough unpolished Cells, I now retire,
'And leave behind fond Hope, and fierce Desire;
'Yet Love will there maintain a languid Flame,
'Like Lamps in Tombs, though useless, burn the same.
'Did my Florella now her Pilgrim view,
'She'd own the Wonders mighty Love can do;
'Wou'd say, I in this Parting suffered more
'Than ever wretched Mortal did before.
'Did she my Trembling, and my Tortures see,
'I'm sure she would pity and remember me,
Mand'vill.


The Virgin faints, as she the Letter read,
Like Dewy Roses, hangs her drooping Head:
Their Search again renewed, they take their Way,
To all the Ports that lay along the Sea;
And that their Message may his Flight prevent,
Blessed News they bring, to give his Mind content,
His Father's Letters, full of kind Consent.
His better Fate o'er-rul'd that working Sea,
And for a Wind, the waiting Pilgrims lay:
Now the general Cry was, All aboard,
Just as the Men arrived, and found their Lord.
Rejoiced, amazed, and filled with glad Surprise,
Delight and Wonder strugl'd in their Eyes;
His were cast down, ashamed of his Disguise.
Great Minds are constant to their Purpose still,
And take from Fate a Disappointment Ill;
Resolved he held a Pon'yard to his Breast,
And said, my Friends, I am not now in Jest;
My Father's Will, I own I should obey,
But Love, over Duty, has imperial Sway:
You force my certain Death, if you come on,
I own my self a most Ungrateful Son:
But quitting that beloved illustrious Maid,
With double Punishment my Faults are paid.
Affrighted, they the headstrong Passion wait,
And scarce could cool this most intemp'rate heat:
At length, they humbly did their Letters give,
Begged he would hear, and be at Peace and live;
He reads his Parents with a double Joy,
His rising Fears, his Raptures did destroy;
'Till Fair Florella's Hand, and Signet came,
She fixed his Hopes, 'twas Sacred, with her Name.
And thus her Letter spoke her kind Concern:
'Return my Dearest, Faithful, Lord, return;
'Give me not endless Cause, your Loss to mourn.
'Can you pretend you Love, and yet prepare,
'For your Florella, worse than Death, Despair?
'Oh most unkind! Could you for ever go,
'And let not me your fatal Purpose know?
'If with a Flame sincere your Heart does burn,
'I Charge you, by that Sacred Flame, return.
So, Royal Mandates, the last Hour arrive,
When pitying Queens bid Malefactures live;
With such vast Joy the Innocent and Brave,
Receives the only Cordial that had Power to save;
Forgets the Penance that his Soul designed,
And with his Garb, resumes a cheerful Mind;
By her Command, his Speed out-flies the Wind.
A general Joy through all the House is spread,
Welcome! as if our Voice could raise some Darling, Dead:
His Father, speedy Marr'age does Command,
And joins in his, the Fair Florella's Hand;
Yet there is a fixed Regret he is forced to hide,
So much the Marr'age mortifies his Pride:
Not so, the Mother; that kind British Dame,
She likes the Maid, and well approves the Flame:
What Is their Concern to the glad Lovers Bliss!
All Day they Gaze, and Talk, and Vow, and Kiss,
'Till that dear joyful, long desired Morn,
That Day, which Mand'vill thinks, will Years adorn,
Is come; when charming Bridal Virgins wait,
And jolly Youths throng to the Palace Gate;
Then bright Florella, lovely as the Rose,
Ten Thousand Glory's in her Eyes disclose;
By curious Art, decked in the British Pride,
To wondering Crowds, appeared the fairest Bride
That ever famed Alhion graced in all her Store,
So bright a Nymph was never seen before.
Then the Bridegroom, gay as the Eastern Sun,
Yet seemed in haste, and wished his Race were run;
Challenged his shining Rival of the Day,
And bid him hasten toward the ebbing Sea;
Paid all his Vows to Sacred Solemn Night,
His Prayers, the sober footed Matron do invite,
And calls her dark'ning Gloom, his Hearts delight.
At length the happy joyful Day is past,
And the dear welcome Shades are come at last.
New Sports the longing Bridegroom's joy's retard,
Farce and Dance, which have but small regard;
He hasts to the last Scene, the gaudy Bed,
With Indian odours, Native Roses spread,
Each busy Hand's employed to undress the Fair,
No need of Sweets, when young Florella's there.
How many Fears the blushing Virgin awe!
She knew not what she said, nor whom she saw,
Blessed Mand'vill comes, my Muse, the Curtain draw:
Leave now, in perfect Bliss, the happy Pair,
And let Perotto next become thy Care.
In all that Court, he was the Youth alone,
Whose Acts immortal Fame, and endless Glory crown;
In Sports, or in great Exercise of War,
Then all the rest he still exceeded far:
His Mother's Beauty, and his Father's Grace,
Was stamped upon the lovely Hero's Face;
Kind Fortune did his glorious Youth befriend,
And all he undertakes, Success does still attend.
Judgment, and piercing Wit, which all approve,
And various Charms, to gain an Universal Love.
The President, who did his Title Grace,
Had bounteous Nature, blessed with numerous Race,
All things in Court, wear an auspiceous Face;
And that Experience may his Arms advance,
He Is sent a Volentier to serve in France:
Such strange Adventures does Blind Fortune bring,
Unknown, he treads his Native Shore, defends his King;
But whilst exposed, he courts an early Name,
And with Expense of Blood, secures that darling, Fame.
At Home
A Pestelential Sickness rages round,
Destructive Mists ascend, thick Vapors from the Ground,
The unwholesome Blasts does Man and Beasts confound.
Perotto heard their State, and evil Case,
And quickly flies to the infected Place:
Rumor but half the Desolation spoke,
'Twas such a Scene, as noblest Hearts might break:
That Palace which he gaudy left, and gay,
Now Midnight Silence reigned at Noon of Day;
A Cause that did incessent Grief afford,
Death had destroyed his Patron, and his Lord,
And all his Sons, with whom he had been bred;
Even all the Heroic Youths were Dead.
Cammilla, the only Daughter still survived,
And in the midst of this Destruction lived;
So tender Plants do sometimes brave the Storm,
When Oaks, and Towers, are from their Basis torn:
She lived, indeed, but shut from humane Eyes,
For 'bove her Life, she did her Father prize:
That being near her dead, and dying Race,
She was confined in the infected Place:
And she, whose Form did all the World delight,
Is shunned like Death, or some destructive Spright:
'Till to the Place, the bold Perotto came,
He Loved, and Danger but increased his Flame.
Through all the Avenues, eagerly he flies,
Still complicated Horror meets his Eyes,
And noisome Steams, from the unburied Dead arise.
Here lifted hands, in vain, for help do call,
The Servant at his Master's Feet does fall.
In one promiscuous Heap, lay Old and Young,
The Rich, the Fair, the Healthful and the Strong;
Then angry Heaven sends the Destroyer forth,
Who can express the Terrors of his Wrath!
The Plague, with rapid Force, devouring Rage,
Seems as 'twou'd clear this crowded busy Stage
Of all that thinking Stock of humane Kind,
Infects the Body, sinks the forming Mind;
Despair, and Black Idea's fill the Soul,
Such Thoughts as all Religion would control:
All ties are broke, the Fathers flies the Sons,
The Mother from her bosomed Infant runs;
Dire Hate, in each infected Breast presides,
And new made Bridegrooms shun their charming Brides:
Death's grown so common, none will shed a Tear,
Nature and Love are both overcome by Fear;
Only Perotto, he his Fair will save,
Or else, in worse than Charnels, find a Grave.
Amid'st these Ruins, bright Cammilla fate,
Expecting still, her tender Parents Fate.
Perotto comes, implores that she would leave
That wretched Place, and fly with him, and live.
At first, she would not believe her weeping Eyes,
And viewed Perotto with a strange Surprise!
Art thou come, she said, to this House of Death?
Approach not, least I infect thee with my Breath,
Shun this contagious and destructive Air,
I am a Prey to Sickness, Sorrow, and Despair:
With untaught Sighs, the Lover made Reply,
Consent with me, your faithful Slave, to fly,
Or give me leave to stay with you and dye.
Dread of these Horrors, soon the Point does gain,
And with those few that did alive remain,
They quit the Castle for the open Plain.
Perotto skilled in Business of the Wars,
A Ten^ for Fair Cammilla strait prepares;
And though their little Troops infected round,
He from their Sight, nor Touch, no Danger found;
Whether Love, with his All powerful Dart,
And burning Flames, secured his Manly Heart,
Filled all, and for Contagion left no Room;
Or whether Fate's Decree deferred his Doom;
With cheerful Health, the faithful Youth was blessed
With Strength, and ardent Power, to serve the rest.
Bleak Winter, now, with nipping Frost draws near,
Courted, desired, and hollow Winds that clear
The hot, unwholesome, and polluted Air:
Thinly the peopled Towns appear again,
The ruined Clime begins to look Serene;
The untilled Land's, again the Laborers Care,
And Temples now, resound with Praise and Prayer.
Nobles, to long deserted Houses come,
And straight invite the Brave Perotto home:
For having learned his Honor, Love, and Truth,
They Court Cammilla to espouse the Youth;
And that he may not want deserving Grace,
Adorn his Merit, with her Father's Place.
Cammilla, Pious, Just, and truly Good,
His Worth, and her Obligements, understood;
Besides the meddling World might Tax her Fame,
And fix some Blot on her unsulli'd Name:
When she with him, fled to preserve her Life,
'Twou'd Stain her Honor, not to be his Wife.
It Is done, in Solemn Pomp, the Knot is tied,
The Great Cammilla is unknown Perotto's Bride.
Oh! Angiers,
Thus Providence makes up what thou did lose,
No better Fortune, if thy self had chose:
That guiding Fate, which does our Steps direct,
We fall not by it, but our own neglect;
We tread forbidden Paths, without a Guide,
It Is not Heavens Fault, but our own selfish Pride.
Thus Man is Cursed, with what we call Free will,
In Error lives, and wondrous prone to Ill.
Why were we made? Why, from our unsought Birth,
Are the immortal Seeds condemned to Earth?
Why do we Think, and Judge, above the Bruits,
Yet gain no farther Knowledge by Disputes!
Why endless Bliss, and Torments do we frame?
Yet cannot give the Joys, nor Punishment, a Name.
Happy, alone, that thoughtless Mortal lives,
Who feeds on Faith, and, as the Church, believes;
Who never wrong commits, and whose calm Breast,
No deep Inquiry makes, to break his Rest,
This Man, my Muse pronounces truly blessed.
Ye undistiuguish'd Notions, hence begone,
Let Us to our Story, let our Tale go on:
Thus Angiers Race, are in due Honors placed,
With plenteous Wealth, and shining Glory graced.
Now my Muse, the Fathers woes depaint,
The various Hardships of that suffering Saint,
Who twenty Years remained in servile State,
With Patience bore the rude Insults of Fate;
Humble in Sorrow, in Affliction Wise,
Conformed his Actions to that base Disguise:
As on the lowly Flowr, he Sleeping lay,
Heaven, to his working Thought, this Vision did display:
His Room seemed filled with Darling Light Divine,
Immortal Rays, with glorious Splendor shine;
Scarce could his humane Eyes, the Brightness bear,
The darting Beams shown forth so radient clear:
When in a Garment of unspotted White,
Too heavenly Fair for earthly Mortal Sight:
Close by his side, the Reverend Hermit stood,
Who twice had taught him, for his Childrens Good;
And with a Voice, whose Sweetness charmed his Ear,
Thus spoke, bid him his Words observe and hear:
From the Eternal Realms of endless Light,
Where there is no Shadow of approaching Night;
Where all with beatifick Joys are crowned,
Where Sin and Sorrow's never to be found,
But Bliss and Praises take their tuneful Round,
From thence, by Gracious Providence, I Am sent
To cheer thee in thy Race of Punishment;
To tell thee thy Reproach draws near an end,
And pitying Heaven will thy last Years befriend:
Angiers, again, to Courteous Albion have,
Good Fortune's welcome, if it comes at last:
Thy Daughter's there, matched equal to her Blood,
Thy Son magnificently Great, and truly Good.
Then thou again shall view thy Native Land,
Again be raised in the State, and fixed in high Command.
From Calumny and Guilt, discovered free,
And after all, my Son, shall Share those Joys with me,
Look up, anticipate what shall hereafter be.
He saw Ten Thousand Angels on the Wing,
Straight heard the loud Immortal Praises sing;
Beheld the Golden Lyres, felt melting Strains,
That struck his Soul, and trembled through his Veins;
The Ecstasy, for Nature grew too strong,
Nor could he bear the mighty Vision long;
But as he strugl'd hard, and would have spoke,
The weaker Bands of flattering Sleep, were broke;
He waked, and found it almost perfect Day,
'Twas Darkness, when compared to the bright Ray,
Which late, his Soul and wandering Eyes had seen;
The glorious Transports of this heavenly Dream:
To doubt the Truth, he deems a mortal Sin,
Parts with his cruel Lord, his Voyage does begin;
Safely he crossed the boisterous watery Main,
And now beholds the British Clifts again:
In Pilgrims Weed, the Noble Earl was dressed,
Begs all his humble Food; and where at Night to rest,
To the Marshal's House, directs his weary Feet;
The first sad Object his sad Eyes did meet,
Was Violante, led by her court'ous Lord,
With all the Pomp such Greatness does afford;
The gaudy Scene of Joy he scarce could bear,
To see his Child so wondrous Great and Fair:
Yet still no sign of Gladness he betrays,
But humbly with his fellow Pilgrims stays,
'Till summoned by the appointed Servants Call,
They press, and fill the hospitable Hall.
Angiers Distress, his Servitude and Woe,
Had turned his curling Locks, as white as Snow;
His Meagre Face, with many a Wrincle plough'd,
And Sun burned Skin, no former Beauty showed.
The Pilgrims fed, and Dinner taken away,
Two lovely Infants were brought forth to play;
Kind Heaven had blessed young Mand'vill's Marriage Joys,
With two bright beauteous charming Boys.
The Children straight to the Pilgrim Angiers run,
As if they knew the Root from whence they sprung;
He kissed them; Joy, that Stranger to his Breast,
At their loved Sight, became once more his Guest:
They walk with him, and hang about his Knees,
While he finds ways, their childish Hearts to please;
And when the Time is come for their Return,
When they their little Studies must perform;
Their Masters call, and Servants ask, in vain,
They Will not the Pilgrim leave, nor to their Books again.
The Mother from within, beheld this sight,
And smiled to see them in such high Delight,
Bid them their Innocent Desires obey,
And let them longer with the Pilgrim stay.
Then the Stern Marshal, and his noble Son,
Walked cross the Court, and through that spacious Room;
With a proud Smile, the scornful Marshal cried,
There let 'em stay, to Beggary they are allied,
Too near, by the ignoble Mother's side.
When that Reproach, poor suffering Angiers heard,
The Tears run down his Cheeks and Snowy Beard.
Young Mand'vill fumed, his inward Rage boiled over,
His Father only durst his Wife explore,
Whom he with true Devotion does adore.
Mand'vill, the unknown Pilgrim thus bespake,
What Sorrow's thine, Is It for the Childrens sake?
Know then thou good old Man, whose tender Heart
Is moved, I feel than thee a greater smart
In the Reproach; the little Babes are mine,
All Virtue's in the Charming Mother shine;
Of Birth unknown, the Tale's too long to tell,
Raised by my Love, she wears her Honors well;
No Power, nor Pomp, o'er-sways her steady Mind,
She Is justly Great, yet Affable and Kind:
Forgive me Father (unawares) he said,
That on this Subject, I so long have staid;
Florella merits more than I can say,
More faithful Love than my whole Life can pay.
Angiers replied, Oh! Noble Constant Youth,
With Pleasure I have heard thy wondrous Truth.
The brightest Tale in the lasting Book of Fame,
Amongst Lovers ever Sacred be thy Name:
Let Vir^ous Maids, Garlands for thee prepare,
Virtue was found, thy most peculiar Care.
The humble Maid was wholly in your Power,
Yet you sosook the loose Luxuriant Hour;
And to make your amorous Wish complete,
Preserved your Passion Good, so made it Great:
No Band is softer than the Nuptial Ties,
Th Renegade that does the Form despise,
M ets with ten Thousand Arrows as he flies.
(Charmed with his Speech) Mana'vill of Nature kind,
Asked him from whence he was, and where designed?
He said, he was a Bark by Tempest hurled,
And left a Stranger in this cruel World.
Here be thy Harbor, generous Mand'vill cried,
Here thou shall find no Frowns, no Ebbing Tide;
In thy Devotion quiet and serene,
In Safety, view thy past tempestuous Scene.
Angiers, with Thanks, replied, if I partake
Thy Kindnesses still done for Virtue's sake,
Accept what service feeble Age can pay thee back.
Again the Germans against the French prepare,
And all is Hostile grown, and open War:
England was then a Friend, and dear ally,
With her bold Britains, did their Troops supply;
To head 'em, Mand'vill and Perotto's chose,
For their unquestioned Merit, none oppose.
The next Delight that charmed old Angiers Heart,
He viewed his Son perform the great Commanders Part;
Beheld him lead a Troop of Gallant Men,
Whose sight brought former Glory back again:
When Young, such Valiant Bands himself had lead,
And been a Kingdom's, and an Amry's Head:
Now bowed with Age, unknown his Life he past,
And seemed to travel to his Grave in haste.
Thus the two Brothers linked in joint Command,
Knew not that they were tied in a much stricter Band.
Let Us vail Cammilla and Florella's Fears,
Their Vows, their parting Sighs, and flowing Tears;
Together they are left, each to condole,
That by dividing Grief, neither may bear the Whole.
Mand'vill designed to leave the Pilgrim here,
But the poor Count, begged to attend him there;
Resolves to view where he had been undone,
The ungrateful Land that cast forth such a Son.
The jolly Soldiers now are got aboard,
And the auspicious Winds, quick Passage do afford;
Their Plumes and waving Banners they advance,
And with their Succors, bring new Joy to France.
Now let our Just Historick Tale remove,
The Queen must give Account for lawless Love;
To All-devouring Time, her Charms give Way,
Her Looks not lovely now, nor briskly Gay;
No Fire her Eyes, her Veins no amourous Flame;
But in her Heart Remorse, Repentance, Shame,
Confusion, Sorrow, a Melancholy Train
Perplex her Soul, and keep her Mind in pain;
Angiers vile Wrongs, stand Glaring in her View;
That Thought does all her secret Steps pursue,
The Hag that nightly loads her tortured Breast,
And never lets her taste the Sweets of Balmy Rest;
A lingering Sickness follows, pining Grief;
Nor can the Sons of Art bring wished Relief:
With down-cast Eyes, they approach the dying Fair,
Their Solemn Looks discover their Despair:
Gashly the King of Terrors does appear;
Black Guilt adds Horror to tormenting Fear:
She looks around, and sees no Comfort nigh,
Spite of Imperial Greatness, she must dye;
To bear the Shock, she Summons former Pride,
She Is grown too weak, all Aid is now denied:
Then let us yield; she sighed, and faintly said,
And sunk upon the Bosom of a faithful Maid;
Fetch here the Council, and the injured King,
Than Death, my Friends, I have a sharper Sting;
I cannot dye in Peace, while it is concealed,
And I must dye, for Shame, when it is revealed.
The waiting Slaves straight her Commands obey,
Eager the King, to hear what she would say:
With weeping Eyes, he viewed departing Life,
And called her by the tender Names of Love and Wife.
Oh Prince! She cried, behold Cleora lost!
And sinking down, a guilty, guilty Ghost;
Unless great Angier's Race you can restore,
I Am wracked on Earth with Pangs, and plunging into more.
Forgive your Wife, let Mountains hide her Shame,
Mine was the Sin, mine the impetuous Flame,
And cursed Cleora only was to blame.
In this Cabinet you will find the Story writ,
If it is possible, my fatal Crimes forget.
Angiers to Honor straight, and Grace retrieve,
And Natures Faults, let Heav'en and you forgive:
This said,
Nature ashamed, her Soul to earth inclined,
Broke the weak Ties of her Majestic Mind,
That it might mount to purer Regions unconfined.
Reason and Sense, from the affrighted King is fled,
To hear the unsuspected Guilt, and see her Dead;
Revived, the Search of Truth his Soul pursues,
And with Amazement, he the Paper views,
Where every secret Thought, he saw confessed,
And every guilty Wish that filled her Breast;
He groaned to think how much he would been deceived,
And said, no beauteous Woman ever should be believed.
Now to her Tomb's conveyed the unhappy Fair;
But busy Fame will not be buried there:
Fame seems to join with our invet'rate Foes,
Spreads our bad Deeds, and gathers as it goes;
And with the Rumor, Royal Mandate's come,
To call the injured suffering Angiers home:
Rewards, whoever brings the Absent Lord,
And all his Castles, and his Lands restored.
Angiers could scarce resolve to trust again
The uncertain World, and faithless cruel Men,
Hid in a lowly State, a mean Retreat,
He found some Plagues, but none like being Great.
Now with a gentle Lord, his Age does rest,
No Care, nor Envy, does his Hours molest,
And Innocence and Peace possess his Breast.
His Children want the Greatness of his Name,
Nay he grows fond of the exalted Fame:
And as his Sons revolving in a Tent,
Discant on Change, Death, and this strange Event,
Both commiserate the guiltless Hero's Fate;
Noblest Natures still, are most compassionate.
Attending Angiers heard, and strait came forth,
And with a Look, that stamped his Words for Truth,
Began:
My Lords, in Pity, lend an Ear,
They Are blessed, who will not disdain the Poor to hear:
If you will Admission to the King obtain,
(For my Endeavors, would, alas, prove vain)
Of that unhappy Angiers, I might tell,
I Have met him often; indeed, I know him well:
They said the Favour's lessened, when with pain it is sought,
My Friend, thou sure shall to the King be brought;
To the Royal Tent, they strait their Steps direct,
And having paid the King their due Respect,
Thus Mand'vill spoke:
This aged Man of my Domestic Train,
Who begged with me, to cross the British Main;
To your Majesty, he sais, he can relate
The History of your loft Angiers Fate:
Let him speak (hastily the King began)
For much I long to hear of that great injured Man.
As Noble Angiers spoke, and formed his Tale,
In such pathetick Words, as must prevail;
The King observed, with an intensive View,
Then starting from his Seat, cried Angiers, it is you;
Those graceful Looks, and that dear faithful Voice,
In which my Youth, with Pleasure, did rejoice:
Quick to my Arms, my constant Wish restore,
And Fate shall never, never part us more.
Who can express the Joy in every Face,
When they beheld him kneel, and saw the King embrace!
The Courtier's Flock, he is circled in the Crowd,
Of those who strive to speak their Welcome loud;
Soon to his wondering Son, the Story's told,
How in the East their Father they behold:
In Silence they their inward Joys suppress,
Blush they no sooner knew their Happiness.
Mand'vill sunk with Shame, when Reflection brought
His Father's sharp Reproach to his revolving Thought.
Angier's Soul was to that Calmness grown,
That he forgave the Ills designed, and those unknown:
With Tears, the worthy kneeling Hero raised,
And to the King their Deeds and Virtue praised.
To make the Earls returning Joy complete,
A Victory they gain, with Wealth and Honor great;
They lead in Triumph, the long suffering Lord,
And he is to thrice his former Wealth restored.
The News to Violante, Fame conveys,
And soon as that, she is begged to cross the Seas:
The Kings own Yatch attends on her Command,
With all the Greatness of the Gallick Land.
Florella here, sees Fortune's smoothest Brow,
Great in her Birth, as in her Marriage now;
Of all her Ills, wronged Angiers might bemoan,
He the chief Notice took, of this alone,
That she was branded mean, because unknown.
To the Earl Marshal, this said, he declare,
Let him not still despise his charming Heir:
Tell him the Blood the Female Side supplies,
Does from as old and great a Fountain rise:
The haughty Marshal, does from her receive,
The wondrous News, which they with Joy believe,
They all congratulate, then she takes her leave.
The Bark is driven by auspicious Gales,
And prosperous Winds fill all the swelling Sails;
Safely she is landed in her Father's Arms,
Adds to the Court, with her Superior Charms.
Now Feasts and Joy, throughout the Realm abound,
Revels and Masks make up the circling Round:
Thus they forget the Tempests they have past,
And thus Heroic Virtue's crowned at last.
FINIS.

