THE PANTHEONITES. A DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENT

[Price One Shilling.]

THE PANTHEONITES. A DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENT. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL
IN THE HAY-MARKET.

LONDON: Printed for J. BELL, near Exeter-Change, in the Strand; and C.
ETHERINGTON, at York. MDCCLXXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE COUNTESS of HERTFORD.
MADAM,
AS I flatter myself the public will agree in my opinion, that a burlesque of
affected gentility, can be no where better addressed than to a Lady, whose
elegant and liberal ideas of life, ornament even Nobility, I have ventured this
intrusion; which as it proceeds from a profound respect for your Ladyship's
very distinguished character, will, I hope, be considered in a favorable light.

I am, with all possible deference, MADAM, Your Ladyship's Most obedient and
very Devoted servant, THE AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author of this Dramatic scrap, having from a fatal, and irreparable event
in his family, labored under a gloom of mind exceedingly disadvantageous to
Comic ideas, has reason to fear it wants much of that spirit, which a happier
state of imagination would have produced; but having promised a piece of this
kind to Mr. As Mr. FOOT kindly conferred an unexpected favor on Mr. WESTON,
which rendered a new piece unnecessary, the author is happy in transferring it
to Mr. JEWEL, as a very valuable member of society.
WESTON, as a performer of singular merit, he encountered a task rather irksome,
and to get the subject out of his way, pursued it with uncommon rapidity;
however, from the favorable opinion of some judicious friends, hopes it will
not be deemed unworthy existence on the stage or in the closet.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir FRANCIS FAIRLOVE, DAN. DRUGGER, Mr. WESTON. FARMER TILWELL, Mr. BANNISTER,
TIM. TILWELL, Mr. FEARON. SKINFLINT, Mr. GENTLEMAN, FRIZEAU, Mr. JACOBS. DICKEY
DRUGGER, Miss FRANCIS. SERVANT, Mr. FRANCIS.
Mrs. DEBORAH DRUGGER, Mrs. WILLIAMS, ANNA, Miss PLATT. LISINI, Miss CRAVEN.
SCENE, LONDON.

THE PANTHEONITES.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE I.
Enter TILWELL and SKINFLINT meeting. SKINFLINT. HA! honest farmer, well met.


TILWELL. Honest farmer! Hey day! what are all you London folks flatterers?
Though by the bye, I believe I am as honest as most of my neighbors: Tom Tilwell
can lay his hand upon his heart, and say he never belied providence, nor wished
a rise of provisions in his life.


SKINFLINT. Hoity toity! if many farmers were of this way of thinking, we
cornfactors and salesmen should be soon as thin as Pharoah's lean kine -- a
parcel of poor devils indeed: the finest scheme in the world, except clipping
and coining, would be totally ruined. No, no, Heaven send the landlords to
raise their rents, and the farmers to keep pace with them. -- Ah, you don't
know the pleasure and profit we enjoy.


TILWELL. Pleasure! what, in starving your fellow creatures?


SKINFLINT. Starving -- no, no, mercy forbid! not so bad as that, only lock
their jaws a little.


TILWELL. You don't, by appearance, master Skinflint, seem as if your jaws were
much locked.


SKINFLINT. Me! why, you would not put me on a footing with ragged weavers in
Spittle-fields, or slip-shod tailors in Clement Danes. -- You don't see into
the bottom of things. -- We are friends to government as well as ourselves. The
English, master Tilwell, Londoners particularly, are, with full bellies,
insolent, grumbling politicians; they pretend to think for themselves. -- Now
weaken the beer when you raise the price; clip short their beef and pudding;
keep provisions high, and wages low -- you have 'em as tame as so many pet
pigeons.


TILWELL. At this rate your business is of great use.


SKINFLINT. The greatest importance, I assure you. -- We are on the
Change-alley plan exactly; as they have at all times letters ready from
Dantzig, Hamburgh, the Hague, or an express from India over land, to influence
stock, so we have accounts from every shire in England, to keep up the markets.


TILWELL. What then you have correspondents in all parts of the kingdom.


SKINFLINT. Not one on that account. -- We don't care how things really are; we
can make them as we please. -- Why I have burned the uplands with sunshine,
and drowned the low-lands with rain a thousand times. I was the means of
lifting up the peck loaf twopence last week; and have another petition from
the bakers to the court of aldermen in my pocket; it is penned in such a
lamentable style, that I don't doubt, with one or two more, working up to a
shilling.


TILWELL. What when there is a fine crop, fine weather for harvest, and new corn
coming in?


SKINFLINT. No matter for that. -- Did not you see a paragraph of mine in the
papers last week, that all the old was gone. Yet, would you think it now, for
all I take so much pains, and make it so fine a time for gentlemen of the
crust, I was obliged to arrest one of the fraternity yesterday for a hundred
and fifty.


TILWELL. He must be a bad manager indeed.


SKINFLINT. Apes quality -- as most of our trades-people do nowadays -- keeps
a country house, a phaeton, and, for ought I know, a mistress. But I don't so
much blame him for this, if he had any brains: why the blockhead, in five years
trade for himself, never had sense enough to make a loaf two or three ounces
short; and is so plaguey conscientious, as not to use any alum, because its
unwholesome. -- Time for me to look sharp, master Tilwell.


TILWELL. But after all, friend Skinflint, though I am a farmer, and may gain
by it, I think it hard that there should be plenty and scarcity at the same
time.


SKINFLINT. Politic, politic. -- If all the fish that is caught was brought to
market, and all the meat that is killed sold, both would soon be a drug. There
is one instance among many -- Mat. Marrow-bone, of Honey-lane market, as pretty
a fellow as ever whetted a knife, will frequently, rather than take a halfpenny
a pound under the fixed price on Saturday night, tip ten guineas worth into the
Thames on Sunday morning. He has showed me his Thames register, and a sweet
pretty collection of drowned joints there is. However, I advised him for the
future, to bury all; because, you know, in the water it may feed and increase
the stock of fish, which might hurt the flesh trade. Mat. took the hint -- ah,
he is a sensible spirited fellow as ever sold thirteen ounces for a pound; and
can afford to live genteelly.


TILWELL. Well, notwithstanding what you say, I am for peace and plenty. You
shall hear my thoughts on that subject, in a song taught me by our vicar, as
hearty an old blade as ever wore black, or used a tobacco-stopper.

SONG.
Let me never know the man,
With pipe and full can,
Whose prayers and study will cease,
That all the good things
Which providence brings
May crown us with plenty and peace.
Of this let our songs never cease,
Of peace and of plenty, of plenty and peace.
Let a cup of strong beer
Each free Briton cheer,
With plenty of pudding and beef;
To France we'll resign
Soup meagre and wine,
And at home find out perfect relief.
Of this let our songs never cease,
Of peace and of plenty, of plenty and peace.
When a kind season sends,
For the best of all ends,
To mankind a plentiful store;
May they who for gain
Would render it vain,
Never taste its indulgences more.
Of this let our songs never cease,
Of peace and of plenty, of plenty and peace.

SKINFLINT. I like the tune and your singing, master Tilwell, but the words are
horribly against trade; I would not have them sung in one of our committees for
ten quarters of wheat.


TILWELL. Committees!


SKINFLINT. Yes, we have seven every week; the fore-stalling one meets Sunday
afternoon, at Islington, to tax Monday's market at Smithfield; on Monday the
staff-of-life committee meet in Mark Lane, to settle how much a quarter; on
Tuesday the coal committee, to pray for strong easterly winds three months
together the beginning of winter; Wednesday the provender committee, to settle
hay, straw, and oats; Thursday the Billingsgate committee, to price fish;
Friday the monopolizing committee, to engross hops; and on Saturday the brewing
committee, to make, as soon as possible, beer four pence a pot.


TILWELL. Well, some of us are bad enough in the country; but here, I find, you
famish one another by rule.


SKINFLINT. Fair game, master Tilwell, the public is very fair game. But you
don't like the subject, I see; till you think better of it, we'll change it --
I had almost forgot to wish you joy.


TILWELL. Joy! of what?


SKINFLINT. Your son-in-law, Dan, Drugger's good fortune.


TILWELL. What has he got a good bargain of tobacco?


SKINFLINT. So I find their hurry and joy have made them forget you. -- The
lottery ticket you gave your youngest daughter Anna, is come up a blank -- that
to Deborah, your eldest, twenty thousand pounds.


TILWELL. Twenty thousand pounds!


SKINFLINT. Certainly; the tobacco trade was given up in three days, a house
was taken near Grosvenor-Square in three more, a French valet, a French cook,
an Italian waiting woman, and a long etc. have been engaged within the last
week.


TILWELL. You astonish me! I must go immediately to this new shop of
politeness. -- Fortune seldom grants her favors right, else poor Anna, who
deserves ten times as much as Deb. would have had the prize.


SKINFLINT. Well, I promised to call at the Exchequer to day about it -- for it
must be sold immediately -- and I Will meet you at Dan's in less than two hours.


Exit. TILWELL. A French cook! a French valet! and an Italian waiting woman! --
Why good luck has turned the brains of the idiots, if they ever had any, upside
down -- But this methodical minister of famine; what must I think of him? that
no monster in human shape can exceed that man who labors to increase the
misery, and to prey on the vitals of the poor. Going.


Enter TIM TILWELL. TIM. Hollo: Uncle!


TILWELL. What have you ventured without a guide?
Did not I bid you take the ostler with you?

TIM. What signifies that; you think I can do nothing by myself -- I maunt be
in leading-strings all my life -- I found the way well enough, and called at
our butter merchant's, who gave me two large glasses of such rare stuff --


TILWELL. As seem to have raised your spirits: well, I am glad you made no
blunder.


TIM. Blunder! No no. I cannot help laughing to think of the good fortune I
have had; but you will tell nobody?


TILWELL. I cannot till I know.


TIM. Coming by the great church with the huge round top --


TILWELL. St. Paul's?


TIM. Ay, ay; I met with a very fine lady, all silks and sattins, who fell
downright in love with me.


TILWELL. How do you know?


TIM. Because she looked as if she did; and besides more, she told me she did.


TILWELL. Very free at first sight!


TIM. Free! Oh la, as free as any thing: she asked me to take a glass of wine;
I could not for shame refuse her; so she told me she was a knight and baronet's
daughter, that she would take me to her papa's house in something square, but
was afraid till she knew how the land lay. Why she told me such things as would
make one's hair stand an end; about one man flying ten feet high on a rope;
another jumping with a ladder like any thing; and another, O la! riding full
speed with his head on a pint pot; and other most wonderful conjurations.


TILWELL. So you are quite sure of her?


TIM. Sure as if we had been at church together. Sure indeed! Why she gave me
her hand, and two hearty smacks upon it.

SONG. This song omitted in representation.

When I this fine lady shall wed,
Like a squire then I Will hold up my head;
With a sword at my side,
I Will strut by my bride;
I Will frisk it and frolic and rant it about,
'Till through this great town I have made a great rout.

TILWELL. So, so; the butter merchant's good stuff, with the lady's kindness
and wine, have made you as merry as a country feast at Christmas. -- Pray how
did you part at last?


TIM. Why she could not stay, but appointed me to meet her tomorrow, precisely
twelve o'clock, at the cap and bells in Knaves-acre.


TILWELL. A most excellent direction; pray, nephew, what is a clock now?


TIM. A clock? why -- oh la! I Have lost my fine eight guinea watch!


TILWELL. Have you so? Oh, the lady has only borrowed it: there are a great
many such knight's daughters about this town: perhaps she has made love to your
purse too.


TIM. Adswooks, and so she has!


TILWELL. So you had a hearty smack for one, and a shake by the hand for the
other.


TIM. Four golden guineas, and a queen Ann's crown piece given me by aunt
Tibby. I shall never be able to face home again.


TILWELL. Never fear; I Will make all up if you behave well while we are in town,
but be sure to mind.


TIM. Mind! I warrant me -- four guineas -- but now I think on it, three of them
were light ones -- that is some comfort however.


TILWELL. Ha! ha! ha! You will not let care hang long on your mind: Come, we'll
step on to your cousin Drugger's; I am told strange things of them.


TIM. If they are as strange as the knight's daughter, I shall not much like to
stay amongst them. -- Oh, my poor watch and queen Ann's crown.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
DRUGGER, FRIZEAU dressing him. DRUGGER. Puff, puff, puff, -- poo -- poo: I
shall be choked -- ugh! -- ugh! -- at this rate of becoming a fine gentleman,
I shall be obliged to swallow as much flower every day, as would make a
tolerable pudding.


FRIZEAU. Dat is true; but I cannot help it, Sir; Madam Drugger say she vil ave
your head as vite as von twelve cake.


DRUGGER. I know that; but its very hard a man cannot catch gentility without
having his eyes blinded and his breath stopped; scrape and rub away that I may
at least get my sight again; so so -- there -- now pray Mr. Fr -- Fr -- Fr --
what a mischief is your name.


FRIZEAU. Name! -- A ha! -- I am call Jean, Jaque, Pierre, Louis, Frederique
Frizeau.


DRUGGER. Frizeau! why there is enough for a whole family!


FRIZEAU. All person in France derive from de noblesse have a great many name.


DRUGGER. Noblesse! What Is that?


FRIZEAU. Vat you call the nobilite! de count, de duke, de baron: My great
grandfather was marquis de Soup Maigre.


DRUGGER. But a thin sort of a title that, Mounsieur, a -- a -- what the plague
is it?


FRIZEAU. Jean, Jaque, Louis, Pierre, Frederique Frizeau.


DRUGGER. Jean, Jaque -- if I had half so long a name, I should never get
through the first question of the catechism -- how shall I remember it?


FRIZEAU. You call a me Frizeau, dat shall be enough.


DRUGGER. Is that the quality way?


FRIZEAU. Yes, Sir.


DRUGGER. Why then, Mounsieur Frizeau, if your great grandfather was a marquis,
how come you to be a valet de chamber?


FRIZEAU. Fortune de la guerre.


DRUGGER. So, by the shrug of your shoulders, and the length of your face,
that is French for ill luck -- ay, I thought so -- I Am better off than you, for
I Am a gentleman, and a fine one too, though my great grandfather only kept a
snuff-shop. -- Did you never hear of little Abel Drugger the tobacconist?


FRIZEAU. Not in my life!


DRUGGER. Oh la! They have got him in one of their plays; you would burst your
sides to see him: when the little great man that makes every body laugh, and
every body cry, does him, you shall go.


FRIZEAU. Me tank you, Sir. -- Now, Sir, rince your hand in this perfume vater,
and I will sprinkle your handkerchief.


DRUGGER. So so; this will make me a kind of a walking nosegay.


FRIZEAU. He! he! he! Your honneur is in de right.


DRUGGER. Why I was something of that there sort when I lived in Bucklersbury;
the tobacco dust sticking to my clothes made every one that came near me sneeze
heartily; so at the Goose and grid-iron they gave me a nickname; little Dan.
the moving snuff-shop.


FRIZEAU. Prenez guard, Monsieur -- have a care, you must not talk of
Bucklerbury nor tobac, it will spoil your qualite.


DRUGGER. Quality! -- where should it come from? though if I had taken Deborah's
advice --


FRIZEAU. Your lady's advice.


DRUGGER. Right, my lady's advice -- I had forgot -- one cannot learn every
thing together. -- Rome was not built in a day, nor London Bridge neither, and
considering I have only taken up this here trade a month, I do pretty well --
eh?


FRIZEAU. Admirable!


DRUGGER. Almost as well as if I had served an apprenticeship -- but as I was
going to say, neighbor Cathartic the apothecary, made two tickling speeches
for me to speak at Guildhall; and if I had but mounted under one of the giants,
for I Am not free of the hustings, I should have been knighted as round as a
robin.


FRIZEAU. Sans doubt dat is true.


DRUGGER. But I never minded holding my head high till now I Am obliged to it,
for fear of having a steel collar put on, and my feet into the dancing-school
stocks.


FRIZEAU. You please, Sir, put on a your coat?


DRUGGER. Ay, ay, let us see -- oons, the French son of a cabbage has made
sleeves as if I had no more giblets than a goose.


FRIZEAU. Dear, it is on: ma foy it is very neat: No Englise tayleur could ave
fit a you so vell; it sit close as your skin.


DRUGGER. Close! why it pinions my shoulders further back than the people that
go up Holborn hill.


FRIZEAU. My lady order that to throw out your shest, she say you stoop widout.


DRUGGER. So then I must have my shoulders in a vice to throw out my chest, and
disjoint my ancles to turn out my toes. -- I can tell you Friz. this here trade
of fashion is not so easy as some people imagine -- I would rather spin tobacco
four --


FRIZEAU. Tobac again!


DRUGGER. I am dumb.


FRIZEAU. You please, Sir, put on your cutteau de chasse.


DRUGGER. You may put it on yourself -- I have no more use of my arms than an
Egyptian mummy -- besides I forget which side it should be.


FRIZEAU. Always de left -- dear, Sir, it hang admirably!


Enter a Servant. SERVANT. Sir, there is one Mr. Tilwell wants to see you?


FRIZEAU. Tilvel! Vat is dat? does he come in the coach or the sedan?


SERVANT. He came on foot, Mr. Frizeau.


FRIZEAU. On foot! -- is he dress like a gentilhome?


SERVANT. No, Mr. Frizeau; he is like a farmer, and has boots on.


FRIZEAU. Boot! What business has such rustique figure do here?


DRUGGER. I believe, little Friz. it is my Debor -- I mean my lady's father,
may not I see him?


FRIZEAU. Fader -- a ha -- dat is another ting; he may come up; [Exit Serve.]
but mind a your consequence, your distance, your character.


DRUGGER. I must be stiff with him whether I will or no.


Drugger goes to the glass. Enter TILWELL. TILWELL. So friend, where is Dan.
Drugger?


FRIZEAU. Dan! -- Mr. Drugger is dear.


TILWELL. What, that him! Why he is kickshaw'd out like a quack doctor: I should
as soon have known him in lawn sleeves as this gingerbread trumpery. Drugger
turns about.


DRUGGER. Muster Tilwell, I am glad to see you.


TILWELL. Mister! Why not father? I have more reason to be ashamed of thee than
thou have of me; give us thy hand, though -- not stir! -- why man thy arms are
fixed like the wings of a skewer'd rabbit.


DRUGGER. I have got twenty thousand pounds.


TILWELL. What does the money pinion you?


DRUGGER. No, the fashion.


TILWELL. Fashion!


DRUGGER. I Am the tip of the mode.


During these short speeches Drugger traverses the stage affectedly. TILWELL.
You're a buckram doll.


DRUGGER. From top to toe.


TILWELL. Top to toe!


DRUGGER. Before, behind, and all round.


TILWELL. Well, if this be fashion, I would not be in it for the best stack of
wheat in my haggard.


DRUGGER. That Is because you don't know what it is to be a gentleman.


TILWELL. May-hap not -- pray what do you call that bauble that hangs at your
side?


DRUGGER. Why a -- Friz --


FRIZEAU. A cutteau to chasse.


DRUGGER. Right, a chasse.


TILWELL. I thought it had been a new-fashioned carving-knife.


DRUGGER. True, that is the English of the French name.


TILWELL. I was afraid you was arming to fight.


DRUGGER. Fight! Damme if I do.


TILWELL. What, you swear too?


DRUGGER. The pink of gentility.


TILWELL. I see you are wonderfully improved; but where is Deborah?


DRUGGER. Oh, my lady's as busy as a be, getting dresses for the masquerade at
the Pantheon to night.


TILWELL. So, here is fine work going on I find. Aside.


DRUGGER. But she will be home by five o'clock to dinner.


TILWELL. Five! this is my time, and I could pick a bit if I had it.


DRUGGER. Friz. do you think there is any vulgar meat left?


FRIZEAU. Me cannot tell, Sir; there was left at supper last night some charman
fricasse of de frog.


TILWELL. Rot your frogs.


FRIZEAU. And nice ragoo of snail.


TILWELL. Confound your snails; if this be the case, I Will go to an
eating-house, and get something substantial to close the orifice of the
stomach; in the afternoon I Will call and ask my girls how they do, and if they
should be as much frenchified as you are, I shall not care how soon I jog home to
farm.


DRUGGER. I Am going to the Herald's-office, to get a coat of arms.


TILWELL. Coat of arms! what need you go there? a hogshead of tobacco supported
by two bunches of leaves, and a snuff-mill for a crest, will serve you well
enough.


Enter TIM. TILWELL, roaring out. TIM. Murder! fire! fire! murder.


TILWELL. What Is the matter, Tim?


TIM. Nothing but tricks in this plaguey London. When you came up stairs, I went
down into the kitchen, for I Am as hungry as a hawk, where the lanthern-jawed
picture of starvation of a cook, gave me some pee-pash, or pash-pee, I think he
called it.


FRIZEAU. Aha! the callapash and callapee; dat is turtle.


TIM. Plague on his P's, Q's and turtle too; I had not swallowed above two
mouthfuls, before my throat was burnt to a cinder.


FRIZEAU. Dat was de Chian.


TIM. Chian! I wish you and all your countrymen were soused over head and ears
in it; I shall not get the skin on my mouth this month.


DRUGGER. Yes, if you learn to be a gentleman; it scorched me at first, but now
I can swallow spoonfuls without winking.


TILWELL. Come, come, Tim. we'll go to some good British beef and beer, the one
to rub, and the other to wash off this outlandish trash. Good bye, Dan.


DRUGGER. Allons, Don.


TILWELL. I don't understand French.


DRUGGER. No, nor I neither; but a word or two gives a man a polite air.


TIM. Good bye, Dan. and you, monsieur Cockatoo.


[Exeunt.] SCENE III.
SIR FRANCIS FAIRLOVE and ANNA. SIR FRANCIS. So delightful a temperature of the
weather, Madam, may induce us to say, with the tender Otway, "This fair day
seems as 'twere sent to invite the world abroad."


ANNA. The elements do, indeed, seem particularly harmonious, Sir


SIR FRANCIS. An emblem of your happy disposition, Madam, which never admits a
cloud to hang on it.


ANNA. I am tolerably at ease, Sir Francis, and strive to keep myself so; there
is no occasion to pursue care, it too often falls in our way unsought.


SIR FRANCIS. Perfectly right -- but you are philosophical on every occasion;
the calmness, or rather pleasure, with which you heard your sister's good
fortune, is a peculiar instance.


ANNA. As I had formed ^o expectations, the disappointment of my chance was
easily borne.


SIR FRANCIS. Not so easily, Madam: though you have given me but very distant
expectation of being made happy by your fair hand, yet I should be much more
unsatisfied if hope was turned up a positive blank.


ANNA. Sir Francis, the world calls you a man of honor, and I believe you one,
believe your professions are sincere, however beyond what I can merit; but,
Sir, that father who brought me up with the utmost tenderness, claims a share
in the disposal; especially as I Am sure he will never do it against my
inclinations.


SIR FRANCIS. Far be it from me to infringe upon his just and natural
authority; had I your leave, his opinion should be soon consulted.


ANNA. I have often told you, Sir, the difference of birth and fortune.


SIR FRANCIS. Virtue and good sense are far above them.


ANNA. I am not, like my sister, fond of the splendour of life.


SIR FRANCIS. Therefore the more wor^^y to enjoy it. Splendour is but a rattle
to weak minds; its dignity rises from due application.


ANNA. A rattle I think indeed, for the very notion of it seems to have rattled
our family out of their senses: but as my father is every day expected in town,
I hope his prudence will set them to rights a little.


SIR FRANCIS. Your father, Madam, so soon expected! May I be indulged with
liberty to ask his opinion of the proposals I have made for you to share my
fortune and my heart.


ANNA. What seems, so far, proper to you, Sir, I can have no objection to.


SIR FRANCIS. You make me happy. -- Remember you are to be a shepherdess at the
Pantheon masquerade tonight, and I am to be your Arcadian swain. Pray what
dress has Mrs. Drugger fixed on?


ANNA. Fifty at least; all the habits of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, yet
not one positively: my brother-in-law she has turned over too almost as often;
from a Punch to Tom Fool, from a chimney-sweeper to a baker, and so on. -- But
I must bid you good morning, Sir; by the time I shall reach home, she will be
returned, and in a sad bustle.


SIR FRANCIS. I am walking within twenty yards of Mr. Drugger's, and shall be
happy to attend you.


ANNA. Sir, you are extremely obliging. [Exeunt.]


ACT THE SECOND.
Mrs. DRUGGER and LISINI. Mrs. DRUGGER. LISINI, reach me a chair -- now my
smelling-bottle -- I shall not recover myself this half hour.


LISINI. Vat be de matter, my Lady?


Mrs. DRUGGER. Matter! why as I was coming from the mascarade shop, as fast as
the horses could go -- for you know it is quality, fashion to drive neck or
nothing -- a nasty cart, with wheels as high as a may pole, came plump against
my phiz-a-phiz, and threw poor Whipcord off the box. -- I don't think he will
turn a corner with spirit for a month to come.


LISINI. Dat was bad inteet.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I would not have him spoiled for any thing; he has drove me a
whole fortnight, and done no mischief, except running over an old fellow with a
wooden leg, and that you know is nothing at all.


LISINI. Noting in the varld -- but me hope your Ladyship gat no hurt -- you
might have broke a de bone.


Mrs. DRUGGER. So I might, but I should not have minded that, only it would
have kept me from the Pantheon to night, and that must have been worse than
breaking of a neck.


LISINI. Your Ladyship say very true; sure dat same Pantheon must be de fine
place.


Mrs. DRUGGER. A perfect candlelight Paradise. -- Did you never see it?


LISINI. No, Matam.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Oh dear, that is a pity -- you shall go some day or other --
though it is hardly worth seeing now; it is but half-a-crown by daylight; when
it was five-and-three-pence, the thing was well enough; now I suppose tag rag
and bobtail go there.


LISINI. It be most like -- it is too cheap.


Mrs. DRUGGER. How do I look to day?


LISINI. Charman as de morn in May.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Have I enough of the roogee on my cheeks?


LISINI. Me give a your Ladyship von leetel touch -- now you bloom as de rose.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Has the man been here about the two teeth I want putting in?


LISINI. Yes, Madam, and he say, he will be here in de von hour, and the leetel
chimney-sweep wit him.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Chimney-sweeper! what does he bring him for?


LISINI. He could not do without. Your Ladyship must know, dat de
chimney-sweep, though he be black, has very white a toots; so de man take them out
of his mout, and put them piping hot into your mout.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Is that the quality way?


LISINI. Quite, me assure you -- and de two toots will only cost ten guinea.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Cheap as dirt; if I like them I Will buy every tooth in his head,
and give him mine into the bargain -- they will serve to gnaw a crust well
enough. -- Has my dancing master called?


LISINI. Not yet, Matam.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I wish duke William's four corner march, the cushion dance, and
bobbing-joan were in fashion, I could foot it away with the best of them; but
I Am afraid I shall not come round your luffers, your allimandies, and your
pasty-pies a great while.


LISINI. All in goot time.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I am pretty well in the minuet swim though; did I tell you the
agreement Mr. Drugger and I have made?


LISINI. No, Matam.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Why you know it would be foolish to live in the old dogtrot way
like Darby and Joan, so he gives me leave to have as many gallants as I please,
and I am to let him have a trate a trate with any lady he chooses.


LISINI. Dat be de very pink of qualite.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Has the man brought the Turkish carpet?


LISINI. He say he have not vone large enough, but some ver fine Inglis.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I Will have nothing English about me dead or alive.


LISINI. Your latyship be quite in de right.


Enter FRIZEAU. Mrs. DRUGGER. Now, Mr. Mounseer?


FRIZEAU. Matam, dear be de man about de Northumberland pye-ball horses.


Mrs. DRUGGER. What! has he got a set of those dear creaters?


FRIZEAU. He say he ave, and that they vill be no more as five hundred guinea
the six.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Cheap as two eggs a penny -- have they long tails?


FRIZEAU. So long they sweep a de ground.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Delightful! -- What a dash I shall cut with these in my phiz a
phiz -- I love long tails vastly -- what do you think, Lisi?


LISINI. And me too; dey are much better as the short.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Tell the man he may bring them home tomorrow; I am too busy to
think of any thing but the masquerade to day.


FRIZEAU. I shall, Matam -- Your latyship sister. Exit.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Hum!


Enter ANNA. ANNA. Well, sister, have you fixed the important point of your
dress yet?


Mrs. DRUGGER. I don't know whether I have or not; I have ordered six different
ones for fear of the worst.


ANNA. Well, I am amazed you can take so sudden and violent a delight in such a
confused senseless assembly, where wit hobbles upon stilts, and common sense
dare not peep in.


Mrs. DRUGGER. So that is your idear of things -- you would have me as
countrified as yourself -- it may do for a farmer's daughter, but not for me.


ANNA. Strange distinction! had not you and I one father?


Mrs. DRUGGER. I don't know -- mayhap not -- for I have heard as how my lord
Shineaway, that lived in our neighborhood, liked mother hugely before I was
born -- and how --


ANNA. Hold -- the child who would taint a parent's virtue to catch at the
ridiculous idea of false nobility, falls below the lowest of the vulgar.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Lack-a-day, good Mrs. Tinder -- what a fuss the thing is in -- I
suppose you have got that wise speech out of some of your books that you are so
fond of.


ANNA. There is no occasion to consult books for what nature alone can tell us.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Well, well, if you don't like things here, you know your way
into the country again.


ANNA. I do: and therefore intended to return with my father -- without so
genteel a dismission.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Genteel! -- ha! ha! ha! a fine thing indeed for a country girl
to talk of gentility -- no, no, you must leave that to us who are better bred.


ANNA. Who have a better opinion of themselves, you mean; indeed, sister, real
good breeding, and the awkward affectation of it, are so different, that it is
impossible to know one by the other.


Enter DICKEY DRUGGER. DICKEY. Oh, mama! mama! mama! -- I have got two of the
finest butterflies in this here box -- I had a rare chase after them before I
could knock them down with my hat -- you would have laughed like any thing.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Lard, this boy is so troublesome -- I have other-guess'd fish to
fry than butterflies to day, child. Speaks aside to Lisini.


DICKEY. Yan, yan, yan, ya, -- if you will not laugh you may let it alone.


ANNA. What do you intend to do with the butterflies, Dickey? keep them, I
suppose, to admire their beautiful colors.


DICKEY. No, no; hang colors -- I shall have the rarest sport with them -- you
shall see it if you will --


ANNA. What sport, my dear?


DICKEY. Why I Will put a pin through one to see if it spins as well as a bumble
be; and I Will pull a wing off the other to see if it can fly then -- will not that
be comical?


ANNA. Fie, my dear, you should not be so cruel.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Comes forward. What Is that, Dickey?


DICKEY. Why aunt says as how that I must not spit the butterfly on a pin.


Mrs. DRUGGER. But you shall, if you like it.


DICKEY. Look ye there now -- do you know, mama, that she gave me a slap the
other day for only biting a piece of the kitten's ear off?


Mrs. DRUGGER. Did she so! -- Marry come up, indeed -- for the future I Will let
her know she is not your mistress.


DICKEY. No, no, -- though you're my aunt you're not my mistress -- mama says so
-- and so take that.


ANNA. For shame, sister, how can you think of encouraging cruelty in a young
mind -- it is laying the shameful foundation of an unfeeling heart -- such kind
of sport, as you call it, encouraged among boys, often makes them, when grown
to riper years, very inhuman members of society.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I don't want you to teach me.


DICKEY. No nor me neither.


ANNA. I shall not attempt it, for it is in vain to think that you can act
prudently for your child, when you are taking all imaginable pains to spoil
your husband, yourself, and the whole family: I shall when distant wish you
well, but from appearances have very little to hope; for where folly and
fashion hold the reins, errors spring up with every hour, and ruin cannot be
far off. Exit.


DICKEY. La, mama, this aunt of mine is as four as a crab-apple, and as cross
as a pussy-cat.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Ah, we shall not be troubled long with her -- she shall soon troop
into the country.


DICKEY. Adslidikins, I Am glad of it -- then I Will do whatever I have a mind --
I will not be afraid to snitch off Mounseer's macaroni tail if I can get at it --
nor to squirt aqua fortis into any body's eyes I meet.


Mrs. DRUGGER. What a witty creater it is -- he knows but every thing; he has a
deal more of me than of Mr. Drugger in him.


LISINI. Ver much so inteet, Matam.


Mrs. DRUGGER. If it would not plague him too much to give him learning, who
knows but he might come to be a bishop, or a judge, or an alderman, or a
deputy, or some such great man.


LISINI. He vil ave fortune enough widout dat -- School spoil a de spirit.


Mrs. DRUGGER. So I say -- great scholars are always dull.


DICKEY. Mama, do you know how I served our butter-woman just now?


Mrs. DRUGGER. How?


DICKEY. Why Sammy Shuttlecock and I, seeing her at the door with a basket of
eggs under her arm --


LISINI. You stole some -- he! he! he!


DICKEY. No, no, -- better than that -- ha! ha! ha! we pulled a jack cord
across the hall, tripped up her heels, and souce she went head foremost into
the basket; such a smash, and such a face! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. DRUGGER. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


LISINA. He! he! he! he! it is so pleasant.


DICKEY. By jingo, I Will go and have the other peep at her, for she will not get it
rubbed and scrubbed off her face this half hour. Exit DICKEY.


Mrs. DRUGGER. This boy is so diverting, that I had almost forgot my jewels --
I Will go and lay them out. If Mr. Drugger should come, bid him wait. I Will come
back in five minutes.


[ Exit Mrs. DRUGGER.] LISINI. This clipping of words is very tiresome to an
English tongue; but if fools of fashion like foreign jargon and foreign
servility, who can blame Frizeau and I for assuming both; if we can feather our
nests among these new made gentry, let them have the pleasure of what they
don't understand, while we laugh in our sleeves, and snack the gain. Here comes
my beau of a master -- he puts me in mind of Bellameer in the puppet-show --
he is as stiff as a stake, and as dull as a log.


Enter DRUGGER. DRUGGER. Lis. where is my Lady?


LISINI. Sir, she will be here in de four or five minute.


DRUGGER. Lis. how do you like me?


LISINI. Admirable! -- If you was in Itale, all the ladies fall in love wit you
-- your honor is so handsome.


DRUGGER. Do You think so? have you fallen in love with me?


LISINI. You make a me blush, Sir.


DRUGGER. I used to blush myself, before I learned gentility; but its all over
now. -- Come near, little Lis. -- But it is no matter if my Lady should hear,
she has given me leave.


LISINI. Vat, Sir?


DRUGGER. I could find in my heart to give you a good smacking buss to begin
with, but that I cannot stoop to take one.


LISINI. You are merry, Sir.


DRUGGER. Will you be my mistress?


LISINI. Your mistress!


DRUGGER. I would not give a farthing for an English one. -- I Will keep you a
chair; I cannot mount a coach.


LISINI. Me cannot tell vat you mean.


DRUGGER. A handsome lodging near Soho; three meals a day regularly, and a
black boy with a white turbot upon his head.


LISINI. I must keep this fool in suspense, to have a little diversion with him
(Aside.) -- Your honor must give me time to tink. Exit.


DRUGGER. I thought the black boy would do the business. -- Think! ay, ay, you
may think as long as you like; I Am in no hurry: its more for the name of the
thing than any thing else.


Enter Mrs. DRUGGER. Mrs. DRUGGER. Well, Mr. Drugger, have you been at the
Harild's office? Lisi. go, and bring me word when the mascarade man comes.


DRUGGER. Yes, my dear, and --


Mrs. DRUGGER. Dear! -- Monstrous! -- Such words might do well enough while we
were behind the counter; but with twenty thousand pounds in our pocket, for
shame!


DRUGGER. I had forgot; my memory's short; it is a family disorder; it came from
my great-grandfather, Abel.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Have you bought the coats of arms?


DRUGGER. Yes; I have bought six cuckoos, with an owl in the crest, for myself;
seven golden lions, and a green crocodile for you.


Mrs. DRUGGER. A crocodile! why did not you get me an oliphant?


DRUGGER. Because there was not one to be sold -- the nabobs have bespoke them
all.


Mrs. DRUGGER. But have you chosen pretty colors to put them on?


DRUGGER. I did not stint for that; I Have bought all the colors in the rainbow.


Mrs. DRUGGER. So far so good. -- Mind that you go tomorrow and get a hundred
mooseum tickets, for I Am quite detarmin'd to have the empress of Russy's head
and both the earrings.


Enter LISINI. LISINI. Matam, de masc man be come wit the dress.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Come, Mr. Drugger, I Will choose one for you.


DRUGGER. I thank you -- but I have thought of one myself.


Mrs. DRUGGER. What is it?


DRUGGER. A rare comical one; I once at Christmas time frightened three old
women almost out of their senses with it.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Frightened!


DRUGGER. I Will wrap myself in a long white sheet, flower my face, and clap
tobacco-stoppers in my mouth to make huge teeth.


Mrs. DRUGGER. But how are you to talk then?


DRUGGER. Talk! -- I believe most of them that go, might wear tobacco-stoppers
as well as me, for all the good things they say.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Pah, pah, you shall have no such feely farely nonsense. -- Come
along, I Will make a Turk, a Jew, a Punch, or something or other of you.


DRUGGER. A Turk -- why I would not give a roll of pigtail --


Mrs. DRUGGER. Pigtail! -- foh -- Will you never forget Bucklersbury? Exeunt.


Enter SIR FRANCIS, TILWELL, and ANNA. TILWELL. Why this son-in-law and
daughter of mine, are as hard to be seen as if he was a Lord and she a Lady. --
Well, Sir Francis, I am a plain man, and thank you heartily, though not in fine
words, for the honorable proposal you have made my girl, Anna; though, to be
sure, she could never have expected such a match, yet, I say it that should not
say it, she is as much above her sister Deborah, as good wheat is above tares.


ANNA. Fie, father!


SIR FRANCIS. It was for that superiority beyond comparison, I first conceived,
and have since cherished a passion for your daughter. Nature has been very kind
to her person, yet more so to her mind.


TILWELL. I think so too -- and, Sir Francis, if she has no objections, I cannot
have any. But this by the bye -- I would not have her married to an Emperor
against her liking.


SIR FRANCIS. Nor would I form a wish upon any other principle.


TILWELL. Well then, now what says the girl herself? -- Nay, blush not, honest
hearts have no occasion for it.


ANNA. I am sensible of Sir Francis's condescension, and proud to have obtained
it; yet still there is a disparity of station which alarms me, therefore I
request some days to think, before I come to a resolution.


TILWELL. Well said -- none but fools take a leap in the dark. Ah, she has
always been a comfort to me; when ramping Deb. used to be at swing-swong,
thread-needle, or riding jack-asses, this Anna always had a book or pen in her
hand; and do you know, though I don't like French much, she would be taught it.


Enter FRIZEAU. FRIZEAU. Sir, I ave tell a de squire and my lady; dey expect
you in the drawing room. Exit.


TILWELL. Squire and lady! Mercy on us! I suppose we shall have these mad
lottery folks lord and lady Bucklersbury soon. Exeunt.


Enter Mr. DRUGGER and Mrs. DRUGGER. DRUGGER. What, rob a chimney-sweeper's
mouth to furnish my own! no, no, I suffer enough already.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Well, take your own way; what is bred in the bone will never out
of the flesh -- its a pity my good luck brought you from behind a counter.


DRUGGER. If it had not, what then? -- I could have had my pipe and pot at the
Cheshire-cheese, and talked about politics and liberty by wholesale.


Enter TILWELL. TILWELL. So Deborah; -- hey day! -- why thou art grown a
grenadier since I saw thee last.


DRUGGER. No wonder at that, she has six inches of wood under her heels, and
eighteen of hair a top of her head -- she is two feet shorter by night than she
is by day.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Well said, Mr. Wit.


TILWELL. What will not you vouchsafe your father a word, Deb.?


Mrs. DRUGGER. It is not the fashion, Sir, to call people by their names.


TILWELL. No! -- What have they names for then -- fashion, quotha; if fashion
makes all its followers as foolish as you, my service to it -- but, Madam,
then, for that is what you want I suppose.


DRUGGER. Yes; that 'll go down like a sugar-plum -- you see how it makes her
cock up her chin.


TILWELL. What do you think all this foolery I hear of, and see about your
house, will come to? -- Mischief on it, cannot fortune put good luck into your
purses without building windmills in your heads?


DRUGGER. Windmills! Pray now, father --


Mrs. DRUGGER. Father! -- Bucklersbury.


DRUGGER. Sir, I meant; pray now, Sir, how does a windmill feel -- I would fain
know, because as how, ever since I turned gentleman, there has been a whirligig
in my brain, and I have been as giddy as a goose.


TILWELL. Yes, and if you are guided by Madam here, you will be served up, Mr.
Goose, to a parcel of hungry knaves, who will pick you to the bone.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I have changed my mind, Mr. Drugger; I Will be a Wenus to night,
and master Dickey shall be a Coopid -- I Will go and dress this minute, to see
how I look. As she is going, enter Tim. Tilwell in Caliban's dress. Ah! She
screams and runs to her father.


TIM. Do you know me? to Drugger, in a very rough voice.


DRUGGER. Not I: Nor don't desire it. Aside.


TIM. I am a gentleman.


DRUGGER. From what country?


TIM. The moon.


DRUGGER. I thought you was outlandish.


TIM. Ha! ha! ha! snap my buttons, if this is not the rarest rig. (Unmasks.)


TILWELL. Tim! what April-day gambol is this?


Mrs. DRUGGER. He has put my heart in such a flustration, that it goes thump,
thump, thump, like a bucking-bat.


TIM. Uncle, you must lend me money to buy this case.


TILWELL. What to do?


TIM. To do! to make my fortune. I Will show myself at the fairs in our country
-- Walk in, Ladies, walk in, Gemmen -- the curosity of curosities is to be seen
here -- the man in the moon -- at two pence a-piece -- no more than two pence
a-piece -- now is your time. Swooks, I Will go and ask the man what it is to be,
and then you will lend me the money, uncle. [Exit.]


Enter FRIZEAU. FRIZEAU. Matam, Monsieur Metamorphose wish to speak von word to
you.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I Will go to him. [Exit.]


TILWELL. Among other strange matters, son Daniel, what, in the name of wonder,
made you choose a French servant?


DRUGGER. Two very good reasons; first, because it is fashionable; and second,
because I may beat him for my diversion.


TILWELL. Beat!


DRUGGER. Oh! a Frenchman will bear it like stock fish, You shall see. --
Frizeau!


FRIZEAU. Your Honeur.


DRUGGER. There. (Kicks him.)


FRIZEAU. Vat vor is dat?


DRUGGER. To please myself. -- There. (Slaps him over the face.)


FRIZEAU. Damn it, that is too much for English flesh and blood to bear: -- Off
Frenchman, and now, as we are pretty well matched, if you have a mind for a
set-to, master of mine?


DRUGGER. What, are not you French?


FRIZEAU. No more than you; I Am a Cockney every inch; Bow-bell for ever -- I
transmogrified myself to make a fool of you.


DRUGGER. I believe that was done to your hands.


TILWELL. Ha! ha! ha!


FRIZEAU. I thought to have picked up some splinters about you; but if they
cannot be got without kicking and thumping, let them that like to earn money
that way, take them; Barny Blunt will not, damme if he will.


TILWELL. Well said, beef and pudding.


Enter Mrs. DRUGGER and LISINI. Mrs. DRUGGER. Yes, yes, Lisini, I am quite
detarmined now, Wenus is the thing.


Enter SKINFLINT. DRUGGER. Oh master Skinflint, have you settled about our
ticket?


SKINFLINT. Yes, it is settled -- your favorite number forty-five has deceived
you.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Deceived!


SKINFLINT. Yes truly; for the twenty thousand happens to be your sister's, not
yours.


(Mr. and Mrs. DRUGGER drop countenances, and look simply at each other.)
TILWELL. If this be true, I shall not think Fortune so blind as I took her to be.


SKINFLINT. Here it is certified at the Exchequer; 45, blank; 46, 20,000l.


Enter TIM. TIM. It will only cost a guinea, uncle. -- Hey-day! what is matter
that coosins wear such Good Friday faces?


DRUGGER. I believe I must turn man in the moon too.


TIM. You shall go partners with me if you will; we'll act and hold the blanket
at the door, day about.


DRUGGER. Well, I shall get out of the stocks, however.


Enter SIR FRANCIS and ANNA. SKINFLINT. Miss Anna, though I have been rather a
disagreeable messenger to your sister, yet I may wish you joy of good fortune.


ANNA. What, Sir!


SKINFLINT. The lottery-office keeper ignorantly gave the prize of your number
to your sister, and her blank to you.


ANNA. My sister's disappointment lessens the pleasure of my advantage, though
it relieves me from a material difficulty. -- Sir Francis, I asked some days to
contemplate your generous offer -- this event has solved my doubts -- Now I
have something more than an honest heart to bestow, I yield my hand with
pleasure: the man who acts disinterestedly in marriage, well deserves all a
woman can bestow.


SIR FRANCIS. Madam, this delicate generosity is worthy the most, elevated
mind; and to deserve it, shall be the study of my life.


TILWELL. I never shed a tear since my boyhood, except when thy poor mother
died; now, my good girl, thou have filled my eyes with the water of joy.


LISINI. I believe, Sir, you will have no occasion for a Signora. -- Shall I have
the Soho lodging -- three meals a day -- a sedan -- a black boy with a white
turbot upon his head? ha! ha! ha! ( To DRUGGER.)


TILWELL. What Is the meaning of all this?


LISINI. The Gentleman wanted an Italian mistress, so made proposals to me,
while I spoke broken English.


TILWELL. A mistress! why he could not have gone further if he had been really
a Lord. Well, Dan. what do you expect to do now? -- I suppose all the tobacco
is gone in trumpery.


DRUGGER. Every quid. (Sighs.)


SKINFLINT. Look you, friend Drugger, don't be quite cast down; if your
relations here will help you to a couple of hundred, I can pop you into a snug
public house at Wapping; and I think you will make a pretty little smart skinker.


DRUGGER. Yes, I can run up and down stairs as tightly as any one of my inches.


Mrs. DRUGGER. I could cry for madness -- Grosvenor-square changed for Wapping.
Our nobles are come to nine-pence with a witness.


SKINFLINT. Not so bad as you think; some Wapping landladies are very fine.


DRUGGER. True; I have seen 'em myself with a ring upon every singer.


ANNA. Sister, though on the supposed advance of your fortune you have treated me
rather ungenteelly, yet I pity your situation, and shall recommend it to Sir
Francis's notice.


SIR FRANCIS. Madam, it has already struck me: Mr. Drugger, that you may not be
obliged to enter again into trade, which you so imprudently left, I Will settle
upon you the interest of ten thousand pounds, and the principal at your decease
on your son, provided he is put under the guardianship of his aunt here.


DRUGGER. Must I be a gentleman still?


SIR FRANCIS. Not in the style you have been.


DRUGGER. I Am glad of it, I shall have my arms at liberty.


TILWELL. Down on your knees, and thank such noble and generous friendship.


DRUGGER. She may -- if I do I cannot get up again, my French coat will not let me.


Mrs. DRUGGER. Must not I have one peep more at the dear sweet Pantheon?


SIR FRANCIS. Yes, yes, we'll enjoy the entertainment of this evening, as
already proposed.


TIM. Cousin Drugger, come down to our neighborhood, and I Will lead you such a
fox-chace -- if you don't break your neck, you shall stand a fair chance of
doing it.


DRUGGER. Pretty sport that.


TILWELL. Adod, my heart's so full that I cannot say, so I Will try if I can sing
what I think.

SONG.
Turned round with Fortune's fickle wheel,
Through ups and downs in life,
Through reason only we can feel
The real sweets of life.
The prudent make a blank a prize,
The foolish prizes blanks;
If mankind then were truly wise,
They Would keep their several ranks.
Our station is a lottery quite,
Where you decide the cause;
The twenty thousand's ours to night,
If crowned with your applause.

FINIS.

