FUGITIVE POETICAL PIECES, BY MR. JERNINGHAM.

LONDON: PRINTED BY SCOTT FOR J. ROBSON, BOOKSELLER, NEW BOND STREET.

MDCCLXXVIII.

MARGARET OF ANJOU, AN HISTORICAL INTERLUDE.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS historical Interlude is formed upon the same plan that ROUSSEAU composed
his Pygmalion, which is a new species of dramatic Entertainment, consisting of
a Monologue that is often suspended by the interposition of Music, which must
sympathise with the passions and feelings of the personage who is supposed to
speak.

The following little drama was performed by Miss YOUNG on her benefit night,
and received from that celebrated actress all the spirit and coloring that
excellence of acting can give. The music (the composition of Mr. HOOK) was
happily adapted to the tendency of the poem.

The subject is taken from a remakable incident in the life of MARGARET. That
unfortunate QUEEN flying with her Son into a forest after the Battle of Hexbam,
saw a robber approach with his naked sword, and finding that she had no means
of escape, she suddenly embraced the resolution of trusting entirely for
protection to his generosity. The man whose humanity and generous spirit had
been obscured, not entirely lost by his vicious course of life, was struck with
the singularity of the event, and charmed with the confidence reposed in him,
and he vowed not only to abstain from all injury against the Queen, but to
devote himself entirely to her safety and protection. HUME, CHAP. xxii.

N. B. The Astericks mark the pauses that admitted the music.

MARGARET OF ANJOU. AN INTERLUDE.
Enter MARGARET with her Son. THE fierce pursuers will not here perchance
Discover us: the thick-inwoven umbrage
Of these gigantic trees will spread concealment:
Yet as their solemn branches wave; strange fear
Possesses me: yet all is still as night.
No thundering tread of horsemen armed, no quick
Approaching footsteps rush upon my ear.
The shourts of rebel victory are lost
And fade away, ere they can pierce these shades:
Ah what a victory! He whose meek sway
Solicited his people's grateful love,
My Henry! England's monarch failed, and at
The dying groan of stern defeat, that panted
Still for conquest, he too sure expired:
While I, a wretched outcast of the throne,
Rove desolate amid these savage walks,
Of every comfort, every hope bereft:
(To her Child) But thou, my Edward, still art mine! ah lay
Thy weary limbs on yonder bank, and I
Will watch beside thee.
(Leads him to a Bank) He sleeps unconscious of the dire distress
That hovers over his head, kind Ignorance
That drops her veil before his infant eyes:
Yet as he blossoms into youth, the hand
Of Time withdrawing back the veil, shall for
The radiant prospect he this morn was heir to
Shall offer to his view a throne o'erturn'd
And floating in the blood of all his friends:
Ah what a sight! it urges me to madness.
Yet all that courage could effect was done:
When wild Dissension her torn banners reared,
Which insolently waved over Henry's head
While he beneath their shade a captive stood,
I, feeble agent, hurried to the field,
And at that moment losing all the fears
That haunt the female breast, I called to loyalty
To snatch my Henry from Rebellion's arm:
The valiant troops who then encircled me
On Wakefield's day performed their duty well,
And on St. Alban's memorable plain
I saw defeated Warwick wing his flight
And rescued Henry hasten to these arms.
Yet what avail these momentary triumphs!
Even while I speak perchance my Henry lies
Extended on the plain, deformed with wounds,
While over his sacred corse the hostile band
Irreverently pass, and with vile taunts
Upbraid his overthrow: nor was I present
To solace his last moments, catch the accents
Of his departing voice, and close his fading eyes.
The illustrious youth on whose bright armor gleam'd
The morning sun! of all that valiant train
Not one remains to guard you helpless innocent.
-- Darkness spreads: cold descending night-air chills
My bosom, while a murmuring noise that tells
The coming storm, sounds through the conscious branches
Of this wood: Ah where shall I betake me!
(Walking in a distracted manner) If at some hamlet-door I knock, will not
These robes betray me! and the sum that is set
Upon that Infant's head, ah will it not
Invite the simple cottager to treachery!
Yet here to brave the stern inclement sky,
With all the horrors of descending night,
My trembling heart refuses -- I will lead
Him hence, vain thought: Ah, to what stranger heart
Dare I confide my son? Should he be torn
From these weak arms, yes, well, too well I know,
This anxious heart would at that moment burst.
The Power above who sees into the depth
Of my great sorrow, knows that not to pride,
That not to Exaltation's gaudy honors
I ever entrusted my felicity:
Amid the rude misfortunes that encircled me
The pulse of pleasure throbb'd within my breast
When I embraced my son: of him bereft,
Calamity's sharp fangs will tear my heart strings.
I feel, I feel her now, fell tygress, at
My bosom, gorging on my mangled peace:
Ye cruel ruffians give me back my son:
Ah me! wild fear foreruns my loss, and joins
The future moment to the present time.
(Kneeling) Oh thou, all seeing Providence, if ever
The scenes on earth attract thy sacred notice!
Then, let thy knowing clear discerning eye,
Whence radiant Pity beams, over my misfortune
Pause -- And, thus humbly as I bend resigned,
Let not my falling ruinous state, while it
O'erwhelms the mother, crush the child.
(Rising) The night increases, I must wake my son,
(Hanging fondly over him) How sleep possesses him! Perhaps this slumber
Is doomed his last -- perhaps -- what do I see
Stretched on a bier, methinks I see him gash'd
With daggers -- -- Ah, 'twas fancy bodied forth
This cruel image, still my Edward breathes,
And these fond arms embrace my living child.

PRINCE. Oh mother lead me hence --


MARGARET, Say whither shall
I lead my Edward?

PRINCE. Lead me to my Father!
Why do you weep? Ah wherefore not reply?
Say, is my father slain?

MARGARET. I know not that.


PRINCE. Whence was that noise?


MARGARET. It was the chiding gale:
Ah no, it is the sound of hostile steps.

(Enter Robber) ROBBER. Who ever thou art, I see you are in distress,
I too am well acquainted with misfortune,
And greater still than thine, for at my door
Pale Famine sits, while starving children send
A mournful peal: if ought thou have concealed
Within this wood, give me the hoarded treasure.

MARGARET. Ah here is all my treasure.


(Pointing to her child) ROBBER. Trisle not,
Give me thy treasure, or I Will slay thy Child.

MARGARET. Arrest that impious arm, He is thy Prince!
Talk not of want; of Misery's scourging hand
Complain no more; in me, in me behold
Distressful Marg'ret, England's vanquished Queen!
And all the treasure left her from the field;
The cruel havoc of this morning's fight,
Is centered in this Child.

ROBBER. Thanks to my God
I Am not so lost in vice, so deep-ingulph'd
In woe, but that my Sovereign's distress
Obliterates my own: forgive the bold
(Kneeling) The savage mode in which I first accosted thee,
And in atonement for my crime accept,
Deign to accept what now my duty offers.
I Will lead thee through some dark and winding pathway
Of this wild forest to a neighboring river,
Where rides a Bark, whose canvass courts the gales
That fly to France: where thou, unhappy Queen,
May find a safe retreat from the wild dangers
That surround thee.

MARGARET. Rise, rise, I dare confide
Myself and my loved Child to your protection;
Lead on: amid the horrors of this hour,
Rest of a crown, a husband, every friend,
Amid this mighty ruin, Edward lives,
And wretched Margaret still shall be a mother.
This godlike deed of thine, thou generous man,
From out the wondrous story of this day
Shall shine to latest time, the most illustrious.

THE END
FOR THE VASE AT BATH EASTON: UPON DREAMS.
NOVEMBER 1777.

I
AS Echo's voice returns the pleasing lay,
So is a Dream the Echo of the day:
The busy thoughts that round some object teem
Often join in sleep to form the nightly theme,
Then bright-ey'd Fancy lifts her magic wand
While scenes unreal rise at her command:
Then Comedy, with all her laughing train
Straight issues from the porch of Comus' fane,
And bringing with her all her pleasing wiles,
Her pranks, her gambols, and her winning smiles,
She bids her merry troop approach the bed
And beat their airy dance round Anstey's head.
II
Still when some chosen fair commands the heart
Gay Fancy acts at night her mimic part:
With skillful hand she decks the living scene
And ushers to the view the bosom's Queen.
Ye lovers answer to the truth I sing;
Say, does not Fancy to your stumber bring,
Dressed by each grace in beauty's best array,
The welcome fair who charmed you through the day!
Does not her form return to glad the sight,
Like Cynthia bursting through the cloud of night!
How pleased each well-known feature we descry,
That look of sense -- that eloquence of eye --
She speaks -- her words beyond vain Music's art
Steal on our slumber and enchant the heart.
III
Sometimes a dream anticipates the date,
Comes as a prophet to reveal our fate:
And thus, ere Yorick sunk into the tomb,
The Priest of sentiment foresaw his doom:
'Twas night -- his solitary couch he pressed,
Till sorrow*worn he wearied into rest;
Eliza then soft-gliding on his view,
Thus over his slumber breathed her sad adieu:
'Oh thou my guardian, confident, and friend,
'To what thy handmaid now reveals attend;
'No longer now the gift of Health implore,
'The curtain drops, and thy short scene is over;
'Yet ere thy feeling spirit takes its flight,
'Yet ere I Am robbed (of all my bliss) thy sight,
Some fond endearment to Eliza show,
'And thy last blessing on thy Child bestow,'
The vision ceased -- yet then the shaul she spread See the Letters to Eliza.

To raise compassionate his drooping head,
And (from her eyes as beads of sorrow fell)
Low on her knees received his last farewell.
IV
Often playful Fancy sheds a brighter beam,
And prompts the splendid allegoric dream:
Thus late while sleep my closing eyelids sealed
This visionary scene she then revealed:
Methought, encompass' d by a brilliant train,
I reached the steps of bright Minerva's fane;
Full in the midst a mystic vase I viewed,
Round which the Muses new-blown flowerets strewn:
Armed with the lyre I saw a youthful band
Who waked the sounding chords, with skillful hand:
Unnumber'd beauties silent stood around,
Who graced as softer priests the hallowed ground:
There Virtue wore her most attractive mein,
And in the form of Marlborough was seen.
The Graces, skilled the cultured mind to win,
Knocked at the door, and Bamfylde let them in.
This visionary scene by Fancy bred,
Removed, and through the gates of morning fled.
I care not that the vision sought the skies
While Miller's dome Minerva's fane supples:
Ye Youths! ye Fair! accept the verse that is due,
The splendid Dream is realized in you.
ALBINA.
WOULD genius to my fond demand
My earnest bold request bestow,
A vivid pencil to this hand,
Dipped in the brilliant vernal bow:
How eager would I then engage
(With faithful and unerring aim)
To paint on the poetic page
Albina's elegance of frame!
Her tresses -- dark with auburn hue:
Her brow serene -- young Candour's throne:
Her timid eye -- whose languid blue
Sheds charms peculiarly its own.
Her cheek -- that wears a lively glow:
Not after the fresh morning shower
Can Italy's rich summer show,
On all her banks, so bright a flower.
Her cherry lip -- inviting bliss,
Where Love deliciously reposes,
Accompanied by many a kiss
On fragrant leaves of breathing roses.
Yet who can paint her beauteous mind!
There Innocence has fixed her seat;
There easy wit, and taste refined,
And sentiment and knowledge meet.
Love, who often whelms the fair in woe,
Soon robbed her guiless mind of rest:
Affection's flame dissolved the snow
That lodged within her spotless breast.
As still the East the morn-beams streak
And gild the portal of the Day,
So did her morning thought still break
On the same Youth with Ardor's ray:
As the last glimm'rings of the sky
Pause on the lake, ere they expire,
Each night her thought (as closed her eye)
Died on the Youth of her desire.
The nuptials eager to profane
The bold unfeeling, treacherous Youth,
Led the chaste Maiden to the fane
With all the mockery of truth.
There a domestic in disguise
The office of a priest supplied;
While the deceiver, led by Vice,
Religion's dread reproach defied.
Hypocrisy with down-cast air,
Profaness with an atheist eye,
And lust with a malignant leer,
Remarked the mock-connubial tie.
No sooner had the youth prevailed,
Successful in his impious aim,
He left the drooping fair assailed
By Grief, by Infamy, and Shame.
'Twas then the beauteous mourner wooed
Meek Quiet in her lonely seat,
Where Competency watchful strewn
Her sober treasures at her feet.
I Will not the little pathway tell
That winds to thy sequestered scene;
Where Virtue loves with thee to dwell,
Remote -- unseeing and unseen.
Where Resignation takes her stand,
Prompt to perform her friendly part,
And gathers with a trembling hand,
The Fragments of a Broken Heart.
An English Officer in the late war being taken prisoner by the French Indians,
became the slave of an old Indian chief, who treated him with humanity. One day
the Indian took the Officer up a Hill, and addressed him as follows.

See the Anecdotes of Literature, vol. 5th.

THE INDIAN CHIEF.
'TWELVE tedious moons have thou my captive been,
'I've taught thee how to build the swift canoe,
'To chase the boar, prepare the beaver's skin,
'To speed the shaft, and scalp the shrieking foe.
'Say, does thy father sleep within his grave!' --
'Oh Heaven forbid, the feeling youth replied! --
'Then do his sorrows all my pity crave'
The chief returned! -- 'Tweve better he had died.
'I was a father once -- oh valiant son!
'Thy loss each lowering morn and eve recall.
'To shield my years, to danger's path he run;
'These eyes beheld the gallant warrior fall:
'And glory saw him fall with wounds overspread,'
'Bold on his bosom every wound he bore:
'I rent the forelock from his murderer's head
'And left him breathless on the crimson shore
'Since that sad day my hours no pleasure share' --
The Indian chief now paused with sorrow fraught,
Wrapped in the awful silence of despair;
At length in words he clothed his mournful thought.
'Behold that sun! how bright it shines to you!
'Since that sad day to me it looks a cloud:
'How gay you blooming roses meet your view!
'To me grief drops over Nature's breast a shroud.
'Go virtuous stranger, to thy father go,
'Wipe from his furrowed cheek Misfortune's tear:
'Go, bid the sun to him his splendour show,
'And bid the flower in all her bloom appear.'
ON SEEING Mrs MONTAGU's PICTURE.
HAD this fair form the mimic art displays
Adorned in Roman time the brightest days:
In every dome, in every sacred place
Her statue would have breathed an added grace,
Andon its basis would have been enrolled
This is Minerva cast in Virtue's mould.
INSCRIPTION FOR A REED-HOUSE. At Cossey, the Seat of Sir WILLIAM JERNINGHAN.

Say, if to shun the noisy day,
The summer sun's oppressive ray,
Thou visit'st Contemplation's cell,
Here tarry -- she will repay thee well:
For she can bid each passion cease
And soothe the troubled heart to peace,
Can to thy sober wishes yield
Contentment's flower and Wisdom's shield.
THE VENETIAN MARRIAGE.
THE western sun's expiring ray
To VENICE gave a milder day;
Till by degrees the lingering light
Hung trembling on the verge of night.
CAMILLA then, with fearful soul,
To the Adriatic margin stole,
Where in a bark, at Love's command,
PLACENTIO took his faithful stand,
Possessing now his future bride,
He bade the bark securely glide,
Which far unlike that gally showed
That down the silver Cydnus rowed,
Beneath whose purple sails were seen,
Proud Ostentiation's gaudy Queen,
Who sure of conquest, vain of mind,
All languishingly lay reclined!
Here Beauty undefiled by art,
Whose bosom owned a tender heart,
Beneath the sails from home removed,
And trusted to the man she loved.
A soothing calmness lulled the deep,
And hushed each wavy surge to sleep:
The air along the sultry day,
Scorched by the summer's fervent ray,
Was freshen'd by a recent shower,
While Silence solemnized the hour.
The still solemnity impressed
With awful thoughts CAMILLA'S breast,
For now by prompting Love impelled,
Now by Timidity witheld,
The words which to pronounce she tried,
Recoiled, and unaccented died.
PLACENTO too alike subdued,
They sailed along in silent mood,
And stillness reigned from shore to shore,
Unbroke -- but by the dashing oar.
At length the fair dissolved the charm --
'Ah, wonder not I feel alarm!
'Confiding in thy love I came,
'And risk'd for thee my virgin fame:
'Ah tell me to what place we sail,
'For in my bosom fears prevail:
'Yet answer not this idle fear,
'Where'er thou art bright Honor's there'.
'The plan I form, the youth replied
'To Innocence is close allied
'And fearful of thy virgin fame
'As of her babe the tender dame.
'These waves that wander to the sea
'Wash in their pilgrimage a tree,
'Which spreads its lowly branches wide,
'And dips them in the passing tide:
'There, in a shed composed of reeds,
'An aged hermit tells his beads:
'He, generous sage, will join our hands
'In wedlock's unremitting bands.
'Then to VALCLUSA we'll repair,
'Where LAURA's soul informs the air:
'Where PETRARCH's spirit hovers round,
'The guardian of the sacred ground,
Forbidding still that fiend of art,
'That shrewd perverter of the heart,
'The snake, Inconstancy, to rove
'Within the paradise of Love.
'As when chill Winter quits the land,
'The snow-drop does her leaves expand,
'So may chill fears your breast release,
'Till gently it expands to peace,
'Mild as these twilight breezes blow,
'Soft as the waves on which we flow.'
'Ye walls where first I drew the air,
'Return'd (assured) the beauteous fair;
'Ye turrets which but dimly seen
'Encrease the terror of the scene!
'Ye stately towers! and rising spires!
'From you CAMILLA now retires.
'Thou tomb whose pious urn contains
'My sacred parents' cold remains:
'Ye partners of my tender years,
'Whom youthful sympathy endears:
'Ye joys that crown my native coast,
'Well for PLACENTIO all are lost.
She ceased -- and on her pensive soul
Agian an awful musing stole,
Such as the twilight scene excites,
Such as the feeling heart delights;
For as the coy nocturnal flower The night-smelling Geranium.

No more its sweets at eve witholds,
So the meek heart at the evening hour
Its sensibility unfolds.
See now they reach the sacred cell
Where Wisdom, Peace, and Virtue dwell:
There, bent beneath the weight of age,
They find prepared the expecting sage.
He hailed them in a friendly tone,
And bade them call his cell their own:
Where rose an altar formed of moss,
Crowned with a simple wooden cross!
There too a taper, mildly bright,
Supplied a pompous glare of light:
No holy relick rich-enchas'd
This humble low-roof'd temple graced.
But flowerets from the neighboring wood,
The unambitious altar strewn:
For incense they exhaled perfume,
For ornament they gave their bloom.
The hermit spoke -- 'Hail virtuous pair,
May sorrow now your bosom spare:
'Tho' youth be yours, yet well I know
'You've tasted deep of human woe!
'Control, and art, and baseness joined,
'To cancel what your hearts designed:
'But now Misfortune's reign is over,
'And Pleasure opens all her store.'
See now the youthful pair unite,
To meet the hymeneal rite:
Pronouncing as they lowly bow,
Warm from the heart, the hallowed vow:
At length the hermit joins their hands
In willing and unvenal bands,
Unspotted bands! which mutual Love,
And Confidence and Virtue wove.
THE MEXICAN FRIENDS. The sublime instance of heroic friendship that forms the
subject of this poem, is recorded by ANTONIO DE SOLIS in his History of the
conquest of Mexico. This is an Episode of a more extensive poem, and being the
part that was the most favorably received, I am not unwilling to sacrisice a
few pages for the sake of rendering my poetical offerings more acceptable to
the public.

SEE to the fane HISPANIA'S troops repair,
Whose high ascending towers are lost in air:
From whence the MEXICANS with speedy art
Shower on the foe the death-inflicting dart:
Yet then by CORTEZ led, still undismayed,
The SPANIARD host the losty fane invade.
Two valiant youths (whom friendship's holy hand,
Had joined with her indissoluble band)
Beheld indignant, smit with patriot grief,
The great achievements of the hostile chief:
And now JANELLAN thus accosts his friend:
'Firm to no purpose, active to no end,
'See from our gallant men you hallowed tower
'Already ravished by the invading power:
'Must this, committed to our mutual care,
'The same defeat, the same dishonor share?
'If so -- the victor shall not long survive --
'A thought that bids my fading hope revive:
'A thought -- that like the thunder-flash of night
'Darts on my darkened mind a radiant light --
'But ere my veiled designment I unfold,
'Declare, however rash, however bold,
'Thou'lt not o'ershade with Caution's chill control,
'The warm, the splendid purpose of my soul.'
VENZULA to his breast his hand applied,
And thus beyond the power of words replied.
The youth resumed -- 'From this aerial height,
'Bid thy bold vision take its deepest flight,
'Down to you rock, far stretching over the shore,
Against which the raging waves incessant roar,
'Whose clashing voices into stillness fade,
'Ere this tremendous distance they pervade:
'If Fortune bless what my proud counsels urge,
'Yon waves shall murmur soon the victor's dirge!
'My secret project I will now unveil:
'Should CORTEZ over this valiant band prevail,
'Should through controulment, and through stubborn force,
'Pour like a torrent his destructive course,
'When on this summit first he shall appear,
'I will advance, with well-dissembled fear,
'And, suppliant as I kneel to win his grace,
'I'll dauntless lock him in a stern embrace,
'Bear him reluctant to you giddy steep,
'Where yawns a dreadful opening to the deep,
'And thence -- self-ruin'd for my country's good,
'Plunge with her foe into the whelming flood!'
VENZULA answered -- 'Yes, I much admire
'What now thy matchless virtue dares inspire:
'But will thou, with an avarice of fame,
'The meed of Glory all exclusive claim?
'Wilt thou to perils close to Death adjoin'd
'Advance, and leave thy fathful Friend behind?
'In infancy we shared the glittering toys,
'And in one circle played our harmless joys:
'And when we quitted childhood's lowly vale,
'Where springing flowerets scent the playful gale,
'Still hand in hand we climbed youth's arduous height,
'Whence greater scences expanded on the sight,
'Still our pursuits consenting to one plan,
'Like wedded streams our lives united ran:
'And will thou now oppose the sacred tide,
'And bid the friendly waves disparting glide?'
JANELLAN spoke -- 'Endearing youth forgive:
'The conq'ror of some future CORTEZ live!
'Nor mark my fall with Grief's dejected brow,
'View from my death the bright effects that flow:
'Behold the tomb that Gratitude shall raise,
'Illustrious signal of my country's praise.'
To this the brave VENZULA made reply,
And as he spoke, tears started from his eye:
'What though Felicity thy gift shall stream
'Sunlike over MEXICO with brighrest beam,
'Not all the splendor that her rays impart,
'Will ever illumine my benighted heart,
'When destitute of thee, its only ray,
'Without the hope of kind returning day.
'Yet then to this great argument adjoin'd
'Sublimer motives urge my steady mind:
'Recall, recall that joy-diffusing hour,
'When gay Prosperity adorned my bower,
'As thy fair sister, half-afraid to speak,
'With down-cast look, and blush-embellish'd cheek
'At Love's request affented to be mine:
'Of fleeting bliss vain momentary shine:
'For she, in flower of Youth and Virtue's bloom,
'Was swept untimely to the ravenous tomb:
'As sorrow-wounded over her couch I hung,
'To catch the tones that faded as they sprung,
'The God, she said, now summons me away,
'Far from the confines of the endearing day:
'Thou of the life I lose the dearest part,
'Thou chosen spouse! thou sunbeam of my heart,
'Say, by Affection's glowing hand impressed,
'Shall I not live in thy recording breast?
'If sacred be the suff'rer's last desires,
'Revere what now my parting soul requires:
'I leave a brother, by bright Honor reared,
'By all approved, and much to me endeared:
'Be, for the sister's love, the brother's friend;
'Nor from his side depart when storms descend:
'The palm of Glory waving in your sight,
'In council, peril, enterprise unite.'
'Shall I, when danger calls, consign to air
'The last bequeathing wishes of the fair?
'Perdition catch the base unmanly thought!
'By Love's subliming purest dictates taught
'Amid the perils that around thee wait,
'View me resolved to share the impending fate:
'Now to this spot the foe impels the war,
'Discordance screams, opposing lances jar:
'The steep ascent lo CORTEZ now has gained,
'Ah, mark his spear with streaming gore distained.'
The illustrious youths now act their dread design,
See at the victor's knee they low incline!
Now clasp with circling force the incautious foe,
And close adhering to his figure grow:
Their deadly aim his better fate controlled,
With matchless power he bursts their stubborn hold:
The heroes, blasted in their bold intent,
Approached (Death hovering near) the dire descent:
Then, in each other's circling arms compressed,
The last and dear farewell in sighs expressed:
'Twas Friendship burning with meridian flame,
On cause -- one thought -- one ruin -- and one fame --
Tremendous moment! See, they fall from light,
And dauntless rush to never ending night!
Ye self-devoted patriot victims, hail!
Oblivion's gulf shall never entomb your tale:
While History to Time's extremest goal
Her stream majestic shall through ages roll,
Like two fair flowerets on one stem that blow
Ye on her margin shall for ever glow.
FINIS.

