A PETITION TO THE Right Hon. Mr. --, In FAVOR of Mr. MACLEAN. By a LADY.

LONDON: Printed for G. SMITH, near Temple Bar, Fleet Street. 1750.

A PETITION TO THE Right Hon. Mr. --, In FAVOR of Mr. MACLEAN.
IF ever Statesman melted at Distress,
Nor chose to make it More instead of Less;
If they retain a Sense of human Things,
And deign to look on Mortals down from Kings,
List! list! oh -- whom Three Realms obey,
To the sad Purport of my weeping Lay.
Ah! how I dread, least crowding on some Hour,
That twists, confused, the intricate Web of Power,
Hiding those slender Threads that lead us, still
Letting the Puppets think they act at Will:
Or if, unhappily, on one I press
More serious, how to keep One's Self in Place:
Nay, I might fear, though this should meet your Eyes,
When only Monarchs linger for Replies;
(Yet they, perhaps, would wait when Ladies write,
For Foreigners, they say, are all polite,
And, strange Effect of breathing different Air!
Reward the Brave, and reverence the Fair)
You should to R -- ts send my unread Griefs,
(Deputies are more difficult than Chiefs)
Perhaps he would see, with Joy, my Maclean's Fall,
Such Little People envy one so Tall.
No, may this find thee when thy Soul's unbent,
And laughs to think, how easy's Government;
When frugal E -- lends her still Retreat,
Or verdant G -- h her pacific Seat,
Or thy pleased Eye athwart the G -- P -- k rolls,
Peeping through L^ C -- 's Pigeon-Holes:
Gently dissolved, in Unconcern the same
As when to Derby the Banditti came;
Yet still I run one Risque, what can be worse?
You Will think it Begging, 'cause it is in Verse.
Too sure we beg, for Life we beg, it is true;
If we had robbed enough, we need not sue;
We own our Guilt, with Tears Contrition-sent,
Oh! let it hurt us not, that we repent!
What can we else! happy, who Law defies,
In complete Armor of past Services;
Him Teas and Brandies, run at L^w's, shall shield,
And stained Ferrara on C^n Field.
True, he robbed W -- e and gave unmeant Fire,
The Patriot-Pistol took him for his Sire,
Say he designed it, had the Ball took place,
And slain one Victim of devoted Race,
It Is not so long since this had met Applause
From Virtue, and the Friends to Virtue's Cause.
Though Doctrine's fall before the Scythe of Time,
Shall his believing what they taught, be Crime?
We dug no Favors in his Father's Mine,
His liberal Hand, to us, was closed as thine.
Un-plac'd, un-pension'd, as in Bribes unshar'd,
What Gratitude to rob the Son debarred?
But had he given us Riches, Rank, and Name,
And we'd attacked his Life, and robbed his Fame,
You Would punish in one Culprit! with what Face?
What Is the sole Merit of some Men in Place?
We spoiled the Scot, and would not hide the Deed:
The Attempt was great! 'twas glorious to succeed!
'Twas Conquest, and not Robbery! A Crime
No needless Law says punish, in our Time;
But make us thankful, that no Soul was harmed.
Oh! never more let gentle L -- s go armed.
Our great Mishap is private Theft too long,
The Publick's not so sensible of Wrong.
Capricious Mistress! on the first she pours
Her Vengeance, and Rewards on the other showers;
Brav'ry on Hounslow with a Gibbet pays,
While look'd-on Sea Fights to new Honors raise.
Would Tyrant Custom but so far recede,
That for Maclean we might in Person plead,
A hundred Hoops thy Levee-Room should crowd;
Nay, shudder not, indeed we'd not be loud.
We Have other Eloquence, than stuns the Bar
With dreadful Din of counterfeited War.
Could you but see the Face our Sorrow wears,
In silent Energy of Female Tears,
The Prevalence of Beauty you should own,
Nor L^y C -- knit one jealous Frown.
Let selfish Man jostle for Power and Place,
Barter his Vote, turn Patriot, lie, caress;
Sincerer Woman has a nobler End,
Unknown to Levees, -- it is to serve a Friend!
Oh! happy France, where Women interfere,
And claim in Government their legal Share;
Control the Minister, advise, debate,
Ride on the Council, and direct the State.
There Beauty often pacifies the Law,
And tears a Favorite from its Iron Jaw;
There the stern Judge remits the forfeit Life,
TO a handsome Cousin, or a lovely Wife.
But English, Men of Business, know us ill,
Think Pudding the utmost Efforts of our Skill;
Us, but Companions for the trifling Vein,
And formed to Satisfy, not Entertain.
Yet, what we may -- to Thee I write,
And almost dry my Tears, and blame my Fright.
Reflecting, in Politeness you, as well
As in your Politics, the French excel;
And Heaven-born Mercy cannot from him be far,
Who sealed with Peace the Lyon-mouth of War.
That Hand, by which this prostrate Island rose
From her sunk Fame tremendous to her Foes,
Will not be slow to raise the suppliant Fair,
Saving Maclean proves the whole Sex thy Care;
So may to Power G -- le have no Pretense,
But, weak Supporters! Knowledge, Parts, and Sense;
So, could thy Judgment in our Steerage err,
Might E -- t's Eagle-Eye wink over the Blur.
INDEX.
A.
AIR, the Effect of Breathing, different from English, l. 17. 18. Armor, what
is a complete Suit of it, 38.
B.
BEAUTY, an Effect it has in France, 83, and subseq. -- Need not cause Jealousy
in a certain Lady, 78. Bravery, local, how rewarded by the Public, 6. Brave,
the, rewarded abroad, as they say, 18. Brandies, what Use of them, may save a
Man's Life, 39.
C.
CHEIFS, easier than Deputies, 20. Custom, Tyranny of it, 69. Conquest,
different from Robbery, 59. -- no Law now in Force against it, 60. Culprit,
one, not to be punished, if many are rewarded for the same Action, 55. Council,
French, what the Ladies there do to it, 86. Cousin, the Use to be made of a
handsome one in France, 90. Culloden, Advantages gained in that Field, 40.
D.
DEPUTIES, difficult, 20. Distress, doubted if that of others raises Compassion
in Statesmen, and whether they don't choose rather to increase, than alleviate
it, 1 and 2
E.
ENGLISH, Men of Business, don't make a right Use of Women, 91. End, that of
Woman better than that of Man, 81. Eloquence, of Ladies, different from that of
the Bar, 73. E -- t, conditional Wish, he might be blind, if a certain Thing
could happen, 108.
F.
FRANCE, who excelled by, in Politeness, 97. Favorites, of handsome Ladies,
their Advantages in France, 88. Fright, that of the Author, why almost
condemned by her, 96, and subseq. France, wherein happy, 83 and subseq.
Foreigners, all said to be polite, 16 Fights, Sea, looked on, a Step to
Preferment, 68. Ferrara, a Sword so called, a fine Defense, 40.
G.
G -- LE, conditional Wish against him, 105. Government, Ladies have their
Share in it, in France, 84. -- Statesmen supposed to set an Hour apart for
considering it, 8. -- the Ease of it, ridiculous, 24. Gibbet, the Reward of One
Sort of Brav'ry* 65.
H.
HOUR, different Ways of employing one, by Statesmen, 8, -- which make it bad
to ask Favors of them in, 12, 14, -- proper one to apply in, 23, and subseq.
Hoops, debarred by Custom, from appearing at Levees, 71. Hounslow, Brav'ry
there, how rewarded, 67.
I.
ISLAND, this, by whom raised from her former deplorable Situation to her
present glorious on, 101.
K.
KINGS, opposed to Mortals, 4. Knowledge, a bad Help to Favor, 106.
L.
LADIES, what they do to the Council in France, 86. -- why not to be dreaded at
a Levee, 72. -- wonderful Efficacy of their Tears, 76. -- their Eloquence, not
the same with that of the Bar, 73. -- their Disinterestedness, greater than
that of Men, 79, and sub. -- what they have, that never yet made its Appearance
at a Levee, 81. -- have their Share of Government in France, 84. -- what
Civilities, the Judges, French, pay them, 89. -- the wrong Judgment English,
Men of Business, are apt to make of them, 91. -- deeply interested in the
Preservation of Maclean, 104. L -- ds, gentle ones, should not go armed, 62.
Lay, an Epithet from a Willow applied to it, 6. L -- s, Maclean's Misfortune in
not having smuggled there, 49. Levees, what Men do at them, 79. and subseq.
M.
MACLEAN, Mr. what sized People would be the least sorry for his Death, 22. --
why forced to beg for his Life, 34. -- repents in Tears, and why, 35, and sub.
-- the Author apprehensive his Repentance should do him Harm, 36. -- His Pistol
goes off itself, 41. -- By what Principles it was animated, 43. -- in a worse
Condition than Smugglers and Rebels, 37, to 40. -- justifiable, though he had
been so, and had yet fired wilfully at his Son, 43, and subseq. -- saving him
of great Consequence to the Ladies, 104. -- the Author wishes she and others
might plead for him in Person, 69. Mistress, the Public a capricious one, 65.
Merit, of some Men in Place, what, 49 to 56. Minister, French, controulable by
Ladies, 85. Man, more selfish than Woman, 79. Monarchs, supposed not always
readily answered, 19. -- their great Civility to Ladies, supposed, 15. Mortals,
opposed to Kings. 4.
P.
PERSON addressed, when the Author dreads her Petition should be presented to
him. 8, 12, 14. -- when she fancies a proper Time. 23, subseq. -- prevented of
a Visit from the Ladies, by Custom. 69. -- the righteous Effect Beauty would
have upon him, supposed, 77. -- Excells the French in Politeness, as much as in
Politics. 97. -- what he did to the War. 100. -- the Obligation this Island
has to him. 101. -- obeyed by three Realms. 5. -- happy Wishes for him, though
conditional. 105. People, little, envy those that are tall. 22. Polite, all
Foreigners said to be so. 16. Power, the Web of it. 8. What the Threads of that
Web do. 9, 10. Poppets, what they think they do when they are led. 10. Place,
the Design of preserving one's self in one, supposed to overweigh the Scheme of
Government, as well as Decency to Kings. 12. Public (the) not vindictive. 64.
People (tall) envied by little. 22. Pudding, what Englishmen of Business think
of it. 92. Parts, (Knowledge and Sense) bad Supporters. 106. Peace, owing to
the Person addressed. 100.
R.
R -- S, Petitions supposed to be sent and read to him. 19. Robbery, its
Difference from Conquest. 59. Realms, three, obey the Person addressed. 5.
S.
SERVICES, past, not always entirely forgot. 38, 39, 40. Sorrows, that of
Ladies of great Efficacy. 75. Sea Fights, look'd-on, what they do. 68. Scot,
spoiled, not robbed. 56. Sense, of human Affairs, doubted if retained by
Statesmen. 3. Sense, Knowledge, and Parts, the Disadvantages of having them.
106. Statesmen, doubted if they remember there is such a Condition in the World
as private Men. 3, 4. State, French, directed by the Ladies. 86.
T.
TEAS, how used most salutary. 39. Theft, private, dangerous. 63. Tears, why
those of the Author almost dried. 96.
V.
VENGEANCE, who liable to that of the Public. 65.
W.
WRONG, to the Public, easily forgiven by it. 64. War, where counterfeited.
74. -- what Sort of a Mouth it has, and who shut it. 100.
Declaration de l'Acteure.
JE, ayant n'aquieres propense, ne donner au Public l'ouvrage qu'ensuit,
qu'avec le Commentaire du moult Reverend and Vertueux Monsieur, Monsieur
Guerreburton, accompare aux plus preux, qu'oncques ne furent, en toute
Litterature proufictable: Mais icelluy n'etant tout pret, and je craignant, que
pendant que je cherche a gorgiaser mes travaux a'un couste, ne m'arrivat
quelque mal-en-suivir, d'un autre si l'Heros du Poem fut accoustre d'un licol,
and occis avaunt leur Publication, ai change du propous, en tant on l'Edition
present; aimant mieux la donner tout halle brene en mon lourdwys: Octroyant
and Baillant, neant moins au facond, Monsieur, deja nomme, permission pleniere
sur tout l'Ovrage si tot, qu'il aura fini son doit commentaire, d'ajouster, on
de tollir de mes rythmes tant qu'il trouvera a propous, memement d' y changer
les Noms propres par tout, and les Louanges en Viliaines.

Je l'Acteure.

FINIS.

