THE HIGHLANDER: A POEM: IN Six CANTOS.

Caetera quae vacuas tenilissent carmina mentes,
Omnia jam vulgata. --
VIRG. EDINBURGH: ^rinted by WALL. RUDDIMAN jun. and COMPANY, MDCCLVIII.

THE HIGHLANDER: A POEM.
CANTO I.
THE youth I sing, who, to himself unknown,
Lost to the world and CALEDONIA's throne,
Sprung over his mountains to the arms of Fame,
And, winged by Fate, his sire's avenger, came;
That knowledge learned, so long denied by fate,
And found that blood, as merit, made him great.
The aged chieftain on the bier is laid,
And graced with all the honors of the dead;
The youthful warriors, as the corse they bear,
Droop the sad head, and shed the generous tear.
For Abria's shore, Tay's winding banks they leave,
And bring the Hero to his father's grave.
His filial tears the godlike ALPIN sheds,
And toward the foe his gallant warriors leads.
The chief along his silent journey wound,
And fixed his rainy eyes upon the ground;
Behind advanced his followers sad and slow,
In all the dark solemnity of woe.
Mean time fierce SCANDINAVIA's hostile power,
Its squadrons spread along the murmuring shore;
Prepared, at once, the city to invade,
And conquer CALEDONIA in her head.
His camp, for night, the royal SUENO forms,
Resolved with morn to use his Danish arms.
Now in the ocean sunk the flaming day,
And streaked the ruddy west with setting ray;
Around great INDULPH, in the senate sat
The noble Chiefs of CALEDONIA's, state.
In mental scales they either forces weigh,
And act, before, the labors of the day;
Arrange in thought their CALEDONIA's might,
And bend their little army to the fight.
Thus they consult. Brave ALPIN's martial gait,
Approached the portals of the dome of state;
Resolved to offer to his king and lord,
The generous service of his trusty sword.
The unusual sight the gallant chief admires,
The bending arches and the lofty spires.
On either side the gate, in order stand
The ancient Kings of CALEDONIA's land.
The marble lives, they breathe within the stone,
And still, as once, the royal warriors frown.
The FERGUS's are seen above the gate;
This first created, that restored the state.
In warlike pomp, the awful forms appear,
And, bending, threaten from the stone the spear;
While to their side young ALEION seems to rise,
And on her fathers turns her smiling eyes.
And next appears GREGORIUS' awful name,
HIBERNIA's conqu'ror for a generous fame.
Incass'd in arms, the royal Hero stands,
And gives his captive all his conquered lands.
The filial heart of hapless ALPIN's son,
In marble melts and beats within the stone.
Revenge still sparkles in the Hero's eye;
Around the PICTS, a nameless slaughter, lie.
The youthful warrior thus reviews, with joy,
The godlike series of his ancestry.
The godlike forms the drooping HERO cheer,
And keen ambition half believes the seer:
Eager he shoots into the spacious gate;
His eye commands, without his followers wait.
No frowning spear-man guards the awful door;
No borrowed terror arms the hand of power:
No cringing bands of sycophants appear,
To send false echoes to the monarch's ear.
Merit's sost voice, oppression's mournful groan,
Advanced, unstiffl'd, to the attentive throne.
The Hero, entering, took his solemn stand
Among the gallant warriors of the land.
His manly port, the staring chiefs admire;
And half-heard whispers blow the soldier's fire.
A while his form engaged the monarch's eyes,
At length he raised the music of his voice.
"Whence is the youth? I see fierce DENMARK warms
Each generous breast, and fires 'em into arms.
A face once known is in that youth expressed,
And mends a dying image in my breast."
He said: And thus the Youth; "'midst rocks afar,
I heard of DENMARK, and of SUENO's war.
My country's safety in my bosom rose;
For CALEDONIA's sons should meet her foes.
We ought not meanly wait the storm at home,
But rush afar, and break it 'ere it come.
Few are my foll'wers, but these few are true;
We come to serve our country, fame, and you!"
He said: The king retorts; "thy form, thy mind,
Declare the scion of a generous kind;
With SCOTIA's foes maintain the stern debate,
And spring from valor to the arms of state.
Whoever would raise his house in ALBION, should
Lay the foundation in her en'mies' blood."
Then to the Chiefs: "Supporters of my throne,
Your sires brought often the Roman Eagles down.
Yourselves, my lords, have caused the haughty DANE,
To curse the land, he tried so often in vain.
Norvegian firs often brought them over the waves,
For ALBION's crown; but ALBION gave'em graves.
Be still the same, exert yourselves like men,
And of the invaders wash our rocks again.
Though few our numbers, these, in arms grown old,
In ALBION's and in INDULPH's cause are bold.
The brave man looks not, when the clarion sounds,
To hostile numbers, but his country's wounds;
Bold to the last and dauntless he will go on,
At once his country's soldier and her son."
The monarch thus his royal mind expressed;
The patriot kindling in each generous breast.
Each chieftain's mind with pleasure goes before,
Already mingling with the battle's roar.
In thought each Hero sweeps the bloody plain,
And deals, in fancy, death upon the DANE.
DUMBAR arose, the brave remains of wars,
Silvered with years, o'er-run with honest scars;
Great in the senate, in the field renowned;
The senior stood: attention hung arround.
He thus: "Fierce DENMARK all the North commands,
And belches numbers on our neighboring lands,
England's subdued, the Saxons are overcome,
And meanly own a Danish lord at home.
Scarce now a blast from SCANDINAVIA roars,
But wafts a hostile squadron to our shores.
One fleet destroyed, another crowns the waves,
The sons seem anxious for their father's graves:
Thus war returns in an eternal round,
Battles on baules press, and wound on wound.
Our numbers thinn'd, our godlike warriors dead,
Pale CALEDONIA hangs her sickly head;
We must be wise, be frugal of our store,
Add art to arms, and caution to our power.
Beneath the sable mantle of the night,
Rush on the foe, and, latent, urge the fight.
Conduct with few may foil this mighty power,
And DENMARK shun the inhospitable shore."
The senior spoke: a general voice approves;
To arm his kindred-bands each chief removes.
Night from the east the drousy world invades,
And clothes the warriors in her dusky shades:
The vassal-throng advance, a manly cloud,
And with their sable ranks the chieftains shroud.
Each chief, now here, now there, in armor shines,
Waves through the ranks, and draws the lengthened lines.
Thus, on a night when rattling tempests war,
Through broken clouds appears a blazing star;
Now veils its head, now rushes on the sight,
And shoots a livid horror through the night.
The full formed columns, in the midnight hour,
Begin their silent journey toward the shore:
Through every rank the chiefs inciting roam,
And rouzing whispers hiss along the gloom.
A rising hill, whose night-invelop'd brow
Hung over the encamped squadrons of the foe,
Shoots to the deep its ooze immantled arm,
And, steadfast, struggles with the raging storm;
Here ends the moving host its winding road:
And here condenses, like a sable cloud,
Which long was gath'ring-on the mountain's brow,
Then broke in thunder on the vales below.
Again the chiefs, in midnight council met,
Before the king maintain the calm debate:
This waits the equal contest of the day,
That rushes, headlong, to the nightly fray.
At length young ALPIN stood, and thus begun,
"Great king, supporter of our ancient throne!
Brought up in mountains, and from councils far,
I am a novice in the art of war;
Yet hear this thought. -- Within the womb of night,
Confirm the troops, and arm the youth for fight;
While softly-treading to yon' camp I go,
And mark the disposition of the foe:
Or, wakeful, arm they for the dismal fight,
Or, wrapped within the lethargy of night,
Are left abandoned to our SCOTTISH sword,
By sleep's soft hand, in fatal chains secured.
If DENMARK sleeps in night's enfolding arms,
Expect your spy to point out latent storms;
But, they in arms, too long delayed my speed,
Then place the faithful scout among the dead."
A general voice the exploring thought approves,
And every wish with youthful ALPIN moves.
The Hero slides along the gloom of night,
The camp-fires send afar their gleaming light;
Athwart his side the trusty sabre flies,
The various played hangs, plaited, down his thighs:
The crested helm waves, awful, on his head;
His manly trunk the mail and corslet shade:
The ponderous spear supports his dusky way;
The waving steel reflects the stellar way.
Arrived, the dauntless youth solemnly slow,
Observant, moved along the silent foe.
Some 'brac'd in arms the midnight vigil keep,
Some over the livid camp-fires nod to sleep:
The feeding courser to the stake is bound,
The prostrate horseman stretched along the ground:
Extended here the brawny footman lay,
And, dosing, wore the lazy night away.
The watchman there, by sleep's soft hand o'erpower'd,
Starts at the blast, and half unsheaths his sword.
The exploring youth, through night's involving cloud,
Circling the foe, their disposition viewed.
At length the Hero's dusky journey ends,
Where HACO feasted with his Danish friends;
HACO, by more than SUENO's blood, was great;
The promised monarch of the triple state.
The Scandinavian camp the youth secured
With watchful troops, and not unfaithful sword.
Two oaks, from earth by headlong tempests torn,
Supply the fire, and in the circle burn;
Around with social talk the feast they share,
And drown in bowls the CALEDONIAN war:
O'erpower'd, at length, by slumber's silken hand,
They press the beach, and cow'r upon the strand.
A gallant deed the Mountain-youth designed,
And nursed a growing action in his mind.
Awful the chief advanced: his armor bright
Reflects the fire and shines along the night.
Hovering he stood above the sleeping-band,
And shone, an awful column, over the strand.
Thus, osten to the midnight traveller,
The stalking figures of the dead appear:
Silent the spectre towers before the sight,
And shines, an awful image, through the night.
At length the giant phantom hovers over
Some grave unhallowed, stained with murdered gore.
Thus ALPIN stood: He exiles to the dead
Six-warrior-youths; the trembling remnant fled;
Young HACO starts, unsheaths his shining sword,
And views his friends in iron-chains secured.
He rushes, headlong, on the daring foe;
The godlike ALPIN renders blow for blow.
Their clatt'ring swords on either armor fell;
Fire flashes round, as steel contends with steel.
Young ALPIN's sword on HACO's helmet broke,
And to the ground the stagg'ring warrior took.
Leaning on his broad shield the hero bends;
ALPIN, aloft in air, his sword suspends:
His arm up-rais'd, he downward bends his brow,
But scorned to take advantage of the-foe.
Young HACO from his hand the weapon threw,
And from his flaming breast these accents drew.
"Bravest of men! who could through night come on,
Who durst attack, and foil an host alone.
I see the man high on the warrior placed,
Both mend each other in your noble breast.
Accept, brave man, the friendship of a Dane,
Who hates the Scot, but yet can love the man."
He said: while thus the Scot; "with joy, I find
The man so powerful in an en'my's mind;
Your forces fled, amidst night's dark alarms,
You both could stand, and use your gallant arms:
Such valiant deeds thy dauntless soul confess,
That I the warrior, though the Dane, embrace."
His brawny arms he round the Hero flung;
As they embrace the clashing corslets rung.
The Dane resumes: "With the sun's rising beam,
We may, in fields of death, contend for fame;
Receive this shield, that, midst tomorrow's storms,
HACO may, grateful, shun his well-known arms."
He said, and gave the gold-enamel'd round;
While, as he reached, the studded thongs resound.
The amicable colloquy they end,
And each a foe, clasped in his arms a friend.
This to the camp his dusky journey bends;
While that to ALBION's chiefs the hill ascends.
The exploring journey, all, with pleasure, hear,
And own the valiant scout their noble care.
Dissolved the council, the attack declined,
Each with the gift of sleep indulged his mind;
And 'midst his kindred-bands, supinely laid,
Each softly slumber'd on a mossy bed.
His mind to soft repose young ALPIN bends,
And seeks the humble circle of his friends:
Reelining on a rock the Hero lies,
And gradual slumbers steal upon his eyes.
Still to his mind the DANISH camp arose,
Hung on his dreams, and hagg'd his calm repose;
Once more he mixed with HACO in the sight
And urged, impending, on the DANISH flight
End of Canto first.
CANTO II.
Heaven's opening portals shot the beam of day;
Earth changed her sable robe to sprightly gray:
To West's dark goal the humid night is fled,
The sun, over ocean, rears his beamy head:
The splendid gleam from Scottish steel returns,
And all the light reflexive mountains burns.
Deep-sounding bag-pipes, gaining on the air,
With lofry voice awake the Scottish war.
The gallant chiefs, along the mountain's brow,
Stand 'cass'd in arms, and lower upon the foe;
Or, awful, through the forming squadrons shine,
Build up the ranks, and stretch the lengthened line.
Each Clan their standards from the beam unbind,
They float along, and clap upon the wind;
The hieroglyphic honors of the brave,
Acquire a double horror as they wave.
The Southern warriors stretch the lines of war
Full on the right, obedient to Dumbar.
Hardened to manhood in the school of arms,
He moves along sedately as he forms:
Next deeply stretch their regular array,
To break the iron tempest of the day,
The sons of LENNOX; and their gallant Grahame,
Often honored with the bloody spoils of fame.
He towers along with unaffected pride,
Whilst they display their blazing arms aside,
Great SOMERLED possessed the middle space,
And ranged the kindred valor of his race;
The dauntless sons of MORCHUAN's rocky soil,
And the rough manhood of MULL's sea-girt isle.
The Mountain-chiefs, in burning arms incass'd,
And carrying all their country in their breast,
Undaunted rear their useful arms on high;
Now fought for food, and now for liberty:
Now met the sport of hills, now of the main,
Here pierced a stag, and there transfixed a DANE.
Though nature's walls their homely huts enclose,
To guard their homely huts though mountains rose;
Yet feeling ALBION in their breasts, they dare
From rocks to rush and meet the distant war.
The full-form'd lines now crown the mountain's brow,
And wave a blazing forest over the foe.
The King commands; down, in array, they creep,
Their clanking arms beat time to every step;
As they descend they stretch along the strand,
Restore the ranks, and make a solemn stand.
Before the camp the Danish columns rise,
And stretch the battle to the clarion's voice.
Majestic SUENO kept the higher place,
Great in the war, as in his noble race;
And, when the sword to milder peace shall yield,
In council great, as in the thundering field.
Behind their King, to either hand afar,
Rough NORWAY's sons extend the front of war.
He moves, incass'd in steel and majesty,
Along the ranks, and plans them with his eye:
Speaks his commands with unaffected ease,
And, unconcerned, the coming battle sees;
Bent on his purpose, obstinately brave,
To win a kingdom or an honest grave;
He seemed to look toward Norway's rocky shore,
And say, -- I Will conquer, or return no more.
Far to the right fierce MAGNUS' fiery sway
Compels the troops, and rears the quick array:
Haughty, he moves, and catching flame from far,
Looks toward the Scots, anticipates the war;
Feels cruel joys in all his fibers rise,
And gathers all his fury to his eyes.
Young HACO, on the left, the battle rears,
And moves majestic through a wood of spears;
With martial skill the rising ranks he forms,
No novice in the iron-trade of arms.
Thus formed, the DANES, in unconfus'd array,
Stretch their long lines along the murmuring sea.
Their anchored ships, a sable wood, behind,
Nod on the wave and whistle to the wind.
On either side, thus stretched the manly line,
With darting gleam the steel-clad ridges shine:
On either side the gloomy lines incede,
Foot rose with foot, and head advanced with head.
Thus when two winds descend upon the main,
To fight their battles on the watery plain;
In two black lines the equal waters crowd,
On either side the white-top'd ridges nod.
At length they break, and raise a bubbling sound,
While echo rumbles from the rocks around.
Thus march the DANES with spreading wings afar,
Thus moves the horror of the Scottish war;
While drowsy silence droops her mournful head,
Whose calm repose the clanking arms invade.
The Mountain-youth with unaffected pride,
Twice thirty warriors rising by his side,
His native band, precedes the Scottish forms,
A shining column in the day of arms.
In act to throw, he holds the ponderous spear,
And views, with awful smiles, the face of war.
Nodding along, his polished helmet shines,
And looks, superior, over the subject lines.
On either side, devoured the narrow ground
The moving troops. -- The hostile ridges frowned.
From either host the HERALD's awful breath
Rung, in the trumpet's throat, the peal of death.
The martial sound foments their kindling rage;
Onward they rush, and in a shout engage.
The swords through air their gleaming journeys fly,
Crash on the helms and tremble in the sky.
Groan follows groan, and wound succeeds on wound,
While dying bodies quiver on the ground.
Thus when devouring hatchet-men invade,
With sounding steel, the forest's leavy head,
The mountains ring with their repeated strokes;
The tap'ring firs, the elms, the aged oaks,
Quake at each gash; then nod the head and yield;
Groan as they fall, and tremble on the field.
Thus fell the men; blood forms a lake around,
While groans and spears hoarse harmony resound.
The mountains hear, and thunder back the noise,
And echo stammers with unequal voice.
As yet the battle hung in doubtful scales;
Each bravely fought, in death or only fails.
All, all are bent on death or victory,
Resolved to conquer, or with glory die.
Fierce DENMARK's honor kindles fire in these;
On these pale ALBION bends her parent-eyes.
This sternly says, "shall DENMARK's children fly?"
But that, "or save, or with your country die."
The SCOTS, a Stream, would sweep the DANES away,
The DANES, a Rock, repelled the SCOTS array.
They fight alternate, and alternate fly,
Both wound, both conquer, both with glory die.
Thrice HACO strove to break DUMBAR's array,
And thrice DUMBAR impelled him to the sea.
The fiery MAGNUS, foaming on the right,
Pours on the Mountain-chiefs his warrior-might.
The Mountain-youths the furious chief restrain,
And turn the battle back upon the DANE.
The ranks of SUENO stand in firm array,
As hoary rocks repel the raging sea.
The HERO to the phalanx crowds his might,
And calmly manages the standing fight;
Not idly madd'ning in the bloody fray,
He wears delib'rately the foe away.
Straight on his spear the godlike ALPIN stood,
His flaming armor 'smear'd with Danish blood:
He casts behind an awe-commanding look,
And to his few, but valiant, followers spoke.
"The cautious DANES, O friends, in firm array,
With perseverance may secure the day;
Our people fall. -- Let us their force divide;
Invade with flame their transports on the tide.
They will defend, the SCOTS restore the day;
Follow, my friends, your ALPIN leads the way."
He said, and rushed upon the phalanx'd DANE,
The bending ranks beneath his sword complain.
Arms, groans of men, beat time to every wound,
Nod at each blow, and thunder on the ground.
Behind his friends advance with martial care,
Move step for step, and spread the lane of war.
He low'rs before, and clears the rugged road;
They rush behind, a rough and headlong flood.
Thus on some eminence, the laboring swain
Unlocks his sluice to drench the thirsty plain:
With mattock armed he shapes the water's course,
The liquid flows behind, with rapid force.
Thus valiant ALPIN hews his bloody way,
And thus his friends force through their firm array;
With great effort he seizes on the strand,
Turns to his friends, and issues his command.
"Thicken your lines, the battle's shock sustain,
And gall with vigor the recoiling DANE.
Brave CALEDONIANS! face your country's foe;
Your lives are hers, her own on her bestow."
He added not. -- The valiant youths obey:
The HERO shaped along his rapid way;
Rushed to the camp, and seized a flaming brand,
Then took his lofty seat upon the strand.
Swift, from his arm, the crackling ember flies,
Whizzes along, and kindles in the skies:
The pitchy hull receives the sparkling fire;
The kindling ship the fanning winds inspire.
Black smoke ascends: at length the flames arise,
Hiss through the shrouds, and crackle in the skies.
The riding fleet is all in darkness lost,
Its wreathy wings the flame spreads on the blast.
Red embers, falling from the burning shroud,
Hiss in the wave, and bubble in the flood.
Great SUENO turns, and sees the flame behind
swell its huge columns on the driving wind;
Then thus to ERIC -- "Urge your speedy flight,
Recall the fiery MAGNUS from the right:
Quick let him come! the endangered transports save,
And dash against the burning ship the wave.
The youth obeys, and, flying over the sand,
Repeats in MAGNUS' ear the king's command.
The warrior starts, rage sparkling in his eyes,
He towers along resounding as he flies:
He comes. -- From SUENO's army squadrons fall
Around the chief, and rear the manly wall;
Till in their front the stately chief appears,
They wave, behind, an iron wood of spears;
In all the gloomy pomp of battle lower,
And beat with sounding steps the fatal shore.
Bent to support the flame, his thin array
Young ALPIN draws along the murmuring sea,
He holds the massy spear in act to throw,
And bends his fiery eyes upon the foe.
Advanced. -- with awful din the fight began;
Steel speaks on steel; man urges upon man.
Groans, shouts, arms, men, a jarring discord sound,
Gain on the sky and shake the mountains round.
Fierce MAGNUS, here, would rush into the main:
Young ALPIN, there, would keep at bay the DANE.
One pushes the swift boat into the sea;
Through his bent back the faulchion cleaves its way:
Another dashes to the ship the wave,
And bends at once into a watery grave;
Spouts with departing breath the bubbling flood,
And dies the water with his foaming blood.
Thus fought the men. -- Behind the flame resounds,
Gains on the fleet, and spreads its wasteful bounds.
Great MAGNUS, burning at the dismal sight,
Advanced with rage redoubled to the fight.
"Degenerate DANES" -- The raging warrior cries,
"The day is lost -- Your fame, your honor dies!
Advance, -- condense your ranks, -- bear on your way,
And sweep these daring striplings to the sea."
The men advance. -- proceeds their haughty lord,
And wounds the air with his impatient sword.
Bending, where ALPIN reapt the bloody plain,
"Turn, here is a man, turn, stripling, here is a DANE!"
He said. -- The Mountain-warrior turns his eyes,
Then sternly wheels, and with a blow replies.
Great MAGNUS falling on young ALPIN's shield,
Adds to the dismal thunder of the field.
Revengful ALPIN, with descending blade,
Crashes the shining thunder on his head.
They aim, defend; their swords, at every stroke,
Talk on the way, and gleam along the smoke.
At length on MAGNUS Fate deals home a wound,
He nods to death, and thunders on the ground.
Starting from the wide wound the bubbling blood,
Sinks through the sand, and rolls a smoking flood.
Prone on the strand, extended every way,
Clad over with steel, a shining trunk he lay.
Thus, on its lofty seat, should winds invade
The statue keeps the memory of the dead;
It quakes at every blast, and nods around,
Then falls, a shapeless ruin, to the ground.
The DANES beholding their commander die,
Start from their ranks, and in confusion fly.
The youth pursues: the flames behind him roar
Catch all the fleet, and clothe with smoke the shore.
Mean time great SUENO, DENMARK's valiant King,
Round royal INDULPH bends the hostile ring.
Hemmed in a circle of invading men,
They face on every side the closing DANE;
Deal blow for blow, and wound return for wound,
And bring the stagg'ring en'my to the ground.
Great SOMERLED, ARGYLE's majestic lord,
Through HARALD's sounding helmet drives his sword:
Stagg'ring he falls, his rattling arms resound,
And in the pangs of death he bites the ground.
Through HILRIC's shield great INDULPH urged the spear,
It pierced his breast, and smok'd behind in air:
Groaning he sinks; as when repeated strokes
Bring headlong to the ground the slaughtered ox.
Brave GRAHAME through mighty CANUTE urged the spear,
Where, 'twixt the helm and mail, the neck was bare.
Pressed with the helm his ponderous head inclined;
He nodding falls, as trees o'erturn'd by wind.
While thus the en'my's front the chieftains wore,
And pil'd with hostile trunks the fatal shore;
By slow degrees their force declines away,
Surrounding DENMARK gains upon the day.
Great INDULPH stood amidst the warrior-ring;
All give attention to their valiant king.
"Hear me, ye chiefs," the mournful monarch cries,
"We fall to day, our state, our country dies.
Let us acquit ourselves of ALBION's death,
And yield in her defense our latest breath."
He said: and rushed from the surrounding ring,
And 'midst the battle sought the DANISH king.
Ready to fight the royal warriors stood,
And longed to revel in each others blood;
While ALPIN rushing from the flaming shore,
With wasteful path, pursued the flying power;
Hewed through great SUENO's ring his bloody way,
And to the desperate chieftains gave the day;
Rushed 'twixt great INDULPH and bold SUENO's sword
And with his royal life preserved his lord.
Brave SUENO nods, falls to the strand, and cries;
"O honor! DENMARK lost, undone!" -- and die.
But still fierce DENMARK made a broken stand;
Here stands a squadron, there a gloomy band,
Rears a firm column on the smoky shore,
Makes the last efforts of a dying power.
Thus, after fire through lanes its way has took,
A prostrate village lies overwhelmed in smoke;
But here and there some sable turrets stand,
And lock, a dismal ruin, over the land,
So stood the DANES; but, soon o'erpower'd, they fly,
Stumble along, and in their flight they dic.
NORVEGIA's sons, of MAGNUS' fire bereft,
Fell down before the chieftains of the left.
The great DUMBAR upon the right repelled
Young HACO's force, and swept him off the field:
He winds his hasty march along the coast,
Fights as he flies, and shields his little host.
At length, within a wood over shades the sea,
With new felled oaks he walls his thin array;
Bent on his fate, and obstinately brave,
There marked at once his battle-field and grave.
End of Canto second.
CANTO III.
AS when, beneath the night's tempestuous cloud,
Embattl'd winds assail the leafy wood;
Tear on their fable way with awful sound,
And bring the groaning forest to the ground:
The trunks of elms, the shrub, the fir, the oak,
In one confusion sink beneath the shock.
So death's sad spoils the bloody field bestrow'd;
The haughty chieftain, the ignoble crowd,
The coward, brave, partake the common wound,
Are friends in death, and mingle on the ground.
Dark night approached. -- the flaming lord of day.
Had plunged his glowing circle in the sea.
On the blue sky the gathering clouds arise,
And tempests clap their wings along the skies.
The murmuring voice of heaven, at distance, fails,
And eddying whirl-winds howl along the vales.
The sky inwrapt in awful darkness low'rs,
And threatens to descend, at once, in showers.
The CALEDONIAN chiefs, to shun the storm,
Beneath a leafy oak their council form.
An ancient trunk supports the weary king;
The nobles bend around the standing ring.
With swords unsheathed the awful forms appeared,
Their shining arms with DANISH blood besmeared:
Their eyes shoot fire; their meins unsettled show,
The battle frowns as yet upon their brow.
The monarch rose, and leaning on the oak,
Stretched out his hand, and to the nobles spoke.
"My lords! the DANES, for so just heaven decreed,
Even on that shore they thought to conquer, bleed.
In vain Death wrapped our fathers in his gloom,
We raise them, in our actions, from the tomb.
Not infamous their aim, over lands afar
To spread destruction and the plague of war;
To meet the sons of battle as they roam,
Content to ward them from their native home;
To show invaders that they dared to die,
For barren rocks, for fame and liberty.
In you they live, fallen DENMARK's host may show:
Accept my thanks; your country thanks you too."
He added not: but turned his eyes around,
Till in the ring the valiant youth he found.
"Approach, brave youth!" the smiling monarch cried,
"Your country's soldier, and your country's pride.
SCOTLAND shall thank thee for this gallant strife,
While grateful INDULPH owes to thee his life."
Thus he, advancing, -- and with ardour pressed
The gallant warrior to his royal breast.
The unpresumptuous ALPIN bends his eyes,
And mixed with blushes to the king replies.
"To save our king, our country's ancient throne,
Are debts incumbent on her every son;
O monarch! add it not to ALPIN's praise,
That, of this general debt, his part he pays."
Thus said the youth, and modestly retired,
While, as he moves, the king and chiefs admired:
Slow to his stand his easy steps he bears,
And hears his praises with unwilling ears.
The king resumes. -- "O chiefs, O valiant peers!
Glad CALEDONIA dries her running tears:
The warrior raised his faulchion over her head
Now sleeps, forgotten, on an earthen bed.
Fierce SCANDINAVIA's fatal storms are over,
Her thunderbolts lie harmless on the shore.
But as when, after night, has beat a storm,
On the mild morn some spots the sky deform;
The broken clouds from every quarter sail,
Join their black troops, and all the heavens veil;
The winds arise, descends the sluicy rain,
The storm, with force redoubled, beats the plain:
So, when the youthful HACO shall afar
Collect the broken fragments of the war,
The Hero, armed with SUENO's death, may come
And claim an expiation on his tomb;
Deep in that wood the gallant warrior lies
Who shall, to night, his little camp surprise;
Surround the martial DANE with nightly care,
And give the final stroke to dying war:
Hence NORWAY's ships shall shun our fatal sea,
And point the crooked beak another way;
If chance they spy where often their armies fell,
Shall turn the prow, and crowd away the sail."
He said no more: the generous chiefs arise,
Bent on the glory of the enterprise.
Eager to climb through dangerous paths to fame,
The nightly war they severally claim.
One chief observed where godlike HACO lay;
This knew the wood; -- and that, the dusky way:
Another urged his more unwearied friends;
And every chieftain something recommends.
Thus for the arduous task the chiefs contest,
While each would grasp the danger to his breast.
The attentive monarch heard their brave debates,
And, with a secret joy, his soul dilates.
Young ALPIN burns to urge the war of night,
To mix again with HACO in the fight.
Eager he stood, and thus the chiefs adrest,
The warrior laboring in his manly breast;
"King, gallant chiefs! -- this enterprise I claim;
Here let me fix my unestablish'd fame.
Already you have beat her arduous path,
Reapt glorious harvests in the fields of death:
Repeated feats fixed fame within your power,
But I gleam once, then sink, and am no more,
Nor am I wholly ign'rant of the fight,
I Have urged the gloomy battles of the night:
Aebudae's chief once touched on ABRIA'S strand,
And swept our mountains with his pilf'ring band;
All day they drove our cattle to the sea,
I went at midnight and rescued the prey;
With a poor handful, and a faithful sword,
Dispersed the robbers and their haughty lord.
'Twas I commanded -- these the gallant men!
May we not act that midnight over again?"
The Hero spoke; a murmuring voice ensued
Of loud applause. -- each Hero's mind subdued,
The glorious danger to the youth resigns:
He towers along, and marshals up his lines.
Some gallant youths, to share his fame, arise,
And mingle in the glorious enterprise.
The warrior-band move on in firm array,
He towers before along the sounding sea.
Through their tall spears the singing tempest raves,
And, falling headlong on the spumy waves,
Pursues the ridgy sea with awful roar,
And throws the liquid mountains on the shore.
In each short pause, before the billow breaks,
The clanking CALEDONIAN armor speaks.
Thus on some night when sable tempests roar,
The watchman wearying of his lonely hour,
Hears some rent branch to squeak 'twixt every blast,
But in each ruder gust the creak is lost.
The king and gallant chiefs, with wishful eyes,
Pursue the youthful warrior as he flies.
His praise through all the noble circle ran --
Approached the ghastly figure of a man:
His visage pale; his loeks are bleach'd with years;
His tottering steps he onward scarcely bears:
His limbs are laced with blood, a hideous sight!
And his wet garments shed the tears of night.
With slow approach he lifts his fading eyes,
And raised the squeaking treble of his voice.
"O king! I feel the leaden hand of death,
To the dark tomb I tread the general path:
Hear me, O king! for this I left the field,
For this to thee my dying form revealed:
NORWAY in vain had interposed her flood,
I come, alas! to pay the debt of blood.
Possessed of crimes, which the good king pursued,
In fell conspiracy, unblest! I vowed
With fierce DOVALUS; that I live to tell!
By us, by us, the great king MALCOLM fell!
Touched with remorse, behind my shield I laid.
His smiling child, and wrapped him in my played.
Now to the sea we urge our rapid flight,
Beneath the guilty mantle of the night.
Still in my arms I little DUFFUS bear;
Behind the voice of men, and arms we hear,
My comrades fly. -- I lay the infant down,
And with my guilty life from vengeance run,
They found him, saved him; for I knew the voice;
It was -- he said, and closed at once his eyes;
Slowly inclined, and, tumbling headlong down,
His guilty life breathed in a feeble groan."
The mournful monarch stood in dumb surprise;
The fate of MALCOLM filled afresh his eyes.
He folds his arms, and bends his silent look,
Then, starting from the gloom of sorrow, spoke.
"You see, my lords, though DENMARK'S hostile state
Long saved the traitors from the hand of fate;
Yet heaven, who rules with equal sway beneath,
Snatched from her arms a victim due to death;
DOVALUS shall not sink among the dead,
But with that vengeance hangs over treason's head.
Still, MALCOLM, still, thou generous, and thou best!
Thy fate hangs heavy on a brother's breast;
You left a young, you left a helpless son,
But lost to me, to SCOTLAND, and his throne.
Perhaps, oppressed with hunger and with cold,
He 'tends some peasant's cattle to the fold;
Or fights a common soldier on the field,
And bows beneath the scepter he should wield."
No more he said; the noble circle sighed,
They droop the silent head, nor aught replied.
Now died apace the occidental light;
The subject world receives the flood of night.
The king from every side his troops recalls;
They fall around and rear their manly walls.
He issues to return the great command,
They move along, and leave the fatal strand.
The city gained, each soldier's weary breast
Forgets the day, and sooths his toil with rest.
The king receives, with hospitable care,
The gallant chiefs, and drowns in wine the war.
Within the royal hall the nobles sat;
The royal hall, in simple nature great.
No pigmy art, with little mimickry,
Distracts the sense, or pains the weary eye:
Shields, spears and helms in beauteous order shone,
Along the walls of uncemented stone.
Here all the noble warriors crown the bowl,
And with the generous nectar warm the soul;
With social talk steal lazy time away,
Recounting all the dangers of the day:
They turn to ALPIN, and the gloomy fight,
And tossed the gallant warrior of the night.
Mean time young ALPIN 'girts the fatal wood,
And longs to mix again with DANISH blood.
Already HACO had, with martial care,
With walls of oak embraced an ample square:
Himself beneath a tree, the storm defends,
And keeps in arms, around, his watchful friends.
The fair Aurelia by the hero's side,
An awful warrior, and a blooming bride,
Who placed in martial deeds her virgin-care,
Wields in her snowy hand the ashen spear.
A silver mail hung round her slender waist,
The corslet rises on her heaving breast.
On her white arm the brazen buckler shows,
The shining helm embraced her marble brows;
Her twining ringlets, flowing down behind,
Sung grateful music to the nightly wind.
Fate was unkind; just as the lovers wed,
Nor yet had tasted of the nuptial bed;
Great SUENO's trumpet called the youth to war,
He sighed, embraced, and left the weeping fair.
With love emboldened, up the virgin rose,
From her soft breast the native woman throws;
And with the gallant warrior clothes the wife,
Following her HACO to the bloody strife.
She sought her love through war's destructive path,
And often turned from him the hand of death.
The chief, attentive, all the youth surveyed,
And in the warrior found the lovely maid.
She leans, inclining, on her martial spear,
And only for the youth employs her fear.
The valiant SCOT assails the oaken wall:
The bulwark groans, the brave defenders fall.
With sounding steel the firm barrier he plied,
And poured his warriors in on every side.
The godlike HACO rushing through the night,
Now here, now there opposed the invaders might,
To every corner gave divided aid,
Still, still supported by the martial maid.
Thus when the ocean, swelling over the strand,
Invades with billowy troops the subject land;
The sed'lous swains the earthen weight oppose,
And fill the fissures where the tempest flows.
So valiant HACO flew to every side,
And stemmed with pointed steel the manly tide;
With great effort preserved the narrow field,
And 'twixt the fair and danger kept the shield.
She, only she, employs the Hero's care;
HACO forgot, he only thinks on her.
He longs to sink with glory to the dead,
But can he leave in grief the captive maid?
Her dying image hags his fancy's eyes,
What should he do, if fair AUSELIA dies?
Love, mighty love, arrested all his power;
He wished for flight who never fled before.
But as the lioness, to save her young,
Despises death, and meets the hunter-throng;
So, starting from the sable maze of care,
He faces death, and shields the lovely fair.
The martial maid with equal love possessed
Would dart 'twixt danger and her HACO's breast;
Oppose her buckler to the listed spear,
And turn from him the iron hand of war.
Now godlike AIPIN hewed his bloody path
Through DANISH ranks, and marked his steps with death.
The enclosed square with desperate hand he shears,
And reaps a bloody field of men and spears.
Groans, crashing steel, and clangour of the fight,
Increase the stormy chorus of the night.
The DANES, diminished, meet the unequal war,
Where two fallen oaks confine an inner square:
Join their broad shields, the close-wedg'd column rear,
And on the SCOTTISH battle turn the spear.
On every side the CALEDONIANS close,
Hemming the desperate phalanx of the foes,
To give the final stroke to battle, crowd:
While HACO thus bespoke the DANES aloud;
"Ye sons of North, unfortunate, though brave!
Here fate has marked out our common grave;
Has doomed our bodies to enrich these plains:
Then die revenged -- like warriors and like DANES!"
He spoke, and turning to the martial maid,
Embraced her softly, and thus, sighing, said;
"Shall then my spouse, my love, my only joy,
Shall fair AURELIA with her HACO die!
Thy death afflicts me. -- I in vain complain;
I Will save AURELLA, or expire -- a DANE!"
He said, and gathering up his spacious shield
Prepared to meet the battle in the field.
Young ALPIN heard. -- It touched his feeling breast,
He stopped the war, and thus the DANE addressed.
"Our CALEDONIA, now relieved of fear,
Feels pity rising in the place of care;
Disdains to tyrannize over vanquished foes,
And for her steel on them her pity throws.
I now disiniss brave HACO from the field,
And own the generous present of the shield."
He said: -- his thanks returns the royal DANE,
Himself escorts them to the sounding main.
A ship escaped the flame, within a bay,
Where bending rocks exclude the rougher sea,
Secure from stormy winds in fafety rides,
And slowly nods on the recoiling tides;
Thither they bend, and launching to the sea,
Plow with the crooked beak the watery way;
Their sable journey to the North explore,
And leave their sleeping friends upon the shore,
End of Canto third.
CANTO IV.
THE sprightly morn with early blushes spread,
Rears over the eastern hills her rosy head;
The storm subsides, the breezes as they pass
Sigh on their way along the pearly grass.
Sweet carol all the songsters of the spray,
Calm and serene comes on the gentle day,
Amidst attendant fair CULENA moves,
CULENA, fruit of INDULPH's nuptial loves!
Too soon to fate the beauteous queen resigned,
But left the image of herself behind.
To the calm main the lovely nymphs repair,
To breathe along the strand the morning air;
They brush with easy steps the dewy grass
Observing beauteous nature as they pass.
The imperial maid moves with superior grace,
Awe mixed with mildness sat upon her face;
High inbred virtue all her bosom warms,
In beauty rises, and improves her charms.
Silent and slow she moves along the main,
Behind, her maids attend, a modest train!
Observe her as she moves with native state,
And gather all their motions from her gait.
Thus through IDALIA's balm-distilling grove,
Majestic moves the smiling Queen of Love:
Her hair flows down her snowy neck behind,
Her purple mantle floats upon the wind;
The Graces move along, a blooming train!
And borrow all the gestures of their queen.
Thus steal the lovely maids their tardy way
Along the silent border of the sea.
Slow-curling waves advance upon the main,
And often threat the shore, and often abstain.
A woody mound, which reared aloft its head,
Threw trembling shadows over a narrow mead:
From a black rock crystalline waters leap,
Arch as they fall, and through the valley creep,
Chide with the murmuring pebbles as they pass,
Or hum their purling journey through the grass.
Pleased with the scene the wandering virgins stood;
The main below, above the lofty wood.
Their eyes they sat with the transporting scene,
And, sitting, press the fair-enamel'd green;
Enjoy with innocence the growing day,
And steal with harmless talk the time away.
Mean time fierce CORBRED, who preferred in vain
His suit to AGNES, fairest of the train;
Who fled from TWEED to shun his hated arms,
Intrusting fair CULENA with her charms;
Saw the disdainful nymph remote from aid,
And bent his lustful eyes upon the maid.
He rushed with headlong russians from the wood,
And seized the fair: the virgins shriek aloud.
For help, for help! the struggling virgin cries,
And as she shrieks, aloud the wood replies.
ALPIN along, -- his men were sent before,
Stalked on his thoughtful way along the shore.
The distant plaint assailed the Hero's ear,
He drew his sword and rushed to save the fair.
Before the chief the dastard CORBRED fled,
And to her brave preserver left the maid.
Prostrate on earth the lovely virgin lay,
Her roses fade, and all her charms decay:
In humid rest her bending eyelids close;
With slow returns her bosom fell and rose:
At length returning life her bosom warms,
Glows in her cheeks, and lights up all her charms,
Thus when invading clouds the moon assail,
The landscape fails, and fades the shining vale;
But soon as CYNTHIA rushes on the sight,
Reviving fields are silvered over with light.
The affrighted fair the gallant warrior leads
To join, upon the sand, the flying maids.
They crowd their cautious steps along the sea,
Quake at each breath, and tremble on their way;
Their timorous breasts unsettl'd from surprise,
To every side they dart their careful eyes.
Thus on the heathy wild the hunted deer
Start at each blast, together crowd through fear;
Tremble and look about, before, behind,
Then stretch along, and leave the mountain-wind.
The gallant youth presents the rescued fair,
Confirms their trembling breasts, removes their care;
The generous story from herself they hear,
And drink his praises with a greedy ear;
Steal on the youth their eyes as AGNES spoke,
And pour their fluttering souls at every look.
But fair CULENA feels a keener dart,
It pierced her breast and sunk into her heart;
She hears attentive, views, admires and loves,
Her eye over all the man with pleasure roves.
With painsul joy she feels the flame increase,
Her pride denies it, but her eyes confess:
She starts, and blushing turns her eye aside,
But love steps in, and steals a look from pride.
Thus fair CULENA struggles up the stream,
And 'tempts in vain to quench the rising flame.
At length, with blushing cheek and bending look,
The imperial maid the warrior thus bespoke.
"O generous chief! for thus your deeds would say,
How shall our gratitude thy kindness pay?
INDULPH shall hear, and INDULPH shall reward;
Such generous actions claim a king's regard."
She said: and thus the chief; -- "Imperial maid,
More than the debt thy approbation paid.
In this I did not strive with gallant men,
Or drive disordered squadrons from the plain;
But frighted from his prey a sensual slave,
The gloomy sons of guilt are never brave.
Whoever would seize on a defenseless fair,
Would shun the sword and fly amain from war."
He said, and stalked away with manly state,
Grandeur, with awe commix'd, informed his gait,
His ponderous mail reflects the trembling day,
And all his armor rings along the way.
The royal maid observes him as he flies,
In silence stands, and from her bosom sighs,
Slowly moves on before the silent fair,
And in the palace shuts her secret care.
Mean time young Alpin seeks the king and peers;
But fair Culena in his bosom bears.
In vain against the rising flame he strove,
For all the man dissolved at once to love.
Within the high-arch'd hall the nobles sat,
And formed in council the reviving state;
For instant peace solicitous prepare,
And raise a bulwark against the future war.
No high-flown zeal the patriot hurled along,
No secret gold engaged the speaker's tongue,
No jarring seeds are by a tyrant sown,
Nor cunning senate undermines the throne.
To public good their public thoughts repair,
And CALEDONIA is the general care.
No orator in pompous phrases shines,
Or veils with public weal his base designs.
Truth stood conspicuous, undisguis'd by art,
They spoke the homely language of the heart.
Arrived the gallant warrior of the night;
They hear with eager joy the gloomy fight.
His conduct, courage, and compassion raise,
And every voice is forward in his praise.
The great DUMBAR his awsul stature rears,
His temples whitened with the snow of years.
On the brave youth he bends his solemn look,
Then, turning round, thus to the nobles spoke.
"Beneath the royal banner, SCOTS asar
Had urged on Humber's banks the foreign war;
My father dead, though young I took the shield,
And led my kindred-warriors to the field.
The noble CALEDONIAN camp was laid
Within the bosom of a spacious mead.
Green-rising hills encompassed it around,
And these king Malcolm with his archers crowned;
Full on the right a spacious wood arose,
And thither night conveyed a band of foes.
The king-commands a chief to clear the wood,
And I the dangerous service claim aloud.
I went, expelled the foes, and killed their lord,
And ever since have worn his shining sword.
I now retire from war, in age to rest;
Take it brave youth; for you can wield it best."
He said, and reached the sword. -- The youth replied,
Shooting the heavy blade athwart his side,
"My lord with gratitude this sword I take,
Esteem the present for the giver's sake.
It still may find the way it often explored,
And glut with hostile blood its second lord;
To bloody honor hew its wasteful path,
A faithful sickle in the fields of death.
He thus. -- With placid mein great INDULPH rose,
And spoke; "Thus always meet our Albion's foes;
With foreign blood your native arms adorn,
And boldly fight for ages yet unborn.
For us, my lords, fought all our godlike sires;
The debt we owe to them, our race requires:
Though future arms our country should enslave,
She shall acquit our ashes in the grave;
Posterity degenerate, as they groan,
Shall bless their sires, and call their woes their own.
Let us, my lords, each virt'ous spark inspire,
And where we find it, blow it to a fire.
Thy service, gallant ALPIN, in this war,
Shall both be INDULPH's and the senate's care,
Mean time, with manly sports and exercise
Let us from business turn the mental eyes:
The mind relaxed acquires a double force,
And with new vigor finishes the course."
He added not: the godlike chiefs obey;
All rise at once; great INDULPH leads the way.
The palace here, and there a virid mound,
Confine a flowery spot of grassy ground.
The under-rock, emerging through the green,
Chequers with hoary knobs the various scene.
Thither repair the chiefs and sceptered king,
And bend upon the plain the hollow ring.
Obedient servants from the palace bear
The horny bow, the helm, the shining spear,
The mail, the corslet, and the brazen shield;
And throw the ringing weight upon the field.
Imperial INDULPH, towering over the plain,
With placid words addressed the warrior-train:
"Let those who bend the stubborn bow arise,
And with the feathered shast dispute this prize;
An antique bow a BALEARIAN wore,
When Romans thundered on our ALBION's shore.
The skilful archer, dealing death afar,
Threw on our Scottish host the distant war;
Great FERGUS springs, a king devoid of fear,
And through his body shoots the reeking spear;
The bloody spoil through striving cohorts brings,
And sends this relic down to after kings."
Thus, grasping the long bow, the monarch said:
Rose valiant Grahame and youthful SOMERLED.
Next GOWAL in the strife demands a part,
Famed on his native hills to wing the dart.
Full on the mound a helm, their aim, was placed;
And GOWAL drew the nerve, first, to his breast;
The bow reluctant yields, then backward springs;
The nerve resounds, through air the arrow sings.
Close to the aim, the earth the arrow meets,
And as it vibrates the bright helmet beats.
Applause ensues. -- The shaft was sent by Grahame,
And cut its brazen journey through the aim.
The prize on him the murmuring chiefs bestow,
Till SOMERLED assumes the ancient bow.
The dancing chord the leaping arrow left,
And, rushing, took on end Grahame's birchen shall;
Tore on its way, around the shivers fly,
And SOMERLED brings off the prize with joy.
"Who," cries the king, "this shield his prize shall bear,
And fling with skilful hand the martial spear?
Behind this buckler mighty KENNETH stood,
When Tay, impurpled, ran with Pictish blood."
He said, and placed a mark, the knobby round,
And measured back with equal steps the ground.
The valiant Grahame, the Mountain-youth arose;
Gowal again his martial stature shows;
Bent on the knobby splendor of the prize,
First from his hand the singing weapon flies.
The steel-head marked a circle as it run,
Flamed with the splendor of the setting sun.
Thus when the night the weeping sky o'er-veils,
Athwart the gloom the streaming meteor sails,
Kindles a livid circle as it flies,
And with its glory dazzles human eyes.
Thus flew the spear, and, sinking in the mound,
With quick vibrations beat the air around;
But missed the shield. -- Grahame's not unpracticed art
Dismisses through the air the murmuring dart:
Full on the middle boss it takes the shield;
The fighting metals clatter over the field:
From the firm knob the point obliquely flies,
And on the field the trembling weapon lies.
Next valiant ALPIN takes the ponderous spear,
And, bending back, dismisses it through air:
The long, quick weapon, flying over the field,
Falls on the boss, and perforates the shield;
The waving shaft is planted on the mound;
And with applause the neighboring rocks resound.
Young SOMERLED wrench'd from the rock a quoit,
A huge, enormous, sharp, unwieldy weight;
Such nowadays as many panting swains
A witness rear on long-contested plains:
Slow-bending down, at length the hero springs;
The rolling rock along the heavens sings;
Falling, it shakes at once the neighboring ground,
And on the face of earth indents a wound.
Thus when strong winds the aged tower invade,
And throw the shapeless ruin from its head;
It falls and cleaves its bed into the ground;
The valley shakes, and rocks complain around.
All try the mark to reach, but try in vain;
All, falling short, unequal wound the plain.
ALPIN with diffidence assumes the stone,
For such a space had SOMERLED over thrown:
The unwieldy rock a while he weighs with care,
Then, springing, sends it whizzing through the air;
The wondering warriors view it as it rolls;
Far over the distant mark the discus falls:
It shakes the plain and deals a gaping wound;
Such as when headlong torrents tear the ground.
The applauding chiefs own in the manly game
The Hero great, as in the fields of fame.
CULENA, leaning on her snowy arms
Observant, from the window points her charms,
The imperial virgin saw with pleasing pain,
The favorite youth victorious on the plain:
Sadly she sighed, accusing cruel fate,
Which chained her in captivity of state.
The veil of night had now inwrapt the pole;
The feast renewed, goes round the sparkling bowl.
Great INDULPH rose with favour-speaking mein;
Approaching ALPIN thus the king began:
"Say, will the stranger tell from whence he came
To reap this harvest of unrivaled fame?
Nobler the youth, who, though before unknown,
From merit mounts to virtue and renown,
Than he, set up by an illustrious race,
Totters aloft, and scarce can keep his place!"
The monarch spoke: -- attentive look the peers,
And long to drink his voice with greedy ears.
End of Canto fourth.
CANTOV.
THE Hero, rising from his lofty seat,
Thus unpresumptuously accosts the great:
"The fame of DENMARK passed our mountains over,
And filled our ears on ABRIA's distant shore:
Brave RYNOLD starts: -- the aged chief alarms,
And kindles all his family to arms.
A hundred youths, who, from the sounding wood,
Or towering mountain brought their living food,
Obey the bag-pipe's voice; for all, in view
Of RYNOLD's seat, the friendly Canton grew.
The hoary warrior leads the onward path,
No stranger to the road which led to death.
Behind advancing, I, with martial care,
Lead on the youthful thunderbolts of war;
With arms anticipate the kindling fire,
And move to every motion of my sire.
"On GRAMPUS, night her mantle round us throws;
We slept in heath -- the dappled morn arose:
Descending thence pursue our headlong way,
And cross the silver errors of the TAY.
Groans, feeble shrieks, ascending from the vale,
Speak on the pinions of the southern gale.
A dismal scene breaks on our distant eyes;
Here one pursues, and there another flies.
This breathes his life through the impurpled wound,
While his proud villa smokes along the ground.
That with the foe maintains unequal strife,
While his dear offspring fly, and dearer wife.
"The senior saw it with indignant eyes,
And bid, at once, his kindred-ranks arise.
With hasty steps we seize a virid brow,
And form a sable cloud above the foe.
Thus on the mountain's brow, I often have seen
The must'ring clouds brew torrents for the plain;
At length the blustering south begins to roar,
And heaven descends impetuous in a shower;
The bubbling floods foam down the hill, and spread
A swimming deluge on the subject mead.
"Thus RYNOLD formed on the mountain's brow,
And headlong rushed into the vale below.
While on the banks of TAY terrific shine
The steel-clad foe, and stretch the hostile line.
They form a wall along the flowing flood,
And awful gleam their arms, an iron wood.
We shout, and rush upon the hostile throng:
The echoing fields with iron clangour rung.
Firm stood the foe, nor made they flight their care,
But hand to hand returned the equal war:
Man close to man, and shield conjoined to shield,
They with the stable phalanx keep the field.
With pointed spear I marked the stoutest foe,
And heaven directed home the happy blow:
He tumbles backward to the groaning flood:
TAY circles round, and mingles with his blood.
My kindred-youth their useful weapons wield,
Fomenting the confusion of the field.
DANE fell on DANE, and man transfixed his man,
Till bloody torrents smoked along the plain.
At length they fly along the banks of TAY;
Their guilty leader points the inglorious way.
Eager we follow: -- still the foe with art
Wound as they fly, and shoot the inverted dart.
RYNOLD is wounded. -- Still he urged the foe;
While down his limbs the crimson torrents flow:
With eager voice he still foments the strife,
Preferring ALBION's liberty to life.
"An ancient pile uprear'd its rev'rent head,
And from its lofty seat surveyed a mead:
The mouldering walls confessed their beauty past;
A fragment falls with each invading blast.
Old arms above the gate time's empire own;
The rampant lion moulders in the stone:
Tall elms around, an old and shattered band,
Their naked arms erect, like centries stand.
"Within the ruined walls their fear enclose
The desperate squadrons of the flying foes.
An ancient plane, whose leaf-dismantled weight
Rude winds o'erturn'd, secures the shapeless gate.
On every side my quick array I form,
Prepared at once the muniment to storm.
Missing my sire, I fly to find the chief,
And give the wounded all a son's relief.
"Far on the plain the wounded warrior creeps,
And scarcely moves along his tottering steps;
But still, far as his feeble voice could bear,
He kindles with his words the distant war.
Quick I approached: -- He first the silence broke;
And leaning on his lance, the warrior spoke."
"Say, why returns young ALPIN from the fight?
Pursue the foe, and urge the DANISH flight.
I sink, my son, I sink into the grave;
You cannot me, your country, ALPIN, save."
No more he said. -- I, mournful, thus reply,
Compassion melting in my filial eye,
O sire, the DANES, within yon walls secured,
Will share our pity, or must feel our sword:
Of filial duty what his wants require,
I come to offer for a dying sire."
"He thus returns: still good, still generous mind!
My wants are, ALPIN, of no earthly kind:
The world, the fading world, retires from view;
Earth cloys me now, and all it has, but you.
Go, ALPIN, go; within that lofty wood
A hermit lives, a holy man and good!
Relieve, my son, relieve me of my cares,
And for the dying RYNOLD raise his prayers."
"Thus said; -- himself the wounded warrior laid,
Within the coolness of a birchen shade:
Some youths around employ their friendly care,
And over the dying shed the mournful tear.
Around the ancient fastness guards I sent;
And to the lofty wood my journey bent.
Two rising hills, whose brows tall pop'lars grace,
With stretching arms a woody plain embrace;
Along the tree-set vale a riv'let flowed,
And murmured softly through the under-wood:
Along the purling stream my steps I bear,
And seek the lonely mansions of the seer.
Irreg'lar files of towering elms embrace,
In their calm bosom, an enameled space.
Full at the end a rock with sable arms,
Stretched over a moss-grown cave, a grotto forms.
A silver stream, clear-issuing from the stones,
In winding mazes through the meadow runs;
Depending flowers their varied colors bind,
Hang over the entrance, and defend the wind.
On a green bank the holy seer is laid,
Where weaving branches cloud the checkered shade;
In solemn thought his hoary head's inclined,
And his white locks wave in the fanning wind.
"With rev'rent steps approaching, I began.
"O blessed with all that dignifies the man!
Who far from life, and all its noisy care,
Enjoy'st the aim of all that wander there:
Let, holy father, thy propitious aid
Guide dying RYNOLD through the deathful shade."
I said: -- the prophet heav'n-ward lifts his eyes,
Long fixed in solemn thought, and thus replies;
"Vain mortals! worms of earth! How can ye dare
To deem your deeds not providence's care?
Heaven looks on all below with equal eye:
They long escape, but yet the wicked die.
With distant time, O youth! my soul's impressed;
Futurity is laboring in my breast:
Thy blood, which rolling down from FERGUS came,
Passes through time, a pure untained stream.
ALBION shall in her pristine glory shine,
And, blessed herself, bless the FERGUSIAN line.
"But ah! I see grim treason rear its head,
Pale ALBION trembling, and her monarch dead;
The tyrant wield his scepter 'smear'd with blood;
O base return! but still great heaven is good:
He falls, he falls: see how the tyrant lies!
And SCOTLAND brightens up her weeping eyes:
The banished race, again, resume their own;
Nor SYRIA boasts her royal saint alone.
Its gloomy front the lowering season clears,
And gently rolls a happy round of years.
"Again I see contending chiefs come on,
And, as they strive to mount, they tear the throne;
To civil arms the horrid trumpet calls,
And CALEDONIA by her children falls.
The storm subsides to the calm flood of peace;
The throne returns to FERGUS' ancient race.
Glad CALEDONIA owns their lawful sway;
Happy in them, in her unhappy they!
See each inwrapt untimely in his shroud,
For ever sleeping in his generous blood!
Who on thy mournful tomb refrains the tear?
O regal charms, unfortunately fair!
Dark FACTION grasps her in his sable arms,
And crushes down to death her struggling charms;
The rose, in all its gaudy liv'ry dressed,
Thus faintly struggles with the blustering west.
"Why mention him in whom the eternal fates
Shall bind in peace the long-discording states?
See SCOT and SAXON coalesc'd in one,
Support the glory of the common crown.
BRITAIN no more shall shake with native storms,
But over the trembling nations lift her arms."
He spoke, and in the cave enclosed his age:
In wonder lost I leave the hermitage;
Measure with thoughtful steps my backward way,
While to the womb of night retires the day.
Pale doubtful twilight broods along the ground:
The forest nods its sleeping head around.
Before my eyes a ghastly vision stood;
A mangled man, his bosom stained with blood!
Silent and sad the phantom stood confessed,
And showed the streaming floodgates of his breast.
Then pointing to the Dome his tardy hand,
Thither his eyes my silent way command.
He hands my sword, emits a feeble groan,
And weakly says, "revenge me, O my son!"
I to reply -- he hissed his way along,
As breezes sing through reeds their shrilly song.
I stood aghast, then winged me to obey;
Across the field I sweep my hasty way.
The men I arm; -- the firm barrier we ply;
And those who dare dispute the passage die.
With dying groans the lonely walls resound:
I on the guilty leader deal a wound;
Through his bright helm the sword its journey takes;
He falls, and thus with dying accents speaks:
"Just heaven! in vain the wicked shun thy power;
Though late thy vengeance, yet the blow is sure.
This earth received the blood from off my hands;
A just return, my own, my own demands!
In night's dead hour, when all, but treason, slept,
With ruffian bands, a bloody train, I crept.
'Twas here, 'twas here, oh! long-deserved death!
'Twas here the godlike man resigned his breath:
The sleeping fam'ly we with blood surprise,
And send the palace flaming to the skies.
I fled, but fled, alas! pursued by fate;
It Is now I find that I have sinned too late.
O MALCOLM! O my king! before my eyes
He stands confessed; -- accursed DOVALUS dies."
His guilty soul in these dire accents fled,
I left with hasty steps the silent dead.
Beneath the birch my aged sire I found;
His life was ebbing through the purple wound.
On me the aged senior lifts his eyes,
And mixes feeble accents with his sighs.
"ALPIN, the commerce of this world I leave,
Convey my relics to my father's grave.
Ten friendly youths the homely rites shall pay;
Lead thou the rest, my ALPIN, to the fray:
DENMARK invades: -- this was a pilf'ring band,
Who spread divided terror over the land."
He said: a qualm succeeds; tears fill my eyes,
And woe, securely, shuts the gates of voice;
Silent and sad I hang the dying over,
And with warm tears intenerate his gore."
The chief resumes: -- "my brave, my only son!
Yes, ALPIN, I may call thee all my own;
I shall not veil a secret in my death;
Take then this story of my latest breath:
The twentieth season liv'ries over the year,
Since on the SEVERN's banks I met the war;
In private feud, against a SAXON lord,
The great DUMBAR had raised his kindred-sword:
I on the foe my bow auxiliar bend,
And join afar our fam'ly's ancient friend:
Returning thence I next the TAY divide,
That very night the great King MALCOLM died.
My clan in arms might then preserve their king;
But Fate withstood; -- along in arms we ring.
An infant's cries, at distance, took my ear,
I went, found thee, a helpless orphan there.
The king, who long infix'd in dumb surprise,
Run over the speaking youth with searching eyes,
Here stopped him short, his arms around him flung,
And silent on the astonished warrior hung;
My son, my son! at last, perplexed, he cries,
My DUFFUS! -- tears hung in his joyful eyes:
The crouding tide of joy his words suppressed;
He clasps the youth, in silence, to his breast.
The astonished chiefs, congealed in dumb amaze,
Stiffen'd to silence, on each other gaze.
Sudden their cheeks are varied with surprise,
And glad disorder darted from their eyes.
As when before the swains, with instant sound,
The forky bolt descending tears the ground;
They stand; with stupid gaze each other eye:
So stood the chiefs oppressed with sudden joy.
At length, relaxed from fetters of surprise,
"Welcome, brave youth!" the sceptered senior cries,
"Welcome to honors justly thine alone,
Triumphant mount, though late, thy father's throne
To thee with joy the scepter I resign,
And waft the kingdom to the coming line."
He said: and thus the youth; "I only know
To shoot the spear, and bend the stubborn bow;
Unskilled to stretch over nations my command,
Or in the scales of judgment poise a land.
Wield still the scepter which with grace you wear,
And guide with steadier hand the regal car;
While, looking up to thee with humble eye,
I first transcribe my future rules of sway;
Till late enjoy the throne which you bequeath,
And only date dominion from thy death."
Resolved he spoke: -- bursts of applause around
Break on the chief: -- with joy the halls resound.
As when some valiant youth returns from far,
And leaves the fields of death, and finished war;
Whom time and honest scars another made,
And friendly hope long placed among the dead;
At first his sire looks with indifference on,
But soon he knows, and hangs upon his son.
So all the chiefs the royal youth embrace;
While joys, tumultuous, rend the lofty place.
While thus the king, and noble chiefs rejoice,
Harmonious bards exalt the tuneful voice:
A select band by INDULPH's bounty fed,
To keep in song the memory of the dead!
They handed down the ancient rounds of time,
In oral story and recorded rhyme.
The vocal quire in tuneful concert sings
Exploits of heroes, and of ancient kings:
How first in FERGUS CALEDONIA rose;
What hosts she conquered, and repelled what foes.
Through time in reg'lar series they decline,
And touch each name of the FERGUSIAN line;
Great CARACTACUS, FERGUS' awful sword;
That bravely lost his country, this restored:
HIBERNIA's spoils, GREGORIUS' martial fire;
The stern avenger of his murdered sire:
Beneath his sword, as yet, whole armies groan,
And a whole nation paid the blood of ONE.
At length descend the rough impetuous strains
To valiant DUFFUS, and the slaughtered DANES:
The battle lives in verse; in song they wound;
And falling squadrons thunder on the ground.
Thus, in the strain, the bards impetuous roll,
And quaff the generous spirit of the bowl;
At length from the elab'rate song respire;
The chiefs remove, and all to rest retire.
End of Canto fifth.
CANTO VI.
NOW, in the blushing east, the morn arose;
Its lofty head, in gray, the palace shows.
Within, the king and valiant chiefs prepare
To urge the chase, and wage the mountain-war.
The busy menials through the palace go;
Some whet the shaft, and others try the bow;
This viewed the toils; that taught the horn to sound;
Another animates the sprightly hound.
For the fleet chase the fair CULENA arms,
And from the gloom of sorrow'wakes her charms:
The Hero's royal birth had reached her ear,
And sprightly hope assumed the throne of care:
Around her slender waist the cincture slides;
Her mantle flows behind in crimson tides.
Bright rings of gold her braided ringlets bind;
The rattling quiver, laden, hangs behind.
She seized, with snowy hand, the polished bow,
And moved before, majestically slow.
The chiefs behind advance their sable forms;
And with dark contrast heighten all her charms.
Thus, on expanded plains of heavenly blue,
Thick-gather'd clouds the queen of night pursue;
And as they crowd behind their sable lines,
The virgin-light with double luster shines.
The maid her glowing charms thus onward bears;
His manly height, aside, young DUFFUS rears.
Her beauty he, his manhood she admires;
Both moved along, and fed their silent fires.
The HUNTERS to the lofty mountains came:
Their eager breasts anticipate the game:
The forest they divide, and sound the horn;
The generous hounds within their bondage burn:
Struggle for freedom, long to stretch away,
And in the wind already scent the prey.
At the approaching noise the starting deer
Crowd on the heath, and stretch away in fear;
Wave, as they spring, their branchy heads on high,
Skim over the wild, and leave the aching eye.
The eager hounds, unchain'd, devour the heath;
They shoot along, and pant a living death:
Gaining upon their journey, as they dart,
Each from the herd selects a flying heart.
Some urged the bounding stag a different way,
And hung with open mouth upon the prey:
Now they traverse the heath, and now assail
The rising hill, now skim along the vale:
Now they appear, now leave the aching eyes,
The master follows with exulting cries;
Fits, as he flies, the arrow to the string;
The rest within the rattling quiver ring:
He, as they shoot the lofty mountains over,
Pursues in thought, and sends his soul before.
Thus they with supple joints the chase pursue,
Rise on the hills, and vanish on the brow.
On the blue heavens arose a night of clouds;
The radiant lord of day his glory shrouds:
The rushing whirlwind speaks with growling breath,
Roars through the hill, and scours along the heath:
Deep rolling thunder, rumbling from afar,
Proclaims with murmuring voice the aerial war:
Fleet lightenings flash in lawful streams of light,
Dart through the gloom, and vanish from the sight:
The blustering winds through heavens black concave sound,
Rain batters earth, and smokes along the ground.
Down the steep hill the rushing torrents run,
And cleave with headlong rage their journey on;
The lofty mountains echo to the fall;
A muddy deluge stagnates on the vale.
CULENA moved a long the level ground;
A heart descends before the opening hound:
From the recoiling chord she twang'd the dart,
And pierced the living vigor of the heart:
He starts, he springs; but falling as he flies,
Pours out his timorous soul with weeping eyes.
As over the dying prey the huntress sighed,
Before the wind heaven pours a sable tide,
And lowering threats a storm: A rocky cave,
Where monks successive hewed their house and grave,
Invites into its calm recess the fair:
The reverend father breathed abroad his prayer.
The valiant DUFFUS comes with panting breath,
Faces the storm, and stalks across the heath.
His sleeky hounds, a faithful tribe, before,
Are bathed with blood, and varied over with gore.
Drenched with the rain, the noble youth descends,
And, in the cave, the growling storm defends.
Amazed, astonished, fixed in dumb surprise,
The lovers stood, but spoke with silent eyes:
At length the distant colloquy they rear,
Run over the chase, the mountain, and the deer.
Far from the soul the evasive tongue departs,
Their eyes are only faithful to their hearts.
The winding volumes of discourse return,
To hostile fields by gallant DUFFUS shorn.
The Imperial maid must hear it over again,
How fell DOVALUS was by DUFFUS slain:
How, by the son, the father's murderer fell.
The kindling virgin flames along the tale.
She turns, she quakes, and from her bosom sighs,
And all her soul comes melting in her eyes.
Flames, not unequal, all the youth possess,
He, for the first, hears willingly his praise.
Praise, harshly heard from warriors, kings and lords,
Came down in balm on fair CULENA's words.
The royal pair thus fed the mutual fire,
Now speak, now pause, when both alike admire.
He longs to vent the passion of his soul,
And she the tempests in her bosom roll.
Now he begun; but shame his voice oppressed;
Loath to offend, his eyes must tell the rest.
At length, upon the headlong passion born,
He spoke his love, and had a kind return;
She sighed, she owned, and bent her modest eyes,
While blushing roses on her cheeks arise.
Thus, on the vale, the poppy's blushing head,
Brimful of summer-show'rs to earth is weighed,
Fanned with the rising breeze it slow inclines,
While over the mead the rosy luster shines.
INDULPH into his cave the hermit led,
Found erring through the mountains stormy head.
CULENA, starting as the king appears,
Looks every way, and trembles as she fears:
On her mild face the modest blushes rise,
And fair disorder darted from her eyes.
The parent-king observed the virgin whole,
And read the harmless secret in her soul.
A while the maze of calm discourse they wind;
At length the king unveils his royal mind.
"Warded from ALBION's head the storm is over;
Her prince is found, her foes are now no more:
Through time it is ours her happiness to trace;
It Is ours to bind the future bands of peace.
Posterity for ALBION's crown may fight,
And couch ambition in the name of right;
With specious titles urge the civil war,
And to a crown their guilty journey tear:
I end these fears: -- the streams shall run in one;
Nor struggling kindred strive to mount the throne.
I shield my daughter with young DUFFUS' arms,
And bless the warrior with CULENA's charms."
Thus said the king. Their willing hands they join:
The rev'rent priest runs over the rites divine.
The solemn ceremony closed with prayer;
And DUFFUS called his own the royal fair.
The storm is ceased: the clouds together fly,
And clear, at once, the azure fields of sky:
The midday sun pours down his sultry slame,
And the wet heath waves glist'ring in the bea^.
The hunter chiefs appear upon the brow,
Fall down the hill, and join the king below:
Slow, through the narrow vale, their steps they bear;
Behind advance the spoils of Sylvan war.
Far on a head-land point condensed they stood,
And threw their eyes over ocean's sable flood;
Tall ships advance afar: their canvas-sails
In their swollen bosom gather all the gales;
Floating along the sable back of sea,
Before the wind they cut their spumy way;
Bend in their course, majestically slow,
And to the land their lazy journey plow.
Thus spungy clouds on heaven's blue vault arise,
And float, before the wind, along the skies;
Their wings opposed to the illustrious sun,
Shine, as they move, majestically on.
Thus godlike HAROLD brought his sloating aid,
Unknowing SUENO's numbered with the dead.
From ANGLIA's coasts he called his troops afar,
To aid his brother in the foreign war.
Arrived, he in the wave the anchor throws,
Attempts to land, and ALEION's chiefs oppose;
Wave on the fatal shore the pointed spear,
And send the arrow whizzing through the air.
The DANES return the flying death afar,
And, as they crowd away, maintain the war.
An arrow tore through air its murmuring path,
Fell on the king, and weighed him down to death:
Quick, from the wound, the blood tumult'ous sprung,
And over the sand the recking weapon flung:
Prone on the strand, an awful trunk he lies,
While sleep eternal steals upon his eyes.
The mournful chiefs around the dying stood,
Some raise the body, others stem the blood:
In vain their care; -- the soul for ever fled,
And fate had numbered INDULPH with the dead.
CULENA, whom young DUFFUS set apart,
With a green bank secured the hostile dart.
Her father's fate assailed her tender ear,
She beat her snowy breast, and tore her hair:
Frantic along the sand she run, she flew,
And on the corse distressful beauty threw:
She called her father's shade with filial cries,
And all the daughter streaming from her eyes.
Bent on revenge the furious DUFFUS strode,
And eyed, with angry look, the sable flood.
A ship, which near had took its nodding stand,
Fixed with the pitchy haulser to the strand,
Remains of SUENO's fleet, the Hero viewed,
And to the mournful warriors spoke aloud:
"Let these whose actions are enchain'd by years
Honor the mighty dead with friendly tears;
While we of youth, descending to the main,
Exact severe atonement of the DANE."
He thus: and rushing through the billowy roars,
With brawny arms his rapid journey oars
Divides with rolling chest the ridgy sea,
Lashing the bubbling liquid in his way.
The boat he seized, and, meas'ring back the deep,
Wafted his brave companions to the ship;
The haulser broke, unfurled the swelling sail,
And caught the vigorous spirit of the gale:
Before the sable prow the ocean parts,
And groans beneath the vessel as it darts.
Now on the foe the SCOTTISH warriors gain;
Swells on the approaching eye the floating DANE,
Fierce ULRIC's skill brought up the lazy rear,
Famed in the fields of main to urge the war.
Twice seven years, in base pursuit of gain;
He plowed the waves, the common foe of men;
At last to HAROLD aiding arms he joined;
Grasping the spoil with avaricious mind.
At first he shoots the leaping shaft afar,
And manages with skill the distant war.
The chiefs of ALBION with collected might,
Bear on the foe, and close the naval fight,
Deck joined to deck, and man engaged with man,
Sword spoke with sword, and SCOT transfixed his DANE.
The smoking oak is covered over with gore,
If the whole pyrate-crew are now no more.
The empty hull from wave to wave is tossed,
Nods as it floats, the sport of every blast.
The CALEDONIAN chiefs again pursue:
The SCANDINAVIAN fleet over ocean flew.
T'elude the foe the DANES fly different ways;
And cut with separate prows the hoary seas.
Some bear to sea, some rush upon the land,
And fly amain on earth, a trembling band.
As, in pursuit of doves, on rapid wings
The darting hawk through air his journey sings;
But when the parting flock divides the sky,
Hovers, in doubt this way or that to fly.
So undetermined long young DUFFUS stood;
At length he sighed, and thus begun aloud:
"While thus, O chiefs, we urge the flying DINE
Unmourn'd, unhonour'd lies the mighty slain;
It Is ours to grace with woe great INDULPH's
And over his fallen virtue shed (...)
The warrior spoke: the (...)
And with returning prow the waves divide,
With swelling sail bring on the fatal shore,
Where, over the dead, the aged chiefs deplor^
The warriors bear their monarch as they com^
In sad procession to the silent tomb;
Forsake with lazy steps the sounding main,
And move a sad and lamentable train.
Behind the dead the tuneful bards appear,
And mingle with their elegies the tear:
From their sad hearts the mournful numbers flow,
In all the tuneful melody of woe.
In grief's solemnity CULENA leads
A mournful train of tear-distilling maids:
Above the rest, the beauteous queen appears.
And hightens all her beauties with her tears.
N^ in the tomb the godlike INDULPH laid,
Shared the dark couch with the illustrious dead:
All over his grave the mournful warriors sigh,
And give his dust the tribute of the eye:
Removing, as the night inwrapt the sky,
They sha^ the nuptial ^east with solemn joy.
^e royal DUFFUS, with a husband's care,
^oth'd, in his martia^ arms, the sorrowing fair;
Over ALBION's rocks exerted his command,
And stretched his scepter over a willing land.
FINIS.

