A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE the LORD MAYOR THE ALDERMEN, AND
CITIZENS of LONDON, AT THE Cathedral CHURCH of St. PAUL, of FRIDAY the Twenty
Ninth Day of May, 1741.

BEING THE Anniversary Day of THANKSGIVING for the RESTORATION of King Charles
the Second, the Royal Family, and Government.

By JAMES TOWNLEY, M. A. Lecturer of St. Dunstan's in the East, and Chaplain to
the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR.

LONDON: Printed for FRANCIS GOSLING, at the Mitre and Crown in Fleetstreet.
MDCCXLI.

LAMBERT, Mayor. Tuesday the Ninth Day of June 1741, and in the Fourteenth Year
of the Reign of King GEORGE the Second, of Great Britain, etc.
IT is ordered that the Thanks of this Court be given to the Reverend Mr.
Townley, for his Sermon preached before this Court, and the Liveries of the
several Companies of this City, at the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, on Friday,
the Twenty Ninth Day of May last, being the Anniversary Day of Thanksgiving for
the Restoration of the Royal Family and Government; and that he be desired to
print the same.

MAN.

To the Right Honorable Daniel Lambert, Esquire LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY of LONDON.
My LORD,
I WOULD fain have suppressed this Sermon, being sensible that it is very
inaccurate and imperfect; but, as it is Your particular Order, that it should
appear in the World, it must entirely depend on Your LORDSHIP'S Patronage, for
a favorable Reception.

To insist on those Virtues that are so eminent in You, would be disagreeable
to a Person of Your LORDSHIP'S Temper, and only a Repetition of the Sentiments
of all Your Fellow-Citizens: But, since You have been pleased to admit me to a
great Degree of Intimacy with Yourself, and, by that means have made me a
Witness of Your Sincerity and Integrity, Your Goodnature and Generosity, Your
strict and impartial Execution of Justice, and, above all, Your Concern and
Regard for Religion, I cannot help taking this Occasion of publicly
acknowledging the Honor and Happiness I therein receive.

MAY that God, whose Worship and Service You endeavor to promote by the best
and most effectual Method, a good Example, shower down his Blessings upon You,
and prosper all Your Labors for the Welfare of the Nation in general, and, of
this City, in particular.

THIS is the hearty and sincere Prayer of

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obedient, and most obliged Servant, JAMES
TOWNLEY.

PSALM L. 14. Offer unto God Thanksgiving.
THE Prophet Samuel, in his Reproof to Saul, styles his Successor 1 Samuel xiii.
14.
The Man after God's own Heart: Which Character was exemplified in no one
Instance more, than in that thorough Knowledge Holy David had of the Will of
God, with regard to the Service he expects from his Creatures.

OF this Knowledge likewise the Asaph.
Author of this Psalm had a large Share; Vid. Patric. Comment.
whose Words King Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. xxix. 30.
commanded the Levites to make use of, with those of David, in the House of the
Lord. -- He was fully sensible that the Obedience God requires from Men is that
of the Heart -- The Sacrifice of their Wills; far more pleasing to him than
Incense or 1 Samuel xv. 22.
the Fat of the Rams.

AND the Reason of this is evident: For, if a Man reflects, He will find, that
his Will is that alone which he can properly call his own, and therefore the
only Sacrifice he can offer unto the Almighty. To offer unto him
Burnt-offerings, Psalm.
the Bullock out of thine House, or He-Goat out of thy Flock, is to offer unto
him what is his own; since all the Beasts of the Forest are his, and so are the
Cattle upon a Thousand Hills. I know, says God, all the Fowls upon the
Mountains, and the wild Beasts of the Field are in my Sight. If I be hungry I
will not tell thee, for the whole World is mine, and all that is therein.
Think thou that I will eat Bull's Flesh, and drink the Blood of Goats? Then
it follows (as a full Declaration of what Sacrifice God is delighted with, and
a Command moreover to perform the same) Offer unto God Thanksgiving.

NOTHING but supine Indolence, and the utmost Indifference to Things of a
spiritual Nature, can make this Duty so neglected among Men, and suffer the
Goodness of God to pass away with so little Regard. The Mercies which he is
pleased, each Day to confer upon us, seem to have no other Effect (with the
Generality I mean) that to make us confident of a Succession of them the
following Day: No other Effect, than to assist us in flattering ourselves, that
we are the peculiar People of God; and to teach us to presume, that he, who
has ever been mindful of us, will ever continue to be so. -- Yet this is not
the Whole of the Case -- For it is observable that those Persons, who are so
unmindful of the Blessings of God, who permit such repeated Instances of his
Mercy to slip out of their Minds, without any Mention, or Acknowledgment of
them, are the first to complain, and murmur, if an Accident disappoints their
Schemes and Designs, or any thing falls out contrary to their Wishes and
Inclinations. -- Surely, this is a most notorious Indication what Strangers we
are to God, and the Ways of his Providence; and how wholly our Minds are busied
and delighted with the Affairs of this World!

A SIGNAL Act indeed of Mercy, a Mark of God's special Providence will raise in
many Men a sudden Spirit of Gratitude; a certain Warmth, and Eagerness to give
Praise unto God. -- But soon does that Spirit subside. -- Variety of Diversions
and Hurry of Business quickly damp that Fire, and introduce Luke-warmness and
Indifference. -- But if the Blessing received be remembered for a Time; it is
often remembered in wanton Gratitude, expressed by unseemly Mirth and Jollity,
and most frequently ending in Excess and Intemperance. -- So evident is that
Truth; That if the common and daily Mercies of God cannot awaken in us a Spirit
of Gratitude, neither shall we be persuaded to a constant Practice of this
Duty, though the most extraordinary Act of Mercy were wrought in that Behalf.

THANKSGIVING is distinguished from Praise as it is a more confined Duty; or
rather a Part of that general one. -- It has respect to those Blessings and
Mercies which concern ourselves; whereas Praise terminates in God, with regard
to his own great, and infinite Perfections.

THANKSGIVING consists in a grateful Sense of any Mercy we have received from
God; expressed by such outward Signs as are most agreeable to our Joy -- It
implies not only a present Acknowledgment of his Favors, but such a constant
Remembrance of them, that no worldly Honors, or Success can deface, or blot
out of our Minds. -- Moreover, it includes a due Reflection on those Favors,
and requires, that we set a just Value on them; omitting no Circumstance that
may heighten their Excellence -- But this Duty is best expressed when the
Mercies of God excite in us a Love and Reverence of his Name, and an hearty
Desire, and sincere Endeavor to present ourselves Romans xii. 1.
a living Sacrifice holy acceptable unto him.

HEREIN consists the Duty of Thanksgiving -- How reasonable an one it is, every
Man must at once confess, when he considers to whom it is to be paid -- To him
who first gave and still continues our Being -- To him who has created all
Things in Heaven and Earth for our Comfort and Convenience -- Jam. i. 5.
Who gives liberally, and upbraideth not, requiring, as a Return for his
Kindness, the Acknowledgment of it; and the Performance of some Duties, that
are by no means difficult to practice -- Whose Providence watches over us, at
all Times, in every Place, and under all Circumstances, when we are rash and
inconsiderate, when we are careless and negligent, and when we are buried in
Sleep, and cannot so much as think how to secure ourselves, or any thing
belonging to us -- Who is so gracious as to call us his Friends, and under that
endearing Relation, to admit us to a free Intercourse with himself; permitting
us to call him Father, and to make known our Requests unto him, by Prayer and
Supplication -- Who with an Eye of Pity beholds our Sorrows, relieves our
Wants, assists our Infirmities, and sends us Strength and Patience to support
ourselves under Trials and Afflictions. -- But, above all, who has sent his
only begotten Son, from his own right Hand, into the World, to take upon him
our Nature, and its Infirmities; to die in our stead, and by his Death to make
us Inheritors of Life and Glory; and who, when, through our manifold
Transgressions, we provoke him to Wrath, at the Intercession of his Son, does
still forgive us, and suffers not his Displeasure to arise.

THERE is one Circumstance which must greatly recommend this Duty to us, and
that is, its Excellence. -- We cannot pay a more acceptable Service to our Lord
than Thanksgiving: A service which, of all others, he is most delighted with:
Nay, which he is pleased to distinguish in a very peculiar manner; Ps. l. 23.
Whosoever offers me Thanks and Praise he honors me. Honors God? -- How
emphatically does this Expression set forth the Excellence of Thanksgiving, and
graciously encourage us in the Performance of the Duty? Let it not then be
termed a mercenary one; let it not be construed to proceed from Selfishness;
since there cannot be that Principle in any Man's Heart, who makes the utmost
Return he is able, for a Benefit received. -- No, Selfishness is the Parent of
Ingratitude; a Sin most unpardonable in us, and most detestable in the Sight of
God. But Thankfulness proceeds from another Principle; a Principle of Love
derived to us from the Fountain of Love, God himself. -- It is not an Address
of Interest, a Petition to him for more Blessings; it is an humble
Acknowledgment of his excellent Mercy and Goodness, in what he has already
bestowed.

THE Reasons and Occasions of the Duty, must, of necessity, make it a pleasant
one: Because the Recollection of every Mercy is a kind of second Enjoyment. We
are assured by one who was very conversant in it, that, Ib. cxlvii 1.
it is a joyful and pleasant Thing to be thankful. It must besides administer
great Delight to the Mind, as it enlarges its Powers, and raises it from low
and trifling Objects, which darken and debase it, to that great and noble one,
the Divine Being.

SUCH is the Nature, Reasonableness and Excellence of Thanksgiving; a Duty
required from, and incumbent upon all since all have tasted of the Mercies of
God.

THE same Obligations which affect every Individual, for the particular
Instances of Kindness shown to him, will respectively affect all Communities
and Bodies of Men, and consequently all States, and Kingdoms.

IT must be confessed by ourselves, and all others who are acquainted with our
History, that this Nation has experienced the most sensible Marks of the Divine
Favor; has been most signally and wonderfully preserved, in Times, both of the
greatest Danger, and most extreme Necessity. -- The God of Hosts has often gone
out with us to Battle. --

YEA, We had, at this Time, received the welcome News of the taking the Forts
and Castles of Carthagena, and were in expectation of soon hearing that the
Town itself was taken.
at this Instant (I speak with all due Deference) we have some Reason to
believe, that Ps. cxxiv. 1.
The Lord is on our Side; that he has most graciously answered our Petitions,
and is See the Additional Prayer for the War.
gone forth with our Fleets and Armies.

THIS is a Mercy, not which our Fathers have told us; but which we do now see
and hear; and which loudly calls for our most devout Thanks to the Author: And
with them our further Prayers that he would be pleased to continue to us his
Favors, and to preserve that Great Man, Who, truly sollicitous for the public
Good, left his Ease and Retirement, to enter upon a painful and hazardous
Expedition; Who departed not in the Spirit of Revenge, but with an Heart full
of Courage, and Resolution, equalled only by his Prudence, and Moderation: In
Whose generous, and honest Breast the Love of his Country appears to be the
governing Principle, and Who seems to rejoice, that it has pleased God to make
him the Instrument of recovering its just Rights; of chastising a faithless and
insolent Enemy.

After two rigorous Winter Seasons (the first of which was very remarkable) and
a long excessive Drought, when our old Stores were greatly exhausted, and a
most melancholy Prospect before us, it pleased God to send a great Rain, which
was universal, and has produced one of the most plentiful Harvests, ever known
in this Kingdom.
ANOTHER Mercy, for which we, at this Time, stand obliged to our Gracious
Preserver, is that glorious Prospect of the Fruits of the Earth, springing up
to supply our present great Necessity; the Effect only of his Goodness, Ps.
lxviii. 9.
who sent a gracious Rain on his Inheritance, and refreshed it when it was
weary. These are Blessings which we are now sensible of, and which require our
sincerest Thanks to the boutiful Giver; Whom, with all Humility, we are to wait
on for a Continuance of these Mercies; trusting that he will finish what he
has begun, that he will preserve us in our Dangers abroad, and our Necessities
at home, that he will both Ib. exlvii. 14.
make Peace in our Borders, and also fill us with the Flour of Wheat.

THE best Method by which we can most reasonably hope to see our Desires
answered, to behold the Completion of these Blessings, is gratefully to
acknowledge those Instances of the Divine Goodness, which were shown to us
heretofore. -- Of these, none more deserves our best and heartiest Thanks, than
the great Deliverance of this Day: Which, it is to be hoped, will be had in
Remembrance, as long as that Constitution shall last which was reestablish'd by
it.

To remember this Mercy is not the Work of the Lips, but of the Heart. -- It is
to reflect, with Seriousness upon it; to learn how to value it; and to look
into every Circumstance that may help to show us the true Value of it. -- It is
to draw such Inferences from it that may direct our Practice, and assist us in
the several Duties of Life. -- To entertain from thence just Notions of the
Relations we bear to each other, and of the Obligations arising from such
Relations. -- Particularly, To learn from thence Obedience to the King, and all
that are put in Authority under him: To endeavor to preserve the Peace and
good Order of the Community in which we live: To show good Offices to our
Friends and Neighbors, and to bear a good Will toward all Men; To restrain
every inordinate and turbulent Passion in our Minds that may incline us to
change, or lead us beyond the Bounds of Equity, Truth, and Reason. -- Above
all, To love and fear, and honor him who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
and to frequent the Service of that Church, which his Providence has
established in these Kingdoms.

THE Blessing, which we, this Day, stand so greatly indebted to Almighty God
for, is The having put an end to the great Rebellion by the Restitution of the
King, and Royal Family, and the Restoration of the Government, after many
Year's Interruption.

To be sensible of the great Value of this Blessing we need only look into the
History of that time, and reflect on the Anarchy, and Confusion that then
overspread the whole Nation.

WHEN that Form of Government, which was so agreeable to the Temper, and
Constitution of the People, and which was proved, by the Experience of many
Ages, to be the best Method of preserving to them their Rights, and Privileges,
nay, which the Usurper himself confessed to be the best Method of governing, by
instituting something of the like Kind, I say, when that excellent Form of
Government was destroyed, no Wonder that Disorder was the Consequence; when
Judges xvii. 6.
there was no King in this our Israel, it is no matter of Amazement, that every
Man did that which was right in his own Eyes. -- After that Effusion of noble
Blood, and the black unparalled Murder of the best of Kings, how soon did
Oppression spread its dark Wings over this unhappy Nation! How soon were those
deluded Men, that were blindly led on by false and mischievous Guides, made
sensible of their Error! And how quickly did they perceive, that That Liberty,
which they thirsted after, even unto Blood, was only made a popular Pretense to
reduce them to the most abject Slavery! -- Thus being grossly deceived, and, by
the most scandalous and false Representations, urged on, through the most
unwarrantable means, to seek Freedom, did they plunge themselves into the very
Gulf of Tyranny; and, madly striving to depose one that was imaginary,
suffered themselves to be evil entreated by many real Tyrants. -- What Envy,
Injustice and Bitterness of Heart was there in every Society! What Malice,
Jealousy, and Suspicion! What Schemes and Designs! What Plotting and
Contrivance! Each Faction, by all the Methods and Arts that the most fiery Zeal
could suggest, striving for the Superiority: Professing Sincerity, Meekness and
Humility, Full of Pride, Rage, and Perfidiousness. -- For how was the sacred
Name of Religion then prostituted, and the Honor and Service of God made a
Cloak to palliate the most enormous Crimes; made the Means not only of
practicing, but justifying the most notorious Instances of Oppression and
Cruelty? -- Surely, more flagrant Hypocrisy, carried to greater Heights, and
attended with stronger Aggravations, never yet appeared in the World! An
Hypocrisy equal in every Circumstance and Character to that of the Pharisees,
and well deserving those severe Matt. xx ii.
Denuntiations pronounced against it by the Mouth of Truth.

THE faithful Loyalist, in the mean while, deprived of all Power, all probable
Means of assisting, or bringing back the King, could only show his Affection
toward him in good Wishes and Inclinations; which the excessive Violence and
Fury of the prevailing Party, would not suffer to extend even to Words. The
Treachery of some compelled him to confine his Thoughts to his own Bosom; as
the Avarice, and Rapine of others, obliged him to conceal his Substance where
it was most likely to be secured. -- How grievous an Heartbreaking must it
have been to him; to Every Man of old English Principles, first to behold a
Prince, of so much Goodness, rudely seized on, and inhumanly murdered by his
own Subjects; Then to see his Son, and the rest of the royal Issue, in their
tender Years, drove from the Kingdom; The purest Christian Church overthrown,
and trampled on; and private Property no better secured than by Faction, and
Opinion!

IN this miserable Situation of Affairs, some Attempts were made toward a
Re-establishment, but without Success. Alas! All human Means were too weak to
recover the Peace of the Kingdom; to place so distracted a Government on its
ancient Basis. Nothing Matt. xxiii.
but the Hand of Providence could effect so mighty a Work, and reconcile so
many contending Parties and jarring Opinions. 'Twas not in the Arm of Flesh;
'twas the Peculiar only of God to cause those Ezekiel. xxxvii.
dried Bones to live. And it was he that did, in his appointed Time, renew a
right Spirit within the People of this Nation: That did Ibid. xi. 19.
take away the stony Heart out of their Flesh, and give them an Heart of Flesh.
'Twas through him alone that Ibid. xxxvi. 3^.
This Land, that was desolate, did become like the Garden of Eden, and the wast
and ruined Cities become fenced and were inhabited.

FOR this Cause therefore let us Dan. iv. 37.
praise, and extol and honor the King of Heaven, all whose Works are Truth,
and his Ways Judgment. Who did Ps. lxvi. 11.
suffer men to ride over our Heads, but, at last, brought us out into a wealthy
Place: Who, in our Troubles and Adversities, did turn and refresh us; who
remembered us in our low Estate, and turned away the Captivity of his People.
-- Is there any one then, among this People, that will refuse to pay to
Almighty God, his annual Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving for so wonderful a
Blessing? -- The Man in whom the Return of this Day does not create Joy, and
raise a Spirit of Gratitude, would have looked upon the Confusion, that
preceded the Restoration, with Pleasure and Complacency: And what a Friend to
his Country, such an one is like to prove, the meanest Capacity may judge. --
Every Satisfaction we enjoy, every new Acquisition we make, every thing that is
dear to us, more especially our Religion and Liberties, are derived to us from
thence. -- To be insensible therefore of this Blessing, were to act most
absurdly indeed, were to indicate that we are even Enemies to our own selves.

HE, whose licentious Tongue, instructed and directed by a wicked Heart, can
rail at, object against, and vilify the truly happy Day we are now remembering,
should consider (if nothing else can stop his Virulence and Detraction) that he
is obliged to that Day's Success for the very Freedom of Speech he is pleased
so intemperately to make use of.

I KNOW not how far Men may be carried by their Humors and Passions; How far
an Affectation of Singularity may incline some, how far a Spirit of Party may
compel others, and how far Indifference and the Distance of Time may be a Cause
in more, of omitting this their Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving; but this
may be said with some Degree of Assurance, That no one, who has a due Regard
for the Honor and Dignity of the Crown, a tender Concern and temperate Zeal
for the Established Church, and an Heart glowing with the Love of Liberty, that
no one can, consistently with these Principles, neglect his Duty on this Day,
and be blameless. -- If a Man will be searching for Excuses, the only possible
Method, by which he can requit himself in this Case, is to doubt the Truth of
the Fact: A Scheme, which may not seem so full of Absurdity, if Skepticism in
History be as flagrant as it is in Religion.

-- Neither do I see with what Reason any one can insinuate himself into
another's Favor, by Misrepresentations of the important Transaction of that
Day, and by depreciating the Character of the King, then restored. With Men of
honest and generous Principles, it has ever been held a Mark of a mean spirit,
to commend one Man by aspersing another. How much more then is it a sign of
base Servitude, to extol one Prince (whose Virtues are too well known to need
such low Helps) at the Expense of debasing another, who wore the same Crown
before him! It amounts to more than a Supposition, that he, who can be guilty
of such Behavior, would, at a fit Opportunity, and under favorable
Circumstances, turn a vile Traitor, and even whet his Sword against the
Gracious Sovereign now set over us. As it is our Duty to pay the greatest
Reverence to his sacred Person, so let the Memory of the other be ever dear
unto us: Of Him, who, as on this Day, returned to his Kingdom, with the
universal Acclamations of his People, rejoicing with one Heart and united
Hands, to see their ancient, their best Constitution restored; to behold, once
again, the glorious Face of Monarchy, Episcopacy, and Liberty.

IT has pleased God, out of his abundant Mercy, to prolong the Lives of some
Persons, who were Eyewitnesses of that happy Day, even to these Times. But had
we no living Evidence of it, were the Distance of Time much greater than it is,
yet a Mercy so signal, and so excellent, can never be forgotten by us. We
cannot, without Forfeiture of our Reason, omit religiously observing a Day, the
joyful Effects of which we are every Moment sensible of. More especially in
this great and renowned City, which the rest of the Kingdom seem so industrious
to copy after, let this Day be ever held sacred. It were to degenerate from the
Spirit of our Ancestors not to acknowledge that Work with Joy, which they were
so sollicitous about, and which, under the Direction of Providence, they were
so remarkably instrumental in bringing to pass.

I WOULD use one Word more of Exhortation, which is, That we take care to
instill into those that come after, the same Sense of this Mercy, the same
Spirit of Gratitude, which we ourselves feel; Ps. lxxviii. 6.
That Posterity may know it, and the Children which are yet unborn, to the
intent that when they come up, they may show their Children the same. Josh. iv.
6.
That when your Children ask their Fathers in Time to come, saying, What
means this appointed Day, and this solemn Thanksgiving? That you shall let
your Children know, saying, This Land was defiled with Blood; the ancient and
free Government of this Kingdom, was overthrown and destroyed by wicked and
blood-thirsty Men, and the Lord delivered us from their Hands, by a stretched
out Arm: Ibid. iv. 24.
That all the People of the Earth might know the Hand of the Lord it is mighty,
and that ye might fear the Lord your God for ever.

THE Royal Psalmist (who had so often experienced the merciful Goodness of the
Lord, some Passages of whose Life the History of this Day is exactly parallel
to; who was driven out of his Kingdom by ungrateful and evil-minded Men, and
returned to it again with Joy and great Triumph) will put a Song of Praise into
the Mouth of every Man, who has a just Sense of this Day's Mercy, and reach him
thus to express his Thanks for it to Almighty God.

Ps. cxlv. 1.
I WILL magnify thee, (...) God my King, and praise thy Name for ever (...)
ever. Every Day will I give thanks unto (...), and praise thy Name for ever and
ever. Great is the Lord and mavelous, worthy to be praised, there is no End
of his Greatness. Ibid. cxlvii. 7.
O sing unto the Lord with Thanksgiving: Sing Praises upon the Harp, unto our
God: Ps. lxv. 7.
Who stille^ the Raging of the Sea, and the Noise of hi^ Waves, and the Madness
of the People. Ibid. cxlvii. 12, 13.
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Sion; for he has made fast the
Bars of thy Gates, and has blessed thy Children within thee, Ps. cxlv. 21.
My Mouth shall speak the Praise of the Lord, and let all Flesh give Thanks
unto his Holy Name for ever and ever.

FINIS.

