ELEGIES.

I. ON THE DEATH OF SAMUEL FOOT, ESQUIRE.

II. ON AGE.

BY THOMAS HOLCROFT, Of the Theater Royal, Drury Lane.

LONDON, Printed for J. BEW, in Paternoster Row. M DCC LXXVII.

[Price One Shilling.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
EVERY one who amuses himself with writing Works of Imagination, has a View to
either Profit or Fame. Though the Author of the following Trifles does not
pretend to be above such Motives, yet he hopes his Anxiety is not powerful
enough to render him unhappy one Moment, should he be entirely disappointed. He
is sensible how much Success depends upon Circumstances. A Poem must be read
before it can be admired; nay more, it must be read with some Share of that
Temper and Spirit in which it was written, or it will appear languid. A good
Character, or a bad one, given by those Gentlemen who take upon themselves the
Office of Public Censors in literary Matters, will frequently, at least for a
Time, determine its Fate. As he is entirely unknown, he is not in any Dread of
a partial Sentence. If these Poems are worthless, let them rest in that
Oblivion which is the utmost Happiness Unworthiness can know: if the contrary
happens to be the Case, he has no doubt but their Merits will be seen and
acknowledged by every one whom Heaven has blessed with Taste and Judgment
sufficient to form the true Critic.

ELEGY I. ON THE Death of S. FOOT, Esquire.

ELEGY.
I.
AH! what avails the fancied Lore of Man,
Or all the envied Gifts the Gods bestow?
His Wisdom Folly, Length of Time a Span,
His Life is Vanity, his Death is Woe!
II.
Could Wit protect, had Genius power to save,
Did they immortal Life with Fame impart,
Alexis never had known a dreary Grave,
Death never had drenched an Arrow in his Heart.
III.
Mourn, mourn, ye Spirits, who delight in Mirth;
In yonder Tomb Alexis breathless lies;
The Soul of Wit, that gave your Laughter Birth,
Inhabits, once again, her native Skies.
IV.
How fixed those Features which so well portrayed
The Cobweb Virtues of the canting Saint;
How dull those Eyes that could so well upbraid,
And Mimas' Vice in Mimas' Manner paint.
V.
Weep, ye who bend beneath the savage Rod
Of stern Oppression, spurning human Laws,
Your Champion, covered by yon senseless Sod,
Hears not your Griefs, or sure he would plead your Cause.
VI.
Rejoice, ye Sons of Rapine; Io! your Foe,
Who dragged your dark Misdeeds to public Shame,
Your scourge is fled, no longer shall ye know
The Stings of guilty Terrot at his Name.
VII.
Where Is now the pliant Muscle big with Whim,
The Eye that filled with Laughter every Face,
The various Voice, the oft-distorted Limb,
And all the mirth-fed Features of Grimace?
VIII.
How ghastly now his Grin! No latent Spark
Of newfound Wit sheds Dimples over his Cheek;
No heavy Blockhead dreads himself the Mark
On whom the biting Gibe shall shortly break.
IX.
Where now the Shouts that Theaters have rent,
While Laughter roared and begged to be relieved?
Ah! where the Plaudits every Hand has sent,
When Humor brought forth all that Wit conceived?
X.
Mourn, every MUSE, in Elegiac Song,
In Meter melancholic let if flow;
Adown the doleful Breeze your Griefs prolong
In Wails, and Sighs, and Tears, shrill sad and slow.
XI.
But oh! THALIA, be thy Sorrows loud,
Though all-unus'd to Accents so severe;
Ah! shed the Drop most precious over his Shroud,
For sure a Son like him deserves a Tear.
XII.
Full well he once was known thy dear Delight;
Thou never deny'd'st whatever he deigned to ask,
Thy choicest Pen was his whenever he would write,
And his, whenever he would act, thy choicest Mask.
XIII.
Ye shagged SATYRS leave the deep Recess,
The dark close Woodland, and the braky Dell;
Quit every pointed Weapon of Redress,
Hear! shriek and hear! your Fav'rite's passing Bell.
XIV.
No more we catch your Meaning from his Eye,
No more he wields the many-barbed Dart,
Or guides your galling Arrows as they fly,
To strike the guilty Sinner through the Heart.
XV.
Ye light-wing'd SPRITES, who sport in Fancy's Dome,
With Freaks and Bounds in antic Circles play,
Attend your kindred Genius to his Home,
Proclaim him welcome to the Realms of Day.
XVI.
Ye SYLPHS, who down the Sunbeams love to flit,
And round the Poet's Temples Laurel twine,
Or, jocund, on the dancing Ignis sit,
Or quaff from azure Streams aetherial Wine,
XVII.
Forsake your Sports; and, if you know to weep,
If ever your silken Lids sustain such Dew,
Here pour your Tears, -- behold, in endless Sleep,
The Swain who all your Haunts and Frolics knew!
XVIII.
Ye FAUNS and FAIRIES, wheresoe'er ye rove,
Over Hill, over Dale, or mid the Virgin Throng;
Ye NYMPHS, ye DRYADS, of the Brook, the Grove,
Who sing so sweet in many a witching Song;
XIX.
Come, FANCY'S OFFSPRING, every CHILD of VERSE,
Whatever Clime your printless Feet shall tread;
Assemble ALL, -- alternate Griefs rehearse,
In solemn Song funereal Honors shed.
XX.
And as ye pass the Mountain, Mead, or Dell,
Where lavish Nature strews her Gifts profuse,
From Hawthorn's Point, Grub's Beard, or Lilly's Bell,
Collect the Sweets that most delight the Muse.
XXI.
Bring every Spell and Charm, each Fruit and Flower,
Each Herb, each Plant to Poet fragrant found;
With all due Rites erect the Cypress Bower,
And bless the Turf, and consecrate the Ground.
XXII.
Then while coy Phoebe grants her glimmering Beam,
And flitting Ghosts entrance the fearful Eye,
On broken Vows while Maids, forsaken, dream,
And start and weep with many a mournful Sigh;
XXIII.
While wanton Rear-Mouse winds her mazy Rout,
And squeaks, to listening Glowworm, antic Song;
Your Vigils keep -- with shrill and sudden Shout
Scare each unhallowed Foot from forth your Throng.
XXIV.
Enough, fair FANCY, lightly bound away; --
Advance PHILOSOPHY. Lo! TRUTH appears,
Who, with her sober Mien, and moral Lay,
Foretells the sad Events of future Years.
XXV.
Young Ammon Alexander the Great.
, once admired, beloved, obeyed,
Grasped half the Globe, and daft the Hours away;
Crowns gave for Playthings, Slaves of Monarchs made,
Then dropped a little Lump of lifeless Clay.
XXVI.
Now what avails the fair historic Page,
Where all his Acts are blazoned to the World?
What though th'Antipodes once selt his Rage,
And against the Poles his Thunderbolts were hurled?
XXVII.
Had he not better far, in peaceful Lore,
Turned over the moral Page, and smiled serene,
Than, thus delighting in the Battle's Roar,
To Have made the shrieking World one tragic Scene?
XXVIII.
Lost is his Valor; lost, to him, his Fame;
He heeds not, hears not, RUMOUR'S fickle Blast;
And all who live to hear and read his Name
Are posting after him with heedless Haste.
XXIX.
With fancied Dignity important grown,
Man acts as though his Follies were to last;
Builds, plants, or mounts, perhaps, a thorn-strew'd Throne,
Dies, rots, and gives the Worms a short Repast.
XXX.
What melancholy Scenes salute his Eyes,
Prophetic Lessons of approaching Fate;
Still he pursues each Phantom as it flies,
And loses Happiness in finding State.
XXXI.
Blessed be the Sons of Science, Nymph sublime!
She lures her Children to the calm Retreat,
And solves the Problem, and suggests the Rhyme,
And to the dulcet Sound directs the Feet.
XXXII.
She prompts the Song to Love, to Peace, and Joy;
The matchless Music of Content she chants;
Her heaven-born Beauties never her Lovers cloy,
She knows no Sorrows, for she feels no Wants.
XXXIII.
She philosophic Temperance loves to cheer,
And bids to shun, like Death, imagined Ills;
Their Sweets are bitter through the plenteous Year
Who know no Medium to their wayward Wills.
XXXIV.
Blessed be Alexis! Science loves the Name;
He well approved him of her darling Race;
And be that Wretch accursed who damns his Fame,
Or would his little Follies backward trace!
ELEGY II. ON AGE.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE is not any Thing, I believe, which calls forth the melancholy and
sympathetic Passions more forcibly than a Sight of those Men who have once been
great or famous, and have outlived their Fortune or Faculties. Who can forbear
sighing when he beholds a BELISARIUS? Whose Heart is not wrung when he views a
SWIFT in his Dotage? -- Reflections of this Kind gave Birth to the following
Stanzas. They were written upon an old Man in a Country-Village, whose
Strength, Activity, and rustic Accomplishments, were once the frequent
Admiration of his Fellow-Swains; and when Age had deprived him of them, and
rendered him feeble and decrepid, the Remembrance of his past Exploits was
often the Subject of their Exclamations, and the honest Motive of their Pity
and Condolence, as well as the frequent Topic of his own Lamentation. The
Effect that this Remembrance had upon his Mind cannot, perhaps, be conveyed
more feelingly than by informing the Reader that the Sentence which I have
chosen for a Motto was common in his Mouth, and generally attended with a Sigh.

ELEGY.
There is a Time to be born, and a Time to die.
I.
I ONCE was young, alack the Day!
And Mirth and Jollity my Theme;
Now fourscore Summers, flown away,
Appear a half-forgotten Dream.
II.
I once could dance, who nimbler seen
When May Day Garlands decked the Pole?
Or, Prize proposed to glide the Green,
Who sooner reached the distant Goal?
III.
How slow and feeble now my Tread!
Those Feet which erst have won the Prize
Are only swift to reach the Bed
Where, undistinguished, Merit lies.
IV.
This Arm athletic once could raise
The massy Beam, the ponderous Stone;
Loud echoed forth the Village Praise
When I the whirling Quoit have thrown.
V.
Behold it withered, now, and weak,
Its brawny Texture quite forgot;
Its languid Pulse, slow winding, seek
The Mansion where to rest and rot!
VI.
When I into the Circle sprung,
What hardy Youth durst ever engage?
Who but would check his daring Tongue,
If, much provoked, he saw my Rage?
VII.
Where Is now the Terror of my Eye?
What Coward quakes though I should frown?
When agile Feats they yearly try,
Who brings to me the festive Crown?
VIII.
My auburn Ringlets, once so gay,
Could win the Sigh, the wishing Glance;
And envied went that Lass away
Who joined me in the rustic Dance.
IX.
My bald Head, sprinkled over with gray,
Wins nothing but predictive Tears,
Reminding Man, from Day to Day,
The Effects of much-desired Years.
X.
I once could sing, what Voice so sweet
Could charm an inattentive Ear?
Or move the merry-making Feet,
Or melt the sighing Virgin's Tear?
XI.
Who now delights to hear my Voice?
Who now shall press the cheerly Song?
Who now shall listen? who rejoice?
Or give the Praise they gave me young?
XII.
Alas! what Voice has drooping Age
To charm the sprightly Ear of Youth?
His Eye delights not in the Sage,
His Heart delights not in the Truth.
FINIS.

