AN ACCOUNT OF THE JAIL FEVER, OR TYPHUS CARCERUM: AS IT APPEARED AT CARLISLE
IN THE YEAR 1781.

BY JOHN HEYSHAM M. D.

Principiis obsta; sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
OVID. LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, J. MURRAY, R. FAULDER, AND J. MILLIKEN,
BOOKSELLER, CARLISLE. M.DCC.LXXXII.

PREFACE.
AS the Hospital or Jail Fever is already well known, and has been correctly
and minutely described by several writers upon the subject; I should not have
thought myself authorized to obtrude this account upon the public attention,
had not the treatment of the disease, which was adopted and successfully
pursued at Carlisle, appeared to differ in some circumstances from what has
hitherto obtained in general practice. This difference consists principally in
the more early application, and in the much freer use of Bark and Port Wine. A
caution seems to have been scrupulously adhered to, of not administering these
remedies until the last stage of the disease; by which delay the strength of
the patient has often been so totally reduced, that all applications of the
most tonic, stimulating, and corroborating medicines have sailed of effect.
With respect to the quantity of Wine, whereas Sir John Pringle never directed
more than a bottle in the day, and rarely so much, we have here prescribed from
one bottle to two bottles and an half daily, always with advantage, and without
any observable inconveniency from excess. The doses also of the Bark are nearly
double to those which the same eminent Physician usually exhibited.

If the medical reader be taught by this account to suspect the reserve with
which he has proceeded in the use of Bark and Wine to be unnecessary and
hurtful -- if further enquiry and experience encourage him in a more liberal
application of these valuable tonics and stimulants -- and if the lives of any
of our fellow creatures be thereby preserved, the publication of these papers
will have fulfilled every intention of their author.

CARLISLE, February 7th, 1782.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE JAIL, HOSPITAL, OR PUTRID FEVER, Typhus of Nosologists,
which is thus accurately defined by Dr. Cullen, "Morbus contagiosus; calor
parum auctus: pulsus parvus, debilis, pleruraque frequens; urina parum mutata;
sensorii functiones plurimum turbatae; vires multum imminutae." Synopsis Nosol.
method. tom. 2. p. 71.
Which raged at CARLISLE in the Year 1781.
ALTHOUGH this Fever neither arose in a Jail, nor a Hospital, yet it so exactly
resembles the Jail Fever, both in the symptoms, causes, and method of cure,
that I have not scrupled to treat of it under that name.

SECTION I. Of the History and Symptoms of this FEVER.
ABOUT the beginning of April an epidemic Fever began to make its appearance in
Carlisle, and continued to rage with more or less violence during the remaining
part of the year.

The rise, progress, and decline of this epidemic will be best ascertained by
examining the register of deaths, where I find that two fell victims to it, in
the month of May; four in June; four in July; eight in August; seven in
September; nine in October; eight in November; and six in December; in all
fifty two, including a soldier of the first regiment of Dragoons, and three
married women from the villages of Rockliffe and Warwick. Of this number, three
were boys; three were bachelors; fifteen were husbands; three were girls; two
were maids; twenty one were wives; and five were widows; so that above two
thirds of those who died were married people, In January 1780 there were 6299
inhabitants in Carlisle, of these 1019 were husbands; 1091 were wives; 91 were
widowers; 408 were widows; and the remainder were either children, bachelors,
or maids. Since that time there has been some increase, which however is not
ascertained, but which cannot be very considerable.
a circumstance, the cause of which, I perhaps may at some future opportunity
endeavor to investigate, at present I shall content myself with barely
mentioning the fact.

During the winter, we had no frost of any long duration, but the cold was,
considering the climate, sometimes very intense. The spring, upon the whole,
was mild and temperate. In May, June, and July, the weather was remarkably
warm, dry, and serene; and continued so till about the middle of August, when
the temperature of the air suddenly changed, and we had ten days or a fortnight
of cold wet weather. In September, the air was warm and moist; in October, it
was remarkably temperate and dry. November commenced with a smart frostt, which
however, continued but two days; the rest; of the month (the 22d and 23d days
excepted which were frost) was constantly wet, blowing weather. Till the 13th
of december, the air was remarkably dry, even to such a degree as to make the
roads du^ly; afterward it became moist, mild, and warm. On christmas day I
observed the common wild daisy, (viz. Bellis Perennis) in full blow. On the
28th there was a most violent storm of wind and rain from the west, which
continued for several hours.

This Fever chiefly, I may almost say entirely, raged amongst the common and
lower ranks of people; and more especially amongst those who lived in narrow,
close, confined lanes, and in small crowded apartments.

It affected adults more frequently than children, I never saw any children
under three years of age who were affected with it.
the infirm, than the robust, women than men, and the married were more subject
to it than the single. The first person seized with it in a family was seldom
the last, for in general more than one, often three or four, and sometimes the
whole family were affected with it one after another.

It was in a great measure confined to this place, very few being seized with
it in the neighboring villages, S^^e time in August, a young man who had
recov^^^^ f^^m this Fever, went home to a small village call^^ R^ckl^ffe, about
four miles from Carlisle, for the ben^^t of fresh air, etc. His mother was in a
little time seized with the Fever and died; a neighboring w^^^n who attended
her likewise caught it, and died; ^ut I have not heard that it spread any
further in that village. About the latter end of November, a child whose mother
died of the Fever, but who had not been affected himself, was taken to Warwick,
a neighbouri^^ village; the woman of the house where he stayed, w^^ soon after
seized with the Fever, and died in the space of five or six days; and since
that time, two or three other persons in the village have been affected. These
three women who died, and a soldier in the first regiment of dragoons are
included in the total number of deaths, though they are not mentioned in the
register.
or other large towns in the county.

It raged with more violence in the suburbs, than within the walls of the city,
and preva^led more without the Irish and Scotch, tha^ ^^t^out the English Gate.

I have endeavored to ascertain the number of persons who have been seized
with this Fever, and, from the best information I have been able to procure, it
appears that near six hundred have, at this time viz. January the 6th, 1782,
been affected with it; that is, about one in eleven or twelve of all the
inhabitants of Carlisle, and one in ten nearly of all who have been attacked by
the disorder have died.

These particulars being premised, which I think may afterward be of some use
toward ascertaining the exact nature of the epidemic, I shall now endeavor to
give a faithful history of the disease, or a brief and accurate narration of
the symptoms, as they appeared to me at the patients bedside.

This Fever constantly begins with a sensation of coldness and shivering,
somewhat resembling the fit of an ague, which however by no means continues so
long, or proceeds to such a violent degree; soon afterward the patient
complains of a pain in his head, and back, and sometimes in other parts of his
body; of nausea and sickness at stomach, but he seldom vomits; of great
lassitude, weakness, and weariness; of dejection of spirits; or heat frequently
alternating with the cold shivering fits; of thirst; and loss of appetite; his
sleep is also confused and disturbed with frightful dreams.

The pulse is weak and frequent, varying ^^om ninety, to a hundred and ten
strokes in a minute; the skin in general is dry; the tongue white but rather
moist; the urine is crude and pale, i. e. paler than urine usually made by a
healthy person; the belly in ge^^ral regular.

In this situation the patient for the most part, continues one, two, or
sometimes even three days, not altogether confined to his bed, but if left to
himself getting up and lying down upon the bed several times in a day.

This I shall denominate the first stage of the disorder.

According to the moderation or violence of the above symptoms, the patient is
confined entirely to his bed, on the second, third, or sometimes on the
beginning of the fourth day from the first accession of the cold shivering fit.
Almost all the symptoms now increase. The pain of the head becomes acute; the
debility is such, that the patient cannot be raised to an erect, or even
sitting posture for any length of time, without great danger of bringing on a
fainting fit; the appetite is totally gone; the thirst increases; a tremor of
the hands supervenes; the tongue becomes gradually dry, and brown, and when
thrust out of the mouth for examination is unsteady and tremulous; the
skincontinues dry; the urine pale and without sediment; the pulse becomes more
frequent and feeble, viz. from a hundred and ten, to a hundred and fifteen, or
even a hundred and twenty strokes in a minute.

The patient talks some what incoherently, yet knows his friends, and will
answer questions with tolerable distinctness. In this situation he continues
six, seven, eight, nine, ten, or eleven days, and from which, if the symptoms
do not increase, he gradually recovers. The acute pain of the head abates; the
thirst is more moderate; the urine becomes higher colored and deposits some
little sediment, the color and consistence of which is however various; the
pulse gets down gradually to a hundred, ninety, eighty, etc. and becomes at the
same time a little fuller and stronger; the patient, though he has no great
desire for food, yet is able to take a little when presented to him; and
lastly, his strength is restored by slow degrees.

The above is the more usual and favorable appearance and progress of the
disease; but often either from neglect or an improper treatment in the
beginning, or the patient's bad habit of body it puts on a more fatal and
alarming form.

The pain of the head continues; a putrid colliquative looseness comes on; the
tongue as well as base of the teeth are covered with a thick black crust, and
the patient is unable to thrust it out of his mouth, and loses the power of
speech and of swallowing.

Sometimes petechiae appear on different parts of the body, and in some cases
the whole surface of the body is covered with a scarlet offlorescence, which
however, soon disappears. The pulse becomes weaker and quicker, from one
hundred and thirty to one hundred and fifty strokes in a minute; the patient is
now altogethe rinsensible; the urine and faeces are voided without
consciousness; he knows not the bystanders; the delirium is however of the
low, not of the furious or outrageous kind.

His muscles become flaccid; he gathers the bed clothes (collectio floccorum);
he his affected with subfultus tendinum, convulsive startings and twitchings of
the muscles of the whole body; he gradually slides toward the foot of the bed;
his extremities become cold; a small quantity of blood sometimes distills from
his nostrils; his face has a livid and cadaverous appearance, and death which
soon follows these symptoms, puts a period to his sufferings.

After death broad livid blotches appear about the neck and shoulders, and
putrefaction soon takes place.

The appearance of the blood I am unable to describe, never having had an
opportunity of seeing or examining it.

Anomalous Symptoms.
A Diarrhaea sometimes occured in the first stage of the disorder, but whether
it was a symptom of the general weakness, or was occasioned by the bark and
other remedies, is uncertain; at all events, if possible, it was to be checked
immediately. In some cases the fever was attended with a cough, sometimes with,
at other times without expectoration; in other cases the pulse was by no means
so weak as is above represented. A difficulty of making water approaching
almost to a suppression of urine, with a swelling of the abdomen and evident
fluctuation, happened in one or two instances. A relapse did not occur to my
observation, and if it ever happened, it was very seldom.

Being persuaded of the general truth of the doctrine of critical days, I
looked for them in the present case with some attention, but as far as I could
observe, this Fever had no stated or certain duration; its terminations whether
in health or in death, by no means happened on certain fixed periods of the
disease, and were seldom or ever attended with the least appearance of a
critical discharge. Patients I believe died on almost every day of the Fever,
from the fifth or sixth, to the sixteenth or seventeenth. The salutary
terminations occurred as frequently on the non-critical as on the critical
days, a favorable change sometimes taking place on the sixth and seventh,
often on the eight, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth,
fifteenth, and sixteenth days from the accession of the disease, and in one
case no visible change for the better took place till the eighteenth day; but
liere the patient had not called in advice till the Fever had made considerable
progress.

In short, an early or a late, a salutary or a fatal termination of this Fever,
entirely depended upon the constitution of the patient, and the speedy
application of proper remedies. If the patient had a tolerable constitution,
and the bark and wine were given in large quantities, immediately after the
accession of the disease, he soon recovered; If on the contrary, the use of
these medicines was neglected for any length of time, he either died, or was
brought to the greatest extremities of weakness and danger, from which he
recovered exceeding flowly; but concerning these matters, I shall have occasion
to speak more fully in the last section.

Having thus related the most distinguishing symptoms of this Fever, I shall
now proceed to mention a few particulars respecting the prognostics.

SECTION II. Of the PROGNOSTICS.
ON this head I shall content myself with pointing out, first, those symptoms
which indicate a favorable issue; and secondly those which on the contrary
portend danger and death.

First, when the pulse, in the second stage of the disease, does not exceed one
hundred and twenty strokes in a minute, and grows slower, and stronger by the
use of wine and bark; when the urine by the same remedies becomes higher
colored, and deposits upon standing a little time a sediment; when the
delirium is not constant, but only occurs when the patient awakens out of
sleep; when the pain of the head is not violent, or if it has been violent,
upon the use of the remedies hereafter described abates; when the patient is
able to lie on his back or sides indifferently; when he is able to put out his
tongue, to swallow, and to answer questions distinctly, we may, in general,
promise a favorable termination.

But in the second place, if the pulse, notwithstanding a liberal and copious
use of wine and bark is feeble, and exceeds one hundred and thirty or one
hundred and forty strokes in a minute; if the urine continues crude and pale;
if the delirium is constant; if the looseness cannot be restrained by proper
remedies; if the urine and faeces are voided involuntarily; if the teeth are
covered with a black gummy matter; if the tongue is parched, black and chopped;
if the patient cannot articulate distinctly, or swallow, or put out his tongue
when desired; when he can only lie upon his back; when subsultus tendinum,
tremours of the hands, and convulsive startings in other parts of the body come
on; when he is affected with stupor; when he attempts to gather up the bed
clothes; when his extremities become cold, his face livid, and covered with a
cold clammy sweat, and he slides down the bed, death is at no great distance.

Petechiae which have by Physicians been justly deemed marks of malignity and
putrefaction in fevers of this kind, did not, according to my observation,
portend imminent danger; nor did a bleeding of the nose, unless occuring
together with other dangerous circumstances, appear to me to be an alarming
symptom; for several patients affected with one or the other of these symptoms,
if a sufficient quantity of proper tonic and stimulant remedies were thrown in,
recovered, and got through the distemper as well as others who were not affected
with them. But I must here remark that I never observed either petechioe, a
scarlet efflorescence or a bleeding of the nose in patients who began to take
the bark and wine early in the disease.

SECTION III. Of the Remote CAUSES of this FEVER, and particularly of the
Occasional CAUSE.
A Peculiar constitution, or temperament of the air has been often accused, and
perhaps in some cases with propriety, as laying the foundation of many
epidemical disorders; accordingly I thought it not improper to mention the
state of the weather, not only previous to the appearance, but during the rise,
progress and decline of this Fever, although I am inclined to think, in the
present instance, it was by no means a powerful agent.

Because, in the first place, this epidemic was in a great measure confined to
the city and suburbs of Carlisle, whereas the general state of the air must be
supposed to be nearly the same through the whole neighborhood, and more
especially in the adjacent villages, where, however, no disease of the kind
ever appeared, unless the seeds of it had been evidently carried, either by
some persons who had labored under the disease, or whose clothes, etc. had
been previously imbued with the contagion.

In the second place because the temperature of the air in the months of
October and November, (when the Fever raged with the greatest violence) was
different from what it had been in April and May, (the months in which the
disorder began to make its appearance) but similar to what it was in December
and January, when it was manifestly upon the decline.

If we therefore wish to discover the causes, which will be of no little
importance in ascertaining the true and precise nature of the disease, we must
attend to more local, circumstances than the general qualities of the air.

It is evident from the preceding history, that this Fever is extremely
contagious, i. e. it is evident that a subtle, active and virulent substance
is generated in, and escapes from the body of a person laboring under the
disease, which, when applied to a sound body, in particular circumstances, will
produce a similar affection; and thus it is propagated from one part of a
family to another; and from neigbour to neigbour. This active poison is by
physicians denominated Contagion, or more properly Human Effluvia.

How this poison operates on our systems is not thoroughly understood, but
under what circumstances it is first generated and produced, we are often, but
too well acquainted. It is the offspring of filth, nastiness, and confined air,
in rooms crowded with many inhabitants. Hence such Effluvia often originates in
ships, hospitals, and jails, of which many striking examples are upon record.

At the assizes held at Oxford in the year 1577, a putrid effluvia arising from
the prisoners at the bar infected a great part of the court with a pestilential
sever, of which upwards of three hundred persons died. Camden. Annal. Reg.
Elizab. Bacon. Mead.


Another very melancholy instance of the fatal effects of human effluvia
occurred in the year 1750, during the sessions at the Old Baily. At these
sessions near one hundred prisoners were tried, who were all during the sitting
of the court, either placed at the bar, or confined in two small rooms which
opened into the court. The court house was crowded with people, great numbers
of whom were almost instantly seized with the Jail Fever, and above forty died
of it; but the must remarkable circumstance is, that those only were affected
who were on the left hand side of the Lord Mayor, a stream of air from the
prisoners being directed to that side of the room, in consequence of a window
being opened on the other. All on the right hand side escaped, the putrid
effluvia being wafted from them to the opposite side.

In both these instances, it does not appear that the prisoners, either before
or after their trials, were affected with any particular distemper, resembling
that which seized so many, and of which they were supposed to have communicated
the contagion. Just before this sheet was going to be printed off, ^oster's
reports accidentally fell into my hands, in which, I find the following
observations. "It ought to be remembered that at the time this disaster
happened, there was no sickness in the Gaol more than is common in such places:
this circumstance, which distinguishes this from most of the cases of the like
kind which we have heard of, suggesteth a very proper caution, not to presume
too far upon the health of the Gaol, barely because the Gaol-Fever is not among
the prisoners.

For without doubt, if the points of cleanliness and free air have been greatly
neglected, the putrid effluvia which the prisoners bring with them in their
clothes, etc. especially where too many are brought into a crowded court
together, may have fatal effects on people who are accustomed to breathe better
air; though the poor wretches, who are in some measuve habituated to the fumes
of a prison, may not always be sensible of any great inconvenience from them.

The persons of chief note who were in court at this time and died of this
Fever were, Sir Samuel Pennant Lord Mayor for that year, Sir Thomas Abney one
of the Justices of the common pleas, Charles Clarke,Esquire; one of the barons of
the exchequer, and Sir Daniel Lambert, one of the aldermen of London. Of less
note a gentleman of the bar, two students, one of the under sheriffs, an
officer of Lord Chief Justice Lee, who attended his Lordship in the Court at
that time, several of the Jury on the Middlesex side, and about forty other
persons whom business or curiosity had brought thither."

Foster's Reports, p. 74.

In order to prevent such melancholy accidents happening in Courts of Justice,
it perhaps might not be improper to bathe the prisoners, and accommodate them
with clean clothes, or at least with clean linen immediately before they are
brought to the bar. Such regulations I apprehend would not be attended either
with much trouble or expense, and might be the means of preserving the lives of
many individuals, who may be serving, on these solemn occasions, their king,
and their country.


How then, it may be asked, could the disease be caught in consequence of any
effluvia arising from their bodies? If any putrid effluvia had been generated
amongst them during their confinement, would not they have suffered from it
sooner than others to whom it was afterward applied; in consequence of
diffusion in the air, and more especially as it is to be imagined that the
bodies of the prisoners were disposed to receive infection, from their being
fed on a poor watery diet, and from that anxiety which they must suffer from
their situations?

In answer to these questions let it be in the first place, observed, that many
of these prisoners had been long confined; many had been long accustomed to
filth and uncleanliness, in consequence of which the putrid effluvia would be
generated gradually, and for along time be constantly applied to their bodies
in small quantities, till it, at length, became as it were, their natural
atmosphere, when they would no more feel its influence, than the Tanner
perceives the smell of his tanyard, or the Chandler the smell of his putrid
tallow.

Further, the human body is possessed of the power either of accommodating
itself to, or resisting the effects of many active and noxious bodies, when
they are constantly and gradually applied in small quantities, which would
injure many of the functions of life, nay even in some cases bring on death,
were they given in large doses at first. This may be illustrated by the effects
of opium, of hemlock, and of tobacco on the human body. Every one knows, that a
person, by constantly accustoming himself to make use of these drugs, in small
quantities, will in time acquire the habit of taking without danger a quantity
at one dose which would either injure the health, or even destroy the life of
another person.

It Is presumed to be upon this principle that physicians and surgeons visit
the sick with so much impunity. They are frequently exposed to the infection,
but rarely in contagious diseases stay any considerable time with the patient,
by which means they never imbibe a large quantity of the contagious matter at
any one time, at least till their constitutions have acquired the power of
resisting its effects.

For examples of the production and effects of human effluvia in hospitals,
ships, and camps, the reader may consult Huxham, Priagle, and Lind.

But jails, hospitals, ships, etc. are not the only places in which this poison
may be produced; it may be generated in any close room or apartment where a
great number of inhabitants are crowded together, and where little attention is
paid to cleanliness. In the instance of this disease which prevailed at
Carlisle, although we perhaps may not be able to point out the particular house
in which the cause of the Fever orginated, yet I think we may without much
hesitation pronounce that the occasional cause of it is human effluvia, which
has been generated in some little dirty confined place, of which there are
great numbers in Carlisle, and every other large manufacturing town. When I
surveyed this town and suburbs, I had an opportunity of seeing many scenes of
poverty, of filth and nastiness; and in the bills of mortality for the year
1779 the following observation is made.

"Nervous and putrid severs are not very frequent; no more than five have
suffered by both these diseases, which must appear somewhat astonishing to one
who knows how many inhabitants there are of the lowest rank, who are crowded in
close and small apartments where they sleep, eat and prepare their victuals;
whose food cannot be the most nutritive; who seldom change their clothes; and
who pay but little attention to cleanliness."

Thus it appears probable that human effluvia was the occasional cause of this
Fever. We have only to observe that it never seemed to produce fever, except in
cases either where it was applied as it immediately issued from its sources,
and especially where it was accumulated from want of ventilation, or where it
was communicated by means of clothes, etc. that had been used by the person
laboring under the fever, in which it may be long retained. Nor was it in
general so virulent and active as to produce any noxious effects, unless in
concurrence with some other remote causes, concerning which we shall now speak.

Since I had arranged the above particulars from my notes, I have upon enquiry,
discovered the precise place where this Fever began; about the latter end of
March or the beginning of April. It was in a house in Richard-Gate, which
contains about half a dozen very poor families; the rooms are exceeding small,
and in order to diminish the window tax, every window that even poverty could
dispense with was shut up, hence stagnation of air, which was rendered still
more noxious by the filth and uncleanliness of the people. The surgeon who
attended some of these poor wretches, told me, the smell was so offensive and
disagreeable that it was with difficulty he could stay in the house, while he
enquired into the situation of his patient.

One of the persons affected with the Fever in this house was a weaver, who, on
his recovery, went to his usual employment at a large workshop, where he
communicated the disorder to his fellow weavers, and from thence the Fever
spread all over the town.

SECTION IV. Of the Causes which predisposed, or rendered the body more liable
to be affected by the occasional Cause when applied.
CONCERNING these causes which, as is were, prepared the body for the action of
human effluvia, it is not my intention at present to enlarge much. Without
attempting to explain their mode of operation, I shall deem it sufficient
briefly to enumerate them. They are evidently such as have a tendency to weaken
and debilitate the whole body; and more especially the nervous and muscular
fibers; and may I think be comprised under the following heads.

1. A poor watery diet, 2. Uncleanliness, 3. Cold, 4. Intemperance in drinking,
5. Excess in venery, 6. Fatigue, 7. Grief and anxiety, 8. Fear, 9. Previous
diseases.
Were it necessary, I could mention many instances where all, or at least most
of the above causes apparently co-operated with human effluvia in producing the
Fever. Therefore by avoiding these predisposing causes, even persons liable to
be exposed to the contagion, will in general escape the disease. During an
epidemic of this kind, to those who can afford it, a gen^^ous diet, and a
liberal use of wine, or spirituous liquors, as the one or the other is most
agreeable to the constitution, will prove the most effectual preservatives. By
a liberal use of wine, etc. I mean such a quantity as will exhilerate the
spirits, without occasioning either head ach, thirst or sickness at stomach;
for intoxication ought to be studiously avoided. Those who have weak delicate
constitutions, or who, either from local circumstances, or their profession are
much exposed to the putrid human effluvia, may with great advantage, have
recourse to the bark and moderate exercise in the open air.

SECTION V. Of the CURE.
IN section first, I have faithfully related the the phenomenon attendant on
this disease; in the third and fourth I have endeavored to ascertain the
causes which produced these phenomenon; and in this I shall attempt to point
out the means, which, from experience, I have found to be the most effectual in
bringing about an early and salutary termination.

After having attentively considered the facts delivered in the preceding
sections, I think we cannot hesitate a moment in deducing the following
conclusions.

1. That the disease in a great measure consists in extreme debility. 2. In a
tendency of the fluids toward putrefaction.
The obvious indications of cure, then, are

1. To remove the causes, or obviate the effects of that debility. 2. To
obviate or correct the tendency of the fluids toward putrefaction.
At whatever period of the disease I am called to a patient, my first care is
to remove, if possible, every cause of the disease which continues to subsist.
The causes which continue to operate, and aggravate the disorder after it is
fully formed, are in general human effluvia generated in and issuing from the
patient's own body; uncleanliness which favors an accumulation of these
effluvia; grief; anxiety; and fear.

I immediately order the patient clean linen, which ought to be changed every
day, or at farthest every other day, and if possible endeavor to direct a
stream of fresh air over the bed, which not only carries off the noxious
particles as they are formed, prevents an accumulation of them, and keeps the
chamber pure and sweet, but universally acts as a refreshing stimulus to the
patient More especially in the summer when the weather was hot: some caution
perhaps ought to be used during intense frost.
. But if the situation of the bed would not admit of this, either a window, or
the door, or sometimes both were advised to be kept open, and if the bed had
curtains they were always ordered to be open. The excretions of the sick,
whether faeces or urine, etc. were immediately removed.

A strict observance of these circumstances, especially in the early stages of
the Fever, tended much to mitigate its virulence; and prevented the disorder
from spreading. On the contrary the neglect of them was, I am satisfied,
frequently attended with dangerous and fatal consequences; which nobody I think
will doubt, when I inform them that I have been often called to patients on the
eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh days of the Fever, and found them in a small
dirty room; the bed near a large fire, where the victuals were preparing for
the rest of the family; the bed curtains close drawn; the sheets, and shirt
upon the patient's back, almost black with dirt, so that he was immersed in a
putrid effluvia, rendered highly poisonous by stagnation, heat, and consequent
fermentation.

If the patient lamented the death of some friend or relation, his sorrow was
attempted to be scothed; and if he was fearful and anxious, as was often the
case, about his own fate, he was always encouraged with hopes of a speedy
recovery. Fear operates as an excessive debilitating power on the human body,
and when it acts in conjunction with human effluvia seldom fails to produce
fever. Every thing therefore which tends in the least to excite this passion of
the mind, especially in those who are already sick, ought to be cautiously
avoided. This observation leads me to take notice of some customs very
prevalent in Carlisle, and which in opposition to this salutary caution, tend
much to alarm and terrify the sick.

1. Upon the death of any inhabitant, what is called the death bell, is
immediately olled for the space of ten minutes or a quar^er of an hour, which
announces to the world ^is dissolution.

2. In due time the public crier comes, and after ringing his bell, proclaims
in every street in a loud, distinct and melancholy tone of voice the hour of
the deceased's funeral, inviting the friends and neighbors to attend.

3. And lastly funeral psalms are sung by the attendants as they are conducting
the corpse through the public streets to the church yard, for interment It is
only amongst the common people that the 2d and 3d ceremonies are observed, but
the 1 st is universal.
.

What is the consequence? A patient is confined to his bed, his body is
debilitated to the last degree, his spirits are depressed, he hears these
repeated and successive notices of death: it may be perhaps of the death of
some friend or near relation; he is anxious and alarmed; and if sensible,
concludes as disponding people usually do, that his fate will be the next; upon
which he is seized with sudden terror, which increases his weakness, aggravates
all his complaints, and sometimes it is to be feared renders a disease fatal,
which might otherwise have yielded to the power of medicine.

In ages of popish ignorance and superstition, such c^remonies, might perhaps
be thought conducive to the suture happiness and repose of the dead; we are now
however certain their only tendency is to injure the living, and as such, with
all due deference, we recommend to the superior judgments of our respectable
magistrates and clergy their abolition, especially during the continuance of a
fatal epidemic disease I am happy to inform the public, that, upon my
representing the evil tendency of these ceremonies to our present Dean, the
Rev. Dr. Percy (who has since he came amongst us, invariably shown a readiness
to interest himself for the good of his fellow-citizens) he not only made an
immediate reform with respect to the usual mode of tolling the bell, and
singing funeral psalms, but likewise recommended to the worshipful the mayor
and corporation, some alterations with respect to the public crier, who
obligingly promised to do every thing in their power toward promoting the
welfare of the community. About the same time, he and other charitable and
humane persons, opened a subscription, for the purpose ^f providing wine and
other necessary cordials for the sick poor, which afforded relief to several
distressed objects. Had it fortunately been established sooner, it is probable,
many who are now orphans, would have had no occasion to lament with unavailing
tears the loss of their parents!

Did the effluent and wealthy know but half the distresses of the poor, and
relieve them, who that are rich would be unhappy? "Nihil est enim tam populate,
quam b^nitas: -- Homines enim ad deos nulla re proprius acced^nt, quam salutem
hominibus dando."

Cic. orat. pro Q. Lig.




These circumstances being premised, I now come to take notice of those
remedies which appeared, from my own experience, to be the most efficacious in
answering the above indications of cure.

At the commencement of the epidemic, when I was called early in the first
stage of the disease, which however was not often the case, I ordered the
patient the saline mixture, and if there were evident symptoms of costiveness,
a small portion of tartar emetic was added to it; a medicine which I had often
used, and with apparent success in slow nervous fevers. Typhus mitior of
Nosologists. Cullen. Synop. Nosol. p. 72.
I took care however that the quantity of the tartar emetic should not be
sufficient to excite any great degree either of nausea or vomiting, for in some
cases where the nausea proceeded to actual vomiting, I found all the symptoms
were considerably aggravated. And as the epidemic advanced, and I had greater
opportunities of ascertaining the nature of the disease, I altogether laid it
aside as an useless or even as a noxious medicine.

Along with the saline mixture the patient was ordered to take the bark in
substance, and to drink plentifully of port wine, sometimes pure, sometimes,
when he complained of thirst, diluted with a small portion of cold water. If
there was any tendency to sickness, the saline draught was taken in the act of
effervescence until the sickness abated.

It happened, however, more usually that I did not see the patient till the
first stage of the disease was finished; in such cases, rather than overload
the patient's stomach with too much medicine, I altogether ommitted the saline
mixture, and entirely confided in the use of bark and wine, and was seldom
disappointed.

The tonic, cordial, stimulant and antiseptic qualities of these remedies in a
remarkable manner increased the vigor of the system, and in a great measure
preventd any tendency to putrefaction. For by a copious and liberal use of
them, the pulse became slower, and stronger; the thirst, and pain of the head
abated; the delirium was removed; the urine became higher colored, and was
either cloudy, or depos^ted some little sediment; and lastly the patient got
some refreshing sleep. It is not, however, by administering these remedies in
small quantities, or at distant intervals, that we are to expect these salutary
effects.

The debility was in general so great, as to render it necessary to throw them
in, in large quantities, otherwise little or no good effects were produced.

The following was my general mode of giving the bark.

R. pulv. cort. p^ruv. opt. unciam unam, rad. serpent. virg. drachmas dues,

M. and divide in parts xii aquales, sumat i. secunda vel tertia quaque hora
ex vin. rub. haust.

When the patient's stomach could not bear the bark in substance, as was
sometimes the case, a strong decoction, somewhat like the following was
substituted.

R. pulv. cort. peruv. opt. sescunciam, coque ex aquae fontanae libris tribus,
ad libras duas, cola and colaturae add tinct. cort. peruv. sescuntiam, syrup.
balsam. unciam unam,

M. and sumat aeger coch. mag. iii. secunda vel tertia queque hoar.

According to the age, sex, constitution of the patient, and urgency of the
symptoms, different quantities of wine were administered. I had no opportunity
of seeing any very young children in the disease, and when it affected children
from eight to twelve or fourteen years of age, it was in general very mild.

To adults I usually ordered from one bottle to two bottles and one half, in
the space of twenty-four hours; and I believe more might have been taken with
advantage, for I never saw any bad effects from an excess, though I have
perceived evident ones from a too sparing use of this grateful cordial. Indeed
I often found it a difficult matter to persuade the nurses to administer it in
sufficient quantities, some were deterred by prejudices, but more I believe
were prevented by poverty. Almost in every case it was my constant custom on
leaving the patient to urge the plentiful use of wine. In this method I
constantly persevered till a change took place, which was in general
favorable, when the quantity of wine was gradually diminished and the patient
was supported by strong fresh broth, panada etc. and in a little time by solid
animal food.

Soon after this Fever made its appearance I had recourse to pediluvium, but I
quickly found it was rather prejudicial than useful, for the debility was in
many cases so extreme that the patient sometimes fainted during the operation,
and was always very much fatigued, which more than counterbalanced the
stimulating and antispasmodic effects of the warm water.

Fomentations however of the feet and legs, by means of several folds of
flannel wrung out of hot water, were afterward used with apparent advantage,
for in this case the fatigue occasioned by the operation was very
inconsiderable.

Blisters seemed to have little or no effect upon the general system, or in
raising the pulse, but when applied behind the shoulders or to the nape of the
neck, their operation was obvious in abating the violent pain of the head. A
young girl about nine years old was affected with the Fever, and particularly
complained of a very severe and acute pain in her head. The surgeon who
attended her prescribed the saline mixture with tartar emetic in small
quantities, and took about five or six ounces of blood from her arm, in hopes
of relieving the head ach, but without effect, for it rather increased after
the bleeding. I was sent for the next day, and notwithstanding her pulse was
stronger than in most instances of this Fever, I advised a blister to be
immediately applied betwixt her shoulders, which soon removed the pain in her
head. She was at the same time ordered to take a strong decoction of the bark
with plenty of wine which soon freed her from all complaints. I afterward in
similar circumstances, always prescribbed blisters, and generally with similar
success.

A Diarrhea often occurred in the second stage of the discase, sometimes even
in the first. Whether it was occasioned by the bark, or was a consequence of
the previous debility is a matter of no great moment. It was always a
disagreeable, often a dangerous symptom, and never to be trisled with; for when
it was even moderate it never failed to weaken the patient greatly.
Disregarding therefore all ill grounded apprehendsions of blocking up the
passages and retaining a putrid somes in the intestinal canal, I constantly
attempted to put a stop to the evacution as quickly as possible, and where I
was fortunate enough to succeed my patients always recovered.

For this purpose I ordered in some cases six or eight drops of tinct. thebaic.
in every dose of the bark. But when the diarrhaea was likely to be violent, and
not to be easily restrained, the bark was discontinued, the quantity of wine
was increased, and a cordial astringent composition some what like the
following was made use of.

R. confect. japon. cardiac. utriusque sesquidrachmam, aq. cinnam. ten. uncias
septem. spirit. tinct. cinnam. syrup. balsam. singulorum uneiam unam.

M. f. mist. cujus dentur coch. mag. ii secunda vel tertia quaque hora cum gut.
vi. viii. vel x. tinct. thebaic. doncec alvum astrinxerint.

In urgent cases an anodyne draught with thirty or forty drops of tinct.
thebaic. was given at bedtime. By this method I generally succeeded in
restraining the diarrhaea, and, as the stools became less frequent they became
better colored, and less putrid and offensive.

If on the other hand several days elapsed without any evacuation by stool, a
simple injection of warm milk and water had the desired effect. I was however
by no means anxious about the retention of the saeces, and in the second and
last stages of the disease seldom ordered a glyster, unless there were evident
symptoms of irritation in the bowels in consequence of such retention.

Likewise in other cases of extreme debility and danger although not attended with
a diarrhaea, I have often administered opuim as a more instantaneous and
diffus^^^e s^i^ulant (than either wine or bark) in the following form, with
considerable advantage.

R. confect. cardiac, gr^^^ quindecim, aq. cinnam. ten. se^unciam, spirit.
drachmas duas, spirit. lavend. comp. drachman unam, tinct. thebaic. gut.
quadraginta, vel quinquaginta vol. alkal. gut. viginti quinque. M. f. haust. h.
s. sumendus.

It sometimes happened that the patient was affected with symptoms of a cold or
catarrh, and in such cases the pulse was not altogether so small and weak as I
have before represented in the history of the Fever; and in one particular
instance I found the pulse so strong that I should have been induced to have
drawn a little blood, had I not been previously acquainted with the nature of
the prevailing epidemic, and the dangerous consequences of bleeding. When the
situation of the patient was such, the only difference of my practice consisted
in administering his wine and medicines a little warm, and if the cough was
very troublesome, I omitted, though perhaps without any great reason, the use of
the radserpent. virgin.

With respect to the anomalous symptoms, such as a difficulty of making water
and in consequence of it a swelling of the abdomen, I left them entirely to
nature, and when the patient recovered from the fever and was able to get out
of bed, the discharge of urine not only became free but copious, which in a
very little time diminished the tumor of the belly.

Through the whole course of the disease, when fruit could be procured, the
patient was desired to eat as much of it as he pleased, except when
contra-indicated by a diarrhaea. By steadily pursuing this method from the
beginning, the patient was not only saved, but the symptoms were rendered more
moderate, and the duration of the disease much shortened.

Every person who is the least acquainted with medicine, after attentively
reading the history, symptoms, and causes of this Fever will readily perceive
that bleeding must be highly improper. In confirmation of which I have now only
to observe, that toward the first appearance of the disorder, before its
nature had been clearly ascertained, and perhaps where the pulse was some what
stronger, than in the cases which I had an opportunity of observing, a few
patients were let blood, some in consequence of advice, some of their own
accord; of these however scarcely one escaped. The weather in the month of
January 1782, except about two days of frost, was constantly wet, warm and
blowing; wind west or south west. In this month three persons died viz. one
bachelor, one wife, and one widow, which makes the number of deaths fifty-five:
and there are at this present time, viz. February 7th, about a dozen or fifteen
patients ill of the Fever.


FINIS.

