PRACTICAL HINTS ON OPIUM CONSIDERED AS A POISON.

By R. HAMILTON, M. D.

OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, LONDON; MEMBER OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL AND
PHYSICAL SOCIETIES OF EDINBURGH, AND OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY, LONDON.

IPSWICH: PRINTED AND SOLD BY G. JERMYN, IN THE BUTTER-MARKET.

M,DCC,XC.

Practical Hints, etc.
A melancholy accident having, within these few days, taken place in this
neighborhood, from a quantity of Opium given to a young boy, by mistake for a
different medicine, which soon proved fatal, gave rise to the following
remarks. The Author hopes the public will receive them with candor, since they
are laid before them to guard them in future, and prevent them from keeping in
their houses, as family medicines, drugs of violent operation, undistinguished
by proper labels from more innocent substances of the Materia Medica: or should
the like again take place, that they may from these hints, be the better
prepared to put in force the means of cure, he submits to their consideration,
which on many such occasions, (for too many such are on record) have been found
effectual when they were had early recourse to, and strenuously applied.

THIS drug of high use, and deserved estimation in Medicine, like many others
of the virulent Vegetable Poisons, becomes, when incautiously exhibited by
those less acquainted with its powers, and when given through mistake, speedily
destructive; changing the regular motions of the living body into irregular and
violent; inducing stupefaction; convulsions; appoplexy etc. soon to be followed
by a total deprivation of life. Eos, qui Opium copiosius acceperunt, sequitur
in somnum gravem collapsio, mentis sopor, et sensus ablienatio cum frigiditate
et pruritu vehementi, ita ut hominem exitet. Odor opii per totum corpus
effertur, et exhalat: maxilla laxatur, tumescunt labra, irruit singultus,
distorquetur nasus, adest pallor, livor unguium, praecordiorum divulsio,
respiratio parva, et frigida, et ad finem etiam convulsio. Auctore Aetio.


WITHOUT entering into a dissertation on the subject at large, or a detail of
the various opinions, and hypotheses that have lately, as well as heretofore,
been advanced relative to its mode of operation as a medicine, this being
foreign to my present purpose, let me at once suppose such a quantity received
into the stomach, as must in a short time induce death, should attempts, (and
these almost instantaneously) not be made to prevent its baneful effects; and
indeed, admitting them made, it must be confessed, (so great may the force of
the poison be) that its effects may be exerted even in a very short time,
altogether beyond the possibility of obviating, notwithstanding the most
diligent application of the most rational means.

THIS reflection, however, should not slacken our endeavors or damp our
ardour, but ought rather to stimulate us to a trial of all the methods that
have been known to succeed.

THE first thing then to which we are to turn our attention, is the use of
emetics: and let one be thrown down the most speedy in its operation. --
Powders of Ipecacuanha, Tartarised Antimony, Vinegar of Squills, or, perhaps
what may still be more quick in exciting the action of the stomach, White
Vitriol. -- The contents of the stomach, suppose the operation succeeds, should
be examined to find whether any of the Opium has been evacuated; this will be
easily discovered by its smell, and will afford encouragement to pursue our
first advantage, by continuing the vomiting till this organ be completely
evacuated.

THE doses used must be in proportion to the exigencies of the case, to the
diminished energy, and sensibility of the nervous system in general, and the
stomach in particular. If the Opium has begun to exert its effects, the more
will be necessary; and as there is no time to loose, and inevitable danger,
perhaps death, awaiting, we must hazard the larger quantities in proportion to
the accustomed doses, and persist in their use.

To prevent stupefaction as far as in our power, and the consequent train of
bad symptoms, strong agitation may be used, such as walking, running, shaking,
etc. this has been strenuously recommended by several Authors. In one case, as
I am lately informed by a Medical Gentleman in this county, whose sister was
the subject of the trial, it appears to have had no small share in the cure.
The gentleman when a child about six years of age, having observed his mother
take something from a bottle in her closet, went afterward and brought it to
his sister, a child about a year younger than himself, persuading her to take
of it, which he intended to do also, but his sister after taking some
complained it was bad tasted, on which he took none; she soon became affected,
the family were alarmed, and their Apothecary was sent for. Among other things
he ordered the child to be walked about though in a state of stupefaction,
being held up between two servants, and kept in constant motion for several
hours. She recovered with difficulty (...)

To these should be added Stimulants of all kinds, as Volatile Salts to the
nose, Blisters to the skin, etc. If epispastics are applied, they should be
placed on the most sensible parts, or joints, as the ancles, arms, inside of
the legs, and soles of the feet, and wherever the body is thinnest of flesh,
and the nervous fibrillae most numerous.

IT may be objected to the use of blisters, that they will act too slowly in a
case of this nature, where expedition is so requisite. But without attempting
formally to remove this objection, which we think might be easily done, as it
is not their evacuant, but their stimulant effects for which we consider them
expedient, we shall only say, that their application even in that case, can do
no harm by interrupting other means; and on this ground alone, I would not have
them omitted.

IF we can rouse the mind so far that it will feel pain, so far one point is
thereby gained, which adds somewhat to our hopes of success, and should quicken
our exertions.

I know not how far Electricity might in this sense be advantageous. As it is
acknowledged, however, one of the most powerful, though transient stimulants,
and as it may be applied to the human body, even for a length of time, and
frequency with the utmost safety, we can run no great hazard in giving it a
trial, especially as machines for its commodious application are now in almost
every body's possession. The poison being of the highest sedative nature, the
strongest stimulants would seem obviously indicated as its antidote.

IN the cases of drowned persons, and those suffocated by the fumes of charcoal
etc. the analogy thus far holds good, that in this as in those there is a
suspension of the functions from a deprivation of sensibility in the system. In
those Electricity is strongly recommended.

THE writer of these hints will not enter here into that part of the Pathology
which supposes the operation of the Opium to be by augmenting, or rarefying the
volume of the blood in the sanguiferous system in general, and the head in
particular, whereby a turgescence, and over-distention of the Vessels of this
organ are said to be particuarly present, and from which the symptoms of
apoplexy are argued to arise. Of this opinion among others was the celebrated
Mead. He affirms that it enflames the Stomach, and rarefies the blood to such a
degree, that the Vessels cannot again recover their tone, whereupon apoplectic
symptoms, etc. will ensue; to prove which he relates an experiment which he
made with it on a Dog.

PERHAPS all stimulants, (and it appears to me, by the bye, that all substances
taken into the stomach exert first a stimulant power, whatever their after
action may be,) have the effect less or more of sending a greater quantity of
blood to the head, at least quickening the circulation by which the face
becomes flushed; but surely stimulants, for this reason alone, are not here to
be omitted. The stimulant power of the Opium seems transitory, the sedative
soon follows. And now, if we can rouse the powers of the heart to exert their
wonted action, and renew the motion of the blood flowing at present languidly,
we need the less dread this supposed plethora, as the consequence must be a
more equitable circulation, and distribution of the blood. I know no proof,
however, that this fluid is augmenting in its volume, but that it is in a state
almost of stagnation is evident.

Dr. Alston, in the presence, and with the assistance of Mr. Fullarton, a
gentleman skilled in microscopical observations, in August 1733, conveyed into
the stomach of a frog some Opium dissolved in water, and after putting it into
a glass cylinder, they adapted the microscope to the membrane between the toes,
in such a manner, that they had a distinct view of the circulation of the blood
in this part. The Dr. had found before that Opium killed these animals, and his
design now was to observe its effects on the circulation; no change, however,
took place either in the color or consistence of the blood; but the diminution
of its velocity was extremely evident, "for it did not move half so swiftly as
it used to do in these creatures." This observation was repeatedly made; and as
the effects of the Opium went off, the blood became gradually quicker in its
motion. When the frog had entirely recovered its vigor, they forced more Opium
into its stomach, and observing again, saw again the same diminution of the
blood's velocity.

FROM Mr. Ramsay's experiment (made in April 1755) on a dog, we have a further
proof of the pulse becoming slower. The heart of this animal in its natural
state beat Vid. Med. Ess.
150 times in a minute. Four minutes after the injection of the Opium into the
cavity of the abdomen, he fell down senseless. Mr. R. opened the thorax, which
seemed to give the Dog no pain, and he felt plainly the motion of the heart
through the pleura. It beat now only 76 times in a minute, and became slower.
Immediately after counting the pulse, he cut the ribs on each side of the
sternum in the common way, and laid them back, by which the heart was brought
into view. It appeared quite turgid.

FROM Dr. Whytt's experiments, we have likewise ample proof of the lessened
motion of the blood, after the application of Opium, "the veins," he says,
"after a large dose of Opium especially those of the brain become much swelled,
whence it has been thought, that Opium produces its effects in the bodies of
animals partly at least, by rarefying the blood, and compressing the brain; but
this distention of the veins seems to be no more than a consequence of a very
slow motion of the blood through the heart, on account of the insensibility with
which this organ is affected." The Author tells us that in frogs, into whose
stomach, and intestines he had injected Opium, he not only found the heart's
auricle, but the great viens leading to it much distended with blood. From all
this it must follow, that the heart and arterial system being so reduced in
their irritability cannot propel the blood with sufficient force through the
larger vessels near, much less through the extreme ones, and less still through the
Veins.

Dr. Leigh gave two grs. of the resin of Opium to a healthy man, of 30 years of
age, his pulse was then at 60 strokes in a minute, half an hour after it rose
to 72; this proves what we have already hinted, that the first operation of
this, as well as other drugs, is that of a stimulus; but behold! in a short
time it fell down to 55. was full and strong; and now headache, vertigo, and
drowsiness succeeded.

THE same gentleman gave three grs. of the gummy part of Opium to a young
woman. In ten minutes her pulse fell 13 strokes; became also full and strong.

To a third person also, he gave Opium, pulse rose six strokes in a minute, but
in a quarter of an hour it fell 15, and became extremely full.

ON the supposition, however, of rarefaction of this fluid, as well as
inflammation, which has been contended was produced. Geoffroy, and others of
the ancient Dr. Tissot is among the number who advise bleeding, from the use of
Opium, in a quantity too great for health, in my opinion, without a just
foundation; he says the patient is to be treated as if he had a sanguine
apoplexy.
physicians recommended, and practiced, V. S. without duly considering, we
apprehend, that it is a most powerfully debilitating means, lessening the
vigor of those functions which are already become too debile; and without
reflecting, that as the stomach is the place of action, the part first
affected, relief can only be rationally sought for by applications chiefly to
this organ. Should evacuations, however, by blood letting be at all practiced,
scarifications on the head, or opening the jugular veins, or temporal artery
would appear preferable to general V. Section.

FROM an experiment of the celebrated Dr. Mead on a dog, which he killed by
Opium, this practice would seem to receive some countenance, for on dissection
he found the blood vessels of the brain very full, and took a large grume of
concreted blood from the upper part of it, as he cut into the sinus
longitudinalis. -- No extravasated serum was found either in the ventricles, or
any of the membranes. The stomach was wonderfully distended, though empty of
every thing but some water and Opium; parcels of frothy mucus swam in it, and
its inside was as clean as if scraped and washed from all the slime of the
glands; some redness was discovered here and there, as if in the beginning of
an inflammation; the pylorus was found contracted.

BUT even under these circumstances, I should be inclined to defer opening
these vessels till symptoms of apoplexy had commenced, and other means, better
adapted to the cure, had been pursued ineffectually.

Dr. Alston The Doctor denies the rarefaction of the fluids in these cases.
makes a curious observation, which may be mentioned here; while he viewed the
slow motion in the foot of the frog, as above related, he took notice that the
frequency of the pulse was as usual, but the heart was weak, and had not power
to propel the fluid with its wonted force to the extremities. "One thing," says
he, "was observable all along, that notwithstanding the diminished velocity of
the blood, there was no sensible dimunition in the frequency of the pulse; yet,
when there was no circulation, or progressive motion of the blood, in this
part, (the foot) the pulse was visible by an undulatory motion; that is, the
blood returned as far back at every diastole of the heart, as it was protruded
by the preceding systole; this continued till the frog was quite dead." -- He
opened it, and "found nothing in its stomach but a clear mucus, like a jelly, a
little colored with the Opium. Every thing else seemed perfectly natural: this
experiment we often repeated." He adds, "and it had always the same appearance
and event."

AFTER the use of the emetics, the next practice, that I would recommend, is
that of cathartics, they seem to hold the second place; nay, both emetics and
cathartics may be conveniently exhibited at the same time. These, for the same
reasons we gave in the use of emetics, should be powerful, and of a
sufficiently stimulating nature. Aloetics, with others, from the tribe of
resinous purges have been recommended; the powder of jalap, scammony, and
calomel, are all active; yet vinegar of squills may be perhaps conveniently
added to the number; and in some respects, at least, it may be found
preferable, as it both vomits and purges, if administered to any extent.

NEUTRAL salts, and especially Glauber's, have been likewise recommended: --
while we use these we are not to omit glisters: and these may be made of salt
and water, or strong brine, to which may be added purgative ingredients, as may
best suit the prescriber's intention: they should be thrown up as warm as
convenient.

Mr. Ramsay injected into the intestinum rectum of a small dog, a solution of
two scruples of Opium, in an ounce of water, blood warm, to which he added a
dram of T. Opii. in about a minute his hind legs became convulsed, and in a
few mimutes more their sensibility was so destroyed, that when pinced, they
seemed insensible to pain; in ten minutes more he became quite stupid; fell
into a "profound sleep," and was convulsed. On observing this, a strong
solution of sea salt, in water, was injected into his guts; this purged him
severely, and occasioned a prolopsus any. Soon after he awoke from his sleep,
and gradually recovered the use of his hind legs. In a few hours he seemed well
in every respect, but could take no food for some time.

BEFORE the enema be injected, I would recommend the use of a suppository, this
may be prepared in an instant, with some paper twisted up, of a proper
thickness, well covered with oil or hogs lard, and introduced per anum. It will
at once bring away the faeces that are hardened, and filling up that part, and
thus give room for the enema to penetrate farther into the intestine.

Dr. Dobson's patient, at Liverpool, was cured by the use of Glauber's salts
and emetics. He had swallowed, in the space of 24 hours, 26 grains of solid
Opium, in the shop composition, called pil. saponac. By mistake for pil.
aloetic. an ounce. The Doctor justly concluded, that in all probability, this
would have proved fatal, but for the following favorable circumstances: First,
That the Opium was in a solid form: Secondly, That a strong emetic was ordered,
and repeated till it produced the desired effects: And Thirdly, That a free
discharge by stool was obtained, by persisting in the use of Glauber's salts.
He observes what is worthy of remark, that the neutral salts gave relief even
before they had occasioned any evacuation. The salts were continued, at proper
intervals, for three days after.

HAVING strengthened our hopes, by evacuations, per os and anum, the next to be
thought of is that by the perspirable pores. To assist our endeavors here, the
patient should be immersed in warm water, and I should prefer that of a
stimulant to that of a relaxing heat; or, the water should be somewhat above
the tepid temperature most commonly used, when the warm bath is applied.

IRECOMMEND this, though at the same time I am well aware, that too great a
degree of heat is unfavourable to perspiration; but we are to keep in view the
want of due sensibility; and that since, for this reason, we were obliged to
augment the doses of emetics and purgatives, so must we now make use of a
higher degree of heat to produce the same effect. Those who contend for a
rarefaction of the blood, and the presence of sanguinous apoplexy, will, no
doubt, think this part of our practice unfavourable to the end we have in view,
the recovery of the patient, as it will have a tendency to increase the
rarefaction of the sanguiferous system, and the fluids in general: but they
will remember that we thought it more than probable, such a state of the fluids
did not exist.

To assist us in opening the perspirable pores, diluents and diaphoretics must
be conjoined; for without a due proportion of diluents we cannot so easily
force a sweat. The principle on which I go, by advising sweating, is from a
supposition that the lymphatic system has absorbed part of the Opium, and that
it is by this means mixed with the fluids in the general habit. And as our
chief view is to evacuate it as completely as possible, that part of it which
has been absorbed, and which creates a great share of the symptoms, cannot be
evacuated by means more effectual than by sudorifics.

I NEED not quote the experiments of professor Monro on this part of my
subject. He is clear that it is taken up by this system of vessels, because,
among other proofs, both urine and sweat smell of it. The heart is a muscle
very irritable. When the Opium is absorbed, the nerves of its inner surface
must be affected, because it is then applied immediately to them, as well as to
the nerves of the inside of the arteries; and through this medium, as well as
through the nerves of the stomach, it must induce its peculiar symptoms. The
diaphoretics, that have been generally used, were of the warm kind, such as
confect. aromatic. mistur. campherat. etc. --

A MAN who swallowed an ounce of L. Laud. within the space of an hour, in small
punch, recovered by vomits, purging, blisters, and sweating. And a lady,
eighteen years of age, who took the same quantity, was cured by much the same
means.

A CHILD, of eighteen months old, laboring under the hooping cough, had a dose
of elix. paregor. given, with the intention of moderating the cough; the
quantity uncertain. It was administered at night, and the symptoms were not
noticed till next morning, when deep sleep and convulsions were observed:
recovery was here brought about by strong cordials. The quantity of the elix.
appears not to have been so large as to induce those symptoms that end in
speedy death.

Dr. Clark's patient, who in July 1766, swallowed a dram of solid Opium, was
also cured by vomits, purges, glisters, and sweating. The patient was an adult;
he took half a dram, and repeated the dose at a short interval; in the space
of 20 minutes it began to operate.

THERE is reason, I presume, to suppose that sudorifics, some sudorifics, at
least, blunt the action of Opium. It is well known, that when emetics, neutral
salts, and Opium are united, a much larger dose of the Opium may be
administered with safety and success, as a medicine, than when given alone; its
action by this addition being modified.

A PROOF of this we have in the composition, commonly known by the name of
Dover's sweating powder. This is an union of Opium, ipecac: and vitriolated
tartar. To assist then both in modifying the action of the Opium and procuring
sweat, either ipecac. in powder, or an antimonial may be employed in warm
water, to which a small quantitiy of a neutral salt may be added; the Opium,
being, as we presume, already in the stomach, will form a strong sudorific, and
thus, part at least of the offending matter be converted into an antidote to
destroy its own noxious quality, by hurrying it through the circulating fluids,
and expelling it by the pores of the skin.

SHOULD the patient have lost the power of deglution, for this has sometimes
happened; these, and the other medicines we have recommended, must be forced
into the stomach by a small tube. A woman was killed, as Dr. Alston relates, by
taking a quantity of liniment for the haemorrhoides composed of Opium and
Myrrh, by mistake for a purge. When the mistake was discovered, a vomit was
given, but though this was not above three quarters of an hour after the bolus
had been taken, she was so convulsed as to have lost the power of deglution.
She died in some hours after. Pulse large, full, and not very frequent. When
her physician first saw her, there appeared a pale livor on her cheek, and in
other respects she was like a person drunk.

THERE are few surgeons without hollow bougees; provided nothing more
convenient be at hand, one of these may be employed to convey the medicines
down, especially for children, where the aesophagus is shorter than in the
adult.

IF the tube be long enough to pass beyond the epgilottis, or the passage into
the lungs, it is all that is requisite; the liquid, of course, must drop into
the stomach; and this is no great length, as is well known to those who have
used the probang, in pushing down, etc. substances accidently sticking in the
throat; or who will take the trouble to examine the distance between the lower
jaw and the top of the sternum, where the trachaea and aesophagus dip under it.

SEVERAL authors have spoken highly in favor of acids, both among the ancients
and moderns, for their power of modifying the noxious effects of Opium; among
these, also, have been men of much celebrity. Wedelius, amongst others,
strenously asserts the use of acids.


To acids Dr. Mead advises alkaline salts to be added. Dr. Cullen embraces the
opinion that acids possess this power, and he speaks of his having found them
so from his own experience "Another means of weakening the powers of Opium is
the application of acids, and we have found this very effectual." Cullen's Mat.
Med.
. We wish the Doctor had mentioned the instances to which he alludes, and the
other means which he pursued at the same time, as we would then have been more
able to determine what share they exerted, and what might be, at the same time,
attributed to the other methods he pursued. He does not, however, pretend that
it changes the nature of this drug; for when it is given thus in union with
Opium, in a large enough quantity, he allows it to have all the same effects as
Opium alone.

Doctor Webster, an eminent medical teacher, at Edinburgh, and whom I have the
honor to rank as one of my preceptors in this science, has the following
observation, which may be found in his Syllabus. "Acids render the stomach less
capable of being acted on by other matters, as spirits, ale, etc." In the
course of his lectures, the Doctor enlarges on the observation, by saying, that
"the action of Hemlock, Opium, and Ipecacuanha, are moderated much by the
addition of an acid."

AN ingenious physician, who has not long since made many experiments on this
article of the Mat. Med. denies that any such effects follow. He affirms that
acids render the stomach less sensible of the operation of Opium, if given
previous to it; but should the Opium be first administered, and its effects
have began, in any degree, to appear, the acid then cannot lessen them.

HE gave to a boy, of twelve years of age, an ounce of common vinegar; a
quarter of an hour after 40 gutts of L. Laud.; in half an hour it produced a
severe sickness at his stomach, but no vomiting. His head now began to be a
little affected, but this did not continue long; the pulse remained steady,
except when the nausea appeared; these symptoms soon went off, and the boy was
restored to his usual situation.

To a healthy young man he gave two ounces of the common vegetable acid, and in
a quarter of an hour after 80 gutts of T. Opii.; two hours after taking it he
complained of a little nausea and headache; these symptoms continued only a
short time, when he felt himself as usual, except a little sickness about the
stomach. The Doctor could discover no change in the pulse whatsover: he made
similar experiments both on dogs and rabbits, and concludes, by saying, "that
the Opium seldom had much effect, if an acid was previously given."

HE instituted other experiments both on frogs and dogs; to satisfy himself
farther, how far the acid would act if the Opium was given, and had begun to
exert its effects before the other was exhibited. His conclusion is this, --
"That the acid, if given after the Opium began to operate, had not the smallest
power of correcting its dangerous tendency." Hence it it is plain, if we put
any credit in the experiments of this ingenious gentleman, that the supposition
of acids correcting the deleterious effects of Opium, like many other of the
ancient theories, has no existence in reality, and that, we must not,
therefore, place our dependence in their use when the patient is in danger from
the noxious powers of Opium, though a different doctrine be supported by great
names, both among the ancient and modern physicians.

HOW far diuretics may conduce to the cure I dare not determine. As our great
and chief business is to evacuate the Opium from the habit, and as the urine is
found to contain it, which is indicated by its smell, I am inclined to think
they may, in their turn, be advantageously had recourse to. The discharges by
the skin are generally observed to lessen that by the kidneys; but both, I am
persuaded, may be forwarded to a certain degree at the same time. Diluents was
recommended to keep up a sweat; diluents, in plenty, will excite the urinary
discharges: to these may be added medicines more directly stimulating the
urinary organs. Parsley tea may be drank; sp. ether. nitros. has been
generally considered as having specific effects on the kidneys.

OTHER methods more effectually for eliminating this poison from the human
body, I know of none; and I fully believe, where the circumstances are such,
that hopes can be entertained, none other are necessary. Let me again
recommend, however, expedition and diligence in their application. Dr. Willis
informs us of a robust man, who, after taking a large dose of laudanum, was
dead in so short a time as four hours. Others have died in ten, twelve, and
sixteen.

Dr. Leigh gave only five grains to a woman, and it threw her into violent
convulsions; he gave her a few grains of ipecucuanha to remove it, and
afterward 60 gutts of ether; she was not well, however, for two days after.
The same gentleman gave to a dog, for an experiment, an ounce dissolved in
water. In a very short time it threw him into convulsions, and killed him. We
may remark, by the bye, that his stomach was immediately laid open, and the
coats attentively examined, but not the smallest marks of inflammation were
perceivable; a much less quantity would most undoubtedly have killed him. Dr.
Mead gave a quarter of an ounce to a dog, and in so short a time as a quarter
of an hour he began to sleep; then was convulsed; fell into universal
tremblings; breathed short and laborious; lost the use of both his fore and
hind legs; and then, as the Doctor expresses it, "his limbs on a sudden grew
limber, and he instantly expired."

WHEN, unhappily, this drug has been swallowed to this quantity, our first
enquiry should be, how long it has been in the stomach, and in what form it was
administered? whether in a liquid, or solid form? whether united with other
substances, and what these substances were? In a liquid form it is found to
exert its effects much sooner than when taken in a solid; and according to the
experiments of the Abbe Fontana, in conjunction with spirits, it is the more
powerfully deleterious.

Mr. Henderson, the comedian, it has been said, died in a short time, by some
mistake in taking Opium; and the same has been asserted of the late Dr. Brown,
who in a state, it seems, of intoxication, took upwards of 500 gutts of
laudanum, and was found dead next morning. If this be true, it was a new way of
taking off the effects of intoxication; if he took it with this intention, it
was like adding oil to extinguish flame; for Opium and spirituous liquors, in
their effects, are very analogous to each other, and the means, in general,
that cures the one will cure the other; with this consideration, that dilution
is even more necessary, where spirits have been drank to a dangerous excess,
than when Opium has been taken to the same extent.

To sum up the whole; if we do not speedily have recourse to emetics and the
other means already mentioned; all other efforts, when strong convulsions and
apoplectic symptoms have taken place, afford but little hopes that life can be
saved. If the dose be swallowed from even 15 minutes to 30 minutes, to an hour,
according to the strength and age of the person, and the quantity taken, its
operation may have already gone such lengths, and exerted its baneful powers so
far on the general system, as to render every succeeding attempt to save life
altogether abortive, even under the management of the most active physicians of
steady perseverance, and ready thought.

Ipswich, July 1, 1790.
Besides the case that gave rise to the foregoing reflections, the following
instance of the death of a young woman, occasioned by Opium, about three years
ago, lately came to my knowledge; on its being intimated to me, I wrote to the
gentleman under whose care she was, during a few of her last hours, when he
obligingly sent me the subjoined particulars.
To Dr. HAMILTON, Physician, Ipswich.
DEAR SIR,
I Am sorry I cannot send you a more perfect account of the case you require,
than that which you will now receive; the girl's name, who was the subject of
it, I forget Her name, as I am told, was Lydia Spratt.
.

JUNE the 3d, 1787, I was sent for, between six and seven in the morning, to a
servant girl of a farmer, who lives about four miles from hence. The only
information which I received, was, that they could not awake her; accordingly,
on my going to her master's, I found her in a deep sleep, attended with
laborious breathing and great sweating; knowing that the mistress of the house
frequently took laudanum for a complaint in the stomach, I enquired whether the
girl might not have taken some. The phial was accordingly sought for. And
missing it, upon farther search, we found it under her pillow, and empty. The
phial had been filled the day before, and contained two ounces; therefore, from
these circumstances, we made no doubt but she had taken the whole about eleven
o'clock the preceding night. I immediately gave her two scruples of ipecacuanha
without the least effect; she did not seem to have the power of deglution at
any one time, during my attendance, which was four hours; but the fluids which
I gave seemed to go down her throat without any effort on her part. She had a
florid look, but a languid pulse; however, I bled her about four ounces; I made
a large orifice, but the blood came away very slowly, and was very black: I
gave her vinegar and brandy, mixed with some of the spirit: ammon: comp: I
likewise had her well rubbed in different parts of the body with the same
mixture. After we had continued this method about two hours, I had her carried
into the air, and laid upon a cask, which we kept moving about; when after all
I found she remained in a total insensible state, I had her set in a chair,
where she remained till she died, which was about another hour. Her breathing
became more and more laborious; at the end of every expiration, there seemed to
be a total inactivity of the lungs for some moments, and the succeeding
inspiration was long. I should call her death, a forgetting to breathe. Her
eyelids were closed all the time, and when lifted up the pupils appeared very
much dilated, and not to have the power of contraction.

I remain, Dear Sir, Your very humble servant, etc. R. PRIEST.
HARLESTON, July 7, 1790.

