AN ORATION ON THE UTILITY OF PUBLIC INFIRMARIES. OCCASIONED BY THE Opening of
the RADCLIFFE INFIRMARY at OXFORD.

BY JOSEPH BROMEHEAD, M. A. of QUEEN'S COLLEGE.

LONDON, Sold by J. and F. RIVINGTON, in St. Paul's Churchyard; and D. PRINCE,
in OXFORD.

MDCCLXXII.

[Price One Shilling.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following little Piece was hastily drawn up in the Year 1769, when the
Heads of the University announced their Intention of opening the Radcliffe
Infirmary with an Encoenia. They afterward dropped this Design. But the Author
having lately employed a leisure Hour in correcting and somewhat enlarging his
ORATION, now begs Leave to lay it before the Public.

AN ORATION ON THE UTILITY OF PUBLIC INFIRMARIES.
IF we closely examine the moral Qualities, which are denominated Virtues, and
which Mankind have agreed to honor with Applause, we shall find that almost
all regard Man, as he is a social Being, born to do good Offices to others.
Upon this Principle it is found likewise, that our Approbation of virtuous
Actions, is usually proportioned to the Extent of their Influence and Utility.
Thus a Legislator and a Patriot must ever be more admired than a Man of
Prudence, Wisdom, and Integrity, exerted only in the contracted Sphere of
private Life.

BUT of all the social Qualities, Benevolence is the most immediately useful.
It is indeed the Source of all the rest, and naturally induces that great End
and Cement of Society, mutual Beneficence. This Virtue too, like all others,
becomes more illustrious in Proportion as its Consequences are more extended.

To the strong and universal Prevalence of this amiable Quality it is owing,
that the Magistrates and Legislators, in most Countries, have instituted some
Provision to alleviate the Miseries of the Indigent and Helpless. This also, in
the opulent, the liberal, and the ingenuous, has produced the undertaking of
Works of the present Kind, of Hospitals, Infirmaries, and Receptacles for the
Relief of various Distresses.

INDEED the Goods of Fortune, the Means of Health and Felicity, which come to
the Rich by Inheritance or Acquisition, are not their sole exclusive Property.
The Poor have a Claim of Right for their Share. And the Relation that subsists
between them and the Rich, certainly obliges the latter to assist them under
Diseases, Casualties, and heavy Calamities.

IT perhaps may not be unnecessary to remind the Sons of Ease and Affluence,
that the laborious Poor not only form the Bulk of the Nation, but are likewise
the Part on which the Strength, the Prosperity, and even the Existence of the
Whole depends. To them, as distributed through the humbler and more toilsome
Offices of Society, we owe all the Necessaries of Life, and all its
Conveniences. The Labor of the Husbandman, the Manufacturer, and Mechanic, is
confessedly essential to the Welfare of the Community; and yet a present
Subsistence for themselves and their Families is their only Recompense. Every
Sun rises to light them to their fatiguing Labor, which often ends not with
the closing Day. They contentedly toil on from Youth to Age, and while they
perhaps repose their weary Limbs in the Hut of Poverty, see their Sons entering
upon the same Course of unnoticed Hardships and unrewarded Industry. Surely
then their Lot at the best is not to be envied. But what a deplorable Change
must they feel, should they be attacked by any one of that Host of Diseases
which make such Havoc amongst the human Race? That Strength which supported
them in their daily Toil, now fails them; that Health of Body and Ease of Mind
which lightened the Burden of Poverty, are now no more. Sickness, by disabling
them from earning a Subsistence, occasions Want, and Want excludes the Means of
Recovery from Sickness. The two greatest of natural Evils united, double each
other's Weight, and accumulate Distress. Thus, in more sultry Climes, the
scorching Sun every where oppresses the fainting Traveller with his Beams, but
should they be reflected from the Declivity of some barren Mountain, the Heat
becomes intolerable, the very Air is tainted, and all Nature sickens.

WITHOUT Health, without the Means of recovering it, or even of subsisting,
whither then must these abandoned Sons of Affliction look for Relief? To the
casual Munificence of private Benefactors? Uncertain, hopeless Prospect! To
their own Friends or Kindred? Alas! their Pity is all they have to bestow. To
their Children (since some of them no doubt are Fathers of Families)? -- But
here the Scene is truly calamitous. The little Mourners stand round the sick
Bed of their Parent, and while they feel, deeply feel for his Sufferings,
cannot be insensible to their own. He turns an hopeless Eye toward them,
perceives them in Want of that Bread which he had hitherto provided for them by
his Labor, perceives them foretasting those Distresses which, at his Death,
are to be their sad Inheritance.

BUT waving these peculiar Circumstances of Misery, let us only reflect on that
Variety of Distempers to which Poverty is exposed, without the Means of Relief.
And in this View, what Objects of Compassion present themselves before us?
Objects which must awe the Pride of Man, and awaken his Tenderness.

"Numbers of all diseased, all Maladies,
Of ghastly Spasm, or racking Torture, Qualms
Of heart-sick Agony, all feverous Kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestine Stone and Ulcer, Colic Pangs,
Demoniac Phrenzy, moping Melancholy,
And Moon-struck Madness, pining Atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting Pestilence,
Dropsies and Asthmas, and joint-racking Rheums."
WHAT a Group of human Miseries! All various, yet all languid, deformed, and
loathsome. A benevolent Mind shudders at their very Names. But could you have
the wretched Sufferers before your Sight, could you mark the dire tossing of
restless Anguish, and listen to the deep Groans of Despair, surely every Eye
would drop a sympathizing Tear, and every gentle Heart would bleed.

IT may justly be a Matter of Wonder that our civil Police has made none, or at
least no adequate Provision for the Poor when laboring under these Calamities.
They are the Servants of the Public, and therefore entitled to its Protection.
Besides, a stronger Tie subsists. They whose Distresses thus loudly implore our
Compassion, what are they? Want, indeed, and Misfortunes have much disguised
them, and Misery has worn them to the Bone. Yet they have the same Nature, and
except a few accidental variable Distinctions, are the same with us. They have
an Original alike divine, a Mind alike intelligent. To be a Man, and to be
miserable, is a sufficient Claim on the generous and humane. Shall we then
leave those to perish, whom it is the Interest of their Country, and the Duty
of all Mankind to assist and preserve? Medicine, and every other Relief in the
Calamity of bodily Diseases, are natural Provisions for the present indigent
and infirm State of the Sons of Men. In Spite, indeed, of all these
Assistances, Sickness will still slay its Thousands, and thin the World by its
destroying Sword. But nothing surely can more contradict the Order of Nature
and the Will of Providence, than that Numbers should fall Victims, not so much
to the Fury of Disease, as to the Neglect and Cruelty of those who ought to
supply them with the Means of Recovery. Yet how many of our sick and disabled
Poor must be left to this unhappy Lot, if no public Infirmaries are established
to receive them?

THESE, indeed, open their friendly Doors for such poor deserted Wretches,
these bind up their Wounds, and exert all the Power of Medicine to heal their
Diseases.

WHERE no charitable Asylums of this Kind are erected, it is a common Resource
with our sick Poor, though a fatal one, to apply to mercenary and pernicious
Empirics, whose Ignorance either immediately deprives them of their Lives, or
injures their Healths beyond Reparation. But in these Houses of Charity they
are sure to find able Physicians, and every Thing provided for their
Convenience and Cure that Art can suggest or Munificence supply.

PUBLIC Infirmaries are not only the best, but the only Means by which the
necessitous can procure the several Kinds of Assistance which their various
bodily Diseases require. In large commercial Towns, what other Provision can be
made against those Casualties which so frequently happen to the poor laboring
Part of the Inhabitants, or to the still more unfortunate Stranger?

HERE give me leave to add to these general Advantages, one peculiar to this
Place. A Fashion has of late prevailed, to send such of our Youth as are
designed for the Profession of Physic, to foreign Academies, which, though far
inferior to our own in every other Respect, have been thought superior in this.
The Reason of a Custom so injurious to the Interest of our Country, and the
Honor of our Seats of Learning, is far from being satisfactory; however, by
the present Institution, the very Shadow of it is removed. Important as every
public Infirmary must be, the Importance of this is still more extensive. It
affords not only the best Assistance to the sick and disabled, but likewise the
best Opportunities of Observation and Improvement to young Students in the
medical Science, on whose future Skill so much depends. It has the happy, the
singular Excellence of at once relieving the Misery of Individuals, and making
that Misery beneficial to the Community. We now, at length, may justly boast
that ours is the most complete Seminary in Europe for so important a Study,
whether we regard Botany, Anatomy, the Theory or Practice of Medicine. To no
Profession is Learning more necessary: and here Students can best consult the
rich Treasures of Antiquity, and the Parents of the healing Art: here they may
add every liberal Accomplishment, and acquire that general and extensive
Knowledge for which the English Physicians are deservedly distinguished. When
we consider the general and local Advantages of the Infirmary here erected,
what public Honors and Benefits may we not date from this auspicious Era? May
we not foretell, that as our Alma Matter already reckons in the list of her
Sons, the greatest Names in Medicine, she will now add to the glorious
Catalogue, and see in her Train future Linacres, Willis's, Radcliffes, and
Friends, who shall emulate the Science and Reputation of those who have gone
before them?

BUT enough perhaps has been said to prove how much these Institutions concern
the public Interest and Honor: Indeed one would think it impossible that any
Persons should object to, or refuse supporting these excellent Undertakings,
which are so beneficial in all their Views: one would think it, I say,
impossible. But if any such should be, with such we will not contend. Let
Avarice refuse its Assistance, and, if possible, its Applause.

THOUGH public Infirmaries have political Advantages so undeniable and
self-evident, yet we may safely affirm that they stand on a firmer Basis, that
they are supported by Arguments stronger than the Deductions of Reason;
Arguments which every generous Breast must feel. When we reflect on the
Malignity of the Diseases, the Weight of the complicated Afflictions which they
are intended to relieve, we are, we cannot but be interested and disposed to
compassionate the Sufferers, partly from the Consciousness of being liable to
the same Evils, and partly from thy nobler Impulses, O Benevolence! Here the
truly humane Mind, like a well-tuned Instrument of Music, obeys the sudden
Touches of Pity, and the sweet Harmony of its social Affections, wholly passive
in the Sympathy of its own Goodness. While the Rich and Powerful indulge the
tender Sensations of Humanity, and promote such well-plann'd Works of
Beneficence as the present Institution, they at once communicate Happiness to
others, and inexpressibly augment their own. They feel, that they are obeying
the Dictates of purest Nature, and wisest Reason; that they are fulfilling the
Ends of Society, and the Will of its great Author, whose darling Attribute is
Mercy, whose very Essence is Love. Most wisely did he distribute Men into these
subordinate Ranks, and implant these generous Principles.

-- "He formed a Whole, the Whole to bless,
On mutual Wants built mutual Happiness."
WHATEVER may be the Vices of the present Age, the most censorious Cynick must
allow that it has its Share of that Philanthropy and Tenderness which we would
here recommend. History informs us that it was the barbarous Policy of some
ancient States to expose Infants if infirm, to abandon diseased Persons, and
even to destroy those who were rendered useless to the Community by Age and
Decrepitude. But polished Times and Nations are Strangers to such unfeeling
Sentiments. A Disposition to Compassion and to Offices of Kindness will ever
gain Ground in Proportion to Civilization, and improved Elegance of Manners.
Perhaps this Virtue expands itself most, when the Powers of the Mind are
softened by Luxury, and all other Virtues are in the Wane. It is certain that
the earliest Societies had less of it; Warriors and Heroes were their greatest
Characters.

HOWEVER this may be, I need not hesitate to congratulate my Country, since a
bountiful and beneficent Spirit is, and has ever been its national
Characteristick. For this, I may appeal even to the ruder Ages of Ignorance and
Superstition, to those hospitable and intentionally Religious, to those
venerable and princely Foundations, over whose general undistinguished Ruins,
Humanity and Piety must for ever mourn. Through the mistaken Zeal of our
Ancestors, these abounded more in our Isle than in any other Christian Country.
And if at their Dissolution, these noble Edifices and Endowments had been
applied to the Uses which the public Interest required; Poverty, Sickness, and
decrepit Age had never wanted an Asylum, nor had the sacred Will of the Dead
been so flagrantly violated, or their Ashes so impiously disturbed. Some of
them it must be owned in the Capital, by the Care and Earnestness of an
excellent Prelate, were saved from the sacrilegious Talons of Court-Harpies,
and consecrated to the Relief of Misery and Disease. But so small was the
Number, that it seemed only to point out how much might and ought to have been
done, had the least Degree of public Spirit, Justice, or Honor influenced
those infamous Plunderers. Here then was lost the grand Opportunity of
establishing Receptacles for Distress in every Part of the Kingdom; and with
equal Indignation and Sorrow must we look back on this deep, this indelible
Stain of the Annals of our Reformation.

BUT now indeed we see fairer and brighter Prospects around us. A Spirit of
Charity has diffused itself amongst all Ranks of People, amongst our Merchants,
our Lawgivers, and Nobles. The Liberality of our Forefathers is at least
equalled, and their Wisdom in choosing Objects of that Liberality much
surpassed. In our Metropolis, almost every Species of Distress has been
considered, pitied, and relieved.

THE deserted Infant, whose Misfortunes begin with its Existence, meets that
Redress for which it cannot petition.

THE unhappy Prostitute, though she has survived Innocence, finds she has not
survived Compassion, she sees an hospitable Retreat open for her Misery and
Shame, sees a friendly Hand reached out to recover her stumbling Feet to the
Paths of Virtue and Peace.

I MIGHT lead your Attention to that Mansion within whose Walls we behold the
noble Fabric of the Human Mind in its melancholy Ruins. -- But this is a Sight
of all others, the most humiliating and painful. For Persons in a State so
consummately calamitous, the bleeding Pity of their Fellow-Citizens has made a
munificent Provision; -- like the wounded Tree of Arabia, it weeps healing Balm.

WORTHY the Kings of a martial and generous People are those royal Foundations,
which receive the maimed Veteran, who has fought the Battles of his Country.
There after all his Toils and Dangers he sits down to recite in the honest
Loquacity of Age his hardy Deeds, and count his glorious Scars. -- Brave Man!
Peaceful shall be the Evening of a Life exposed in the Service of Britain; --
thy hoary Head is covered with well-earned Laurels!

I NEED not mention the various Infirmaries and Hospitals for the Sick. Enough
has already been said on the Excellence of these Houses of Mercy; and this is a
Species of patriotick Charity which has not been confined to our chief City. In
other Parts of the Kingdom, Receptacles have been established for those who
groan under the complicated Wretchedness of Poverty and Disease. And every one
of this illustrious Audience, every one (I doubt it not) will join me in
wishing that the Streams of Beneficence may still flow in so useful a Channel,
and that each of our provincial Towns may be blessed with such an Institution as
that which Oxford at length enjoys.

WHILST the benevolent Speculatist, the sincere Lover of his Country
contemplates all these Establishments as the Monuments of national Virtue, and
the Sources of innumerable Advantages to the State; the Lover of the Arts will
consider them in an additional Point of View, will regard the Structures which
are destined to the Purposes of public Munificence as exhibiting to foreign
Nations and to Posterity, the most striking Proofs of the Taste and
Magnificence of his Countrymen and Contemporaries. The Houses of private
Citizens (however opulent) are seldom equal in the Beauty of their Structure to
Edifices of public Use and Contrivance. Where the Purposes of private and
domestic Utility are only to be answered, the Genius of the Artist is
necessarily circumscribed: He may indeed in these give Proofs of the Elegance
of his Taste, and the Correctness of his Ideas; but from the Grand and
Magnificent he is unavoidably precluded. But public Edifices of every Kind,
have most of all, contributed to display the Arts of Design in their full
Luster, in every Age and Country where those Arts have been cultivated. To them
we owe the Memory both of laudable Actions and of illustrious Artists; and by
them the flourishing Nations of Antiquity have transmitted to us the most
durable Records of their former Splendour and Greatness. To them the first, and
most celebrated Cities of the World at this Day owe their chief Ornament.

THE Number of magnificent Churches, Colleges, and other public Buildings
throughout the Christian Boundaries, and especially in Italy, have afforded an
ample Field to the Genius of the Architect, the Statuary, and the Painter. In
one City only, the immense Fabric of St. Peter's, the Church of St. John
Lateran, the Vatican Library, the Hospital of the Holy Ghost, and almost
innumerable other Edifices of public Use, will always present Rome, though
fallen from her ancient Glories, as highly deserving the Attention of the
curious Traveller, and will immortalize the Names as well of those Artists who
contributed their Talents to their Erection and Embellishment, as of the Popes
their Patrons.

IN Spain, in France, in our own Country, and in every Nation where the Arts
have fixed their Residence, their Influence is most conspicuous in the Beauty
and Grandeur of public Structures.

No City or People can be more indebted for Decorations of this Kind to the
Munificence of a private Citizen, than we are to that admirable Person, from
whose extensive Benefactions to this Seminary has arisen the Design and
Establishment of an Infirmary in this Place. It would therefore be unjust to
close these Reflections without some Tribute to his Memory.

SUPERIOR to the common Views of a lucrative Profession, he esteemed Wealth
only valuable, as it enabled him to extend his good Offices to Mankind. Hence
the vast Fortune which he acquired by his singular Talents in the important
Science of Physic, was while he lived, a Fund of Charity and Beneficence; and
the noble Bequests made by him at his Death to this Place of his Education,
will continue the good Effects of his Liberality and his Gratitude to the
remotest Times.

HE was a Man undoubtedly born for the Benefit and Ornament of his Country. His
Virtues were of that Kind whose Luster will appear more amiable to the
undazzled Eye of Wisdom than the Trophies of Conquerors, and the splendid
Qualities of those whom the ill-judging Multitude calls Great. Amongst the
military Honors of ancient Rome, the only one perhaps, with which a benevolent
Man would wish to intwine his Brow, is the Civic Crown. And if he who preserved
the Life of a single Citizen deserved to be so distinguished, what Crowns must
we weave for RADCLIFFE? -- Such was the Wisdom which guided his beneficent
Soul, such was the Propriety which regulated the Disposition of his Wealth,
that though dead he still remedies the Distresses and Diseases of Men, and
claims from them a daily-increasing Tribute of grateful Applause. The helpless
Objects, who are relieved from Misery, or rescued from Death by his Bounty,
shall hang around his Monument, the useless Crutch, and the votive Tablet. --
Even those on whom Providence has bestowed Affluence, though they are not
affected by his Munificence, may be animated by his Example.

BUT it is unnecessary to expatiate on Merit so transcendent, and I will not
obscure his Praises by my feeble Attempts to display them. As the Benefits
resulting from his well-directed and boundless Liberality, will assuredly
extend to future Ages, we may safely trust his Fame to Posterity.

FINIS.

