IN THE PRESS, AND SPEEDILY WILL BE PUBLISHED, ELEGANTLY PRINTED IN ONE VOLUME,
QUARTO, Illustrated with a great Variety of PLATES of Non-descript ANIMALS,
BIRDS, SERPENTS, LIZARDS, curious CONES of TREES, etc. etc., and other Natural
Productions of NEW SOUTH WALES, copied from Nature by Miss STONE, and engraved
by the best Artists, of A JOURNAL of a VOYAGE TO BOTANY BAY, IN NEW SOUTH WALES.

With a full and accurate Account of His Majesty's Settlement at that Place,
PORT JACKSON, and NORFOLK ISLAND; with a Description of the NATIVES, a correct
DIARY of the WEATHER, LATITUDES and LONGITUDES, etc. etc.

By JOHN WHITE, Esquire.

Surgeon General to His Majesty's Forces, and to the Settlement in NEW SOUTH
WALES.

Printed for J. DEBRETT, opposite Burlington House, Piccadilly.

* SPECIMENS, in fine Preservation, of the Subjects in NATURAL HISTORY,
transmitted by Mr. WHITE, may be seen at J. DEBRETT's, who will thankfully
receive the Names of such Noblemen and Gentlemen, who may be pleased to
patronize Mr. White's Journal.

JOURNAL of a Voyage to new South Wales with Sixty-five Plates of Non descript
Animals* Birds* Lizards* serpents* curious Cones of Trees and other NATURAL
PRODUCTIONS By John White Esqre. Surgeon General to the Settlement.



LONDON Printed for J. Debrett, Piccadilly

MDCCXC

To THOMAS WILSON, Esquire.
DEAR SIR,
AS the following Journal was undertaken at your Request, and its principal
Object to afford you some Amusement during your Hours of Relaxation, I shall
esteem myself happy if it answers that Purpose.

I hope that the Specimens of Natural History may tend to the Promotion of your
favorite Science, and that, on this Account, it will not be unacceptable to
you. By the next Conveyance I trust I shall be enabled to make some Additions,
that will not be unworthy the Attention of the Naturalists.

Let my present Communications, which the sudden sailing of the Ships from
hence, and the Duties of my Department, have rendered less copious than I
intended, at least serve to convince you of my Readiness at all Times to comply
with your Wishes; and of the Respect and Esteem with which I am,

DEAR SIR, YOUR VERY OBEDIENT AND HUMBLE SERVANT, JOHN WHITE.
SYDNEY COVE, Port Jackson, New South Wales, November 18th, 1788.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT becomes the duty of the Editor, as much as it is his inclination, to return
his public and grateful acknowledgements to the Gentlemen, through whose
abilities and liberal communications, in the province of Natural History, he
has been enabled to surmount those difficulties that necessarily attended the
description of so great a variety of animals, presented for the first time to
the observation of the Naturalist, and consequently in the class of
Non-descripts.

Among those Gentlemen he has the honor, particularly, to reckon the names of
Dr. Shaw; Dr. Smith, the possessor of the celebrated Linnaean Collection; and
John Hunter, Esquire. who, to a sublime and inventive genius, happily unites a
disinterested and generous zeal for the promotion of natural science.

The Public may rely, with the most perfect confidence, on the care and
accuracy with which the Drawings have been copied from nature, by Miss Stone,
Mr. Catton, Mr. Nodder, and other artists; and the Editor flatters himself the
Engravings are all executed with equal correctness, by, or under the immediate
inspection of Mr. Milton. The Birds, etc. from which the drawings were taken
are deposited in the Leverian Museum.

A LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
A.
A 'COURT, William Pierce Ash, Esquire. M. P. Addison, Edward, Esquire. Anderson,
Thomas, Esquire. Anstruther, John, Esquire. M. P. Allen, Joseph, Esquire. Arthur, Mr.
Adair, James, Esquire.
B.
Burrell, Sir William, Bart. Barnard, Mr. Brisac, Mrs. G. Banks, Sir Joseph,
Bart. Budgen, John Smith, Esquire. Buck, George, Esquire. Brook, Mr. Brook, Mr. Richard
Bolt, John, Esquire. Bunbury, Sir Tho. Charles, Bart. M. P. Bonnor, Mr. William
Bowering, Mr. Bosville, William, Esquire. Bradshaw, Augustus Cavendish, Esquire.
Buckingham Book Club Bowyer, George, Esquire. Boldero, Charles, Esquire. Binstead,
Thomas, Esquire. Blackmore, Mr. Buckmaster, Joseph, Esquire. Barwell, Edward, Esquire.
Barton, the Rev. Mr. Brown, Jackson, Esquire. Bateman, Lord Viscount Byrne,
William, Esquire. Beckett, Mr. Bookseller, 4 copies Barker, George Hollington, Esquire.
Baldwin, Mr. Bookseller, 25 copies Bew, Mr. ditto, 12 ditto
C.
Crewe, John, Esquire. M. P. Caldwell, Sir John, Bart. Cotterell, John, Esquire.
Cavendish, Right Hon. Sir Henry, Bart. Carpenter, Richard, Esquire. Comb, Dr.
Caslon, William, Esquire. Clake, Rev. James Charles Church, James Miller, Esquire.
Crookshanks, John, Esquire. Crace, John, Esquire. Carter, Thomas, Esquire. Clarke, Richard,
Esquire. Currie, Mark, Esquire. Chase, John, Esquire. Claridge, Mr. Chapman, Mr. Henry, two
copies. Calvert, Robert, Esquire. Calvert, Charles, Esquire. Cornwall, Thomas, Esquire.
Clark, Mr. Bookseller, 6 copies Clarke, Mr. ditto, 3 ditto Cuthell, Mr. ditto,
3 ditto Cooper, Mr. ditto, 6 ditto
D.
Dundas, Sir Thomas, Bart. M. P. Dawkins, Henry, Esquire. Donegal, the Earl of
Dyer, Mr. George Dormer, Lady Cottrell Do, John, Esquire. Digby, the Rev. Noel
Delgarno, John, Esquire. Dent, John, Esquire. Dilly, Mr. Bookseller, 6 copies Deighton,
Mr. ditto 6 ditto
E.
Ellis, George, Esquire. Earl, George, Esquire. Evans, Mr. David Elliot, William, Esquire.
Eardley, Mrs. Estridge, John, Esquire. Englefield, Sir Henry, Bart. Eaton, the Rev.
Stephen Elmsley, Mr. Bookseller, 6 copies Egerton, Mess. T. and J. ditto, 15
do. Edwards, Mr. ditto, 9 ditto Evans, Mr. ditto, 6 ditto Earl, Mr. 3 copies
F.
Falkner, Thomas, Esquire. Fullarton, William, Esquire. Fonnereau, Martin, Esquire.
Fairbank, Mr. Fitzhugh, Thomas, Esquire. Faulder, Mr. Bookseller, 15 copies Forbes,
Mr. Bookseller, 3 copies Foster, Mr. 12 copies Freeman, John, Esquire.
G.
Gardener, Sir John Whalley, Bart. Godfrey, John, Esquire. Gilbert, Captain Garrow,
William, Esquire. Garrow, Joseph, Esquire. Grierson, J. Esquire. Gregson, Mr. C.
Groombridge, Mr. Goldsmid, Jeremiah, Esquire. Goldsmid, Abraham, Esquire. Goodenough,
Rev. Dr. Gray, Richard, Esquire. Gardner, Mr. Bookseller, 9 copies
H.
Harwood, William, Esquire. Hargrave, Francis, Esquire. Holland, Richard, Esquire. Hawke,
Lord Hawkins, Thomas, Esquire. Hookham, Mr. Bookseller, 12 copies Hughes, Sir
Edward, K. B. Heydinger, Mr. Hume, Sir Abraham, Bart. Holmes, Leonard
Troughear, Esquire. Hall, Mr. Hoare, Charles, Esquire. Halliday, Capt. John Smith Home,
Everard, Esquire. Hibbert, Thomas, Esquire. Hodgson, John, Esquire. Hibbert, George, Esquire.
Hunter, John, Esquire. Heylin, J. Esquire. How, Captain Harlow, Mrs. Bookseller, 6
copies Hanbury, William, Esquire. Harpur, Robert, Esquire. Haskoll, Mr.
J.
Jenkins, Rev. Mr. James, Charles, Esquire. Inchiquin, the Earl of, K. P. Jeffery,
Mr. Bookseller, 12 copies Jervoise Clarke Jervoise, Esquire. Johnson, Mr.
Bookseller, 12 copies
K.
Kanmacher, Mr. Frederick King, Lord Kelsall, Lieutenant Kenton, B. Esquire.
Kennion, Mr. Keys, Richard, Esquire. Kerby, Mr. John, Bookseller, 6 copies Kerby,
Mr. James, ditto, 6 ditto
L.
Lettsom, Dr. Lewisham, Viscount Lucan, Lord Lomax, Mr. Charles Lowes, J. Esquire.
Lawrence, Richard, Esquire. two copies L. P. Esquire. Lake, Sir James Winter, Bart.
Losack, Mrs. London, Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of Lester, Mr. Long, William,
Esquire. Ladbroke, Felix, Esquire. Longman, Mr. Bookseller, 6 copies Law, Mr. ditto, 9
copies Lewis, Mr. ditto, 6 ditto
M.
Molesworth, Sir William, Bart. Monro, Dr. John Marsham, Hon. Charles Mellow,
A. Esquire. two copies Mundy, Edward Miller, Esquire. M. P. Mollyneux, Sir Francis,
Bart. Murray, Mr. 6 copies Minshull, William, Esquire. Minet, Daniel, Esquire.
Mollyneux, Miss Mackenzie, Alexander, Esquire. Milton, Mr. Thomas
N.
Nesbitt, John, Esquire. M. P. Noble, Francis, Esquire. Nassau, Hon. Mr.
O.
Orford, the Earl of, 2 copies Orr, Captain Osbaldeston, George, Esquire. Ormerod,
Rev. Mr. Ogilvy and Spear, Messrs. Booksellers, 3 copies
P.
Pennant, Thomas, Esquire. Pit, William, Esquire. Parker, Sir Hyde Popham, John, Esquire.
Peachey, Sir James, Bart. Peachey, John, Esquire. Price, Charles, Esquire. Popplewell,
Mr. Pratt, John, Esquire. Parkinson, Rev. John Purling, John, Esquire. Poeliskie,
Lewis, Esquire. Poulter, Rev. Mr. Pratt, Mr. J. Price, Mr. William. Powlett, the
Rev. Charles Pigou, W. H. Esquire. Pain and Son, Messrs. Booksellers, 15 copies
Phillips, Mr. ditto, 6 ditto
R.
Rushworth, Edward, Esquire. M. P. Rous, Thomas Bates, Esquire. Rainsford, Mr. Ramus,
Mr. Roberts, John, Esquire. Rebello, D. A. Esquire. Robinson, J. Esquire. Raynsford,
Nicolls, Esquire. Rycroft, Sir Nelson, Bart. Rigg, J. Jun. Esquire. Reppington, Charles
Edward, Esquire. Ridley, Sir Matthew White, Baronet, M. P. Richards, the Rev. Mr.
Rowles, Charles Lee, Esquire. Rudge, Samuel, Esquire. Robinsons, Messrs. Booksellers,
60 copies Rivington and Sons, ditto, 6 ditto Robson, Mr. ditto, 6 copies
Spencer, Earl Sturt, Charles, Esquire. M. P. Songa, A. Esquire. Stimpson, Captain
Styan, Mr. Smith, William, Esquire. Swainson, Isaac, Esquire. Smith, Mr. Shuttleworth,
Robert, Esquire. Smith, Sir John, Bart. Sage, Isaac, Esquire. Spence, George, Esquire. St.
John, Lord Staniforth, William, Esquire. Smith, Mrs. late Miss Stone Shaw, Doctor
Smith, Dr. Sewell, Mr. Bookseller, 62 copies Strahan, Mr. ditto, 3 copies
Scatcherd and Whitaker, Messrs. 6 do.
T.
Tahourdin, I. S. Esquire. Twigge, Rev. Mr. Tailor, Michael Angelo, Esquire. M. P.
Throckmorton, John, Esquire. Todd, Thomas, Esquire. Tunnard, William, Esquire. Tunstall,
Marmaduke, Esquire. Tyrwhit, Emund, Esquire. Trevelyan, Sir John, Bart. M. P. Turner,
John, Esquire. Tahourdin, Captain Tempest, John, Esquire. M. P. Tollemache, the Hon.
Mr. Tesseyman, Mr. William, 6 copies Tailor, Messrs. J. and J. 3 copies
U.
Uphill, Mr. Upjohn, Mr. Peter Upjohn, Mr.
W.
Wilson, Thomas, Esquire. 20 copies Wilson, Rev. Joseph Woodd, Mr. John Wools, Mr.
Warren, Dr. Ward, Rev. William Walsh, John, Esquire. Walford, Thomas, Esquire. Wilson,
Mr. George Ward, Rev. Mr. Watson, Hon. Lewis Watherston, Dalhousie, Esquire. White,
Rev. Edward Watson, Thomas, Esquire. Winchester, the Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of
Willan, Dr. Walpole, Lord Wilson, Lady Whalley, James, Esquire. Wollaston, Mr.
Wallace, Sir James Worsley, the Rev. Henry, of Arriton, Hants Worsley, the Rev.
H. of Whitcombe Win, Robert Watkyn, Esquire. M. P. White, Mr. Bookseller, 3
copies Walker, Thomas, Esquire. Weld, Richard, Esquire. Wakeman, Thomas, Esquire. Wright,
Mr. Thomas Walker, Mr. Bookseller, 12 copies Wilkie, Messrs. ditto, 6 copies
White and Son, ditto, 18 ditto Walter, Mr. Charing Cross, ditto, 15 ditto
Z.
Zimmermann, Mr.
A LIST OF PLATES.
1 NEW Holland Cassowary PAGE. 129 2 Great Brown King's Fisher PAGE. 137 3
Banksian Cockatoo PAGE. 139 4 Blue Bellied Parrot PAGE. 140 5 Anomalous
Hornbill PAGE. 142 6 Wattled Bee-eater PAGE. 144 7 Do. Female PAGE. 145 8
Golden Winged Pigeon PAGE. 146 9 Port Jackson Thrush PAGE. 157 10 Yellow Eared
Fly Catcher PAGE. 161 11 Tabuan Parrot, Male PAGE. 168 12 Do. Female PAGE. 169
13 Pennantian Parrot, Male PAGE. 174 14 Do. Female PAGE. 175 15 New Holland
Creeper, Male PAGE. 186 16 Knob Fronted Bee-eater PAGE. 190 17 Sacred King's
Fisher PAGE. 193 18 The Banksia Serrata in Bud PAGE. 221 19 Do. in Flower PAGE.
222 20 Do. in Fruit PAGE. 223 21 The Banksia Pyriformis PAGE. 224 22 The
Banksia, and Banksia Gibbosa PAGE. 225 23 Peppermint Tree PAGE. 226 24 Tea Tree
of New South Wales PAGE. 230 25 Bark of the Red Gum Tree PAGE. 231 26 Crested
Cockatoo PAGE. 237 27 White Fulica PAGE. 238 28 Southern Motacilla PAGE. 239 29
Crested Goatsucker PAGE. 241 30 Scinc-formed Lizard PAGE. 242 31 Muricated
Lizard and Snake PAGE. 244 32 Ribboned and Broad-tailed Lizards PAGE. 245 33
Blue Frogs PAGE. 248 34 Root of the Yellow Gum Tree PAGE. 249 35 White Hawk
PAGE. 250 36 White Vented Crow PAGE. 251 37 Fulliginous Peteril PAGE. 252 38
Variegated Lizard PAGE. 253 39 Pungent Chaetodon and Granulated Balistes PAGE.
254 40 Muricated Lizard, Variety PAGE. 255 41 Superb Warblers PAGE. 256 42
Motacilla PAGE. 257 43 Snake, No. 1. PAGE. 258 44 Do. No. 2. PAGE. 258 45 Do.
No. 5. PAGE. 258 46 Do. No. 1. and 2. PAGE. 259 47 Insects of New South Wales,
viz. Large Scolopendra, Spider, Crab, and Caterpillar PAGE. 260 48 Small
Paroquet PAGE. 262 49 Red Shouldered Do. PAGE. 263 50 Cypronaceous Labrus and
Hippocampus PAGE. 264 51 Doubtful Lophius PAGE. 265 52 Southern Cottus and
Flying Fish PAGE. 266 53 Fasciated Mullet and Doubtful Sparus PAGE. 268 54 The
Kangaroo PAGE. 272 55 White Jointed Spider PAGE. 277 56 Wha Tapoua Roo PAGE.
278 57 Dog of New South Wales PAGE. 280 58 The Tapoa Tafa PAGE. 281 59 The
Spotted Do. PAGE. 285 60 A Poto Roo PAGE. 286 61 Hepoona Roo PAGE. 288 62
Feather of the Cassowary, and Fish Hooks PAGE. 290 63 Implements of New South
Wales; viz. a War Spear, Fish Gig, Hatchet, a Sword, and Basket of New South
Wales PAGE. 292 64 Atherine, Tobacco Pipe, and Remora Fish PAGE. 296 65 New
Holland Creeper, Female PAGE. 297
WHITE's JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE TO NEW SOUTH WALES.


General Collins, commander in chief at that port, lost no time in carrying the
orders I had brought into execution: so that on the morning of the ninth, the
detachment of marines were on board, with all the baggage. But the next day
being ushered in with a very heavy gale of wind, 1787. March.
made it impracticable to remove the convicts from on board the Dunkirk
prison-ship, where they were confined. So violent was the gale, that his
Majesty's ship the Druid, of thirty-two guns, was forced to cut away her
mainmast to prevent her driving on shore.

The weather being moderate the following day, the convicts were put on board
the transports, and placed in the different apartments allotted for them; all
secured in irons, except the women. In the evening, as there was but little
wind, we were towed by the boats belonging to the guardships out of the
Hamaoze, where the Dunkirk lay, into Plymouth Sound. When this duty was
completed, the boats returned; and the wind now freshening so as to enable us
to clear the land, we proceeded to Spithead, where we arrived the seventeenth,
and anchored on the Mother Bank, among the rest of the transports and
victuallers intended for the same expedition, under the conduct of his
Majesty's ship the Sirius. As soon as the ship came to anchor, I visited all
the other transports, and was really surprised to find the convicts on board
them so very healthy. When I got on board the Alexander, I found there a
medical gentleman from Portsmouth, among whose acquaintance I had not the
honor to be numbered. He scarcely gave me time to get upon the quarter deck,
before he thus addressed me -- I am very glad you are arrived, Sir; for your
people have got a malignant disease among them of a most dangerous kind; and it
will be necessary, for their preservation, to get them immediately relanded!
Surprised at such a salutation, and alarmed at the purport of it, I requested
of my assistant, Mr. Balmain, an intelligent young man, whom I had appointed to
this ship for the voyage, to let me see the people who were ill. "Sir,"
returned Mr. Balmain, taking me aside, you will not find things by any means so
bad as this gentleman represents them to be: they are made much worse by him
than they really are. Unlike a person wishing to administer comfort to those
who are afflicted, either in body or in mind, he has publicly declared before
the poor creatures who are ill, that they must inevitably fall a sacrifice to
the malignant disorder with which they are afflicted; -- the malignity of which
appears to me to exist only in his own imagination. I did not, however,
continued Mr. Balmain, think proper to contradict the gentleman; supposing,
from the consequence he assumed, and the ease with which he had given his
opinion, or more properly his directions, that he was some person appointed by
the Secretary of State to officiate for you till your arrival. When you go
among the people you will be better able to judge of the propriety of what I
have said. Mr. Balmain had no sooner concluded than I went between decks, and
found every thing just as he had represented it to be. There were several in
bed with slight inflammatory complaints; some there were who kept their bed to
avoid the inconvenience of the cold, which was at this time very piercing, and
whose wretched clothing was but a poor defense against the rigor of it; others
were confined to their bed through the effects of long imprisonment, a weakened
habit, and lowness of spirits; which was not a little added to by the
declaration of the medical gentleman above mentioned, whom they concluded to be
the principal surgeon to the expedition. However, on my undeceiving them in
that point, and at the same time confirming what Mr. Balmain had from the first
told them, viz. that their complaints were neither malignant nor dangerous,
their fears abated. To this I added, that I would immediately give orders for
such as were in want of clothing, to be supplied with what was needful; a power
delegated to me by Captain Phillip, together with the liberty of giving such
other directions as I thought would tend to the recovery or preservation of
their health. And further, as they had been nearly four months on board, and
during that time had been kept upon salt provisions, I would endeavor to get
fresh for them while in port. This short conversation had so sudden an effect
on those I addressed, and was of so opposite a tendency to that of the
gentleman alluded to, that before we got from between decks, I had the pleasure
to see several of them put on such clothes as they had, and look a little
cheerful. I then pointed out to Lieutenant Johnson, commanding officer of the
marines on board, and to the master of the ship, the necessity there was of
admitting the convicts upon the deck, one half at a time, during the course of
the day; in order that they might breathe a purer air, as nothing would conduce
more to the preservation of their health. To this these gentlemen readily
assented; adding, that they had no objection to the whole number coming upon
deck at once, if I thought it necessary, as they were not apprehensive of any
danger from the indulgence. On returning to the quarter deck, I found my new
medical acquaintance still there; and before I could give some directions to
Mr. Balmain, as I was about to do, he thus once more addressed me -- I suppose
you are now convinced of the dangerous disease that prevails among these
people, and of the necessity of having them landed, in order to get rid of it.
Not a little hurt at the absurd part the gentleman had acted, and at his
repeated importunity, I replied with some warmth, that I was very sorry to
differ so essentially in opinion from him, as to be obliged to tell him that
there was not the least appearance of malignity in the disease under which the
convicts labored, but that it wholly proceeded from the cold; and was nearly
similar to a complaint then prevalent, even among the better sort of people, in
and about Portsmouth. Notwithstanding this, he still persisted so much in the
propriety of their being landed, and the necessity there was for an application
to the Secretary of State upon the occasion, that I could no longer keep my
temper; and I freely told him, that the idea of landing them was as improper as
it was absurd. And, in order to make him perfectly easy on that head, I assured
him, that when any disease rendered it necessary to call in medical aid, he
might rest satisfied I would not trouble him; but would apply to Doctor Lind,
Physician to the Royal Hospital at Hasler, a gentleman as eminently
distinguished for his professional abilities as his other amiable qualities; or
else to some of the surgeons of his Majesty's ships in Portsmouth harbor, or
at Spithead, most of whom I had the pleasure of knowing, and on whose medical
knowledge I was certain I could depend. This peremptory declaration had the
desired effect. The gentleman took his leave, to my great satisfaction, and
thereby gave me an opportunity of writing by that evening's post, to inform the
Secretary of State, and Captain Phillip, of the real state of the sick; and at
the same time to urge the necessity of having fresh provisions served to the
whole of the convicts while in port, as well as a little wine for those who
were ill. Fresh provisions I dwelt most on, as being not only needful for the
recovery of the sick, but otherwise essential, in order to prevent any of them
commencing so long and tedious a voyage as they had before them with a
scorbutic taint; a consequence that would most likely attend their living upon
salt food; and which, added to their needful confinement and great numbers,
would, in all probability, prove fatal to them, and thereby defeat the
intention of Government.

The return of the post brough me an answer; and likewise an order to the
contractor for supplying the marines and convicts daily with fresh beef and
vegetables, while in port. A similar order I found had been given long before
my arrival; but, by some strange mistake or other, had not been complied with.
The salutary effect of this change of diet, with the addition of some wine and
other necessaries ordered for the sick, through the humanity of Lord Sydney,
manifested itself so suddenly, that in the space of a fortnight, on comparing
my list of sick with that of a surgeon belonging to one of the guardships,
allowing for the disproportion of numbers, mine did not exceed his. And yet,
notwithstanding this, which is a well known fact, the report of a most
malignant disease still prevailed: and so industriously was the report
promulgated and kept alive by some evil-minded people, who either wished to
throw an odium on the humane promoters of the plan, or to give uneasiness to
the friends and relations of those engaged in the expedition, that letters from
all quarters were pouring in upon us, commiserating our state. The newspapers
were daily filled with alarming accounts of the fatality that prevailed among
us; and the rumor became general, notwithstanding every step was taken to
remove these fears, by assurances (which were strictly true) that the whole
fleet was in as good a state of health, and as few in it would be found to be
ill, at that cold season of the year, as even in the most healthy situation on
shore. The clearest testimony that there was more malignity in the report than
in the disease, may be deduced from the very inconsiderable number that have
died since we left England; which I may safely venture to say is much less than
ever was known in so long a voyage (the numbers being proportionate), even
though not laboring under the disadvantages we were subject to, and the
crowded state we were in.

During the absence of Captain Phillip, I mentioned to Captain Hunter of the
Sirius, that I thought whitewashing with quick lime the parts of the ships
where the convicts were confined, would be the means of correcting and
preventing that unwholesome dampness which usually appeared on the beams and
sides of the ships, and was occasioned by the breath of the people. Captain
Hunter agreed with me on the propriety of the step: and with that obliging

May 12. His Majesty's ship the Hyaena joined us this day, and put herself
under the command of Captain Phillip, who had instructions to take her with him
as far as he should think needful. In the evening the Sirius made the signal to
weigh, and attempted to get down to St. Helen's; but the wind shifting, and
several of the convoy not getting under way, through some irregularity in the
seamen, she was obliged to anchor. When this was done, Captain Phillip sent
Lieutenant King on board the ships which had occasioned the detention, who soon
adjusted the difficulties that had arisen; as they were found to proceed more
from intoxication than from any nautical causes.

13th. This morning the Sirius and her convoy weighed again, with an intention
of going through St. Helen's; but the wind being fair for the Needles, we run
through them, with a pleasant breeze. The Charlotte, Captain Gilbert, on board
of which I was, sailing very heavy, the Hyaena took us in tow, until she
brought us ahead of the Sirius, and then cast us off.

15th. An accident of a singular nature happened today. Corporal Baker of the
marines, on laying a loaded musket down, which he had just taken out of the
arms chest, was wounded by it in the inner ankle of the right foot. The bones,
after being a good deal shattered, turned the ball; which taking another
direction, had still force enough left to go through a harness-cask full of
beef, at some distance, and, after that, to kill two geese that were on the
other side of it. Extraordinary as this incident may appear, it is no less
true. The corporal being a young man, and in a good habit of body, I had the
pleasure, contrary to the general expectation, of seeing him return to his duty
in three months, with the perfect use of the wounded joint.

20th. A discovery of a futile scheme, formed by the convicts on board the
Scarborough, was made by one of that body, who had been recommended to Captain
Hunter previous to our sailing. They had laid a plan for making themselves
masters of the ship; but being prevented by this discovery, two of the
ringleaders were carried on board the Sirius, where they were punished; and
afterward put on

28th. Departed this life, Ismael Coleman, a convict, who, worn out by lowness
of spirits and debility, brought on by long and close confinement, resigned his
breath without a pang.

30th. In the forenoon passed to the southward of Madeira, and saw some turtle
of the hawks-bill kind.

June 2d. Saw and passed the Salvages. These islands are not laid down in any
of the charts we had on board, except a small one, by Hamilton Moore, in the
possession of the second mate. They lie, by our observation, in lat. 30. 10. N.
long. 15. 9. W.

3d. This evening, after seeing many small fish in our way from the Salvages,
we arrived at Teneriffe, and anchored in Santa Cruz road, about a mile to the
N. E. of the town of that name, in sixteen fathom water; some of the ships came
to in twenty fathom. We were visited the same night, as is the custom of the
port, by the harbor master, and gained permission to water, and procure such
refreshments as the island afforded. The marines were now served with wine in
lieu of spirits; a pound of fresh beef was likewise daily distributed to them
as well as to the convicts; together with a pound of rice instead of bread, and
such vegetables as could be procured. Of the latter indeed the portion was
rather scanty, little besides onions being to be got; and still less of fruit,
it being too early in the season.

4th. Captain Phillip, as governor of his Majesty's territories in New South
Wales, and commander in chief of the expedition, accompanied by twenty of the
principal officers, paid his respects to the Marquis de Brancifort, governor of
this and the other Canary islands. We were received by his Excellency with
great politeness and cordiality; and after the ceremony of introduction was
over, he entered into familiar conversation with Captain Phillip on general
topics. In person the Marquis is genteel; he is rather above the middle size,
but cannot boast of much embonpoint; his countenance is animated; his
deportment easy and graceful; and both his appearance and manners perfectly
correspond with the idea universally entertained of the dignity of a grandee of
Spain. This accomplished nobleman, as I have been informed, is not a Spaniard
by birth, but a Sicilian; and descended from some of the princes of that
island. On this ancestry and descent, it is visible that he prides himself not
a little. The people he is placed over will have it, that he carries himself
with too much stateliness to be long a favorite there; they cannot, however,
help acknowledging that he preserves a degree of disinterestedness, moderation,
and justice, in his conduct toward them, that is not to be objected to.

6th. A convict, named James Clark, died of a dropsy; he had been tapped ten
days before, and discharged twelve quarts of water.

8th. During the night, while the people were busily employed in taking in
water on board the Alexander, a service in which some of the convicts assisted,
one of them, of the name of Powel, found means to drop himself unperceived into
a small boat that lay along-side; and under cover of the night to cast her off
without discovery. He then drifted to a Dutch East Indiaman that had just come
to an anchor, to the crew of which he told a plausible story, and entreated to
be taken on board; but, though they much wanted men, they would have nothing to
do with him. Having committed himself again to the waves, he was driven by the
wind and the current, in the course of the night, to a small island lying to
leeward of the ships, where he was the next morning taken. The boat and oars,
which he could not conceal, led to a discovery; otherwise he would probably
have effected his escape. When brought back by the party sent after him,
Captain Phillip ordered him into irons, in which state he remained for some
time; but at length, by an artful petition he got written for him, he so
wrought on the governor's humanity, as to procure a release from his
confinement.

As you approach the island of Teneriffe, and even when you are near to it, the
appearance from the sea conveys no very favorable idea of its fertility; one
rugged, barren hill or mountain terminating in another, until it forms the
famous Peak. The town of Santa Cruz is large and populous, but very irregular
and ill built; some of the private houses, however, are spacious, convenient,
and well constructed. Although this town is not considered as the capital,
Laguna enjoying that pre-eminence, yet I cannot help thinking it ought to be
so; not only from its being more frequented by ships of various nations, and
having a greater share of trade than any other port in the Canaries, but on
account of its being the residence of the governor-general.

Among other steps for its improvement, the Marquis set on foot a contribution,
and from the produce of it has caused to be built an elegant and commodious
mole, or pier, about the center of the town. To this pier, water of an
excellent quality is conveyed by pipes; so that boats may come along-side, and
by applying a hose to the cocks placed there for this purpose, fill the casks
without the usual trouble and fatigue. The landing or shipping of goods is
likewise, by means of this pier, rendered both convenient and expeditious. In
short, I think I may safely recommend this port as a very good one for ships
undertaking long voyages to water at, and refresh their crews; more especially
in the time of the fruit season.

About four or five miles, inland, from Santa Cruz, stands the city of Laguna;
so called from a lake near which it is situated. This lake, during the winter,
or in rainy weather, is full of stagnant water, that in a little time becomes
putrid, and, in very dry hot weather, is totally exhaled. I have before
observed, that Laguna is considered as the capital of the island, and added my
reasons for thinking this an ill-judged distinction. The road from Santa Cruz
to it is a pretty steep ascent, until you approach the town, which is situated
at the extremity, or rather on a corner, of a plain three or four miles long.
This city has two churches, one of them richly ornamented; and several convents
both of friars and nuns. It has likewise three hospitals; two of which were
originally instituted for the wise, but ineffectual, purpose of eradicating the
lues venerea; a disease that has long been, and still continues to be, very
common in this island. I was however informed, that persons afflicted with
other disorders are now received into these two charitable institutions; and
that the third is appropriated to the reception of foundlings. Besides the
foregoing, there are some other public, as well as private buildings, that tend
to improve the appearance of the town. There is very little trade carried on at
Laguna, it being rather the retired residence of the gentry of the island, and
of the merchants of Santa Cruz, which is the principal seat of commerce. The
officers of justice likewise reside here; such as the corrigedor, lieutenant of
the police, etc. and a judge whose business it is to regulate commercial
affairs. An office of inquisition, with the proper officers, delegated from,
and subject to, the tribunal of the holy office held at Grand Canary, is
besides established here.

The present natives of this island seem to have in them very little of the
stock from whence they sprung; intermarriages with the Spaniards have nearly
obliterated all traces of the original stamina: they are of a middle stature,
inclining to be slender, and of a dark complexion, with large animated black
eyes. The peasants in general are wretchedly clothed; when they do appear
better, they are habited in the Spanish fashion. The men, in a genteeler line,
dress very gaily, and are seldom seen without long swords. It is remarked, that
few of them walk with dignity and ease; which may be attributed to the long
cloaks they usually wear, except on particular occasions.

The women wear veils: those worn by the lower ranks are of black stuff, those
of the higher, of black silk; and such among the latter as have any claim to
beauty, are far from being over careful in concealing their faces by them. The
young ladies, some of whom I saw that were really pretty, wear their fine long
black hair plaited, and fastened with a comb, or a ribbon, on the top of the
head.

The common people, and in this they resemble the inhabitants of most of the
islands in the Pacific Ocean lately discovered, have a strong spice of furacity
in them; they are besides lazy; and the most importunate beggars in the world:
I observed likewise, that the itch was so common among them, and had attained
such a degree of virulence, that one would almost be led to believe it was
epidemic there.

Some of the women are so abandoned and shameless, that it would be doing an
injustice to the prostitutes met with in the streets of London, to say they are
like them. The females of every degree are said to be of an amorous
constitution, and addicted to intrigue; for which no houses could be better
adapted than those in Teneriffe.

The manufactures carried on here are very few, and the product of them little
more than sufficient for their own consumption. They consist of taffeties,
gauze, coarse linens, blankets, a little silk, and curious garters. The
principal dependence of the inhabitants is on their wine (their staple
commodity), oil, corn, and every kind of stock for shipping. With these the
island abounds; and, in their season, produces not only the tropical fruits,
but the vegetable productions of the European gardens, in the greatest plenty.
Teneriffe enjoys an agreeable and healthful mediocrity of climate. Indeed I
know of none better adapted for the restoration of a valetudinarian; as, by
going into the mountains, he may graduate the air, and choose that state of it
which best suits his complaint. But although the inhabitants are thus healthy,
and have so little occasion for medical aid, they loudly complain of the want
of knowledge in the professional gentlemen of the island.

The present governor has established a manufactory of silk and woollen goods
in the suburbs of Santa Cruz, which is carried on by poor children, old and
infirm people, and by abandoned females, with a view to reclaiming them: an
institution that will ever do honor both to his excellency, and to those who
have liberally aided him in so laudable a scheme.

Like the inhabitants of most catholic countries, the people of this island are
very profuse in decorating their churches, and even their dwelling-houses, on
the festivals held in honor of their saints. This being Corpus Christi, a day
of much solemnity and parade, I went on shore with Lieutenant Ball of the
Supply to see the procession incident to the occasion. Before we landed we
formed a resolution to avoid, as much as lay in our power, giving offense even
to the most zealous devotee. But we found this was not to be done. When we
arrived at the church, from whence the procession commenced, the Host was just
making its appearance; a circumstance that is announced by ringing of bells,
and firing of guns. As it passed by us we fell on our knees, as we observed
those around us to do; but it unfortunately happening, that the spot we knelt
upon consisted of sand intermixed with small rough pebbles, the posture we were
in soon became so exceedingly painful, that, in order to procure a momentary
ease, we only let one knee remain on the ground. This heretical act did not
escape the observation of one of the holy fathers, all of whom were intent on
the exact performance of every ceremonious etiquette. It procured for us a
frown from him, and treatment that was not of the most civil kind; so that, in
order to pacify him, we again dropped on both knees. He did not, however, pass
on, without exhibiting strong marks of ill nature and resentment in his
countenance, at this trivial and unintended breach of respectful attention to
the religious rights of the country. The procession, in which the governor and
all the principal inhabitants joined, having passed through most of the
streets, returned, with the same solemnity, to the church it had set out from;
which was richly ornamented, and splendidly illuminated with large wax tapers,
upon the occasion. During our stay here, his excellency the governor
entertained Captain Phillip and all the officers belonging to the expedition
with a very elegant dinner.

Before we sailed from the Motherbank, a sporatic disease had appeared among
the marines and convicts. On its first appearance it resembled the mumps, or
swellings of the chaps; and as that distemper sometimes terminates in a
translation of the inflammation to the testicles, so this complaint (after the
swelling and induration of the jaws had subsided, which usually happened on the
sixth or seventh day) never in one instance failed to fix on those parts; and
that in so very obstinate a manner, as not to give way to the treatment
generally found effectual in similar inflammations. One of the convicts, thus
affected, was seized with an intermitting fever: between the paroxysm I gave
him an emetic; which had such a sudden and wonderful effect on this strange
complaint, that I was induced to repeat it; and I found it effectual in this,
as well as in all subsequent cases. As soon as we got to sea, the motion of the
ship acted on all those who were affected, to the number of seventeen, in a
most surprising and extraordinary manner. Indeed it was so sudden, that it was
like a placebo. I could never account, with any satisfaction to myself, for the
origin of this uncommon disease, though much acquainted with those incident to
seamen; nor did I ever see or hear of any that resembled it. The most steady
and prudent of the mariners, even those who had their wives on board, were
equally affected with those who led more irregular lives. At first I attributed
it to the verdigrease that might gather on the copper utensils wherein the
provisions were cooked; but I am now fully persuaded that this was not the
source from which it proceeded; for at the very time it was most prevalent, and
attended with the greatest degree of inveteracy, the coppers were cleaned, and
made as bright as they could be, every day, under my own inspection. Another
proof, and a very strong one, that it did not proceed from the beforementioned
cause is, that the provisions still continued to be dressed in the same
coppers, when the smallest trace of the disease was no longer to be perceived;
which was the case after being four or five days at sea.

9th, P. M. the Sirius made the signal for all officers to repair on board
their respective ships; an officer was likewise sent to the governor, to inform
him that we intended to put to sea in the morning, and, at the same time, to
thank him for the civilities and politeness he had shown us. His excellency
returned, in answer to this message, that his best and most sincere good wishes
should attend us; and that he should ever feel a very particular interest in
our success; which he hoped would answer the intention of government, and the
expectations of those who had so cheerfully entered as volunteers on so novel
and very uncertain a service.

10th. This morning the fleet got under way with a light breeze, which carried
us out of Santa Cruz, but left us two days becalmed between Teneriffe and the
Grand Canary. After this a fine breeze sprung up from the north-east; and no
occurrence worthy of notice happened for some days. We crossed the tropical
line in 18. 20. west longitude, and was nearly pressed on board the Lady
Penrhynn transport, whose people did not attend to her steerage, being deeply
engaged in sluicing and ducking all those on board who had never crossed it.

17th. In the morning saw a strange sail to the northward, and at night the
Sirius made the signal for the convoy to shorten sail.

18th. Early this morning the Sirius threw out the Supply's signal to make
sail, and look out ahead. She immediately obeyed, and at eight o'clock made the
signal for seeing land; which was repeated by the Sirius to the convoy. At
eleven we passed the Isle of Sal, in lat. 16 38 N. long. 22 5 W., and in the
evening Bonavista; two of the Cape de Verd islands, a cluster of islands so
called from a cape of that name situated opposite to them on the continent of
Africa. We passed the latter island so close, that we saw the breakers which
endangered Captain Cook's ship in his last voyage. It blew at the time pretty
fresh, and was so hazy, that we could make no other observation, than that the
land was high, and the shore (what we could perceive of it through the haze,
for the horizon line did not exceed two miles) had a white appearance, as if
sand or chalk cliffs. At six in the evening, the Sirius made a signal for the
convoy to observe a close order of sailing, and to shorten sail for the night;
and at twelve, running under an easy sail, she made the signal for the ships to
bring to, with their heads to the south-east.

19th. At day break we made fail, the Supply being ahead on the look-out. At
eight o'clock she made the signal for seeing land; which proved to be the isle
of Mayo, another of the Cape de Verd islands, lying in lat. 15 10 N. long. 23
W. The Sirius now made the signal to prepare to anchor; which was followed by
one, that the boats from the victuallers and transports may land, as soon as
the ships came to an anchor, without asking permission as at Teneriffe. We ran
down the east side of the island, close in with the shore, on which we could
perceive a high surf, or rather the sea, breaking violently among the rocks.
The haze still continued so thick that we could only observe the shore to be
rough, craggy, and bold; and that several parts of the island seemed high and
mountainous. At twelve, through the haze, saw the island of Saint Jago, the
principal of the Cape de Verd islands, lying in lat. 14 54 N. long. 23 29 W.
Half after one, the Sirius leading into Port Praya Bay, on a sudden brought to,
as we imagined, to wait for the sternmost ships, which, as they all came up,
likewise brought to, on the outside of the entrance into the bay. After the
preparations which had been made for anchoring, and the disposition shown by
the Sirius to run in, we were not a little surprised to see her, at two
o'clock, throw out the signal for the convoy to keep nearer the commanding
officer; then make sail and bear away, steering south-west. At six in the
evening we lost sight of the island, running with a smart top-gallant, and
steering sail, breeze at north-east. A small Portugueze brig lay at anchor in
Por Praya, which was the only vessel of any kind at that time there. This bay
is rendered memorable by the action that took place there, on the 16th of April
1781, between Commodore Johnstone and Monsieur Suffrein; in giving an account
of which, the French admiral (in a letter said to be written by him) humorously
thus observes: In leading into the bay, I was some time at a loss to
distinguish which was the commodore's ship: but on getting more in, I at length
saw his pendant blushing through a forest of masts; the Romney being securely
placed in shore of the merchant ships and smaller men of war.

The entrance into this bay appeared to be about a mile, between two bluff
points, which makes it secure from every wind, except a southerly one; and when
that prevails, a very high sea tumbles into it. On an eminence, in the center
of the bay, stands a fort, where the Portugueze colors were displayed. Many
people appeared on the batteries, looking at the ships; which were probably
more in number than had been seen there since the memorable 16th of April. The
appearance of the town and the island, from the distant view we had, gave us no
very favorable opinion of them. The face of the country seemed to be sterile
in the extreme. The lifeless brown of the Isle of Mayo, described by Captain
Cook, may very well be applied to this island; for as far as my eye or glass
could reach, not the smallest trace of vegetation or verdure was to be
perceived, except at the west end of the fort, on the left side of the bay,
where a few trees of the cocoa nut or palm kind appeared. But notwithstanding
the sterile picture it exhibits when viewed from the sea, geographers, and
those who have been on shore, describe it to be, in many places, well
cultivated and very fertile; producing sugar canes, a little wine, some cotton,
Indian corn, cocoa nuts, and oranges, with all the other tropical fruits in
great plenty; and point it out as a place where ships, bound on long voyages,
may be conveniently supplied with water, and other necessaries; such as fowls,
goats, and hogs; all which are to be purchased at a very easy rate.

20th. This evening, standing to the southward with all sail; the wind
moderate; the air warm and damp, with haze; the Sirius made the Alexander's
signal, who had dropped considerably astern, and reprimanded the master for
hoisting out a boat without permission. The two following days the weather was
moderately warm, with some flashes of lightning.

23d. The weather became exceedingly dark, warm, and close, with heavy rain; a
temperature of the atmosphere very common on approaching the equator, and very
much to be dreaded, as the health is greatly endangered thereby. Every
attention was therefore paid to the people on board the Charlotte, and every
exertion used to keep her clean and wholesome between decks. My first care was
to keep the men, as far as was consistent with a regular discharge of their
duty, out of the rain; and I never suffered the convicts to come upon deck when
it rained, as they had neither linen nor clothing sufficient to make themselves
dry and comfortable after getting wet: a line of conduct which cannot be too
strictly observed, and enforced, in those latitudes. To this, and to the
frequent use of oil of tar, which was used three times a week, and oftener if
found necessary, I attribute, in a great degree, the uncommon good health we
enjoyed. I most sincerely wish oil of tar was in more general use throughout
his Majesty's navy than it is. If it were, I am certain that the advantage
accruing from it to the health of seamen, that truly useful and valuable class
of the community, and for whose preservation too much cannot be done, would
soon manifest itself. This efficacious remedy wonderfully resists putrefaction,
destroys vermin and insects of every kind; wherever it is applied overcomes all
disagreeable smells; and is in itself both agreeable and wholesome.

In the evening it became calm, with distant peals of thunder, and the most
vivid flashes of lightning I ever remember. The weather was now so immoderately
hot, that the female convicts, perfectly overcome with it, frequently fainted
away; and these faintings generally terminated in fits. And yet,
notwithstanding the enervating effects of the atmospheric heat, and the
inconveniences they suffered from it; so predominant was the warmth of their
constitutions, or the depravity of their hearts, that the hatches over the
place where they were confined could not be suffered to lay off, during the
night, without a promiscuous intercourse immediately taking place between them
and the seamen and marines. What little wind there was, which was only at
intervals, continuing adverse, and the health of these wretches being still
endangered by the heat, Captain Phillip, though anxious to prevent as much as
possible this intercourse, gave an order, on my representing the necessity of
it, that a grating should be cut, so as to admit a small wind sail being let
down among them. In some of the other ships, the desire of the women to be with
the men was so uncontrollable, that neither shame (but indeed of this they had
long lost sight), nor the fear of punishment, could deter them from making
their way through the bulk heads to the apartments assigned the seamen.

25th. Still inclinable to calms, in lat. 8 30 N. long. 22 36 W. we perceived a
strong current setting to the north-west; so that on the following day, though
by our log we had run thirty miles south by east, yet by observation we found
ourselves in lat. 8 45; which shows the current against us to be nearly a knot
an hour. I visited the different transports, and found the troops and convicts,

27th. Still calm, with loud thunder, and incessant heavy rain.

28th. A gentle breeze sprung up to the westward, and the next day, about
eleven in the forenoon, we saw a strange sail standing to the south-west. At
twelve she tacked, stood toward us, and hoisted Portugueze colors. The Sirius
spoke her; after which we all made sail again, steering south-east by east.

July 2d. The wind continuing southerly, in latitude 6 36 N. and being still so
far to the eastward as 20 23 W. longitude, the Sirius made the signal for the
convoy to tack; and stood to the westward. This day we saw some remarkable
flights of flying fish; they were so very numerous as to resemble flights of
small birds. The poor creatures were so closely pursued, on all sides, by their
common enemy, bonitoes, albacores, and skip-jacks, that their wings availed
them little. The succeeding night was a continuation of heavy rain. Every
evening, while we continued between nine and six degrees of north latitude, we
were baffled with calms, and adverse winds. For seven days together I observed
that each day generally closed with heavy rains, and some squalls of wind,
which were always remarked to be from the northward.

5th. The wind south-west by south, the fleet tacked by signal and stood to the
eastward. In the evening, a more numerous shoal of porpoises than ever
remembered to be seen by the oldest seaman on board, presented themselves to
our view. They were, as we conjectured, in pursuit of some wounded fish; and so
very intent were they on the object of their chase, that they passed through
the fleet, and close to some of the ships, without showing any disposition to
avoid them. The sailors and mariners compared them to a numerous pack of
hounds, scouring through watery ground; and indeed, when the rays of the sun
beamed upon them, I know not what they resembled more. The weather being
moderate, I went round the ships, and was really surprised, considering the
damp and unfavourable weather we had had, to find the people look so well, and
to be in so good a state of health.

6th. In lat. 5 38 N. long. 21 39 W. the wind S. S. W. we tacked by signal, and
in the course of the day spoke a sloop bound to the coast of Africa, belonging
to the house of Mether in London; had been out four months, and was then
standing to the westward.

The wind continuing adverse, and the fleet making little progress in their
voyage, Captain Phillip put the officers, seamen, marines, and convicts to an
allowance of three pints of water per day (not including a quart allowed each
man a day for boiling pease and oatmeal); a quantity scarcely sufficient to
supply that waste of animal spirits the body must necessarily undergo, in the
torrid zone, from a constant and violent perspiration, and a diet consisting of
salt provisions. Necessity, however, has no law in this instance as well as in
every other; and I am fully persuaded the commander acted upon this occasion
from the best of motives, and for the good of the whole. Were it by any means
possible, people subject to long voyages should never be put to a short
allowance of water; for I am satisfied that a liberal use of it (when freed
from the foul air, and made sweet by a machine now in use on board his
Majesty's navy) will tend to prevent a scorbutic habit, as much, if not more,
than any thing we are acquainted with. My own experience in the navy has
convinced me, that when scorbutic patients are restrained in the use of water
(which I believe is never the case but through absolute necessity), and they
have nothing to live on but the ship's provision, the surgeon's necessaries
being ill-chosen and very inadequate to the wise and salutary purposes for
which government intended them, all the antiseptics and antiscorbutics we know
of will avail very little in a disease so much to be guarded against, and
dreaded, by seamen. In one of his Majesty's ships, I was liberally supplied
with that powerful antiscorbutic, essence of malt; we had also sour krout; and
besides these, every remedy that could be comprised in the small compass of a
medicine chest; yet, when necessity forced us to a short allowance of water,
although, aware of the consequence, I freely administered the essence, etc. as
a preservative, the scurvy made its appearance with such hasty and rapid
strides, that all attempts to check it proved fruitless, until good fortune
threw a ship in our way, who spared us a sufficient quantity of water to serve
the sick with as much as they could use, and to increase the ship's allowance
to the seamen. This fortunate and very seasonable supply, added to the free use
of the essence of malt, etc. which I had before strictly adhered to, made in a
few days so sudden a change for the better in the poor fellows, who had been
covered with ulcers and livid blotches, that every person on board was
surprised at it: and, in a fortnight after, when we got into port, there was
not a man in the ship, though, at the time we received the water, the gums of
some of them were formed into such a fungus as nearly to envelope the teeth,
but what had every appearance of health.

7th. Dark, cloudy, unpleasant, sultry weather; the wind fouth by east. We saw
many fish, and caught two bonitoes. The boatswain struck, with a pair of
grains, out of the cabin window, a most beautiful fish, about ten pounds
weight. In shape it a good deal resembled a salmon, with this difference, that
its tail was more forked. It was in color of a lovely yellow; and when first
taken out of the water, it had two beautiful stripes of green on each side,
which, some minutes after, changed to a delightful blue, and so continued. In
the internal formation of this fish I observed nothing particular, except that
its heart was larger, and its respirations contracted and dilated longer, than
I had ever seen before in any aquatic animal, a tortoise not excepted. As we
were at a loss what appellation to give it, having never met with a fish of
this species, and it being a non-descript, the sailors gave it the name of the
Yellow Tail.

8th. The wind still S. by E. in lat. 4 36 N. long. 23 W. we saw a large vessel
standing to the northward under a press of sail. Her colors, though at a
considerable distance, were judged to be Imperial. Again saw fish of various
kinds in chase of the flying fish, whose enemies seem to be innumerable. In
order to avoid being devoured by their pursuers, they frequently sought for
shelter in the ships; but much oftener flew with such force against their sides
as to drop lifeless into the water. We caught three fine bonitoes, and thereby
rid the poor flying fish, whose wings seemed to excite the enmity of all the
larger finny race, of three formidable enemies.

9th and 10th. Caught a great number of fish, as did the Alexander, who was
near us. At night, in the wake of the ship the sea appeared quite luminous; a
phenomenon we attributed to the spawn of the fish which surrounded us on all
sides.

14th. About five in the evening we crossed the equator, without any wish or
inclination being shown by the seamen to observe the ceremony usually practiced
in passing under it. The longitude was 26 37 W. the wind at east, the weather
moderate and clear. In lat. 1 24 S. long. 26 22 W. the boatswain caught sixteen
fine bonitoes, which proved a very seasonable and acceptable supply. At night
the sea, all around the ship, exhibited a most delightful sight. This
appearance was occasioned by the gambols of an incredible number of various
kinds of fish, who sported about us, and whose sudden turnings caused an
emanation, which resembled flashes of lightning darting in quick succession.
What I before spoke of as the spawn, I am now fully convinced were rather the
fish themselves, turning up their white bellies at some little distance below
the surface of the water, and these sudden evolutions were what gave the sea
the luminous appearance observed on it before. I can the more readily affirm
this to be the cause, as, one evening, when we had immense quantities about us,
I carefully attended to them till it became dark, and was fully satisfied, from
the observations I was then able to make, that it was the fish, and not the
spawn, which occasioned the appearance; for there was not an officer or person
on board but what was able very plainly to perceive their frolicsome turnings
and windings. Indeed, some of them came so near the surface, that we frequently
attempted to strike them with a pair of grains.

18th. Being informed that several of the mariners and convicts on board the
Alexander were suddenly taken ill, I immediately visited that ship, and found
that the illness complained of was wholly occasioned by the bilge water, which
had by some means or other risen to so great a height, that the pannels of the
cabin, and the buttons on the clothes of the officers, were turned nearly
black, by the noxious effluvia. When the hatches were taken off, the stench was
so powerful, that it was scarcely possible to stand over them. How it could
have got to this height is very strange; for I well know, that Captain Phillip
gave strict orders (which orders I myself delivered) to the masters of the
transports to pump the ships out daily, in order to keep them sweet and
wholesome; and it was added, that if the ships did not make water enough for
that purpose, they were to employ the convicts in throwing water into the well,
and pumping it out again, until it became clear and untinged. The people's
health, however, being endangered by the circumstance, I found a representation
upon the subject to Captain Phillip needful; and accordingly went on board the
Sirius for that purpose. Captain Phillip, who upon every occasion showed great
humanity and attention to the people, with the most obliging readiness sent Mr.
King, one of his lieutenants, on board the Alexander with me, in order to
examine into the state of the ship; charging him, at the same time, with the
most positive and pointed instructions to the master of the ship instantly to
set about sweetening and purifying her. This commission Mr. King executed with
great propriety and expedition; and by the directions he gave, such effectual
means were made use of, that the evil was soon corrected: and not long after
all the people, who, suffering from the effects of it, were under Mr. Balmain,
my assistant's, care, got quite rid of the complaint. I now returned to the
Sirius, and solicited an increase of water; which Captain Phillip with equal
readiness complied with; and as we had by this time got into a regular
south-east trade wind, our allowance served tolerably well; every man having
three quarts a day.

22d. The weather moderate and cloudy, in lat 9 6 S. long. 26 4 W. we saw a
noddy and two pintado birds. At night, the commanding officer of marines having
received information that three men had made their way, through the hole cut
for the admission of the windsail, into the apartment of the female convicts,
against an express order issued for that purpose, he apprehended them, and put
them in confinement for trial.

23d. The weather being dark and cloudy, with heavy rain and strong breezes,
the Sirius carried away her maintopsail-yard, in the slings; which, however, in
a little time she got replaced. In the evening we saw some grampuses sporting
about.

26th. In latitude 15 18 south, the Sirius made the signal for the longitude by
lunar observation, which was found to be 29 34 W. Strong breezes and cloudy
weather. The Borrowdale victualler carried away her foretop-gallant-mast. This
evening we observed some flying fish, very different from those we had before
seen. They had wings on both the head and tail, and when in the act of flying,
were said by our people to resemble a double-headed shot. About six o'clock the
Alexander brought to, and hoisted out a boat in order to pick up a man who had
fallen over board from the spanker boom; but, as he sunk before the boat could
reach him, the attempt proved ineffectual.

27th. The Sirius made the signal to close, and keep nearer the commanding
officer. The weather rainy and unsettled, with strong breezes, and a heavy
swell from the eastward.

28th. Fresh breezes and cloudy weather. At ten in the morning the Sirius made
the Supply's signal to come within hail, and desired the commanding officer to
acquaint the different transports, that in the track we then were, lat. 18 9 S.
long. 28 2 W. there were some sunken rocks, for which we were directed to keep
a good look-out. This signal was followed by one, for the ships to take their
proper stations in the order of sailing; and for the Lady Penrhyn, who was
considerably to windward, and astern withal, to come into the wake of the
Sirius. After these orders were complied with, we bore away, steering S. by W.
the wind E. S. E.

30th. The Supply hailed us, and acquainted me, that a female convict, on board
the Prince of Wales, had met with an accident which endangered her life. It
being then nearly dark, and the ships making quick way through the water, it
was judged imprudent to hoist a boat out. Lieutenant Ball, of the Supply,
therefore promised to send a boat early

August 1st. In latitude 22 39 S. Captain Phillip for the first time displayed
his broad pendant; and in the evening made the signal for the longitude; which,
being considerably astern, we could not discern.

2d. Early in the morning passed and spoke a Portugueze brig steering the same
course with us, which was to the coast of Brazil. She sailed so very dull, that
we passed her as if she lay at anchor, although we had not a fast sailing ship
in the fleet. At eight in the morning saw a ganet, which are seldom seen out of
soundings. Being now in expectation of soon seeing land, the commodore made the
Supply's signal to look out ahead; and the Alexander's and Prince of Wales's to
take their station in the order of sailing, being too far ahead. At three in
the afternoon the Supply made the signal for seeing land, which was repeated by
the commodore to the convoy. At nine at night, being well in with Cape Frio, we
shortened sail, running at an easy rate until morning; when the wind was little
and variable.

3d. This evening, finding it impossible to get hold of anchorage, the
commodore dispatched Lieutenant King in the Supply, which sailed well in light
winds, to the viceroy, with information that he was, with his convoy, arrived
near the mouth of the harbor. He then made the signal for the ships to bring
to, with their heads to the fouthward, about six miles from the shore, Rio de
Janeiro Sugar Loaf bearing west half north, distant about six leagues. In the
course of the day we saw many whales playing about.

4th. This morning, standing in for the harbor, the wind headed us; which
obliged us to tack, and stand out to sea a little, in order to prevent our
falling to leeward of the port, which it would have been no easy matter to have
regained.

5th. Still calm. This morning a boat came alongside, in which were three
Portugueze and six slaves; from whom we purchased some oranges, plantains, and
bread. In trafficking with these people, we discovered, that one Thomas Barret,
a convict, had, with great ingenuity and address, passed some quarter dollars
which he, assisted by two others, had coined out of old buckles, buttons
belonging to the marines, and pewter spoons, during their passage from
Teneriffe. The impression, milling, character, in a word, the whole was so
inimitably executed, that had their metal been a little better, the fraud, I am
convinced, would have passed undetected. A strict and careful search was made
for the apparatus wherewith this was done, but in vain; not the smallest trace
or vestige of any thing of the kind was to be found among them. How they
managed this business without discovery, or how they could effect it at all, is
a matter of inexpressible surprise to me; as they never were suffered to come
near a fire; and a sentinel was constantly placed over their hatchway, which,
one would imagine, rendered it impossible for either fire or fused metal to be
conveyed into their apartments. Besides, hardly ten minutes ever elapsed,
without an officer of some degree or other going down among them. The
adroitness, therefore, with which they must have managed, in order to complete
a business that required so complicated a process, gave me a high opinion of
their ingenuity, cunning, caution, and address; and I could not help wishing
that these qualities had been employed to more laudable purposes. The officers
of marines, the master of the ship, and myself, fully explained to the injured
Portugueze, what villians they were who had imposed upon them. We were not
without apprehensions that they might entertain an unfavourable opinion of
Englishmen in general from the conduct of these rascals; we therefore thought
it necessary to acquaint them, that the perpetrators of the fraud were felons
doomed to transportation by the laws of their country, for having committed
similar offenses there.

About one o'clock a gentle breeze from the east carried us within about a mile
of the bar; where, at nine o'clock, we anchored in sixteen fathom water. The
calms had baffled the Supply so much, that she had only dropped her anchor a
little while before us.

6th. Early this morning, it being quite calm, the commodore dispatched an
officer to the viceroy, who met with a courteous reception, and about eleven
o'clock returned with the boat nearly full of fruit and vegetables, sent as
presents to the commodore from some of his old friends and acquaintance. Some
years ago Captain Phillip was on this coast, commander of a Portugueze man of
war. During that time he performed several gallant acts, which, aided by his
other amiable qualities, rendered him extremely popular here, and recommended
him to the notice of the court of Lisbon. Shortly after, his own country having
a claim to his services, on the breaking out of a war, he declined a command
offered him by the Portugueze, and returned to the English navy; where he
served some time as lieutenant (a rank he had held before he had engaged in the
service of Portugal) on board the Alexander, under the command of that brave
and exemplary character, Lord Longford.

About two o'clock we got under way, with a gentle seabreeze, which ran us into
the harbor. In passing Santa Cruz fort, the commodore saluted it with thirteen
guns, which was returned with an equal number. This day a Portugueze ship
sailed for Lisbon, which gave us an opportunity of writing short letters to our
friends in England.

8th. In the forenoon, the commodore, attended by most of the officers on the
expedition, paid the viceroy a visit of ceremony. On our landing, we were
received by an officer and a friar, who conducted us to the palace. As we
passed the guard on duty there, the colors were laid at the feet of the
commodore; than which nothing could have been a higher token of respect. We
then proceeded up stairs into a large antichamber, crowded with officers,
soldiers, and domestics. Here we were received by several officers belonging to
the household, and the surgeon-general to the army, who spoke good English,
having acquired his professional knowledge in London. A few minutes after our
arrival, a curtain, which hung over the door of the presence chamber, was drawn
aside; and on our entrance we were individually introduced to the viceroy by
the commodore. The ceremony being ended, and a short conversation having taken
place, we were ushered into another spacious room, where we all sat down. I
could not help remarking that the viceroy placed himself in such a manner as to
have his back turned on most of the officers. I was told afterward that he
apologized for this; but I did not hear him, though very near. Neither the room
we were now in, nor that into which we were first introduced, exhibited any
marks of magnificence or elegance. I acknowledge, that for my own part I was
exceedingly disappointed. From the parade without, such as the number of
guards, etc. I was led to suppose that we should find every thing within the
palace proportionably magnificent and princely. But this was by no means the
case. The only furniture I saw in the room we were in, except chairs, were six
card tables, and portraits of two of the sovereigns of Portugal; one of which
was that of King Sebastian the First, the other of her present majesty; the
former placed in the center, the latter at the upper end of the room. The
viceroy appeared to be of a middle age, somewhere between forty and fifty,
stout and corpulent, with a strong cast or defect in both his eyes. He seemed
to be a person of few words, but at the same time civil and attentive. I could
not, however, help observing the very great difference there was between his
excellency's manner and address, and that of the elegant and accomplished
Marquis de Brancifort.

9th. The contract being settled, the commissary supplied the troops and
convicts with rice (in lieu of bread), with fresh beef, vegetables, and
oranges; which soon removed every symptom of the scurvy prevalent among them.

11th. The commodore ordered six female convicts, who had behaved well, to be
removed from the Friendship into the Charlotte; and at the same time an equal
number, whose conduct was more exceptionable, to be returned to the Friendship
in their stead. The commodore's view was (a matter not easily accomplished) to
separate those whose decent behavior entitled them to some favor from those
who were totally abandoned and obdurate.

13th. Cornelius Connell, a private in the marines, was, according to the
sentence of a court martial, punished with a hundred lashes, for having an
improper intercourse with some of the female convicts, contrary to orders.
Thomas Jones was also sentenced to receive three hundred lashes, for attempting
to make a sentinel betray his trust, in suffering him to go among the women;
but in consideration of the good character he bore previous to this
circumstance, the court recommended him to the clemency of the commanding
officer; and, in consequence thereof, he was forgiven. John Jones and James
Reiley, privates, accused of similar offenses to that of Connell's, were
acquitted for want of evidence, there being no witnesses to support the charge
except convicts, whose testimony could not be admitted.

15th. This being a day of great parade and gaiety with the Portugueze, the
inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro, arrayed in their best and richest attire, as
their custom is on regale days, began to show themselves, during the forenoon,
between the city and the church of St. Gloria, which is about a mile distant,
and situated on a rising ground near the sea. Persons of all ranks, as well in
carriages as equestrians and pedestrians, joined in the crowd; but what was the
purpose of this cavalcade, or to what circumstances it owed its origin, I am
still at a loss to know. Gloria church, which is rather neat than rich, was
decorated with various flowers (in the disposal of which some taste was
displayed), and most brilliantly illuminated. I observed that the multitude
generally stopped here, in succession, and employed themselves in some
religious ceremonies, such as praying and singing hymns, before they returned
to the city. This kind of parade was continued the whole day; the better sort
of people, however, made their appearance only in the afternoon. Returning with
the rest of the crowd, after it was dark, to the town, I perceived a small
church, in one of the bye streets, richly ornamented and elegantly illuminated.
As I saw men, women, and children, struggling for entrance, I joined in the
throng out of mere curiosity, and with no little difficulty made my way in; but
all the satisfaction I reaped from being thus squeezed and jostled was, seeing
such as could gain admission fall on their knees, and praying with more fervor,
to appearance, than real devotion. On one side of the church stood a shabby
ill-looking fellow, selling to the multitude consecrated beads; as did another,
on the outside of the door. I own I could not help resembling them to
mountebanks vending and distributing their nostrums. There were many more of
these religious hawkers in the streets; from some of whom, as I saw it was the
custom, I purchased a few of their beads. At a little distance from the door of
the church was erected a stage, on which was placed a band of vocal and
instrumental performers, who exerted themselves with might and main to please
the surrounding audience. I cannot, however, say that they succeeded in
pleasing me. About ten o'clock a display of fireworks and rockets, of which the
Portugueze seem to be very fond, concluded the entertainments of the day. Some
intrigues, I have reason to believe, followed. I was led to this conclusion
from seeing many well-dressed women in the crowd quite unattended; and this was
the only time, during my stay in the country, that I ever saw any circumstances
which could warrant my forming such an opinion. I know it has been asserted by
some writers, that the women of Rio de Janeiro are not uncensurable in this
point. They have affirmed, that as soon as it became dark, the generality of
them exposed themselves at their doors and windows, distinguishing, by presents
of nosegays and flowers, those on whom they had no objection to bestow their
favors; a distinction in which strangers shared as well as their acquaintance.
That this might have been the case I will not take upon me to deny; and,
impressed with the idea, on my first arrival, I considered every woman as a
proper object of gallantry; but a month's residence among them convinced me
that this imputed turn for intrigue is chiefly confined to the lower class, and
that, in general, the higher ranks are as undeserving of the imputation as the
females of any other country.

The popularity of our commodore with the viceroy and principal inhabitants
here, procured for the officers the liberty of going wherever they pleased. It
has always been the custom, for a soldier to follow every foreign officer that
landed at this port; and it was scarcely ever dispensed with. It was, however,
unknown to us; and this unaccustomed liberty gave us an opportunity of
inspecting more minutely into the manners and disposition of the women as well
as the men.

21st. This being the Prince of Brazil's birthday, the commodore, with most of
his officers, went to court, to compliment the viceroy on the occasion. As soon
as we landed, we were received by an officer, who conducted us to the
presence chamber; where his excellency stood under a canopy of state, receiving
the compliments of the officers of the garrison, the principal inhabitants, and
such foreigners as were in the place. After having paid our respects, we
withdrew, as did every other person, except the principal officers of state,
some general and law officers, and those of the governor's household. The
Sirius and one of the forts fired royal salutes. The court was brilliant, if a
place where a female does not appear can be said to be brilliant; but this, I
was informed, is always the case here. Those gentlemen who appeared in the
circle were richly and elegantly dressed. The officers of the army and of the
militia were particularly so, and that in a style and fashion which did no
small credit to their taste. The viceroy wore a scarlet coat trimmed with very
broad rich gold lace; and his hair, according to his usual mode of wearing it,
in a remarkable long queue, with very little powder; an article of dress to
which I observed the Portugueze were not very partial; while, on the contrary,
they were profuse in the use of pomatum. The day ended without any other
demonstrations of joy. As the

31st. James Baker, a private marine, received two hundred lashes, agreeable to
the sentence of a court martial, for endeavoring to get passed on shore, by
means of one of the seamen, a spurious dollar, knowing it to be so; and one he
had undoubtedly got from some of the convicts, as it was of a similar base
metal to those which they had coined during the passage, and had attempted to
put off on our first arrival at this port.

September 1st. Having now procured every thing at Rio de Janeiro that we stood
in need of, and thoroughly recovered and refreshed our people, the commodore,
with such officers of the fleet as could be spared from duty, waited on the
viceroy to take leave, and to return our acknowledgments for the indulgence and
attention shown us; which, I think we may say, we experienced in a greater
extent and latitude than any foreigners had ever before done. On our landing,
the same officer who had attended us upon every other public occasion,
conducted us to the presence chamber. As we passed, every military and public
honor was paid to the commodore; the colors were laid at his feet, as they
hitherto had been whenever he landed in his public character; a token of
respect that is never bestowed on any person but the governor himself. When we
arrived at the palace, an officer of the household, who was waiting to receive
us, conducted us through a most delightful recess, hung round with bird-cages,
whose inhabitants seemed to vie with each other, both in the melody of their
notes and the beauty of their plumage. The passage we walked through was
adorned on each side with odoriferous flowers, and aromatic shrubs; which,
while they charmed the eye, spread a delightful fragrance around. This passage
led to a private room, on the outside of the door of which we were received by
the viceroy, who stood uncovered, and noticed each person separately in the
most friendly and polite manner. His excellency preceded us into the room, and
having requested all of us to be seated, placed himself by the commodore, in a
position that fronted us. In return for our thanks and acknowledgments, he
said, it gave him infinite pleasure and satisfaction to find that the place had
afforded us the supplies we stood in need of: to this he added, that the
attention of the inhabitants, which we were good enough to notice, was much
short of his wishes. We then arose and took our leave; but not before his
excellency had expressed a desire of hearing from the commodore, with an
account of his success in the establishment of the new colony. He concluded
with saying, that he hoped, nay did not doubt, from the character the English
bore for generosity of disposition, but that those who had so cheerfully
engaged in a service, strange and uncertain in itself, would meet with an
adequate reward -- a recompense that every one must allow they justly merited.
The room in which the governor received us was that wherein he usually sat in
his retired moments. It was furnished and painted in a neat and elegant style;
the roof displaying well-executed representations of all the tropical fruits,
and the most beautiful birds of the country. The walls were hung round with
prints, chiefly on religious subjects.

Rio de Janeiro is said to derive its name from being discovered on St.
Januarius's day. It is the capital of the Portugueze settlements in South
America, and is situated on the west side of a river, or, more properly (in my
opinion), of a bay. Except that part which fronts the water, the city is
surrounded by high mountains, of the most romantic form the imagination can
fashion to itself any idea of. The plan on which it is built has some claim to
merit. The principal street, called Strait Street, runs from the viceroy's
palace, which is near the south-east end of the town, to the north-west
extremity, where it is terminated by a large convent belonging to the
Benedictine friars, situated on an eminence. The street is broad, well built,
and has in it a great number of handsome shops. All the others are much
inferior to this, being in general only wide enough to admit two carriages to
pass each other in the center. The pavement for foot-passengers (except in
Strait Street, which is without any) is so very unsociably narrow, that two
persons cannot walk with convenience together. The houses are commonly two, and
sometimes three stories high; of which, even though inhabited by the most
wealthy and respectable families, the lower part is always appropriated to
shops, and to the use of the servants and slaves (who are here extremely
numerous), the family rather choosing to reside in the upper part, that they
might live in a less confined air. To every house there is a balcony, with
lattice-work before it; and the same before all the windows.

The churches are very numerous, elegant, and richly decorated; some of them
are built and ornamented in a modern style, and that in a manner which
proclaims the genius, taste, and judgment of the architects and artists. Two or
three of the handsomest are at this time either unfinished or repairing; and
they appear to go on but very slowly, notwithstanding large sums are constantly
collecting for their completion. As they are erected or repaired by charitable
contributions, public processions are frequently made for that purpose; and the
mendicant friars, belonging to them, likewise exert themselves in their line.
At these processions, which are not unfrequent, persons of every age and
description assist. They usually take place after it is dark, when those who
join in it are dressed in a kind of cloak adapted to religious purposes, and
carry a lanthorn fixed at the end of a pole of a convenient length: so that
upon these occasions you sometimes see three or four hundred moving lights in
the streets at the same time; which has an uncommon and a pleasing effect.
Considerable sums are collected by this mode. At the corner of every street,
about ten feet from the ground, is placed the image of a saint, which is the
object of the common people's adoration.

The town is well supplied with water from the neighboring mountains; which is
conveyed over a deep valley by an aqueduct formed of arches of a stupendous
height, and from thence distributed by pipes to many parts of the city. The
principal fountain is close to the sea, in a kind of square, near the palace;
where ships water at a good wharf, nearly in the same manner as at Teneriffe,
and with equal expedition and convenience. On the opposite side of the fountain
are cocks, from which the people in the neighborhood are supplied. This
convenient and capital watering place is so near the palace, that when disputes
or contentions arise between the boats crews of different ships, the slaves,
etc. they are suppressed and adjusted by the soldiers on guard; who, in the
Portugueze service, have great power, and often treat the people with no little
severity.

While we staid at this place, we made several short excursions into the
country; but did not go near the mines, as we knew the attempt would not only
prove hazardous, but ineffectual: and as the liberty and indulgence granted us
was on the commodore's account, we never extended our trips beyond a few miles,
lest our doing so should appear suspicious, and reflect discredit on him; we
considering him in some degree responsible for our conduct. As far as we did
go, we experienced the same polite and attentive behavior we met with from the
inhabitants of the city. Never was more distinguished urbanity shown to
strangers, than was shown to us by every rank.

From its complicated state, I could learn but few particulars relative to the
government of Brazil. The viceroy is invested with great power and authority,
subject in some cases to an appeal to the court of Lisbon; but, like a wise and
prudent ruler, he seldom exerts it, unless in instances where sound judgment
and true policy render it expedient and necessary. He is a man of little
parade, and appears not to be very fond of pomp and grandeur, except on public
days, when it is not to be dispensed with. When he goes abroad for amusement,
or to take the air, his guard consists only of seven dragoons; but on public
occasions he makes his appearance in a grander style. I once saw him go in
state to one of the courts of justice; and, though it was situated not a
hundred yards from his palace, he was attended by a troop of horse. His state
carriage is tolerably neat, but by no means elegant or superb; it was drawn by
four horses irregularly mottled.

Carriages are pretty common at this place; there is scarcely a family of
respectability without one. They are mostly of the chaise kind, and drawn in
general by mules, which are found to answer better than horses, being more
indefatigable and surer footed; consequently better calculated to ascend their
steep hills and mountains.

The military force of Brazil consists of a troop of horse, which serve as
guards for the viceroy, twelve regiments of regulars from Europe, and six
raised in the country: these last enlist men of a mixed color, which the
former are by no means suffered to do. Besides the foregoing, there are twelve
regiments of militia always embodied. This whole force, regulars and militia,
except those on out-posts and other needful duties, appear early in the
morning, on every first day of the month, before the palace, where they undergo
a general muster, and review of arms and necessaries. The private men, although
they are considered as persons of great consequence by the populace, are, on
the other hand, equally submissive and obedient to their officers. This strict
discipline and regularity, as the city is in a great measure under military
orders, renders the inhabitants extremely civil and polite to the officers,
who, in return, study to be on the most agreeable and happy terms with them.

A captain's guard (independent of the cavalry, who are always in readiness to
attend the viceroy) is mounted every day at the palace. Whenever Commodore
Phillip passed, which he did as seldom as possible, the guard was turned out,
with colors, etc. and, as I before observed, the same mark of honor paid to
him as to the governor. To obviate this trouble and ceremony, he most
frequently landed and embarked at the north-west side of the town, where his
boat constantly waited for him.

On both sides of the river which forms the bay or harbor, the country is
picturesque and beautiful to a degree, abounding with the most luxuriant
flowers and aromatic shrubs. Birds of a lovely and rich plumage are seen
hopping from tree to tree in great numbers; together with an endless variety of
insects, whose exquisite beauty and gaudy colors exceed all description. There
is little appearance of cultivation in the parts we visited; the land seemed
chiefly pasturage. The cattle here are small, and when killed do not produce
such beef as is to be met with in England: it is not, however, by any means so
bad as represented by some travelers to be; on the contrary, I have seen and
eat here tolerably good, sweet, and well-tasted beef. I never saw any mutton:
they have indeed a few sheep, but they are small, thin, and lean. The gardens
furnish most sorts of European productions, such as cabbages, lettuce, parsley,
leeks, white radishes, beans, pease, kidney beans, turnips, water melons,
excellent pumpkins, and pine-apples of a small and indifferent kind. The
country likewise produces, in the most unbounded degree, limes, acid and sweet
lemons, oranges of an immense size and exquisite flavor, plantains, bananas,
yams, cocoa-nuts, cashoo apples and nuts, and some mangos. For the use of the
slaves and poorer sort of people, the capado is cultivated in great plenty; but
this cannot be done through a want of corn for bread, as I never saw finer
flour than at this place, which is plentiful, and remarkably cheap.

Brazil, particularly toward the northern parts, furnishes a number of
excellent drugs. In the shops of the druggists and apothecaries of Rio de
Janeiro, of which there are many, hippo, oil of castor, balsam capiva, with
most of the valuable gums, and all of an excellent quality, are to be found;
but they are sold at a much dearer rate than could possibly have been conceived
or expected in a country of which they are the natural produce.

The riches of this country, arising from the mines, are certainly very great.
To go near, or to get a sight of these inexhaustible treasuries, is impossible,
as every pass leading to them is strongly guarded; and even a person taken on
the road, unless he be able to give a clear and unequivocal account of himself
and his business, is imprisoned, and perhaps compelled ever after to work in
those subterraneous cavities, which avarice, or an ill-timed and fatal
curiosity, may have prompted him to approach. These circumstances made a trial
to see them without permission (and that permission I understand has never been
granted the most favored foreigners) too dangerous to be attempted.

In addition to the above source of wealth, the country produces excellent
tobacco, and likewise sugar canes, from which the inhabitants make good sugar,
and draw a spirit called aquadente. This spirit, by proper management, and
being kept till it is of a proper age, becomes tolerable rum. As it is sold
very cheap, the commodore purchased a hundred pipes of it for the use of the
garrison when arrived at New South Wales. Precious and valuable stones are also
found here. Indeed they are so very plenty, that a certain quantity only is
suffered to be collected annually. At the jewellers and lapidaries, of which
occupation there are many in Rio, I saw some valuable diamonds, and a great
number of excellent topazes, with many other sorts of stones of inferior value.
Several topazes were purchased by myself and others; but we chose to buy them
wrought, in order to avoid imposition, which is not unfrequent when the stones
are sold in a rough state. One of the principal streets of this city is nearly
occupied by jewellers and the workers of these stones; and I observed that
persons of a similar profession generally resided in the same street.

The manufactures here are very few, and those by no means extensive. All kinds
of European goods sell at an immoderate price, notwithstanding the shops are
well stored with them.

The Brazil, or native Indians, are very adroit at making elegant cotton
hammocks of various dies and forms. It was formerly the custom for the
principal people of Rio to be carried about in these hammocks; but that fashion
is succeeded by the use of sedan chairs, which are now very common among them;
but they are of a more clumsy form than those used in England. The chair is
suspended from an awkward piece of wood, borne on the shoulders of two slaves,
and elevated sufficiently to be clear of the inequalities of the street. In
carrying, the foremost slave takes the pavement, and the other the street, one
keeping a little before the other; so that the chair is moved forward in a
sidelong direction, and very unlike the procedure of the London chairmen. These
fellows, who get on at a great rate, never take the wall of the
foot-passengers, nor incommode them in the smallest degree.

The inhabitants in general are a pleasant, cheerful people, inclining more to
corpulency than those of Portugal; and, as far as we could judge, very
favorably inclined to the English. The men are strait and well-proportioned.
They do not accustom themselves to high living, nor indulge much in the juice
of the grape.

The women, when young, are remarkably thin, pale, and delicately shaped; but,
after marriage, they generally incline to be lusty, without losing that
constitutional pale, or rather sallow appearance. They have regular and better
teeth than are usually observable in warm climates, where sweet productions are
plentiful. They have likewise the most lovely, piercing, dark eyes; in the
captivating use of which they are by no means unskilled. Upon the whole, the
women of this country are very engaging; and rendered more so by their free,
easy, and unrestrained manner. Both sexes are extremely fond of suffering their
hair, which is black, to grow to a prodigious length. The ladies wear it
plaited, and tied up in a kind of club, or large lump; a mode of hair-dressing
that does not seem to correspond with their delicate and feminine appearance.
Custom, however, reconciles us to the most outre fashions; and what we thought
unbecoming, the Portugueze considered as highly ornamental. I was one day at a
gentleman's house, to whom I expressed my wonder at the prodigious quantity of
hair worn by the ladies; adding, that I did not conceive it possible for it to
be all of their own growth. The gentleman assured me that it was; and, in order
to convince me that it was so, he called his wife, and untied her hair, which,
notwithstanding it was in plaits, dragged at least two inches upon the floor as
she walked along. I offered my service to tie it up again; which was politely
accepted, and considered as a compliment by both. It has been said that the
Portugueze are a jealous people; a disposition I never could perceive among any
of those with whom I had the pleasure of forming an acquaintance; on the
contrary, they seemed sensible of, and pleased with, every kind of attention
paid to their wives or daughters.

The current coin here is the same as that in Portugal, but silver as well as
gold is coined at this place, where they have an established mint. The pieces
of gold are of various sizes, and have marked on them the number of thousand
rees they are worth. The most common coin is a 4000 ree piece, which passes for
L. 1.2.6, though not so heavy as an English guinea. The silver pieces, called
petacks, value two shillings, are also marked with the number of rees they are
worth. You get ten of these in exchange for a guinea; and for a Spanish dollar
two petacks, five vintins and a half, which is about four shillings and
eight-pence. Here, as in Portugal, they have five, ten, and twenty thousand ree
pieces. A ree is a nominal coin; twenty make a vintin, value about three
halfpence; eight vintins make one shilling; a petack is worth two shillings,
and of these there are some double pieces, value four shillings sterling.

One morning, as I attended Mr. Il de Fonso, surgeon general to the army, and a
man of ingenuity and abilities in his profession, to a large public hospital, a
soldier was brought in with a wound in his left side. The instrument had
penetrated the abdomen, without injuring the intestines; and from its form and
nature the wound must have been inflicted with the point of a knife, or a
stiletto. The patient, after being dressed, acquainted us, that the preceding
night he had had some words with another man about a woman; who,
notwithstanding blows had not passed, stabbed him with some sharp instrument,
of what kind he could not see, as it was then dark, and afterward made his
escape. This account led me to believe that assassinations were not unfrequent
in Brazil; but Mr. Il de Fonso assured me to the contrary; telling me that such
instances seldom happened, except among the negroes, whose vindictive and
treacherous dispositions led them wonderful lengths to gratify their revenge,
whenever night and a convenient opportunity conspired, at once to aid and to
conceal their horrid acts.

While we remained here, the weather being cool and favorable, I prevailed on
the surgeon who was about to amputate a limb, to allow me to take it off
according to Allenson's method. During the operation I could plainly see, that
he and his pupils did not seem much pleased with it; and he afterward told me
it was impossible it could ever answer. A very short space of time, however,
made them of a different opinion; and in eighteen days after, when we sailed, I
had the satisfaction to leave the patient with his stump nearly cicatrized, to
the no small joy of the surgeon, who said, that if the man had died, he should
have been heavily censured for making him the subject of experiments. The
circumstance of a man's leg being cut off, and almost healed in as many days as
it generally takes weeks, soon became known, and added very much to the
estimation in which the people of this place held English surgeons. Whenever I
visited the hospital afterward, the objects of pity with which it was filled,
used to crowd around me in such a manner, and in such numbers, for my advice,
that I found it difficult to get from them. And they now would readily have
submitted to any operation I should have proposed; but as I saw the surgeon did
not much approve of my interference, I gave up all ideas of it.

The harbor of Rio de Janeiro lies in 22 54 south latitude, and 43 19 west
longitude, about eighteen or twenty leagues to the westward of Cape Frio. The
entrance is good, and cannot be mistaken, on account of a remarkable hill,
resembling a sugar loaf, that is on the left hand side; and some islands before
it, one of which is oblong, and does not, at some distance, look unlike a
thatched house: they lie from the mouth of the harbor S. by W. about two
leagues. Ships going in may run on either side. The bar, over which we carried
seven fathom water, is not more than threefourths of a mile across, and well
defended by forts. The strongest is called Santa Cruz, built on a rock, on the
starboard side as you run in, from which every shot fired at ships passing must
take effect. The other, named Fort Lozia, is smaller, and built on an island or
rock, on the larboard side, a little higher up, and lying contiguous to the
main land. The tide in the harbor rarely ebbs and flows more than seven feet;
however, ships, if possible, never anchor in this narrow pass between the
forts, as the bottom is foul, and the tide runs with considerable rapidity. All
danger in going in, or running out, may be avoided by keeping the mid channel,
or a little bordering on the starboard shore. After Santa Cruz fort is passed,
the course is nearly N. by W. and N. N. W.; but, as I before observed, the eye
is the best pilot. When you get within a mile of a strong fortified island
which lies before the town (only separated by a narrow pass), called the Isle
of Cobras, you are then in the great road; where we anchored in fifteen fathom
water; or, should you have occasion to get nearer the town, you may run round
this island, on the north side, and anchor above it, before the convent of
Benedictine friars at the N. W. end of the city, before spoken of.

The city and harbor are strongly defended and fortified, but with very little
judgment or regularity. The hills are very high, and so is the coast, which has
such strange, romantic, and almost inaccessible terminations, that nature of
her own accord, without the aid of military skill, seems disposed to defend
them. Taking every thing into the account, I think it one of the best harbors
I have ever seen; and, upon the whole, better calculated to supply the wants of
people who have long been at sea, and stand in need of refreshment, than any
part of the world, every thing being so remarkably cheap. Beef may be purchased
at seven farthings per pound; hogs, turkeys, and ducks, both English and
Muscovy, were equally reasonable. Fowls were dearer, but still sold at a lower
rate than in England. Fish was not very plentiful, but I was told, that at
other seasons they have a most excellent market for that article. Their market
for vegetables, however, abounded with fruit, roots, and garden stuff, of every
kind, notwithstanding it was not the best season for fruit, it then being too
early in the spring to expect abundance. Oranges, which we had in the greatest
plenty, cost only five-pence the hundred.

On a hill, about half a mile S. E. of the city, stands a convent, named
Convento de Santa Theresa; the nuns of which, amounting to about forty, are not
allowed to unveil when they come to the grate: and on a plain between this
convent and the city, stands another, called Convento A. de Juda, a very large
building, governed by an abbess and several nuns, all under the direction of a
bishop. Here about seventy young ladies are placed to be educated, who are
subject to all the restrictions of a monastic life, only they are permitted to
be frequently at the grate, and that unveiled. But what is singular, the nuns
of this convent, when they arrive at a proper age, are allowed either to take a
husband, or to take the veil, just as their inclination leads. They are not
however suffered to quit the convent on any other terms than that of marriage;
to which the consent and approbation of the bishop is always necessary. If they
do not get a husband early in life, it is common for them to take the veil.
Many of these young ladies were very agreeable both in person and disposition;
and by frequently conversing with them at the grate, we formed as tender an
intercourse with them as the bolts and bars between us would admit of. Myself,
and two other gentlemen belonging to the fleet, singled out three of those who
appeared to be the most free and lively, to whom we attached ourselves during
our stay, making them such presents as we thought would prove most acceptable,
and receiving more valuable ones in return. These little attentions were viewed
by them in so favorable a light, that when we took a last farewell they gave us
many evident proofs of their concern and regret. Indeed every circumstance
while we continued at this charming place (except there being no inns or
coffee-houses, where a stranger could refresh himself, or be accommodated when
he chose to stay a night or two on shore) conspired to make us pleased and
delighted with it; and I can truly say, that I left it with reluctance, which I
believe was the case with many of my companions.

September 3d. The commodore sent Mr. Moreton, the master of the Sirius, and
two of his midshipmen, who had been put on the invalid list, aboard an English
ship returning from the Southern whale fishery to England, which, being leaky,
had been forced into Rio. As this ship was to sail in a few days, it furnished
us with an opportunity of writing to our friends. About two in the afternoon
the commodore made the signal for all officers to repair on board their
respective ships, and for the transports to hoist in their boats.

4th. At six the fleet weighed with a light land breeze. On the commodore's
approaching Santa Cruz Fort, he was saluted from the batteries with twenty-one
guns; which he returned from the Sirius with an equal number. About ten o'clock
we got clear of the land, steering to the eastward with a gentle breeze. Thomas
Brown, a convict, was punished with a dozen lashes, for behaving insolently to
one of the officers of the ship. This was the first that had received any
punishment, since their embarkation on board the Charlotte.

5th. Wind variable and cloudy; Rio Sugar Loaf still in sight, about eight or
nine leagues distant.

6th. The officers, ship's company, marines, and convicts, were, by signal from
the Sirius, put to an allowance of three quarts of water per day, including
that usually allowed for cooking their provisions. In the course of the day a
steady breeze sprung up at N. E. About six in the evening, the Fishburne
victualler carried away her fore-top-gallant yard, which she soon got replaced
with another.

7th and 8th. The weather continued dark and cloudy, with some heavy showers of
rain. On the evening of the 8th, between the hours of three and four, Mary
Broad, a convict, was delivered of a fine girl.

9th and 10th. Fine, clear, dry weather. The commodore made a signal for the
convoy to close, being scattered about at a considerable distance from him.

11th, 12th, and 13th. Fresh breezes, with sudden squalls and heavy rain. The
four succeeding days, light airs, and hazy, with some showers, and a damp moist
air. On the evening of the 17th, our longitude being, by signal from the
commodore, 31 34 W. we caught a shark six feet long, of which the people made a
good mess.

18th. Heavy rain, with dark and cold weather. Saw several albatrosses and
pintado birds.

19th. William Brown, a very well behaved convict, in

23d. From the 19th, the weather had been cold, dry, and pleasant; it now
became wet, squally, and unsettled; the wind westerly, with a high sea;
albatrosses, pintado birds, and some small hawks, hovering round the ship.

30th. The weather became more moderate and pleasant, the wind variable,
inclining to calms.

October 1st. Light airs, with haze and rain. Saw a great number of different
birds; we were then in latitude 34 42 S. longitude 1 10 E. of the meridian of
London.

13th. The Sirius made the signal for seeing land; and at seven in the evening
we came to, in Table Bay, at the Cape of Good Hope, in seventeen fathom water,
abreast of Cape Town, distant about a mile or a mile and half. As soon as the
Sirius anchored, the commodore and commissary went on shore, and took up their
residence in lodgings at the house of Mrs. De Wit. They were soon followed by
such officers as could be spared from the duty of the fleet, all wishing to
prepare themselves, by the comforts and refreshments to be enjoyed on shore,
for the last and longest stage of their voyage.

14th. The contract for provisions being settled with Messrs. De Wits and
Caston, the troops, men, women, and children, were served with a pound and half
of soft bread, and an equal quantity of beef or mutton daily; and with wine in
lieu of spirits. The convicts, men, women, and children, had the same allowance
as the troops, except wine.

16th. Commodore Phillip, attended by most of the officers of the fleet, paid a
complimentary visit to his excellency Mynheer Van Graaf, the Dutch governor, by
whom we were received with extreme civility and politeness. A few hours after
we had taken leave, he called on the commodore at his lodgings, to return his
visit; and the next day returned the visit of such officers, residing on shore,
as had paid their respects to him.

Notwithstanding this studied politeness, several days elapsed before the
commodore could obtain a categorical answer to the requisition he had made for
the supplies he stood in need of for the expedition: and had it not been for
the judicious perseverance Commodore Phillip observed, in urging his particular
situation, and the uncommon exigency of the service he was engaged in; it was
believed the governor, fiscal, and council, would have sheltered their refusal
under the pretense that a great scarcity had prevailed in the Cape colony the
preceding season, particularly of wheat and corn, which were the articles we
stood most in want of. This idea they wished to impress us with; but, as just
observed, the commodore's sagacity and industrious zeal for the service subdued
and got over the supineness shown by the governor, etc. and procured permission
for the contractor to supply us with as much stock, corn, and other
necessaries, as we could stow. It is, however, much to be lamented that the
quantity we could find room for fell very short of what we ought to have taken
in; as the only spare room we had, was what had been occasioned by the
consumption of provisions, etc. since we left Rio de Janeiro, and the removal
of twenty female convicts from the Friendship into the Charlotte, the Lady
Penrhyn, and the Prince of Wales.

After the supplies had been granted, his excellency Governor Graaf invited the
commodore, and many of the officers of the expedition, to a very handsome
dinner at his town residence. The house at which we were entertained, is
delightfully situated, nearly in the center of an extensive garden, the
property of the Dutch East India company, usefully planted, and at the same
time elegantly laid out. The governor's family make what use they please of the
produce of the garden, which is various and abundant; but the original
intention of the company in appropriating so extensive a piece of ground to
this purpose was, that their hospital, which is generally pretty full when
their ships arrive after long voyages, may be well supplied with fruits and
vegetables, and likewise that their ships may receive a similar supply.

This garden is as public as St. James's park; and, for its handsome, pleasant,
and well-shaded walks, is much frequented by persons of every description, but
particularly by the fashionable and gay. There are many other agreeable walks
about Cape Town, but none to be compared with these. At the upper end of the
principal of them is a small space walled in for the purpose of confining some
large ostriches, and a few deer. A little to the right of this is a small
menagery, in which the company have half a dozen wild animals, and about the
same number of curious birds.

As you approach the Cape of Good Hope, a very remarkable mountain may, in
clear weather, be discovered at a considerable distance; it is called the Table
Land, from its flat surface, which resembles that piece of furniture. Mr.
Dawes, lieutenant of marines on board the Sirius, an ingenious and accurate
observer, who has undertaken during the voyage the astronomical observations;
accompanied by Messrs. Fowell and Waterhouse, midshipmen of the Sirius;
Lieutenant De Wit, of the Dutch navy; and myself, went to the top of this
mountain; an undertaking which we found to be of a far more serious nature than
we at first were aware of. For my own part, I suffered so much from heat and
thirst, that had not the fear of shame urged me on, my companions being
determined to accomplish it at all events, I should most certainly have given
it up, before I reached the top. During this sultry and fatiguing expedition, I
found great benefit, toward alleviating my thirst, by keeping a small pebble
in my mouth; and sometimes by chewing rushes, which we met with in our way.
But, when we had reached the summit, the delightful and extensive prospect we
there enjoyed, the weather being uncommonly fine, fully atoned for the trouble,
fatigue, and every suffering, we had undergone. From this elevation we could
overlook all the country about the Cape.

As soon as we got to the top, our first business was to look out for water;
but all we could find was some stagnant rain, which lay in the hollow of the
stones. Our thirst, however, was so intolerable, that the discovery even of
this gave us inexpressible pleasure; and, notwithstanding we all perspired most
violently, and were sensible of the danger and impropriety of drinking a
quantity of bad water in such a situation, yet we could not refrain. As for my
own part, it was utterly out of my power to listen at that time to the dictates
of prudence; and I believe it was equally difficult to my companions, if I
might judge from the avidity with which they drank out of the little pools,
lying on the ground at full length, that being the only posture in which it was
to be obtained.

The regularity of the streets of the town, which intersect each other at right
angles; the buildings, gardens, castle, and forts; with twenty-three ships then
at anchor in the bay; all which appeared directly underneath us; was a sight
beautiful and pleasing beyond description. The perpendicular height of this
land is 1857 feet from the surface of the water. On the top of it we gathered
several species of heath, some wild celery, a few shrubs, and some non-descript
plants; we found also some little stones of a fine polish and singular
whiteness.

In our descent, which proved nearly as difficult and troublesome as going up,
we saw some runaway negroes, round a fire, on the clift of a stupendous rock,
where it was entirely out of the power of their owners to get at them. To look
at their situation, one would think it beyond the utmost stretch of human
ingenuity to devise a way to reach it. Here they remain all day in perfect
security, and during the night make frequent excursions to the town and the
parts adjacent, committing great depredations on the inhabitants. The whole
subsistence of these fugitives depends on this precarious method: and even this
method would prove insufficient, were it not for the assistance they receive
from those who were once their fellow slaves. Nor is it always that they
succeed in the depredatory trips, which necessity thus urges them to take; they
are often betrayed by their quondam friends; and when this happens, as the
Dutch are not famed for their lenity in punishing crimes, they are made horrid
examples of. But neither the fear of punishment, nor hunger, thirst, cold, and
wretchedness, to which they are often unavailably exposed, can deter them from
making Table Land their place of refuge from what they consider to be greater
evils. Scarcely a day passes but a smoke may be seen from some of these
inaccessible retreats.

In the mild or summer season, which commences in September, and continues till
March, the Table Land is sometimes suddenly capped with a white cloud, by some
called the spreading of the Table-cloth. When this cloud seems to roll down the
steep face of the mountain, it is an unerring indication of an approaching gale
of wind from the south-east; which generally blows with great violence, and
sometimes continues a day or more, but in common is of short duration. On the
first appearance of this cloud, the ships in Table Bay begin to prepare for it,
by striking yards and top-masts, and making every thing as snug as possible.

A little to the westward of the Table Land, divided by a small valley, stands,
on the right hand side of Table Bay, a round hill, called the Sugar Loaf; and
by many the Lion's Head, as there is a continuance from it contiguous to the
sea, called the Lion's Rump; and when you take a general view of the whole, it
very much resembles that animal with his head erect. The Sugar Loaf or Lion's
Head, and the Lion's Rump, have each a flag-staff on them, by which the
approach of ships is made known to the governor, particularizing their number,
nation, and the quarter from which they come. To the eastward, separated by a
small chasm from the Table Land, stands Charles's Mount, well known by the
appellation of the Devil's Tower; and so called from the violent gusts of wind
supposed to issue from it, when it partakes of the cap that covers the Table
Land; though these gusts are nothing more than a degree of force the wind
acquires in coming through the chasm. When this phenomenon appears in the
morning, which is by no means so frequent as in the evening, the sailors have a
saying, as the Devil's Tower is almost contiguous to the Table Land, that the
old gentleman is going to breakfast; if in the middle of the day, that he is
going to dinner; and if in the evening, that the cloth is spread for supper.

The foregoing high lands form a kind of amphitheatre about the Table Valley,
where the Cape Town stands. From the shipping the town appears pleasantly
situated, but at the same time small; a deception that arises from its being
built in a valley with such stupendous mountains directly behind it. On
landing, however, you are surprised, and agreeably disappointed, to find it not
only extensive, but well built, and in a good style; the streets spacious, and
intersecting each other at right angles with great precision. This exactness in
the formation of the streets, when viewed from the Table Land, is observed to
be very great. The houses in general are built of stone, cemented together with
a glutinous kind of earth which serves as mortar, and afterward neatly
plastered, and whitewashed, with lime. As to their height, they do not in
common exceed two stories, on account of the violence of the wind, which at
some seasons of the year blows with great strength and fury; indeed sometimes
so violently as to shake the houses to the very foundation. For the same
reason, thatch has been usually preferred to tiles or shingles; but the bad
effects that have proceeded from this mode when fires happen, has induced the
inhabitants in all their new buildings to give the preference to slates and
tiles. The lower parts of the houses, according to the custom of the Dutch
nation, are not only uncommonly neat and clean in appearance, but they are
really so; and the furniture is rather rich than elegant. But this is by no
means the case with the bed-rooms or upper apartments; which are more barely
and worse furnished than any I ever beheld: and the streets seem to be much
upon a par with them, they being rough, uneven, and unpaved. I was, however,
upon the whole, extremely well pleased with the town. Many of the houses have a
space flagged before the door, and others have trees planted before them, which
form a pleasant shade, and give pleasing novelty to the streets.

The only landing-place is at the east end of the town, where there is a wooden
quay running some paces into the sea, with several cranes on it, for the
convenience of loading and unloading the scoots that come along side. To this
place excellent water is conveyed by pipes, which makes the watering of ships
both easy and expeditious.

Close to this quay, on the left hand, stands the castle and principal
fortress; a strong extensive work, having excellent accommodations for the
troops, and for many of the civil officers belonging to the company. Within the
gates, the company have their principal stores; which are spacious as well as
convenient. This fort covers and defends the east part of the town and harbor,
as Amsterdam fort does the west part. The latter, which has been built since
commodore Johnstone's expedition, and whereon both French and Dutch judgment
have been united to render it effectual and strong, is admirably planned and
calculated to annoy and harass ships coming into the bay. Some smaller detached
fortifications extend along the coast, both to the east and west, and make
landing, which was not the case before the late war, hazardous and difficult.
In a word, Cape Town is at this time fortified with strength, regularity, and
judgment.

There are two churches here; one large, plain, and unadorned, for the
Calvinists, the prevailing sect; and a smaller one for the Lutherans.

The hospital, which is large and extensive, is situated at the upper end of
the town, close to the company's garden. It is an honor to that commercial
body, and no small ornament to the town. The only objection that can be made to
it as a building, is its situation: had it been erected on an eminence, and a
little detached from the town, which might easily have been done, no fault
could have been found with it. As it is, the convalescents have free access to
the company's gardens, where they reap the benefit of a wholesome pure air,
perfumed with the exhalations of a great variety of rich fruit trees, aromatic
shrubs, and odorous plants and flowers; and likewise have the use of every
production of it, as before observed; advantages that compensate, in a great
measure, for the flat situation of the hospital.

The inhabitants are all exceedingly fond of gardens, which they keep in most
excellent order. The doing this is very little trouble to them, the climate and
soil being most benign and friendly to vegetation. Among the many which
afforded me delight, I must not forget that belonging to Coloned Gordon,
commander in chief of the Dutch troops at the Cape; where not only the taste
and ingenuity of the gardener, but the skill and knowledge of the botanist, are
at once manifest. The colonel is a man of science, of an active and
well-cultivated genius, and who appropriates those hours he can spare from his
military duties (in which he is said to excel), to a perusal of the book of
nature, and researches after useful knowledge. These pursuits tend not only to
this amusement, but to his honor; and they will, doubtless, at some time or
other, further conduce to the advancement of natural history, and to the honor
of his country; as it is said he intends to publish the observations and
remarks which have been the result of his researches. Those he has made on the
Hottentots, Caffres, and the countries they inhabit, will doubtlessly be
valuable; he having made himself better acquainted with the subject, and
penetrated farther into the interior parts, than any traveller or naturalist
that has hitherto visited the Cape. It is to be lamented, that he has so long
withheld from the world the gratification and improvement, which most assuredly
must be derived from the observations of a person so well and so extensively
informed. His polite attention and civility, during our stay at the Cape, claim
our most grateful acknowledgments.

Besides their hospital, the Dutch East India company have several other public
buildings, which tend to improve the appearance of the town. The two principal
of these are, the stables, and a house for their slaves. The former is a
handsome range of buildings, capable of containing an incredible number of
horses. Those they have at the Cape are small, spirited, and full of life. The
latter is a building of considerable extent, where the slaves, both male and
female, have separate apartments, in a very comfortable style, to reside in
after the fatigues and toil of the day; which undoubtedly is great, but by no
means equal, in my opinion, to that endured by the slaves in our own colonies.
However severe and cruel the Dutch may be considered in other respects, they
certainly treat their slaves with great humanity and kindness; which, I am
sorry to say, I scarcely ever saw done in the West Indies, during a residence
there of three years. On the contrary, I have frequently been witness to the
infliction of the most brutal, cruel, and wanton punishments on these poor
creatures, who are the source and immediate support of the splendor of the
Creoles. The bare retrospect of the cruelties I have seen exercised there,
excites a kind of horror that chills my blood. At the Cape, there are several
officers placed over the slaves, who have commodious apartments, and treat them
humanely.

The first week after our arrival at this place, the militia, consisting both
of horse and foot, were embodied, and held their annual meeting: I say annual,
as that is the usual period; but this was the first time of their assembling
since the conclusion of the war in 1783. The Cape militia differ from the
English, in not receiving pay, or wearing regimentals. In fact they should
rather be called volunteers, who turn out for the protection of their own
property, and are not subject to strict military discipline. Most of them wore
blue coats, with white metal buttons, aukwardly long, and in the cut and shape
of which uniformity had not been attended to. Neither was it visible in the
other parts of their dress or accoutrements; some wore powder, others none; so
that, upon the whole, they made a very unmilitary appearance. The officers are
chosen annually from among themselves. Some of these, indeed, I observed to be
very well dressed. Neglect, non-attendance, and every other breach of their
military rules, is punished by fine or forfeiture, and not corporally. At this
burlesque on the profession of a soldier, I could not help observing, that many
of them had either got intoxicated that morning, or were not recovered from
their overnight's debauch; notwithstanding which they marched to the field, and
went through their evolutions with a steadiness and regularity that was really
astonishing, considering the state they were in: but it is said, and I believe
with some truth, that a Dutchman, when half drunk, is more capable of
performing every kind of business, than if he were perfectly sober. After these
annual exhibitions, the members of the corpse meet their wives, daughters, etc.
(who take care to be present, that they may be witnesses of their military
skill and achievements) at some friend's house, where they crown the night in
dancing, of which they are uncommonly fond. To dancing are added substantial
suppers, and potent libations; in which they indulge not only upon this, but on
all other occasions. A Dutch supper to me, at first, was a matter of wonder, as
I could never see any kind of difference, either in the quality or quantity,
between them and their dinners, which were always abundant, and consisting
chiefly of heavy food.

The inhabitants of the Cape, though in their persons large, slout, and
athletic, have not all that phlegm about them which is the characteristic of
Dutchmen in general. The physical influence of climate may in some degree
account for this; for it is well known that in all southern latitudes the
temper and disposition of the people are more gay, and that they are more
inclined to luxury and amusements of every kind, than the inhabitants of the
northern hemisphere.

The ladies at the Cape are lively, good natured, familiar, and gay. They
resemble the women of England more than any foreigners I have ever seen.
English fashions prevail among them (the female part of the governor's family
excepted, who imitate the French), notwithstanding their intercourse with
France is now by far greater than with England. The habits and customs of the
women of this place are extremely contrasted to those of the inhabitants of Rio
de Janeiro. Among the latter a great deal of reserve and modesty is apparent
between the sexes in public. Those who are disposed to say tender and civil
things to a lady, must do it by stealth, or breathe their soft sighs through
the lattice-work of a window, or the grates of a convent. But at the Cape, if
you wish to be a favorite with the fair, as the custom is, you must in your
own defense (if I may use the expression) grapple the lady, and paw her in a
manner that does not partake in the least of gentleness. Such a rough and
uncouth conduct, together with a kiss ravished now and then in the most public
manner and situations, is not only pleasing to the fair one, but even to her
parents, if present; and is considered by all parties as an act of the greatest
gallantry and gaiety. In fact, the Dutch ladies here, from a peculiar gay turn,
admit of liberties that may be thought reprehensible in England; but perhaps as
seldom overstep the bounds of virtue, as the women of other countries.

During my residence on shore, whenever I heard of any Hottentots being in
town, I made a point of endeavoring to get a sight of them, in order to see
whether their manners and appearance corresponded with the description given of
them by travelers; such as being besmeared with grease, and decorated with the
stinking entrails of animals; on which they likewise, when pressed by hunger,
are said to feed.

I saw many of the men, without being able to make any other remarks on them,
than that they were thin, of rather a low stature, but formed for activity: and
further, that their hair, which was short and woolly, as well as their whole
bodies, was bedaubed with some unctuous or greasy substance, which was very
offensive. They were of a dark brown color, had a flat nose, thick lips, large
full eyes, and were ornamented with ivory rings, and wore narrow strips of the
skin of some animal, devoid of its hair, around their neck, legs, and arms. The
only female of that nation I could get a sight of, was during a little
excursion in the environs of Cape Town: walking one evening with a Dutch
getleman, to see a garden about a mile from the town, I accidentally met one of
these ladies, who was equally as offensive as the male I had met.

The heavy draft work about the Cape is mostly performed by oxen; which are
here brought to an uncommon degree of usefulness and docility. It is not
uncommon to see fourteen, sixteen, and sometimes eighteen, in one of their
teams; when the roads are heavy, they sometimes, though rarely, yoke twenty;
all which the Hottentots, Malayes, and Cape slaves, have in the most perfect
subjection and obedience. One of these fellows places himself on the fore part
of the wagon, or, when loaded, on the top of the load, and with a tremendous
long whip, which, from its size, he is obliged to hold in both his hands,
manages these creatures with inexpressible address. I have often seen the
driver, when he has found expedition needful, make them keep whatever pace he
thought proper; either trot or gallop (a gait performed or kept up with
difficulty by European oxen), and that with as much ease as if he was driving
horses. This immense whip, the only thing with which they guide the team, the
drivers use so dexterously, that they make them turn a corner with the utmost
nicety; hitting even the leading pair, in whatever part they please. The blows
thus given must inflict intolerable pain, or these slow animals could never be
brought to go with the velocity they do at the Cape. These sooty charioteers
likewise manage horses with the same dexterity. To see one of them driving
three, four, five, and sometimes six pair, in hand, with one of these long
whips, as I have often done with great surprise, would make the most complete
master of the whip in England cut a despicable figure. Carriages are not very
numerous at the Cape, as the inhabitants in general travel in covered wagons,
which better suit the roughness of the country. The governor and some few of
the principal people keep coaches, which are a good deal in the English style,
and always drawn by six horses. The only chariot

November 11th. Having got on board such animals, provisions, etc. as we could
stow, the commodore, with all the officers that had lodgings on shore,
embarked. Previous to the commodore's embarkation he gave a public dinner to
some of the gentlemen of the town and the officers of his fleet. The Dutch
governor was to have been of the party, but by some unforeseen event was
detained in the country, where he had been for some days before. Commodore
Phillip had his band of music on shore upon the occasion, and the day was spent
with great cheerfulness and conviviality.

13th. About half past one o'clock we sailed from the Cape of Good Hope. A
small American ship had arrived during the forenoon, bound on a trading voyage
to China, with several passengers on board. We learnt from her, that the
Hartwell East Indiaman had been lost, by bordering too close on the island of
Bonavista, in order to land some recruits, who had mutinied, and occasioned
great disorder and confusion in the ship. It gave us pleasure to hear from the
carpenter of the Hartwell, who was on board the American ship, that no lives
were lost by the accident. The principal part of the crew, we found, had got to
Madeira, on their return to England. Abreast of Penguin Island, about three
o'clock, we passed a large Dutch ship from Holland, bound to the Cape, with
troops on board. A little before it was dark, we spoke the Kent whaler, from
London, who had been four months out. She with ourselves was endeavoring to
get to the eastward. On our first discovering her, as she seemed desirous of
joining or speaking to the fleet, we were in hopes of her being from England,
probably to us; or at least that we might get letters by her; but our suspense
on these points, a suspense only to be conceived by persons on long voyages,
was soon put an end to by hearing she had been so many months out. A few days
before we left the Cape, some of the officers of the expedition received
letters from England by the Ranger East India packet, Captain Buchanan, who had
put in to water, and stop a leak; both of which being soon accomplished, she
proceeded on her voyage.

14th. This morning Catherine Pryor, one of the convicts, was delivered of a
male child. The officers, seamen, troops, and convicts, were put to an
allowance of three quarts of water a day.

17th. The wind variable, inclining to the southward and eastward, with hazy
weather, an epidemic dysentry appeared among the convicts, which very soon made
its way among the marines, and prevailed with violence and obstinacy until
about Christmas, when it was got under by an unremitting attention to
cleanliness, and every other method proper and essential for the removal and
prevention of contagion. It gives me pleasure to be able to add, that we only
lost one person by this disease, violent and dangerous as it was; and that was
Daniel Cresswell, one of the troops intended for the garrison; who was seized
on the 19th of November, and died the 30th of the same month, the eleventh day
of his illness. From the commencement of his disorder, he was in the most acute
agonizing pain I ever was witness to; nor was it in the power of medicine to
procu^re him the shortest interval of ease. His case being a very singular one,
I have transmitted it, with some others, to a medical friend in London, with
permission to make what use of them he may think proper. The wind kept to the
southward and eastward until the 21st, without veering a point in our favor,
which carried us far out of our way to the westward; but that day it shifted.

23d. We spoke the Prince of Wales, who informed us, that the preceding night
one of the seamen had fallen from the top-sail yard, and was drowned. Indeed it
was so dark, and the ship went so fast through the water, that all efforts to
save him, had any been made, would have proved fruitless. This day and the
following running to eastward, with the wind to the southward and westward, we
saw many aquatic birds.

25th. The commodore removed into the Supply armed tender, and took with him
Lieutenant King of the Sirius, and Mr. Dawes of the marines, whom I had before
occasion to mention as having undertaken the astronomical observations during
the voyage. Having likewise selected some artificers from among the convicts,
he went on, taking the Alexander, Scarborough, and Friendship with him, being
fast sailing vessels; leaving the heavy sailers, both transports and
victuallers, under the direction of Captain Hunter of the Sirius. Major Ross,
commanding officer of the troops, removed into the Scarborough, as did the
adjutant.

flying squadron, as the seamen termed them. The wind continued all this day at
E. S. E. with pleasant clear weather.

28th. The wind shifted to the E. N. E.; the weather hazy, with small rain and
strong breezes. The Sirius made a signal for the convoy to close.

30th. The wind variable, with some heavy showers, and in the intervals clear
weather.

December 1st and 2d. The wind from W. S. W. to S. W. by W. in lat. 40 south,
long. 35 10 east; the weather moderate, cold, clear, and pleasant. We saw birds
of different kinds.

3d. In the evening, and on the succeeding day, the wind to northward and
westward; fresh gales, dark, wet, unpleasant weather, with a high sea. The
Sirius, for fear of separation, as the weather did not look kindly, made the
signal for the convoy to keep nearer the commanding officer.

5th. In the morning almost calm, with a heavy swell; in the evening a small
breeze sprung up at the N. E. which next day shifted to the westward.

16th. In lat. 41 7 south, long. 74 54 east, clear weather, with a small breeze
at N. N. W. we saw some large whales, several birds, mostly of the peteral
kind, a seal, and some rock weed.

17th. Dark, cold, and gloomy. Had some gulls and whales round the ship.

20th. Wind variable, inclining to the south. I visited the Prince of Wales,
where I found some of the female convicts with evident symptoms of the scurvy,
brought on by the damp and cold weather we had lately experienced. The two
succeeding days the wind to the westward, though at times variable, with dark,
wet, gloomy weather; in lat. 41 18 south, long. 90 7 east. We saw and passed
some sea weed. On those days the scurvy began to show itself in the Charlotte,
mostly among those who had the dysentery to a violent degree; but I was pretty
well able to keep it under, by a liberal use of the essence of malt, and some
good wine, which ought not to be classed among the

24th. The weather still dark and gloomy. Had several birds round the ship of
the albatross and peteral kind; with what appeared to me to be something of the
sea-hawk species.

27th. Dark hazy weather, with some light squalls. We passed more sea weed;
some gulls, and many of the beforementioned birds, about the ship.

30th and 31st. Strong breezes, with unsettled-looking weather; birds still
about us, and likewise some whales.

January 1st, 1788. The new year was introduced with a pretty heavy gale of
wind from the northward and westward, which was the first we had encountered
since we left England. It began a little before 12 o'clock the preceding night,
and continued till seven this evening. The Sirius was the whole day under her
stay-sails; and the convoy under their fore-sail and stay-sails.

2d and 3d. Smart gales, with dark gloomy weather. Some seals and oceanic birds
about the ship.

4th. Cloudy weather, in latitude 44 2 S. The Sirius made the signal for the
longitude by lunar observation, which was found to be 135 30 East. In the
evening some birds, called Mother Cary's Chickens, were round the ship.

5th. The weather cold and clear, the wind N. W. Passed some sea weed. In the
morning the third mate thought he saw some diverse; but as they were not seen by
any other person, not much attention was paid to the report. At night we had
some squalls, with light showers of rain.

7th. Early in the morning the Lady Penrhyn made the signal for seeing land;
but it only proved to be a fog-bank; a circumstance that often deceives the
anxious mariner. About two o'clock in the afternoon the Prince of Wales, being
the headmost ship, made the same signal. The Charlotte being next in
succession, the signal was scarcely displayed, before we also discovered it
very plainly through the haze; and repeated the signal, which was answered by
the Sirius. By our last lunar observation this land appears to be well laid
down in Maskelyne's Tables, and in the journals of the celebrated Cook: but to
the surprise of every one on board, we found a small chart, published by
Steel, and which was held in little estimation, to be not only accurate as to
the situation, but also to give a tolerable appearance and description of Van
Diernan's Land: indeed such as may prove extremely useful to ships coming this
way, and fully sufficient to enable them to avoid all danger if the weather be
clear. For my own part, I see no hazard that attends making this land by day
(such an attempt by night would be very incautious and absurd), as nature has
been very particular in pointing out where it lies, by rocks which jutt out of
the sea, like so many beacons. I believe a convoy was never conducted with more
care, or made the land with greater accuracy and certainty, than this. Indeed,
ability and experienced nautical knowledge were never more fully evinced on all
occasions than by Captain Hunter; who, I may venture to pronounce, without much
risk of having my veracity called in question, one of the most assiduous and
accurate observers, and able navigators, the present day furnishes. His
appointment to this expedition by Lord How is strongly marked with that
prudence and wisdom which are known to govern his Lordship's conduct. Captian
Hunter has a pretty turn for drawing, which will enable him, no doubt, to give
such a description of this coast as will do credit to himself, and be of
singular advantage, as well to those whose lot it may to visit, hereafter, this
extensive coast, as to navigation at large. The assistance of Lieutenant
Bradley, first of the Sirius, (who likewise is an officer of more than common
abilities), as a navigator in conducting a convoy in a track so little known,
must have been pleasing to Captain Hunter.

As we run in with the land, which is pretty high, we were surprised to see, at
this season of the year, some small patches of snow. The haze being dispersed,
by a gentle breeze at N. N. W. we could observe, and hear, as we were not more
than six or seven miles from the shore, the surf beating high and loudly
against some uneven rocks which jutted out, in strange projections, into the
sea. This part of the coast, as far as we could see, is bold, irregular, and
craggy; and very few trees, or appearance of verdure, to be seen. At four in
the afternoon, being about six or eight miles to the eastward of the
eastward-most rock, called the Mewstone (there being several others which we
distinctly saw), bearing N. N. W. we discovered to the westward of them some
eminences, which probably might be islands; or, if not, some land running a
considerable way into the sea. For my own part I am inclined to believe the
latter to be the case; though the distance was too great to hazard a conclusive
opinion upon it, as a large smoke was seen close to the innermost height.

About seven, steering to the eastward, along shore, nearly at the distance of
four miles, being well in with the westward-most point of a very large bay,
called Storm Bay, laid down in lat. 44 3 S. and long. 146 E. we discovered
Swilly bearing S. E. S. and a little to the eastward of it a small rock rising
out of the sea, distinguished by the name of the Eddystone, from its
resemblance to the Eddystone light-house off Plymouth, which was very
perceptible at the distance we were then from it. Our being close in with the
land, prevented us from seeing either of these before, as they lie at least six
or seven leagues out to sea. From the S. W. cape, which lies in lat. 43 39 S.
and long. 145 50 E. to the S. E. cape, which is admitted to be Tasman's South
Cape, is about the distance of fifteen or sixteen leagues. As we got to the
eastward, we saw many trees, mostly of a dwarf or stunted kind, with a whitish
bark, and perfectly leafless. This part of the country still continued to be a
rough, rugged, uneven tract, with very little appearance of fertility. Some
small patches of verdure were discovered about Storm Bay, and the trees seemed
to increase in number and size. Between eight and nine at night, we saw a large
fire on the east point of land which forms this bay, made by the natives; none
of whom could we see during the day, though close in with the shore: nor did we
perceive any other indication of its being inhabited, but this fire, and the
smoke mentioned to be seen on our first falling in with the land. The distance
between the smoke and the fire was eight leagues, a space that would surely
have exhibited some other proofs of populosity had it been thickly peopled.

About 10 o'clock, off Storm Bay, the weather moderately pleasant, the ship was
taken aback. The Lady Penrhyn was then under our lee quarter, which obliged us
to tack; after which we immediately wore, brought the ship to the wind on the
other tack, and stood to sea with the rest of the ships. The wind was then at
N. E. which just enabled us to weather Swilly and the Eddystone. As we got to
sea the wind increased moderately.

8th. The wind and weather variable; could perceive nothing of the land. I went
on board the Fishburne, to see the boatswain, who, on the first night of the
new year, having probably drank more grog than he ought, and the ship laboring
much, had fallen from the top-sail yard; by which he bruised himself in a
dreadful manner. The man being highly scorbutic, the parts soon mortified, and
he died about half an hour after I got on board. The master of the ship showed
evident marks of great concern for this invaluable man, as he termed him. He
declared to me, that sooner than venture again on so long a voyage without a
surgeon, he would put to sea with less than half his complement of men; for he
was strongly of opinion, that if the poor fellow had received immediate
assistance he would have recovered. I should have seen him sooner, but was
prevented by my own indifferent state of health. How owners of ships can think
of sending them through such a variety of climates, and a voyage of so great a
length, without a surgeon, is to me a matter of surprise. The Lady Penrhyn,
owned by Alderman Curtis, was the only merchant ship in our fleet that had a
surgeon. What the others will do on their return, Heaven only knows; but this I
well know, that they would never have reached thus far but for the succor
given them by myself and my assistants.

9th. Wind variable, and weather hazy, damp and dark; with some vivid flashes
of lightning, succeeded by distant peals of loud thunder. On the morning of
this day died Edward Thomson, a convict, worn out with a melancholy and long
confinement. Had he lived, I think he would have proved a deserving member of
society, as he seemed sensible of the impropriety and imprudence of his former
life, and studious to atone for it.

10th. The wind variable, and weather dark and gloomy, with a very troublesome
high sea. About two o'clock P. M. we had one of the most sudden gusts of wind I
ever remember to have known. In an instant it split our mainsail; and but for
the activity shown by the sailors, in letting fly the sheets, and lowering the
topsails, the masts must have gone over the side. The Prince of Wales, who was
close to us, had her main yard carried away in the slings. Fortunately for us
the squall was of short duration, otherwise the ships must have suffered
considerably from the uncommon cross sea that was running; which we had found
to be the case ever since we reached this coast.

11th. and 12th. The wind variable, inclining to the southward and westward,
and still an unpleasant cross troublesome sea. We saw a whale, several seals,
and many large oceanous birds, which we frequently fired at, without their
betraying the smallest symptom of fear either at the report, or at the balls,
which frequently dropped close to them. A conclusion may be drawn from hence,
that they had never been harassed with fire arms before; if they had, they
would undoubtedly have shown some fear; a sensation they seemed to be totally
unacquainted with. In all our firings we did not kill one of them.

19th. In the evening we saw the land over Red Point, bearing W. by N. the
extremes of the land from S. S. W. to N. We were then about three leagues from
the shore; and finding it unlikely to get in that night, Captain Hunter made
the signal for the convoy to come within hail; when he acquainted them, that
the entrance into Botany Bay bore N. N. W.: adding, that for the night he
intended to stand off and on, and early in the morning make sail for the bay.

20th. At four in the morning the Sirius and convoy made sail, and at eight
o'clock anchored in eight fathom water; Cape Banks E. S. E. Point Solander S.
S. E. and the entrance of the bay, between these two lands, W. S. W. We found
here the Supply tender, which had arrived the 18th, and the Alexander,
Scarborough, and Friendship transports, who had only arrived the day before. To
fee all the ships safe in their destined port, without ever having, by any
accident, been one hour separated; and all the people in as good health as
could be expected or hoped for, after so long a voyage, was a sight truly
pleasing, and at which every heart must rejoice. As we sailed into the bay,
some of the natives were on the shore, looking with seeming attention at such
large moving bodies coming amongst them. In the evening the boats were
permitted to land on the north side, in order to get water and grass for the
little stock we had remaining. An officer's guard was placed there to prevent
the seamen from straggling, or having any improper intercourse with the
natives. Captain Hunter, after anchoring, waited on the governor, on board the
Supply; who, with several other officers, landed. As they rowed along the
shore, some of the natives followed the boat; but on her putting in for the
snore, they ran into the woods. Some of the gentlemen, however, before they
returned on board, obtained an interview with them; during which they showed
some distrust, but, upon the whole, were civilly inclined. The boats sent to
haul the seine returned, having had tolerable success. The fish they caught
were bream, mullet, large rays, besides many other smaller species.

21st. The governor, Captain Hunter, and the two masters of the men of war,
with a party of marines, set off this morning, in two rigged long boats, to
examine Port Jackson, a harbor lying a little to the northward, which was
discovered by Captain Cook.

23d. The party returned this evening, full of praises on the extent and
excellence of the harbor, as well as the superiority of the ground, water, and
situation, to that of Botany Bay; which, I own, does not, in my opinion, by any
means merit the commendations bestowed on it by the much-lamented Cook, and
others, whose names and judgments are no less admired and esteemed. During his
excellency's absence the lieutenant governor had issued his orders to land all
the artificers that could be found among the convicts, and a party of others,
to clear the ground for the intended town, to dig sawpits, and to perform every
thing that was essential toward the works purposed to be carried on. Although
the spot fixed on for the town was the most eligible that could be chosen, yet
I think it would never have answered; the ground around it being sandy, poor,
and swampy, and but very indifferently supplied with water. The fine meadows
talked of in Captain Cook's voyage, I could never see, though I took some pains
to find them out; nor have I ever heard of a person that has seen any parts
resembling them. While the people were employed on shore, the natives came
several times among them, and behaved with a kind of cautious friendship. One
evening, while the seine was hauling, some of them were present, and expressed
great surprise at what they saw; giving a shout expressive of astonishment and
joy, when they perceived the quantity that was caught. No sooner were the fish
out of the water, than they began to lay hold of them, as if they had a right
to them, or that they were their own; upon which the officer of the boat, I
think very properly, restrained them; giving, however, to each of them a part.
They did not at first seem very well pleased with this mode of procedure, but
on observing with what justice the fish was distributed, they appeared content.

While we remained at Botany Bay, as I was one morning on board the Supply, we
saw twenty-nine of the natives on the beach, looking toward the shipping; upon
which Lieutenants Ball and King, Mr. Dawes, and myself, went on shore, landing
at the place where they were. They were friendly and pacific, though each of
them was armed with a spear or long dart, and had a stick, with a shell at the
end, used by them in throwing their weapons. Besides these, some few had
shields made of the bark of the cork tree, of a plain appearance, but
sufficient to ward off or turn their own weapons, some of which were pointed
and barbed with the bones of fish, fastened on with some kind of adhesive gum.
One of the most friendly, and who appeared to be the most confident, on signs
being made to him, stuck the end of his shield in the sand, but could not be
prevailed upon to throw his spear at it. Finding he declined it, I fired a
pistol ball through it. The explosion frightened him, as well as his
companions, a little; but they soon got over it, and on my putting the pistol
into my pocket, he took up the shield, and appeared to be much surprised at
finding it perforated. He then, by signs and gestures, seemed to ask if the
pistol would make a hole through him; and on being made sensible that it would,
he showed not the smallest signs of fear; on the contrary he endeavored, as we
construed his motions, to impress us with an idea of the superiority of his own
arms, which he applied to his breast, and by staggering, and a show of falling,
seemed to wish us to understand that the force and effect of them was mortal,
and not to be resisted. However, I am well convinced that they know and dread
the superiority of our arms, notwithstanding this show of indifference; as
they, on all occasions, have discovered a dislike to a musket: and so very
soon did they make themselves acquainted with the nature of our military dress,
that, from the first, they carefully avoided a soldier, or any person wearing a
red coat, which they seem to have marked as a fighting vesture. Many of their
warriors, or distinguished men, we observed to be painted in stripes, across
the breast and back, which at some little distance appears not unlike our
soldiers cross belts.

24th. The boats were employed in getting water and grass for the live stock;
as the governor, finding Port Jackson more suited to his wishes, had determined
to remove to that place, and form the settlement there. While these
preparations were making, every person in the fleet were surprised to see, in
this part of the world, two large ships plying hard in the offing to get into
the bay. It was seen, in the evening, that they had French colors flying; but
the wind blowing pretty strong out of the bay, they were unable to get in; and
the weather becoming thick and hazy, we soon lost sight of them.

25th. Nothing of the strange ships to be seen. The governor, with a detachment
of marines, sailed in the Supply tender for Port Jackson; leaving instructions
with Captain Hunter to follow him with all the transports and victuallers, as
soon as the wind and weather would permit.

26th. We again descried the French ships standing in for the bay, with a
leading wind; upon which Captain Hunter sent his first lieutenant on board the
commanding officer's ship, which was distinguished by a broad pendant, to
assist them in coming in. 'Soon after the lieutenants were returned to the
Sirius, Captain Clonnard, the French commodore's captain (who during the late
war commanded the Artois, taken by the Bienfaisant, Captain Macbride), waited
on Captain Hunter, and informed him, that the ships were the Astrolabe and the
Boussale, which sailed from France in the year 1786, under the command of
Messieurs de la Perouse, and De Langle. He further acquainted him, that having
touched at Navigator's Isles, they had had the misfortune to lose Captain De
Langle, the second in command, with ten other officers, and two boats crews,
all of whom were cut off by the natives of those islands, who appeared to be
numerous and warlike. This accident induced them to put into this port, in
order to build some boats, which they had in frames. It also had afforded room
for the promotion of Monsieur Clonnard, who, on their leaving France, was only
the commodore's first lieutenant.

At ten o'clock the Sirius, with all the ships, weighed, and in the evening
anchored in Port Jackson, with a few trifling damages done to some of them, who
had run foul of each other in working out of Botany Bay. Port Jackson I believe
to be, without exception, the finest and most extensive harbor in the
universe, and at the same time the most secure; being safe from all the winds
that blow. It is divided into a great number of coves, to which his excellency
has given different names. That on which the town is to be built, is called
Sydney Cove. It is one of the smallest in the harbor, but the most convenient,
as ships of the greatest burden can with ease go into it, and heave out close
to the shore. Trincomale, acknowledged to be one of the best harbors in the
world, is by no means to be compared to it. In a word, Port Jackson would
afford sufficient and sase anchorage for all the navies of Europe. The Supply
had arrived the day before, and the governor, with every person that could be
spared from the ship, were on shore, clearning the ground for the encampment.
In the evening, when all the ships had anchored, the English colors were
displayed; and at the foot of the flag-staff his Majesty's health, and success
to the settlement, was drank by the governor, many of the principal officers,
and private men, who were present upon the occasion.

27th. A number of convicts from the different transports were landed to assist
in clearing the ground for the encampment. His excellency marked the outlines,
and as much as possible to prevent irregularity, and to keep the convicts from
straggling, the provost marshal, aided by the patrole, had orders to take into
custody all convicts that should be found without the lines, and to leave them
in charge of the main or quarter guard. The boats sent this day to fish were
successful. Some of the natives came into the little bay or cove where the
seine was hauled, and behaved very friendly. Indeed they carried their civility
so far, although a people that appeared to be averse to work, as to assist in
dragging it ashore. For this kind office they were liberally rewarded with
fish, which seemed to please them, and give general satisfaction.

29th. A convenient place for the cattle being found, the few that remained
were landed. The frame and materials for the governor's house, constructed by
Smith in St. George's Fields, were likewise sent on shore, and some
preparations made for erecting it. This day Captain Hunter and Lieutenant
Bradley began to take a survey of the harbor. In the course of the last week,
all the marines, their wives and children, together with all the convicts, male
and female, were landed. The laboratory and sick tents were erected, and, I am
sorry to say, were soon filled with patients afflicted with the true camp
dysentery and the scurvy. More pitiable objects were perhaps never seen. Not a
comfort or convenience could be got for them, besides the very few we

February 1st. We had the most tremendous thunder and lightning, with heavy
rain, I ever remember to have seen.

2d. This morning five sheep, belonging to the lieutenant governor and
quartermaster, were killed by the lightning under a tree, at the foot of which
a shed had been built for them. The branches and trunk of the tree were
shivered and rent in a very extraordinary manner.

5th. A storehouse has been begun, for the purpose of receiving the stores and
provisions of the three transports bound to China. On a muster of the convicts
this morning, some were found to be missing, and supposed to have gone to
Botany Bay, in hopes of being received on board the French ships; which are
said to be short of hands, and made more so by the loss they had recently
sustained, as before mentioned.

7th. The governor's commission, and that for establishing a criminal court of
judicature, admiralty court, etc. were read. After this was done the troops
under arms fired three volleys; when his excellency thanked the soldiers for
their steady and good conduct; which Major Ross caused to be inserted in the
general order book. The governor then addressed the convicts in a short speech,
extremely well adapted to the people he had to govern, and who were then before
him. Among many circumstances that would tend to their future happiness and
comfort, he recommended marriage; assuring them that an indiscriminate and
illegal intercourse would be punished with the greatest severity and rigor.
Honesty, obedience, and industry, he told them, would make their situation
comfortable; whereas a contrary line of conduct would subject them to ignominy,
severities, and punishment. When the ceremony was concluded, his excellency,
attended by all the officers of the colony, withdrew to a tent pitched for the
occasion, where a cold dinner was laid out; and after the cloth was removed,
many loyal and public toasts were drank.

8th. A party of the gentlemen of the garrison set out by land to pay a visit
to the French at Botany Bay; from whom they met with the most hospitable,
polite, and friendly reception and treatment. Many of the convicts who had been
missing had been at Botany Bay. They had offered themselves to the French
navigators on any terms, but not one of them had been received. This refusal
obliged them to return; and when they came back they were real objects of pity.
Conscious of the punishment that awaited so imprudent and improper an
experiment, they had stayed out as long as the cravings of nature would permit,
and were nearly half starved. A woman named Ann Smith, and a man, have never
since been heard of. They are supposed to have missed their way as they
returned, and to have perished for want. As the French commodore had given his
honor that he would not admit any of them on board, it cannot be thought he
would take them. The convict, it is true, was a Frenchman, named Peter Paris,
and it is possible, on that account, he might have been concealed through pity,
by his countrymen, and carried off without the knowledge of the commanding
officer. At the very time the party from hence were gone by land to Botany Bay,
Captain Clonnard came round in a boat, on a visit of ceremony from Monsieur de
la Peyrouse to the governor. He brought with him some dispatches, which he
requested might be forwarded to the French ambassador at the court of London,
by the first transports that sailed for England. The captain stayed all night,
and returned the next morning. This day, for the first time, a Kangaroo was
shot and brought into camp. Some of the natives passed pretty close to the
Sirius, without seeming to express, by their countenance or actions, either
fear, curiosity, or surprise. During the course of this week fourteen marriages
were solemnized. The criminal court, consisting of six officers of his
Majesty's forces by land or sea, with the judge advocate, sat for the first
time; before whom several convicts were tried for petty larceny. Some of them
were acquitted, others sentenced to receive corporal punishment, and one or two
were, by the decision of the court, ordered to a barren rock, or little island,
in the middle of the harbor, there to remain on bread and water for a stated
time.

12th. The commissions were read a second time, at the desire of some of the
officers, whose situation with the battalion prevented them from being present
at the first reading; after which, the lieutenant governor and judge advocate
were sworn in justices of the peace; and Lieutenant King (second of the Sirius)
superintendant and commanding officer of New Norfolk Island; an appointment
given him by the governor.

14th. The Supply sailed for Norfolk Island, with Lieutenant King and his
detachment, consisting of Mr. Cunningham, master's mate, and Mr. Jameson,
surgeon's first mate, of the Sirius, two marines, and twelve male and female
convicts. The governor furnished him with provisions and stores of every kind
for six months, and with tools for cutting down timber; which last employment
was the purpose of his mission.

27th. Thomas Barrett, Henry Lovel, and Joseph Hall, were brought before the
criminal court, and tried for feloniously and fraudulently taking away from the
public store beef and pease, the property of the crown. They were convicted on
the clearest evidence; and sentence of death being passed on them, they were,
about six o'clock the same evening, taken to the fatal tree; where Barrett was
launched into eternity, after having confessed to the Rev. Mr. Johnson, who
attended him, that he was guilty of the crime, and had long merited the
ignominious death which he was about to suffer, and to which he said he had
been brought by bad company and evil example. Lovel and Hall were respited
until six o'clock the next evening. When that awful hour arrived, they were led
to the place of execution, and just as they were on the point of ascending the
ladder, the judge advocate arrived with the governor's pardon, on condition of
their being banished to some uninhabited place.

29th. Daniel Gordon and John Williams were tried and convicted of stealing
wine, the property of Mr. Zachariah Clarke. Williams being an ignorant black
youth, the court recommended him to the governor as a proper object of mercy,
and he was accordingly pardoned. Gordon, who was another black, had his
sentence of death, while at the gallows, changed to banishment with Lovel and
Hall.

Cassomary of New South Wales
depiction of bird

30th. John Freeman was tried for stealing from another convict seven pounds of
flour. He was convicted, and sentenced to be hanged; but while under the
ladder, with the rope about his neck, he was offered his free pardon on
condition of performing the duty of the common executioner as long as he
remained in this country; which, after some little pause, he reluctantly
accepted. William Sheerman, his accomplice, was sentenced to receive on his
bare back, with a cat-o'nine-tails, three hundred lashes, which were inflicted.

A New Holland Cassowary was brought into camp. This bird stands seven feet
high, measuring from the ground to the upper part of the head, and, in every
respect, is much larger than the common Cassowary of all authors, and differs
so much therefrom, in its form, as to clearly prove it a new species. The
color of the plumage is greatly similar, consisting of a mixture of dirty
brown and gray; on the belly it was somewhat whiter; and the remarkable
structure of the feathers, in having two quills with their webs arising out of
one shaft, is seen in this as well as the common sort. It differs materially in
wanting the horny appendage on the top of the head. The head and beak are much
more like those of the ostrich than the common Cassowary, both in shape and
size. Upon the upper part of the head the feathers, with which it is but thinly
covered, are very small, looking more like hair than feathers, and in having
the neck pretty well clothed with them, except the chin and throat, which are
so thinly covered, that the skin, which is there of a purplish color, may be
seen clearly. The small wings are exceedingly short, which form a ridiculous
contrast with the body, as they are even less than those of the Cassowary: they
have no large quills in them, being only covered with the small feathers that
grow all over the body. Another singularity also presents itself in this
species, which is in respect to the legs. As to the back part of them, the
whole length is indented, or sawed, in a remarkable manner. The toes are three
in number, the middle one long, the other two short, with strong claws, not
unlike the same part of the common species. On examining the viscera, they
differed from that of every other species of the feathered kind which I had
ever seen; particularly in having no gizzard, or second stomach; and the liver
was so very small, that it did not exceed in size that of a blackbird.

This bird is supposed to be not uncommon in New Holland, as it has been
frequently seen by our Settlers both at Botany Bay and Port Jackson, but is
exceedingly shy, and runs faster than a greyhound. One of them however has been
shot A drawing was taken from this bird, of which an engraving is annexed. It
has been lately sent to England by the governor, as a present to Lord Sydney,
who, through the medium of Sir Joseph Banks, has deposited it in the
collections of Natural History of Mr. John Hunter in Leicester Square.


March 9th. The governor, with two long boats manned and armed, returned from
Broken Bay, situated a little to the northward, which he had been exploring for
several days. It affords good shelter for shipping, and the entrance is bold;
it cannot, however, be compared to Port Jackson. While he was there, he saw a
great many of the natives, some of whom he thinks he had observed before,
either at Botany Bay or in the neighborhood of Port Jackson. One of the
females happened to fall in love with his great coat; and to obtain it, she
used a variety of means. First, she danced, and played a number of antic
tricks; but finding this mode ineffectual, she had recourse to tears, which she
shed plentifully. This expedient not answering, she ceased from weeping, and
appeared as cheerful as any of the party around her. From this little incident
it may be seen that they are not a people devoid of art. At Broken Bay many of
the females, young and old, had the first joint of the little finger, on their
left hand, cut off. As this was the case with those who were married, or
appeared to be so from their having young children, as well as with those who
were too young for a connection of that nature, it was not possible to account
for the cause of such an amputation. Thefts and depredations on one another
have become so very frequent and glaring among the convicts, that scarcely a
day passes without some of these miserable delinquents being punished. So
hardened in wickedness and depravity are many of them, that they seem
insensible to the fear of corporal punishment, or even death itself.

The principal business going forward at present is erecting cabbage-tree huts
for the officers, soldiers, and convicts; some storehouses, etc.; and a very
good hospital; all which in the completion will cost a great deal of time and
trouble, as the timber of this country is very unfit for the purpose of
building. Nor do I know any one purpose for which it will answer, except for
firewood; and for that it is excellent: but, in other respects, it is the
worst wood that any country or climate ever produced; although some of the
trees, when standing, appear fit for any use whatever, masts for shipping not
excepted. Strange as it may be imagined, no wood in this country, though sawed
ever so thin, and dried ever so well, will float. Repeated trials have only
served to convince me that, immediately on immersion, it sinks to the bottom
like a stone.

The stone of this country is excellent for building, could any kind of cement
be found to keep it together. There is not any limestone (I believe) in New
South Wales. The governor, notwithstanding that he had collected together all
the shells which could be found, for the purpose of obtaining from them the
lime necessary to the construction of a house for his own residence, did not
procure even a fourth part of the quantity which was wanted. The foundation
stone of a private house for him has been laid; and a plate of copper, with the
following inscription engraved on it, is to be placed in the wall: ARTHUR
PHILLIP, ESQUIRE. Captain General in and over his Majesty's Territory of New South
Wales, and its Dependencies; Arrived in this Country on the 18th Day of
January, 1788, with the first Settlers; And on the 15th Day of May, in the same
Year, the first of these Stones was laid.

The Supply tender returned from Norfolk Island; where, with great difficulty
and danger, the stores sent with Lieutenant King were landed, on account of the
rockyness of its shore, and the violence of the surf that almost continually
beats upon it. In her passage there she fell in with an island, in lat. 31 36
S. long. 159 4 E. never before discovered, to which Lieutenant Ball, who
commanded the Supply on this occasion, gave the name of Lord Howe's Island. On
her return to this port she stopped at it, and found the landing nearly, if not
quite, as difficult as at Norfolk Island. The shore in many places was covered
with excellent turtle, eighteen of which were brought here, and proved a
seasonable supply to the convicts afflicted with the scurvy, many of whom were
in a deplorable situation.

The smallest turtle brought from Lord Howe's Island did not weigh less than
150lb. They also found on it, in great plenty, a kind of fowl, resembling much
the Guinea fowl in shape and size, but widely different in color; they being
in general all white, with a red fleshy substance rising, like a cock's comb,
from the head, and not unlike a piece of sealing-wax. These not being birds of
flight, nor in the least wild, the sailors availing themselves of their
gentleness and inability to take wing from their pursuits, easily struck them
down with sticks. There were also many birds of the dove kind, as tame as the
former, and caught with equal facility. Some of them were brought alive to this
place. Besides these, the shore abounded with sea

25th. The Scarborough, Lady Penrhyn, and Charlotte, transports, being cleared
of government stores, were discharged from the service, and are shortly to
depart for China, in order to load home with tea, they being chartered by the
East India company for that purpose.

April 15th. His excellency, attended by Lieutenant Ball of the navy,
Lieutenant George Johnston of the marines, the judge advocate, myself, three
soldiers, and two seamen, landed in Manly Cove (so called from the manly
conduct of the natives when the governor first visited it), on the north side
of the entrance into Port Jackson harbor, in order to trace to its source a
river, which had been discovered a few days before. We, however, found this
impracticable, owing to a thicket and swamp which ran along the side of it. The
governor, anxious to acquire all the knowledge of the country in his power,
forded the river in two places, and more than up to our waists in water, in
hopes of being able to avoid the thicket and swamp; but, notwithstanding all
his perseverance, we were at length obliged to return, and to proceed along the
sea shore, a mile or two to the northward. depiction of bird At the end of this
we fell in with a small salt water lagoon, on which we found nine birds, that,
whilst swimming, most perfectly resembled the rara avis of the ancients -- a
black swan. We discharged several shot at them, but the distance was too great
for execution. Our frequent firing, however, caused them to take wing, and they
flew toward the sea, which was very near, in the order that wild geese
generally preserve; the one before the other. Had we not raised them, we should
certainly have concluded that they were black swans; but their flight gave us
an opportunity of seeing some white feathers, which terminated the tip of each
wing; in every other part they were perfectly black. Their size appeared not
equal to that of an European swan, but the shape exactly corresponded, except
about the wings, which seemed rather small for the body. We not long after
discovered the great brown King's Fisher, of which a plate is annexed. This
bird has been discribed by Mr. Latham in his General Synopsis of Birds, vol.
ii. p. 603, nearly to the following purport: -- The length eighteen inches; the
bill black above, and white beneath; the feathers of the head narrow, and
pretty long, so as to form a kind of crest. They are of a brown color,
streaked with paler brown; the back and wings in general brown; the lower part
of the back and rump pale blue-green; the outer edges of the quills blue;
within and the tips black. On the wing covert is a patel of glossy blue-green:
the tail is barred with ferruginous, and steel-black, glossed with purple; the
end, for one inch, white; the under part of the body is white, transversely
streaked with dusky lines; legs yellow, claws black.

This bird is not uncommon in many islands of the South Seas, being pretty
frequent at New Guinea, from whence the specimen came from which Mr. Latham
took his description: it is also an inhabitant of New Holland, from whence
several have been sent over to England.

We rounded this lagoon, and proceeded four or five miles westward, along the
banks of a small fresh water river, which emptied itself into it, and had for
its source only a swamp, or boggy ground. After we had passed this swamp, we
got into an immense wood, the trees of which were very high and large, and a
considerable distance apart, with little under or brush wood. The ground was
not very good, although it produced a luxuriant coat of a kind of sour grass
growing in tufts or bushes, which, at some distance, had the appearance of
meadow land, and might be Banksian Cockatoo.
depiction of bird mistaken for it by superficial examiners. Here we pitched
our tents (without which the governor never traveled) for the night, near a
swamp, out of which we were supplied with water, not, indeed, either of the
best or clearest kind. The night being cold, and a heavy dew falling, we kept
up a large fire before the tents, which, though in one respect an excellent
precaution, far from chasing away, seemed to allure the musquitos, which
tormented us inexpressibly during the whole night. We this day discovered the
Banksian Cockatoo. This species was first described by Mr. Latham, in his
seventh volume or supplement to the General Synopsis of Birds, and the one in
the plate annexed differs from that in some few particulars. -- In Mr. Latham's
figure the general color is dusky black, the feathers of the head longer than
the rest, forming a crest; and each of those on the head, back of the neck, and
major part of the wings, have a spot of buff-colour at the tips; the under
parts of the body barred with narrow bars of buff-colour; the tail is black at
the bottom and ends of the feathers, but the middle of a fine red, barred
irregularly with black. -- In our specimen, the general color of the bird is
olive, or rusty black; the head feathers pretty long, and about the sides of
the head and top of it is a mixture of fine yellow; but none of the feathers
are marked with buff at the tips, nor is the under part of the body crossed
with buff-colour. In the tail it differs scarcely at all from Mr. Latham's
figure.

These birds have been met with in several parts of New Holland.

We likewise saw several Blue-bellied Parrots. This is a very beautiful bird;
and Mr. Latham, whose leave we have to copy the account of it, from his Syn.
vol. i. p. 213, No 14. B. describes it thus: The length is fifteen inches; the
bill is reddish; orbits black; head and throat dark blue, with a mixture of
lighter blue feathers; back part of the head green; toward the throat yellow
green; back and wings green; prime quills dusky, barred with yellow; breast
red, mixed with yellow; belly of a fine blue; thighs green and yellow; tail
cuneiform; the two middle feathers green; the others the same, but bright
yellow on the outer edges; legs dusky.

This bird is a very common species in various parts of New Holland, and in
great plenty both at Botany Bay and Port Jackson. It is found to differ much in
plumage, several other varieties having been met with, which are natives of
Amboina and others of the Molucca Islands.

16th. We pursued our route westward, proceeding many miles inland, without
being able to trace, by a single vestige, that the natives had been recently in
those parts. We saw, however, some proofs of their ingenuity, in various
figures cut on the smooth surface of some large stones. They consisted chiefly
of representations of themselves in different attitudes, of their canoes, of
several sorts of fish and animals; and, considering the rudeness of the
instruments with which the figures must have been executed, they seemed to
exhibit tolerably strong likenesses. On the stones, where the natives had been
thus exercising their abilities in sculpture, were several weather-beaten
shells. The country all around this place was rather high and rocky; and the
soil arid, parched, and inhospitable.

In the evening, after a long and fatiguing march, we fell in with the
north-west branch of Port Jackson harbor. Here the two seamen, overcome with
fatigue, and having their shoes torn from their feet through the ruggedness of
the road along which we had traveled, could proceed no further. This
circumstance induced the governor to consign them to the care of Lieutenant
Ball, and a marine, supplying them with provisions sufficient to last them till
they reached the ships. His excellency, with the rest of the party, pushed on
to the westward, by the water side, in hopes of finding better land, and a more
open country. About four o'clock in the afternoon we came to a steep valley,
where the flowing of the tide ceased, and a fresh water stream commenced. Here,
in the most desert, wild, and solitary seclusion that the imagination can form
any idea of, we took up our abode for the night; dressed our provisions, washed
our shirts and stockings, and turned our inconvenient situation to the best
advantage in our power. Saw this day the Anomalous Hornbill, of which a plate
is annexed. This bird is so very singular in its several characteristics, that
it can scarcely be said to which of the present known genera to refer it. In
the bill it seems most allied to the hornbill, but the legs are those of a
toucan, and the tongue is more like that of a crow than any other: it must
therefore be left to future ornithologists to determine the point, resting here
satisfied with describing its external appearance.

The size of the body is not much less than that of a crow: the bill is very
large, and bent, particularly at the tip of the Anamolous Hernbill
depiction of bird upper mandible; the nostrils and space round the eyes are
bare and red; the head, neck, and all beneath, are of a pale gray, crossed over
the thighs with dusky lines; the back and wings dusky lead-colour, with the end
of each feather black; the tail is long and wedge-shaped, the feathers white at
the ends; near which is a bar of black. The bill and legs are brown; the toes
are placed two before and two behind, as in the parrot or toucan genus.

This singular bird was met with at New Holland, from whence three or four
specimens have found their way to England, but whether it is a numerous species
has not been mentioned.

The next morning we hid our tents and the remains of our provisions, and with
only a little rum, and a small quantity of bread, made a forced march into the
country, to the westward, of about fourteen miles, without being able to
succeed in the object of our search, which was for good land well watered.
Indeed, the land here, although covered with an endless wood, was better than
the parts which we had already explored. Finding it, however, very unlikely
that we should be able to penetrate through this immense forest, and
circumstanced as we were, it was thought more prudent to return. We,
accordingly, after an expeditious walk, reached the stream from whence we had
set out in the morning, and taking up the tents and provisions which we had
left, proceeded a little farther down, to the flowing of the tide, and there
pitched our tents for the night; during which it rained very heavily, with
thunder and lightning. The Wattled Bee-eater, of which a plate is annexed, fell
in our way during the course of the day. This bird is the size of a missel
thrush, but much larger in proportion; its total length being about fourteen
inches. The feathers on the upper part of the head, longer than the rest, give
the appearance of a crest; those of the under part are smooth; the plumage for
the most part is brown, the feathers long and pointed, and each feather has a
streak of white down the middle; under the eye, on each side, is a kind of
wattle, of an orange color; the middle of the belly is yellow; the tail is
wedge-shaped, similar to that of the magpie, and the feathers tipped with
white; the bill and legs are brown.

This bird seems to be peculiar to New Holland, and is undoubtedly a species
which has not hitherto been described.

18th. We began our progress early in the morning, Wattled Be Eater.
depiction of bird The Wattled Be Eater. Female.
depiction of bird bending our course down the river. Some places along the
shore, where the tide had flowed so as to obstruct our passage, we were obliged
to ford; and, at times, we were under the necessity of climbing heights nearly
inaccessible. At length, after undergoing much fatigue, we were agreeably
surprised, and cheered, with the sight of two boats, sent by Captain Hunter to
meet us, and just then coming up with the tide. By them we learnt, that
Lieutenant Ball, with his enfeebled party, had arrived safe at the ship the day
after they had quitted us. We all went on board the boats, and fell down the
river till we got to a pleasant little cove, where we dined, with great
satisfaction and comfort, upon the welcome provisions which were sent in the
boats by the governor's steward. After having refreshed ourselves, we again
embarked, and about six o'clock in the evening arrived in Sydney Cove.

We were likewise able, during this excursion, to take one of the Gold-winged
Pigeons, of which a plate is annexed. This bird is a curious and singular
species, remarkable for having most of the feathers of the wing marked with a
brilliant spot of golden yellow, changing, in various reflections of light, to
green and copper-bronze; and, when the wing is closed, forming two bars of the
same across it. The general color of the bird otherwise is brown, changing to
vinaceous red on the breast, in the manner of our domestic species. The fore
part of the head and chin are buff color, with a streak of brownish red
passing on each side through the eye. The quills and tail are darker than the
rest of the plumage, but all the feathers of the last, except the two middle
ones, incline to lead color, with a bar of black near the tip. The bill and
legs are of a dull red.

This species is a native of New South Wales, several of them having been sent
from Port Jackson.

22d. On the morning of this day the governor, accompanied by the same party,
with the addition of Lieutenant Cresswell of the marines and six privates,
landed at the head of the harbor, with an intention of penetrating into the
country westward, as far as seven days provisions would admit of; every
individual carrying his own allowance of bread, beef, rum, and water. The
soldiers, beside their own provisions, carried a camp kettle, and two tents,
with their poles, etc. Thus equipped, with the additional weight of spare
shoes, shirts, trowsers, together with a great coat, or Scotch played, for the
purpose of sleeping in, as Golden Winged Pidgeon.
depiction of bird the nights were cold we proceeded on our destination. We
likewise took with us a small hand hatchet, in order to mark the trees as we
went on; those marks (called in America blazing) being the only guide to direct
us in our return. The country was so rugged as to render it almost impossible
to explore our way by the assistance of the compass.

In this manner we proceeded for a mile or two, through a part well covered
with enormous trees, free from underwood. We then reached a thicket of
brush-wood, which we found so impervious, as to oblige us to return nearly to
the place from whence we had set out in the morning. Here we encamped, near
some stagnant water, for the night, during which it thundered, lightened, and
rained. About eleven o'clock the governor was suddenly attacked with a most
violent complaint in his side and loins, brought on by cold and fatigue, not
having perfectly gotten the better of the last expedition. The next morning
being fine, his excellency, who was rather better, though still in pain, would
not relinquish the object of his pursuit; and therefore we proceeded, and soon
got round the wood or thicket which had harassed us so much the day before.
After we had passed it, we fell in with an hitherto unperceived branch of Port
Jackson harbor, along the bank of which the grass was tolerably rich and
succulent, and in height nearly up to the middle, interspersed with a plant
much resembling the indigo. We followed this branch westward for a few miles,
until we came to a small fresh water stream that emptied itself into it. Here
we took up, our quarters for the night, as our halts were always regulated by
fresh water, an essential point by no means to be dispensed with, and not very
abundant, or frequently to be met with, in this country. We made a kettle of
excellent soup out of a white cockatoo and two crows which I had shot, as we
came along. The land all around us was similar to that which we had passed. At
night we had thunder, lightning, and rain. The governor, though not free from
pain, was rather recovering.

24th. As soon as the dew, which is remarkably heavy in this country, was off
the ground, we proceeded to trace the river, or small arm of the sea. The banks
of it were now pleasant, the trees immensely large, and at a considerable
distance from each other; and the land around us flat, and rather low, but well
covered with the kind of grass just mentioned. Here the tide ceased to flow;
and all further progress for boats was stopped by a flat space of large broad
stones, over which a fresh water stream ran. Just above this flat, close to the
waterside, we discovered a quarry of slates; from which we expected to derive
great advantage in respect to covering our houses, stores, etc. it being a
material beyond conception difficult to be procured in this country; but on
trial it was found of no use, as it proved to be of a crumbling and rotten
nature. On this fresh water stream, as well as on the salt, we saw a great many
ducks and teal; three of which we shot in the course of the day, besides two
crows, and some loraquets. About four in the afternoon, being near the head of
the stream, and somewhat apprehensive of rain, we pitched our tents, before the
grass became wet; a circumstance which would have proved very uncomfortable
during the night. Here we had our ducks picked, stuffed with some slices of
salt beef, and roasted; and never did a repast seem more delicious; the salt
beef, serving as a palatable substitute for the want of salt, gave it an
agreeable relish. The evening cleared up, and the night proved dry. During the
latter, we heard a noise which not a little surprised us, on acoount of its
resemblance to the human voice. What it proceeded from we could not discover;
but I am of opinion that it was made by a bird, or some animal. The country
round us was by no means so good, or the grass so abundant, as that which we
had passed. The water, though neither clear, nor in any great quantity, was
neither of a bad quality nor ill-tasted.

The next day, after having sowed some seeds, we pursued our route for three or
four miles west, where we met with a mean hut, belonging to some of the
natives, but could not perceive the smallest trace of their having been there
lately. Close to this hut we saw a Kangaroo, which had come to drink at an
adjacent pool of stagnated water, but we could not get within shot of it. A
little farther on, we fell in with three huts, as deserted as the former, and a
swamp, not unlike the American rice grounds. Near this we saw a tree in flames,
without the least appearance of any natives; from which we suspected that it
had been set on fire by lightning. This circumstance was first suggested by
Lieutenant Ball; who had remarked, as well as myself, that every part of the
country, though the most inaccessible and rocky, appeared as if, at certain
times of the year, it had been all on fire. Indeed in many parts we met with
very large trees, the trunks of which and branches were evidently rent, and
demolished by lightning. Close by the burning tree we saw three kangaroos.
Though by this time very much fatigued, we proceeded about two miles farther
on, in hopes of finding some good water, but without effect; and about half
past four o'clock we took up our quarters near a stagnant pool. The ground was
so very dry and parched, that it was with some difficulty we could drive either
our tent pegs or poles into it. The country about this spot was much clearer of
underwood than that which we had passed during the day. The trees around us
were immensely large, and the tops of them filled with loraquets and paroquets
of exquisite beauty, which chattered to such a degree, that we could scarcely
hear each other speak. We fired several times at them, but the trees were so
very high that we killed but few.

26th. We still directed our course westward, and passed another tree on fire;
and others which were hollow, and perforated by a small hole at the bottom, in
which the natives seemed to have snared some animal. It was certainly done by
the natives, as the trees where these holes or perforations were, had in
general many knotches cut, for the purpose of getting to the top of them. After
this we crossed a watercourse; which shows, that at some seasons the rain is
very heavy here, notwithstanding that there was, at present, but little water
in it. Beyond the chasm, we came to a pleasant hill, the top of which was
tolerably clear of trees, and perfectly free from underwood. His excellency
gave it the name of Belle Veue. From the top of this hill we saw a chain of
hills or mountains, which appeared to be thirty or forty miles distant, running
in a north and south direction. The northernmost being conspicuously higher
than any of the rest, the governor called it Richmond Hill; the next, or those
in the center, Lansdown Hills; and those to the southward, which are by much
the lowest, Carmarthen Hills.

In a valley below Belle Veue, we saw a fire, and by it found some chewed root
of a saline taste, which showed that the natives had recently been there. The
country hereabout was pleasant to the eye, well wooded, and covered with long
sour grass, growing in tufts. At the bottom of this valley or flat, we crossed
another watercourse, and ascended a hill, where the wood was so very thick as
to obstruct our view. Here, finding our provisions to run short, our return was
concluded on, though with great reluctance; as it was our wish, and had been
our determination, to reach the hills before us if it had been possible. In our
way back, which we easily discovered by the marks made in the trees, we saw a
hollow tree on fire, the smoke issuing out of the top part as through a
chimney. On coming near, and minutely examining it, we found that it had been
set on fire by the natives; for there was some dry grass lighted and put into
the hole wherein we had supposed they used to snare or take the animal before
alluded to. In the evening, where we pitched our tents, we shot two crows and
some loraquets, for supper. The night was fine and clear; during which we often
heard, as before, a sound like the human voice, and, from its continuance on
one spot, we concluded it to proceed from a bird perched on some of the trees
near us.

27th. We now found ourselves obliged to make a forced march back, as our
provisions were quite exhausted; a circumstance rather alarming, in case of
losing our way; which, however, we met with no difficulty in discovering, by
the marked trees. By our calculation we had penetrated into the country, to the
westward, not less than thirty-two, or thirty-three miles. This day we saw the
dung of an animal as large as that of a horse, but it was more like the
excrement of a hog, intermixed with grass. When we got as far back as the arm
or branch of the sea which forms the upper part of Port Jackson harbor, we saw
many ducks, but could not get within shot of any of them. It was now growing
late; and the governor being apprehensive that the boats which he had ordered
to attend daily, might be, for that day, returning before we could reach them,
he sent Lieutenants Johnston and Cresswell, with a marine, ahead, in order to
secure such provisions as might have been sent up; and to give directions for
the boats to come for us the next morning, as it then appeared very unlikely
that all the party, who were, without exception, much fatigued, could be there
soon enough to save the tide down. Those gentlemen accordingly went forward,
and were so fortunate as to be just in time; and they returned to us with a
seasonable supply of bread, beef, rum, and wine. As soon as they had joined us,
we encamped for the night, on a spot about the distance of a mile from the
place where the boats were to take us up in the morning. His excellency was
again indisposed, occasioned by a return of his complaint, which had been
brought on by a fall into a hollow place in the ground, that being concealed by
the long grass, he was unable to discern. We passed the next day in examining
different inlets in the upper part of the harbor. We saw there some of the
natives, who, in their canoes, came along-side of the boat, to receive some
trifles which the governor held out to them. In the evening we returned to
Sydney Cove.

May 1st. James Bennet, a youth, was executed for robbing a tent belonging to
the Charlotte transport, of sugar and some other articles. Before he was turned
off he confessed his guilt, and acknowledged, that young as he was he had been
an old offender. Some other trifling thefts were brought before the court at
the same time, and those concerned in them sentenced to receive corporeal
punishment.

The Supply tender sailed for Lord Howe's Island to fetch turtle; as did the
Lady Penrhyn transport for China. The Scarborough dropped down the harbor; she
was followed the next day by the Charlotte, and they sailed in company for

21st. William Airs, a convict, who was in a state of convalescence, and to
whom I had given permission to go a little way into the country, for the
purpose of gathering a few herbs wherewith to make tea, was, after night,
brought to the hospital, with one of the spears used by the natives sticking in
his loins. It had been darted at him as he was stooping, and while his back was
turned to the assailant. The weapon was barbed; and stuck so very fast, that it
would admit of no motion. After dilating the wound to a considerable length and
depth, with some difficulty I extracted the spear, which had penetrated the
flesh nearly three inches. After the operation, he informed us that he received
his wound from three of the natives, who came behind him at a time when he
suspected no person to be near him except Peter Burn, whom he had met a little
before, employed on the same business as himself. He added, that after they had
wounded him, they beat him in a cruel manner, and stripping the clothes from
his back, Port Jackson Thrush.
depiction of bird carried them off; making signs to him (as he interpreted
them) to return to the camp. He further related, that after they had left him,
he saw Burn in the possession of another party of the natives, who were
dragging him along, with his head bleeding, and seemingly in great distress;
while he himself was so exhausted with loss of blood, that, instead of being
able to assist his companion, he was happy to escape with his life.

The Port Jackson thrush, of which a plate is annexed, inhabits the
neighborhood of Port Jackson. The top of the head in this species is
blueish-grey; from thence down the hind part of the neck, and the back, the
color is a fine chocolate brown; the wings and tail are lead color, the edges
of the feathers pale; the tail itself pretty long, and even at the end; all the
under parts from chin to vent are dusky-white, except the middle of the neck,
just above the breast, which inclines to chocolate. The bill is of a dull
yellow; legs brown.

25th. The Supply arrived from Lord Howe's Island without a single turtle, the
object for which she was sent: a dreadful disappointment to those who were
languishing under the scurvy; many of whom are since dead, and there is great
reason to fear that several others will soon share the same fate. This disorder
has now risen to a most alarming height, without any possibility of checking it
until some vegetables can be raised; which, from the season of the year, cannot
take place for many months. And even then I am apprehensive that there will not
be a sufficiency produced, such are the labor and difficulty which attend the
clearing of the ground. It will scarcely be credited, when I declare that I
have known twelve men employed for five days, in grubbing up one tree; and when
this has been effected, the timber (as already observed) has been only fit for
firewood; so that in consequence of the great labor in clearing of the ground,
and the weak state of the people; to which may be added the scarcity of tools,
most of those we had being either worn out by the hardness of the timber, or
lost in the woods among the grass, through the carelessness of the convicts;
the prospect before us is not of the most pleasing kind. All the stock that was
landed, both public and private, seems, instead of thriving, to fall off
exceedingly. The number at first was but inconsiderable, and even that number
is at present much diminished. The sheep, in particular, decreaser apidly, very
few being now alive in the colony, although there were numbers, the property of
Government or individuals, when first landed.

26th. Two men of the Sirius were brought before the criminal court, and tried
for assaulting, and beating, in a cruel manner, another man belonging to the
same vessel, while employed on an island appropriated by the governor to the
use of the ship. They were sentenced to receive five hundred lashes each, but
could not undergo the whole of that punishment, as, like most of the persons in
the colony, they were much afflicted with the scurvy.

28th. Captain Hunter, his first lieutenant, and the surgeon of the Sirius,
went to the point of land which forms the north head of Port Jackson. In going
there they discovered an old man, with a little girl about five years of age,
lying close to the ground watching their motions, and at the same time
endeavoring to conceal themselves. The surgeon had his gun with him, the
effects of which he let the old man see, by shooting a bird, which fell at his
feet. The explosion at first greatly alarmed him, but perceiving that they
intended him no ill, he soon got over his fears. The bird was then given to
him, which (having barely plucked, and not more than half broiled it) he
devoured, entrails, bones, and all. The little girl was much frightened, and
endeavored to hide herself behind the old man, to escape the least observation.

30th. Captain Campbell of the marines, who had been up the harbor to procure
some rushes for thatch, brought to the hospital the bodies of William Okey and
Samuel Davis, two rush-cutters, whom he had found murdered by the natives in a
shocking manner. Okey was transfixed through the breast with one of their
spears which with great difficulty and force was pulled out. He had two other
spears sticking in him to a depth which must have proved mortal. His skull was
divided and comminuted so much that his brains easily found a passage through.
His eyes were out, but these might have been picked away by birds. Davis was a
youth, and had only some trifling marks of violence about him. This lad could
not have been many hours dead; for when Captain Campbell found him, which was
among some mangrove-trees, and at a considerable distance from the place where
the other man lay, he was not stiff, nor very cold; nor was he perfectly so
when brought to the hospital. From these circumstances we have been led to
think that while they were dispatching Okey, he had crept to the Yellow Eared
Fly Catcher.
depiction of bird trees among which he was found; and that fear, united with
the cold and wet, in a great degree contributed to his death. What was the
motive or cause of this melancholy catastrophe we have not been able to
discover; but from the civility shown, on all occasions, to the officers, by
the natives, whenever any of them were met, I am strongly inclined to think
that they must have been provoked and injured by the convicts. We this day
caught a Yellow-eared Flycatcher (see annexed plate). This bird is a native of
New Holland, the size of a martin, and nearly seven inches in length; the bill
is broad at the bottom, and of a pale color; the legs dusky; the plumage is
mostly brown, mottled with paler brown; the edges of the wing feathers
yellowish; the under part of the body white, inclining to dusky about the chin
and throat; the tail is pretty long, and, when spread, seems hollowed out at
the tip; beneath the eye, on each side, is an irregular streak, growing wider,
and finishing on the ears, of a yellow or gold color.

Early the next morning the governor, lieutenants G. Johnston and Kellow,
myself, six soldiers, and two armed convicts, whom we took as guides, went to
the place where the murder had been committed, in hopes, by some means or
other, to be able to find out, either the actual perpetrators, or those
concerned. As most of their clothes, and all their working tools were carried
off, we expected that these might furnish us with some clue; but in this we
were disappointed. We could not observe a single trace of the natives ever
having been there. We then crossed the country to Botany Bay, still flattering
ourselves that we might be able to discover, among a tribe at that place, some
proof that they had been concerned; as the governor was resolved, on whomsoever
he found any of the tools or clothing, to show them his displeasure, and, by
every means in his power, endeavor to convince them of his motives for such a
procedure. In our route we saw several kangaroos, and shot a very fine teal. A
little before sunset, after a long and fatiguing march, we arrived at Botany
Bay. When we approached the bay, we saw eleven canoes, with two persons in
each, fishing; most of them had a fire in their canoe, a convenience which they
seldom go without at any time or season, but particularly at this, as the
weather was very cold. Here we pitched our tents, for (as I have before
observed) we never travel without them, and kindled large fires both in front
and rear; still, however, the cold was so very intense that we could scarcely
close our eyes during the night. In the morning the grass was quite white with
a hoar frost, so as to crackle under our feet. After breakfast we visited the
grave of the French abbe, who died whilst the Count de Peyrouse was here. It
was truly humble indeed, being distinguished only by a common head-stone, stuck
slightly into the loose earth which covered it. Against a tree, just above it,
was nailed a board, with the following inscription on it: HIC JACET LE RECEVEUR
EX F. F. MINORIBUS GALLIA SACERDOS PHYSICUS IN CIRCUMNAVIGATIONE MUNDI DUCE D.
DE LA PEYROUSE. OBIIT DIE 17th FEBR. ANNO 1788. As the painting on the board
could not be permanent, Governor Phillip had the inscription engraved on a
plate of copper, and nailed to the same tree; and at some future day he intends
to have a handsome head-stone placed at the grave. We cut down some trees which
stood between that on which the inscription is fixed and the shore, as they
prevented persons passing in boats from seeing it.

Between this and the harbour's mouth, we found forty-nine canoes hauled upon
the beach, but not a native to be seen. After we had passed them, we fell in
with an Indian path; and, as it took a turn toward the camp, we followed it
about two miles; when on a sudden, in a valley or little bay, to the northward
of Botany Bay, we were surprised at hearing the sound of voices, which we
instantly found to proceed from a great number of the natives, sitting behind a
rock, who appeared to be equally astonished with ourselves; as, from the
silence we observed, they had not perceived us till we were within twenty yards
of them. Every one of them, as they got up, armed himself with a long spear,
the short stick before described, used in throwing it, a shield made of bark,
and either a large club, pointed at one end, or a stone hatchet. At first they
seemed rather hostilely inclined, and made signs, with apparent tokens of
anger, for us to return; but when they saw the governor advance toward them,
unarmed, and with his hands opened wide (a signal we had observed among them of
amity and peace), they, with great confidence, came up to him, and received
from him some trifles which he had in his pocket, such as fish-hooks, beads,
and a looking-glass. As there appeared not to be less than three hundred of
them in this bay, all armed, the soldiers were ordered to fix their bayonets,
and to observe a close, well connected, order of march, as they descended the
hill. These people (as already mentioned) seem to dislike red coats, and those
who carry arms; but, on the present occasion, they showed very little fear or
distrust; on the contrary they, in a few minutes, mixed with us, and conducted
us to a very fine stream of water, out of which some of them drank, to show
that it was good. The women and children kept at some distance, one or two more
forward than the rest excepted, who came to the governor for some presents.
While he was distributing his gifts, the women danced (an exercise every
description of people in this country seem fond of), and threw themselves into
some not very decent attitudes.

The men in general had their skins smeared all over with grease, or some
stinking, oily substance; some wore a small stick, or fish-bone, fixed
cross-ways, in the division of the nose, which had a very strange appearance;
others were painted in a variety of ways, and had their hair ornamented with
the teeth of fish, fastened on by gum, and the skin of the kangaroo. As they
conducted us to the water, a toadstool was picked up by one of our company,
which some of the natives perceiving, they made signs for us to throw it away,
as not being good to eat. Soon after I gathered some wood sorrel, which grew in
our way, but none of them endeavored to prevent me from eating it; on the
contrary, if a conclusion may be drawn from the signs which they made relative
to the toadstool, they showed, by their looks, that there was nothing hurtful
in it.

We halted but a short time with them, as it was growing late, and we had a
long way to walk. Before we parted from them, the governor gave them two small
hand-axes, in exchange for some of their stone axes and two of their spears. As
we ascended a hill, after our departure from them, eight of them followed us
until we had nearly reached the top, where one of those who had been most
familiar with us made signs for us to stop; which we readily complying with, he
ran to the summit, and made a strange kind of hallooing, holding at the same
time his hands open above his head. As soon as we came up to him, we discovered
another large body of them in a bay, about half a mile below us. Our new friend
seemed anxious to carry us down to them; but it not being in our way, we
declined his offer. Seeing us take another direction, he halted, and opened his
hands, in order, as we supposed, to put us in mind that he had received nothing
from us; upon which we presented him with a bird, the only thing we had, with
which he returned, to appearance, fully content and satisfied. We now proceeded
toward the camp, where we arrived about sunset.

This was the greatest number of the natives we had ever seen together since
our coming among them. What could be the cause of their assembling in such
numbers gave rise to a variety of conjectures. Some thought they were going to
war among themselves, as they had with them a temporary store of half-stinking
fish and fern-root, the latter of which they use for bread. This we remarked,
as several of them were eating it at the time we were among them. Others
conjectured that some of them had been concerned in the murder of our men,
notwithstanding we did not meet with the smallest trace to countenance such an
opinion, and that fearing we should revenge it, they had formed this
convention, in order to defend themselves against us. Others imagined that the
assemblage might be occasioned by a burial, a marriage, or some religious
meeting.

The Tabuan Parrot, one of which was observed here, and of which a plate is
annexed, is a bird about eighteen inches in length, and bigger than the Scarlet
Lory. The head, neck, and under parts, are of a fine scarlet; the upper parts
of the body and wings are of a beautiful green; across the upper part of the
wing coverts is an oblique bar of yellowish green, more glossy than the rest;
the lower part of the back and rump is blue; there is also a small patch of
blue at the lower part of the neck behind, between a scarlet and green,
dividing those colors; the tail is pretty long, and of an olive brown color;
the bill is reddish; the legs deep brown, nearly black.

The Female is mostly green; the head, neck, and under parts olive brown; belly
red; rump blue; tail, on the upper surface, green; beneath, dusky.

Tabuan Parrot.
depiction of bird

The Tabuan Parrot, Female
depiction of bird

The above inhabits Botany Bay, and seems much allied to the Tabuan Parrot
described by Mr. Latham, in his Synopsis of Birds; but in that the head, neck,
and under parts, incline to purplish or chocolate color; both quills and tail
are blue, more or less edged with green, and a crescent of blue at the back
part of the neck; it has also the under jaw surrounded with green feathers. It
is probable, therefore, that our bird is only a variety of the Tabuan species.

June 4th. This being the anniversary of his Majesty's birthday, and the first
celebration of it in New South Wales, his excellency ordered the Sirius and
Supply to fire twenty-one guns at sunrise, at one o'clock, and at sunset.
Immediately after the King's ships had ceased firing, at one o'clock, the
Borrowdale, Friendship, Fishburne, Golden Grove, and Prince of Wales, fired
five guns each. The battalion was under arms at twelve, and fired three
vollies, succeeded by three cheers. After this ceremony had taken place, the
lieutenant governor, with all the officers of the settlement, civil and
military, paid their respects to his excellency, at his house. At two o'clock
they all met there again to dinner, during which the band of music Pitted
against any that ever conducted the affairs of Great Britain.

When all the public toasts had gone round, the governor nominated the district
which he had taken possession of, Cumberland County; and gave it such an extent
of boundary as to make it the largest county in the whole world. His excellency
said, that he had intended to have named the town, and laid the first stone, on
this auspicious day; but the unexpected difficulties which he had met with, in
clearing the ground, and from a want of artificers, had rendered it impossible;
he therefore put it off till a future day. Its name, however, we understand, is
to be ALBION. The day was passed in cheerfulness and good humor; but it was a
little damped by our perceiving that the governor was in great pain, from a
return of his complaint. Though his countenance too plainly indicated the
torture which he suffered, he took every method in his power to conceal it,
lest it should break in upon the festivity and harmony of the day. His
excellency ordered every soldier a pint of porter, besides his allowance of
grog; and every convict half a pint of spirits, made into grog, that they all
may drink his Majesty's health; and, as it was a day of general rejoicing and
festivity, he likewise made it a day of forgiveness; remitting the remainder of
the punishment to which the sailors of the Sirius were subject, and pardoning
Lovel, Sideway, Hall, and Gordon, who had been confined on a little sterile
island, or rather rock, situated in the harbor, until a place of banishment
could be found. This act of lenity and mercy, added to many others which the
governor had shown, it is to be hoped will work some change on the minds of
these men. Indeed some good may be expected from Hall and Gordon, who, since
their sentence, have appeared penitent; but from Lovel and Sideway very little
change for the better can be expected, because they seem so truly abandoned and
incorrigible. At night every person attended an immense bonfire that was
lighted for the occasion; after which the principal officers of the settlement,
and of the men of war, supped at the governor's, where they terminated the day
in pleasantry, good humor and cheerfulness.

The next morning we were astonished at the number of thefts which had been
committed, during the general festivity, by the villainous part of the convicts,
on one another, and on some of the officers, whose servants did not keep a
strict look-out after their marquees. Availing themselves thus of the
particular circumstances of the day, is a strong instance of their unabated
depravity and want of principle. Scarcely a day passes without an example being
made of some one or other of these wretches; but it seems to have no manner of
effect upon them.

10th. John Ascott and Patrick Burn, two convicts, were brought before the
criminal court, and prosecuted by Lieutenant G. William Maxwell of the Sirius,
and Mr. Kelter the Master of the same ship, for having, a few nights before, in
a riotous manner, with many more of the convicts, attacked some seamen
belonging to the men of war, and behaving in an insolent and contemptuous
manner to them. After a long and judicious hearing, the prisoners were
acquitted, as the charge brought against them was by no means substantiated.

26th. About four in the afternoon a slight shock of an earthquake was felt at
Sidney Cove, and its environs. This incident had so wonderful an effect on
Edward Corbett, a convict, who had eloped about three weeks before, on a
discovery being made of his having stolen a frock, that he returned and gave
himself up to justice. A few days antecedent to his return, he had been
outlawed; and was supposed to have driven off with him four cows, the only
animals of this kind in the colony. This, however, he declared himself innocent
of; but confessed his having committed the theft laid to his charge. The
strictest search was made, but in vain, after the cows. It is probable that
they have strayed so far off in this endless wild, as to be irrecoverably lost.
Previously to the return of Corbett he must have suffered very severely from
hunger; his eyes were sunk into his head, and his whole appearance showed that
he had been half starved. While he was absent, he says, he frequently fell in
with the natives, who, though they never treated him ill, did not seem to like
his company. He informed us, that in a bay adjacent to that where the governor
and his party had met with so many of the natives, he saw the head of one of
the convicts lying near the place where the body had been burnt in a large
fire. This, in all likelihood, was Burn, who was carried off at the time Airs
was wounded, as he has not been heard of since.

The natives of this country, though their mode of subsisting seems to be so
very scanty and precarious, are, I am convinced, not cannibals. One of their
graves, which I saw opened, the only one I have met with, contained a body
which had evidently been burned, as small pieces of the bones lay in the bottom
of it. The grave was neatly made, and well covered with earth and boughs of
trees.

The Pennantian Parrot (of which see plate annexed) was about this time first
noticed. The general color of the body, in the male, is crimson; the feathers
of the back black in their middle; the chin and throat blue; the wings blue,
with a bar of a paler color down the middle of them; the tail is long, and
blue also, and all but the two middle feathers have the ends very pale.

The female differs, in having the upper parts of the neck and body of a
greenish color; the top of the head red, and a patch of the same under each
eye; the chin and Pennantian Parrot
depiction of bird Pennantian Parrot, Female.
depiction of bird throat blue; lower part of the neek and breast red; as are
the rump and vent; the middle of the belly dusky green; tail dark blue, fringed
with chestnut; shoulders blue; the rest of the wing the same, but darker; bill
and legs as in the male.

24th. The governor revoked the decree by which Corbett was outlawed, and he
was tried by the criminal court, simply for the theft he had committed, and
sentenced to be hanged. Samuel Payton, a convict, likewise received the same
sentence, for feloniously entering the marquee of Lieutenant Fuzer, on the
night of the fourth of June, and stealing from thence some shirts, stockings,
and combs. His trial had been put off to the present time, on account of a
wound in his head, which he had received from Captain Lieutenant Meredith, who,
on his return from the bonfire, found Payton in his marquee. When brought to
the hospital, in consequence of the wound which he had received, he was
perfectly senseless. During the time he remained under my care, I frequently
admonished him to think of the perilous situation he then stood in, and to make
known the accomplices whom he was supposed to have; but he firmly and uniformly
denied his guilt; and disclaimed his having any knowledge of, or concern in,
robbing Lieutenant Fuzer. He further said, that he did not recollect how he
came to Captain Lieutenant Meredith's tent, or any circumstance relative to it.
However, since he received his sentence, he has confessed that he robbed
Lieutenant Fuzer; and gave him information where to find the articles he had
been robbed of: he at the same time acknowledged that he entered Mr. Meredith's
marquee with an intention to rob him, doubting not but he should be able to
make his escape undiscovered, as every one seemed so fully engaged on the
pleasures of the day.

When he and Corbett were brought to the fatal tree, they (particularly Payton)
addressed the convicts in a pathetic, eloquent, and well-directed speech. He
acknowledged the justice of his sentence; a sentence, which (he said) he had
long deserved. He added, that he hoped and trusted that the ignominious death
he was about to suffer, would serve as a caution and warning to those who saw
and heard him. They both prayed most fervently, begging forgiveness of an
offended GOD. They likewise hoped, that those whom they had injured, would not
only forgive them, as they themselves did all mankind, but offer up their
prayers to a merciful REDEEMER that, though so great sinners, they might be
received into that bliss, which the good and virtuous only can either deserve
or expect. They were now turned off; and in the agonizing moments of the
separation of the soul from the body seemed to embrace each other. The
execution of these unhappy youths, the eldest of whom was not twenty-four years
of age, which seemed to make a greater impression on the convicts than any
circumstance had done since their landing, will induce them, it is to be hoped,
to change their conduct, and to adopt a better mode of life than, I am sorry to
say, they have hitherto pursued.

The principal business now going forward, is the erecting huts for the marines
and convicts, with the cabbage-tree. We have been here nearly six months, and
four officers only as yet got huts: when the rest will be provided with them
seems uncertain; but this I well know, that living in tents, as the rainy
season has commenced, is truly uncomfortable, and likely to give a severe trial
to the strongest and most robust constitution.

The trees of this country are immensely large, and clear of branches to an
amazing height. While standing, many of them look fair and good to the eye, and
appear sufficient to make a mast for the largest ship; but, when cut down, they
are scarcely convertible to any use whatever. At the heart they are full of
veins, through which an amazing quantity of an astringent red gum issues. This
gum I have found very serviceable in an obstinate dysentery that raged at our
first landing, and still continues to do so, though with less obstinacy and
violence. When these trees are sawed, and any way exposed to the sun, the gum
melts, or gets so very brittle, that the wood falls to pieces, and appears as
if the pieces had been joined together with this substance. How any kind of
houses, except those built of the cabbage tree, can be raised up, the timber
being so exceedingly bad, it is impossible to determine.

I have already said that the stone of this country is well calculated for
building, could any kind of cement be found to keep them together. As for
limestone, we have not yet discovered any in the country; and the shells
collected for that purpose have been but inconsiderable. From Captain Cook's
account, one would be led to suppose that oyster and cockle shells might be
procured in such quantities, as to make a sufficiency of lime, for the purpose
of constructing at least a few public buildings; but this is by no means the
case. That great navigator, notwithstanding his usual accuracy and candor, was
certainly too lavish of his praises on Botany Bay.

The peculiarity I have mentioned relative to the wood of this place is
strange. There are only three kinds of it, and neither of them will float on
the water. We have found another resin here, not unlike the balsam Tolu in
smell and effect, but differing widely in color, being of a clear yellow,
which exudes from the tree. This, however, is not to be met with in such
quantities as the red gum before mentioned, nor do I think that its medicinal
virtues are by any means so powerful. A kind of earth has been discovered which
makes good bricks, but we still are in want of a cement for them as well as for
the stone.

What animals we have yet met with have been mostly of the Opossum kind. The
Kangaroo, so very accurately delineated by Captain Cook, is certainly of that
class, and the largest animal seen in the country. One has been brought into
camp which weighed a hundred and forty-nine pounds. See plate annexed. The
conformation of this animal is peculiarly singular. Its hinder parts have great
muscular power, and are, perhaps, beyond all parallel, out of proportion, when
compared with the fore parts. As it goes, it jumps on its two hind legs, from
twenty to twenty-eight feet, and keeps the two fore ones close to the breast;
these are small and short, and it seems to use them much like a squirrel. The
tail of these animals is thick and long; they keep it extended, and it serves
as a kind of counterpoise to the head, which they carry erect, when bounding at
full speed. The velocity of a Kangaroo as far outstrips that of a greyhound, as
that animal exceeds in swiftness a common dog. It is a very timid, shy, and
inoffensive creature, evidently of the granivorous kind. Upon our first
discovering one of them, as it does not use its fore feet to assist it in
running, or rather jumping, many were of opinion that the tail, which is
immensely large and long, was made use of by them in the act of progression;
but this is by no means the case. Had it been used in such a manner, the hair
would probably have been worn away from the part which, of course, must be
applied to the ground. The tail, from its size and weight, seems to serve it
for a weapon both of defense and offense; for it does not appear that nature
has provided it with any other. Its mouth and head, even when full grown, are
too small for it to do much execution with the teeth; nor is the conformation
of either at all calculated for the purpose. Indeed, its fore feet, which it
uses, as a squirrel or monkey, to handle any thing with, and which assist it in
lying down, are too small, and out of proportion, as are all the superior
parts, to admit of its either possessing or exerting much strength. It has been
reported by some convicts who were out one day, accompanied by a large
Newfoundland dog, that the latter seized a very large Kangaroo, but could not
preserve its hold. They observed that the animal effected its escape by the
defensive use it made of its tail, with which it struck its assailant in a most
tremendous manner. The blows were applied with such force and efficacy, that
the dog was bruised, in many places, till the blood flowed. They observed that
the Kangaroo did not seem to make any use of either its teeth or fore feet, but
fairly beat off the dog with its tail, and escaped before the convicts, though
at no great distance, could get up to secure it.

The female has a pouch or pocket, like the Opossum, in which she carries her
young. Some have been shot with a young one, not larger than a walnut, sticking
to a teat in this pocket. Others, with young ones not bigger than a rat: one of
which, most perfectly formed, with every mark and distinguishing characteristic
of the Kangaroo, I have sent to Mr. Wilson, of Gower Street, Bedford Square.

There is a peculiar formation in the generative parts of this animal. Of its
natural history we at present know little; and therefore as we are so
unacquainted with its habits, haunts, and customs, to attempt particular and
accurate descriptions of it might beget error, which time, or a fuller
knowledge of its properties, would directly contradict. As to mere conjectures
(and such too often are imposed upon the public for incontestible facts), it
cannot be improper to suppress them.

Every animal in this country partakes, in a great measure, of the nature of
the Kangaroo. We have the Kangaroo Opossum, the Kangaroo Rat, etc. In fact
every quadruped that we have seen, except the flying squirrel, and a spotted
creature, nearly the size of a Martin, resembles the Kangaroo in the formation
of the fore legs and feet, which bear no proportion to the length of the hind
legs.

The scarcity of boats will prevent our being so well supplied with fish, as
otherwise might be expected. Fish is far from abounding at the cold season of
the year; but, in the summer, judging from the latter end of the last, we have
every reason to conclude that the little bays and coves in the harbor are well
stored with them. The fish caught here are, in general, excellent; but several
of them, like the animals in some degree resembling the Kangaroo, partake of
the properties of the shark. The land, the grass, the trees, the animals, the
birds, and the fish, in their different species, approach by strong shades of
similitude to each other. A certain likeness runs through the whole.

July 8th. A party of the natives came to the place where the Sirius's boat had
been to haul the seine, and having beaten the crew, took from them by force a
part of the fish which they had caught. It is a great misfortune to us that we
cannot find proper wood in this place wherewith to build a boat; particularly
as fish is not only so very plentiful in the summer, but the only change from
salt provisions which we can procure, there being neither wild nor domestic
animals fit for food. Here, where no other animal nourishment is to be
procured, the Kangaroo is considered as a dainty; but in any other country I am
sure that such food would be thrown to

A few days since a civil court of jurisdiction (which consisted of the judge
advocate, the Reverend Mr. Johnson, and myself), was convened, by his
excellency, to hear a complaint made against Duncan Sinclair, master of the
Alexander transport, by Henry Coble and Susannah his wife (the Norwich convicts
who so much excited the public attention), for the non-delivery of a parcel
sent on board the Alexander, by Mrs. Jackson of Somerset Street, containing
wearing apparel, books, and other things, for the use of the said Henry Coble,
his wife, and child, value twenty pounds. The parcel was proved (and this even
by the acknowledgment of the master) to have been received on board; and it
likewise appeared in evidence that, on moving it from one part of the ship to
another, the package had broken, and the books had fallen out, which books the
convict said had been delivered to him. The court, after deducting five pounds
(the value of the books received), gave a verdict in favor of the couple, in
whose cause the world had seemed so much to interest and in consequence of the
authority unto them granted by Act of Parliament, in such cases made and
provided, they adjudged the master of the transport fully to compensate the
loss of the convicts, amounting to fifteen pounds. Sinclair considered it as
oppressive to be obliged to pay for that on account of which he had not
received any freightage; but this objection had no weight with the court, as
the ship was in the service of government, and paid for the sole purpose of
conveying these people, and the little property which they possessed, to this
country.

July 13th. The Alexander, Friendship, and Prince of Wales transports, with the
Borrowdale victualler, sailed for England. His Majesty's brig the Supply sailed
at the same time for Norfolk Island, with provisions, etc. for the people there.

21st. I went down the harbor, with the master of the Golden Grove victualler,
to look for a cabbage tree, as a covering for my hut. On our return, we fell in
with three canoes that had been out fishing. We rowed toward them, when the
natives in them suddenly appeared intimidated, and paddled away with all
possible dispatch. Willing to convince them that they had nothing to dread from
us, we rowed after them, in order to present them with some trifles which we
had about us. When we approached the canoes, an old woman in one of them began
to cast her fish overboard, in great haste; whether it was for fear that we
should take them from her, or whether she threw them to us, we could not
ascertain. However, when we came along-side, our conduct soon convinced her
that her alarms, with respect to us, were groundless. She had in the canoe with
her a young girl, whom, as she wore a complete apron, we could not help
considering as such an instance of female decency, as we had not at any other
time observed among the natives. The girl did not betray the least sign of
apprehension, but rather seemed pleased at the interview. She laughed
immoderately, either at us, or at the petulance shown by the old woman, who, I
believe, was more terrified on the girl's account than on her own. After this
we left them fully satisfied that we did non mean to offer them any injury.

We discovered the New Halland Creeper; (See plate annexed). The general color
of the bird is black, spotted in various parts with white: the bill is dusky,
growing paler New Holland Creeper.
depiction of bird toward the tip. The neck, breast, belly, and sides are more
or less streaked with white; over the eye is also a white streak, and the sides
of the neck and beginning of the back have likewise some streaks of the same.
The quills and tail feathers are marked with yellow on the outer margins; the
last are rounded in shape, and two or three of the outer feathers spotted
within, at the tip, with white; legs dusky; is about the size of a nightingale,
and measures seven inches in length. It is probably a nondescript species.

A party of convicts, who had crossed the country to Botany Bay to gather a
kind of plant resembling balm, which we found to be a good and pleasant
vegetable, were met by a superior number of the natives, armed with spears and
clubs, who chased them for two miles without being able to overtake them; but
if they had succeeded in the pursuit, it is probable that they would have put
them to death; for wherever persons unarmed, or inferior in numbers, have
fallen in with them, they have never failed to maltreat them. The natives had
with them some middling sized dogs, somewhat resembling the species called, in
England, fox-dogs. A servant of Captain Shea being one day out shooting, he
found a very young puppy, belonging to the natives, eating part of a dead
Kangaroo. He brought it to the camp, and it thrives much. The dog, in shape, is
rather short and well made; has very fine hair of the nature of fur, and a
sagacious look. When found, though not more than a month old, he showed some
symptoms of ferocity. It was a considerable time before he could be induced to
eat any flesh that was boiled, but he would gorge it raw with great avidity.
(See plate annexed).

23d. The blacksmith's shop, which was built of common brush wood, was burnt
down. Very fortunately for us, the bellows and the other tools were, through
the exertion of the people, saved. To effect this was no easy point, as, in the
course of three or four minutes, the wood being very dry, every part of the
shop was in flames.

29th. One of the convicts was met by some of the natives, who wounded him very
severely in the breast and head with their spears. They would undoubtedly have
destroyed him had he not plunged into the sea, near which he happened to be,
and by that means saved himself. When he was brought to the hospital he was
very faint from the loss of blood, which had flowed plentifully from his
wounds. A piece of a broken spear had entered through the scalp and under his
ear, so that the extraction gave him great pain. Their spears are made of a
kind of cane which grows out of the tree that produces the yellow gum; they are
ten or twelve feet long; pointed, and sometimes barbed, with a piece of the
same cane or the teeth of fish. These they throw, with the assistance of the
snort stick already mentioned, which has a shell made fast to the end of it
with the yellow gum. With this gum they likewise fasten their barbs to their
spears and fish-gigs. The latter of these differ from the former by having four
prongs, and being always barbed; which is not generally the case with the
spears. Their spears, the only weapon they are ever seen to have that may be
considered in any degree as dangerous, they throw thirty or forty yards with an
unerring precision. When equipped for any exploit, they are also armed with a
shield made of the bark of a tree, with which they very dexterously ward off
any thing thrown at them. An humble kind of scymitar; a bludgeon, or club,
about twenty inches long, with a large and pointed end; and sometimes a stone
hatchet; make up the catalogue of their military implements.

We this day shot a Knob-fronted Bee-eater; (See plate annexed). This is about
the size of a blackbird; the plumage mostly brown above and white beneath; the
head and upper part of the neck are sparingly covered with narrow feathers,
almost like hairs; but the fore part of the neck and breast are furnished with
long ones, of a white color and pointed at the ends; the tail is pretty long,
and the feathers tipped with white; the bill is about one inch in length, and
pale; but what is most remarkable, on the forehead, just at the base of the
bill, is a short blunt knob, about a quarter of an inch in length, and of a
brownish color; the tongue is nearly of the length of the bill, and bristly at
the end; the legs are brown. This inhabits New South Wales, and is supposed to
be a non-descript species.

This day three canoes, with a man and woman in each, came behind the point on
which the hospital is built, to fish. I went over to them, as did two other
gentlemen, my assistants, without their showing any fear at our coming; on the
contrary, they manifested a friendly confidence. Knob fronted Be Eater
depiction of bird We gave them some bread, which they received with apparent
pleasure, but did not eat any of it while in our presence. We likewise
presented them with a looking-glass, but this they received with indifference,
and feemed to hold in no kind of estimation. I gave one of the women a pocket
handkerchief, which she immediately tied round hen head, and showed great
satisfaction. She had a young child between her knees in the canoe, (the way in
which they always carry their infants), for whom she solicited something, in
the most suppliant tone of voice I ever heard. The only thing I had about me
was a narrow slip of linen, which I gave her; and trifling as it was, she
appeared to be perfectly satisfied with it, and bound it round the child's
head. She would not come out of the came, though along-side the rocks; but the
man quitted it, and showed us some wild figs that grew near at hand. Such as
were green and unripe he did not pull; but, after some search, having found one
that was tolerably ripe, he made me pluck it and put it into his mouth. He eat
it with an apparent relish, and smacked his lips, after he had swallowed it, to
convince us how good it was.

At some little distance from the place where we were a sheep lay dead. As soon
as he had discovered it, he took it by the horns, and, as well as we could
understand him, he was extremely inquisitive and anxious to know what it was.
When his curiosity was satisfied, he went into the canoe, where the woman had
been waiting for him. About ten or twenty yards from the shore, among the long
grass, in the shallow water, he struck and took with his fish-gig several good
fish; an acquisition to which, at this season of the year, it being cold and
wet, we were unequal. While he was engaged in watching for them, both he and
the woman chewed something, which they frequently spit into the water; and
which appeared to us, from his immediately striking a fish, to be a lure. While
they were thus employed, one of the gentlemen with me sung some songs; and when
he had done, the females in the canoes either sung one of their own songs, or
imitated him, in which they succeeded beyond conception. Any thing spoken by us
they most accurately recited, and this in a manner of which we fell greatly
short in our attempts to repeat their language after them.

While we were thus amicably engaged, all on a sudden Sacred kings Fisher
depiction of bird they paddled away from us. On looking about to discover the
cause, we perceived the gunner of the Supply at some little distance, with a
gun in his hand; an instrument of death, against which they entertain an
insuperable aversion. As soon as I discovered him, I called to him to stay
where he was, and not make a nearer approach; or, if he did, to lay down his
gun. The latter request he immediately complied with; and when the natives saw
him unarmed, they showed no further fear, but returning to their employment,
continued alternately to sing songs, and to mimic the gentlemen who accompanied
me.

We this day shot the Sacred Kings-Fisher (See Plate annexed). This bird is
about the size of a thrush, and measures nearly ten inches in length: the top
of the head is blue, and crested; sides of the head, and back part of it,
black; over the eyes, from the nostrils, a rusty colored streak; the chin, the
middle of the neck, all round, and all the under part of the body, buff-colour,
more or less inclining to rust; the upper part of the plumage chiefly blue; but
the beginning of the back is black, as are also the quills and tail feathers
within, Synopsis. The present seems to come nearest his Var. C. See vol. ii.
page 622, of that work.

August 12th. Celebrated the Prince of Wales's birthday. The men of was fired a
royal salute, and all the officers in the colony, civil and military, dined
with the governor. The evening was spent in making bonfires, and testifying
such other demonstrations of joy as could be shown in this country. The weather
is now very wet and cold, and has been so for the last six weeks. Several
mornings we have had a hoar frost, and a few distinct pelicles of ice were
formed on shallow spots of water; the thermometer frequently as low as the
freezing point.

16th. A convict who has been out gathering what they called sweet tea, about a
mile from the camp, met a party of the natives, consisting of fourteen, by whom
he was beaten, and also slightly wounded with the shellstick used in throwing
their spears; they then made him strip, and would have taken from him his
clothes, and probably his life, had it not been for the report of two muskets;
which they no sooner heard, than they ran away. This party were returning from
the wood with cork, which they had been cutting, either for their canoes or
huts; and had with them no other instruments than those that were necessary for
the business on which they were engaged; such as a stone hatchet, and the shell
stick before mentioned. Had they been armed with any other weapons, the convict
would probably have lost his life.

That which we call the sweet tea, is a creeping kind of vine, running to a
great extent along the ground; the stalk is not so thick as the smallest
honey-suckle; nor is the leaf so large as the common bay leaf, though something
similar to it; and the taste is sweet, exactly like the liquorice root of the
shops. Of this the convicts and soldiers make an infusion which is tolerably
pleasant, and serves as no bad succedaneum for tea. Indeed were it to be met
with in greater abundance, it would be found very beneficial to those poor
creatures, whose constant diet is salt provisions. In using it for medical
purposes, I have found it to be a good pectoral, and, as I before observed, not
at all unpleasant. (See Plate annexed). We have also a kind of shrub in this
country resembling the common broom; which produces a small berry like a white
current, but, in taste, more similar to a very four green gooseberry. This has
proved a good antiscorbutic; but I am sorry to add, that the quantity to be met
with is far from sufficient to remove the scurvy. That disorder still prevails
with great violence, nor can we at present find any remedy against it,
notwithstanding that the country produces several sorts of plants and shrubs,
which, in this place, are considered as tolerable vegetables, and used in
common. The most plentiful, is a plant growing on the sea shore, greatly
resembling sage. Among it are often to be found samphire, and a kind of wild
spinach, besides a small shrub which we distinguish by the name of the
vegetable tree, and the leaves of which prove rather a pleasant substitute for
vegetables.

22d. His Excellency Governor Phillip, Lieutenant George Johnston, his Adjutant
of Orders, Lieutenant Cresswell of the Marines, myself, and six soldiers,
landed in Manly Cove, in order to examine the coast to Broken Bay. At a short
distance from the shore, we saw sixteen canoes, with two persons in each, and
in some three, employed in fishing. They seemed to take very little notice as
we passed them, so very intent were they on the business in which they were
engaged. On our landing, we saw sixty more of the natives, about two hundred
yards distant from us. Some of them immediately came up to us, and were very
friendly. A black man, who carried our tents, gave two of them a stocking each,
with which they seemed much pleased; and pointing to the naked leg, expressed a
great desire to have that also clothed. The morning was so cold, that these
poor wretches stood shivering on the beach, and appeared to be very sensible of
the comfort and advantage of being clothed.

We sent back our boats, and proceeded northward along the coast about six
miles, where we were forced to halt for near two hours, until the tide had run
out of a lagoon, or piece of water, so as to admit of its being forded. While
we were detained here, an old native came to us, and, in the most friendly
manner, pointed out the shallowest part of the water we had to cross; but the
tide ran with too much rapidity at that time for us to attempt it. After we had
waded through, one of our company shot a very fine duck, which we had dressed
for supper, on a little eminence by the side of a cabbage tree swamp, about
half a mile from the run of the tide. Here the whole party got as much cabbage,
to eat with their salt provisions, as they chose. While we had been detained by
the tide, several natives were on the opposite side, who also pointed out to us
the shoalest water, and appeared, by their signs and gestures, to wish us very
much to come over; but before the tide was sufficiently low, they went away.
One of them wore a skin of a reddish color round his shoulders. Near the place
where we pitched our tent, we saw several quails exactly like those in England.
I fired four or five times at them, but without success, as my shot was too
large.

23d. As soon as the dew was off the grass, we began our march, and about
twelve o'clock fell in with the south branch of Broken Bay: but finding the
country round this part very rugged, and the distance too great for our stock
of provisions, we returned to the sea shore, in order to examine the south part
of the entrance into the bay. This, like every other part of the country we
have seen, had a very indifferent aspect. From the entrance of Port Jackson to
Broken Bay, in foam places from fifty to a hundred, in others to two hundred
yards distant from the sea, the coast indeed is very pleasant, and tolerably
clear of wood; the earth a kind of adhesive clay, covered with a thick and
short sour grass.

All along the shore we met the natives, who seem to have no fixed residence or
abode; but, indiscriminately, whenever they meet with a hut, or, what is more
common, a convenient excavation or hole in the rocks, take possession of it for
the time. In one of their huts, at Broken Bay, which was constructed of bark,
and was one of the best I had ever met with, we saw two very well made nets,
some fishing lines not inferior to the nets, some spears, a stone hatchet of a
very superior make to what they usually have, together with two vehicles for
carrying water, one of cork, the other made out of the knot of a large tree
hollowed. In this hut there were two pieces of coarse linen, which they must
have obtained from some of our people, and every thing about it bespoke more
comfort and convenience than I had observed in any other. A little way from it
we fell in with a large party of natives, whom we supposed to be the
proprietors; they were armed with spears and stone hatchets. One of the latter
they very earnestly wished to exchange for one of ours. Though we would readily
have obliged them, it was not in our power to comply with their wishes, as we
had only a sufficient number wherewith to cut wood for our own fires. However,
notwithstanding our refusal, they parted from us without appearing at all
dissatisfied.

As we proceeded along the sandy beach, we gathered some beans, which grew on a
small creeping substance not unlike a vine. They were well tasted, and very
similar to the English long-pod bean. At the place where we halted, we had them
boiled, and we all eat very heartily of them. Half an hourafter, the governor
and I were seized with a violent vomiting. We drank warm water, which, carrying
the load freely from our stomachs, gave us immediate relief. Two other
gentlemen of the party ate as freely of them as we had done, without feeling
the smallest inconvenience or bad effect. About this place we got some
rasberries; but they had not that pleasant tartness peculiar to those in Europe.

24th. We returned by the same passage, along the coast, without seeing any
objects worth notice, until we came to a convenient spot to encamp for the
night, where there was great plenty of cabbage trees, and tolerable water; a
circumstance, as I have already observed, not generally to be met with in this
country, except on the sea coast; and even there by no means in abundance.

While soup was making of some birds we had lately killed (which proved very
good), and every thing was getting ready for the night, the governor, the two
other gentlemen, and myself, took our guns, and ascended a hill just above us.
From this eminence we saw the southern branch of Broken Bay, which ran far into
the country. During our return, we picked up, in the distance of about half a
mile, twenty-five flowers of plants and shurbs of different genera and species,
specimens of which I have transmitted to Mr. Wilson, particularly the Red Gum
Tree. (See Plate annexed). On the spot where we encamped, the grass was long,
dry, and sour; and in such abundance, that we set it on fire all around, for
fear the natives should surprise us in the night by doing the same; a custom in
which they seem always happy to indulge themselves.

25th. We set off early in the morning to look at the branch of Broken Bay
which we had seen the evening before; and were led to it by a path not very
much frequented. At the head of this branch we found a fresh water river, which
took its rise a little above, out of a swamp. Such is the origin and source of
every river we have yet discovered in this country; though few, when compared
to those in any other part of the world. It is very extraordinary that in all
this extensive tract, a living spring has not yet been explored. On this river
we saw many ducks and teal. Mr. Cresswell shot one of the latter, and I shot
one of the former. They were both well tasted, and good of their kind. At the
head of this branch we found the country rough and impassable. Having followed
the course of the river to its origin, we that day returned to Manly Cove,
where we surprised two old men, an old woman, a grown-up girl, and thirteen
children, in a hut. When the children saw us approach, they all gathered
themselves closely together around the girl; they cried, and seemed much
terrified. The old men showed such dislike to our looking at them, that the
governor and the rest of the party withdrew to some little distance to dine.
Some of the children, on seeing all the party gone but myself and another
gentleman, began to laugh, and thus proved that their fears had vanisned. When
we joined the rest of the party, the old man followed us in a very friendly
manner, and took part of every kind of provision we had, but he ate none of it
in our sight. The women and children stood at some distance, and beckoned to us
when the men, of whom they feemed to stand in very great dread, had turned
their backs.

As soon as we had dined, and refreshed ourselves, the governor, by himself,
went down to them, and distributed some presents among them, which soon gained
their friendship and confidence. By this time sixteen canoes, that were out
fishing, came close to the spot where we were, and there lay on their paddles,
which they managed with wonderful dexterity and address; mimicking us, and
indulging in their own merriment. After many signs and entreaties, one of the
women ventured to the governor, who was by himself, and with seemingly great
timidity, took from him some small fishing lines and hooks; articles which they
hold in great estimation. This made her less fearful; and in a little time she
became perfectly free and unrestrained. Her conduct influenced many others, who
came on shore for what they could procure. Many of them were painted about the
head, breast, and shoulders, with some white substance. None of those who were
thus ornamented came on shore, till by signs we made them understand that we
intended to offer them some presents; and even then, only one of them ventured.
To this person Lieutenant Cresswell gave a white pocket handkerchief, with
which she seemeds much pleased. Every gentleman now singled out a female, and
presented her with some trinkets, not forgetting, at the same time, to bestow
gifts upon some of her family, whom she took considerable pains to make known,
lest they should fall into the hands of such as did not belong to her. It was
remarked that all the women and children, (an old woman excepted) had the
little finger of the left hand taken off at the second joint; the stump of
which was as well covered as if the operation had been performed by a surgeon.

While we were thus employed among the women, a body of men came out of the
woods with a new canoe, made of cork. It was one of the best we had observed in
this country; though it fell very short of those which I have seen among the
American or Musquito-shore Indians; who, in improvements of every kind, the
Indians of this country are many centuries behind. The men had also with them
some new paddles, spears, and fishgigs, which they had just been making. They
readily showed us the use of every thing they had with them. Indeed they always
behave with an apparent civility when they fall in with men that are armed; but
when they meet persons unarmed, they seldom fail to take every advantage of
them.

Those females who were arrived at the age of puberty did not wear a covering;
but all the female children and likewise the girls wore a slight kind of
covering before them, made of the fur of the kangaroo, twisted into threads.
While we went toward the party of men that came out of the woods with the new
canoe, all the women landed, and began to broil their fish, of which they had a
large quantity. There seemed to be no harmony or hospitality among them.
However, the female to whom I paid the most attention gave me, but not until I
asked her for it, some of the fish which she was eating. She had thrown it on
the fire, but it was scarcely warm.

Many of the women were strait, well formed, and lively. My companion continued
to exhibit a number of coquettish airs while I was decorating her head, neck,
and arms, with my pocket and neck handkerchiefs, which I tore into ribbons, as
if desirous of multiplying two presents into several. Having nothing left,
except the buttons of my coat, on her admiring them, I cut them away, and with
a piece of string tied them round her waist. Thus ornamented, and thus
delighted with her new acquirements, she turned from me with a look of
inexpressible archness.

Before the arrival of the boats, which was late, the natives pointed to a
hawk, and made signs to us to shoot it. It had alighted upon an adjoining tree,
and the governor desired that I would bring it down. The report of the gun
frightened them very much. Some ran away; but on perceiving that no harm was
intended against them, they returned, and were highly pleased to see the hawk
presented by the governor to a young girl, who appeared to be the daughter of
the most distinguished amongst them.

While the boats were preparing for our reception, an old woman, perfectly gray
with age, solicited us very much for some present; and in order to make us
comply, threw herself, before all her companions, into the most indecent
attitudes.

The cockswain of the boat informed us, that while he was waiting for our
return, the day before, two parties of the natives met, and commenced
hostilities against each other. The man thus described the manner in which this
encounter was carried on. A champion from each party, armed with a spear and a
shield, pressed forwards before the rest; and, as soon as a favorable
opportunity offered (till which he advanced and retreated by turns), threw his
spear, and then retired; when another immediately took his place, going through
the same maneuvers; and in this manner was the conflict carried on for more
than two hours. The boats crew and two midshipmen, who saw the whole of the
proceeding, perceived that one of the natives walked off with a spear in his
side. During the engagement, the women belonging to them, who stood at some
distance, discovered strong marks of concern, and screamed loudly when any of
the combatants appeared to be wounded. As the boat was returning close along
shore, a spear was thrown at the people by some of the natives, who were
lurking behind the trees and rocks. It was hurled with such force, that it flew
a considerable way over the boat, although we were between thirty and forty
yards from the shore.

It was late in the evening before we arrived in Sydney Cove; and as soon as
the governor landed, he was informed that a gold mine had been discovered, near
the entrance of the harbor, by a convict. During his excellency's absence, the
convict had made this discovery known to the lieutenant governor and the judge
advocate; for which, he said, that he hoped and expected to have his freedom,
and a pecuniary reward. The gentlemen to whom he applied answered, that they
could not promise to grant his request until he should have put them in
possession of the mine; but, that they were well assured that the governor
would bestow on him a proper recompense, after sufficient proof of the
discovery. A boat was, in consequence, ordered from the Sirius, to carry him
and Captain Campbell down to the place where he declared that the mine was
situated. At their landing, he begged leave to withdraw a little, on some
necessary occasion; when, instead of returning to Captain Campbell, he went
back to the camp, and waiting on the lieutenant governor and judge advocate,
asserted that he had put Captain Campbell in possession of the mine, who had
dispatched him over land for another officer and a proper guard. His account
not being doubted, he was well fed and treated; and Lieutenant Paulden, with a
guard and all necessary articles, was ordered to attend him to the place. But,
before they could set out, to the great astonishment of all, Captain Campbell
arrived, and unravelled the whole of this extraordinary deception. This
produced an unexpected revolution. Instead of receiving a reward for his golden
discoveries, the impostor was immediately taken into custody, with two others,
supposed to be concerned in carrying on the artifice. The next day he was
examined, with great privacy and strictness; but no satisfactory elucidation
being obtained from him, he was ordered to be severely whipped. Subsequently to
this punishment, of which he was prepared to expect a weekly repetition,
between the intervals of hard labor, and to be loaded incessantly with heavy
irons, during the time of his remaining in the colony, he most audaciously
persisted in endeavoring to maintain the delusion, and declared that if an
officer was sent with him, he would show him the mine; adding, that he was
heartily sorry for what had happened. Accordingly, he was suffered to accompany
Lieutenant G. Johnston, the Governor's Adjutant of Orders, to the place in
question. Before the boat had reached its destination Mr. Johnston argued with
him, yet not without protesting, that if he either attempted to deceive him as
he had imposed upon Captain Campbell, or presumed to move five yards from him
and his party, he would instantly order him to be shot. Finding that this
officer was not to be trifled with, but seemed determined, he acknowledged that
it was unnecessary to proceed any farther; that he was ignorant of the
existence of any such mine, and that the specimens shown by him were only a
composition of brass and gold, which he had filed down and melted. Mr. Johnston
brought him back; when he was again examined, and ordered to be punished. It is
needless to add that no further discovery was made. He is now at liberty. He
is, however, obliged to wear a large R on his back. The man, whose name is
Daily, appears insane; yet others cannot be persuaded that he is a lunatic, but
are rather of opinion that he is a designing miscreant, and that time will
disclose a deep-laid scheme, which he had planned for some purpose hitherto
undiscovered. For my own part, I freely confess, that I cannot coincide with
their sentiments. He was so artful as to circulate a report that he had sold
several pounds weight of the ore to the master of the Golden Grove, and some of
his seamen. This rumor was received with such credulity, that, in consequence
of the impression which it made, none of the sailors were suffered to leave the
ship after a certain hour in the evening. In a word, so many ridiculous
circumstances attended this affair, that to attempt a complete enumeration of
them would prove not less difficult than uninteresting.

26th. The Supply arrived from Norfolk Island, after a long and rough passage.
She had landed, but neither in apparent safety nor with facility, the stores
which she carried to that place: and, upon the present occasion, I am sorry to
add, that the hazard of landing and embarking from this little island is so
very great, that Mr. Cunningham, a midshipman of the Sirius (who resided on it
with Lieutenant King, the superintendant), was lost, with three seamen, in a
boat that was swamped by the surf, which on every part of the coast runs high,
and beats against the shore with great violence; so that I much fear, from the
difficulty of access, and its situation, it never will prove of any great
consequence, although it promised some advantages; particularly in furnishing
us with pine trees, which grow here to a size nearly equal to those of Norway.
In the whole island there is not a harbor capable of admitting even so small a
vessel as the Supply, and the anchorage on every part of the coast is equally
bad.

The island produces a kind of gladiolus luteus, or iris palustris, of which,
as may be seen by the specimens sent Mr. Wilson, exceeding good hemp is to be
made; and which is to be procured in any quantity, the plants growing in great
abundance throughout the whole island. The foregoing articles, were the island
larger and more easy of access, with even a tolerable harbor, might, in any
other country, be of the first consequence to a maritime nation. But from every
information which I have gained from the officers and crew of the Supply, the
procuring of this beneficial acquisition is at present somewhat doubtful. The
people settled upon it, when they can venture out, get great plenty of fish;
and, at certain seasons, turtle. In the island also are pigeons, as tame as
domestic fowls; and the soil seems well adapted for the growth of all kinds of
grain and vegetables. It produces a wild banana, or plantain tree, which, by
cultivation, may assist the settlers, as a succedaneum for bread: and I am not
without hopes that we shall be able to make some additions from thence to such
necessaries of life as may in time be produced here.

A few days since the natives landed near the hospital, where some goats
belonging to the Supply were browsing; when they killed, with their spear, a
kid, and carried it away. Within this fortnight, they have also killed a
he-goat of the governor's. Whenever an opportunity offered, they have seldom
failed to destroy whatever stock they could seize upon unobserved. They have
been equally ready to attack the convicts, on every occasion which presented
itself; and some of them have become victims to these savages. I have already
observed that they stand much in fear of a musket, and therefore they very
seldom approach any person by whom it is carried; and their apprehensions are
almost equally great when they perceive a red garment.



October 2d. His Majesty's ship the Sirius sailed for the Cape of Good Hope,
for a supply of flour, it being discovered that our stock of this article bore
no proportion to the salt beef and pork.

The same day the Golden Grove sailed for Norfolk Island, with a reinforcement
of male and female convicts; two free men, as gardeners; a midshipman from the
Sirius, to fill up the vacancy occasioned by the death of Mr. Cunningham; a
sergeant, corporal, and six privates; and a supply of necessaries for eighteen
months.

4th. A convict, named Cooper Handley, who went out with an armed party of
marines to collect wild vegetables and sweet tea, strayed from them, and was
afterward met by the natives, who murdered and mutilated him in a shocking
manner. The natives were so near our men, that they heard them very distinctly
shouting and making a great noise, yet were unable to overtake them in the
pursuit. In the evening, a party of soldiers and convicts were sent out to bury
the deceased.

10th. A general court martial was convened by warrant from the governor. When
the members, with the deputy judge advocate, were assembled, they gave it as
their opinion, that notwithstanding the governor has full power and authority
to grant and hold court martials among regular troops; yet, as a corpse of
marines, under the influence of a particular code of laws, and instructions
from the Admiralty, and only amenable to that board, they could not proceed to
trial; the board of Admiralty not having delegated any part of their authority
over the marine corpse, particularly that of holding court martials, to the
governor; neither did any part of the act of Parliament for forming a colony in
New South Wales contain directions relative to that subject. The marine
instructions, with respect to court martials, state, that no general court
martial can be ordered but by the Lord High Admiral, or three commissioners for
executing the office; nor any sentence be carried into execution until approved
of by him or them, unless the marines, as in America, should be, by act of
Parliament, considered as a part of the army; which is not the case here. They
are truly and literally governed and regulated by the same rules and
instructions as the marine divisions at Chatham, Portsmouth, or Plymouth; and,
consequently, their proceeding to trial would not only be illegal, but a direct
insult to the governance and power of the Board under which they act, and to
whom every appeal from them must come; unless an act of Parliament, in that
case made and provided, otherwise directs.

28th. A marine went to gather some greens and herbs, but has not returned; as
he was unarmed, it is feared that he has been met and murdered by the natives.

31st. A sergeant and four privates, who had been missing three days, returned.
They were sent by the commanding officer to look for the marine, and lost
themselves in the woods. In the evening of this day we had very loud thunder,
and a shower of hail; many of the hailstones were measured, and found to be
five-eights of an inch in diameter.

November 2d. This day more hail; the weather dark and gloomy, with dreadful
lightning. The mercury during the whole of the day stood between 66 and 68.

7th. A criminal court sentenced a convict to five hundred lashes for stealing
soap, the property of another convict, value eight pence.

10th. The Golden Grove returned from Norfolk Island with a few spars, and some
timber for the governor. While she lay there, she was obliged to cut her cable
and stand to sea, there being (as before observed) no harbor in the whole
island, where a ship can ride in safety. The master of the ship was swamped in
the surf and nearly lost, with his boat and crew.

11th. Thomas Bulmore, a private marine, died in consequence of the blows which
he received during a battle with one of his companions; who is to be tried for
his life, on the 17th instant, by a criminal court. So small is our number, and
so necessary is every individual who composes it, for one purpose or another,
that the loss of even a single man may truly be considered as an irreparable
disadvantage!

The preceding is all the account I am able at present to send you of the
territories of New South Wales, and its productions. The unsettled state in
which you must naturally suppose every thing, as yet, to remain, will not
permit me to be as copious as I could wish; but, by the next dispatch, I hope
to be able to send you no inconsiderable additions to the Natural History, and
at the same time such further information concerning our affairs here as during
the interim shall have occurred.

APPENDIX.
The Banksia serrata in Bud
depiction of plant

NATURAL HISTORY.
THE DIFFERENT SPECIES OF BANKSIA.
THE finest new genus hitherto found in New Holland has been destined by
Linnoeus, with great propriety, to transmit to posterity the name of Sir Joseph
Banks, who first discovered it in his celebrated voyage round the world. It is
indeed one of the most magnificent genera with which we are acquainted, being
nearly allied to Protea and Embothrium in habit and botanical characters, but
sufficiently distinguished from both by its fruit. Four species of Banksia are
described in the Supplementum Plantarum of Linnoeus; specimens of which we have
seen in his Herbarium now in thepossession of Dr. Smith of Marlborough Street;
and we have deposited with the same gentleman specimens of all the plants we
are about to describe in this work. Dr. Gaertner, in his admirable book on
fruits and seeds, has figured the fruit of several Banksias, some of them
described by Linnaeus. Having had his plates, with the names, engraved before
he saw the Supplementum of Linnaeus, his nomenclature differs from that of the
last mentioned author; but he quotes his synonyms in the letter press. We
mention this, that he may not be accused of wantonly changing Linnaean names,
and that for the worse, as it would appear to any one uninformed of this
circumstance.

The character of the genus is very badly made out in Linnaeus. Gaertner has
greatly corrected it, but it is still a doubt whether the flowers are
constantly monopetalous or tetrapetalous, nor have we materials sufficient to
remove this difficulty. All we can say is, that Banksia is next in natural
arrangement to Protea, from which it is essentially distinguished by having an
hard woody bivalve capsule, containing two winged seeds, with a moveable
membranous partition between them. It is strangely misplaced in Murray's 14th
edition of Systema Vegetabilium, being put between Ludwigia and Oldenlandia!

Mr. White has sent imperfect specimens and seeds of The Banksia serrata in
Flower
depiction of plant The Banksia serrata in Fruit
depiction of plant four species of Banksia, which we have endeavored to
settle as follows: 1. B. serrata. Linn. Supp. 126. B. conchifera. Gaertn. 221.
t. 48.


This is the most stately of the genus. Its trunk is thick and rugged. Leaves
alternate, standing thick about the ends of the branches on short footstalks,
narrow, obtuse, strongly serrated, smooth and of a bright green color above,
beneath opaque and whitish, with a strong rib running through their middle. A
very large cylindrical spike of flowers terminates each branch. Most of the
flowers are abortive, a few only in each spike producing ripe seed. The form of
the capsules may be understood from the figure, which represents a whole spike
in fruit, about half the natural size. The capsules are covered with thick
down. Another plate of the plant in flower shows the curved position in which
the style is held by the corolla; the increase of the former in length being
greater and more rapid than that of the latter.

2 B. pyriformis. Gaertn. 220. t. 47. f. 1.

This species was unknown to Linnaeus; and as Gaertner has given no specific
character of it, we beg leave to offer the following:

B. floribus solitariis, capsulis ovatis pubescentibus, foliis lanceolatis
integerrimis glabris.

Banksia with solitary flowers, ovate downy capsules, and lance-shaped entire
smooth leaves.

The capsules are larger than in any other known species. In the figure they
are represented somewhat smaller than the life; but the seed is given as large
as life.

3. B. gibbosa. B. dactyloides Gaertn. 221. t. 47. f. 2.?

B. floribus solitariis, capsulis ovatis gibbosis rugosis, foliis teretibus.

Banksia with solitary flowers; ovate, tumid, rugged capsules; and cylindrical
leaves.

We suspect this to be the Banksia dactyloides of Gaertner; but if so, his
figure is by no means a good one; as he is generally very accurate, we are
rather inclined to believe The Banksia pyriformis.
depiction of plant The Banksia. 2 The Banksia gibbosa.
depiction of plant ours a different plant, and have therefore given it a new
name. The leaves are very peculiar, being perfectly cylindrical, about two
inches long and one line in diameter, pale, green and smooth. The flowers we
have not seen.

Fig. 1. of the same Plate represents the capsule of another Banksia, belonging
to those which bear the flowers in spikes, but we cannot with certainty
determine the species. The capfules are smooth, at least when ripe, and a
little shining. We think this is neither the B. serrata, integrifolia, nor
dentata of Linnaeus, nor probably his ericifolia; so that it seems to be a
species hitherto undescribed. The leaves and flowers we have not seen.

THE PEPPERMINT TREE. EUCALYPTUS PIPERITA.
An Eucalyptus obliqua, L'Heritier Sert. Angl. p. 18? (See Plate annexed.)

This tree grows to the height of more than an hundred feet, and is above
thirty feet in circumference. The bark is very smooth, like that of the poplar.
The younger branches are long and slender, angulated near the top, but as they
grow older the angles disappear. Their bark is smooth, and of a reddish brown.
The leaves are alternate, lanceolate, pointed, very entire, smooth on both
sides, and remarkably unequal, or oblique, at their base; the veins alternate
and not very conspicuous. The whole surface of both sides of the leaves is
marked with numerous minute resinous spots, in which the essential oil resides.
The footstalks are about half an inch in length, round on the under side,
angular above, quite smooth. The flowers we have not seen. What Mr. WHITE has
sent as the ripe capsules of this tree (although not attached to the specimens
of the leaves) grow in clusters, from six to eight in each, sessile The
Peppermint Tree.
depiction of plant and conglomerated. These clusters are supported on angular
alternate footstalks, which form a kind of panicle. Each capsule is about the
size of an hawthorn berry, globular, but as it were cut off at the top, rugged
on the outside, hard and woody, and of a dark brown color. At the top is a
large orifice, which shows the internal part of the capsule divided into four
cells, and having a square column in the center, from which the partitions of
the cell arise. These partitions extend to the rim of the capsule, and
terminate in four small projections, which look like the teeth of a calyx. The
seeds are numerous, small, and angular.

The name of Peppermint Tree has been given to this plant by Mr. WHITE on
account of the very great resemblance between the essential oil drawn from its
leaves and that obtained from the Peppermint (Mentha piperita) which grows in
England. This oil was found by Mr. WHITE to be much more efficacious in
removing all cholicky complaints than that of the English Peppermint, which he
attributes to its being less pungent and more aromatic. A quart of the oil has
been sent by him to Mr. Wilson.

The tree above described appears to be undoubtedly of the same genus with that
cultivated in some greenhouses in England, which Mr. L'Heritier has described
in his Sertum Anglicum by the name of Eucalyptus obliqua, though it is commonly
called in the gardens Metrosideros obliqua; but we dare not assert it to be the
same species, nor can this point be determined till the flowers and every part
of both be seen and compared; we have compared the best specimens we could
procure of each, and find no specific difference. The Eucalyptus obliqua has,
when dried, an aromatic flavor somewhat similar to our plant. We have remarked
indeed innumerable minute white spots, besides the resinous ones, on both
surfaces of the leaves in some specimens of the garden plant, which are not to
be seen in ours, and the branches of the former are rough, with small scaly
tubercles. But how far these are constant we cannot tell. The obliquity in the
leaves, one side being shorter at the base than the other, as well as somewhat
narrower all the way up, as in the Begonia nitida of the Hortus Kewensis, is
remarkable in both plants.

The figure represents a branch of the Peppermint Tree in leaf: on one side of
it part of a leaf separate, bearing the gall of some insect; on the other the
fruit above described.

TEA TREE OF NEW SOUTH WALES. MELALEUCA? TRINERVIA.
This is a small shrub, very much branched. The bark full of longitudinal
fissures, and easily separated from the branches. Leaves on short footstalks,
alternate, lanceolate, pointed, entire, about three quarters of an inch in
length, smooth on both sides, marked with three longitudinal ribs, and
reticulated with transverse veins; they are also full of resinous spots, the
seat of an aromatic essential oil. The flowers we have not seen, nor can we
determine with certainty the genus of this plant. It most nearly approaches the
Leptospermum virgatum of Forster, referred by the younger Linnaeus, perhaps
improperly, to Melaleuca. At least it may safely be determined to belong to the
same genus with the Melaleuca virgata Linn. Supp. though a distinct species.
The specific difference between them is, that the leaves of our plant have
three ribs, whereas. M. virgata has leaves perfectly destitute of ribs or
veins. Hence we judge the figure and description of Rumphius, Herb. Amboin. V.
2. t. 18. to belong rather to our Tea Tree, than to M. virgata; and if this
conjecture be right, the plants are still further distinguished by the
inflorescence, which in M. virgata is an umbel, whereas in the figure above
mentioned the flowers are solitary.

a. Represents a leaf slightly magnified.

SWEET TEA PLANT. SMILAX? GLYCIPHYLLA.
This is a tree or shrub whose leaves only we have seen, but from them we judge
it to belong to the genus of Smilax. For want of the stem we cannot settle its
specific character. These leaves are about two inches long, ovato-lanceolate,
pointed, entire, marked with three longitudinal ribs, and many transverse
elevated veins, smooth and shining above, glaucous beneath, with a thick
cartilaginous edge of the substance of the ribs. The leaves have the taste of
liquorice root accompanied with bitter. They are said to make a kind of tea,
not unpleasant to the taste, and good for the scurvy. The plant promises much
in the last respect, from its bitter as a tonic, as well as the quantity of
saccharine matter it contains.

Leaves of this plant are represented on the same plate with the Tea Tree. A.
is the front, B. the back of a leaf.

The Tea Tree of New South Wales
depiction of plant

Bark of the Red Gum Tree
depiction of bark
THE RED GUM TREE. EUCALYPTUS RESINIFERA.
Floribus pedunculatis, calyptra conica acuta.

(See Plate annexed)

This is a very large and losty tree, much exceeding the English Oak in size.
The wood is extremely brittle, and, from the large quantity of resinous gum
which it contains, is of little use but for firewood. Of the leaves Mr. WHITE
has given no account, nor sent any specimens. The flowers grow in little
clusters, or rather umbels, about ten in each, and every flower has a proper
partial footstalk, about a quarter of an inch in length, besides the general
one. The general footstalk is remarkably compressed (anceps), and the partial
ones are so in some degree. We have perceived nothing like bracteae, or floral
leaves. The flowers appear to be yellowish, and are of a very singular
structure. The calyx is hemispherical, perfectly entire in the margin, and
afterward becomes the capsule. On the top of the calyx, rather within the
margin, stands a conical pointed calyptra, of the same color with the calyx,
and about as long as that and the footstalk taken together. This calyptra,
which is the essential mark of the genus, and differs from that of the
Eucalyptus obliqua of L'Heritier only in being conical and acute, instead of
hemispherical, is perfectly entire, and never splits or divides, though it is
analogous to the corolla of other plants. When it is removed, we perceive a
great number of red stamina, standing in a conical mass, which before the
calyptra was taken off, were completely covered by it, and filled its inside.
The Antherae are small and red. In the center of these stamina is a single
style or pointal, rising a little above them, and terminated by a blunt stigma.
The stamina are very resinous and aromatic. They are inserted into the margin
of the calyx, so that the genus is properly placed by Mr. L'Heritier in the
class Icosandria. These stamina and style being removed, and the germen cut
across about the middle of the calyx, it appears to be divided into three
cells, and no more, as far as we have examined, each containing the rudiments
of one or more seeds, for the number cannot with certainty be determined.
Whether the calyptra in this species falls off, as in that described by Mr.
L'Heritier, or be permanent, we cannot tell. From one specimen sent by Mr.
WHITE, the latter should seem to be the case; and that the calyx swells and
rises around it nearly to the top, making a pearshaped fruit, with the point of
the calyptra sticking out at its apex; but as this appears only in a single
flower, and none of the others are at all advanced toward ripening seed, the
flower in question may possibly be in a morbid state, owing to the attacks of
some insect. ( See Fig. g.) Future observations will determine this point. We
have been the more diffuse in our description on account of the singularity of
the genus, and the value of the plant.

On making incisions in the trunk of this tree, large quantities of red
resinous juice are obtained, sometimes even more than sixty gallons from a
single tree. When this juice is dried, it becomes a very powerfully astringent
gum-resin, of a red color, much resembling that known in the shops by the name
of Kino, and, for all medical purposes, fully as efficacious. Mr. WHITE
administered it to a great number of patients in the dysentery, which prevailed
much soon after the landing of the convicts, and in no one instance found it to
fail. This gum-resin dissolves almost entirely in spirit of wine, to which it
gives a blood red tincture. Water dissolves about one sixth part only, and the
watery solution is of a bright red. Both these solutions are powerfully
astringent.

The Plate represents a portion of the bark of the Eucalyptus resinifera, with
the fructification annexed.

a. Is a bunch of the flowers the size of nature. b. The flower, its calyptra,
or hood, being removed. c. Calyx. d. Stamina. e. Pistillum. f. Calyptra
separate. g. The enlarged flower, which we suspect to be in a diseased state.
THE YELLOW RESIN TREE.
This is about the size of an English walnut tree. Its trunk grows pretty
straight for about fourteen or sixteen feet, after which it branches out into
long spiral leaves, which hang down on all sides, and resemble those of the
larger kinds of grass or sedge. From the center of the head of leaves arises a
single footstalk, eighteen or twenty feet in height, perfectly straight and
erect, very much resembling the sugar cane, and terminating in a spike of a
spiral form, not unlike an ear of wheat. This large stem or footstalk is used
by the natives for making spears and fish gigs, being pointed with the teeth of
fish or other animals, some of which are represented, in the plate of
Implements, from originals now in Mr. Wilson's possession.

But the most valuable produce of this plant seems to be its resin, the
properties of which vie with those of the most fragrant balsams. This resin
exudes spontaneously from the trunk; the more readily, if incisions are made in
its bark. It is of a yellow color; fluid at first, but being inspissated in
the sun, it acquires a solid form. Burnt on hot coals, it emits a smell very
much resembling that of a mixture of balsam of Tolu and benzoin, somewhat
approaching to storax. It is perfectly soluble in spirit of wine, but not in
water, nor even in essential oil of turpentine, unless it be digested in a
strong heat. The varnish which it makes with either is very weak, and of little
use. With respect to its medicinal qualities, Mr. White has found it, in many
cases, a good pectoral medicine, and very balsamic. It is not obtainable in so
great abundance as the red gum produced by the Eucalyptus resinifera.

The plant which produces the yellow gum seems to be perfectly unknown to
botanists, but Mr. White has communicated no specimens by which its genus or
even class could be determined.

The Crested Cockatoo.
depiction of bird

THE CRESTED COCKATOO. PSITTACUS CRISTATUS. Lin.
I cannot regard this bird in any other view than as a variety of the Psittacus
Cristatus of Linnaeus, or large white Cockatoo, which has been described by
almost all ornithologists, and figured in several works of Natural History. The
bird seems liable to great variation both as to size and color; the white in
some being of a much purer appearance than in others, and the yellow on the
crest and tail more predominant. All the varieties yet known agree in having
the beak and legs blackish. The individual specimen here figured seemed of a
somewhat slenderer form than usual. The color not a pure white, but slightly
tinged on the upper parts, and particularly on the neck and shoulders, with
dusky. The feathers on the front white, but the long lanceolate feathers below
them, which form the crest, of a pale jonquil-yellow. The tail white above, and
pale yellow beneath; as are also the wings.

THE WHITE FULICA. FULICA ALRA.
Fullea alba, rostro fronteque rubris, humeris spinosts, pedibus flavis?

Corpus magnitudine sere gallinae domesticae. Humeri spina parva in curvata.

In specimine exsiccato pedes flavi; sed fortasse in viva ave rostro
concolores.

White Fulica, with the bill and front red, shoulders spined, legs and feet
yellow?

The body is about the size of a domestic fowl. The shoulders are furnished
with a small crooked spine. In the dried specimen the legs and feet are yellow;
but, perhaps, in the living bird might have been of the same color with the
beak.

THIS bird is the only species of its genus yet known of a white color. The
birds of this genus rank in the order called by Linnaeus Grallae, and most of
the species frequent watery places. To this genus belongs the well-known bird
called the Moor-hen, or Fulica chloropus; as also a very beautiful exotic
species called the Purple Water-hen, which is the Fulica porphyrio of Linnaeus,
and which in shape much resembles the White Fulica now described.

The White Fulica.
depiction of bird

The Southern Motacilla.
depiction of bird

THE SOUTHERN MOTACILLA. MOTACILLA AUSTRALIS.
M. cinera, subtus flava.

N. B. Gula fere albida.

Ash-colored Motacilla, yellow beneath.

N. B. The throat inclines a little to whitish.

IT is not perhaps absolutely clear whether this bird should be referred to the
genus Motacilla, or Muscicapa: the probability, however, is in favor of
Motacilla.

The bird is about the size of the Motacilla flava of Linnaeus, or yellow
wagtail, but seems of a stouter make. The beak is of a pale color, and the
legs brown. The two middle tail-feathers have the very extremities slightly
marked with white.

The genus Motacilla is extremely numerous, and it is not easy to fix upon a
proper or expressive trivial name. Such names should, if possible, convey some
idea either of the color, or some other circumstance relative to the manners
or habits of the animal; but in new species, whose history is unknown, this is
impracticable. The trivial name, therefore, of Australis may be allowable,
though it cannot be regarded as sufficiently distinctive.

WATTLED BEE-EATER, OR MEROPS, Female.
The female Bea-eater is stouter in the body and in the legs, more brilliant in
the plumage, the bill more curved: and the tail cuneated and tipped with white;
but shorter than in the male. The feathers on the head are small, each tipped
with white, and somewhat erected: it has no wattles, but on the chin the
feathers are dark, long, and hang diffusely.

The general color of the bird is a blackish chocolate, lighter on the breast,
and toward the vent; darker on the abdomen and toward the tip of the tail.
The feathers on the neck and breast have each a streak of white through the
middle. On the wing the outer long feathers are slightly edged with whitish,
those of the middle region round-ended and tipped only; and on the upper part
of the wing each feather bears a streakd own the middle, suddenly dilating at
the tip.

The legs yellower than those of the male; claws blackish.

The Crested Goatsucker.
depiction of bird

THE CRESTED GOAT-SUCKER. CAPRIMULGUS CRISTATUS.
C. cinereo-fuscus, subtus pallidus, remigibus caudaque fasciis pallidis
numerosis, vibrissis utrinque erecto-cristatis.

Corpus supra punctis minutissimis subalbidis irroratum.

Cinereous-brown Goat-sucker, pale beneath; with the long feathers of the wings
and tail sprinkled with numerous pale fasciae, and the vibrissae (or bristles
on the upper mandible) standing up on each side, in the manner of a crest.

The body on the upper part is sprinkled with very small whitish specks.

The birds of this genus are remarkable for the excessive wideness of the
mouth, though the beak is very small; in their manner of life, as well as
general structure, they are very nearly allied to the genus Hirundo, or
swallow; and indeed may be regarded as a kind of nocturnal swallows. They feed
on insects, particularly on beetles. The name Caprimulgus, or Goat-sucker, was
given to this genus from an idea that prevailed amongst the more ancient
naturalists of their sometimes sucking the teats of goats and sheep; a
circumstance in itself so wildly improbable, that it would scarce deserve to be
seriously mentioned, were it not that so accurate a naturalist as the late
celebrated Scopoli seems in some degree to have given credit to it.

THE SCINCOID, or SKING-FORMED LIZARD. LACERTA SCINCOIDES.
This Lizard comes nearer to the Scineus than any I am acquainted with, but is
still a distinct species.

In the two specimens sent over by Mr. WHITE, one had a process on the upper
part of the tail, near the top, almost like a supernumerary or forked tail, but
which I rather conceive to be natural; and as this one was a male, I am
inclined to think that this is peculiar to that sex, which would in some degree
have been more clearly made out, if the other, which had not this process, had
proved a female; but as its being gutted and stuffed before I saw it, prevented
my examination, this remains still to be proved: but what makes the conjecture
very probable, is, that it is mentioned by Mr. WHITE that some are without, and
some with this process. Now if it was a monster, arising either from accident,
or originally so formed, it would hardly be so common as to be taken notice of.
The tail is longer than that of the Scincuses, and not so taper; the animal is
of a dark iron-grey color, which is of different shades in different parts,
forming a kind of stripes across the back and tail. The Shine-formed Lizard, 2
Eggs, 3 The Egg as broken, 4 The Young
The scales of the cuticle are strong, but not so much so as those of the
Scincus. Its legs are short and strong, covered with the same kind of scales as
the body, but the scales of the feet are not. On the cuticle are small knobs,
as if it were studded.

The toes on each foot are pretty regular; the difference in length not great,
and the same on both the fore and hind foot; which is not the case with the
Sincus, it having a long middle toe.

There are small short nails on each toe; on their upper surface they are
covered with a series of scales, which go half round; like a coat of mail.

Just within the verge of the external opening of the ear, on the anterior
edge, is a membrane, covering about one third of it, which is scolloped on its
loose or unattached edge; this can hardly be called an external ear, nor can it
be called the reserve, viz. a valve; but if it is an assistant to hearing,
which it most probably is, it should be considered as the external ear.

The teeth are in a row on each side of each jaw, becoming gradually larger
backwards. They are short above the gum, and rounded off, fitted for breaking
or bruising of substances, more than cutting or tearing.

THE MURICATED LIZARD. LACERTA MURICATA.
L. cauda tereti longa, corpore griseo, squamis carinatis mucronatis.

Corpus supra fasciis tranversis fuscis; subtus pallidum. Valde affinis Agamae
et Calotae.

L. with long rounded tail, body greyish, scales carinated and sharp pointed.

The animal on its upper part is fasciated with transverse dusky bars, and is
pale beneath. This species is very nearly allied to the L. Agama and Calotes.

This species measures somewhat more than a foot in length. The general color
is a brownish gray, and the whole upper part of the animal is marked with
transverse dusky bars, which are most conspicuous on the legs and tail. The
tail is very long; the scales on every part of the animal are of a sharp form,
and furnished with a prominent line on the upper surface; toward the back part
of the head the scales almost run into a sort of weak spines; the feet are
furnished with moderately strong, sharp claws.

1. snake. 2. Muricated Lizard


1. Ribbon Lizard. 2. Broad-tailed Lizard.


THE RIBBONED LIZARD. LACERTA TAENIOLATA.
L. laevis, cauda tereti longa, corpore supra taeniolis albis nigrisque, subtus
albo.

Affinis L. lemniscatae. Crura supra albo nigroque striata: digiti unguiculati:
aures conspicuae: squamae totius corporis laevissimae, nitidissimae, cauda vix
distinct striata, subferruginea.

This is a very elegant species. The length of the animal is about six inches
and a half; and is distinguished by a number of parallel stripes, or bands of
black and white, disposed longitudinally throughout the whole upper part of the
body, except that on the tail the bands are not carried much above the base;
the remainder being of a pale ferruginous color. In some specimens a tinge of
this color is also visible on the back; the lower part of the body is of a
yellowish white; the tail is perfectly round, of a great length, and gradually
tapers to the extremity.

THE BROAD-TAILED LIZARD. LACERTA PLATURA.
L. cauda depresso-plana lanceolata, margin subaculeato, corpore griseofusco
scabro.

Ungues quasi duplicati. Lingua brevis, lata, integra, seu non forficata; apice
autem leniter emarginato.

L. with a depressed lanceolate tail, almost spiny on the margin; the body of a
dusky gray color, and rough.

The claws appear as if double; the tongue is short and broad, not forked, but
slightly emarginated at the tip.

This Lizard is strikingly distinguished by the uncommon form of its tail,
which is of a depressed or flattened shape, with very thin edges, and gradually
tapers to a sharp extremity. This depressed form of the tail is extremely rare
in Lizards; there being scarcely more than two other species yet known in which
a similar structure takes place. One of these is the L. Caudiverbera of
Linnaeus, in which the tail appears to be not only depressed, but pinnated on
the sides. Another species with a depressed tail has been figured by the Count
De Cepede, in his History of Oviparous Quadrupeds.

The present species is about four inches and a half in length. The head is
large in proportion; and the whole upper surface of the animal is beset with
small tubercles, which in some parts, especially toward the back of the head,
and about the tail, are lengthened into a sharpened point. The lower surface is
of a pale color, or nearly white.

THE BLUE FROG. RANA CAERULEA.
R. caerulea, subtus griseo-punctata, pedibus tetradactylis, posterioribus
palmatis.

Magnitudo Ranae temporariae.

Blue Frog, speckled beneath with greyish; the feet divided into four toes; the
hind-feet webbed.

Size of the common Frog.

Blue Frogs.
depiction of frogs

Plate A.


Plate A. annexed, represents a production of which Mr. WHITE has sent no
description, nor can we give any satisfactory account of it. This is said to
come from the root of the Yellow Gum Tree, and is a congeries of scales,
cemented, as it were, together by the gum. Whether they are the bases of the
leaves of that tree, or part of a parasitical plant growing upon it, future
observations must determine. The latter supposition seems to be countenanced by
the appearance of fibrous roots at the base of this singular production.

THE WHITE HAWK. FALCO ALBUS.
Falco-albus, rostro nigro, cera pedibusque flavis.

White Hawk, with black beak, cere and legs yellow.

This species, in shape and general appearance, seems very nearly allied to the
bird called, in England, the Hen-Harrier, which is the Falco cyaneus of
Linnaeus. It is very nearly of the same size, and the legs and thighs are of a
slender form, as in that species.

The whole plumage is white, whithout any variegation.

The White Hawke^


The White Vented Crow.
depiction of bird

THE WHITE-VENTED CROW. CORVUS GRACULINUS.
Corvus niger, remigum rectricumque basi apiceque caudoe albis.

Black Crow, with the bases of the wing and tail feathers, and the tip of the
tail, white.

This bird is about the size of a Magpye; and in shape is not much unlike one,
except that the tail is not cuneated, but has all the feathers of equal length.
The bird is entirely black, except the vent, the base of the tail feathers, the
base of the wing feathers, and the extremity of the tail, which are white. The
small part of the white base of the wing feathers gives the appearance of a
white spot when the wings are closed. The beak is very strong; the upper
mandible slightly emarginated near the tip, and the lower mandible is of a pale
color toward the tip. The capistrum reversum, or set of bristles, which are
situated forward on the base of the upper mandible in most of the birds of this
genus, is not very conspicuous in this species; but the whole habit and general
appearance of the bird sufficiently justify its being regarded as a species of
Corvus.

FULIGINOUS PETERIL. PROCELLARIA FULIGINOSA.
Procellaria fuliginosa, rostro albido.

Fuliginous Peteril, with whitish beak.

This is probably nothing more than a variety of the Procellaria AEquinoctialis
of Linnaeus. Its size is nearly that of a raven. The whole bird is of a deep
sooty brown, or blackish; except that on the chin is a small patch of white,
running down a little on each side from the lower mandible. The beak is of a
yellowish white.

Fuliginous Peteril.
depiction of bird

The Variegated Lizard.
depiction of lizard

VARIEGATED LIZARD. LACERTA VARIA.
Lacerta cauda longa carinata, corpore maculis transversis variis.

Lizard with long carinated tail, the body transversely variegated.

This Lizard approaches so extremely near to the Lacerta Monitor of Linnaeus,
or Monitory Lizard, as to make it doubtful whether it be not in reality a
variety of that species. The body is about 15 inches in length, and the tail is
considerably longer. The animal is of a black color, variegated with yellow
marks and streaks of different shapes, and running in a transverse direction.
On the legs are rows of transverse round spots; and on the tail broad alternate
bars of black and yellow. In some specimens the yellow was much paler than in
others, and nearly whitish.

THE LONG-SPINED CHAETODON. CHAETODON ARMATUS.
Chaetodon albescens, corpore sasciis septem nigris, spinis pinnae dorsalis sex
tertia longissima.

Whitish Chaetodon, with seven black stripes on the body, six spines on the
dorsal fin, the third very long.

This appears to be a new and very elegant species of the genus Chaetodon. The
total length of the specimen was not more than four inches. The color a
silvery white, darker, and of a bluish tinge, on the back; the transverse
fasciae, or bands, of a deep black; the fins and tail of a pale brown. The
third ray or spine of the first dorsal fin is much longer than the rest.

1. The Pungent Choeledon. 2 Granulated Balistes.
depiction of fish

Muricated. Lizard, variety.
depiction of lizard

MURICATED LIZARD. LACERTA MURICATA. Var.
This variety chiefly differs from that represented in a preceding Plate, p.
244, in having the head less distinctly acculeated, and the scales on the body
not so strongly carinated.

Figure 1. in the above mentioned Plate is a small Snake, about a foot in
length, of a white color, tinged with ferruginous; the body marked by distant
black bands, and each scale on the back marked with a small black speck.

SUPERB WARBLERS. MOTACILLA SUPERBA.
Motacilla nigra, remigibus fuscis, abdomine albo, front genisque caeruleis.

Black Warbler, with the long feathers of the wings brown; the belly white; the
forehead and cheeks blue.

This beautiful species is generally found in the state described in the
specific character; but it appears to be subject to great variety, two of which
are exhibited; the lower and largest specimen having not only more blue on the
head than usual, but also a patch of brilliant blue on each side the back, and
a mark of reddish brown or orange near the shoulders.

The upper specimen is considerably less than that beneath, and has still more
blue upon the head; the beak and legs smaller in proportion, darker in color,
and the latter almost black. The head is crowned with a small crest of bright
azure; the cheek, and upper part of the back and wings, are of the same color;
the lower parts of each brown. The outer feathers of the wing whitish, near the
shoulder marked with brown. The head, neck, and breast deep black; abdomen
white, faintly tinged with dusky. Tail black, highly cuneated. In this bird the
blue is most lucid, composed of short, stiff feathers, resembling fish-scales,
with shining surfaces; but it has not the beautiful scapulary of prismatic
violet-colour, found in the other. Legs, feet, and claws black, and extremely
slender.

Superb Warblers
depiction of birds

Motacilla
depiction of bird

MOTACILLA, OR WARBLER. MOTACILLA PUSILLA.
M. fusca, subtus pallida, caude prope apicem fascia fusca.

Brown Warbler, pale beneath, with a band of brown toward the tip of the tail.

This little bird is about the same size with the Superb Warbler, and has
evidently some affinity with that species, but (exclusive of the difference in
color) the tail is not in the least cuneated, but even at the end.

SERPENTS.
The species of Serpents are much less easily ascertained than those of most
other animals; not only on account of the great number of species, but from the
innumerable variations to which many of them are subject in point of color.
Amongst those lately received from New Holland, the following are the most
remarkable.

SNAKE, No. 1, about three feet and a half in length, of a bluish ash color,
coated with scales rather large than small, and having nearly the same general
proportion with the common English snake, or Coluber Natrix of Linnaeus.

SNAKE, No. 2, nearly three feet in length, slender, and of a tawny yellowish
color, with numerous indistinct bars of dark brown, and somewhat irregular, or
flexuous, in their disposition.

Snake, No 1
depiction of snake

Snake, No 2
depiction of snake

snake, No. 5
depiction of snake

snakes.
depiction of snakes

SNAKE, No. 5, upwards of eight feet in length, of a darkish color, varied
with spots and marks of a dull yellow: the belly also is of a yellowish color.
The scales are small in proportion to the size of the animal; the tail
gradually tapers to a point.

SNAKES. See Plate containing Two Figures.
No. 1. Small, about fourteen inches in length, coated with very small scales,
and varied with irregular markings of yellow on a dark brown or blackish
ground. It is probably a young snake.

No. 2. Small, about fifteen inches in length, and fasciated with alternate
bars of black and white.

None of the above Serpents appear to be of a poisonous nature: they belong to
the Linnaean genus Coluber; yet No. 5. has some characters of the genus Anguis.

INSECTS.
The Insects received from New Holland are: No. 1. The large Scolopendra, or
Centipede (Scolopendra Morsitans Lin.) The specimens seemed of a somewhat
darker color than usual. See Plate of large Scolopendra, etc. annexed. No. 2.
A smaller Spider, of a dark color; with a small thorax and large round
abdomen, and with the joints of the legs marked with whitish. No. 3. A small
species of Crab, or Cancer, of a pale color, and which should be ranked
amongst the Cancri brachyuri in the Linnaean division of the genus. No. 4. A
Caterpillar, beset with branchy prickles, and consequently belonging to some
species of Papilio or butterfly.


Large scolopendra 2 spider 3 Crab, 4 Caterpillar


LIZARD EGGS.
With the specimens of Lacertae, several Eggs were received. They were of an
oval shape, and of a livid brown color, whitish within and not much larger
than pease. On opening them the young Lizards were extracted, perfectly formed,
and in all respects resembling the Scincoid Lizard, except that the tail was
longer in proportion. See Plate of the Skinc-formed Lizard, Fig. 2, 3, and 4,
which are given of the natural size. Fig. 1. represents the Eggs in the
proportion they bear to the adult specimen.

SMALL PAROQUET. PSITTACUS PUSILLUS.
Psittacus submacrourus viridis, capistro rectricumque basi rubris.

Cauda subtus flavescens, basi rubra. Remiges latere interiore fuscae.
Magnitudo Psittaci Porphyrionis. Rostrum subflavescens, seu fusco-slavescens
Pedes subfusci

Green Paroquet, with somewhat lengthened tail; the feathers round the beak,
and the base of the tail feathers, red.

About the size of the violet-coloured Otaheite Paroquet. The beak is
yellowish, or brownish yellow. The feet dusky. The tail feathers yellowish
beneath, and red at the base. The wing feathers dusky on the interior margin.

The Small Paroquet.
depiction of bird

The Red Shouldered Paroquet.
depiction of bird

RED SHOULDERED PAROQUET. PSITTACUS DISCOLOR.
Psittacus macrourus viridis, rectricibus basi ferrugineis, humeris subtus
sanguineis.

Long tailed Green Parrot, with the tail feathers ferruginous toward the base,
the shoulders blood-red beneath.

This species, which appears to be new, is of that sort generally termed
Paroquets. It is about ten inches in length: the general color of the bird a
fine green: the outer edge of the wing, near the shoulders, blue: the edge of
the shoulders deep red; the under part the same. On the sides of the body a
patch of red: round the beak a few red feathers: long feathers of the wings of
a deep blackish blue, edged slightly with yellow: tail deep ferruginous toward
the base, each feather becoming blue at the tip: bill and feet pale brown.

CYPRINACEOUS LABRUS. LABRUS CYPRINACEUS.
Labrus corpore albescente.

Labrus with whitish body.

The length of this fish was about six inches: the color whitish: scales large.

From the bad condition of the specimen it was not possible to make so accurate
an examination of its characters as might have been wished.

1. Cyprinaeleus Labrus. 2. The Hippocampus or Seahorse.


The Doubtful Lophius.


DOUBTFUL LOPHIUS. LOPHIUS DUBIOUS.
Lophius nigricans, subtus pallidus.

Blackish Lophius, pale beneath.

This fish was about six inches in length; its general color a very deep
brown, almost black; the mouth extremely wide, and furnished with several row,
of slender sharp teeth. On opening it many ova were found, which were very
large in proportion to the fish.

SOUTHERN COTTUS. COTTUS AUSTRALIS.
Cottus albidus, capite aculeato, corpore fasciis transversis lividis.

Whitish Cottus, with aculeated head, body marked with transverse livid bands.

This fish did not exceed four inches in length, and is sufficiently described
in its specific character.

1. The Southern Cottus. 2. The Flying-Fish
depiction of fish

DOUBTFUL, OR COMPRESSED SPARUS. SPARUS? COMPRESSUS.
Sparus? Argenteus, compressus.

Sparus? Of a silvery color, the body much compressed.

The specimen figured was nearly six inches in length; the color a silvery
white; scales of a moderate size, and the body much compressed. It seemed to
possess the characters of a Sparus, though they could scarce be determined with
sufficient certainty, from the bad condition of the specimen.

FASCIATED MULLET. MULLUS FASCIATUS.
Mullus subflavescens, fasciis longitudinalis fuscis.

Pale yellowish Mullet, with longitudinal brown bands.

Length about five inches: scales large.

1 Pasciated Mullet. 2 Doubtful sparus.
depiction of fish

The Non-descript Animals of New South Wales occupied a great deal of Mr.
WHITE'S attention, and he preserved several specimens of them in spirits, which
arrived in England in a very perfect state. There was no person to whom these
could be given with so much propriety as Mr. Hunter, he, perhaps, being most
capable of examining accurately their structure, and making out their place in
the scale of animals; and it is to him that we are indebted for the following
observations upon them; in which the anatomical structure is purposely avoided,
as being little calculated for the generality of readers of a work of this kind.

It is much to be wished that those gentlemen who are desirous of obliging
their friends, and promoting the study of Natural History, by sending home
specimens, would endeavor to procure all the information they can relating to
such specimens as they may collect, more especially animals. The subjects
themselves may be valuable, and may partly explain their connection with those
related to them, so as, in some measure, to establish their place in nature,
but they cannot do it entirely; they only give us the form and construction,
but leave us in other respects to conjecture, many of them requiring further
observations relative to their economy. A neglect in procuring this
information has left us, almost to this day, very ignorant of that part of the
Natural History of animals which is the most interesting. The Opossum is a
remarkable instance of this. There is something in the mode of propagation in
this animal that deviates from all others; and although known in some degree to
be extraordinary, yet it has never been attempted, where opportunity offered,
to complete the investigation. I have often endeavored to breed them in
England; I have bought a great many, and my friends have assisted me by
bringing them or sending them alive, yet never could get them to breed; and
although possessed of a great many facts respecting them, I do not believe my
information is sufficient to complete the system of propagation in this class.
In collecting animals, even the name given by the natives, if possible, should
be known; for a name, to a Naturalist, should mean nothing but that to which it
is annexed, having no allusion to any thing else; for when it has, it divides
the idea. This observation applies particularly to the animals which have come
from New Holland; they are, upon the whole, like no other that we yet know of;
but as they have parts in some respect similar to others, names will naturally
be given to them expressive of those similarities; which has already taken
place: for instance, one is called the Kangaroo Rat, but which should not be
called either Kangaroo or Rat; I have therefore adopted such names as can only
be appropriated to each particular animal, conveying no other idea.

Animals admit of being divided into great classes; but will not so distinctly
admit of subdivision, without interfering with each other. Thus the class
called Quadruped is so well marked, that even the whole is justly placed in the
same class. Birds the same; Amphibia (as they are called) the same; and so of
fish, etc.; but when we are subdividing these great classes into their
different tribes, genera, and species, then we find a mixture of properties;
some species of one tribe partaking of similar properties with a species of
another tribe.

Of the KANGAROO.
This animal (probably from its size) was the principal one taken notice of in
this island; the only parts at first brought home were some skins and sculls;
and I was favored with one of the sculls from Sir Joseph Banks. As the teeth
of such animals as are already known, in some degree point out their digestive
organs, I was in hopes that I might have been able to form an opinion of the
particular tribe of the animals already known, to which the Kangaroo should
belong; but the teeth did not accord with those of any one class of animals I
was acquainted with, therefore I was obliged to wait with patience till I could
get the whole: and in many of its other organs the deviation from other animals
is not less than in its teeth. In its mode of propagation it very probably
comes nearer to the Opossum than any other animal; although it is not at all
similar to it in other respects. Its hair is of a greyish brown color, similar
to that of the wild rabbit of Great Britain, is thick and long when the animal
is old; but it is A Kangaroo.
depiction of kangaroo late in growing, and when only begun to grow, it is like
a strong down; however, in some parts it begins earlier than others, as about
the mouth, etc. In all of the young Kangaroos yet brought home (although some
as large as a full grown cat), they have all the marks of a foetus; no hair;
ears lapped close over the head; no marks on the feet of having been used in
progressive motion. The large nail on the great toe sharp at the point; and the
sides of the mouth united something like the eyelids of a puppy just whelped,
having only a passage at the anterior part. This union of the two lips on the
sides is of a particular structure, it wears off as it grows up, and by the
time it is of the size of a small rabbit, disappears.

Of the Tooth of the Kangaroo.
The teeth of this animal are so singular, that it is impossible, from them, to
say what tribe it is of. There is a faint mixture in them, corresponding to
those of different tribes of animals.

Take the mouth at large, respecting the situation of the teeth, it would class
in some degree with the Scalpris dentata; This tribe includes the Rat, etc.
in a fainter degree with the Horse, and Ruminants; and with regard to the line
of direction of all the teeth, they are very like those of the Scalpris
dentata. The fore teeth in the upper jaw agree with the Hog; and those in the
lower, in number, with the Scalpris dentata; but with regard to position, and
probably use, with the Hog. The grinders would seem to be a mixture of Hog and
Ruminants; the enamel on their external and grinding surfaces, rather formed
into several cutting edges, than points. There are six incisors in the upper
jaw, and only two in the lower; but these two are so placed as to oppose those
of the upper; five grinders in each side of each jaw, the most anterior of
which is small. The proportions of some of the parts of this animal bear no
analogy to what is common in most others. The disproportions in the length
between the fore legs and the hind are very considerable; also in their
strength; yet perhaps not more than in the Jerboa. This disproportion between
the fore legs and the hind is principally in the more adult; for in the very
young, about the size of a half grown rat, they are pretty well proportioned;
which shows that at the early period of life they do not use progressive
motion. The proportions of the different parts of which the hind legs are
composed, are very different. The thigh of the Kangaroo is extremely short, and
the leg is very long. The hind foot is uncommonly long; on which, to
appearance, are placed three toes, the middle toe by much the largest and the
strongest, and looks something like the long toe of an Ostrich. The outer toe
is next in size; and what appears to be the inner toe, is two, enclosed in one
skin or covering.

The great toe nail much resembles that of an Ostrich, as also the nail of the
outer toe; and the inner, which appears to be but one toe, has two small nails,
which are bent and sharp.

From the heel, along the under side of the foot and toe, the skin is adapted
for walking upon.

The fore legs, in the full grown Kangaroo, are small in proportion to the
hind, or the size of the animal; the feet, or hands, are also small; the skin
on the palm is different from that on the back of the hand and fingers. There
are five toes or fingers on this foot; the middle rather the largest; the
others become very gradually shorter, and are all nearly of the same shape. The
nails are sharp, fit for holding. The tail is long in the old; but not so long,
in proportion to the size of the animal, in the young. It would seem to keep
pace with the growth of the hind legs, which are the instruments of progressive
motion in this animal; and which would also show that the tail is a kind of
second instrument in this action.

The under lip is divided in the middle, each side rounded off at the division.

It has two clavicles; but they are short, so that the shoulders are not thrown
out.

White-Jointed Spider
depiction of spider

WHITE JOINTED SPIDER.
The species of Spiders, unless seen recent, and in the utmost state of
perfection, are not easily distinguished. The present species is most
remarkable for the lucid surface of its thorax and legs, which latter are
furnished with several long moveable spines, that may be either elevated or
depressed at the will of the animal: this however is not peculiar to the
present species, but is seen in some others. The eyes are eight in number, and
are arranged in the same manner as those of the great American Spider, or
Aranea Avicularia of Linnaeus. The color of this Spider is a clear chestnut
brown, except the body, which is a pale brown, with a very deep or blackish
fascia on its upper part, reaching about half way down. The orifice at the tip
of each fang is very visible by so slight a magnifying power as that of a glass
of two inches focus: this Spider is therefore of the number of those which
poison their prey before they destroy it.

The Plate exhibits the back and front view, of the natural size. A. the order
in which the Spines are placed. The lesser a. two Spines enlarged, showing the
Bracket on which they turn, and the Groove or Niche they shut into when closed.
C. the Fangs magnified.

WHA TAPOAU ROO.
This animal is about the size of a Racoon, is of a dark gray color on the
back, becoming rather lighter on the sides, which terminates in a rich brown on
the belly. The hair is of two kinds, a long hair, and a kind of fur, and even
the long hair, at the roots, is of the fur kind.

The head is short; the eyes rather prominent; the ears broad, not peaked.

The teeth resemble those of all the animals from that country I have hitherto
seen.

The incisors are not continued into the grinders by intermediate teeth,
although there are two teeth in the intermediate space in the upper jaw, and
one in the lower. The incisors are similar to those of the Kangaroo, and six in
number in the upper jaw, opposed by two in the lower, which have an oblique
surface extending some distance from their edge, so as to increase the surface
of contact.

There are two cuspidati on each side in the upper jaw, and only one in the
lower; five grinders on each side of each Wha Tapoau Roo
jaw, the first rather pointed, the others appear nearly of the same size, and
quadrangular in their shape, with a hollow running across their base from the
outside to the inner, which is of some depth; and another which crosses it, but
not so deep, dividing the grinding surface into four points.

On the fore foot there are five toes, the inner the shortest, resembling, in a
slight degree, a thumb. The hind foot resembles a hand, or that of the Monkey
and Opossum, the great toe having no nail, and opposing the whole sole of the
foot, which is bare. The nails on the other toes, both of the fore and hind
foot, resemble, in a small degree, those of the cat, being broad and covered;
and the last bone of the toe has a projection on the under side, at the
articulation. Each nail has, in some degree, a small sheath, covering its base
when drawn up.

The tail is long, covered with long hair, except the under surface of that
half toward the termination, of the breadth of half an inch, becoming broader
near the tip or termination: this surface is covered with a strong cuticle, and
is adapted for laying hold.

A DINGO, or DOG, of NEW SOUTH WALES.
This animal is a variety of the Dog, and, like the shepherd's dog in most
countries, approaches near to the original of the species, which is the wolf,
but is not so large, and does not stand so high on its legs.

The ears are short, and erect, the tail rather bushy; the hair, which is of a
reddish dun color, is long and thick, but strait. It is capable of barking,
although not so readily as the European dogs; is very ill-natured and vicious,
and snarls, howls, and moans, like dogs in common.

Whether this is the only Dog in New South Wales, and whether they have it in a
wild state, is not mentioned; but I should be inclined to believe they had no
other; in which case it will constitute the wolf of that country; and that
which is domesticated is only the wild dog tamed, without having yet produced a
variety, as in some parts of America.

Dog of New South Wales


A Tapoa Tafa


THE TAPOA TAFA, or TAPHA.
This animal is the size of a rat, and, has very much the appearance of the
martin cat, but hardly so long in the body in proportion to its size.

The head is flat forwards, and broad from side to side, especially between the
eyes and ears; the nose is peaked, and projecting beyond the teeth, which makes
the upper jaw appear to be considerably longer than the lower; the eyes are
pretty large; the ears broad, especially at their base, not becoming regularly
narrower to a point, nor with a very smooth edge, and having a small process on
the concave, or inner surface, near to the base. It has long whiskers from the
sides of the cheeks, which begin forwards, near the nose, by small and short
hairs, and become longer and stronger as they approach the eyes. It has very
much the hair of a rat, to which it is similar in color; but near to the
setting on of the tail, it is of a lighter brown, forming a broad ring round
it. The fore feet are shorter than the hind, but much in the same proportion as
those of the rat; the hind feet are more flexible. There are five toes on the
fore feet, the middle the largest, falling off on each side nearly equally; but
the fore, or inner toe, is rather shortest: they are thin from side to side,
the nails are pretty broad, laterally, and thin at their base; not very long
but sharp; the animal walks on its whole palm, on which there is no hair. The
hind feet are pretty long, and have five toes; that which answers to our great
toe is very short, and has no nail; the next is the longest in the whole,
falling gradually off to the outer toe; the shape of the hind toes is the same
as in the fore feet, as are likewise the nails; it walks nearly on the whole
foot. The tail is long and covered with long hair, but not all of the same
color.

The teeth of this creature are different from any other animal yet known. The
mouth is full of teeth. The lower jaw narrow in comparison to the upper, more
especially backwards, which allows of much broader grinders in this jaw than in
the lower, and which occasions the grinders in the upper jaw to project
considerably over those in the lower. In the middle the cuspidati oppose one
another, the upper piercers, or holders, go behind those of the lower; the
second class of incisors in the lower jaw overtop those of the upper while the
two first in the lower go within, or behind those of the upper. In the upper
jaw, before the holders, there are four teeth on each side, three of which are
pointed, the point standing on the inner surface; and the two in front are
longer, stand more obliquely forwards, and appear to be appropriated for a
particular use. The holders are a little way behind the last fore teeth, to
allow those of the lower jaw to come between. They are pretty long, the
cuspidati on each side become longer and larger toward the grinders; they are
points or cones placed on a broad base.

There are four grinders on each side, the middle two the largest, the last the
least; their base is a triangle of the scalenus kind, or having one angle
obtuse and two acute. Their base is composed of two surfaces, an inner and an
outer, divided by processes or points: it is the inner that the grinders of the
lower jaw oppose, when the mouth is regularly shut. The lower jaw has three
fore teeth, or incisors, on each side; the first considerably the largest,
projecting obliquely forwards; the other two of the same kind, but smaller, the
last the smallest.

The holder in this jaw is not so large as in the upper jaw, and close to the
incisors. There are three cuspidati, the middle one the largest, the last the
least; these are cones standing on their base, but not on the middle, rather on
the anterior side. There are four grinders, the two middle the largest, and
rather quadrangular, each of which has a high point or cone on the outer edge,
with a smaller, and three more diminutive on the inner edge. It is impossible
to say critically, what the various forms of these teeth are adapted for from
the general principles of teeth. In the front we have what may divide and tear
off; behind those, there are holders or destroyers; behind the latter, such as
will assist in mashing, as the grinders of the lion, and other carniverous
animals; and last of all, grinders, to divide parts into smaller portions, as
in the graminiverous tribe: the articulation of the jaw in some degree admits
of all those motions.

The Tapoa Tafa.


THE TAPOA TAFA.
Another animal of the same species; only differing from the Tapoa Tafa in its
external color, and in being spotted.

THE POTO ROO, OF KANGAROO RAT.
The head is flat sideways, but not so much so as the true Scalpris Dentata.
The ears are neither long nor short, but much like those of a mouse in
proportion to the size of the animal.

The fore legs are short in comparison to the hind. There are four toes on the
fore feet, the two middle are long, and nearly of equal lengths, with long
narrow nails, slightly bent; the two side toes are short, and nearly equal in
size, but the outer rather the largest. From the nails on the two middle toes,
one would suppose that the animal burrowed. Their hind legs are long, and it is
in their power to stand either on the whole foot, or on the toes only.

On the hind legs are three toes, the middle one large, and the two side ones
short. The tail is long. The hair on the body is rather thin; it is of two
kinds, a fur, and a long hair, which last becomes exterior from its length. The
fur is the finest, and is composed of serpentine hairs; the long hair is
stronger, and is also serpentine, for more than two A Poto Roo
thirds of its length near to the skin, and terminates in a pretty strong
pointed end, like the quill of a hedge hog. It is of a brownish gray color,
something like the brown, or gray rabbit, with a tinge of a greenish yellow.

It has a pouch on the lower part of the belly, the mouth opens forwards, and
the cavity extends backwards to the pubis, where it terminates; on the
abdominal surface of this pouch are four nipples or two pair, each pair placed
very near the other.

THE HEPOONA ROO.
This animal is of the size of a small rabbit: it has a broad flat body, the
head a good deal resembles that of the squirrel: the eyes are full, prominent,
and large: the ears broad and thin: its legs short, and its tail very long.
Between the fore and hind legs, on each side, is placed a doubling of the skin
of the side, which, when the legs are extended laterally, is as it were pulled
out, forming a broad lateral wing or fin, and when the legs are made use of in
walking, this skin, by its elasticity, is drawn close to the side of the
animal, and forms a kind of ridge, on which the hair has a peculiar appearance.
In this respect it is very similar to the flying squirrel of America.

It has five toes on each fore foot, with sharp nails. The hind foot has also
five toes, but differs considerably from the fore foot; one of the toes may be
called a thumb, having a broad nail, something like that of the Monkey or
Opossum: what answers to the fore and middle toes are united in one common
covering, and appear like one toe Hepoona Roo.
with two nails; this is somewhat similar to the Kangaroo, the two other toes
are in the common form, these four nails are sharp like those on the fore foot.
This formation of the foot is well calculated for holding any thing while it is
moving its body, or its fore foot, to other parts, a property belonging
(probably) to all animals who move from the hind parts; such as the Monkey,
Mocock, Mongoose, Opossum, Parrot, Leech, etc.

Its hair is very thick and long, making a very fine fur, especially on the
back. It is of a dark brown gray on the upper part, a light white gray on the
lower side of what may be termed the wing, and white on the under surface, from
the neck to the parts adjacent to the anus.

FEATHER OF THE CASSOWARY.
The feathers of the New Holland Cassowary are of a remarkable construction;
and may, perhaps, be more easily delineated than described. The specimen is
figured of the exact size, and consists of two long slender shafts, extremely
flaccid, issuing from one small quill. The feather at the base of each shaft is
closely set, soft, and flossy, widening and growing harder gradually to the
tip, resembling the texture of a dried plant.

The color brownish ash, whitening toward the quill.

It seems incapable of resisting water, or of holding air. This circumstance in
the feather, added to the great pliability of the shaft, is a most admirable
provision for a bird whose safety is entrusted solely to its feet.

Fish Hooks of New So. Wales.

Feather of the Cassowary.



FISH HOOKS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Fig. A. represents a hook of the same size, formed of a hard black wood-like
substance, neatly executed, and finished with a small knob to assist in
fastening it to the line; it is well mounted: the line consists of two strands
very evenly laid, and twisted hard; made with a grassy substance dark in
color, and nearly as fine as raw silk: the length of it is shown by the top of
the rod being broken off.

Fig. B. is a hook of mother of pearl, formed by an internal volute of some
spiral shell, assisted by grinding it a little on one side only: the point of
this hook, as well as of the former, seems, to an European, to turn so much as
to render them almost useless.

IMPLEMENTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
AA. is a War Spear, formed of a light reed-like substance produced by the
Yellow Gum Tree, vide p. 235, which if the ends marked with the letters were
joined together, would show its full length: the long pointed head is of hard
wood, of a reddish color, and is fastened into the shaft in the firmest manner
by a cement of the yellow gum only.

B. is a Stick, at one end of which is a small peg fastened with the same
cement, and forming a hook: the other end is ornamented with the shell of the
Limpet or Patella, stuck on with the gum; and, thus constructed, it is used to
throw the spear -- in this manner: The shell end of the stick being held in the
right hand, and the spear poised in the left, the end of the hook at B. is
inserted into a hollow at the foot of the spear at D. and thus thrown with a
force similar to that of a stone from a sling: this is shown more particularly
in a reduced figure at the upper part of the Plate, a. b.

CC. is a Spear or Gig, of a substance similar to the former, for striking fish
in the water: the true length of which will be Implements of New South Wales
known by supposing the parts joined together at the lettered ends: the shaft
consists of two pieces, a large and a small one, joined by the gum: and the
head is composed of four sticks inserted into the shaft with gum, and tied
together above with slips of bark, which are afterward tightened by little
wedges, driven within the bandage: each of these sticks is terminated by the
tooth of a fish, very sharp, and stuck on by a lump of the gum cement: the
shaft of this instrument is punctured in many places with very small holes, to
the pith in the center, but for what purpose is not known.

H. is a Hatchet, of which the head is a very hard black pebble stone, rubbed
down at one end to an edge; the handle is a stick of elastic wood, split, which
being bent round the middle of the stone, and the extremities brought together,
is strongly bound with slips of bark, and holds the head very firmly, as smiths
chissels are held by hazel sticks in Europe.

S. is a kind of blunt Sword, of hard wood, like the head of the spear A.

F. seems to be an instrument of offense; it is a stick of the natural growth,
with the bark on; the root of which is cut round into a large knob; the end F.
is made rough with notches, that it may be held more firmly in the hand.

R. is a Basket, formed by a single piece of a brown fibrous bark. This
separated whole from the tree is gathered up at each end in folds, and bound in
that form by withes, which also make the handle. The Basket is patched in
several places with yellow gum, from which it appears to have been sometimes
used for carrying water.

These Implements are drawn from exact measurements, and fitted to a scale of
three feet, inserted at the foot of the Plate.

FLYING-FISH. EXOCAETUS VOLITANS.
This fish is so well known to Naturalists, and is so frequently seen in every
voyage, that it is unnecessary to give a particular description of it. See
Plate page 266.

SEAHORSE, OR HIPPOCAMPUS.
This animal, like the Flying-fish, being commonly known, a description is not
necessary. It is the Syngnathus Hippocampus of Linnaeus. See Plate page 264.

GRANULATED BALISTES. BALISTES GRANULATA.
Balistes pinna dorsali anteriore biradiata, corpore granoso.

Valde affinis B. Papilloso Linnaei. Corpus albido-cinerascens, papillis
parvulis aspersum.

Thorax velut in sacculum productus.

Balistes with the anterior dorsal fin two-spined, and the body covered with
granules.

This fish is extremely nearly allied to the Balistes Papillosus of Linnaeus.
The body is of a whitish ash color, and covered with small papillae.

The thorax as it were produced into a Sacculus beneath. See Plate page 254.

SOUTHERN ATHERINE. ATHERINA AUSTRALIS.
Au vere distincta ab A. Hepseto Lin.?

A. pinna any radiis sedecim.

Corpus subferrugineum. Cauda forficata. Fascia lateralis nitidissima.

Doubtful whether really distinct from the A. Hepsetus of Linnaeus.

Atherine with the anal fin furnished with sixteen rays.

The body is of a subferruginous cast. The tail forked. The lateral line
extremely bright.

THE TOBACCO-PIPE FISH.
This fish is so well known, that a particular description need not be given.
It is the Fistularia Tabacaria of Linnaeus.

REMORA, OR SUCKING-FISH.
The Echeneis Remora of Linnaeus.

This fish, like the preceding, does not require a particular description; is
met with in most seas, and possesses powerfully the faculty of adhesion, by the
top of the head: frequently to ships bottoms, whence it is named Remora.

1. The Atherine 2. The Tobacco Pipe Fish 3. The Remora.
depiction of fish

New Holland Creeper, Female.
depiction of bird

NEW HOLLAND CREEPER, Female.
The general colors of the female are the same as in the male, but less vivid;
nor has it the white markings on the front of the head and over the eye, but on
the cheeks only. The back and breast are black without white interspersions.
The abdomen black, streaked with dusky white; the yellow on thewings and tail
inclining to an olivaceous green, the feathers in the latter obtusely pointed.
A scapulary of brown adorns the shoulders, terminating in a lanceolate shape,
half way down the back.

In this bird the bill is longer, and the legs and general (...) stouter than
the male.

DEATHS between DECEMBER 1786 and JULY 1788.
On the Passage. Marines 1 Marines Wives 1 Marines Children 1 After the
Landing. Marines 3 Marines Children 2 Total 8 On the Passage. Male Convicts 36
Female Convicts 4 Convicts Children 5 After the Landing. Male Convicts,
including two murdered 22 Female Ditto 8 Convicts Children 9 Total 84 Executed,
by a sentence of the Criminal Court 4 Condemed to death by the Court, but
pardoned by the Governor 6 Missing, including one Female 9

ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
CIVIL DEPARTMENT.
ARTHUR PHILLIP, Esquire. -- Governor in Chief, Captain General etc. etc. ROBERT
ROSS, Esquire. -- Lieut. Governor, and Commander of the Troops. Rev. RICHARD
JOHNSON -- Chaplain. ANDREW MILLER -- Commissary, and Secretary to his
Excellency. DAVID COLLINS -- Judge Advocate. JOHN WHITE -- Surgeon. D. CONSIDOR
-- First Assistant Ditto. THOMAS ARNDELL -- Second Ditto Ditto. WILLIAM BALMAIN
-- Third Ditto Ditto. WILLIAM BREWER -- Provost Marshal. H. T. AUGUSTUS ALT,
Esquire. Surveyor of Lands.
MILITARY DEPARTMENT.
Captains -- JAMES CAMPBELL. Captains -- JOHN SHEA. Capt. Lieutenants --
MEREDITH. Capt. Lieutenants WATKIN TENCH. First Lieutenants -- G. JOHNSTON.
First Lieutenants -- JOHN CRESSWELL. First Lieutenants -- ROBERT KELLOW. First
Lieutenants -- JOHN POULDEN. First Lieutenants -- JOHN JOHNSTON. First
Lieutenants -- JAMES MAITLAND SHAIRP. First Lieutenants -- THOMAS TIMMINS.
First Lieutenants -- THOMAS DAVY. Second Lieutenants -- CLARKE. Second
Lieutenants WILLIAM FEDDY. Second Lieutenants JOHN LONG, Adjutant. First
Lieutenant -- JAMES FURZAR, Quartermaster. First Lieutenant -- JAMES MAXWELL,
COLLINS, Returning to Europe for the recovery of their health. Second
Lieutenant -- Returning to Europe for the recovery of their health.
A DIARY OF THE Winds, Weather, Temperature of the Air, etc. WITH THE DIFFERENT
LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES. IN A VOYAGE TO PORT JACKSON, NEW SOUTH WALES.
DIARY of the Winds, Weather, Temperature of the Air, etc. with the different
Latitudes and Longitudes.
MAY 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 13 S. E. Clear -- --
-- 52 0 -- -- Squally in the evening, and a high swell. 14 S. E. Clear -- -- --
52 0 -- -- Some small rain. 15 Variable Clear 49 49 N. 4 49 W. -- 52 0 30 8 --
Strong breezes, at times rain. 16 E. S. E. Cloudy 48 47 6 26 4 33 54 0 29 9 --
Strong breezes. 17 S. S. W. Rain 49 0 7 30 6 12 59 0 30 0 18 S. W. Clear 49 2 8
56 7 51 60 0 30 8 -- Little wind. 19 South Cloudy 48 33 10 43 9 21 58 0 29 44
-- Much rain. 20 W. N. W. Foggy 47 37 11 36 -- 60 0 30 20 -- Light airs of
wind.

21 W. S. W. Clear 47 2 N. 11 38 W. 11 45 W. 11 40 60 0 30 12 22 W. by N. Clear
47 2 11 11 11 35 63 0 30 21 -- Fresh gales in the evening. 23 N. N. W. Clear 45
42 11 23 11 2 57 0 30 14 -- Some rain in the evening. 24 N. N. W. Clear 44 15
12 12 10 38 59 0 29 93 -- Strong gales, and high sea. 25 North Clear 42 24 13 9
11 30 60 0 30 25 26 N. E. Cloudy 40 42 13 59 12 20 61 0 30 12 20 17 20 36 27 N.
E. Clear 38 44 14 59 12 46 64 0 30 26 -- Saw some Gulf weed. 28 N. E. Cloudy 36
9 16 24 13 52 61 0 30 15 -- Fresh gales, with a following sea. 29 N. E. Cloudy
33 56 16 24 -- 63 0 30 10 -- Ditto weather: no observation. 30 N. E. Clear 32
18 15 50 16 30 65 0 30 3 -- Saw the Deserter Isles, also some turtle. 31 North
Clear 30 47 15 16 -- 70 0 30 0 -- Mercury in the Sun 98.

JUNE 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 S. W. Clear 29 52
N. 15 18 W. 15 17 W. 71 0 30 8 30 2 -- Little wind: saw many small fish. 2 Calm
Clear 29 40 15 24 -- 74 0 -- 18 27 18 0 Anchored in Santa Cruz Road, in the
Island of Teneriffe. 3 S. W. Clear -- -- -- 78 0 -- -- 4 S. W. Clear -- -- --
74 0 -- -- 5 S. W. Cloudy -- -- -- 72 0 -- -- Still at anchor. 6 South Clear --
-- -- 75 0 -- -- 7 S. by E. Clear -- -- -- 75 0 -- -- 8 S. W. Cloudy -- -- --
78 0 -- -- 9 S. E. Cloudy -- -- -- 75 0 -- -- Still at anchor. 10 Variable
Cloudy -- -- -- 75 0 -- -- We sailed; very little wind, an Iris round the Sun
at equal distance. 11 Calm Clear -- -- -- 76 0 12 Calm Clear -- -- -- 78 0 --
-- Current setting us to the westward. 13 South Cloudy 26 33 N. 17 11 W. -- 73
0 29 98 -- Sea luminous. 14 N. E. Cloudy 25 8 18 29 -- 72 0 30 0 15 N. E.
Cloudy 23 24 19 40 19 40 73 0 31 1 15 40 15 45 Saw a flying-fish. 16 N. E.
Cloudy 21 23 21 2 21 10 73 30 30 2 -- A great number of flying-fish.

JUNE 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 17 N. E. Cloudy 18
53 N. 22 8 W. 22 22 W. 74 0 30 11 -- Saw a strange sail. 18 N. E. Hazy 16 27 23
11 -- 76 0 30 0 -- Horizon line about two miles. 19 N. E. Hazy 14 53 23 11 --
76 0 30 0 -- Passed the Islands of Sal, Bonavista, and Mayo: looked into Port
Praya. 20 E. by N. Hazy 13 29 22 56 -- 81 0 29 96 21 East Clear 11 52 22 45 23
10 82 0 30 6 10 23 22 East Clear 10 43 22 57 22 57 82 0 30 14 -- Lightning. 23
N. E. Cloudy 9 49 22 51 -- 82 0 30 8 -- Heavy rain, lightning, and distant
thunder. 24 East. Cloudy 9 2 22 46 -- 81 0 30 3 -- Ditto weather. 25 Variable
Showery 8 32 22 56 -- 82 0 30 2 -- Strong current setting to the N. W. 26
Variable Clear 8 45 22 50 22 34 85 0 30 3 -- Light airs. 27 Variable Calms 8 12
22 31 21 45 82 0 30 4 -- Heavy rain, with thunder in the evening. 28 S. W.
Clear 7 29 22 19 21 41 80 0 30 3 -- In the evening moderate breezes. 29 S. S.
W. Clear 7 28 21 33 -- 81 0 30 4 30 W. S. W. Clear 7 19 21 7 19 43 82 0 30 5 --
Ditto weather in the evening.

JULY 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 S. S. W. Cloudy 6
48 N. 20 37 W. 18 51 W. 79 0 30 7 -- Heavy rain: saw a gull, and many
flying-fish. 2 South Clear 6 36 20 33 -- 80 0 30 6 -- Tacked Ship, and stood to
the westward. 3 S. S. E. Cloudy 6 36 21 29 -- 80 0 30 5 4 S. S. E. Cloudy 6 18
22 5 -- 80 20 30 8 5 S. W. by S. Cloudy 5 53 22 25 -- 81 0 30 6 -- A great
variety of fish in chase of one another. 6 S. S. W. Cloudy 5 38 21 39 -- 80 40
30 1 -- Fresh breezes: a swell from the S. E. 7 S. by E. Cloudy 5 15 22 19 --
80 0 30 4 -- Caught a Boneta. 8 S. by E. Cloudy 4 36 23 0 -- 79 0 30 7 -- Fish
round us in great numbers. 9 S. E. by S. Clear 3 57 N. 23 28 W. -- 78 0 30 7 --
Moderate weather, the sea very luminous. 10 S. E. by S. Cloudy 3 29 24 18 -- 78
0 30 5 -- Caught an Albacore, and several Bonetoes. 11 S. by E. Hazy 2 59 24 54
-- 77 0 30 6 12 S. E. by S. Hazy 2 24 25 6 -- 77 0 30 6 13 S. E. by E. Cloudy 1
22 26 6 -- 78 0 30 6 -- Sea luminous, with Dolphins; caught two. 14 E. S. E.
Cloudy 0 18 N. 26 37 -- 77 0 30 3 -- Pleasant weather; sea quite luminous with
ditto. 15 E. S. E. Clear 0 25 S. 26 24 -- 77 40 30 5 -- Saw a Noddy, and two
Pinrado birds. 16 East Clear 1 24 26 22 -- 78 0 30 3 -- Sea perfectly luminous
with fish; struck 14 with a gig. 17 East Clear 2 54 26 19 -- 79 0 30 7 5 9 W. 4
40

JULY 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 18 E. by N. Clear 4
18 S. 26 5 W. -- 80 0 30 6 5 6 W. 0 0 19 E. by S. Clear 6 3 25 53 -- 80 40 30 7
6 0 W. 0 0 20 East Clear 6 57 25 49 -- 79 0 30 7 6 35 W. 6 52 21 E. by S. Clear
8 0 26 0 -- 79 0 30 7 22 E. by S. Cloudy 9 8 26 4 -- 79 0 30 9 -- Saw a Noddy.
23 E. by N. Rainy 10 4 26 0 -- 75 0 30 13 -- Heavy showers; saw two Grampuses.
24 E. by S. Cloudy 11 52 26 3 -- 77 0 30 17 -- Strong breezes, as the day
before. 25 E. S. E. Cloudy 13 29 26 13 76 0 30 20 0 0 3 44 W. Ditto weather. 26
E. by S. Cloudy 15 18 26 41 29 34 W. 75 0 30 2 -- Saw flying-fish with double
fins. 27 E. S. E. Showers 16 36 27 12 -- 73 0 30 20 -- Unsettled weather; swell
from the eastward. 28 E. S. E. Cloudy 18 13 28 2 -- 73 0 30 22 -- Fresh
breezes. 29 East Clear 19 36 29 38 -- 72 0 30 24 0 0 1 30 E. Pleasant weather.
Looking for Trinidada. 30 N. E. by E. Cloudy 20 41 30 50 -- 72 0 30 26 31 N E.
by E. Clear 21 48 32 5 -- 75 0 30 26 5 47 E. 5 24 Pleasant dry weather.

AUGUST 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long, in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 N. E. Clear 22 39
S. 33 24 W. -- 75 0 30 17 -- Pleasant weather. 2 N. E. Clear 23 3 -- -- 73 0 --
-- Saw the coast of Brazil. 3 Variable Hazy 23 12 -- -- 72 0 -- -- In sight of
Rio de Janeiro Sugar Loaf. 4 Variable Hazy 23 14 -- -- 69 0 5 Variable Hazy 23
6 -- -- 71 0 -- -- Saw many Whales and Porpoises. 6 Variable Clear -- -- -- 72
0 -- -- Anchored out side of Rio bar. 7 Calm Clear -- -- -- 72 0 -- -- Anchored
in Kio de Janeiro Harbor. 8 Calm Dark -- -- -- 74 0 -- -- 9 -- Rain -- -- --
65 0 -- -- 10 -- Cloudy -- -- -- 70 0 -- -- 11 Calm Clear -- -- -- 77 0 -- --
12 Calm Clear -- -- -- 76 0 -- -- 13 Calm Clear -- -- -- 75 0 -- -- At anchor
in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 14 Calm Clear -- -- -- 76 0 -- -- 15 Calm Clear --
-- -- 75 0 -- -- 16 Calm Clear -- -- -- 76 0 -- --

AUGUST 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 17 Variable Rain --
-- -- 69 0 -- -- 18 Variable Dark -- -- -- 69 0 -- -- 19 Variable Dark -- -- --
72 0 -- -- At anchor in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 20 Variable Cloudy -- -- -- 74
0 -- -- 21 Variable Clear -- -- -- 75 0 -- -- Prince of Brazils birthday; paid
compliments to the Vice-King. 22 Calm Clear -- -- -- 76 0 -- -- 23 Calm Hazy --
-- -- 76 0 -- -- At anchor in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 24 Variable Hazy -- -- --
74 0 -- -- 25 Calm Clear -- -- -- 72 0 -- 26 Variable Clear -- -- -- 70 0 -- --
27 Variable Cloudy -- -- -- 72 0 -- -- 28 Variable Clear -- -- -- 76 0 -- -- At
anchor in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 29 Calm Clear -- -- -- 78 0 -- -- 30 Variable
Clear -- -- -- 74 0 -- -- 31 Calm Clear -- -- -- 75 0 -- --

SEPTEMBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and Lunar
Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 Calm Clear -- -- -- 78 0
-- -- All the Officers took leave of the Vice-King. 2 Calm Cloudy -- -- -- 72 0
-- -- 3 Calm Dark -- -- -- 72 0 -- -- Still in Rio harbor. 4 Variable Clear --
-- -- 76 0 -- -- Sailed for the Cape of Good Hope. 5 Variable Cloudy -- -- --
71 0 -- -- Rio Sugar Loaf in sight. 6 N. E. Cloudy 24 33 S. 42 32 W. -- 72 0 30
2 7 N. N. E. Dark 25 47 40 52 -- 73 0 30 28 -- At night heavy rain. 8 S. by E.
Cloudy 25 54 S. 39 47 W. 39 39 W. 68 0 30 21 -- Showery at times. 9 S. E. Clear
26 6 38 25 38 9 67 30 30 23 -- Fine dry weather. 10 S. S. E. Clear 25 55 37 15
37 7 68 0 30 22 4 30 E. 0 0 11 E. N. E. Cloudy 27 6 37 18 -- 68 0 30 16 --
Strong breezes, with squalls. 12 E. N. E. Rainy 28 40 36 8 -- 67 0 30 14 --
Ditto weather, with heavy rain. 13 N. by E. Rainy 29 52 34 7 -- 64 0 30 14 --
Ditto weather. 14 S. by E. Dark 30 28 32 26 -- 66 0 30 12 -- Light airs. 15
South Cloudy 30 37 32 11 31 39 68 0 30 20 -- Caught a Shark. 16 N. by E. Cloudy
30 54 31 21 -- 67 0 30 25 -- Damp moist air.

SEPTEMBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 17 E. by N. Cloudy
31 35 S. 28 56 W. 31 34 W. 66 0 30 17 -- Damp moist air. 18 N. N. E. Dark 32 17
26 20 -- 63 0 30 14 -- Rain. Saw several Albatrosses and Pintado Birds. 19
South Cloudy 32 10 24 14 24 30 57 0 30 15 -- A Convict lost overboard. 20 S. E.
by E. Cloudy 31 54 22 26 -- 58 0 30 12 -- Albatrosses and Pintado Birds about
the ship. 21 S. E. Clear 32 7 22 24 22 45 58 30 30 15 22 N. E. Cloudy 33 4 22 4
-- 59 0 30 38 -- Cold dry weather. 23 N. N. E. Dark 33 54 19 28 -- 59 0 29 96
-- Strong squalls. 24 S. S. W. Cloudy 34 9 16 37 -- 54 0 29 94 -- Cold weather;
high sea. 25 W. by N. Squally 34 25 13 24 -- 54 0 29 84 -- Strong gales, with
some hail, and a high sea. 26 West Clear 34 19 10 10 -- 53 0 30 20 -- Many
birds about the ship. 27 West Cloudy 34 25 7 13 -- -- 30 36 28 W. N. W. Cloudy
34 36 3 59 -- 61 0 29 96 -- Unsettled weather. 29 S. S. E. Squally 34 20 1 56
-- 59 0 30 1 -- Cold, were, unpleasant weather. 30 Variable Clear 33 55 S. 1 8
W. 3 10 W. 56 0 30 4 6 0 W. Inclinable to calm.

OCTOBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 N. N. W. Dark 34
42 S. 1 10 E. -- 60 7 29 19 -- Saw a great many birds of different kinds. 2 N.
W. Clear 35 9 2 49 E. 0 36 E. 60 4 30 17 -- Pleasant weather. 3 N. E. Cloudy 35
20 3 17 -- 62 0 30 22 12 8W. Light air, and small rain. 4 N. by W. Foggy 35 35
4 56 -- 63 6 30 14 -- Moderate weather; some rain. 5 -- Foggy 35 39 5 57 -- 62
9 30 22 -- Cloudy, damp weather. 6 E. by N. Clear 36 18 6 9 -- 63 4 30 8 --
Light air, and pleasant weather. 7 N. E. Dark 36 51 6 37 5 52 E. 61 5 29 93 16
30 W. Damp, moderate weather. 8 N. W. Clear 36 59 8 35 7 55 60 0 29 97 -- Air
damp, although clear. 9 W. by N. Clear 36 28 10 39 -- 60 3 30 0 16 40 W. 16 54
W. Flocks of Oceanic Birds. 10 W. by N. Clear 35 27 13 37 -- 57 8 30 36 Flying
clouds; many birds about. 11 West Cloudy 35 0 15 49 -- 60 1 30 31 -- Saw some
Peterels. 12 South Cloudy 34 28 S. 17 24 E. -- 60 4 30 20 21 10 W. 18 45 A
swell from the S. E. 13 W. S. W. Hazy -- -- -- -- -- -- Anchored in Table Bay,
Cape of Good Hope. 14 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 15 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- At
anchor. 16 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

OCTOBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 17 -- -- -- -- -- --
-- -- 18 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 19 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 20 -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- At anchor: my living on shore for the recovery of my health prevented
me from filling up this blank. 21 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 22 -- -- -- -- -- --
-- -- 23 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 24 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- 26 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 27 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 28 -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- Still at anchor at the Cape of Good Hope. 29 -- -- -- -- -- -- --
-- 30 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 31 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

NOVEMBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom: Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 -- -- -- -- -- --
-- -- 2 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 3 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 4 -- -- -- -- -- --
-- -- Still at anchor at the Cape of Good Hope. 5 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 6 --
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- 7 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 8 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 9 --
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Still at anchor at the Cape of
Good Hope. 11 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 12 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 13 S. by E.
Clear -- -- -- 63 0 30 40 -- Sailed from the Cape of Good Hope. 14 S. by E.
Clear 35 12 S. 16 2 E. 15 7 E. 63 0 30 30 15 S. by W. Clear 35 23 15 4 13 29 62
30 30 53 16 Variable Hazy 34 44 14 56 12 37 63 45 30 25 -- A dysentery made its
appearance.

NOVEMBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 17 South Squally 36
40 S. 14 10 E. 11 42 E. 61 15 30 14 -- Rain. 18 South Cloudy 37 13 14 26 10 43
61 30 30 32 21 99 W. 19 Variable Hazy 37 40 13 58 10 29 62 45 30 8 20 54
Inclinable to calm. 20 Calm Hazy 37 38 13 50 10 21 64 15 29 99 21 18 21 N. N.
E. Clear 38 39 16 37 12 57 65 0 29 88 -- Saw some Whales. 22 N. N. W. Clear 39
0 20 5 -- 65 0 29 91 20 4 23 West Cloudy 39 8 22 49 -- 65 30 29 95 -- Prince of
Wales lost a Sailor overboard. 24 S. S. W. Cloudy 39 5 25 3 -- 63 30 30 7 --
Saw a great number of birds. 25 Variable Cloudy 38 48 24 34 20 49 61 30 31 1 --
Heavy rain, with squalls. 26 S. W. Clear 38 8 25 31 -- 62 0 30 20 27 E. S. E.
Clear 38 31 26 17 -- 61 30 30 20 28 E. N. E. Hazy 39 10 28 5 -- 62 0 29 8 27 0
27 30 Strong gales, with drizzling rain. 29 W. S. W. Hazy 39 56 30 12 -- 63 30
29 30 -- Moderate weather; damp air. 30 Variable Clear 40 0 31 22 -- 66 30 30 9
28 30 W. Heavy rain.

DECEMBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 W. S. W. Clear 40
4 S. 33 58 E. -- 62 0 29 8 26 54 W. Moderate, pleasant weather. 2 S. W. by W.
Clear 40 3 35 10 36 45 61 30 29 30 29 20 28 30 Saw many birds. 3 North Clear 40
18 38 44 41 1 61 45 29 87 30 42 31 20 4 N. N. W. Cloudy 40 36 42 40 -- 60 30 29
8 -- Strong gales; wet, unpleasant weather, and high sea. 5 Calm Hazy 40 15 44
20 -- 58 0 29 8 31 10 A great swell in the evening; wind at E. N. E. 6 N. W. by
W. Clear 40 49 45 54 -- 60 0 29 62 7 W. N. W. Clear 40 34 48 11 -- 61 30 29 77
29 58 8 West Clear 40 19 50 21 -- -- -- 31 0 9 N. N. E. Rain 40 21 53 20 -- 61
30 29 77 32 12 Moderate breezes. 10 W. S. W. Clear 41 12 56 20 -- 59 30 29 81
-- Cold, moderate weather. 11 West Cloudy 40 56 58 34 12 N. N. E. Clear 40 56
61 50 -- 62 30 30 0 29 9 30 30 13 W. S. W. Hazy 40 57 65 40 -- 62 30 29 6 --
Squally at times, with small rain. 14 S. W. Clear 41 2 68 50 -- 60 0 30 33 28
33 W. 27 30 Moderate, light winds. 15 N. N. W. Clear 40 56 71 8 -- 61 0 29 85
23 30 25 0 Saw some large Whales. 16 W. N. W. Clear 41 6 74 54 -- 61 30 30 16
22 16 23 50 Saw a Seal, some rock-weed, and many birds of the Peterel kind.

DECEMBER 1787.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 17 N. N. W. Dark 41
10 S. 77 37 E. -- -- -- -- Saw some Gulls in the evening. 18 S. by W. Cloudy 41
6 79 47 -- 55 30 30 6 -- Cold weather; saw some Whales. 19 Variable Dark 41 5
82 29 -- 55 30 30 8 -- Cold weather. The scurvy broke out on board the Prince
of Wales. 20 Variable Cloudy 41 4 84 29 -- 55 30 29 96 19 0 21 S. W. Dark 41 4
86 47 -- 57 0 29 80 -- Rain. Saw some sea-weed. 22 W. N. W. Hazy 41 21 90 7 --
59 0 29 82 -- Fresh breezes, with small rain. 23 W. by N. Hazy 41 34 93 27 --
59 0 30 7 24 W. by N. Cloudy 41 44 95 49 -- 58 30 30 10 17 40 18 0 Moderate
weather; many birds about the ship. 25 N. W. by N. Hazy 42 9 99 33 -- 61 30 29
98 -- Drizzling rain. 26 W. S. W. Clear 42 20 102 6 -- 57 0 30 2 14 30 27 W. N.
W. Hazy 42 40 105 36 -- -- -- -- Saw more sea-weed. 28 W. N. W. Hazy 42 59 109
14 -- 58 30 30 11 -- Saw several Albatrosses and Gulls. 29 N. W. Hazy 43 35 113
29 -- -- -- 15 20 High following sea. 30 W. S. W. Clear 43 51 116 32 -- 55 30
29 67 -- Some Whales about the ship. 31 N. N. W. Cloudy 43 53 S. 120 39 E. --
-- -- -- Dark gloomy weather, with rain and squalls.

JANUARY 1788.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 1 N. by W. Clear 44
4 S. 123 48 E. -- -- -- -- Heavy gales, with sudden squalls; at night the wind
N. by E. 2 W. N. W. Cloudy 43 34 126 48 -- 59 0 29 62 -- Unpleasant, unsettled
weather; many birds about the ship. 3 W. N. W. Rain 43 48 130 40 -- 56 30 29 96
-- Saw some Seals, and many Albatrosses. 4 W. N. W. Cloudy 44 0 134 15 135 30
57 45 30 0 1 22 W. 1 0 Some Mother Carey's chickens about the ship. 5 N. W.
Clear 44 2 137 50 -- 55 0 29 88 1 0 E. Cold weather; passed some sea-weed. 6
West Cloudy 44 4 141 5 -- 56 0 29 88 -- Some squalls, with rain. 7 N. N. W.
Cloudy 44 4 144 48 -- 62 0 29 90 -- Saw the S. W. Cape of New Holland. 8
Variable -- -- -- -- 63 45 29 92 9 Variable Squally 44 15 -- -- 66 30 29 96 5
30 Dark, damp weather, with thunder and lightning. 10 Variable Dark 42 28 -- --
61 40 29 1 7 24 Strong, sudden squalls. 11 Variable Cloudy 41 15 -- -- 65 0 29
77 8 50 Squally, Birds and Seals about the Ship. 12 S. S. W. Clear 40 1 -- --
62 30 29 31 9 40 Whales and birds about the ship. 13 Variable Hazy -- -- -- 66
30 29 70 10 50 10 52 14 W. S. W. Hazy 37 39 -- -- 66 30 29 79 10 30 Warm moist
air. 15 Variable Dark 37 39 -- 151 30 74 30 30 29 -- Ditto weather, with strong
breezes. 16 North Hazy 37 22 -- 151 40 75 15 29 66 -- Ditto weather; at night
thunder and lightning.

JANUARY 1788.
Days. Winds. Weather. Latitude in Long. in Longitude per Time-keeper, and
Lunar Ob. Therm. Barom. Variation per Az. and Am. REMARKS. 17 Variable Clear 35
48 S. -- -- 151 36 74 15 29 6 9 40 E. Inclinable to calm. 18 S. S. E. Cloudy 34
30 -- -- 72 30 29 96 -- Pleasant weather. Saw the land over Red Point. 19
Variable. Cloudy -- -- -- -- 70 30 30 33 -- In the morning saw the land near
Botany Bay. 20 -- Clear -- 34 0 E. 151 23 E. 74 45 30 20 -- Anchored in Botany
Bay. 21 -- Clear -- -- -- 75 0 30 21 22 -- -- -- -- -- 74 30 30 21 23 -- -- --
-- -- 75 0 30 17 24 -- -- -- -- -- 75 0 29 97 -- 25 -- -- -- -- -- 70 0 29 98
-- This day I had the misfortune to break the only thermometer I had left of
six, and my barometer, on taking them on shore, to determine the difference
between it and the air on board a ship. 26 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 27 -- -- --
-- -- -- -- -- 28 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 29 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 30 -- --
-- -- -- -- -- -- 31 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

EXTRACTS OF LETTERS FROM ARTHUR PHILLIP, ESQUIRE. GOVERNOR OF NEW SOUTH WALES, TO
LORD SYDNEY, TO WHICH IS ANNEXED A DESCRIPTION OF NORFOLK ISLAND, BY PHILIP
GIDLEY KING, ESQUIRE. AND An ACCOUNT of Expenses incurred in transporting Convicts
to NEW SOUTH WALES.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. DEBRETT, OPPOSITE BURLINGTON-HOUSE, PICCADILLY.

MDCCXCI.

EXTRACTS OF LETTERS, etc. etc.
Extract of a Letter from Governor PHILLIP to the Right Honorable Lord SYDNEY,
dated Sydney Cove, 12th February 1790.
WHEN the Supply left Norfolk Island, the people were all very healthy, and
they had vegetables in the greatest abundance; they get fish when the weather
permits to the boat to go without the reef, and, at times, in such quantities,
that fish is served to the people in lieu of salt provisions. They make their
lines from the flax plant, but unfortunately we have not any person who
understands how to dress it.

Half a pod of cotton being found on the island, supposed to be brought there
by a bird, and a cocoa-nut which was perfectly sound, and appeared to have been
but a short time in the water, being thrown upon the beach, have given some
reason to suppose that both these articles will be found in some island at no
great distance.

Lord How Island has been examined, but no fresh water, or good anchorage,
being found, it can be of no other advantage to this Settlement, than
occasionally supplying a few turtle.

I had the honor of informing your Lordship, that a Settlement was intended to
be made at a place I named Rose Hill. -- At the head of this harbor there is a
creek, which at half flood has water for large boats to go three miles up; and
one mile higher the water is fresh, and the soil good. A very industrious man,
who I brought from England, is employed there at present, and has under his
direction one hundred convicts, who are employed in clearing and cultivating
the ground. A barn, granary, and other necessary buildings, are erected, and
twenty-seven acres in corn promise a good crop. The soil is good, and the
country for twenty miles to the westward, which is as far as I have examined,
lays well for cultivation; but even there the labor of clearing the ground is
very great; and I have seen none that can be cultivated without cutting down
the timber, except some few particular spots, which from their situation
(laying at a distance from either of the harbors) can be of no advantage to us
at present; and I presume the meadows mentioned in Captain Cook's voyage were
seen from the high grounds about Botany Bay, and from whence they appear well
to the eye, but when examined are found to be marshes, the draining of which
would be a work of time, and not to be attempted by the first settlers.

The captain's guard, which until lately did duty at Rose Hill, is now reduced
to a lieutenant and twelve privates, and intended merely as a guard to the
store which contains the provisions, and which is in the redoubt, for I am now
sensible there is nothing to be apprehended from the natives; and the little
attention which had been desired of the officers, more than what was
immediately garrison duty, when at Rose Hill, is now no longer required.

At Sydney Cove all the officers are in good huts, and the men in barracks; and
although many unforeseen difficulties have been met with, I believe there is
not an individual, from the governor to the private soldier, whose situation is
not more eligible at this time than he had any reason to expect it could be in
the course of the three years station. And it is the same with the convicts;
and those who have been any ways industrious have vegetables in plenty. The
buildings now carrying on are of brick and stone. The house intended for myself
was to consist of only three rooms, but having a good foundation has been
enlarged, contains six rooms, and is so well built that I presume it will stand
for a great number of years.

The stores have been lately overrun with rats, and they are equally numerous
in the gardens, where they do considerable damage; and as the loss in the
stores could only be known by removing all the provisions, that was ordered to
be done, and many casks of flour and rice were found to be damaged or totally
destroyed. The loss in those two articles by the rats, since landing, has been
more than twelve thousand weight.

Vegetables and provisions having been frequently stolen in the night from
convicts and others, twelve convicts were chosen as a night watch; and they
have actually answered the end proposed, no robbery having been committed for
several months, and the convicts in general have lately behaved better than I
ever expected. Only two convicts have suffered death in the last year. -- Four
were executed the first year.

As near two years have now passed since we first landed in this country, some
judgment may be formed of the climate, and I believe a finer or more healthy
climate is not to be found in any part of the world. Of one thousand and thirty
people who were landed, many of whom were worn out by old age, the scurvy, and
various disorders, only seventy-two have died in one and-twenty months; and by
the Surgeon's returns it appears that twenty-six of those died from disorders
of long standing, and which it is more than probable would have carried them
off much sooner in England. Fifty-nine children have been born in the above
time.

In December the corn at Rose Hill was got in: the corn was exceeding good;
about two hundred bushels of wheat, and sixty of barley, with a small quantity
of flax, Indian corn, and oats, all which is preserved for seed. -- Here I beg
leave to observe to your Lordship, that if settlers are sent out, and the
convicts divided amongst them, this Settlement will very shortly maintain
itself, but without which this country cannot be cultivated to any advantage:
at present I have only one person (who has about a hundred convicts under his
direction) who is employed in cultivating the ground for the public benefit,
and he has returned the quantity of corn above mentioned into the public store;
the officers have not raised sufficient to support the little stock they have.
Some ground I have had in cultivation will return about forty bushels of wheat
into store; so that the produce of the labor of the convicts employed in
cultivation has been very short of what might have been expected, and which I
take the liberty of pointing out to your Lordship in this place, to show as
fully as possible the state of this colony, and the necessity of the convicts
being employed by those who have an interest in their labor. The giving
convicts to the officers has been hitherto necessary, but it is attended with
many inconveniences, for which the advantages arising to the officers do not
make amends. It will not, therefore, be continued after this detachment is
relieved, unless particularly directed. The numbers employed in cultivation
will of course be increased, as the necessary buildings are finished, but which
will be a work of time; for the numbers in this Settlement who do nothing
toward their own support exceed those employed for the public.

In November the Supply sailed for Norfolk Island with some convicts, and
returned after being absent six weeks. All the people in that island were well,
and their crops, after all they had suffered from rats, birds, and a worm which
had done them considerable damage, so good that they had grain sufficient for
six months bread for every one upon the island, reserving sufficient for their
next year's crops.

Early in January 1790 the Supply again sailed for Norfolk Island with more
convicts; and in her passage left a small party on Lord How Island, to turn
turtle; but in fifteen days only three were taken; so that no great advantages
will at present accrue from thence. The island has fresh water, but no good
anchoring ground.

Since the deaths mentioned in a former part of this letter, one woman has
suffered for a robbery, five children have died, and twenty-eight children have
been born; making in all seventy-seven deaths, and eighty-seven births.

Extract of a Letter from Governor PHILLIP to the Right Honorable Lord SYDNEY;
dated Sydney Cove, 13th of February 1790.
IN order to get a knowledge of the country round this Settlement, frequent
excursions have been made since the ships sailed in November 1788; soon after
which I went to Botany Bay, and the five days spent in that harbor confirmed
me in the opinion I had first formed of it -- that it afforded no eligible
situation for fixing the Settlement, and was a bad harbor, not affording good
security for ships against the easterly winds, which frequently blow very hard
in the winter, and which has been further proved by Captain Hunter, and the
first lieutenant of the Sirius, when there to survey the Bay.

After having been several times with the boats to Broken Bay, in order to
examine the different branches in that harbor, a river was found; but the want
of provisions obliged us to return without being able to trace it to its
source, which has since been done; and in the sixteen days we were then out,
all those branches which had any depth of water were traced as far as the boats
could proceed.

The breadth of this river (named the Hawkesbury) is from 300 to 800 feet; and
it appears from the soundings we had to be navigable for the largest merchant
ships to the foot of Richmond Hill; but as the water near the head of the river
sometimes rises after very heavy rains thirty feet above its common level, it
would not be safe for ships to go so far up; but fifteen or twenty miles below
Richmond Hill they would lay in fresh water, and perfectly safe. I speak of
Richmond Hill as being the head of the river, it there growing very shallow,
and dividing into two branches.

The high rocky country which forms Broken Bay is lost as you proceed up the
Hawkesbury, and the banks of the river are there covered with timber, the soil
a rich light mould; and, judging from the little we saw of the country, I
should suppose it good land to a very considerable extent; the other branches
of fresh water are shoal, but probably run many miles further into the country
than we could trace them with our boats. On these rivers we saw great numbers
of wild ducks, and some black swans; and on the banks of the Hawkesbury several
decoys made by the natives for to catch the quail.

Richmond Hill (near the foot of which a fall of water prevented our proceeding
further with the boats) is the southern extremity of a range of hills, which,
running to the northward, most probably join the mountains which lay nearly
parallel to the coast, from fifty to sixty miles inland. The soil of Richmond
Hill is good, and it lays well for cultivation. Our prospect from the hill was
very extensive to the southward and eastward; the country appearing, from the
height at which we were, to be a level covered with timber: there is a flat of
six or seven miles between Richmond Hill and a break in the mountains, which
separates Landsdowne and Carmarthen Hills; and in this flat, I suppose, the
Hawkesbury continues its course, but which could not be seen for the timber,
that, with very few exceptions, covers the country wherever the soil is good.

The great advantages of so noble a river, when a Settlement can be made on its
banks, will be obvious to your Lordship.

The Settlement made at Port Jackson, near the head of the harbor (Rose Hill)
very fully answers my expectations -- the soil is exceeding good, lays well for
cultivation, and is well watered. Six miles to the southward there is a small
fresh water river, and twenty miles to the westward there is a more
considerable river, the source of which I suppose to be at the foot of the
mountains. The banks of this river, which most probably empties itself into the
Hawkesbury, are high; the soil a good light mould, and covered with trees; the
wood of some of those trees is very light; they are about the size of large
walnut trees, which they resemble; they shed their leaves, and bear a small
fruit, which is said to be very wholesome. This river likewise frequently rises
thirty feet above its common level; it is, as far as I have seen it, from 300
to 400 feet in breadth, I named it the Nepean, and its source will be traced in
the course of the winter, and from its banks I hope to reach the mountains,
which has been attempted by a party who crossed the river, but after the first
day's journey they met with such a constant succession of deep ravines, the
sides of which were frequently inaccessible, that they returned, not having
been able to proceed above fifteen miles in five days; when they turned back
they supposed themselves to be twelve mile sfrom the foot of the mountains.

As the land for several miles to the southward, and twenty miles to the
westward of Rose Hill, that is, to the banks of the Nepean, is as fine land for
tillage as most in England (some few particular spots excepted, the soil of
which is poor, but bears a very small proportion to the good land), I propose
that tract of land for those settlers which may be sent out; and though they
will be placed at some distance from each other, for the convenience of water
(from one to three or four miles), they will have nothing to apprehend from the
natives, who avoid those parts we most frequent, and always retire at the sight
of two or three people who are armed.

As the labor of clearing the ground of timber will be great, I think each
settler should not have less than twenty men on his farm, which I suppose to be
from five hundred to one thousand acres: It will be necessary to give that
number of convicts to those settlers who come out, and to support them for two
years from the public stores; in that time, if they are any ways industrious,
they will be in a situation to support themselves, and I do not think they will
be able to do it in less time. At the expiration of the two years they may
return half the convicts they have been allowed, and would want no further
assistance from government.

It may be necessary to grant lands to officers and soldiers, who becoming
settlers will of course be entitled to every indulgence; but few of the
officers now here have reaped any great advantage from being allowed convicts;
and it is attended with unavoidable inconvenience from those convicts being
left so much to themselves, and from their mixing with the soldiers. It may be
found more to the advantage of the Crown and the officers likewise, if officers
on duty in this Settlement were allowed a certain quantity of grain to support
their live stock, until they have a market to go to, and I make no doubt but
that in the third year from the time settlers arrive there will be a market
well supplied with grain, poultry, hogs, and goats, of all which there has been
a great increase, but killed, from wanting corn to support them; and the
natives so frequently setting fire to the country, which they do to catch the
opossum, flying squirrel, and other animals, has prevented swine from being
turned out, as was intended.

If this plan, of distributing amongst the settlers those convicts who are not
immediately necessary for carrying on the public works, is approved of, and
which I propose, as appearing to me the most likely to render this Settlement
independent for the necessaries of life in the shortest time possible, there
are many regulations which will of course take place.

Extracts of a Letter from Governor PHILLIP to Lord SYDNEY; dated Government
House, Sydney Cove, April 11th, 1790.
THE quantity of flour brought from the Cape of Good Hope by the Sirius was
less than I expected -- Four months flour only for the Settlement, and a year's
provisions for the ship's company; and it was necessary to give the ship a very
considerable repair before she could be sent to sea again, which was not
completed before the middle of January, when I had reason to expect ships from
England in the course of a few weeks. The sending to the islands would have
answered as far as procuring live stock to breed from, but which was not
immediately wanted; and what the Sirius could have brought for the consumption
of such a number of people, would have been but a very small relief. How
Island has been tried several times, and only a few turtle procured.

The goodness of the soil on Norfolk Island, and the industry of those employed
there, rendered that island a resource, and the only one that offered, when,
from the time which had passed since my letters might be supposed to have been
received in England, there was reason to suppose some accident had happened to
the store ships sent out.

I therefore ordered two companies of marines to be ready to embark with a
number of convicts, by the 5th of March, if no ship arrived before that time;
and a proportion of what provisions and stores remained in this Settlement
being put on board the Sirius and Supply, sixty-five officers and men, with
five women and children from the detachment and civil department, one hundred
and sixteen male and sixty-seven female convicts, with twenty-seven children,
embarked and sailed the 6th of March.

The advantage I expected by sending away such a number of people was from the
little garden ground they would leave, and which would also assist those who
remained, and the fish which might be caught in the winter would go the
further; at the same time those sent to Norfold Island would have resources in
the great abundance of vegetables raised there, and in fish and birds, which
this Settlement could not afford them; and it was my intention to have sent
more convicts to that island, if there had not been this necessity.

The provisions sent, with what was on the Island, and the wheat and Indian
corn raised there, more than would be necessary for seed, was calculated to
last full as long as the provisions in this place; and at Norfolk Island, from
the richness of the soil, a man may support himself with little assistance from
the store after the timber is cleared away.

As I wished to send an officer to England who could give such information as
cannot be conveyed by letters, and the detachment was now divided, I replaced
the officer who was superintendant and commandant at Norfolk Island, by Major
Ross; the officer I have recalled having been two years on the island, is very
capable of pointing out the advantages which may be expected from it, and I
think it promises to answer very fully the end proposed by making the
Settlement; it will be a place of security for the convicts, where they will
soon support themselves, and where they may be advantageously employed in
cultivating the flax plant.

Extracts from Instructions given by Governor PHILLIP to the Lieutenant
Governor, during his Command at Norfolk Island; dated 2d March, 1790.
YOU will cause the convicts to be employed in the cultivation of the land, in
such manner as shall appear to you the best calculated to render that
Settlement independent, as far as respects the necessaries of life, paying such
attention to the cultivation of the flax plant as your situation will admit of,
and which is to be the principal object, when the necessaries of life are
secured to the settlers.

As from the great increase of corn and other vegetable food, which may be
expected from a common industry and in so fertile a soil, after a certain
quantity of ground is cleared and in cultivation, as well as from the natural
increase of swine and other animals, it cannot be expedient that all the
convicts should be employed in attending only to the object of provisions, you
are to cause the greatest possible number of these people to be employed in
cultivating and dressing the flax plant, as a means of acquiring clothing for
themselves and others persons, who may become settlers, as well as for a
variety of maritime purposes, and for which its superior excellence renders it
a desirable object in Europe.

You will at every opportunity transmit to me all such remarks or observations
as you may make respecting the nature of the soil on the island, and point out
such means as may appear to you the most likely to answer the views of
government in the cultivation of the flax plant, and in rendering that island
independent for the necessaries of life, and for the order and government of
the settlers thereon, that such information may from me be transmitted to his
Majesty's Ministers.

DESCRIPTION OF NORFOLK ISLAND.
NORFOLK Island is situated in the latitude 29 00, and in the longitude of 168
00 east: its form is nearly an oblong, and contains from twelve to fourteen
thousand acres.

The face of the country is hilly, and some of the valleys are tolerably large
for the size of the island; many of the hills are very steep, and some few so
very perpendicular that they cannot be cultivated; but where such situations
are, they will do very well for fuel; on the tops of the hill are some
extensive flats.

Mount Pit is the only remarkable high hill in the island, and is about one
hundred and fifty fathoms high. The clifts which surround the island are about
forty fathoms high, and perpendicular; the basis of the island is a hard firm
clay. The whole island is covered with a thick wood, choked up with underwood.

The island is well supplied with many streams of very fine water; many of
which are sufficiently large to turn any number of mills. These springs are
full of very large eels.

From the coast to the summit of Mount Pit is a continuation of the richest
and deepest soil in the world, which varies from a rich black mould to a fat
red earth; we have dug down forty feet, and found the same soil; the air is
very wholesome, and the climate may be called a very healthy one; there has
been no sickness since I first landed on the island.

There are five kinds of trees on the island, which are good timber, viz. the
pine, live oak, a yellow wood, a hard black wood, and a wood not unlike the
English beech. The pine trees are of a great size, many of which are from 180
to 220 feet in height, and from six to nine feet in diameter. Those trees,
which are from 100 to 180 feet in height, are in general sound; from the root
to the lower branches there is from 80 to 90 feet of sound timber, the rest is
too hard and knotty for use; it sometimes happens, that after cutting off
twenty feet from the butt, it becomes rotten or shakey, for which reason no
dependence can be put in it for large masts or yards. The timber of the pine is
very useful in buildings, and is plentiful along the coast; its dispersed
situation in the interior parts of the island is well calculated for erecting
such buildings as may be necessary. From what I have seen of this wood, I think
it is very durable. Two boats have been built of it, and have answered the
purpose fully.

The live oak, yellow wood, black wood, and beech, are all of a close grain,
and are a durable wood.

The flax plant of New Zealand grows spontaneously in many parts of the island,
but mostly abounds on the sea coast, where there is a very great quantity of
it; the leaves of which the flax is made is, when full grown, six feet long and
six inches wide; each plant contains seven of those leaves; a strong woody
stalk rises from the center, which bears the flowers; it seeds annually, and
the old leaves are forced out by young ones every year. Every method has been
tried to work it, but I much fear that until a native of New Zealand can be
carried to Norfolk Island, that the method of dressing that valuable commodity
will not be known; and, could that be obtained, I have no doubt but Norfolk
Island would very soon cloth the inhabitants of New South Wales.

There are a great quantity of pigeons, parrots, hawks, and other smaller
birds, which are now in a wild state.

The ground is much infested with different kinds of the grub worm, which are
very destructive to the growth of vegetables; they are mostly troublesome about
the spring. It is to be hoped that when more ground is cleared away, that this
evil will cease.

There is no quadrupede on the island except the rat, which is much smaller
than the Norway rat: these vermin were very troublesome when first we landed,
but at present there are but very few.

The coasts of the island abound with very fine fish. No opportunities were
ever lost of sending the boat out, which enabled us to make a saving of two
pounds of meat, each man, a week.

The coasts of the island are in general steep too, and excepting at Sydney,
Anson, Ball, and Cascade Bays, they are inaccessible, being surrounded by steep
perpendicular clifts rising from the sea. Some rocks are scattered about close
to the shore.

Sydney Bay, on the south side of the island, is where the Settlement is made:
landing at this place entirely depends on the wind and the weather; I have seen
as good landing as in the Thames, for a fortnight or three weeks together, and
I have often seen it impracticable to land for ten or twelve days successively,
but it is much oftener good landing than bad.

Anson Bay is a small bay with a sandy beach, where landing is in general good,
with an off-shore wind and moderate weather; but as the interior parts of the
island are so difficult of access from thence, no ship's boats have ever landed
there.

Ball Bay is on the south-east side of the island, the beach is a large loose
stone: when landing is bad in Sydney Bay, it is very good here, as it also is
in Cascade Bay, on the north side of the island.

During the winter months, viz. from April to August, the general winds are the
south and south-west, with heavy gales at times. In the summer the south-east
wind blows almost constant.

The spring is visible in August, but the native trees, and many plants in the
island, are in a constant state of flowering: the summer is warm, and sometimes
the droughts are very great; all the grain and European plants seeded in
December; from February to August may be called the rainy reason, not that I
think there is any stated times for rains in these months, as it is sometimes
very fine weather for a fortnight together, but when the rain does fall, it is
in torrents; I do not remember above three claps of thunder during the time I
was on the island. The winter is very pleasant, and it never freezes.

The proper time for sowing wheat and barley is from May to August, and is got
in in December; that which has been sowed has produced twenty-five fold, and I
think the increase may be greater. Two bushels of barley sowed in 1789 produced
twenty-four bushels of a sound full grain.

The Indian corn produces well, and is, in my opinion, the best grain to
cultivate in any quantity, on account of the little trouble attending its
growth, and manufacturing for eating.

The Rio Janeiro sugar cane grows very well, and is thriving.

Vines and oranges are very thriving; of the former there will be a great
quantity in a few years.

Potatoes thrive remarkably well, and yield a very great increase; I think two
crops a year of that article may be got with great ease.

Every kind of garden vegetable thrives well, and comes to great perfection.

The quantity of ground cleared, and in cultivation, belonging to the public,
was, on the 13th March 1790, from twenty-eight to thirty-two acres, and about
eighteen cleared by free people and convicts for their gardens,

PHILIP GIDLEY KING.
London, January 10th, 1791.
AN ACCOUNT OF The Number of Convicts which have been shipped from England for
New South Wales, and of the Number intended to be sent in the Ships now under
Orders for that Service: Made out pursuant to an Order of the Honorable House
of Commons, dated 9th February 1791.
Numbers. Convicts shipped 2,029 Convicts intended to be sent in the Ships now
under Orders 1,830 3,859

Treasury Chambers, 18th March, 1791. CHARLES LONG.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Expense incurred in transporting Convicts to New South
Wales, as far as the same can be made up: Pursuant to an Order of the
Honorable House of Commons, dated the 9th of February 1791.
NATURE OF THE EXPENSES. AMOUNT. L. s. d. Freight of the Transport Ships, with
the Expense of fitting them for the Service 42,271 -- 4. Clothing, Slops, and
Bedding 4,939 16 8 Victualling and providing for the Convicts and the Marine
Guard, prior to sailing, as also on the Passage, and for a Store there; viz. L.
s. d. Prior to sailing 4,324 1 11 On the Passage 7,310 12 2 For a Store at New
South Wales 16,205 3 -- 28,221 12 2 Wine, Essence of Malt, etc. 381 15 1
Handcuffs and Irons for securing the Convicts 42 -- 1 Stationary for the
Commissary of Stores and Provisions, and for the Commanding Officer of Marines
63 19 4 Tools, Implements of Husbandry, etc. 3,056 8 7 Marquees and Camp
Equipage for Marine Officers 389 4 1 Portable House for the Governor 130 -- --
Medicines, Drugs, Surgeons Instruments, and Necessaries 1,429 15 5 Seed Grain
286 17 4 Old Canvas supplied from Portsmouth Dock Yard, for Tents, etc. for the
Convicts, until Huts could be erected 69 -- 9 Hearths, Coppers, etc. for the
Use of the Settlement 118 10 3 Pay and Disbursements of the Agent to the
Transports employed on this Service 881 6 6 This Expense has been in curred
upon the First Expedition, and is all paid 81,899 11 6 NATURE OF THE EXPENSES.
AMOUNT. Brought over 81,899 11 6 Charge of clothing, victualling, and
transporting Female Convicts in the Lady Juliana, hired in December 1788; viz.
L. s. d. Paid already upon Account 4,269 18 9 Estimate of what more may be due,
upon the Supposition that the Ship may have been discharged at Port Jackson
from the Pay of this Board, at the End of August last 3,454 3 2 7,724 1 11
Charge of the Justinian, hired in November 1789, for a Store Ship to Port
Jackson, and from thence to proceed to China to bring home Teas for the East
India Company; viz. L. s. d. Freight for Two Years, the Time calculated for the
Performance of those Services out and home 7,389 -- -- Deduct what may be
expected to be received from the Company for Freight of the Teas she may bring
Home 5,000 -- -- There remains the Sum of 2,389 -- -- Note. -- L. 623.2, Part
of the Sum of L. 2,389, being the Amount of the Expense incurred on Account of
this Ship, according to the above Estimate, has been already paid, which leaves
a Balance due of L. 1,765. 18. Pay and Disbursements of the Two Agents who went
out in the Lady Juliana and Justinian 1,500 -- -- Charge of victualling,
clothing, and transporting Convicts, according to Agreements with Mr. Whitlock,
in August 1789, and with Messrs. Camden, Calvert, and King, in November 1790;
viz. L. s. d. Paid upon Account to Mr. Whitlock 17,463 3 9 Do -- to Messrs.
Camden, Calvert, and King 30,100 -- -- 47,563 3 9 67,563 3 9 The Total Expense
cannot be known until the Service is over, and the Acounts are settled; but it
is estimated that what will remain due upon the above two Agreements will not
probably be less than 20,000 -- -- L. 160,075 17 2

The Expense incurred on his Majesty's Ships sent on Service to New South
Wales, is estimated to be as under; viz.

L. s. d. On the Sirius 45,183 -- -- Supply Tender 17,283 -- -- Guardian 22,924
-- -- Gorgon 10,211 -- -- 95,601 -- --

Whitehall, Treasury Chambers, 18th March, 1791. CHARLES LONG.
N. B. -- In the preceding Account, the Charges incurred for the Transport of
200 Convicts from Ireland are included.



An ACCOUNT of the Quantity and Cost of the Provisions and Stores which have
been sent to New South Wales for the Maintenance and Support of the Settlements
there, as for as the same Account can be made up: Pursuant to an Order of the
Honorable House of Commons, dated 9th February 1791.
L. s. d. L. s. d. 600 Tons of Provisions shipped in June and July 1789 12,034
8 6 300 Tons of Provisions shipped in December -- 1789 6,178 4 -- 450 Tons Do
-- Do -- February 1791 9,514 10 2 27,727 2 8 Clothing, comprehending Leather,
Shoes, Stockings, Hats, Cloth, Ozenburgs, Blankets, Rugs, Tape, Thread, etc.
16,865 2 3 Implements, etc. comprehending Implements of Husbandry, Iron, Steel,
Blacksmith, Armourer, Carter, Bricklayer, and Masons Tools, Nails, Hoes, Axes,
Glass, Iron Pots, Tin Plates, Fishing Tackle, Hooks, Twine, Thread, Rope,
Hawsers, Pig, and Sheet Lead, Shot, Ball, Gunpowder, Bowls, Paints, Oil,
Canvas, Bibles, Prayer and other Books, Weights, Scales, Measures, Wagon, etc.
11,772 10 3 Medicines, Hospital Stores, comprehending a moveable Hospital,
Sheets, Blankets, Rugs, Palliasses, Chirurgical Instruments and Necessaries,
Pewter, Tin, and Copper Ware, Kettles, Wine, Vinegar, Groceries, Flannel, Salt,
Hammocks, Soup, Oatmeal. Barley, Rice, Sago, etc. 23,129 8 -- 51,767 -- 7 Off
Discounts 2,011 2 1 49,755 18 6 Amount of Bills drawn by Governor Phillip and
Commissary Miller on the Lords of the Treasury for sundry Provisions, Stores,
and Necessaries for the Use of the Settlement 7,070 3 6 L. 84,553 4 8

In the aforegoing Account is included the Cost of Twelve Months Provisions,
Clothing, Stores, etc. for 200 Convicts from Ireland, after their Arrival.

Treasury Chambers, 18th March 1791. CHARLES LONG.

An ACCOUNT of the Charge and Expense of the Civil and Military Establishments
in the Settlements of New South Wales: Pursuant to an Order of the Honorable
House of Commons, dated the 9th of February 1791.
L. s. d. L. s. d. Civil Establshment to 10th of October 1790 -- -- 13,190 17 8
Military Establishment. Pay of Marines to 1st January 1791, about 18,784 -- --
Charge of the New South Wales Corpse, from 5th June to 24th December 1789,
including Levy Money, the Allowance for Clothing, and Accoutrements, and
Contingencies 4,751 8 11 The Charge of the said Corpse for the Year 1790,
according to the Establishment 6,134 7 3 29,669 16 2 Total Expense of the Civil
and Military Establishment, from the Commencement thereof in 1787 to the
present Period L. 42,860 13 10 L. s. d. Future Annual Expense of the Civil
Establishment 3,856 -- -- Future Annual Charge of the Military Establishment
6,134 7 3 L. 9,990 7 3

Treasury Chambers, 18th March, 1791. CHARLES LONG.


