THE FOLLOWING OBSERVATIONS ON (...) METHOD OF CURING BURNS and SCALDS. ARE
OB^ERED BY THE AUTHOR, FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PUBLIC.

S^^'d by J. FIELDING, PATERNOSTER ROW. (...)

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
ABOUT the Year 1769, the Author of the following Tract, being frequently
Witness to the Miseries attending People that had the Misfortune to be burned
or scalded, was induced to apply himself studiously to observe the Effects, and
to find a Remedy that would quickly restore Nature, and one so simple, that it
might in general be readily adopted in all Families. -- This Desideratum was
accordingly, after many Experiments about that Time, acquired, and Numbers that
have been miserably scorched and scalded have been instantaneously cured by
following the Author's Method.

THE outer Dress of Ladies being of late Years composed of Gauze, Muslin, and
other inflammable Articles, which blaze away so violently, when they
unfortunately take Fire, that the most dreadful Mischief has ensued, too
suddenly for Prevention. The Numbers of the Unfortunate have much increased
with the Fashion; -- how many have of late been most miserably scorched and
defaced; -- how many have suffered a lingering death, under the most
excruciating tortures; -- while the Methods used as Remedies have only served
to lengthen the Term of their Misery.

THE Author presumes, that the Utility of his Method will entitle it to a
favorable Reception with the Public, and that there need no Apology for the
Publication.

IN the Use of Oil, and several other Things that are applied as Remedies for
Scalds and Burns, it may be observed, that Nature denies their Admission into
the Pores of the Skin. That the acid Perspiration, Plenty of which is generally
upon the Surface of the Skin, together with the continued Action of Nature
through the Pores, are Repellers of several Things that would be Remedies in
these Cases.

THE Author surmised, that if this acid Perspiration was to be overcome, or
continually washed away as it is produced, that Applications might then take
Effect; and in Consequence of those Observations, after repeated Experiments,
he laid down the following easy Rules, which, when practiced, were never known
to fail, but many and surprising Cures have been performed; and so far from
giving Pain, that the Pain caused by the Burning or Scalding ceases immediately
on the Application. Whereas such violent Pains are produced by the Application
of Spirits, and some other Things, that the Remedy is worse than the Disease,
and the Patient lingers out a most miserable Life, and dies the most
excruciating of all Deaths.

TAKE Soft Soap (Hard if that is not to be had), dissolve it in boiling Water,
exceeding strong, in as little Water as possible; then make it cold
immediately, by the Addition of cold Water; be careful to observe, that there
be full six Ounces of Soap in every Gallon of this cold Solution, and Half a
Dram of Sal Tartar: -- Then put in the injured Part, and move it gently
about, keeping it there Half an Hour: For a recent Matter this is sufficient;
if it be of long Standing it may be continued or repeated as Occasion requires.

MIND to have Solution in Proportion to the Nature of the Case. If a Person is
scalded or scorched all over, he or she may stand or sit up to the Chin naked
in it, and frequently immerge the Head, or let some Person continually pour
plentifully of the Solution upon the Head.

IN this Case, it will take 50 or 60 Gallons of Water, and from 18 lb. to 22
lb. of Soap, with about two Ounces of Sal Tartar.

THIS will be strong enough to take off all Greasiness and Dirt from the Body,
without rubbing. It will keep the injured Part soft and cold, while the
Circulation regains its usual or a new Course, and innate Nature repairs the
Havoc made by the Fire.

A FEW Cases, among many, here follow, by Way of Elucidation:

A BOY having his Leg scalded, by a Pan-full of boiling Water being thrown upon
it, after trying various Methods for three or four Days to no Purpose, was
cured by keeping it in the Solution (prepared as abovementioned) about Half an
Hour, so that the Pain never returned, and the Leg healed in a very short Time.

IN like Manner, a Man was cured who burned the Skin off his Hand, and terribly
scorched the Flesh, against a hot Plate of Iron.

THE Author having accidentally slipped his Arm, almost up to the Elbow, into a
Copper of Water that was boiling furiously; he put it into cold Water, which
immediately took off the Pain, which was become excessive; while immersed, it
was benumbed and senseless, but when took out of the Water, the Pain returned
with great Violence. -- He therefore kept it in this Situation while the
Solution was making as above. -- The Soap being dissolved and cooled well, he
plunged his Hand and Arm in it; the Pain never returned, the Numbness went off,
and the Limb as it were revivified; he continued it in the above Solution about
15 Minutes, and never after felt the least Pain or ill Effects from this
terrible Scald.

FINIS.

